 = = Personal life and business = = 
 In 1844 , Davis and his nephew Isaac were among the founders of the State Mutual Life Assurance Company of Worcester , one of only five life insurance companies in the country . Davis served as its president until his death , after which his nephew took over . 
 Davis married Eliza Bancroft in 1822 . She was the daughter of Worcester minister Aaron Bancroft and sister to historian and statesman George Bancroft . They had five children , including diplomat John Chandler Bancroft Davis , general Hasbrouck Davis , and Congressman Horace Davis ; their descendants include Assemblyman Gherardi Davis ( 1858 – 1941 ) , Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr . John Davis Long , the grandson of a cousin , and who was named in his honor , also served as Governor of Massachusetts . 
 = Earthquake ( Modern Family ) = 
 " Earthquake " is the third episode of the second season of the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) American sitcom , Modern Family and the 27th episode overall . The episode originally aired October 6 , 2010 . It was written by Paul Corrigan & Brad Walsh and directed by Michael Spiller . It guest starred Nathan Lane as Pepper Saltzman and Vic Polizos as a plumber . 
 In the episode , an earthquake causes Claire to be stuck in the bathroom with the plumber . Gloria interprets the natural disaster as a sign that God wants Jay to go to church while Mitchell and Cameron use it as an excuse to not attend Peppers party . 
 " Earthquake " received positive reviews from critics . The episode also received a nomination for Episode Comedy at the 2010 Writers Guild of America Awards , but ultimately lost . 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode received a 4 @.@ 6 rating / 13 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 receiving the same rating from the previous episode and also tied for being the highest rated scripted program with Glee . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Haley ( Sarah Hyland ) and Claire ( Julie Bowen ) are arguing about Haley 's wanting to go to a party instead of staying home and prepare for her SATs when a plumber ( Vic Polizos ) arrives . After an earthquake , Claire ends up locked in the bathroom with the plumber and a bookcase is knocked down . Phil ( Ty Burrell ) realizes that if he can keep Claire in the bathroom long enough he can get the bookcase strapped to the wall like he told Claire he had already done while Haley realizes she can go to the party . Claire though hears her telling Alex ( Ariel Winter ) about the plan while Alex was blackmailing Haley into driving her to the Museum of Tolerance in exchange for the lie . 
 Phil convinces Luke ( Nolan Gould ) that the bookshelf " did not fall " . After Phil " tries " to get Claire out , the plumber tells Claire that the reason she is being so controlling to Haley is because Haley is much like her when she was her age , just as his son drove him crazy exactly for the same reason . Claire and the plumber finally get out of the bathroom on their own and Claire questions what took Phil so long . Alex lies for him and says he was helping everybody and checking that there were no gas leaks . Claire believes her and Phil takes Alex to the Museum of Tolerance . 
 Meanwhile , Cameron ( Eric Stonestreet ) and Mitchell ( Jesse Tyler Ferguson ) get ready for Cameron 's ex @-@ boyfriend , Pepper Saltzman 's ( Nathan Lane ) , new theme party , Oscar Wilde and Crazy Brunch . <unk> to Pepper , Cameron and Mitchell have grown to dislike his parties because they take a lot of work and one has to assume a character and dress up in costume . While this is happening Mitchell realizes he can use the earthquake as an excuse to get out of the party . Mitchell has Cameron tell Pepper because he is the one who always cancels , but Cameron panics while telling about the extent of the earthquake 's damage . Since Pepper is on his way to their house , Mitchell starts breaking items to match Cameron 's description of the damage . 
 At the end , Cameron tells Pepper they did not want to go to the party and Pepper , while having a breakdown , reveals that no one came to the party . To stop it , Mitchell lies by telling Pepper that Cameron still has feelings for him and then goes on a fake rampage of anger breaking items of Cameron that he hates . Pepper announces they will not have to come to his upcoming parties . 
 At the Pritchett house , Gloria ( Sofía Vergara ) gets angry at Jay ( Ed O 'Neill ) for going golfing instead of going to church with her and Manny ( Rico Rodriguez ) . As Jay tells them he is done with church , the earthquake occurs . Jay still goes golfing despite Gloria telling him the earthquake was a sign from God . Manny decides to go with Jay for golf instead with Gloria at the church , something that makes her mad . 
 At the golf course Manny asks questions about Jay 's idea of hell and heaven . Jay 's ideas soon worry Manny and at the end come to the conclusion that Manny is missing church because Jay is acting upon a hunch . When Gloria tells Manny of her vision of heaven he becomes even more fearful since she says that there are butterflies ( which he is afraid of ) in heaven . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Earthquake " was written by Paul Corrigan and Brad Walsh making it their fifth writing credit for the series . The episode was directed by Michael Spiller , marking his second directing credit for the season after the season premiere , " The Old Wagon " , and fifth credit overall for the series . " Earthquake " originally aired in the United States on September 30 , 2010 on ABC as the third episode of the second season . This episode of Modern Family was filmed on August 3 , and August 16 , 2010 . 
 Part of the plot line was revealed at a Writers Guild of America event at Paley Center in Los Angeles . On August 1 , 2010 , Joyce Eng of TV Guide reported that Nathan Lane would appear on Modern Family as Pepper Saltzman . He filmed his part on August 16 , 2010 . Lane had approached creators Christopher Lloyd and Steven Levitan if he could guest star on the series . Levitan stated in an interview with USA Today he was " the perfect fit for the part " of Pepper . Levitan also said in the same interview they would stop stunt casting actors like Nathan Lane . Lane later reprised his role in the episode , " Boys ' Night " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Earthquake " was viewed by an estimated 11 @.@ 36 million households according to the Nielsen Media Research , making it the third most viewed show of the night . It received 6 @.@ 8 rating / 11 % share among viewers and a 4 @.@ 6 rating / 12 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . It received the same rating as the previous episode , " The Kiss " , but the viewership figure decreased from 11 @.@ 877 million to 11 @.@ 36 million . The episode also became the highest rated scripted show of the original week it aired tying with Glee 's " Grilled Cheesus " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received overwhelmingly positive reviews . 
 Joel Keller from TV Squad wrote " that it was a great job all the way around . I 'm hoping the show can keep avoiding a sophomore slump for as long as they possibly can . " 
 Donna Bowman from The A.V. Club gave the episode a B calling it a " merely solid half @-@ hour " . 
 Lesley Savage of Entertainment Weekly praised the use of the characters and cast members saying " Every character had hilarious moments tonight " . She also called Manny the best character saying he " stole the show " 
 James Poniewozik of Time called it " solid and grounded " and also commented " " Earthquake " , especially in its main storyline with the <unk> , worked because it took this basic principle and quickly , simply showed how this family reacts to sudden disorder . 
 Alan Sepinwall stated in his review " every now and then the show will give us a wholly satisfying , very funny episode with the three groups in isolation . " Earthquake " was one of those episodes " he also called the show " simple , effective , very funny outing . " 
 Kara <unk> of TV Guide said " I thought there were a ton of hilarious moments in this episode " 
 Donald Deane of TV Squad named the episode one of the " Five Funniest TV Clips of the Week " between October 3 and 9 , 2010 . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Paul Corrigan and Brad Walsh received a nomination for an Episodic Comedy at the 2010 Writers Guild of America Awards facing six other programs including the Modern Family episode , " Starry Night " . The episode eventually lost to 30 Rock of Robert Carlock for his work on " When It Rains , It Pours " . Also , Nathan Lane was nominated for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = Convoy GP55 = 
 Convoy GP55 was a convoy of Allied ships that travelled from Sydney to Brisbane in June 1943 during World War II . It comprised ten cargo ships , three landing ships , tank ( LSTs ) and an escort of five corvettes . The Japanese submarine I @-@ 174 attacked the convoy on 16 June , sinking the United States Army transport ship Portmar and damaging USS LST @-@ 469 . Two of the corvettes subsequently counter @-@ attacked I @-@ 174 , but only lightly damaged her . 
 The Australian military conducted an intensive search for I @-@ 174 in the days after the attack in the mistaken belief that she had been significantly damaged . This search was not successful and highlighted the unsatisfactory communications between the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) and Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . However , another Japanese submarine passing through the area may have been sunk by RAAF aircraft . Because of Japan 's deteriorating strategic situation , I @-@ 174 was the last Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) submarine to operate off the Australian east coast . 
 = = Background = = 
 During 1942 and 1943 , Japanese submarines periodically operated in the waters surrounding Australia . A force of midget submarines raided Sydney Harbour on the night of 31 May – 1 June 1942 and attacks on merchant shipping travelling off the east coast began several days later . These attacks continued until August 1942 , when the Japanese submarine force was redeployed . The Kaidai @-@ class submarine I @-@ 174 made a 24 @-@ day patrol off Australia in July and August 1942 , but did not attack any ships . In response to the Japanese attacks , the Australian naval authorities ordered that all ships with a displacement of more than 1 @,@ 200 tons and a maximum speed of less than 12 knots travel in escorted convoys from 8 June . These convoys were successful in minimising losses , and no escorted ships were sunk off Australia during 1942 . 
 Japanese submarines resumed operations in Australian waters in January 1943 . I @-@ 21 made a highly successful patrol in January and February , during which she sank five ships , and two other submarines operated off Sydney and Brisbane in March . A force of five boats from the IJN 's 3rd Submarine Squadron subsequently attacked shipping along the full length of the Australian east coast during April and May in an attempt to disrupt the Allied supply line to New Guinea . This marked the peak of the Japanese submarine offensive against Australia and nine ships were sunk off the east coast within a month . In contrast with 1942 , several successful attacks were made against ships travelling in convoys . 
 The large number of Japanese attacks in 1943 put great strain on the Allied forces responsible for protecting shipping off eastern Australia . The Australian naval authorities were forced in April to reduce the number of convoys that sailed so their escort could be increased to at least four warships . The RAAF also greatly increased the number of aircraft allocated to escort convoys and ships sailing independently . Further ships and aircraft fitted for anti @-@ submarine warfare ( ASW ) became available in May , but were still not adequate to counter the Japanese attacks . 
 The sinking of the hospital ship AHS Centaur on 14 May 1943 with heavy loss of life led the Advisory War Council to seek information from the RAN and RAAF on the actions being taken to protect shipping . While the RAN acknowledged that the Bathurst @-@ class corvettes that made up most of its escort force were too slow , it argued that the losses suffered by escorted convoys were no worse than those in other parts of the world . Despite the Navy 's assurances , Australia 's anti @-@ submarine forces were constrained by a shortage of training opportunities and poor coordination between the RAN , RAAF and the United States Navy . The Australian military had also not kept pace with improvements to British and United States ASW doctrine by fully implementing the tactics that had proven most successful in other theatres of the war . 
 = = Attack = = 
 I @-@ 174 departed from the major Japanese naval base at Truk on 16 May 1943 under the command of Lieutenant <unk> Nanbu and arrived off Sandy Cape , Queensland on 27 May . She was the only Japanese boat operating off Australia at the time , as all other available submarines were deployed to counter Allied advances in the Solomon Islands . She made an unsuccessful torpedo attack on the American ship Point San Pedro on 1 June , exchanged gunfire with U.S. Army transport Edward Chambers three days later , and on 5 June was driven off by convoy PG 53 's escorts . On 7 June , I @-@ 174 fired four torpedoes at the American Liberty ship John Bartram , all of which missed . She sighted another convoy on 13 June , too far away to attack . During this period , she was repeatedly attacked by Allied aircraft and warships , but did not sustain any damage . 
 Convoy GP55 was assembled in mid @-@ June 1943 as one of at least 69 convoys that sailed from Sydney to Brisbane during 1943 . It comprised ten cargo ships and three U.S. Navy Landing Ships , Tank ( LST ) , and was escorted by the Bathurst @-@ class corvettes Warrnambool ( which embarked the convoy 's senior officer ) , Bundaberg , Cootamundra , Deloraine and Kalgoorlie . After departing Sydney at 8 @.@ 45 am on 15 June the convoy maneuvered into five columns , with three ships in each of the centre columns and two in those at the edges . The escorts surrounded the convoy , with four sailing ahead of it and Deloraine to the stern . RAAF Anson and Beaufort aircraft also patrolled over the convoy at all times . U.S. Army transport Portmar , which had been badly damaged in the Bombing of Darwin on 19 February 1942 , had difficulty maintaining her position in the convoy and at times straggled behind the other ships . 
 I @-@ 174 sighted Convoy GP55 about 35 nautical miles ( 65 km ) east of Smoky Cape at 4 @.@ 37 pm on 16 June . The submarine immediately began preparations to attack the Allied ships and easily penetrated the escort screen . At this time Portmar was trying to return to her station and was passing to the port of USS LST @-@ 469 . This made the ships an ideal target for Nanbu as they overlapped from the viewpoint of his periscope . Accordingly , he fired two torpedoes at them at 5 @.@ 20 pm . A single torpedo struck the LST near her stern two minutes later , resulting in severe damage and the loss of 26 lives and 17 wounded . Portmar spotted the second torpedo and attempted to evade it but was also struck on her starboard side . The transport 's cargo of petrol and ammunition quickly caught fire and she sank within ten minutes . One of her crew and a passenger were killed , and 71 survivors , including four who were injured , were rescued by Deloraine . Despite losing steerage LST @-@ 469 remained afloat and was taken under tow by the corvette . I @-@ 174 's attack on Convoy GP55 was probably the most successful made by a Japanese submarine off Australia . 
 While Deloraine attended to the torpedoed ships , the other four escorts attempted to locate the Japanese submarine . I @-@ 174 had not been detected approaching the convoy , and after the attack the Australian corvettes reversed their courses to conduct a sonar sweep of the area from where she was presumed to have attacked . This was in accordance with tactics that had recently been adopted by the RAN after they proved successful in the Battle of the Atlantic . Warrnambool detected the submarine 23 minutes after the attack , and she and Kalgoorlie subjected I @-@ 174 to four depth charge attacks over two hours until contact was lost . An Anson from No. 71 Squadron was escorting the convoy at the time the two ships were torpedoed but was low on fuel and returned to base shortly after the attack . While the corvettes believed that they had sunk I @-@ 174 , she was only lightly damaged and withdrew to the east . The Australian failure to sink the submarine was due to a lack of practice and too few ships being available to create an adequate search scheme . 
 After breaking off their attack Warrnambool rejoined the convoy while Kalgoorlie assisted Deloraine in protecting the damaged LST . Deteriorating weather broke the tow @-@ line between Deloraine and LST @-@ 469 , and instead the corvette proceeded to the nearby town of Coffs Harbour with Portmar 's survivors and the LST 's wounded personnel . The tugboat HMAS Reserve was dispatched from Brisbane on 16 June to recover the LST and towed her to Sydney , where they arrived on 20 June . LST @-@ 469 had been carrying troops and supplies for Operation Chronicle , an amphibious landing at Woodlark and Kiriwina islands on 30 June , and this operation was hindered by her unavailability . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the attack , the Australian Chief of Naval Staff , Admiral Sir Guy Royle , judged that the submarine had been damaged and ordered that " special measures " be taken to search for it . The RAAF commenced air searches of an 80 @-@ square @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 270 km2 ) box south @-@ east of Coffs Harbour on the night of 16 / 17 June , while Deloraine , Kalgoorlie and the recently arrived destroyer HMAS Vendetta patrolled the area . On 17 June , Anson aircraft were assigned to patrol the submarine 's most likely escape routes in the hope that this would force her to remain submerged during the day and surface at night . Radar @-@ equipped Beauforts relieved the Ansons after dusk and continued the search . 
 In the early morning of 18 June , two No. 32 Squadron Beauforts attacked with bombs and gunfire what they took to be a submarine . Deloraine was less than 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from the area of the RAAF attack , but did not acknowledge repeated attempts by the aircraft to communicate with her . The Beauforts reported that they had damaged the submarine and intensive efforts were made on 19 June to locate and sink her , with twelve Ansons continuously sweeping the area while six Vengeance dive bombers were held in readiness nearby . No further sightings were made and it was assumed that the submarine had been damaged by a No. 32 Squadron aircraft but escaped . Naval historian David Stevens has written that the sighting made on 18 June was probably mistaken , as I @-@ 174 was at least 60 miles ( 97 km ) to the east of where the RAAF attack took place and the incident was not recorded in her war diary . However , other historians believe that the Beauforts may have sunk I @-@ 178 , which was patrolling off the east coast of Australia at the time ; this submarine disappeared some time after 17 June 1943 , and the cause of her loss has never been confirmed . I @-@ 174 was ordered to depart from Australian waters on 20 June , and returned to Truk on 1 July . She did not make contact with any Allied ships or aircraft after attacking GP55 . 
 The seeming failure of the RAAF and RAN to cooperate to finish off a damaged submarine led Royle to order an inquiry into the attack . This found that a breakdown in communication between the two services was the main cause of the failure , with both the aircraft and the naval signal room in Sydney making procedural errors . Rear Admiral Gerard Muirhead @-@ Gould , the naval officer in command of the Sydney region , also noted that communications between the RAN and RAAF were unsatisfactory at higher levels , and that the communication procedures to be used in anti @-@ submarine operations were not well known or understood . In response , he suggested that the RAN establish the position of Commander Escort Vessels Group to organise and command escorts and coordinate their tactics . 
 The attack on Convoy GP55 was the last attack made by a Japanese submarine on the east coast of Australia . Two submarines were dispatched to operate off Australia in July 1943 , but were diverted to the Solomon Islands shortly before reaching the east coast . Following this , the Japanese submarines were fully occupied responding to Allied offensives and transporting supplies to isolated garrisons . As the threat to shipping declined , the RAN ceased running convoys in waters south of Newcastle on 7 December 1943 and Sydney – Brisbane convoys ended on 10 February 1944 . 
 = Brachiopod = 
 Brachiopods , phylum Brachiopoda , are marine animals that have hard " valves " ( shells ) on the upper and lower surfaces , unlike the left and right arrangement in bivalve molluscs . Brachiopod valves are hinged at the rear end , while the front can be opened for feeding or closed for protection . Two major groups are recognized , articulate and inarticulate . Articulate brachiopods have toothed hinges and simple opening and closing muscles , while inarticulate brachiopods have untoothed hinges and a more complex system of muscles used to keep the two halves aligned . In a typical brachiopod a stalk @-@ like pedicle projects from an opening in one of the valves near the hinges , known as the pedicle valve , keeping the animal anchored to the seabed but clear of silt that would obstruct the opening . 
 The word " brachiopod " is formed from the Ancient Greek words <unk> ( " arm " ) and πούς ( " foot " ) . They are often known as " lamp shells " , since the curved shells of the class Terebratulida look rather like pottery oil @-@ lamps . 
 Lifespans range from three to over thirty years . Ripe gametes ( ova or sperm ) float from the gonads into the main coelom and then exit into the mantle cavity . The larvae of inarticulate brachiopods are miniature adults , with lophophores that enable the larvae to feed and swim for months until the animals become heavy enough to settle to the seabed . The planktonic larvae of articulate species do not resemble the adults , but rather look like blobs with yolk sacs , and remain among the plankton for only a few days before leaving the water column upon metamorphosing . 
 In addition to the traditional classification of brachiopods into inarticulate and articulate , two approaches appeared in the 1990s : one approach groups the inarticulate Craniida with articulate brachiopods , since both use the same material in the mineral layers of their shell ; the other approach makes the Craniida a third group , as their outer organic layer is different from that in either of the other two . However , some taxonomists believe it is premature to suggest higher levels of classification such as order and recommend a bottom @-@ up approach that identifies genera and then groups these into intermediate groups . Traditionally , brachiopods have been regarded as members of , or as a sister group to , the deuterostomes , a superphylum that includes chordates and echinoderms . One type of analysis of the evolutionary relationships of brachiopods has always placed brachiopods as protostomes while another type has split between placing brachiopods among the protostomes or the deuterostomes . 
 It was suggested in 2003 that brachiopods had evolved from an ancestor similar to Halkieria , a slug @-@ like Cambrian animal with " chain mail " on its back and a shell at the front and rear end ; it was thought that the ancestral brachiopod converted its shells into a pair of valves by folding the rear part of its body under its front . However , new fossils found in 2007 and 2008 showed that the " chain mail " of tommotiids formed the tube of a sessile animal ; one tommotiid resembled phoronids , which are close relatives or a subgroup of brachiopods , while the other tommotiid bore two symmetrical plates that might be an early form of brachiopod valves . Lineages of brachiopods that have both fossil and extant taxa appeared in the early Cambrian , Ordovician , and Carboniferous periods , respectively . Other lineages have arisen and then become extinct , sometimes during severe mass extinctions . At their peak in the Paleozoic era , the brachiopods were among the most abundant filter @-@ feeders and reef @-@ builders , and occupied other ecological niches , including swimming in the jet @-@ propulsion style of scallops . Brachiopod fossils have been useful indicators of climate changes during the Paleozoic . However , after the Permian – Triassic extinction event , brachiopods recovered only a third of their former diversity . A study in 2007 concluded the brachiopods were especially vulnerable to the Permian – Triassic extinction , as they built calcareous hard parts ( made of calcium carbonate ) and had low metabolic rates and weak respiratory systems . It was often thought that brachiopods went into decline after the Permian – Triassic extinction , and were out @-@ competed by bivalves , but a study in 1980 found both brachiopod and bivalve species increased from the Paleozoic to modern times , with bivalves increasing faster ; after the Permian – Triassic extinction , brachiopods became for the first time less diverse than bivalves . 
 Brachiopods live only in the sea , and most species avoid locations with strong currents or waves . The larvae of articulate species settle in quickly and form dense populations in well @-@ defined areas while the larvae of inarticulate species swim for up to a month and have wide ranges . Brachiopods now live mainly in cold water and low light . Fish and crustaceans seem to find brachiopod flesh distasteful and seldom attack them . Among brachiopods , only the lingulids ( Lingula sp . ) have been fished commercially , on a very small scale . One brachiopod species ( <unk> adamsi ) may be a measure of environmental conditions around an oil terminal being built in Russia on the shore of the Sea of Japan . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Shells and their mechanisms = = = 
 Modern brachiopods range from 1 to 100 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 039 to 3 @.@ 937 in ) long , and most species are about 10 to 30 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 39 to 1 @.@ 18 in ) . The largest brachiopods known – <unk> and <unk> , reaching 30 to 38 centimetres ( 12 to 15 in ) in width – occurred in the upper part of the Lower Carboniferous . Each has two valves ( shell sections ) which cover the dorsal and ventral surface of the animal , unlike bivalve molluscs whose shells cover the lateral surfaces . The valves are termed brachial and pedicle . The brachial valve bears on its inner surface the brachia ( " arms " ) from which the phylum gets its name , and which support the lophophore , used for feeding and respiration . The pedicle valve has on its inner surface the attachment to the stalk @-@ like pedicle by which most brachiopods attach themselves to the substrate . ( R. C. Moore , 1952 ) The brachial and pedicle valves are often called the dorsal ( " upper " ) and ventral ( " lower " ) , but some paleontologists regard the terms " dorsal " and " ventral " as irrelevant since they believe that the " ventral " valve was formed by a folding of the upper surface under the body . The pedicle valve is typically larger than the brachial . In most articulate brachiopod species , both valves are convex , the surfaces often bearing growth lines and / or other ornamentation . However , inarticulate lingulids , which burrow into the seabed , have valves that are smoother , flatter and of similar size and shape . ( R. C. Moore , 1952 ) 
 Articulate ( " jointed " ) brachiopods have a tooth and socket arrangement by which the pedicle and brachial valves hinge , locking the valves against lateral displacement . Inarticulate brachiopods have no matching teeth and sockets ; their valves are held together only by muscles . ( R. C. Moore , 1952 ) 
 All brachiopods have adductor muscles that are set on the inside of the pedicle valve and which close the valves by pulling on the part of the brachial valve ahead of the hinge . These muscles have both " quick " fibers that close the valves in emergencies and " catch " fibers that are slower but can keep the valves closed for long periods . Articulate brachiopods open the valves by means of abductor muscles , also known as <unk> , which lie further to the rear and pull on the part of the brachial valve behind the hinge . Inarticulate brachiopods use a different opening mechanism , in which muscles reduce the length of the coelom ( main body cavity ) and make it bulge outwards , pushing the valves apart . Both classes open the valves to an angle of about 10 ° . The more complex set of muscles employed by inarticulate brachiopods can also operate the valves as scissors , a mechanism that lingulids use to burrow . 
 Each valve consists of three layers , an outer periostracum made of organic compounds and two biomineralized layers . Articulated brachiopods have an outermost periostracum made of proteins , a " primary layer " of calcite ( a form of calcium carbonate ) under that , and innermost a mixture of proteins and calcite . Inarticulate brachiopod shells have a similar sequence of layers , but their composition is different from that of articulated brachiopods and also varies among the classes of inarticulate brachiopods . <unk> and <unk> , which have pedicles , have a matrix of <unk> ( long , unbranched polysaccharides ) , in which other materials are embedded : chitin in the periostracum ; apatite containing calcium phosphate in the primary biomineralized layer ; and a complex mixture in the innermost layer , containing collagen and other proteins , <unk> and apatite . <unk> , which have no pedicle and cement themselves directly to hard surfaces , have a periostracum of chitin and mineralized layers of calcite . Shells can grow <unk> , where new material is added all around the margin , or <unk> , where new material is added to the posterior region of the shell in an anterior direction , growing towards the other shell . 
 = = = Mantle = = = 
 Brachiopods , as with molluscs , have an epithelial mantle that secretes and lines the shell , and encloses the internal organs . The brachiopod body occupies only about one @-@ third of the internal space inside the shell , nearest the hinge . The rest of the space is lined with the mantle lobes , extensions that enclose a water @-@ filled space in which sits the lophophore . The coelom extends into each lobe as a network of canals , which carry nutrients to the edges of the mantle . 
 Relatively new cells in a groove on the edges of the mantle secrete material that extends the periostracum . These cells are gradually displaced to the underside of the mantle by more recent cells in the groove , and switch to secreting the mineralized material of the shell valves . In other words , on the edge of the valve the periostracum is extended first , and then reinforced by extension of the mineralized layers under the periostracum . In most species the edge of the mantle also bears movable bristles , often called chaetae or setae , that may help defend the animals and may act as sensors . In some brachiopods groups of chaetae help to channel the flow of water into and out of the mantle cavity . 
 In most brachiopods , diverticula ( hollow extensions ) of the mantle penetrate through the mineralized layers of the valves into the <unk> . The function of these diverticula is uncertain and it is suggested that they may be storage chambers for chemicals such as glycogen , may secrete repellents to deter organisms that stick to the shell or may help in respiration . Experiments show that a brachiopod 's oxygen consumption drops if petroleum jelly is smeared on the shell , clogging the diverticula . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Like bryozoans and phoronids , brachiopods have a lophophore , a crown of tentacles whose cilia ( fine hairs ) create a water current that enables them to filter food particles out of the water . However a bryozoan or phoronid lophophore is a ring of tentacles mounted on a single , retracted stalk , while the basic form of the brachiopod lophophore is U @-@ shaped , forming the brachia ( " arms " ) from which the phylum gets its name . Brachiopod lophophores are non @-@ retractable and occupy up to two @-@ thirds of the internal space , in the frontmost area where the valves gape when opened . To provide enough filtering capacity in this restricted space , lophophores of larger brachiopods are folded in moderately to very complex shapes — loops and coils are common , and some species ' lophophores resemble a hand with the fingers splayed . In all species the lophophore is supported by cartilage and by a hydrostatic skeleton ( in other words by the pressure of its internal fluid ) , and the fluid extends into the tentacles . Some articulate brachiopods also have a <unk> , a calcareous support for the lophophore attached to the inside of the brachial valve . 
 The tentacles bear cilia ( fine mobile hairs ) on their edges and along the center . The beating of the outer cilia drives a water current from the tips of the tentacles to their bases , where it exits . Food particles that collide with the tentacles are trapped by mucus , and the <unk> down the middle drive this mixture to the base of the tentacles . A brachial groove runs round the bases of the tentacles , and its own cilia pass food along the groove towards the mouth . The method used by brachiopods is known as " upstream collecting " , as food particles are captured as they enter the field of cilia that creates the feeding current . This method is used by the related phoronids and bryozoans , and also by pterobranchs . Entoprocts use a similar @-@ looking crown of tentacles , but it is solid and the flow runs from bases to tips , forming a " downstream collecting " system that catches food particles as they are about to exit . 
 = = = Attachment to substrate = = = 
 Most modern species attach to hard surfaces by means of a cylindrical pedicle ( " stalk " ) , an extension of the body wall . This has a chitinous cuticle ( non @-@ cellular " skin " ) and protrudes through an opening in the hinge . However , some genera such as the inarticulate <unk> and the articulate <unk> have no pedicle , and cement the rear of the " pedicle " valve to a surface so that the front is slightly inclined up away from the surface . In a few articulate genera such as <unk> and <unk> , the pedicles wither as the adults grow and finally lie loosely on the surface . In these genera the shells are thickened and shaped so that the opening of the gaping valves is kept free of the sediment . 
 <unk> of inarticulate species are extensions of the main coelom , which houses the internal organs . A layer of longitudinal muscles lines the epidermis of the pedicle . Members of the order Lingulida have long pedicles , which they use to burrow into soft substrates , to raise the shell to the opening of the burrow to feed , and to retract the shell when disturbed . A <unk> moves its body up and down the top two @-@ thirds of the burrow , while the remaining third is occupied only by the pedicle , with a bulb on the end that builds a " concrete " anchor . However , the pedicles of the order Discinida are short and attach to hard surfaces . 
 An articulate pedicle has no coelom , is constructed from a different part of the larval body , and has a core composed of connective tissue . Muscles at the rear of the body can straighten , bend or even rotate the pedicle . The far end of the pedicle generally has rootlike extensions or short papillae ( " bumps " ) , which attach to hard surfaces . However , articulate brachiopods of genus <unk> use a branched pedicle to anchor in sediment . The pedicle emerges from the pedicle valve , either through a notch in the hinge or , in species where the pedicle valve is longer than the brachial , from a hole where the pedicle valve doubles back to touch the brachial valve . Some species stand with the front end upwards , while others lie horizontal with the pedicle valve uppermost . 
 Some brachiopods do not have a functional pedicle , and thus do not have this pedicle opening . 
 = = = Feeding and excretion = = = 
 The water flow enters the lophophore from the sides of the open valves and exits at the front of the animal . In lingulids the entrance and exit channels are formed by groups of chaetae that function as funnels . In other brachiopods the entry and exit channels are organized by the shape of the lophophore . The lophophore captures food particles , especially phytoplankton ( tiny photosynthetic organisms ) , and deliver them to the mouth via the brachial grooves along the bases of the tentacles . The mouth is at the base of the lophophore . Food passes through the mouth , muscular pharynx ( " throat " ) and oesophagus ( " gullet " ) , all of which are lined with cilia and cells that secrete mucus and digestive enzymes . The stomach wall has branched ceca ( " pouches " ) where food is digested , mainly within the cells . 
 Nutrients are transported throughout the coelom , including the mantle lobes , by cilia . The wastes produced by metabolism are broken into ammonia , which is eliminated by diffusion through the mantle and lophophore . Brachiopods have metanephridia , used by many phyla to excrete ammonia and other dissolved wastes . However , brachiopods have no sign of the <unk> , which perform the first phase of excretion in this process , and brachiopod metanephridia appear to be used only to emit sperm and ova . 
 The majority of food consumed by brachiopods is digestible , with very little solid waste produced . The cilia of the lophophore can change direction to eject isolated particles of indigestible matter . If the animal encounters larger lumps of undesired matter , the cilia lining the entry channels pause and the tentacles in contact with the lumps move apart to form large gaps and then slowly use their cilia to dump the lumps onto the lining of the mantle . This has its own cilia , which wash the lumps out through the opening between the valves . If the lophophore is clogged , the <unk> snap the valves sharply , which creates a " sneeze " that clears the obstructions . In some inarticulate brachiopods the digestive tract is U @-@ shaped and ends with an anus that eliminates solids from the front of the body wall . Other inarticulate brachiopods and all articulate brachiopods have a curved gut that ends blindly , with no anus . These animals bundle solid waste with mucus and periodically " sneeze " it out , using sharp contractions of the gut muscles . 
 = = = Circulation and respiration = = = 
 The lophophore and mantle are the only surfaces that absorb oxygen and eliminate carbon dioxide . Oxygen seems to be distributed by the fluid of the coelom , which is circulated through the mantle and driven either by contractions of the lining of the coelom or by beating of its cilia . In some species oxygen is partly carried by the respiratory pigment <unk> , which is transported in <unk> <unk> maximum oxygen consumption of brachiopods is low , and their minimum requirement is not measurable . 
 Brachiopods also have colorless blood , circulated by a muscular heart lying in the dorsal part of the body above the stomach . The blood passes through vessels that extend to the front and back of the body , and branch to organs including the lophophore at the front and the gut , muscles , gonads and nephridia at the rear . The blood circulation seems not to be completely closed , and the coelomic fluid and blood must mix to a degree . The main function of the blood may be to deliver nutrients . 
 = = = Nervous system and senses = = = 
 The " brain " of adult articulates consists of two ganglia , one above and the other below the oesophagus . Adult inarticulates have only the lower ganglion . From the ganglia and the commissures where they join , nerves run to the lophophore , the mantle lobes and the muscles that operate the valves . The edge of the mantle has probably the greatest concentration of sensors . Although not directly connected to sensory neurons , the mantle 's chaetae probably send tactile signals to receptors in the epidermis of the mantle . Many brachiopods close their valves if shadows appear above them , but the cells responsible for this are unknown . Some brachiopods have statocysts , which detect changes in the animals ' position . 
 = = = Reproduction and life cycle = = = 
 Lifespans range from 3 to over 30 years . Adults of most species are of one sex throughout their lives . The gonads are masses of developing gametes ( ova or sperm ) , and most species have four gonads , two in each valve . Those of articulates lie in the channels of the mantle lobes , while those of inarticulates lie near the gut . Ripe gametes float into the main coelom and then exit into the mantle cavity via the metanephridia , which open on either side of the mouth . Most species release both ova and sperm into the water , but females of some species keep the embryos in brood chambers until the larvae hatch . 
 The cell division in the embryo is radial ( cells form in stacks of rings directly above each other ) , holoblastic ( cells are separate , although adjoining ) and regulative ( the type of tissue into which a cell develops is controlled by interactions between adjacent cells , rather than rigidly within each cell ) . While some animals develop the mouth and anus by deepening the blastopore , a " dent " in the surface of the early embryo , the blastopore of brachiopods closes up , and their mouth and anus develop from new openings . 
 The larvae of inarticulates swim as plankton for months and are like miniature adults , with valves , mantle lobes , a pedicle that coils in the mantle cavity , and a small lophophore , which is used for both feeding and swimming — except that <unk> have no pedicle . As the shell becomes heavier , the juvenile sinks to the bottom and becomes a sessile adult . The larvae of articulate species live only on yolk , and remain among the plankton for only a few days . This type of larva has a ciliated frontmost lobe that becomes the body and lophophore , a rear lobe that becomes the pedicle , and a mantle like a skirt , with the hem towards the rear . On metamorphosing into an adult , the pedicle attaches to a surface , the front lobe develops the lophophore and other organs , and the mantle rolls up over the front lobe and starts to secrete the shell . In cold seas , brachiopod growth is seasonal and the animals often lose weight in winter . These variations in growth often form growth lines in the shells . Members of some genera have survived for a year in aquaria without food . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = <unk> history = = = 
 Brachiopod fossils show great diversity in the morphology of the shells and lophophore , while the modern genera show less diversity but provide soft @-@ bodied characteristics . Both fossils and extant species have limitations that make it difficult to produce a comprehensive classification of brachiopods based on morphology . The phylum also has experienced significant convergent evolution and reversals ( in which a more recent group seems to have lost a characteristic that is seen in an intermediate group , reverting to a characteristic last seen in an older group ) . Hence some brachiopod taxonomists believe it is premature to define higher levels of classification such as order , and recommend instead a bottom @-@ up approach that identifies genera and then groups these into intermediate groups . 
 However , other taxonomists believe that some patterns of characteristics are sufficiently stable to make higher @-@ level classifications worthwhile , although there are different views about what the higher @-@ level classifications should be . The " traditional " classification was defined in 1869 ; two further approaches were established in the 1990s : 
 In the " traditional " classification , the Articulata have toothed hinges between the valves , while the hinges of the <unk> are held together only by muscles . 
 A classification devised in the 1990s , based on the materials of which the shells are based , united the Craniida and the " articulate " brachiopods in the <unk> , which have calcite shells . The Lingulida and Discinida , combined in the <unk> , have shells made of chitin and calcium phosphate . 
 A three @-@ part scheme , also from the 1990s , places the Craniida in a separate group of its own , the <unk> . The Lingulida and Discinida are grouped as <unk> , and the Rhynchonellida and Terebratulida as <unk> . 
 About 330 living species are recognized , grouped into over 100 genera . The great majority of modern brachiopods are <unk> ( Articulata , but excluding Craniida ) . 
 = = = Modern classification = = = 
 Genetic analysis performed since the 1990 ’ s has extended the understanding of the relationship between different organisms . It is now clear the brachiopods do not belong to the <unk> ( such as echinoderms and chordates ) as was hypothesized earlier , but should be included in the <unk> ( with mollusks and annelid worms ) , in a subgroup now called Lophotrochozoa . Although their adult morphology seems rather different , the <unk> sequence of the 18S rRNA indicates that the horseshoe worms are the closest relatives of the inarticulate brachiopods rather than articulate brachiopods . For now , the weight of evidence is inconclusive as to the exact relations within the inarticulates . Consequently , it has been suggested to included horseshoe worms in the Brachiopoda as a class named <unk> <unk> & <unk> in addition to the <unk> and <unk> , within the subphylum <unk> . The other subphylum <unk> only contains one class , which is subdivided in the orders Rhynchonellida , Terebratulida and <unk> . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Distribution and habitat = = = 
 Brachiopods live only in the sea . Most species avoid locations with strong currents or waves , and typical sites include rocky overhangs , crevices and caves , steep slopes of continental shelves , and in deep ocean floors . However , some articulate species attach to kelp or in exceptionally sheltered sites in intertidal zones . The smallest living brachiopod , <unk> , is only about 1 millimetre ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) long , and lives in between gravel . <unk> ( Articulata excluding Craniida ) , whose larvae consume only their yolks and settle and develop quickly , specialize in specific areas and form dense populations that can reach thousands per meter . Young adults often attach to the shells of more mature ones . On the other hand , inarticulate brachiopods , whose larva swim for up to a month before settling , have wide ranges . Members of the <unk> genus <unk> have a cosmopolitan distribution . 
 = = = Interactions with other organisms = = = 
 The rates of metabolism of Brachiopoda are between one third and one tenth of those of bivalves . While brachiopods were abundant in warm , shallow seas during the Cretaceous period , they have been outcompeted by bivalves , and now live mainly in cold and low @-@ light conditions . 
 Brachiopod shells occasionally show evidence of damage by predators , and sometimes of subsequent repair . Fish and crustaceans seem to find brachiopod flesh distasteful . The fossil record shows that drilling predators like gastropods attacked molluscs and echinoids 10 to 20 times more often than they did brachiopods , suggesting that such predators attacked brachiopods by mistake or when other prey was scarce . In waters where food is scarce , the snail <unk> <unk> steals food from bivalves , snails , tube worms , and brachiopods . 
 Among brachiopods only the lingulids have been fished commercially , and only on a very small scale . Brachiopods seldom settle on artificial surfaces , probably because they are vulnerable to pollution . This may make the population of <unk> adamsi useful as a measure of environmental conditions around an oil terminal being built in Russia on the shore of the Sea of Japan . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 Over 12 @,@ 000 fossil species are recognized , grouped into over 5 @,@ 000 genera . While the largest modern brachiopods are 100 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) long , a few fossils measure up to 200 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) wide . The earliest confirmed brachiopods have been found in the early Cambrian , inarticulate forms appearing first , followed soon after by articulate forms . Three unmineralized species have also been found in the Cambrian , and apparently represent two distinct groups that evolved from mineralized ancestors . The inarticulate Lingula is often called a " living fossil " , as very similar genera have been found all the way back to the Ordovician . On the other hand , articulate brachiopods have produced major <unk> , and suffered severe mass extinctions — but the articulate Rhynchonellida and Terebratulida , the most diverse present @-@ day groups , appeared at the start of the Ordovician and Carboniferous respectively . 
 Since 1991 Claus Nielsen has proposed a hypothesis about the development of brachiopods , adapted in 2003 by Cohen and colleagues as a hypothesis about the earliest evolution of brachiopods . This " brachiopod fold " hypothesis suggests that brachiopods evolved from an ancestor similar to Halkieria , a slug @-@ like animal with " chain mail " on its back and a shell at the front and rear end . The hypothesis proposes that the first brachiopod converted its shells into a pair of valves by folding the rear part of its body under its front . 
 However , fossils from 2007 onwards have supported a new interpretation of the Early @-@ Cambrian tommotiids and a new hypothesis that brachiopods evolved from tommotiids . The " armor mail " of tommotiids was well @-@ known but not in an assembled form , and it was generally assumed that tommotiids were slug @-@ like animals similar to Halkieria , except that tommotiids ' armor was made of <unk> compounds while that of Halkieria was made of calcite . However fossils of a new tommotiid , <unk> , showed an assembled mail coat that formed a tube , which would indicate a sessile animal rather than a creeping slug @-@ like one . <unk> 's <unk> tube resembled that of phoronids , sessile animals that feed by lophophores and are regarded either very close relatives or a sub @-@ group of brachiopods . <unk> , another mostly assembled fossil found in 2008 and described in 2009 , had two symmetrical plates at the bottom , like brachiopod valves but not fully enclosing the animal 's body . 
 At their peak in the Paleozoic the brachiopods were among the most abundant filter @-@ feeders and reef @-@ builders , and occupied other ecological niches , including swimming in the jet @-@ propulsion style of scallops . However , after the Permian – Triassic extinction event , informally known as the " Great Dying " , brachiopods recovered only a third of their former diversity . It was often thought that brachiopods were actually decline in diversity , and that in some way bivalves out @-@ competed them . However , in 1980 Gould and Calloway produced a statistical analysis that concluded that : both brachiopods and bivalves increased all the way from the Paleozoic to modern times , but bivalves increased faster ; the Permian – Triassic extinction was moderately severe for bivalves but devastating for brachiopods , so that brachiopods for the first time were less diverse than bivalves and their diversity after the Permian increased from a very low base ; there is no evidence that bivalves out @-@ competed brachiopods , and short @-@ term increases or decreases for both groups appeared at the same times . In 2007 Knoll and <unk> concluded that brachiopods were one of several groups that were most vulnerable to the Permian – Triassic extinction , as all had calcareous hard parts ( made of calcium carbonate ) and had low metabolic rates and weak respiratory systems . 
 Brachiopod fossils have been useful indicators of climate changes during the Paleozoic era . When global temperatures were low , as in much of the Ordovician , the large difference in temperatures between equator and poles created different collections of fossils at different latitudes . On the other hand , warmer periods , such much of the Silurian , created smaller difference in temperatures , and all seas at the low to middle latitudes were colonized by the same few brachiopod species . 
 = = = Evolutionary family tree = = = 
 = = = = <unk> or protostomes = = = = 
 From about the 1940s to the 1990s , family trees based on embryological and morphological features placed brachiopods among or as a sister group to the <unk> a super @-@ phylum that includes chordates and echinoderms . Closer examination has found difficulties in the grounds on which brachiopods were affiliated with deuterostomes : 
 Radial cleavage in the earliest divisions of the egg appears to be the original condition for the ancestral bilaterians , in the earliest Ecdysozoa and possibly in the earliest <unk> , a major sub @-@ group of the Lophotrochozoa . Hence radial cleavage does not imply that brachiopods are affiliated with deuterostomes . 
 The traditional view is that the coelom ( s ) in deuterostomes and protostomes form by different process , called enterocoely and schizocoely respectively . However , research since the early 1990s has found significant exceptions . Both types of coelom construction appear among brachiopods , and therefore do not imply that brachiopods are deuterostomes . 
 The terms " deuterostomes " and " protostomes " originally defined distinct ways of forming the mouth from the blastopore , a depression that appears in an early stage of the embryo . However , some " protostomes " forming the mouth using a process more like that typical of deuterostomes . Hence forming the mouth via a deuterostome @-@ like process does not imply that brachiopods are affiliated with deuterostomes . 
 Nielsen views the brachiopods and closely related phoronids as affiliated with the deuterostome pterobranchs because their lophophores are driven by one cilium per cell , while those of bryozoans , which he regards as <unk> , have multiple cilia per cell . However , pterobranchs are hemichordates and probably closely related to echinoderms , and there is no evidence that the latest common ancestor of pterobranchs and other hemichordates or the latest common ancestor of hemichordates and echinoderms was sessile and fed by means of tentacles . 
 From 1988 onwards analyses based on molecular phylogeny , which compares biochemical features such as similarities in DNA , have placed brachiopods among the Lophotrochozoa , a protostome super @-@ phylum that includes molluscs , annelids and flatworms but excludes the other protostome super @-@ phylum Ecdysozoa , whose members include arthropods . This conclusion is unanimous among molecular phylogeny studies , which use a wide selection of genes : rDNA , Hox genes , mitochondrial protein genes , single nuclear protein genes and sets of nuclear protein genes . 
 Some combined studies in 2000 and 2001 , using both molecular and morphological data , support brachiopods as Lophotrochozoa , while others in 1998 and 2004 concluded that brachiopods were deuterostomes . 
 = = = = Relationship with other lophotrochozoans = = = = 
 The phoronids feed with a lophophore , burrow or encrust on surfaces , and build three @-@ layered tubes made of polysaccharide , possibly chitin , mixed with particles with seabed material . Traditionally they have been regarded as a separate phylum , but increasingly detailed molecular phylogeny studies between 1997 and 2000 have concluded that phoronids are a sub @-@ group of brachiopods . However , an analysis in 2005 concluded that phoronids are a sub @-@ group of bryozoans . 
 While all molecular phylogeny studies and half the combined studies until 2008 conclude that brachiopods are lophotrochozoans , they could not identify which <unk> phylum were the closest relatives of brachiopods — except phoronids , which are a sub @-@ group of brachiopods . However , in 2008 two analyses found that brachiopods ' closest <unk> relatives were nemertines . The authors found this surprising , since nemertines have spiral cleavage in the early stages of cell division and form a trochophore larva , while brachiopods have radial cleavage and a larva that shows no sign of having evolved from a trochophore . Another study in 2008 also concluded that brachiopods are closely related to nemertines , casting doubt on the idea that brachiopods are part of a clade Lophophorata of lophophore @-@ feeding animals within the lophotrochozoans . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Children and Television : Lessons from Sesame Street = 
 Children and Television : Lessons from Sesame Street ( 1974 ) is a non @-@ fiction book written by Gerald S. Lesser , in which he describes the production of Sesame Street , and the formation and pedagogical philosophy of the Children 's Television Workshop . Lesser was a professor at Harvard University , studying how social class and ethnicity interacted with school achievement and was one of the first academics in the US who researched how watching television affected children and their development . He was initially skeptical about the potential of using television as a teaching tool , but he was eventually named as the advisory board chairman of the Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) , the organization created to oversee the production and research of Sesame Street , and was the show 's first educational director . Lesser wrote the book early in Sesame Street 's history , to evaluate the show 's effectiveness , to explain what its writers , researchers , and producers were attempting to do , and to respond to criticism of Sesame Street . 
 Children and Television has four sections , " A Proposal " , " Planning " , " Broadcasting " and " Lessons from Sesame Street " . The book also has a preface and an epilogue , written by Lesser , a foreword written by co @-@ creator Joan Ganz Cooney , and an introduction by co @-@ creator Lloyd Morrisett . Scattered throughout the book are cartoons drawn by children 's author Maurice Sendak . Lesser describes the origin and development of Sesame Street and his part in it . He also describes the research involved in the show 's creation and production . 
 = = Background = = 
 Gerald S. Lesser was the Biglow Professor of Education and Developmental Psychology at Harvard University . He studied how social class and ethnicity interacted with school achievement and was one of the first academics in the US who researched how watching television affected children and their development . In 1963 , he served as an academic adviser for the NBC educational program , Exploring . In 1968 , Sesame Street co @-@ creator Lloyd Morrisett , whom he had met as a student at Yale University , asked Lesser to assist with the research of a new children 's show he and producer Joan Ganz Cooney were developing , a show that eventually became Sesame Street . 
 Lesser was initially skeptical about the potential of using television as a teaching tool , but he was eventually named as the advisory board chairman of the Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) , the organization created to oversee the production and research of Sesame Street , and was the show 's first educational director . He was also skeptical about Cooney 's qualifications as CTW 's first director , but Cooney later stated , " ... I couldn 't begin to measure how proud I am to be Gerry Lesser 's colleague and how happy I am to know the pleasure of his company " . 
 In the summer of 1968 , under what Sesame Street researchers Edward Palmer and Shalom Fisch called Lesser 's " able leadership " , five three @-@ day curriculum planning seminars were conducted in Boston . The purpose of the seminars , attended by educational experts and the new show 's writers and producers , was to ascertain which school @-@ preparation skills to emphasize . According to writer Michael Davis , Lesser 's skills at encouraging collegiality were evident during the seminars . Writer Louise Gikow reported that the real friction occurred between the educators present . As Sesame Street songwriter Christopher Cerf reported , " ... [ Lesser ] ran meetings better than anyone I 've ever seen . He made everybody feel like they were important , that they got listened to , and that their work ended up in the final product " . Davis noted that the seminars also served as a " crash course in child development , psychology , and preschool education " for the show 's producers and writers . According to researcher Robert W. Morrow , Lesser understood that in order to bring research about child development into the production process of Sesame Street , a close working relationship had to be created between the researchers and the producers . Davis credited Lesser 's " informal , unpretentious , and collaborative " manner with the creation of that close relationship . 
 As head of research on Sesame Street , Lesser came up with what he called " the CTW model " . This model included having assumptions about how children learn from television , the use of high @-@ quality production values , and establishing " an organization that fostered mutual confidence among its members " . Field research testing the effectiveness of each episode 's content was conducted at preschools , prior to broadcast . The show 's educational goals were measured after each episode aired to further evaluate the show 's effectiveness . 
 Lesser wrote Children and Television in 1974 , early in the show 's history , to evaluate the effectiveness of the CTW model , to explain what the show 's writers , researchers , and producers were attempting to do , and to respond to criticism of Sesame Street . Lesser also explained the show 's logic , its curriculum , and its pedagogy . Writer Robert W. Morrow called Lesser 's book " Sesame Street 's most adept defense " . According to Morrow , Children and Television was the most complete explanation of the CTW 's reasoning behind the show at the time , and a memoir of the show 's development . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Children and Television has four sections , " A Proposal " , " Planning " , " Broadcasting " and " Lessons from Sesame Street " . The book also has a preface and an epilogue , written by Lesser , a foreword written by Joan Ganz Cooney , and an introduction by Lloyd Morrisett . Scattered throughout the book are cartoons drawn by children 's author Maurice Sendak , who attended the 1968 seminars . 
 Lesser begins his book by describing the origin of Sesame Street and his part in it . He had been studying child development and how its concepts could be used to teach children ; since 1961 , he studied children 's reaction to television and whether or not the medium could be used to teach them . In 1966 , he was approached by Cooney and Morrisett to assist them in creating the new show 's educational objectives and research goals , and he agreed despite his misgivings about the effectiveness of television as a teaching tool . 
 Sesame Street 's audience included any child in the country who wished to watch it , but Lesser reports that the producers ' original purpose was to reach the poor children of America . Lesser states , " If the series did not work for poor children , the entire project would fail " . He is critical of the American public school system , and blames its failure to educate children on the lack of defined goals . When he wrote Television and Children , most American children received no preschool education . The first two chapters of the book detail the reasons for the experiment of creating an educational television program like Sesame Street , especially in regards to its audience . 
 " <unk> never seem to understand anything by themselves , and it is tiresome for children to be always and forever explaining things to them " . 
 Antoine de Saint @-@ Exupéry , The Little Prince . 
 Gerald Lesser used this quote to begin the second section of Children and Television . He introduced many of his sections and chapters with pertinent quotes . 
 Lesser opens the section on " Planning " by relating how many of the cast and crew were recruited : executive producer David Connell , producer Sam Gibbon , head writer Jon Stone , producer and writer Matt Robinson , Jim Henson , composer Joe Raposo , and actors Loretta Long , Bob McGrath , and Will Lee . Lesser also recounts the process of hiring head researcher Edward L. Palmer and those involved with community outreach . The producers of the new show spent eighteen months planning , something that was unprecedented in children 's television . Lesser extensively describes the series of curriculum seminars that took place at Harvard University and in New York City in the summer of 1968 . 
 These chapters outline the philosophy behind Sesame Street . The show 's creators made assumptions about teaching and held the unconventional view that learning can be unintentional and enjoyable . Finally , they decided that although Sesame Street was set in an urban setting , they would avoid depicting more negativity than what was already present in the child 's environment . Lesser states , " With all its raucousness and slapstick humor , Sesame Street became a sweet show , and its staff maintains that there is nothing wrong in that " . 
 The researchers developed a " Writer 's Notebook " for the show 's writers and producers to serve as a bridge between curriculum goals and script development . Lesser connects the show 's production techniques — including the use of music , humor ( especially slapstick humor ) , and animation — with educational goals . Lesser emphasizes the importance of characters , both human and Muppet , to sustain children 's attention . According to Lesser , Sesame Street combines four elements to sustain attention : Muppets , the cast of live adults and children on the set , animation , and live @-@ action film . 
 According to Lesser , before the creation of Sesame Street , children 's reactions to educational television was ignored ; this marked the first time that they were studied to evaluate and improve the show 's content and efficacy . Lesser reports that approximately 10 @-@ 15 percent of the CTW 's initial two @-@ year budget of $ 8 million was spent on research . He relates the priorities for pre @-@ production research , which he called " summative evaluation " . Using outside research groups like the Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) , the Workshop wanted to ascertain if watching the show made any difference . They were particularly interested in comparing the show 's effect on children from different socio @-@ economic groups , and if viewing conditions affected its effectiveness . 
 Lesser states , " This became the first time in television 's 25 @-@ year history that child @-@ watching was systematically applied over a sustained period to the design of a televised series for children " . Lesser describes the new methods researcher Edward Palmer created to study the effects Sesame Street had on its young viewers ; for example , the " distractor " , in which a slide projector was placed next to a television set and adjusted to change slides every eight seconds . The researchers recorded when children in their study moved their attention away from the television to the projector , and the data collected were analyzed . Segments were removed based upon the information gathered . " This was the first time in television 's history that the children themselves would be listened to with care as a television series for them was designed and broadcast " , Lesser states . 
 Lesser begins the section on " Broadcasting " relating the origin of the show 's name . As he puts it , " ... We were forced to select the name we all liked the least " . Lesser reports that the show 's premiere on November 10 , 1969 was met with a large amount of acclaim and good reviews , but there were some negative reviews and criticism , which he recounts and addresses in great detail in the chapter entitled " Criticism " . He includes the criticism of approximately thirty groups and individuals , and demonstrates the essence and range of their arguments . 
 Lesser describes the research about the long @-@ term effect of Sesame Street . He reports that the show was watched by three to four million viewers by the middle of its first season , and breaks down the viewership into categories . According to Lesser , ratings remained consistently high . Lesser also describes the testing used by ETS , which found positive differences after the first three weeks of the show 's first season . They found that the children who watched the most learned the most . 
 The final section of Lesser 's book , " Lessons from Sesame Street " , summarizes what the creators and researchers were attempting to do . As Lesser states , " Here is Sesame Street 's main lesson : It deliberately uses television to teach without hiding its educational intentions and yet it attracts a large and devoted audience of young children from all parts of the country " . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 Terry Barrett of Ohio State University calls Children and Television a " serious book " , something that could be read by the general public without compromising the field of education . Barrett also calls the book an informative treatment of an " interesting contemporary educational phenomenon " . Joan Tierney of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation calls the book " a well @-@ thought , well @-@ organized historical version " of the early history and development of Sesame Street . She not only considers the book a " how @-@ to " in how to create and produce a children 's television show , but also an important exposure to the public the hard work and dedication it required to put it on the air . For Tierney , the most interesting part of the story Lesser tells in the book is how people with strong and different opinions and temperaments learned to work together and to give television " a little bit of class " . She applauds Lesser for including the CTW 's detractors , but believes that he unnecessarily included the more ridiculous criticisms in order to give Sesame Street and the Workshop more credibility . Rose K. <unk> of Cornell University criticizes Lesser for legitimizing " the strange folk belief that depositing lore in a child 's head is the same as educating a child " . She criticizes the research Lesser describes in the book , and insists that it should be considered as product @-@ testing rather than educational research . She also criticizes Lesser for legitimizing consumerism . 
 Ellen <unk> of Northwestern University called Children and Television a " profound book " that greatly influenced the field of children and media . She said that it was the first book in the U.S. that established the idea that children and television could be studied from a developmental perspective , that academics could be involved in the production of educational television programs , and that " children 's development and our understanding of children 's development could be important in the creation of media products " . The book also had a profound effect how later research has been conducted , and has been cited in hundreds of studies and books . 
 = Black Act = 
 The Black Act ( 9 Geo . 1 c . 22 ) was an Act of the Parliament of Great Britain passed in 1723 in response to a series of raids by two groups of poachers , known as the Blacks . Arising in the aftermath of the South Sea Bubble 's collapse and the ensuing economic downturn , the Blacks gained their name from their habit of blacking their faces when undertaking poaching raids . They quickly demonstrated both " a calculated programme of action , and a conscious social resentment " , and their activities led to the introduction of the Black Act to Parliament on 26 April 1723 ; it came into force on 27 May . The Act introduced the death penalty for over 50 criminal offences , including being found in a forest while disguised , and " no other single statute passed during the eighteenth century equalled [ the Black Act ] in severity , and none appointed the punishment of death in so many cases " . Following a criminal law reform campaign in the early 19th century , it was largely repealed on 8 July 1823 , when a reform bill introduced by Robert Peel came into force . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the South Sea Bubble 's collapse in 1720 , Britain suffered an economic downturn that led to heightened social tensions . A small element of this was the activity of two groups of poachers , based in Hampshire and Windsor Forest respectively . The first flurry of activity came from the Hampshire group , and began in October 1721 when 16 poachers assembled in Farnham to raid the park of the Bishop of Winchester . Three deer were carried off , and two others killed ; four of the poachers were later caught , with two released due to a lack of evidence and the others pilloried and sentenced to a year and a day in prison . The poachers became known as the " Blacks " , due to their practise of blackening their faces to prevent identification ; most famously , the Hampshire groups were the " Waltham Blacks " . In response to the convictions , the poachers decided to attack the Bishop 's property again , demonstrating " a calculated programme of action , and a conscious social resentment " that distinguished them from normal poachers . In the reprisal attack , 11 deer were taken and many more killed , leading to a royal proclamation offering £ 100 for information that led to the arrest of the gang . This was followed by a series of raids highlighting a " fairly direct class hatred " , that culminated in the raid of a shipment of wine ordered for the Prince of Wales . This proved to be the final straw , with Sir Francis Page , a " notorious hanging judge " , sent to the Winchester Assizes to preside over any prosecutions , forcing the Hampshire Blacks underground . 
 The Windsor Blacks then began their activities , copying the Hampshire group . Their main target was Caversham Park , owned by the Earl of Cadogan , with a series of increasingly audacious raids in 1722 and 1723 including one in which a gamekeeper 's son was killed . In response to these actions , the government introduced the Black Act , formally " An Act for the more effectual punishing wicked and evil disposed Persons going armed in Disguise and doing Injuries and Violence to the Persons and Properties of His Majesty 's Subject , and for the more speedy bringing the Offenders to Justice " , to Parliament on 26 April 1723 ; it came into force on 27 May . 
 = = Act = = 
 The Act dealt with any offender who was armed and with a blacked face , armed and otherwise disguised , merely blacked , merely disguised , accessories after the fact or " any other person or persons " . If anyone who fitted into one of the above categories was found in a forest , chase , down or Royal Park , they could be sentenced to death . Similarly , it was an offence to hunt , kill , wound or steal deer in these locations , with the first offence punishable by a fine , and the second by penal transportation . Other criminalised activities included fishing , the hunting of hares , the destruction of fish @-@ ponds , the destruction of trees and the killing of cattle in these locations – the latter also punishable by death . An offender could also be executed if he set fire to corn , hay , straw , wood , houses or barns , or shot another person . The same penalties applied to attempting to rescue anyone imprisoned under the Black Act , or attempting to solicit other people to participate in crimes that violated it . In total , the Act introduced the death penalty for over 50 criminal acts . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Three of the Blacks ' leaders had already been captured during the passage of the Act , although one later escaped , and a series of raids captured a total of 32 Blacks who were tried after the Act 's passage in Reading . Four were sentenced to death for the killing of the gamekeeper 's son , with the executions occurring on 15 June 1723 . Trials for the others continued into 1724 , and 7 more were captured and tried on 7 December . This marked the effective end of the Blacks as an organised group . At the time , it was thought that the Blacks were Jacobites , with Sir Robert Walpole encouraging these ideas to advance his own interests ; the rationale for the Act has been described as " at least as much to do with the hysteria induced by Walpole ... as with any need for new powers to fight deer @-@ stealing " . 
 Modern scholars have differed in their view of whether the Blacks were Jacobites or not . Some argue that the links between the Blacks and the Jacobites were " fantasies " , and that the Blacks were " simply a mixed group of foresters : labourers , yeomen and some gentry defending their customary rights " . Others , however , have claimed that the Blacks were closely connected with Jacobitism and that the Black Act was designed to combat this political threat . 
 In March 1723 Philip Caryll was arrested by the government for drinking to the Pretender 's health in the home of the Pretender 's former nurse in Portsea , Portsmouth . An innkeeper of <unk> testified that Caryll held meetings at his inn with the former Tory MP Sir Henry Goring . Goring fled to France after the Jacobite Atterbury Plot was discovered , in August 1722 . It quickly became known to the Dutch ambassador that Goring had requested from the Waltham Blacks support for a Jacobite rising . The ambassador wrote that the Blacks were originally a group of smugglers and that their Jacobite allegiance was the primary reason for the passing of the Black Act . Goring wrote to the Pretender on 6 May 1723 : 
 I had settled an affair with five gentlemen of that country who were each of them to raise a regiment of dragoons well mounted and well armed which I knew they could easily do for the men had horses and homes of their own , and were , to say the truth most of them , the persons who some time since robbed the late Bishop of Winchester 's Park , and have increased in their number ever since . They go by the name of the Waltham Blacks ( tho few of them live there ) which is a most loyal little town ... I once saw two hundred and upwards of these Blacks in a body within half a mile of my house . They had been running brandy . There was 24 customs officers following them who they abused heartily and carried off their cargo . I am told there is no less than a thousand of them and indeed I believe they have now taken loyalty into their heads , and will I hope prove very useful . 
 As late as the Jacobite rising of 1745 @-@ 46 newspapers were reporting that the Blacks had reappeared in Hampshire , stealing deer and robbing parks . 
 Sir Geoffrey Elton claimed that the Act was " passed not in order to suppress legitimate protest but because organized gangs were destroying deer and planning a Jacobite rising " . The Act has been described as " severe and sanguinary " , and L. <unk> notes in the Cambridge Law Journal that " no other single statute passed during the eighteenth century equalled [ the Black Act ] in severity , and none appointed the punishment of death in so many cases " . Efforts to repeal it started in 1810 , with comments by William Grant as part of a wider debate on penal reform ; a formal recommendation for its repeal took almost a decade , with the publication of the Report on Criminal Laws in 1819 marking the first " official " suggestion that the law be removed from the statute books . Following the publication of the Report , Sir James Mackintosh introduced a law reform bill that would have repealed the Act , but although it passed through the House of Commons successfully it was strongly opposed in the Lords . In 1823 he submitted a memo to the House of Commons , again suggesting the repeal of the Act , and a few months later Robert Peel , the Home Secretary , introduced a bill that repealed the entirety of the Black Act except for the provisions that criminalised setting fire to houses and shooting a person . This passed , and came into effect on 8 July 1823 . 
 = Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror = 
 Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror is a point @-@ and @-@ click adventure video game originally released on Microsoft Windows and PlayStation in 1997 . It was re @-@ released on Microsoft Windows , OS X and iOS as a remastered edition in 2010 and on Android in 2012 . It is the second installment in the Broken Sword series , and the first game in the series that does not follow the Knights Templar storyline . The player assumes the role of George Stobbart , a young American who is an eyewitness to the kidnapping of his girlfriend Nicole Collard . 
 The game was conceived in 1997 by Revolution . Though serious in tone , The Smoking Mirror incorporates some humour and graphics animated in the style of classic animated films . It was the fourth and last game built with the Virtual Theatre engine , which was used to render the locations of the game 's events . 
 Unlike the first Broken Sword game , which garnered critical acclaim , The Smoking Mirror received mixed to positive reviews , mostly for not living up to its predecessor . Nevertheless , it was a commercial success , selling about one million copies in the mid @-@ 1990s . Revolution released a remastered version of the game in 2010 , which unlike the original version , received highly favorable reviews from critics . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror is a 2D adventure game played from a third @-@ person perspective . Via a point @-@ and @-@ click interface , the player guides protagonist George Stobbart through the game 's world and interacts with the environment by selecting from multiple commands , while Nicole Collard is also a playable character in selected portions of the game . The player controls George 's movements and actions with a mouse ( PC and PlayStation ) , or a gamepad ( PlayStation ) . Player can collect objects that can be used with either other collectible objects , parts of the scenery , or with other people in order to solve puzzles and progress in the game . George can engage in dialogue with other characters through conversation trees to gain hints of what needs to be done to solve the puzzles or to progress the plot . The player uses a map to travel , and new locations are added to it as the story unfolds . By right clicking on an object , the player gets a description and clues . The player character 's death is possible if the player makes a wrong decision . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Six months after the events of The Shadow of the Templars , protagonist George Stobbart and his girlfriend , Nicole Collard , visit an archaeologist named Professor Oubier to learn about a mysterious Mayan stone Nico uncovered while researching a newspaper story . At Oubier 's home , they are ambushed by two Central Americans , who kidnap Nico , tie George to a chair and set the building ablaze . George unties himself and puts out the fire . He contacts Andre Lobineau , who reveals that Nico had suspected that something would go wrong and had left the stone with him . Lobineau tells him of a gallery owner who can tell him more about Mayan art . George discovers that Oubier supplies the gallery with Mayan artifacts , which he imports through a company named Condor Transglobal . Following this lead , George finds the two Central Americans who kidnapped Nico . One of them , whose name is later revealed to be Pablo , is shown threatening and berating the other ( later revealed to be called Titipoco ) . George knocks Pablo unconscious and discovers that Condor Transglobal has links with Quaramonte City in Central America . He also frees Titipoco , who had been manacled by Pablo . George finds Nico , who reveals that , while trying to expose a drug ring run by a man named Karzac , she was sent the stone instead , prompting her to arrange the appointment with Oubier . 
 The two escape the warehouse and retrieve the Mayan stone from Lobineau . Afterwards , they go to Quaramonte City in hopes of finding Condor Transglobal . They find the city under dictatorial rule by ' Madame La Presidente ' Grasiento , and learn that the town contains no Condor Transglobal offices . The two meet Professor Oubier , who is talking to the chief of police , Raoul ' The General ' Grasiento , about a mysterious chart . George confronts Oubier about his girlfriend 's abduction , but the professor claims he knows nothing , and that he has not been in Paris recently . George decides to help a CIA agent , Duane , free a local agitator , Miguel , from jail by distracting General Grasiento . Afterwards , he prepares to detonate the jail wall but is arrested in the process . George gets Duane to tie a rope to the bars and pull the wall down with his truck , alerting General Grasiento . Miguel escapes , and Nico and George flee down river on a boat . However , the boat sinks after being attacked by a helicopter . 
 George wakes up the next morning on the river bank , and finds a treehouse belonging to a Christian missionary named Father Hubert . Hubert has been nursing Nico back to health , but she has suffered a snakebite and requires special medicine . He takes George to the local Mayan village , as he believes the village Shaman will be able to help . George shows his Mayan stone to the shaman , who explains that , hundreds of years ago , Mayan shamans had trapped the god Tezcatlipoca inside a mirror . However , he was so powerful that he would inevitably escape , so they created three stones that contained the power to keep him imprisoned . Before they could be put in place , they were stolen by explorers : one by a Spanish pirate named Captain Ketch , who hid it in the Caribbean ; one by an English ship , which took it to England ; and one by Spanish explorers , who took it back to Spain . The third of these stones was in Nico 's and George 's possession . George returns to the treehouse and cures Nico with medicine from the shaman . Shortly thereafter , the two separate to find the two remaining stones . 
 Nico tracks a stone down to a museum in London , England , where she encounters but does not recognize Professor Oubier . After he leaves , the stone is discovered to be missing and the museum is locked down . Nico escapes via an abandoned subway station and finds Oubier on a boat in the Thames with Karzac . Nico witnesses Karzac killing Oubier , and then sneaks in , takes the stone and escapes . Meanwhile , George tracks the remaining stone to a small museum in the Caribbean . Following subtle clues left by Captain Ketch , George learns that the stone was left on the nearby " Zombie Island " . George explores Zombie Island and finds that a butchered remake of Treasure Island is being filmed there . He poses as a stuntman to gain access to the place where the stone is being kept , but gets captured by Pablo and his men to be used as a sacrifice to Tezcatlipoca . Nico travels back to Quaramonte and saves George ; together with Titipoco they enter Tezcatlipoca 's pyramid . As they reach the central room , Karzac frees the ancient god there . However , Tezcatlipoca promptly kills Karzac . President Grasiento appears and attacks Titipoco , and their struggle sends them over a cliff . Raoul , realizing that he is expendable to his mother , chooses to save Titipoco . The protagonists place the stones into their respective slots , which causes Tezcatlipoca to be pushed back into the mirror . George and Nico briefly celebrate and the final cut @-@ scene fades into the credits . 
 = = Development = = 
 Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror was conceived in 1997 , by Charles Cecil and Revolution . Charles Cecil was the director and writer of the game ; Tony Warriner , David Sykes , Jonathan Howard , Paul Porter , James Long , Patrick Skelton , Chris Rea and Pete <unk> worked on the software side of the project . Noirin Carmody was the executive producer . The game uses the Virtual Theatre engine , which was previously used for Lure of the Temptress , Beneath a Steel Sky , and Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars . 
 The artwork for Broken Sword II was developed through a number of stages . Initially pencil drawings were made of characters which were then digitally coloured in , before being cleaned up . The background layouts were produced in a similar way , starting out as pencil designs , and were all drawn by Eoghan Cahill and Neil Breen , who previously worked on the first Broken Sword , working together with Amy <unk> and Lee Taylor . The game 's graphics are animated in a style which resembles classic animated films . 
 The music in the game was composed by Barrington Pheloung , who also composed the music in Shadow of the Templars , with Bob Sekar adding the closing score . Audio features of the game include recorded sound effects , orchestral music and voice acting directed by Edward Hall . While Rolf Saxon returned to voice George Stobbart , a new actress , Jenny Caron Hall , was cast as Nicole Collard . The rest of the credited voice actors in the game are Dennis Chinnery , Stephanie Clive , Jeff Fletcher , Corey Johnson , Chris Miles , Gary Parker , <unk> Cinque and Leo <unk> . 
 = = = Remastered edition = = = 
 When considering the project , Charles Cecil played the game again and noticed many issues , including pixilated backgrounds , FMV and audio were of poor quality , and he also felt some dialogue was out of place . He thought all these elements could be addressed and improved in a remastered edition , in which they could add a diary , hint system , and new artwork from Dave Gibbons , which they could offer as an interactive digital comic . 
 On December 9 , 2010 , Revolution Software announced the release of Broken Sword : The Smoking Mirror - Remastered on iOS devices , and was released on December 16 , 2010 . The new features include an exclusive interactive digital comic from Dave Gibbons , fully animated facial expressions , enhanced graphics , high quality music , a context @-@ sensitive hint system , diary , and a Dropbox integration which facilitates a unique cross @-@ platform save @-@ game feature , enabling players to enjoy the same adventure simultaneously on multiple devices . It also featured full Game Center integration – including in @-@ game achievements . The Mac and PC versions followed in early 2011 . 
 = = = Marketing and release = = = 
 A launch trailer for the iPhone and iPod touch version was also released on Revolution 's YouTube channel <unk> . On the second day of Apple 's 12 Days of Christmas , Broken Sword II - Remastered was made free to download for 24 hours . 
 The original PC version is available from Sold @-@ Out Software and GOG.com ( with purchases of Broken Sword II - Remastered ) . However , the Remastered version of the game is available from various digital distribution services , including the iPhone / iPod Touch and iPad AppStore , Mac AppStore , Intel <unk> , Steam and GOG.com. Broken Sword II - Remastered is also a part of the Broken Sword Complete package from Mastertronic . 
 With purchases of Broken Sword II - Remastered on GOG.com , the consumer also gets the original game , the manual , an exclusive game guide , 18 artworks , and the comic book . The digital Broken Sword : The Smoking Mirror - Remastered comic book was created by Dave Gibbons . The short comic provides information on what happened before the beginning of the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was a commercial success . According to Charles Cecil , it sold around one million copies in the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 The Smoking Mirror received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Gaming Age gave the game a B + , saying : " The sound is another area in which The Smoking Mirror excels . Although there isn 't a constant soundtrack playing , haunting music often accompanies certain actions , much like the original Tomb Raider . " PC Gamer gave it a score of 82 % , saying it 's " more of the same solid adventure fare found in Circle of Blood . " GameSpot gave the game a 7 @.@ 9 out of 10 and praised it for its additions that " help to streamline the adventure " , but criticised the " insufficient information about Tezcatlipoca and Maya civilization altogether " when it came to the storyline . Jen of Four Fat Chicks gave it a " thumbs up " and stated that he would recommend this game for the good storyline and the beautiful graphics , but if players want a game that has more adventuring , they should look elsewhere . " Mr. Bill and Lela " of Mr. Bill 's Adventureland praised its controls and humour , and called it an excellent sequel , that they wouldn 't have missed playing . 
 = = = Remastered Edition = = = 
 Unlike the original release , Broken Sword : The Smoking Mirror has received very positive reviews from critics . <unk> gave the game a 5 out of 5 , saying : " Production values for the game are sky @-@ high , with gorgeous graphics , challenging , well @-@ designed puzzles , and pitch @-@ perfect voice acting . The sequel also implements the same fantastic touch interface of its predecessor . " <unk> gave the game a 10 out of 10 , saying : " Broken Sword 2 will last you hours , having all the playability of a full @-@ priced PC game . It is the kind of game that could convert people who wouldn 't look twice at adventure games , and is easily one of my most highly recommended titles on the platform . " GameZone gave the game an 8 out of 10 and praised the game 's controls and cut scenes , but stated that the iPad version of the game can be blurry at times . Carl Stevens of <unk> gave the game 4 out of 5 start and stated that it should be on everybody 's " must play list " and that the ease of , and restriction between some puzzles were the only let down in the game . <unk> Allen of 148Apps gave the game a 4 out of 5 start and praised it , saying : " Broken Sword : The Smoking Mirror is a fantastic game . The story feels as fresh and as entertaining as it did back in the day , and the slightly improved graphics are much appreciated . Many hours of entertaining storytelling lie ahead . " 
 = Neuroblastoma = 
 Neuroblastoma ( NB ) is the most common extracranial solid cancer in childhood and the most common cancer in infancy , with an incidence of about 650 cases per year in the U.S. , and 100 cases per year in the UK . Nearly half of neuroblastoma cases occur in children younger than two years . It is a neuroendocrine tumor , arising from any neural crest element of the sympathetic nervous system ( SNS ) . It most frequently originates in one of the adrenal glands , but can also develop in nerve tissues in the neck , chest , abdomen , or pelvis . 
 Neuroblastoma is one of the few human malignancies known to demonstrate spontaneous regression from an undifferentiated state to a completely benign cellular appearance . It is a disease exhibiting extreme heterogeneity , and is stratified into three risk categories : low , intermediate , and high risk . Low @-@ risk disease is most common in infants and good outcomes are common with observation only or surgery , whereas high @-@ risk disease is difficult to treat successfully even with the most intensive multi @-@ modal therapies available . 
 <unk> , also known as olfactory neuroblastoma , is believed to arise from the olfactory epithelium and its classification remains controversial . However , since it is not a sympathetic nervous system malignancy , <unk> is a distinct clinical entity and is not to be confused with neuroblastoma . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The first symptoms of neuroblastoma are often vague making diagnosis difficult . Fatigue , loss of appetite , fever , and joint pain are common . Symptoms depend on primary tumor locations and metastases if present : 
 In the abdomen , a tumor may cause a swollen belly and constipation . 
 A tumor in the chest may cause breathing problems . 
 A tumor pressing on the spinal cord may cause weakness and thus an inability to stand , crawl , or walk . 
 Bone lesions in the legs and hips may cause pain and limping . 
 A tumor in the bones around the eyes or orbits may cause distinct bruising and swelling . 
 Infiltration of the bone marrow may cause pallor from anemia . 
 Neuroblastoma often spreads to other parts of the body before any symptoms are apparent and 50 to 60 % of all neuroblastoma cases present with metastases . 
 The most common location for neuroblastoma to originate ( i.e. , the primary tumor ) is in the adrenal glands . This occurs in 40 % of localized tumors and in 60 % of cases of widespread disease . Neuroblastoma can also develop anywhere along the sympathetic nervous system chain from the neck to the pelvis . Frequencies in different locations include : neck ( 1 % ) , chest ( 19 % ) , abdomen ( 30 % non @-@ adrenal ) , or pelvis ( 1 % ) . In rare cases , no primary tumor can be discerned . 
 Rare but characteristic presentations include transverse myelopathy ( tumor spinal cord compression , 5 % of cases ) , treatment @-@ resistant diarrhea ( tumor vasoactive intestinal peptide secretion , 4 % of cases ) , Horner 's syndrome ( cervical tumor , 2 @.@ 4 % of cases ) , <unk> myoclonus syndrome and ataxia ( suspected paraneoplastic cause , 1 @.@ 3 % of cases ) , and hypertension ( catecholamine secretion or renal artery compression , 1 @.@ 3 % of cases ) . 
 = = Cause = = 
 The etiology of neuroblastoma is not well understood . The great majority of cases are sporadic and non @-@ familial . About 1 – 2 % of cases run in families and have been linked to specific gene mutations . Familial neuroblastoma in some cases is caused by rare germline mutations in the <unk> lymphoma kinase ( ALK ) gene . <unk> mutations in the <unk> or <unk> gene have been implicated in familial neuroblastoma as well . Neuroblastoma is also a feature of neurofibromatosis type 1 and the Beckwith @-@ Wiedemann syndrome . 
 <unk> oncogene amplification within the tumor is a common finding in neuroblastoma . The degree of amplification shows a bimodal distribution : either 3- to 10 @-@ fold , or 100- to 300 @-@ fold . The presence of this mutation is highly correlated to advanced stages of disease . 
 Duplicated segments of the <unk> gene within neuroblastoma tumor cells have been shown to increase the risk of developing an aggressive form of the cancer . 
 Neuroblastoma has been linked to copy @-@ number variation within the <unk> gene , which results in the 1q21.1 deletion syndrome or 1q21.1 duplication syndrome . 
 Several risk factors have been proposed and are the subject of ongoing research . Due to characteristic early onset many studies have focused on parental factors around conception and during gestation . Factors investigated have included occupation ( i.e. exposure to chemicals in specific industries ) , smoking , alcohol consumption , use of medicinal drugs during pregnancy and birth factors ; however , results have been inconclusive . 
 Other studies have examined possible links with atopy and exposure to infection early in life , use of hormones and fertility drugs , and maternal use of hair dye . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The diagnosis is usually confirmed by a surgical pathologist , taking into account the clinical presentation , microscopic findings , and other laboratory tests . 
 = = = Biochemistry = = = 
 In about 90 % of cases of neuroblastoma , elevated levels of catecholamines or their metabolites are found in the urine or blood . <unk> and their metabolites include dopamine , homovanillic acid ( <unk> ) , and / or <unk> acid ( VMA ) . 
 = = = Imaging = = = 
 Another way to detect neuroblastoma is the mIBG scan ( meta @-@ <unk> ) , which is taken up by 90 to 95 % of all neuroblastomas , often termed " mIBG @-@ avid . " The mechanism is that mIBG is taken up by sympathetic neurons , and is a functioning analog of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine . When it is radio @-@ <unk> with I @-@ 131 or I @-@ 123 ( radioactive iodine isotopes ) , it is a very good radiopharmaceutical for diagnosis and monitoring of response to treatment for this disease . With a half @-@ life of 13 hours , I @-@ 123 is the preferred isotope for imaging sensitivity and quality . I @-@ 131 has a half @-@ life of 8 days and at higher doses is an effective therapy as targeted radiation against relapsed and refractory neuroblastoma . 
 = = = Histology = = = 
 On microscopy , the tumor cells are typically described as small , round and blue , and rosette patterns ( Homer Wright rosettes ) may be seen . Homer Wright rosettes are tumor cells around the <unk> , not to be confused with <unk> , which are tumor cells around a blood vessel . They are also distinct from the <unk> of an <unk> which consist of tumor cells with glial <unk> acidic protein ( <unk> ) – positive processes tapering off toward a blood vessel ( thus a combination of the two ) . A variety of immunohistochemical stains are used by pathologists to distinguish neuroblastomas from histological mimics , such as <unk> , Ewing 's sarcoma , lymphoma and <unk> ' tumor . 
 Neuroblastoma is one of the peripheral <unk> tumors ( <unk> ) that have similar origins and show a wide pattern of differentiation ranging from benign <unk> to stroma @-@ rich <unk> with <unk> cells intermixed or in nodules , to highly malignant neuroblastoma . This distinction in the pre @-@ treatment tumor pathology is an important prognostic factor , along with age and mitosis @-@ <unk> index ( <unk> ) . This pathology classification system ( the Shimada system ) describes " favorable " and " unfavorable " tumors by the International Neuroblastoma Pathology Committee ( <unk> ) which was established in 1999 and revised in 2003 . 
 = = = Staging = = = 
 The " International Neuroblastoma Staging System " ( <unk> ) established in 1986 and revised in 1988 <unk> neuroblastoma according to its anatomical presence at diagnosis : 
 Stage 1 : Localized tumor confined to the area of origin . 
 Stage 2A : Unilateral tumor with incomplete gross resection ; identifiable ipsilateral and contralateral lymph node negative for tumor . 
 Stage 2B : Unilateral tumor with complete or incomplete gross resection ; with ipsilateral lymph node positive for tumor ; identifiable contralateral lymph node negative for tumor . 
 Stage 3 : Tumor infiltrating across midline with or without regional lymph node involvement ; or unilateral tumor with contralateral lymph node involvement ; or midline tumor with bilateral lymph node involvement . 
 Stage 4 : Dissemination of tumor to distant lymph nodes , bone marrow , bone , liver , or other organs except as defined by Stage 4S . 
 Stage 4S : Age < 1 year old with localized primary tumor as defined in Stage 1 or 2 , with dissemination limited to liver , skin , or bone marrow ( less than 10 percent of nucleated bone marrow cells are tumors ) . 
 Although international agreement on staging ( <unk> ) has been used , the need for an international consensus on risk assignment has also been recognized in order to compare similar cohorts in results of studies . Beginning in 2005 , representatives of the major pediatric oncology cooperative groups have met to review data for 8 @,@ 800 neuroblastoma patients treated in Europe , Japan , USA , Canada , and Australia between 1990 and 2002 . This task force has proposed the International Neuroblastoma Risk Group ( <unk> ) classification system . Retrospective studies revealed the high survival rate of 12 – 18 month old age group , previously categorized as high @-@ risk , and prompted the decision to reclassify 12 – 18 month old children without N @-@ myc ( also commonly referred to as <unk> ) amplification to intermediate risk category . 
 The new <unk> risk assignment will classify neuroblastoma at diagnosis based on a new International Neuroblastoma Risk Group Staging System ( <unk> ) : 
 Stage L1 : Localized disease without image @-@ defined risk factors . 
 Stage L2 : Localized disease with image @-@ defined risk factors . 
 Stage M : <unk> disease . 
 Stage MS : <unk> disease " special " where MS is equivalent to stage 4S . 
 The new risk stratification will be based on the new <unk> staging system , age ( <unk> at 18 months ) , tumor grade , N @-@ myc amplification , unbalanced 11q aberration , and ploidy into four pre @-@ treatment risk groups : very low , low , intermediate , and high risk . 
 = = Screening = = 
 Urine catecholamine level can be elevated in pre @-@ clinical neuroblastoma . Screening asymptomatic infants at three weeks , six months , and one year has been performed in Japan , Canada , Austria and Germany since the 1980s . Japan began screening six @-@ month @-@ olds for neuroblastoma via analysis of the levels of homovanillic acid and <unk> acid in 1984 . Screening was halted in 2004 after studies in Canada and Germany showed no reduction in deaths due to neuroblastoma , but rather caused an increase in diagnoses that would have disappeared without treatment , subjecting those infants to unnecessary surgery and chemotherapy . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 When the lesion is localized , it is generally curable . However , long @-@ term survival for children with advanced disease older than 18 months of age is poor despite aggressive multimodal therapy ( intensive chemotherapy , surgery , radiation therapy , stem cell transplant , differentiation agent isotretinoin also called 13 @-@ cis @-@ retinoic acid , and frequently immunotherapy with anti @-@ <unk> monoclonal antibody therapy ) . 
 Biologic and genetic characteristics have been identified , which , when added to classic clinical staging , has allowed patient assignment to risk groups for planning treatment intensity . These criteria include the age of the patient , extent of disease spread , microscopic appearance , and genetic features including DNA ploidy and N @-@ myc oncogene amplification ( N @-@ myc regulates microRNAs ) , into low , intermediate , and high risk disease . A recent biology study ( COG <unk> ) analyzed <unk> neuroblastoma patients and the spectrum of risk assignment was determined : 37 % of neuroblastoma cases are low risk , 18 % are intermediate risk , and 45 % are high risk . ( There is some evidence that the high- and low @-@ risk types are caused by different mechanisms , and are not merely two different degrees of expression of the same mechanism . ) 
 The therapies for these different risk categories are very different . 
 Low @-@ risk disease can frequently be observed without any treatment at all or cured with surgery alone . 
 Intermediate @-@ risk disease is treated with surgery and chemotherapy . 
 High @-@ risk neuroblastoma is treated with intensive chemotherapy , surgery , radiation therapy , bone marrow / hematopoietic stem cell transplantation , biological @-@ based therapy with 13 @-@ cis @-@ retinoic acid ( isotretinoin or Accutane ) and antibody therapy usually administered with the cytokines GM @-@ CSF and IL @-@ 2 . 
 With current treatments , patients with low and intermediate risk disease have an excellent prognosis with cure rates above 90 % for low risk and 70 – 90 % for intermediate risk . In contrast , therapy for high @-@ risk neuroblastoma the past two decades resulted in cures only about 30 % of the time . The addition of antibody therapy has raised survival rates for high @-@ risk disease significantly . In March 2009 an early analysis of a Children 's Oncology Group ( COG ) study with 226 high @-@ risk patients showed that two years after stem cell transplant 66 % of the group randomized to receive ch14.18 antibody with GM @-@ CSF and IL @-@ 2 were alive and disease @-@ free compared to only 46 % in the group that did not receive the antibody . The randomization was stopped so all patients enrolling on the trial will receive the antibody therapy . 
 Chemotherapy agents used in combination have been found to be effective against neuroblastoma . Agents commonly used in induction and for stem cell transplant conditioning are platinum compounds ( cisplatin , carboplatin ) , alkylating agents ( cyclophosphamide , <unk> , melphalan ) , topoisomerase II inhibitor ( etoposide ) , anthracycline antibiotics ( doxorubicin ) and vinca alkaloids ( vincristine ) . Some newer regimens include topoisomerase I inhibitors ( topotecan and irinotecan ) in induction which have been found to be effective against recurrent disease . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Between 20 % and 50 % of high @-@ risk cases do not respond adequately to induction high @-@ dose chemotherapy and are progressive or refractory . Relapse after completion of frontline therapy is also common . Further treatment is available in phase I and phase II clinical trials that test new agents and combinations of agents against neuroblastoma , but the outcome remains very poor for relapsed high @-@ risk disease . 
 Most long @-@ term survivors alive today had low or intermediate risk disease and milder courses of treatment compared to high @-@ risk disease . The majority of survivors have long @-@ term effects from the treatment . Survivors of intermediate and high @-@ risk treatment often experience hearing loss . Growth reduction , thyroid function disorders , learning difficulties , and greater risk of secondary cancers affect survivors of high @-@ risk disease . An estimated two of three survivors of childhood cancer will ultimately develop at least one chronic and sometimes life @-@ threatening health problem within 20 to 30 years after the cancer diagnosis . 
 = = = <unk> profiles = = = 
 Based on a series of 493 neuroblastoma samples , it has been reported that overall genomic pattern , as tested by array @-@ based karyotyping , is a predictor of outcome in neuroblastoma : 
 Tumors presenting exclusively with whole chromosome copy number changes were associated with excellent survival . 
 Tumors presenting with any kind of segmental chromosome copy number changes were associated with a high risk of relapse . 
 Within tumors showing segmental alterations , additional independent predictors of decreased overall survival were N @-@ myc amplification , 1p and 11q deletions , and <unk> gain . 
 Earlier publications categorized neuroblastomas into three major subtypes based on cytogenetic profiles : 
 <unk> 1 : favorable neuroblastoma with near <unk> and a predominance of numerical gains and losses , mostly representing non @-@ metastatic NB stages 1 , 2 and 4S . 
 Subtypes 2A and 2B : found in unfavorable widespread neuroblastoma , stages 3 and 4 , with 11q loss and <unk> gain without N @-@ myc amplification ( subtype 2A ) or with N @-@ myc amplification often together with 1p deletions and <unk> gain ( subtype 2B ) . 
 Virtual karyotyping can be performed on fresh or paraffin @-@ embedded tumors to assess copy number at these loci . SNP array virtual karyotyping is preferred for tumor samples , including neuroblastomas , because they can detect copy neutral loss of heterozygosity ( acquired <unk> <unk> ) . Copy neutral LOH can be biologically equivalent to a deletion and has been detected at key loci in neuroblastoma . <unk> , FISH , or conventional cytogenetics cannot detect copy neutral LOH . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Neuroblastoma comprises 6 – 10 % of all childhood cancers , and 15 % of cancer deaths in children . The annual mortality rate is 10 per million children in the <unk> to 4 @-@ year @-@ old age group , and 4 per million in the 4- to 9 @-@ year old age group . 
 The highest incidence is in the first year of life , and some cases are congenital . The age range is broad , including older children and adults , but only 10 % of cases occur in people older than 5 years of age . A large European study reported less than 2 % of over 4000 neuroblastoma cases were over 18 years old . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1864 German physician Rudolf Virchow was the first to describe an abdominal tumor in a child as a " glioma " . The characteristics of tumors from the sympathetic nervous system and the adrenal medulla were then noted in 1891 by German pathologist Felix Marchand . In 1901 the distinctive presentation of stage 4S in infants ( liver but no bone metastases ) was described by William Pepper . In 1910 James Homer Wright understood the tumor to originate from primitive neural cells , and named it neuroblastoma . He also noted the circular clumps of cells in bone marrow samples which are now termed " Homer Wright rosettes " . Of note , " Homer @-@ Wright " with a hyphen is grammatically incorrect , as the eponym refers to just Dr. Wright . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Legislative efforts = = = 
 U.S. Representative Chet Edwards of Waco , Texas , successfully introduced legislation to earmark $ 150 million toward a cure for neuroblastoma and other cancers . The measure was signed into law in July 2008 by U.S. President George W. Bush . Edwards was inspired in the endeavor by the illness and subsequent death of Erin Channing <unk> ( 1997 – 2009 ) of Bryan , daughter of one of his constituents , Walter L. <unk> , head of the history department at Texas A & M University . 
 = = = Fundraising = = = 
 Several organizations fundraise for research into neuroblastoma . <unk> <unk> cancer care NGO a pioneer non profit organisation in India supporting poor cancer patients since 2009 [ 1 ] . Tom Hanks is the Honorary Patron of the James Fund , a leading fundraising organization in support of clinical research . On December 31 , 2014 , <unk> Foundation took over stewardship of The James Funds . The Cincinnati Bengals announced in 2014 that they would donate proceeds from the jersey sales of defensive lineman Devon Still 's jersey to the Cincinnati Children 's Hospital , and presented a check from more than $ 1 @.@ 3 million to Still 's daughter Leah during Thursday night 's game on November 6 , 2014 . Cincinnati Bengals defensive lineman Devon Still 's jersey is the 11th @-@ most popular in the NFL 
 = = Research = = 
 = = = Preclinical models = = = 
 Neuroblastoma patient derived tumor <unk> ( PDXs ) have been created by <unk> implantation of patient tumor samples into immunodeficient mice . PDX models have several advantages over conventional cancer cell lines ( CCL ) s . Neuroblastoma PDXs retain the genetic hallmarks of their corresponding patient tumors and PDXs display <unk> growth and metastasis to distant organs . PDX models are more predictive of clinical outcome as compared to conventional cancer cell line <unk> . Neuroblastoma PDXs might thus serve as clinically relevant models to identify effective compounds against neuroblastoma . 
 = = = Treatments = = = 
 Recent focus has been to reduce therapy for low and intermediate risk neuroblastoma while maintaining survival rates at 90 % . A study of 467 intermediate risk patients enrolled in <unk> from 1997 to 2005 confirmed the hypothesis that therapy could be successfully reduced for this risk group . Those with favorable characteristics ( tumor grade and response ) received four cycles of chemotherapy , and those with unfavorable characteristics received eight cycles , with three @-@ year event free survival and overall survival stable at 90 % for the entire cohort . Future plans are to intensify treatment for those patients with aberration of <unk> or <unk> chromosomes as well as for those who lack early response to treatment . 
 By contrast , focus the past 20 years or more has been to intensify treatment for high @-@ risk neuroblastoma . Chemotherapy induction variations , timing of surgery , stem cell transplant regimens , various delivery schemes for radiation , and use of monoclonal antibodies and retinoids to treat minimal residual disease continue to be examined . Recent phase III clinical trials with randomization have been carried out to answer these questions to improve survival of high @-@ risk disease : 
 1982 – 1985 : European Neuroblastoma Study Group ( <unk> ) enrolled 167 children and randomized to melphalan autologous bone marrow transplant or no further therapy ( no radiation therapy given to any ) . Transplant and no @-@ transplant arms each had 65 patients , and recent long @-@ term follow @-@ up report revealed significantly better 5 year event @-@ free survival for stage 4 over 1 year old in melphalan @-@ transplant group versus no further treatment : 33 % versus 17 % respectively . 
 1990 – 1999 : European study ( EU @-@ <unk> or <unk> @-@ 1990 @-@ 11 ) randomized 262 high @-@ risk children over 1 year old and revealed higher survival rate for rapid sequence induction ( 10 @-@ day cycle ) versus standard induction ( 21 @-@ day cycle ) with same total dose . Ten @-@ year event free survival was 27 % and 18 % respectively with non @-@ aggressive surgical approach , no radiotherapy , and melphalan @-@ only autologous bone marrow or stem cell transplant for both groups . 
 1991 – 1996 : Phase III trial with two sequential <unk> for 379 high @-@ risk NB patients was carried out by the Children 's Cancer Group ( CCG @-@ <unk> ) which demonstrated improved survival with <unk> therapy ( with total body irradiation ) and 13 @-@ cis @-@ retinoic acid ( Accutane ) with 50 patients in each of the four arms of the study . , 
 1996 – 2003 : The German ( <unk> ) study <unk> compared outcomes of 295 high @-@ risk NB patients randomized for stem cell transplant or consolidation chemotherapy . Results showed increased survival with transplant . 
 2000 – 2006 : The recent study ( COG @-@ <unk> ) questioned the need for purged stem cells for CEM @-@ LI ( carboplatin , etoposide , melphalan , with local irradiation ) transplant , and accrued 486 patients . Purging stem cells was not found to improve survival 
 2000 – 2012 : A concurrent study ( COG @-@ <unk> ) determined in early review that the antibody ch14.18 with interleukin 2 and <unk> ( studied retrospectively in German <unk> <unk> and NB 97 at a lower dose and without cytokines ) improved survival , and will accrue a total of 423 patients . A follow on Phase III study COG @-@ <unk> opened Jan 2010 to accrue 105 patients to gather further safety and efficacy data for FDA approval . 
 2002 – 2008 : SIOP ( International Society of Paediatric Oncology ) formed the European SIOP Neuroblastoma Group ( <unk> ) in 1994 and activated a phase III high @-@ risk NB protocol in 2002 ( SIOP @-@ <unk> @-@ HR @-@ NBL @-@ 1 ) using " rapid " <unk> ( 8 cycles of chemotherapy given at 10 @-@ day intervals ) followed by transplant randomization to CEM ( carboplatin , etoposide , melphalan ) or <unk> ( <unk> , melphalan ) and the study has been recently amended to randomize children to ch14.18 antibody treatment with or without subcutaneous <unk> ( without GM @-@ CSF as given in the COG ) . This antibody was remanufactured in <unk> hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells and shows molecular and functional differences compared to ch14.18 used in the COG trial . This study recently reported the benefit of growth factors ( <unk> ) , and all patients receive retinoic acid . This trial will accrue 1000 patients ( 175 per year ) . 
 2005 – 2010 : The current German <unk> randomization will include MIBG therapy and randomize topotecan use in up @-@ front therapy and will accrue a total of 642 for all risk groups ( roughly half will be high @-@ risk ) . After transplant , the high @-@ risk protocol includes six months of cis @-@ retinoic acid , a three @-@ month break , and another three months of retinoic acid . 
 2007 : The COG phase III <unk> trial opened December 2007 for accrual of 495 and will compare single versus tandem transplants , and induction begins with two cycles of topotecan . 
 In addition to these phase III studies , some research institutions offer pilot treatment protocols . For example , St Jude 's recently finished ( 2007 ) testing a new up @-@ front chemotherapy regimen in 23 children which included irinotecan and <unk> with 16 months of maintenance chemotherapy after stem cell transplant with alternating oral 13 @-@ cis @-@ retinoic acid and topotecan . Memorial Sloan @-@ Kettering Cancer Center in New York offers treatment that includes a mouse @-@ derived monoclonal antibody , <unk> , used in protocols since the mid @-@ 1980s . This antibody is used for treating minimal residual disease or consolidation instead of stem cell transplant . A new pilot protocol COG @-@ <unk> available for newly diagnosed ( high @-@ risk ) children at several Children 's Oncology Group ( COG ) centers will offer MIBG radiotherapy and chemotherapy for the transplant regimen . 
 = = = Refractory and relapsed neuroblastoma = = = 
 Some children ( particularly in high @-@ risk cases ) do not respond completely to frontline treatment ( with a complete response or very good partial response ) and are labeled refractory . These children are removed from the frontline therapy ( clinical trial ) and are eligible for clinical trials using new therapies . Many high @-@ risk children have a good response to frontline therapy and achieve a remission , but later the disease recurs ( relapse ) . These children are also eligible for new therapies being tested in clinical trials . 
 Chemotherapy with topotecan and cyclophosphamide is frequently used in refractory setting and after relapse . A randomized study ( 2004 ) with 119 patients ( comparing topotecan alone to topotecan and cyclophosphamide ) revealed a 31 % complete or partial response rate with two @-@ year progression @-@ free survival at 36 % in the topotecan and cyclophosphamide group . <unk> ( intravenous or oral ) and oral <unk> are also used in refractory and recurrent neuroblastoma . 
 Many phase I and phase II trials are currently testing new agents against neuroblastoma in children who have relapsed or are resistant to initial therapy . Investigators are currently studying new agents , alone and in new combinations , using small molecule targeted therapy , 131 @-@ I MIBG radiation therapy , angiogenesis agents , new monoclonal antibodies , vaccines , oncolytic viruses , as well as new <unk> regimens . 
 A group of 16 children 's hospitals in the United States known as the New Advances in Neuroblastoma Therapy ( <unk> ) consortium coordinates the I @-@ 131 MIBG radiation therapy trials . The <unk> consortium also offers trials using an oral powder formulation of <unk> , intravenous <unk> , <unk> ( <unk> ) with other agents , and combining I @-@ 131 MIBG with the inhibitor <unk> . 
 The <unk> group investigated a new delivery method for anti @-@ <unk> antibody ch14.18 / CHO given as long term continuous infusion mostly combined with cytokine <unk> ( Ref 1 ) in order to achieve a better tolerated treatment regimen . 
 Other research study groups such as The Neuroblastoma and <unk> Translational Research Consortium ( <unk> ) also conduct clinical trials to treat relapse neuroblastoma . Institutions in Europe are studying novel therapies to treat relapse , including <unk> stem cell transplant . Many hospitals conduct their own institutional studies as well . 
 The protein p53 is believed to play a role in the development of resistance to chemotherapy . A November 2009 study in mice shows that activating the tumor suppressor p53 with a new drug , nutlin @-@ 3 , may slow tumor growth . In this study , physician Tom Van <unk> of Ghent University Hospital in Belgium and his colleagues used nutlin @-@ 3 to neutralize MDM2 , a protein that binds to the p53 protein and obstructs p53 's ability to trigger programmed cell death . Earlier studies have shown that nutlin @-@ 3 can specifically prevent MDM2 from disabling p53 . 
 = Cyptotrama asprata = 
 Cyptotrama asprata ( alternatively spelled <unk> ) , commonly known as the golden @-@ scruffy <unk> , is a saprobic species of mushroom in the family Physalacriaceae . Widely distributed in tropical regions of the world , it is characterized by the bright orange to yellow cap that in young specimens is covered with tufts of fibrils resembling small spikes . This fungus has had a varied taxonomical history , having been placed in fourteen genera before finally settling in Cyptotrama . This species is differentiated from several other similar members of genus Cyptotrama by variations in cap color , and spore size and shape . 
 = = History = = 
 This species was first described from Ceylon by English naturalist Miles Joseph Berkeley in 1847 ; soon after ( 1852 ) , specimens were collected from South Carolina USA . Later , the fungus was described under a variety of names : Lentinus <unk> from Cuba ; Agaricus <unk> and Agaricus lacunosa from New York ; Collybia lacunosa from Michigan ; and Omphalia <unk> in Connecticut . As Canadian mycologists Redhead and Ginns explain in a 1980 article on the species , since its original 1847 description , C. asprata has been given 28 names , and placed in 14 different genera . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is 0 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 24 to 1 @.@ 06 in ) in diameter , convex to cushion @-@ shaped . The cap surface is dry , and younger specimens are covered with characteristic spikes ; as the spikes break up with age , they tend to look more hairy or woolly . Older specimens typically have the surface features worn off . The cap margin tends to be rolled inwards when young , gradually becoming straight with maturity . The color of the cap is bright or pale yellow , increasing in intensity towards the center of the cap . C. asprata has a web @-@ like ring that soon disappears . 
 The gills , pale yellow to white in color , are distantly spaced and have an adnate ( squarely attached ) or short decurrent ( running down the length ) attachment to the stem ; they feel greasy when dried and crushed . The stem is 1 to 6 @.@ 7 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 6 in ) long by 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 4 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 08 to 0 @.@ 16 in ) thick at the stem apex ; the stem is slightly thicker towards the base , and may be covered with hyphae that appear woolly ( <unk> ) or hairy ( fibrillose ) . The surface of the stem may also be scaly – especially towards the base – or it may be covered with very small particles ( granular ) . The flesh of this mushroom is white or pale yellow , with no distinctive taste or odor . The spore print is white . Edibility is unknown for this fungus . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 Spores are thin @-@ walled , smooth , and ellipsoidal or oval in shape . Viewed with a microscope , they appear translucent ( hyaline ) , and stain red or blue with Melzer 's reagent ( in amyloid ) . Their dimensions are typically 7 – 10 by 5 – 7 µm ; the spores contain a single large oil droplet . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are club @-@ shaped , two- to four @-@ spored , and 25 – 30 by 5 – 7 µm . The presence of sterile cells called pleurocystidia ( large cells found on the gill face in some mushrooms ) is uncommon ; specimens may contain few or abundant cheilocystidia ( large sterile cells found on the gill edge ) that are club @-@ shaped , thin @-@ walled and 39 – 87 @.@ 5 by 8 @.@ 5 – 16 µm in size . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Cyptotrama asprata is a saprobic fungus , and grows on the decaying wood of deciduous and coniferous trees . Host species include white fir ( Abies concolor ) , sugar maple ( Acer saccharum ) and other maple ( Acer ) species , grey alder ( Alnus oblongifolia ) , beech ( Fagus ) species , spruce ( Picea ) species , ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa ) and other pine ( Pinus ) species , poplar ( Populus ) and oak ( Quercus ) species . In temperate North America , specimens are typically collected between July through September . 
 The species has a pantropical distribution , and is widely distributed in tropical regions of the world . It has been collected from Australia , southeastern Canada , China , Costa Rica , India , Hawaii , New Zealand , Japan , and the Russian Far East . It is absent from Europe and Northwestern North America . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Many other members of genus Cyptotrama are similar in appearance and differ from C. asprata by only one or two readily observable features . For example , C. granulosa is bright yellowish @-@ brown ( rather than bright or pale yellow in C. asprata ) ; C. <unk> is ochre @-@ colored ; C. <unk> is cream @-@ colored with brown scales ; C. <unk> has a " copper @-@ rust @-@ brown " cap ; C. <unk> has olive @-@ colored pigments . Species may also be distinguished by differences in spore size and shape , although a considerable size range has been noted for C. asprata spores . 
 = Watford F.C. = 
 Watford Football Club is a football club based in Watford , Hertfordshire , England , that plays in the Premier League , the highest level of English football . Founded in 1881 as Watford Rovers , the club entered the FA Cup for the first time in 1886 , and the Southern League a decade later . After finishing the 1914 – 15 season as Southern League champions under the management of Harry Kent , Watford joined the Football League in 1920 . The club played at several grounds in its early history , before moving to a permanent location at Vicarage Road in 1922 , where it remains to this day . Watford spent most of the following half century in the lower divisions of The Football League , changing colours and crest on multiple occasions . 
 England manager Graham Taylor 's tenure at the club saw Watford scale new heights . Between Taylor 's appointment in 1977 and departure in 1987 , Watford rose from the Fourth Division to the First Division . The team finished second in the First Division in the 1982 – 83 season , competed in the UEFA Cup in 1983 – 84 , and also reached the 1984 FA Cup Final . Watford experienced a decade of decline between 1987 and 1997 , before Taylor returned as full @-@ time manager , leading the team to successive promotions from the renamed Second Division to the Premier League for one season in 1999 – 2000 . The club experienced a further one season stint in the top division of English football during the 2006 – 07 season , under Aidy Boothroyd 's management . After eight years , Watford are again competing in the Premier League 2015 – 16 season , after clinching promotion from the Football League Championship in the 2014 – 15 season . 
 Watford is currently owned by the Pozzo family , which also owns Udinese Calcio in Italy and used to own Granada CF in Spain Sir Elton John , who owned Watford during both of Graham Taylor 's successful periods as manager , served alongside Taylor as the club 's joint Honorary Life President until 2008 , only to later resume the role which he now shares alongside Graham Taylor . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Watford Rovers was formed in 1881 by Henry <unk> , who went on to play for the club as a full @-@ back . Rovers , originally composed entirely of amateur players , held home games at several locations in the town of Watford . The team first competed in the FA Cup in the 1886 – 87 season , and in 1889 Watford won the County Cup for the first time . The team became the football section of West Hertfordshire Sports Club in 1890 , and consequently moved to a ground on Cassio Road . Renamed as West Hertfordshire in 1893 , Rovers joined the Southern Football League in 1896 , and started to pay professional footballers in 1897 . West Hertfordshire merged with local rivals Watford St Mary 's in 1898 ; the merged team was named Watford Football Club . 
 Following relegation to the Southern League Second Division in 1903 , Watford appointed its first manager – former England international and First Division top scorer John Goodall . He led Watford to promotion , and kept the team in the division until his departure in 1910 . Despite financial constraints , Watford won the Southern League title in the 1914 – 15 season under his successor , Harry Kent . Watford held the title for five years following the suspension of the Southern League during the First World War – after finishing the 1919 – 20 season runners @-@ up on goal average , the club resigned from the Southern League to join the new Football League Third Division . 
 From 1921 – 22 , the third tier of The Football League consisted of two parallel sections of 22 clubs , fighting both for promotion to the Second Division and also battling to hold on to their league status . There was a re @-@ election system in place which meant the bottom two teams in each of the two divisions had to apply for re @-@ election to the league . Watford finished outside the top six league positions in every season between 1922 and 1934 . Following Kent 's departure in 1926 , they finished 21st out of 22 clubs in 1926 – 27 , but were unanimously re @-@ elected to the league after a ballot of clubs in the top two divisions of The Football League . By contrast , under Neil McBain and subsequently Bill Findlay , the team recorded five consecutive top six finishes between 1934 – 35 and 1938 – 39 , and won the Football League Third Division South Cup in 1937 . The Football League was suspended in 1939 due to the Second World War . 
 = = = Post @-@ war era = = = 
 Football resumed in 1946 , with Watford still in the Third Division South . A 23rd @-@ placed finish in 1950 – 51 meant that the club had to apply for re @-@ election to the league once more , but again teams in the First and Second Divisions unanimously voted for Watford to stay in the league . McBain returned in 1956 , and the team remained in the division until 1958 ; the league was restructured into four national divisions for the 1958 – 59 season , and Watford were placed in the Fourth Division . Ron Burgess replaced McBain during that season , and in the following campaign Burgess presided over Watford 's first Football League promotion . This team included Fourth Division top scorer Cliff Holton , who scored a club record 42 league goals in the season . Holton was sold to Northampton the following year after another 34 goals , to the anger of supporters . Burgess was succeeded by Bill McGarry , who bought new players such as Charlie Livesey and Ron Saunders , and in his only season at the club led the club to what was at the time its highest ever league position : third in the Third Division . Eighteen @-@ year @-@ old Northern Irish goalkeeper Pat Jennings also featured under McGarry , and made his international debut despite being a Third Division player . 
 McGarry joined Ipswich in 1964 , and was replaced by player @-@ manager Ken Furphy , from Workington Furphy rebuilt the team around players such as Keith Eddy and Dennis Bond , but after holding Liverpool to a draw in the FA Cup and narrowly failing to win promotion in 1966 – 67 , Bond was sold to Tottenham Hotspur for £ 30 @,@ 000 , Watford 's record transfer receipt at the time . Furphy 's rebuilding came to fruition in 1969 with the signing of Barry Endean , whose arrival marked the start of an unbeaten run after Christmas . Watford secured the league title in April , at home to Plymouth Argyle . A year later Watford reached the FA Cup semi @-@ final for the first time , defeating First Division teams Stoke City and Liverpool along the way . Hampered by a lack of funds , however , Furphy eventually joined Blackburn Rovers , to be succeeded by George Kirby . Forced to sell players to survive , Watford fell back into the Third Division in 1972 . The team continued to struggle in the third tier , and despite a managerial change , Watford were relegated again in 1975 . 
 = = = Elton John Era = = = 
 Lifelong Watford supporter Elton John became club chairman in 1976 . The singer declared an ambition to take the team into the First Division , and sacked Kirby 's successor Mike Keen in April 1977 . When Graham Taylor was named as Keen 's successor , the club was still in the Fourth Division . Taylor achieved promotion in his first season ; Watford won the Fourth Division title , recording the most wins , fewest defeats , most goals scored and fewest goals conceded of any side in the division . Promotion to the Second Division followed in 1978 – 79 , and Ross Jenkins finished the season as the league 's top scorer with 29 goals . Watford consolidated with 18th and 9th @-@ placed finishes over the following two seasons , and secured promotion to the First Division for the first time in 1981 – 82 , finishing second behind rivals Luton Town . 
 Watford started the 1982 – 83 season with four league wins from the opening five fixtures ; in the space of seven years , the club had climbed from bottom place in the lowest division of The Football League to top position in the highest division . Watford were unable to maintain a title challenge , but eventually finished the season second behind Liverpool , which ensured UEFA Cup qualification for the following season . Luther Blissett finished the season as the First Division top scorer , before signing for Italian Serie A side Milan for £ 1 million at the end of the season . An FA Cup Final appearance followed in the 1984 fixture , where they lost to Everton . After guiding Watford to a ninth @-@ place finish in 1986 – 87 , Taylor left the club to manage Aston Villa . 
 Following Taylor 's departure , Wimbledon manager Dave Bassett was appointed as his replacement , and England winger John Barnes was sold to Liverpool . After 4 wins from his opening 23 league fixtures , Bassett was sacked in January 1988 . Watford were bottom of the First Division at the time of his departure , and Steve Harrison could not prevent relegation at the end of the season . In 1988 – 89 , Harrison 's Watford failed to return to the First Division , after defeat in the Second Division play @-@ offs . The under @-@ 18 team won the FA Youth Cup , beating Manchester City 2 – 1 after extra time , with future England international David James in goal for the Hornets . Harrison departed in 1990 , and over the next few years , the closest Watford came to promotion was a seventh @-@ placed finish in Division One in the 1994 – 95 season . However , in the following season – Glenn Roeder 's third as manager – Watford struggled . Despite the return of Graham Taylor as caretaker manager in February 1996 , the club was relegated to Division Two . 
 Following the relegation , Taylor became Director of Football , with former Watford midfielder Kenny Jackett as manager . After a mid @-@ table finish in Division Two in 1996 – 97 , Jackett was demoted to the position of assistant manager . Taylor returned as manager , and won the Second Division title in 1997 – 98 – Watford 's second league title under his management . A second successive promotion followed in 1998 – 99 , thanks to a 2 – 0 play @-@ off final victory over Bolton Wanderers . Watford 's first Premiership season started with an early victory over Liverpool , but Watford 's form soon faded , and the club was relegated after finishing bottom . Graham Taylor retired at the end of the 2000 – 01 season , and was replaced by Gianluca Vialli . Wage bills at the club rose by £ 4 million during Vialli 's tenure , and the club finished 14th in the division in 2001 – 02 . Vialli was sacked at the end of the season , following a dispute with the club 's board over the wage bill . He was replaced by Ray Lewington , who had joined the club the previous summer as Vialli 's reserve team manager . 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 Watford 's weak financial position was exposed in 2002 – 03 , following the collapse of ITV Digital . The club was facing administration , but an agreement by players and staff to a 12 % wage deferral helped the club 's cash flow , and a run to the FA Cup semi @-@ final generated vital revenue . Financial constraints saw a large number of players released that summer . After consolidating in 2003 – 04 , the following season started well , with the club in the upper half of the Championship at the end of September . Poor form , however , saw the club drop towards the relegation zone . Despite reaching the semi @-@ final of the League Cup , Watford 's league form did not improve , and Lewington was sacked in March 2005 . His successor , Aidy Boothroyd , led the club to Championship survival . 
 = = = Return to the Premier League = = = 
 Watford finished third in the league in Boothroyd 's first full season , and defeated Leeds United 3 – 0 in the play @-@ off final to gain promotion to the Premier League . But the team did not record a Premier League win until November , and Ashley Young was sold to Aston Villa for a club record fee of £ 9 @.@ 65 million in January 2007 . Watford finished bottom after only winning five league games , but did reach the semi @-@ finals of the FA Cup . Boothroyd continued as manager , and spent heavily on players , including a then @-@ club record £ 3 @.@ 25 million for Nathan Ellington . Watford led the Championship by several points early in 2007 – 08 , but only finished sixth ; Boothroyd 's team were defeated 6 – 1 on aggregate by Hull City in the play @-@ off semi @-@ finals . Boothroyd left the club by mutual consent three months into the 2008 – 09 season , with Watford 21st in the Championship table . 
 Under Boothroyd 's successor , Brendan Rodgers , Watford finished 13th . Rodgers left to manage Reading at the end of the season ; Malky Mackay , who had previously served as caretaker manager , was his replacement . Amid the departures of several key players during Mackay 's tenure , including Tommy Smith and Jay DeMerit , and the club coming close to administration , Watford finished 16th in 2009 – 10 and 14th the following season . Mackay left to manage Cardiff City in June 2011 and was replaced by Sean Dyche . Despite presiding over Watford 's highest league position in four years , Dyche was dismissed as Watford manager in July 2012 . He was replaced by former Italy international Gianfranco Zola following the Pozzo family 's purchase of the club . 
 = = = Pozzo Family Era = = = 
 = = = = Championship = = = = 
 Following a successful 2012 – 13 season which saw a league @-@ best 85 goals scored , Watford ultimately finished third in the Championship , narrowly missing out on an automatic promotion place by two points , behind Hull . In the promotion play @-@ off semi @-@ final , Watford were defeated by Leicester City 1 – 0 in the away leg , but won 3 – 1 at home , with Troy <unk> scoring the winning goal on a last @-@ second injury time attack following a Leicester penalty kick miss to advance to the final . Watford were defeated in the final by Crystal Palace , 1 – 0 , on an extra @-@ time penalty by Kevin Phillips . 
 Watford went into the 2013 – 14 season full of confidence . They started the season well with positive results , including a 6 – 1 win over Bournemouth FC and then a 5 – 1 win over Barnsley . The club 's form , however , soon dipped , and Watford struggled , losing five consecutive home matches . This lack of form ultimately led to Gianfranco Zola 's departure from the club . In December 2013 , Watford appointed Beppe Sannino as their new manager and finished the 2013 – 14 season in 13th place . 
 Despite winning four of the first five league games of the 2014 – 15 season , Sannino 's future at Watford was subject to much speculation after it emerged some players were unhappy with his management style . Sannino resigned from his position as Watford manager on 31 August 2014 with the club second in the table , despite winning 4 – 2 at home to Huddersfield Town the previous day . 
 Two days later , on 2 September 2014 , Watford confirmed the appointment of former Brighton & Hove Albion head coach Óscar García as the club 's new manager and the successor to Sannino , beating off competition from fellow Championship side Leeds United for his services . García , however , resigned from his position as Watford manager on 29 September 2014 for health reasons , having been admitted to hospital with chest pains after the game against Charlton Athletic . Billy McKinlay , who had only been appointed first team coach on 26 September 2014 , was appointed as his immediate successor on the same day – his first position in management after spells as a coach with Fulham , and as assistant manager with Northern Ireland . However , on 7 October 2014 , McKinlay was replaced as Watford head coach by ex @-@ Chelsea defensive @-@ midfielder Slaviša Jokanović . On 25 April 2015 , Watford gained promotion to the Premier League after defeating Brighton 2 – 0 and other results going their way . Unfortunately for the Hornets , however , they failed to win their final game of the season against Sheffield United , thus gifting the Championship title to AFC Bournemouth in a dramatic season finale . 
 = = = = Premier League = = = = 
 Slaviša Jokanović left Watford at the end of his one @-@ year contract after he , and the club , failed to reach new contractual agreements ; he was replaced by the Spaniard Quique Sánchez Flores . Watford 's first fixture in their return to the Premier League was a 2 – 2 draw with Everton Watford reached the semi @-@ finals of the FA Cup with a fantastic goal by midfielder <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Club identity = = 
 Watford 's kit has changed considerably over the course of the club 's history . The club 's kit featured various combinations of red , green and yellow stripes , before a new colour scheme of black and white was adopted for the 1909 – 10 season . These colours were retained until the 1920s , when the club introduced an all @-@ blue shirt . After a change of colours to gold shirts and black shorts for 1959 – 60 , the team 's nickname was changed to The Hornets , after a popular vote via the supporters club . These colours remained until 1976 , when Watford 's kits started featuring red , and the gold was changed to yellow . That colour scheme has continued into the 21st century . 
 Watford 's initial nickname was The Brewers , in reference to the <unk> Brewery , which owned the freehold of Vicarage Road . This nickname did not prove particularly popular , and upon the adoption of a blue @-@ and @-@ white colour scheme in the 1920s , the club became predominantly known as The Blues . When Watford changed kit colours in 1959 , supporters chose The Hornets as the team 's new nickname , and the club later introduced a crest depicting a hornet . In 1974 the design was changed to depict Harry the Hornet , the club 's mascot . The club 's nickname remains , but in 1978 the hornet crest was replaced by a depiction of a hart – a male red deer – on a yellow and black background . A hart represents the town 's location in the county of Hertfordshire . Until Barnet and , later , Stevenage joined the Football League , Watford were Hertfordshire 's only league club . Other nicknames have since been adopted , including The Golden Boys , Yellow Army and The ' <unk> . 
 When Watford play at Vicarage Road their players traditionally enter the pitch at the start of the game to the Z @-@ Cars theme tune . 
 = = = Kit manufacturers and shirt sponsors = = = 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Watford Rovers played at several grounds in the late 19th century , including Cassiobury Park , Vicarage Meadow and Market Street , Watford . In 1890 , the team moved to a site on Cassio Road , and remained there for 32 years , before moving to Watford 's current stadium at nearby Vicarage Road . The new stadium was initially owned by <unk> Brewery ; the club rented the ground until 2001 , when it purchased the freehold outright . However , the club 's financial situation worsened following the purchase , and in 2002 Watford sold the ground for £ 6 million in a deal which entitled Watford to buy the stadium back for £ 7 million in future . Watford took up this option in 2004 using a campaign backed and funded by the fans called " Lets buy back the Vic " . 
 Vicarage Road is a four @-@ sided ground with a capacity of 21 @,@ 577 . The East Stand , part of which was constructed in 1922 , was closed to the general public in 2008 for health and safety reasons , although it still hosted the dressing rooms and the matchday press area . In November 2013 , the East Stand was demolished and in its place a new steel @-@ framed , 3 @,@ 500 @-@ seater stand was constructed . The stand opened fully on Boxing Day 2014 and was named The Elton John Stand after the club 's long standing chairman . The Graham Taylor Stand ( previously the Rous Stand ) , built in 1986 , has two tiers and runs the length of the pitch , with the upper section containing the club 's corporate hospitality . At either end of the pitch , The Vicarage Stand is split between the club 's family section and away supporters , while the Rookery Stand is for home supporters only . Both stands were built in the 1990s , financed by proceeds from player sales . In the summer of 2015 , The Elton John Stand was revamped in order to accommodate an extra 700 seats . This number was revised a day later to around 1 @,@ 000 extra seats following the announcement of an expansion in the north @-@ east corner . 
 Between 1997 and early 2013 , Watford shared Vicarage Road with rugby union side Saracens F.C. The stadium has hosted matches for the England under @-@ 21s , and senior international football between overseas teams . Elton John has also used Vicarage Road as a venue for concerts : He first played at the stadium in 1974 and returned in 2005 and 2010 to stage fundraising concerts for the club . Former events include horse and carriage shows and greyhound racing . 
 = = Luton rivalry = = 
 Watford fans maintain a rivalry with those of Luton Town . The two sides met regularly in the Southern League between 1900 and 1920 , and continued to do so in The Football League until 1937 , when Luton gained promotion from Division Three South . Luton remained in a higher division than Watford until 1963 . 
 Throughout the 1960s and 1970s , Watford and Luton met sporadically . Despite this , the rivalry grew in significance , particularly following an ill @-@ tempered match between the sides in 1969 , in which three players were sent off . Both sides won promotion to the First Division in the 1981 – 82 season , with Luton taking the championship ahead of Watford . They were also relegated together from the new Division 1 in 1995 – 96 , with Watford finishing 23rd ahead of bottom @-@ placed Luton . Watford 's promotion from Division 2 in 1997 – 98 meant that the two sides did not meet again until Luton won promotion to the Championship for the 2005 – 06 season . The only meeting between those seasons – a League Cup tie in the 2002 – 03 season – was marred by violence inside Vicarage Road . On 2 January 2006 , Watford won 2 – 1 at Kenilworth Road in the Championship . A 1 – 1 draw in the most recent match between the sides , on 9 April 2006 , secured Watford 's place in the 2006 Championship play @-@ offs , from which they eventually won promotion to the Premier League for the second time beating , Leeds United 3 – 0 at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff . Watford have played in a higher division than Luton in every season since 2006 – 07 , a nine @-@ season span . 
 The head @-@ to @-@ head record between the clubs in competitions which currently exist stands at Luton 39 wins , Watford 27 wins , with 23 draws . Watford have remained the higher ranked team at the end of every season since 1997 ( and for 23 of the last 24 seasons , with only 1996 – 97 seeing Luton finish higher in the league than Watford ) . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 As of 3 June 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Out on loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Under @-@ 21 squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Hall of fame = = = 
 = = Management = = 
 = = = Managerial history = = = 
 Watford 's team was selected by committee until 1903 , when former England international John Goodall was appointed player @-@ manager . The impact was immediate , as Watford secured promotion to the Southern League First Division in 1903 – 04 . Goodall retired as a player in 1907 , and left the club in 1910 . He was replaced by his former captain , Harry Kent , who become known for his financial management of the club ; under Kent , Watford frequently made a profit in the transfer market . Kent led the club to the Southern League title in 1914 – 15 , and missed out on a second title in 1919 – 20 on goal average , before resigning in 1926 . His three immediate successors – Fred Pagnam , Neil McBain and Bill Findlay – all played for Watford before and during the early part of their managerial tenures . None were able to lead the team to promotion from the Third Division South , although Findlay did lead Watford to a Third Division South Cup win in 1937 . 
 Up until Findlay 's departure in 1947 , Watford had been managed by five managers in 44 years , all of whom played for the team . By contrast , six men managed the club between 1947 and 1956 , only two of whom were former Watford players . After a further three years under McBain between 1956 and 1959 , Watford 's following three managers presided over improved teams . Ron Burgess led Watford to promotion from the Fourth Division in 1959 – 60 . Bill McGarry was only in charge for one full season ( 1963 – 64 ) , but Watford recorded a finish of third in the Third Division , the club 's highest Football League finish until that point . His successor Ken Furphy matched that achievement in 1966 – 67 , and led Watford to the Third Division title in 1969 , before taking the club to its first FA Cup semi @-@ final in 1970 . Following Furphy 's departure in 1971 , Watford entered a period of decline , experiencing relegation under subsequent managers George Kirby and Mike Keen . 
 Graham Taylor took charge of Watford in 1977 . He led the club to promotion to the Third Division in 1978 , the Second Division in 1979 , and the First Division for the first time in Watford 's history in 1982 . After a second @-@ placed finish in the First Division in 1983 , Watford competed in European competition for the first time in 1983 – 84 , as well as reaching the 1984 FA Cup final . Taylor left the club at the end of 1986 – 87 . Under the six subsequent permanent managers ( Dave Bassett , Steve Harrison , Colin Lee , Steve Perryman , Glenn Roeder and Kenny Jackett ) , Watford slid from 9th in the top tier in 1987 , to 13th in the third tier in 1997 . Taylor returned as manager for the start of the 1997 – 98 season . He led the club to consecutive promotions , but could not prevent relegation from the Premier League in 1999 – 2000 . Since Taylor 's retirement in 2001 , Watford have had twelve managers . Of these , Aidy Boothroyd took Watford back to the Premier League in 2006 , but Watford were relegated in 2007 , and Boothroyd departed in 2008 . 
 Following Watford 's takeover by the Pozzo family , Gianfranco Zola was appointed head coach , replacing former centre back Sean Dyche in July 2012 , . Zola took Watford to third position in the Championship in 2012 – 13 but resigned on 16 December 2013 . He was replaced by fellow Italian Beppe Sannino in December 2013 . Sannino guided the team to a final league position of 13th . 
 Despite winning four of the first five league matches of the 2014 / 15 season , and with Watford sitting in 2nd place , Sannino 's position had become the subject of much speculation following rumours of dressing @-@ room unrest and some players taking a dislike to his style of management . Sannino resigned from his position as head coach on 31 August 2014 after just over eight months in charge . His final game in charge was a 4 – 2 win at home to Huddersfield Town the day before . 
 Sannino 's departure initiated a bizarre sequence of events which led to Watford having three further head coaches in little more than a month . On 2 September , Watford confirmed the appointment of former Brighton & Hove Albion head coach Óscar García as the successor to Sannino , beating off competition from fellow Championship side Leeds United for his services . García , however , resigned from his position on 29 September 2014 for health reasons , having been admitted to hospital with chest pains a couple of weeks prior . Billy McKinlay , who had only been appointed first team coach on 26 September 2014 , was appointed as his immediate successor on the same day – his first position in management . A week later , McKinlay was released by mutual consent and former Partizan coach Slaviša Jokanović appointed in his place , apparently because the club favoured a head coach with greater experience . 
 On 4 June 2015 , Quique Sánchez Flores was announced as the new head coach as the replacement to Jovanović , who had failed to agree contract terms . Despite going on to lead the newly promoted Watford to a comfortable mid @-@ table position in the Premier League and the semi @-@ final of the FA Cup , it was announced on 13 May 2016 that Sánchez Flores would be leaving the club at the end of the season . 
 = = Club officials = = 
 = = = Current management team = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 For a complete record of the club 's achievements , see List of Watford F.C. seasons . 
 = = Records = = 
 Striker Luther Blissett holds the record for Watford appearances , having played 503 matches in all competitions between 1976 and 1992 , and his 415 appearances in The Football League during the same period is also a club record . Blissett holds the corresponding goalscoring records , with 186 career Watford goals , 148 of which were in the league . The records for the most league goals in a season is held by Cliff Holton , having scored 42 goals in the 1959 – 60 season . The highest number of goals scored by a player in a single game at a professional level is the six registered by Harry Barton against Wycombe Wanderers in September 1903 . 
 Watford 's biggest ever competitive win came in 1900 , when the team defeated Maidenhead 11 – 0 in the Southern League Second Division . The team 's biggest Football League winning margin is 8 – 0 ; this first occurred in a Third Division South match against Newport County in 1924 , and was repeated in a First Division match against Sunderland in 1982 . Both of these matches were at home – Watford have won an away league match by five goals on six occasions , most recently in the 6 – 1 win against Leeds United at Elland Road in 2012 . The most goals scored in a Football League game involving Watford is 11 , in Watford 's 7 – 4 victories against Swindon Town , Torquay United and Burnley in 1934 , 1937 and 2003 respectively . The club 's highest home attendance is 34 @,@ 099 , for a fourth round FA Cup match against Manchester United on 3 February 1969 . The record home league attendance is 27 @,@ 968 against Queens Park Rangers in August of the same year . Watford 's home capacity has since been reduced due to all @-@ seater requirements ; it currently stands at 21 @,@ 577 . 
 = History of York City F.C. = 
 The history of York City Football Club spans the period from 1908 to the present time . For detail on individual periods of the club 's history , see one of the following articles : 
 History of York City F.C. ( 1908 – 80 ) 
 History of York City F.C. ( 1980 – present ) 
 = SMS Kaiser ( 1911 ) = 
 SMS Kaiser was the lead ship of the Kaiser class of battleships of the Imperial German Navy . Kaiser was built by the Imperial Dockyard at Kiel , launched on 22 March 1911 and commissioned on 1 August 1912 . The ship was equipped with ten 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in five twin turrets , and had a top speed of 23 @.@ 4 knots ( 43 @.@ 3 km / h ; 26 @.@ 9 mph ) . Kaiser was assigned to the III Squadron of the High Seas Fleet for the majority of World War I. 
 In 1913 , Kaiser and her sister König Albert conducted a cruise to South America and South Africa . The ship participated in most of the major fleet operations during the war . She fought at the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , during which she was hit once and suffered negligible damage . The ship was also present during Operation Albion in the Baltic Sea in September and October 1917 , and at the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight in November 1917 . 
 During peace negotiations after the end of the war in 1918 , she was interned with other ships of the High Seas Fleet at Scapa Flow . On 21 June 1919 the commander of the interned fleet , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , ordered the fleet to be scuttled to ensure that the British would not be able to seize the ships . The wreck was subsequently raised in 1929 and broken up in Rosyth in 1930 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Ordered under the contract name Ersatz Hildebrand as a replacement for the obsolete coastal defense ship Hildebrand , Kaiser was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel in September 1909 . The hull was completed by 22 March 1911 , when the ship was launched ; this date was specifically chosen , as it was the birthday of Kaiser ( Emperor ) Wilhelm I. His grandson , Kaiser Wilhelm II , attended the launching ceremony , where German Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann @-@ Hollweg gave a speech while Kaiserin ( Empress ) Augusta Victoria christened the ship . Fitting @-@ out work then began , which was completed by the end of July 1912 . On 1 August , the ship was commissioned for sea trials . These were concluded by 7 December ; the following day Kaiser joined the fleet as the flagship of V Division . Her crew consisted largely of men who had been transferred from the recently decommissioned battleships Elsass and Braunschweig . 
 The ship was 172 @.@ 40 m ( 565 ft 7 in ) long overall and displaced a maximum of 27 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 26 @,@ 570 long tons ) . She had a beam of 29 m ( 95 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 10 m ( 29 ft 10 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 80 m ( 28 ft 10 in ) aft . Kaiser was powered by three sets of Parsons turbines , supplied with steam by 16 coal @-@ fired boilers . The powerplant produced a top speed of 23 @.@ 4 knots ( 43 @.@ 3 km / h ; 26 @.@ 9 mph ) . She carried 3 @,@ 600 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 500 long tons ) of coal , which enabled a maximum range of 7 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 600 km ; 9 @,@ 100 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 Kaiser was armed with a main battery of ten 30 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 50 guns in five twin turrets . The ship disposed with the inefficient hexagonal arrangement of previous German battleships ; instead , three of the five turrets were mounted on the centerline , with two of them arranged in a superfiring pair aft . The other two turrets were placed en echelon amidships , such that both could fire on the broadside . The ship was also armed with fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 guns in casemates amidships , eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns in casemates and four 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns . The ship 's armament was rounded out by five 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes , all mounted in the ship 's hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After joining the active fleet in December 1912 , Kaiser was stationed in Kiel . The ship then conducted individual training . In February 1913 , Kaiser was transferred to Wilhelmshaven , along with her sister ship Friedrich der Grosse . She then took part in several training exercises with the rest of the High Seas Fleet . These included maneuvers in the North Sea in March and April , artillery drills in the Baltic at the end of the month , and further fleet maneuvers in May . In June , Kaiser took part in the Kiel Week regatta . Kaiser Wilhelm II and Italian King Victor Emmanuel III inspected the ship . The annual summer cruise to Norway was conducted in July and August , followed immediately by the autumn maneuvers in August and September . In September 1913 , Captain Adolf von Trotha became the ship 's commanding officer , a post he held until January 1916 . 
 Kaiser was selected to participate in a long @-@ distance cruise to test the reliability of the new turbine propulsion system . The ship was joined by her sister König Albert and the light cruiser Strassburg in a special " Detached Division " . The trio departed Germany on 9 December 1913 and proceeded to the German colonies in western Africa . The ships visited Lomé in Togoland , Duala and Victoria in Kamerun , and Swakopmund in German South @-@ West Africa . From Africa , the ships sailed to St. Helena and then on to Rio de Janeiro , arriving on 15 February 1914 . Strassburg was detached to visit Buenos Aires , Argentina before returning to meet the two battleships in Montevideo , Uruguay . The three ships sailed south around Cape Horn and then north to Valparaiso , Chile , arriving on 2 April and remaining for over a week . 
 On 11 April , the ships departed Valparaiso for the long journey back to Germany . On the return trip , the ships visited several more ports , including Bahía Blanca , Argentina , before returning to Rio de Janeiro . On 16 May the ships left Rio de Janeiro for the Atlantic leg of the journey ; they stopped in Cape Verde , Madeira , and Vigo , Spain while en route to Germany . Kaiser , König Albert , and Strassburg arrived in Kiel on 17 June 1914 . In the course of the voyage , the ships traveled some 20 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 37 @,@ 000 km ; 23 @,@ 000 mi ) . A week later , on 24 June , the Detached Division was dissolved and Kaiser returned to the III Squadron . Kaiser then participated in squadron exercises in July . Kaiser joined the High Seas Fleet for its annual summer cruise to Norway in July 1914 , about two weeks after the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo . As a result of rising international tensions , the cruise was cut short and the German fleet was back in Wilhelmshaven by 29 July . At midnight on 4 August , the United Kingdom declared war on Germany . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The High Seas Fleet , including Kaiser , conducted a number of sweeps and advances into the North Sea . The first occurred on 2 – 3 November 1914 , though no British forces were encountered . Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet , adopted a strategy in which the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group raided British coastal towns to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet where they could be destroyed by the High Seas Fleet . The raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 was the first such operation . On the evening of 15 December , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts — including Kaiser and her four sisters — and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced von Ingenohl that he was faced with the entire Grand Fleet . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battlefleet back toward Germany . 
 Following the loss of SMS Blücher at the Battle of Dogger Bank in January 1915 , the Kaiser removed Admiral von Ingenohl from his post on 2 February . Admiral Hugo von Pohl replaced him as commander of the fleet . Admiral von Pohl conducted a series of fleet advances in 1915 in which Kaiser took part ; in the first one on 29 – 30 March , the fleet steamed out to the north of Terschelling and return without incident . Another followed on 17 – 18 April , where Kaiser and the rest of the fleet covered a mining operation by the II Scouting Group . Three days later , on 21 – 22 April , the High Seas Fleet advanced towards the Dogger Bank , though again failed to meet any British forces . Kaiser was in dock in Kiel for periodic maintenance during the operation on 17 – 18 May , but she was back with the fleet for the sortie on 29 – 30 May , during which the fleet advanced as far as Schiermonnikoog before being forced to turn back by inclement weather . On 10 August , the fleet steamed to the north of Helgoland to cover the return of the auxiliary cruiser Meteor . A month later , on 11 – 12 September , the fleet covered another mine @-@ laying operation off the Swarte Bank . The last operation of the year , conducted on 23 – 24 October , was an advance without result in the direction of Horns Reef . 
 On 12 January 1916 , Admiral Reinhard Scheer replaced von Pohl as the fleet commander . Kaiser was present during the fleet advance on 5 – 7 March , though this too ended without action . While in port in Kiel , the old pre @-@ dreadnought Hannover accidentally collided with Kaiser , though neither ship was seriously damaged . Scheer continued the series of fleet operations practiced by his predecessors ; the fleet conducted sweeps of the North Sea on 26 March , 2 – 3 April , and 21 – 22 April . The battlecruisers conducted another raid on the English coast on 24 – 25 April , during which Kaiser and the rest of the fleet provided distant support . Scheer planned another raid for mid @-@ May , but the battlecruiser Seydlitz had struck a mine during the previous raid and the repair work forced the operation to be pushed back until the end of the month . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Almost immediately after the Lowestoft raid , Admiral Reinhard Scheer began planning another foray into the North Sea . He had initially intended to launch the operation in mid @-@ May , by which time the mine damage to Seydlitz was scheduled to be repaired — Scheer was unwilling to embark on a major raid without his battlecruiser forces at full strength . On 9 May , however , several battleships developed problems with their engines , which delayed the operation further , to 23 May . On 22 May , Seydlitz was still not fully repaired , and the operation was again postponed , this time to 29 May . At noon on 29 May , the repairs to Seydlitz were finally completed , and the ship returned to the I Scouting Group . The plan called for Hipper 's battlecruisers to steam north to the Skagerrak , with the intention of luring out a portion of the British fleet so it could be destroyed by Scheer 's waiting battleships . 
 Kaiser and the rest of the III Battle Squadron were the leading unit of the High Seas Fleet ; the four König @-@ class battleships led the line . Kaiser , the flagship of Konteradmiral H. Nordmann , was directly astern of the four Königs . I Battle Squadron , composed of the eight Helgoland- and Nassau @-@ class battleships , followed III Squadron , with the six elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of II Battle Squadron bringing up the rear . Hipper 's five battlecruisers left the Jade estuary at 02 : 00 on 31 May ; Scheer , with the High Seas Fleet , followed an hour and a half later . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 CET , the battlecruisers of I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , under the command of David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that saw the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary , less than a half an hour later . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south in order to draw the British ships towards the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , König 's crew spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers , and a minute later at 17 : 46 , the order to open fire was given . 
 Between 17 : 48 and 17 : 52 , Kaiser , Kronprinz , Friedrich der Grosse , and all eight battleships of the I Squadron opened fire on several ships of the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron ; Kaiser , Ostfriesland , and Nassau engaged HMS Southampton , though only Nassau managed to score a hit on the cruiser . In the span of eight minutes , Kaiser fired eleven salvos at Southampton without success . The 2nd LCS then moved back out of range , having largely escaped unscathed . At 17 : 58 , Scheer ordered the fleet to maximum speed ; the greater speed of the Königs caused the distance between Kaiser and König to rapidly increase . At 18 : 05 , Southampton again came into range , and Kaiser opened fire . Kaiser fired four salvos at a range of 12 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 yd ) , though again without scoring any hits . After three minutes of firing , Kaiser 's guns again fell silent . 
 Starting at 18 : 10 , Kaiser began firing on the 5th Battle Squadron battleship Malaya ; in the span of 25 minutes , Kaiser fired 27 salvos at an average range of 17 @,@ 300 m ( 18 @,@ 900 yd ) . The British destroyers Nestor and Nomad , which had been disabled by earlier in the engagement , lay directly in the path of the advancing High Seas Fleet . Shortly before 18 : 30 , Kaiser and her three sister ships opened fire on Nomad with their secondary batteries . The hail of 15 @-@ cm shells smothered the ship ; a fire was started and one shell detonated the ship 's forward ammunition magazine . Nomad sank stern first at 18 : 30 . Nestor was meanwhile destroyed by the battleships of I Squadron . 
 Shortly after 19 : 00 , the German cruiser Wiesbaden had become disabled by a shell from the British battlecruiser Invincible ; Rear Admiral Behncke in König attempted to maneuver the III Squadron to cover the stricken cruiser . Simultaneously , the British 3rd and 4th Light Cruiser Squadrons began a torpedo attack on the German line ; while advancing to torpedo range , they smothered Wiesbaden with fire from their main guns . The eight III Squadron battleships fired on the British cruisers , but even sustained fire from the battleships ' main guns failed to drive off the British cruisers . The armored cruisers Defence , Warrior , and Black Prince joined in the attack on the crippled Wiesbaden . Between 19 : 14 and 19 : 17 , Kaiser and several other battleships and battlecruisers opened fire on Defence and Warrior . Defence was struck by several heavy caliber shells from the German dreadnoughts . One salvo penetrated the ship 's ammunition magazines and , in a massive explosion , destroyed the cruiser . 
 As Warrior limped away to the west , the Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron joined the Grand Fleet as it entered the battle from the north . However , Warspite was forced to haul out of line to the south , towards the oncoming German fleet . Warspite came under intense fire from the approaching German battleships ; Kaiser scored a hit on Warspite that damaged her steering gear and forced her to steam in a circle , out of control . After completing two full circles and sustaining 13 heavy hits , Warspite came back under control and rejoined the squadron . However , by 20 : 00 the steering gear had again failed , so the ship was forced to withdraw from the engagement . 
 By 20 : 15 , the German fleet had faced the Grand Fleet for a second time and was forced to turn away ; in doing so , the order of the German line was reversed . Kaiser was now the fifth ship from the rear of the German line , ahead of only the four König @-@ class battleships . Kaiser was hit twice in quick succession by heavy @-@ caliber shells , at 20 : 23 and three minutes later . The Common Pointed , Capped , shells came from the 30 cm ( 12 in ) guns of Agincourt . One shell penetrated the upper deck and landed in a hammock stowage compartment below the No. 7 casemate ; the shell failed to explode and instead broke up on impact , starting a small fire that was quickly put out . The other shell probably exploded outside the ship . 
 Shortly before 21 : 30 , Kaiser , Prinzregent Luitpold , and Markgraf spotted British light forces approaching . The German ships opened fire at a range of around 7 @,@ 300 m ( 8 @,@ 000 yd ) with both their main and secondary armament . The light cruiser Calliope was badly damaged , which forced the British ships to withdraw . At around 23 : 30 , the German fleet reorganized into the night cruising formation . Kaiser was the twelfth ship , in the center of the 24 @-@ ship line . 
 After a series of night engagements between the leading battleships and British destroyers , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British light forces and reached Horns Reef by 04 : 00 on 1 June . The German fleet reached Wilhelmshaven a few hours later ; the I Squadron battleships took up defensive positions in the outer roadstead and Kaiser , Kaiserin , Prinzregent Luitpold , and Kronprinz stood ready just outside the entrance to Wilhelmshaven . The remainder of the battleships and battlecruisers entered Wilhelmshaven , where those that were still in fighting condition replenished their stocks of coal and ammunition . The two shell hits suffered by Kaiser had been largely ineffectual , wounding only one crewmember . 
 = = = = Subsequent operations = = = = 
 On 18 August , Admiral Scheer attempted a repeat of the 31 May operation ; the two serviceable German battlecruisers — Moltke and Von der Tann — supported by three dreadnoughts , were to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . The rest of the fleet , including Kaiser , would trail behind and provide cover . The British were aware of the German plans and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Admiral Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just eleven weeks after the decidedly close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 Another fleet advance followed on 18 – 20 October , though it ended without encountering any British units . Two weeks later , on 4 November , Kaiser took part in an expedition to the western coast of Denmark to assist two U @-@ boats — U @-@ 20 and U @-@ 30 — that had become stranded there . On 1 December , the High Seas Fleet was reorganized ; Kaiser and her sisters were transferred to the newly created IV Battle Squadron , with Kaiser as the flagship . In 1917 , the policy of unrestricted submarine warfare was reinstated ; the surface units of the German navy were therefore tasked with covering the departures and arrivals of the U @-@ boats . As a result , Kaiser spent most of the year on picket duty in the German Bight . In May 1917 , Kaiser went into the dock for periodic maintenance . 
 = = = = Operation Albion = = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German Army 's conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the Navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon islands ; the primary naval component was organized into a Special Unit , which comprised the flagship , Moltke , along with the IV Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . The IV Squadron was composed of the V and VI Divisions . V Division included the four König @-@ class ships , and was by this time augmented with the new battleship Bayern . The VI Division consisted of the five Kaiser @-@ class battleships . Along with 9 light cruisers , 3 torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , supported by over 100 aircraft and 6 zeppelins . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsesarevich , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , and several torpedo boats and gunboats . The garrison on Ösel numbered some 14 @,@ 000 men . 
 On 24 September , Kaiser left Kiel , bound for the Putziger Wiek , where she rendezvoused with several other battleships . From there , the ship went to Libau , which she reached on 10 October . Two days later , on the morning of 12 October , Kaiser , joined by her sisters Kaiserin and Prinzregent Luitpold , opened fire on the Russian shore batteries at Cape Hundsort . On 14 October Kaiser engaged the Russian destroyer Grom and disabled the ship 's engine with a single hit . Grom was captured and taken in tow , but she quickly foundered . Kaiser then bombarded Russian positions on Cape Toffri on 16 October . 
 By 20 October , the fighting on the islands was winding down ; Moon , Ösel , and Dagö were in German possession . The previous day , the Admiralstab had ordered the cessation of naval actions and the return of the dreadnoughts to the High Seas Fleet as soon as possible . On 31 October Kaiser and the rest of the Special Unit were detached from the operation and sent back to Kiel , which they reached by 2 November . Kaiser was back in the North Sea on 7 November . 
 = = = = Final operations = = = = 
 Kaiser and Kaiserin were assigned to security duty in the Bight on 17 November ; they were tasked with providing support to the II Scouting Group ( II SG ) and several minesweepers . Two British light cruisers , Calypso and Caledon , attacked the minesweepers and II SG in Heligoland Bight . Kaiser and her sister intervened and hit one of the light cruisers . The two ships briefly engaged the battlecruiser Repulse , but neither side scored any hits . However , the German commander failed to press the attack . 
 On 2 February 1918 , the light cruiser Stralsund struck a mine ; Kaiser was among those ships that sortied to escort the damaged cruiser back to port . The ship was also present during the fleet advance on 23 – 24 April . The operation was intended to intercept a heavily escorted British convoy to Norway on 23 – 25 April , though the operation was canceled when the battlecruiser Moltke suffered mechanical damage . In the final months of the war , Captain Hermann Bauer took command of the ship ; his period in command lasted from August to November . 
 Kaiser was to have taken part in a final fleet action days before the Armistice , an operation which envisioned the bulk of the High Seas Fleet sortieing from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet . In order to retain a better bargaining position for Germany , Admirals Hipper and Scheer intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , whatever the cost to the fleet . Consequently , on 29 October 1918 , the order was given to depart from Wilhelmshaven to consolidate the fleet in the Jade roadstead , with the intention of departing the following morning . However , starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen mutinied . The unrest spread to other battleships , which forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of their fleet ships were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made clear to von Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any conditions . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive flotilla consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks . The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . 
 A copy of The Times informed von Reuter that the Armistice was to expire at noon on 21 June 1919 , the deadline by which Germany was to have signed the peace treaty . Rear Admiral von Reuter came to the conclusion that the British intended to seize the German ships after the Armistice expired . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Kaiser sank at 13 : 24 ; the ship was raised in 1929 and broken up for scrap in Rosyth starting in 1930 . 
 = Treehouse of Horror XXII = 
 " Treehouse of Horror XXII " is the third episode of the twenty @-@ third season and the twenty @-@ second Halloween episode of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 30 , 2011 . The episode is part of the Treehouse of Horror series , which is an episode divided into three separate stories and an opening that is a parody of scary or Halloween themed stories . This episode 's stories were primarily spoofs of the French film The Diving Bell and the Butterfly , the television series Dexter , and the American film Avatar . The opening was a parody of the autobiographical film 127 Hours , in which the subject Aron Ralston loses an arm . 
 The episode was written by Carolyn Omine , directed by Matthew Faughnan , and featured guest voices from Aron Ralston and Jackie Mason . In its original American broadcast , it was viewed by approximately 8 @.@ 1 million people . The critical reception was very diverse , ranging from a plea to end the show to a statement that the show is on top of its game and should not be cancelled . The episode featured a reference to the Broadway musical Spider @-@ Man : Turn Off the Dark . After watching the show , the producers of the musical released a press statement in which they told how flattered they were when their show was mentioned on The Simpsons . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 When Bart , Lisa and Maggie come home from trick @-@ or @-@ treating , Marge switches out the candy with dental hygiene products and asks Homer to deliver the candy to a drive for the troops overseas . Homer instead runs off with the bag to eat its contents in privacy at a canyon cliff . Unfortunately , Homer trips and falls to the bottom of the canyon with his arm pinned . Fueled by his need to get the out @-@ of @-@ reach bag of candy , and reluctant to wait twenty minutes for help , Homer is forced to chew off his arm . Though he manages it after a few tries , Homer learns that he was carrying a bag of vegetables , as Bart , Lisa and Maggie had secretly stolen back their candy , inciting an upset Homer to scream in rage . 
 = = = The Diving Bell and the Butterball = = = 
 In a parody of The Diving Bell and the Butterfly , Homer begins to decorate the house for Halloween and is reaching for a decoration in a box . Unfortunately , there is a real Black Widow spider in the box and when Homer grabs what he thinks is a plastic spider , he is bitten it . The bite leaves Homer paralyzed , unable to move or talk . When Lisa reads for him , she discovers that he can communicate through farting . The Simpson family is amazed at the result and Lisa helps Homer tell Marge how he feels about her . When he is again bitten by another spider ( a radioactive one this time ) , he gains the ability to shoot spider webs out of his rear end and have the same abilities as Spider @-@ Man , though he is still unable to move or talk . 
 = = = Dial D for Diddily = = = 
 In a parody of Dexter , after hearing a voice that he thinks is God tell him to murder people , Ned Flanders becomes a serial killing vigilante , targeting characters who are Homer 's enemies . When Flanders discovers that Homer is the one who has been duping him into committing murder ( by way of a Bible @-@ shaped receiver ) , Homer argues that God does not exist and starts burning Ned 's bible , only to be stopped and strangled to death by God Himself . Marge begs God to reverse everything that has happened , but God tells her that Satan is the one who is running the world . When Flanders thinks that this scenario cannot get any worse , it is revealed that Satan is having sex with Ned 's deceased wife , Maude . 
 = = = In the Na 'vi = = = 
 In a parody of Avatar , taking place in the future , Krusty the Clown is still alive , but has trouble entertaining his Nazi audience . On the distant planet Rigel 7 , there is a sacred extract called Hilarrium , which causes people to get in a better mood . Krusty desperately needs this sacred extract and uses military force to obtain it . The military recruits Bart and Milhouse to befriend the alien race in avatar bodies . They succeed in this and Bart ends up getting Kang 's daughter pregnant . It turns out that the extract Hilarrium , which is excreted by their queen , is primarily used by the natives to reduce the mood swings of pregnant women . After Bart and Milhouse are shown where the alien race gets the Hilarrium , Milhouse then reveals the location of the extract to the military , which then attacks the natives . In the battle , the natives are helped by all the animals of the planet , which eventually defeats the military . Kang and Kodos then admit that they would have just given the Hilarrium to the humans . 
 = = = Ending = = = 
 At the end , a Christmas carol is played as all of the characters that appeared say various things about Christmas , such as Marge saying that making a sweater causes 27 people to lose their jobs . At the very end , Grampa Simpson shows up in a black tutu , asking when the Black Swan comes up , and everyone wonders when the Black Swan will come . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Treehouse of Horror XXII " was written by Carolyn Omine and directed by Matthew Faughnan . The episode is part of the Treehouse of Horror series , which since the second season , has been a tradition for The Simpsons to air a new Halloween special each year . Treehouse of Horror episodes typically consist of four parts : an opening and Halloween @-@ themed version of the credits , followed by three segments . These segments usually have a horror , science fiction or fantasy theme and quite often are parodies of films , novels , plays , television shows , Twilight Zone episodes , or old issues of EC Comics . The episode featured guest appearances from Jackie Mason and Aron Ralston , who was the subject of the film 127 Hours . Mason has a recurring role on The Simpsons as Rabbi Hyman Krustofski , who is the father of Krusty the Clown . As it is tradition with most Treehouse of Horror episodes , this episode featured the use of " scary " names in the credits , which is to write alternate names for cast and crew in a " scary " fashion . Ralston came up with his own scary name for the credits , which was Aron " I gave my right arm to be on ' The Simpsons ' " <unk> . 
 The episode marks the first time of all the Treehouse of Horror episodes that an actual theremin was used for music cues . Previously , the show had trouble locating a theremin player , who could work under the time constraints of the show . Instead , the show used a synthesizer keyboard to play a theremin sample - much to creator Matt Groening 's displeasure . The situation turned when a scene in " Homer Scissorhands " was written to feature Milhouse playing the theremin . Now the crew had to find a suitable theremin player and Charles Richard Lester was hired for that episode as well as " Treehouse of Horror XXII " . 
 The opening segment had many parodies and references to films . When the segment opens , the Simpson family is dressed up for Halloween . Here Maggie pops out of Bart 's astronaut suit , dressed as a baby alien , which is a reference to the 1979 film Alien . Homer is dressed as Doctor Manhattan from the 2009 superhero film Watchmen . During the middle , there is a spoof of the 1960 film Psycho , as the same music and similar scenes are used ( <unk> : Reverend Lovejoy eyeing Homer in his car . In the end of the segment , it turns into a spoof of the 2010 film 127 Hours , in which Ralston loses his arm after being trapped under a rock . Ralston voiced the 911 dispatcher Homer calls when he is trapped . 
 " The Diving Bell and the Butterball " was a satire of the 2007 French film The Diving Bell and the Butterfly , in which a paralyzed man learns to communicate through moving his eyelids . Instead of moving his eyelids , Homer communicated through flatulence . The segment took off in different direction when Homer was bitten by another spider and turned into a paralyzed Spider @-@ Man with reversed colors , swinging around Springfield and fighting crime . The last part references the Spider @-@ Man musical , Spider @-@ Man : Turn Off the Dark that was plagued by stage malfunctions and sometimes left its performers to dangle in mid @-@ air . The many accidents caused five people to become injured while working on the musical . 
 The last two segments were also parodies of popular culture . " Dial D for Diddily " featured various references to the television series , Dexter , the titular character whom Ned Flanders is supposed to represent when he goes on a killing spree . The music in the segment is the original music from the main title theme of Dexter by Rolfe Kent , although the title references Dial M for Murder . Two of the targets , Patty and Selma Bouvier , were killed in a similar fashion to the style of Wile E. Coyote . " In the Na 'vi " was a parody of the 2009 film Avatar . In the end , Kang and Kodos mentions that " there is no word for ‘ yours ’ or ‘ mine . ’ " , which is why they do not enjoy the 1968 film Yours , Mine and Ours ( or the 2005 remake ) . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 " Treehouse of Horror XXII " originally aired on Fox in the United States on October 30 , 2011 , the night before Halloween . In recent years , this Treehouse of Horror episode aired closest to Halloween without leaving October . The release date was unusual for a Treehouse of Horror episode , because ever since Fox got the rights to the Major League Baseball playoffs , most of the Halloween specials aired in the first week of November . This only marks the second time Fox has aired a Treehouse of Horror episode in October since 1999 – in 2009 it aired nearly two weeks before Halloween . Major League Baseball decided to move the 2011 World Series earlier than the previous season so that no games would be played in November , leaving October 30 free for Fox to air " Treehouse of Horror XXII " on that date . When The Wrap asked show runner Al Jean if he was satisfied with the airing the night before Halloween , Jean said : " Yes , and the perfect thing is , Halloween is actually a bad day to air it , because nobody watches TV that night . Especially if they have kids . So October 30th , it is our Halloween . People can watch it and then still go out the next night . " As of 2015 every Treehouse of Horror episode following " Treehouse of Horror XXII " has aired during the month of October . 
 Treehouse of Horror XXII aired closest to Halloween without going over . ( October 30 , 2011 ) . The last time <unk> actually aired on Halloween night was in 1999 . 
 The episode was watched by approximately 8 @.@ 10 million people during the first broadcast . The show received a 4 @.@ 0 Nielsen rating in the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 and a ten percent share of the audience , which was a 33 percent increase from the previous episode " Bart Stops to Smell the Roosevelts " . The Simpsons became the highest @-@ rated program in Fox 's Animation Domination lineup that night both in terms of viewers and in the 18 – 49 demographic . It finished before Family Guy , The Cleveland Show and the series premiere of Allen Gregory . Besides a broadcast of a NFL Football game between the Dallas Cowboys and the Philadelphia Eagles on NBC , The Simpsons was the most watched program of the night in the 18 – 49 demographic . In comparison , the episode increased eight percent over the previous year 's " Treehouse of Horror XXI " , which had a 3 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating and a nine percent share of the audience in the 18 – 49 demographic . For the week of October 24 – 30 , 2011 , The Simpsons finished 14th in the 18 – 49 demographic , fourth in the 18 – 34 demographic , and third among teenagers . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Since airing , " Treehouse of Horror XXII " has received mixed reviews from critics . Josh Harrison of Ology was positive and gave the episode a rating of seven out of ten , but commented that he preferred " episodes that feature longer , more involved storylines more than the spoof collections . " At The A.V. Club , Hayden Childs gave the episode a C + grade , saying , " The writers seem unwilling to mock the more outrageous aspects of the movies they are sending up and settle for weakly batting at the obvious . Some of the jokes land , but none land too solidly . " Meredith Woerner of io9 thought that " [ t ] he whole thing never quite achieved the same level of brilliance as some previous years — even though the Avatar bit was funny , we 've seen so many Avatar spoofs by now that , well , it 's tired . However we did get a lot of joy out of seeing Homer dressed up as Doctor Manhattan and Maggie as a wee @-@ little chest burster . " Even more critical was CraveOnline 's Blair Marnell who gave the episode a rating of three out of ten . He commented that " there is no stronger argument for ending ' The Simpsons ' than the latest Halloween installment of ' Treehouse of Horror ' " and further said that " in all honesty , it 's amazing how tame ' The Simpsons ' has become over the years . This show used to be the ' South Park ' of its day . Now it 's just showing its age and it 's no longer the cool TV rebel that it used to be . " Alex Strachan had the opposite reaction in a review in Calgary Herald and concluded that we should " [ f ] <unk> all that talk about The Simpsons being past its prime . Based on tonight 's sharp @-@ eyed , keen @-@ witted Treehouse of Horror XXII - funnier , faster and more fright @-@ worthy than last year 's dud , thankfully - there 's a lot of ink left in the old ink pot yet . " 
 The first segment , " The Diving Bell and the Butterball " , was met with mixed reactions . Marnell called the parody " wildly unfunny " , while Childs was critical of Homer turning into a paralyzed Spider @-@ Man and stated that it was " simply not very funny . " Tim Surette of TV.com was more ambivalent and said : " I found this sketch to be simultaneously awesome and terrible because I have the maturity of a 6 @-@ year old and the intelligence of an average man . " The reference to the Broadway musical Spider @-@ Man : Turn Off the Dark was noticed by the producers of the musical . They reacted by issuing a statement the following day : " Everyone at ' Spider @-@ Man : Turn Off the Dark ' was extremely flattered by last night ’ s tribute on ' The Simpsons . ' ' The Simpsons ' is an iconic American institution , and being part of last night 's episode was an honor and dream come true . " Coincidentally , the previous aired episode of South Park , " Broadway Bro Down " , also had a reference to the musical , but the spokesperson for the Broadway show did not want to comment on that episode . 
 The response for " Dial D for Diddly " was that it started well , but then gradually declined . In Marnell 's opinion , " [ t ] he best segment of the entire episode comes when Ned makes his normal routine look sinister and yet when he finally closes his hands to pray , he 's actually holding a pair of severed hands " , but as for the rest of the segment , he is disappointed : " [ W ] hen it seems like the short is heading for some darkly hilarious territory , the voice of God turns out to be Homer urging Ned to murder his enemies . " Other reviewers agreed with his assessment . Surette concluded that the episode " [ s ] tarted off good , but got boring very quick . " Likewise , Childs commented that the " segment had a lot of promise for the funny , but it started to sag fast and then sank altogether . " 
 Much of the criticism towards the Avatar spoof " In the Na <unk> " goes towards the timing of the episode . Surette thought that it was " [ a ] n Avatar spoof that came about two years too late . This sketch had no redeeming qualities and should be erased from the minds of all Simpsons fans immediately . " Similarly , Marnell commented that in the episode " The Simpsons ' finally gets around to parodying ' Avatar ' — a movie picked to death by ' South Park ' and other series a year or two ago " and further elaborated that " [ i ] t 's almost a straight forward retelling of ' Avatar ' without the biting satire that made the film parodies of previous years so much fun . " In general , Treehouse of Horror episodes take about a year to complete for the staff . This is because they have to do many original designs , such as characters and backgrounds . Prior to the airing of the episode , Jean revealed that the staff was already working on " Treehouse of Horror XXIII " . 
 At the 39th Annual Annie Awards , Omine won the " Writing in a Television Production " category for her work on " Treehouse of Horror XXII " . 
 = Salanoia durrelli = 
 Salanoia durrelli , also known as Durrell 's <unk> , is a Madagascan mammal in the family Eupleridae of the order Carnivora . It is most closely related to the brown @-@ tailed mongoose ( Salanoia concolor ) , with which it forms the genus Salanoia . The two are genetically similar , but morphologically distinct , leading scientists to recognize them as separate species . After an individual was observed in 2004 , the animal became known to science and S. durrelli was described as a new species in 2010 . It is found only in the Lac Alaotra area . 
 A small , reddish @-@ brown carnivore , Salanoia durrelli is characterized by broad feet with prominent pads , reddish @-@ buff underparts , and broad , robust teeth , among other differences from the brown @-@ tailed mongoose . In the only two weighed specimens , body mass was 600 g and 675 g ( 21 and 24 oz ) . It is a marsh @-@ dwelling animal that may feed on crustaceans and mollusks . The Lac Alaotra area is a threatened ecosystem , and S. durrelli may also be endangered by competition with introduced species . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 An individual Salanoia durrelli was observed swimming in 2004 by the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust ( DWCT ) during a survey of bamboo lemurs ( Hapalemur ) in the Lac Alaotra area , the largest wetlands of Madagascar . The animal was captured , photographed , and then released , but examination of the photograph showed that it could not be identified with any known species of Malagasy carnivoran ( family Eupleridae ) . Therefore , two specimens were caught in 2005 by the DWCT . One was killed to facilitate additional morphological comparisons . In 2010 , it was formally described as Salanoia durrelli in a paper by conservationist Joanna Durbin and a team of scientists from the Climate , Community & Biodiversity Alliance , Nature Heritage , the Natural History Museum , Conservation International , and the DWCT . The specific name , durrelli , honors Gerald Durrell , a noted conservationist and the founder of the DWCT . Previously , local villagers had already reported the presence of a small carnivoran at Alaotra , and it was speculated that the animal was the closely related brown @-@ tailed mongoose ( Salanoia concolor ) . 
 Salanoia durrelli was placed in the genus Salanoia , which previously included only the brown @-@ tailed mongoose of eastern Madagascar . S. durrelli shows substantial morphological differences from the brown @-@ tailed mongoose , but the mitochondrial DNA of the two species is very similar . The discoverers chose to recognize the Lac Alaotra population as a separate species in view of its significant morphological differentiation . The observed morphological distinctiveness might be result of adaptations to life in the Alaotra wetlands , similar to the Alaotra bamboo lemur species , Hapalemur <unk> , which is also recognized as a distinct species despite being genetically close to the more widespread Hapalemur griseus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Salanoia durrelli most closely resembles the brown @-@ tailed mongoose , which is a small , gracile mongoose @-@ like carnivoran . It is reddish @-@ brown overall , paler than the brown @-@ tailed mongoose . The head and nape are speckled . The underparts are reddish @-@ buff , not brownish as in the brown @-@ tailed mongoose . Most of the tail is similar in color to the body , but the tip is yellowish @-@ brown . The inner side of the well @-@ furred external ear ( pinna ) is reddish @-@ buff . The broad feet are naked below , with the naked skin buff on the forefeet and dark brown on the hindfeet , and show prominent pads . Each of the five digits on the fore- and hindfeet bears a long , dark brown claw . There are rows of stiff hairs along the outer margins of the feet . In contrast , the brown @-@ tailed mongoose has narrower feet with more poorly developed pads . In S. durrelli , the fur is long and soft . 
 In the holotype specimen , a female , the head and body length was 310 mm ( 12 @.@ 2 in ) , the tail length was 210 mm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) , the hindfoot length was 66 @.@ 8 mm ( 2 @.@ 63 in ) , the ear length was 17 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 69 in ) , and the body mass was 675 g ( 24 oz ) . In another specimen , a male which was captured and released , the head and body length was about 330 mm ( 13 in ) , the tail length was about 175 mm ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) , and the body mass was 600 g ( 21 oz ) . Based on these limited data , S. durrelli may be slightly smaller than the brown @-@ tailed mongoose . 
 The skull generally resembles that of the brown @-@ tailed mongoose , but the rostrum ( front part ) is broad and deep , the nasal bones are broad and short , and the region of the palate is broad . The mandible ( lower jaw ) is robust and shows a high , steeply rising coronoid process ( a projection at the back of the bone ) . Statistical analysis of measurements of the skulls and teeth strongly separates S. durrelli from specimens of the brown @-@ tailed mongoose . 
 Salanoia durrelli has a more robust dentition than the brown @-@ tailed mongoose ; the teeth have larger surface areas . The first and second upper incisors are smaller than the third , which is separated by a pronounced diastema ( gap ) from the canine tooth . The canine is more robust than in the brown @-@ tailed mongoose . The first upper premolar is small , but the second and third are larger ; these two teeth are shorter and broader than in the brown @-@ tailed mongoose . The fourth premolar is large , as is the first molar . The second upper molar is less than one @-@ third the size of the first , and is more highly reduced than that of the brown @-@ tailed mongoose , which is about two @-@ thirds the size of the first molar . The first lower incisor is smaller than the other two . The lower canine , premolars , and first molar are well @-@ developed . The second molar is broad , but smaller than in the brown @-@ tailed mongoose . 
 = = Distribution , habitat , and behavior = = 
 Salanoia durrelli has been recorded at <unk> , a marshy area at 750 m ( <unk> ft ) above sea level on the eastern coast of Lac Alaotra . The nearest occurrence of the brown @-@ tailed mongoose is about 55 km ( 35 mi ) from Alaotra . The first observed specimen was swimming ; it may have fled from human activity on the shore . The two others were caught on mats of floating vegetation . Thus , S. durrelli occurs in a marsh habitat — quite different from the forest @-@ dwelling brown @-@ tailed mongoose . S. durrelli may use its robust dentition to feed on prey with hard parts , such as crustaceans and molluscs , in addition to small vertebrates , rather than the insects that the more gracile @-@ toothed brown @-@ tailed mongoose eats . Indeed , the two specimens of S. durrelli were captured using traps baited with fish and meat . S. durrelli is similar in many respects to the larger mainland African marsh mongoose ( <unk> <unk> ) , a carnivorous wetland @-@ dweller that also uses mats of vegetation to eat and sleep on . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The unique habitat of Lac Alaotra is threatened by pollution , destruction of marshes for the construction of rice fields , overfishing , and introduced species such as exotic fish , plants , the black rat ( Rattus rattus ) , and the small Indian civet ( Viverricula indica ) , another small carnivoran . A bird restricted to the area , the Alaotra grebe ( <unk> <unk> ) , was declared extinct in 2010 and the population of the bamboo lemur fell by about 30 % from 1994 to 1999 . As a narrowly distributed species with a small population , S. durrelli is likely to be threatened by degradation of its habitat and perhaps competition with the small Indian civet and the black rat , but its conservation status has not yet been formally assessed . The DWCT is working to conserve the Lac Alaotra area and the region has been designated as a protected area . 
 = Alcibiades = 
 Alcibiades , son of Cleinias , from the deme of <unk> ( / <unk> / ; Greek : <unk> <unk> <unk> , transliterated <unk> <unk> <unk> ; c . 450 – 404 BC ) , was a prominent Athenian statesman , orator , and general . He was the last famous member of his mother 's aristocratic family , the Alcmaeonidae , which fell from prominence after the Peloponnesian War . He played a major role in the second half of that conflict as a strategic advisor , military commander , and politician . 
 During the course of the Peloponnesian War , Alcibiades changed his political allegiance several times . In his native Athens in the early <unk> BC , he advocated an aggressive foreign policy and was a prominent proponent of the Sicilian Expedition , but he fled to Sparta after his political enemies brought charges of sacrilege against him . In Sparta , he served as a strategic adviser , proposing or supervising several major campaigns against Athens . In Sparta too , however , Alcibiades soon made powerful enemies and felt forced to defect to Persia . There he served as an adviser to the satrap Tissaphernes until his Athenian political allies brought about his recall . He then served as an Athenian general ( Strategos ) for several years , but his enemies eventually succeeded in exiling him a second time . 
 The Sicilian Expedition was the idea of Alcibiades , and scholars have argued that , had that expedition been under Alcibiades 's command instead of that of Nicias , the expedition might not have met its eventual disastrous fate . In the years when he served Sparta , Alcibiades played a significant role in Athens 's undoing ; the capture of Decelea and the revolts of several critical Athenian subjects occurred either at his suggestion or under his supervision . Once restored to his native city , however , he played a crucial role in a string of Athenian victories that eventually brought Sparta to seek a peace with Athens . He favored unconventional tactics , frequently winning cities over by treachery or negotiation rather than by siege . Alcibiades 's military and political talents frequently proved valuable to whichever state currently held his allegiance , but his propensity for making powerful enemies ensured that he never remained in one place for long ; and by the end of the war which he had helped to rekindle in the early <unk> , his days of political relevance were a bygone memory . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Alcibiades was born in Athens . His father was Cleinias . His mother was <unk> , the daughter of <unk> , and could trace her family back to <unk> and the <unk> Ajax . Alcibiades thereby , through his mother , belonged to the powerful and controversial family of the Alcmaeonidae ; the renowned Pericles and his brother <unk> were <unk> 's cousins , as her father and their mother were siblings . His maternal grandfather , also named Alcibiades , was a friend of Cleisthenes , the famous constitutional reformer of the late 6th century BC . After the death of Cleinias at the Battle of Coronea ( 447 BC ) , Pericles and <unk> became his guardians . According to Plutarch , Alcibiades had several famous teachers , including Socrates , and was well trained in the art of Rhetoric . He was noted , however , for his unruly behavior , which was mentioned by ancient Greek and Latin writers on several occasions . 
 Alcibiades took part in the Battle of Potidaea in 432 BC , where Socrates was said to have saved his life and again at the Battle of Delium in 424 BC . Alcibiades had a particularly close relationship with Socrates , whom he admired and respected . According to Plutarch , Alcibiades " feared and <unk> Socrates alone , and despised the rest of his lovers " . 
 Alcibiades was married to <unk> , the daughter of Hipponicus , a wealthy Athenian . According to Plutarch , <unk> loved her husband , but she attempted to divorce him because he consorted with courtesans but he dragged her away from her court appearance . She lived with him until her death , which came soon after , and gave birth to two children , a daughter and a son , Alcibiades the Younger . 
 = = Political career until 412 BC = = 
 = = = Rise to prominence = = = 
 Alcibiades first rose to prominence when he began advocating aggressive Athenian action after the signing of the Peace of Nicias . That treaty , an uneasy truce between Sparta and Athens signed midway through the Peloponnesian War , came at the end of seven years of fighting during which neither side had gained a decisive advantage . Historians Arnold W. Gomme and Raphael Sealey believe , and Thucydides reports , that Alcibiades was offended that the Spartans had negotiated that treaty through Nicias and <unk> , overlooking him on account of his youth . 
 Disputes over the interpretation of the treaty led the Spartans to dispatch ambassadors to Athens with full powers to arrange all unsettled matters . The Athenians initially received these ambassadors well , but Alcibiades met with them in secret before they were to speak to the ecclesia ( the Athenian Assembly ) and told them that the Assembly was haughty and had great ambitions . He urged them to renounce their diplomatic authority to represent Sparta , and instead allow him to assist them through his influence in Athenian politics . The representatives agreed and , impressed with Alcibiades , they alienated themselves from Nicias , who genuinely wanted to reach an agreement with the Spartans . The next day , during the Assembly , Alcibiades asked them what powers Sparta had granted them to negotiate and they replied , as agreed , that they had not come with full and independent powers . This was in direct contradiction to what they had said the day before , and Alcibiades seized on this opportunity to denounce their character , cast suspicion on their aims , and destroy their credibility . This ploy increased Alcibiades 's standing while embarrassing Nicias , and Alcibiades was subsequently appointed General . He took advantage of his increasing power to orchestrate the creation of an alliance between Argos , Mantinea , Elis , and other states in the Peloponnese , threatening Sparta 's dominance in the region . According to Gomme , " it was a grandiose scheme for an Athenian general at the head of a mainly Peloponnesian army to march through the Peloponnese cocking a snook at Sparta when her reputation was at its lowest " . This alliance , however , would ultimately be defeated at the Battle of Mantinea . 
 Somewhere in the years 416 – 415 BC , a complex struggle took place between Hyperbolos on one side and Nicias and Alcibiades on the other . Hyperbolos tried to bring about the ostracism of one of this pair , but Nicias and Alcibiades combined their influence to induce the people to expel Hyperbolos instead . This incident reveals that Nicias and Alcibiades each commanded a personal following , whose votes were determined by the wishes of the leaders . 
 Alcibiades was not one of the Generals involved in the capture of Melos in 416 – 415 BC , but Plutarch describes him as a supporter of the decree by which the grown men of Melos were killed and the women and children enslaved . An oration urging Alcibiades ' ostracism , " Against Alcibiades " ( historically attributed to the orator Andocides but not in fact by him ) , alleges that Alcibiades had a child by one of these enslaved women . 
 = = = Sicilian Expedition = = = 
 In 415 BC , delegates from the Sicilian city of <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) arrived at Athens to plead for the support of the Athenians in their war against <unk> . During the debates on the undertaking , Nicias was vehemently opposed to Athenian intervention , explaining that the campaign would be very costly and attacking the character and motives of Alcibiades , who had emerged as the supporter of the expedition . On the other hand , Alcibiades argued that a campaign in this new theatre would bring riches to the city and expand the empire , just as the Persian Wars had . In his speech Alcibiades predicted ( over @-@ optimistically , in the opinion of most historians ) that the Athenians would be able to recruit allies in the region and impose their rule on Syracuse , the most powerful city of Sicily . In spite of Alcibiades 's enthusiastic advocacy for the plan , it was Nicias , not he , who turned a modest undertaking into a massive campaign and made the conquest of Sicily seem possible and safe . It was at his suggestion that the size of the fleet was significantly increased from 60 ships to " 140 galleys , 5 @,@ 100 men at arms , and about 1300 archers , slingers , and light armed men " . Philosopher Leo Strauss underscores that the Sicilian expedition surpassed everything undertaken by Pericles . Almost certainly Nicias 's intention was to shock the assembly with his high estimate of the forces required , but , instead of dissuading his fellow citizens , his analysis made them all the more eager . Against his wishes Nicias was appointed General along with Alcibiades and <unk> , all three of whom were given full powers to do whatever was in the best interests of Athens while in Sicily . 
 One night during preparations for the expedition , the <unk> , heads of the god Hermes on a plinth with a phallus , were mutilated throughout Athens . This was a religious scandal and was seen as a bad omen for the mission . Plutarch explains that Androcles , a political leader , used false witnesses who accused Alcibiades and his friends of mutilating the statues , and of profaning the Eleusinian Mysteries . Later his opponents , chief among them being Androcles and Thessalus , Cimon 's son , enlisted orators to argue that Alcibiades should set sail as planned and stand trial on his return from the campaign . Alcibiades was suspicious of their intentions , and asked to be allowed to stand trial immediately , under penalty of death , in order to clear his name . This request was denied , and the fleet set sail soon after , with the charges unresolved . 
 As Alcibiades had suspected , his absence emboldened his enemies , and they began to accuse him of other sacrilegious actions and comments and even alleged that these actions were connected with a plot against the democracy . According to Thucydides , the Athenians were always in fear and took everything suspiciously . When the fleet arrived in Catana , it found the state trireme <unk> waiting to bring Alcibiades and the others indicted for mutilating the <unk> or profaning the Eleusinian Mysteries back to Athens to stand trial . Alcibiades told the heralds that he would follow them back to Athens in his ship , but in Thurii he escaped with his crew ; in Athens he was convicted in absentia and condemned to death . His property was confiscated and a reward of one talent was promised to whoever succeeded in killing any who had fled . Meanwhile , the Athenian force in Sicily , after a few early victories , moved against Messina , where the Generals expected their secret allies within the city to betray it to them . Alcibiades , however , foreseeing that he would be outlawed , gave information to the friends of the Syracusans in Messina , who succeeded in preventing the admission of the Athenians . With the death of <unk> in battle some time later , command of the Sicilian Expedition fell into the hands of Nicias , whom modern scholars have judged to be an inadequate military leader . 
 = = = Defection to Sparta = = = 
 After his disappearance at Thurii , Alcibiades quickly contacted the Spartans , " promising to render them aid and service greater than all the harm he had previously done them as an enemy " if they would offer him sanctuary . The Spartans granted this request and received him among them . In the debate at Sparta over whether to send a force to relieve Syracuse , Alcibiades spoke and instilled fear of Athenian ambition into the Spartan ephors by informing them that the Athenians hoped to conquer Sicily , Italy , and even Carthage . Yale historian Donald Kagan believes that Alcibiades knowingly exaggerated the plans of the Athenians to convince the Spartans of the benefit they stood to gain from his help . Kagan asserts that Alcibiades had not yet acquired his " legendary " reputation , and the Spartans saw him as " a defeated and hunted man " whose policies " produced strategic failures " and brought " no decisive result " . If accurate , this assessment underscores one of Alcibiades 's greatest talents , his highly persuasive oratory . After making the threat seem imminent , Alcibiades advised the Spartans to send troops and most importantly , a Spartan commander to discipline and aid the Syracusans . 
 Alcibiades served as a military adviser to Sparta and helped the Spartans secure several crucial successes . He advised them to build a permanent fort at Decelea , just over ten miles ( 16 km ) from Athens and within sight of the city . By doing this , the Spartans cut the Athenians off entirely from their homes and crops and the silver mines of Sunium . This was part of Alcibiades 's plan to renew the war with Athens in Attica . The move was devastating to Athens and forced the citizens to live within the long walls of the city year round , making them entirely dependent on their seaborne trade for food . Seeing Athens thus beleaguered on a second front , members of the Delian League began to contemplate revolt . In the wake of Athens 's disastrous defeat in Sicily , Alcibiades sailed to Ionia with a Spartan fleet and succeeded in persuading several critical cities to revolt . 
 In spite of these valuable contributions to the Spartan cause , Alcibiades fell out of favor with the Spartan government at around this time , ruled by Agis II . Leotychides , the son born by Agis 's wife <unk> shortly after this , was believed by many to be Alcibiades 's son . Alcibiades 's influence was further reduced after the retirement of <unk> , the <unk> who was on good terms with him . It is alleged that <unk> , a Spartan Admiral , was sent orders to kill him , but Alcibiades received warning of this order and defected to the Persian satrap Tissaphernes , who had been supporting the Peloponnesian forces financially in 412 BC . 
 = = = In Asia Minor = = = 
 On his arrival in the local Persian court , Alcibiades won the trust of the powerful satrap and made several policy suggestions which were well received . According to Thucydides , Alcibiades immediately began to do all he could with Tissaphernes to injure the Peloponnesian cause . At his urging , the satrap reduced the payments he was making to the Peloponnesian fleet and began delivering them irregularly . Alcibiades next advised Tissaphernes to bribe the Generals of the cities to gain valuable intelligence on their activities . Lastly , and most importantly , he told the satrap to be in no hurry to bring the Persian fleet into the conflict , as the longer the war dragged out the more exhausted the combatants would become . This would allow the Persians to more easily conquer the region in the aftermath of the fighting . Alcibiades tried to convince the satrap that it was in Persia 's interest to wear both Athens and Sparta out at first , " and after docking the Athenian power as much as he could , forthwith to rid the country of the Peloponnesians " . Although Alcibiades 's advice benefited the Persians , it was merely a means to an end ; Thucydides tells us that his real motive was to use his alleged influence with the Persians to effect his restoration to Athens . 
 = = Recall to Athens = = 
 = = = Negotiations with the Athenian oligarchs = = = 
 Alcibiades seemed to assume that the " radical democracy " would never agree to his recall to Athens . Therefore , he exchanged messages with the Athenian leaders at Samos and suggested that if they could install an oligarchy friendly to him he would return to Athens and bring with him Persian money and possibly the Persian fleet of 147 triremes . Alcibiades set about winning over the most influential military officers , and achieved his goal by offering them a threefold plan : the Athenian constitution was to be changed , the recall of Alcibiades was to be voted , and Alcibiades was to win over Tissaphernes and the King of Persia to the Athenian side . Most of the officers in the Athenian fleet accepted the plan and welcomed the prospect of a narrower constitution , which would allow them a greater share in determining policy . According to Thucydides , only one of the Athenian Generals at Samos , Phrynichus , opposed the plan and argued that Alcibiades cared no more for the proposed oligarchy than for the traditional democracy . The involvement in the plot of another General , Thrasybulus , remains unclear . 
 These officers of the Athenian fleet formed a group of conspirators , but were met with opposition from the majority of the soldiers and sailors ; these were eventually calmed down " by the advantageous prospect of the pay from the king " . The members of the group assembled and prepared to send Pisander , one of their number , on an embassy to Athens to treat for the restoration of Alcibiades and the abolition of the democracy in the city , and thus to make Tissaphernes the friend of the Athenians . 
 Phrynichus , fearing that Alcibiades if restored would avenge himself upon him for his opposition , sent a secret letter to the Spartan Admiral , Astyochus , to tell him that Alcibiades was ruining their cause by making Tissaphernes the friend of the Athenians , and containing an express revelation of the rest of the intrigue . Astyochus went up to Alcibiades and Tissaphernes at Magnesia and communicated to them Phrynichus 's letter . Alcibiades responded in kind , sending to the authorities at Samos a letter against Phrynichus , stating what he had done , and requiring that he should be put to death . Phrynichus in desperation wrote again to Astyochus , offering him a chance to destroy the Athenian fleet at Samos . This also Astyochus revealed to Alcibiades who informed the officers at Samos that they had been betrayed by Phrynichus . Alcibiades however gained no credit , because Phrynichus had anticipated Alcibiades 's letter and , before the accusations could arrive , told the army that he had received information of an enemy plan to attack the camp and that they should fortify Samos as quickly as possible . 
 Despite these events , Pisander and the other envoys of the conspirators arrived at Athens and made a speech before the people . Pisander won the argument , putting Alcibiades and his promises at the center . The Ecclesia deposed Phrynichus and elected Pisander and ten other envoys to negotiate with Tissaphernes and Alcibiades . 
 At this point , Alcibiades 's scheme encountered a great obstacle . Tissaphernes would not make an agreement on any terms , wanting to follow his policy of neutrality . As Kagan points out , Tissaphernes was a prudent leader and had recognized the advantages of wearing each side out without direct Persian involvement . Alcibiades realized this and , by presenting the Athenians with stiffer and stiffer demands on Tissaphernes 's behalf , attempted to convince them that he had persuaded Tissaphernes to support them , but that they had not conceded enough to him . Although the envoys were angered at the audacity of the Persian demands , they nevertheless departed with the impression that Alcibiades could have brought about an agreement among the powers if he had chosen to do so . This fiasco at the court of Tissaphernes , however , put an end to the negotiations between the conspirators and Alcibiades . The group was convinced that Alcibiades could not deliver his side of the bargain without demanding exorbitantly high concessions of them and they accordingly abandoned their plans to restore him to Athens . 
 = = = Reinstatement as an Athenian General = = = 
 In spite of the failure of the negotiations , the conspirators succeeded in overthrowing the democracy and imposing the oligarchic government of the Four Hundred , among the leaders of which were Phrynichus and Pisander . At Samos , however , a similar coup instigated by the conspirators did not go forward so smoothly . Samian democrats learned of the conspiracy and notified four prominent Athenians : the generals Leon and <unk> , the trierarch Thrasybulus , and Thrasyllus , at that time a hoplite in the ranks . With the support of these men and the Athenian soldiers in general , the Samian democrats were able to defeat the 300 Samian oligarchs who attempted to seize power there . Further , the Athenian troops at Samos formed themselves into a political assembly , deposed their generals , and elected new ones , including Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus . The army , stating that they had not revolted from the city but that the city had revolted from them , resolved to stand by the democracy while continuing to prosecute the war against Sparta . 
 After a time , Thrasybulus persuaded the assembled troops to vote Alcibiades 's recall , a policy that he had supported since before the coup . Then he sailed to retrieve Alcibiades and returned with him to Samos . The aim of this policy was to win away Persian support from the Spartans , as it was still believed that Alcibiades had great influence with Tissaphernes . Plutarch claims that the army sent for Alcibiades so as to use his help in putting down the tyrants in Athens . Kagan argues that this reinstatement was a disappointment to Alcibiades , who had hoped for a glorious return to Athens itself but found himself only restored to the rebellious fleet , where the immunity from prosecution he had been granted " protected him for the time being but not from a reckoning in the future " ; furthermore , the recall , which Alcibiades had hoped to bring about through his own prestige and perceived influence , was achieved through the patronage of Thrasybulus . 
 At his first speech to the assembled troops , Alcibiades complained bitterly about the circumstances of his exile , but the greatest part of the speech consisted of boasting about his influence with Tissaphernes . The primary motives of his speech were to make the oligarchs at Athens afraid of him and to increase his credit with the army at Samos . Upon hearing his speech the troops immediately elected him General alongside Thrasybulus and the others . In fact , he roused them so much that they proposed to sail at once for Piraeus and attack the oligarchs in Athens . It was primarily Alcibiades , along with Thrasybulus , who calmed the people and showed them the folly of this proposal , which would have sparked civil war and led to the immediate defeat of Athens . Shortly after Alcibiades 's reinstatement as an Athenian general , the government of the Four Hundred was overthrown and replaced by a broader oligarchy , which would eventually give way to democracy . 
 Presently Alcibiades sailed to Tissaphernes with a detachment of ships . According to Plutarch , the supposed purpose of this mission was to stop the Persian fleet from coming to the aid of the Peloponnesians . Thucydides is in agreement with Plutarch that the Persian fleet was at Aspendus and that Alcibiades told the troops he would bring the fleet to their side or prevent it from coming at all , but Thucydides further speculates that the real reason was to flaunt his new position to Tissaphernes and try to gain some real influence over him . According to the historian , Alcibiades had long known that Tissaphernes never meant to bring the fleet at all . 
 = = = Battles of Abydos and Cyzicus = = = 
 For more details on this topic , see Battle of Abydos and Battle of Cyzicus 
 Alcibiades was recalled by the " intermediate regime " of The Five Thousand , the government which succeeded the Four Hundred in 411 , but it is most likely that he waited until 407 BC to actually return to the city . Plutarch tells us that , although his recall had already been passed on motion of Critias , a political ally of his , Alcibiades was resolved to come back with glory . While this was certainly his goal , it was again a means to an end , that end being avoiding prosecution upon his return to Athens . 
 The next significant part he would play in the war would occur at the Battle of Abydos . Alcibiades had remained behind at Samos with a small force while Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus led the greater part of the fleet to the Hellespont . During this period , Alcibiades succeeded in raising money from Caria and the neighboring area , with which he was able to pay the rowers and gain their favor . After the Athenian victory at <unk> , both fleets summoned all their ships from around the Aegean to join them for what might be a decisive next engagement . While Alcibiades was still en route , the two fleets clashed at Abydos , where the Peloponnesians had set up their main naval base . The battle was evenly matched , and raged for a long time , but the balance tipped towards the Athenians when Alcibiades sailed into the Hellespont with eighteen triremes . The Persian satrap Pharnabazus , who had replaced Tissaphernes as the sponsor of the Peloponnesian fleet , moved his land army to the shore to defend the ships and sailors who had beached their ships . Only the support of the Persian land army and the coming of night saved the Peloponnesian fleet from complete destruction . 
 Shortly after the battle , Tissaphernes had arrived in the Hellespont and Alcibiades left the fleet at Sestos to meet him , bringing gifts and hoping to once again try to win over the Persian governor . Evidently Alcibiades had gravely misjudged his standing with the satrap , and he was arrested on arrival . Within a month he would escape and resume command . It was now obvious , however , that he had no influence with the Persians ; from now on his authority would depend on what he actually could accomplish rather than on what he promised to do . 
 After an interlude of several months in which the Peloponnesians constructed new ships and the Athenians besieged cities and raised money throughout the Aegean , the next major sea battle took place the spring of 410 BC at Cyzicus . Alcibiades had been forced to flee from Sestos to Cardia to protect his small fleet from the rebuilt Peloponnesian navy , but as soon as the Athenian fleet was reunited there its commanders led it to Cyzicus , where the Athenians had intelligence indicating that Pharnabazus and Mindarus , the Peloponnesian fleet commander , were together plotting their next move . Concealed by storm and darkness , the combined Athenian force reached the vicinity without being spotted by the Peloponnesians . Here the Athenians devised a plot to draw the enemy into battle . According to Diodorus Siculus , Alcibiades advanced with a small squadron in order to draw the Spartans out to battle , and , after he successfully deceived Mindarus with this ploy , the squadrons of Thrasybulus and Theramenes came to join him , cutting off the Spartans ' retreat . 
 The Spartan fleet suffered losses in the flight and reached the shore with the Athenians in close pursuit . Alcibiades 's troops , leading the Athenian pursuit , landed and attempted to pull the Spartan ships back out to sea . The Peloponnesians fought to prevent their ships from being towed away , and Pharnabazus 's troops came up to support them . Thrasybulus landed his own force to temporarily relieve pressure on Alcibiades , and meanwhile ordered Theramenes to join up with Athenian land forces nearby and bring them to reinforce the sailors and marines on the beach . The Spartans and Persians , overwhelmed by the arrival of multiple forces from several directions , were defeated and driven off , and the Athenians captured all the Spartan ships which were not destroyed . A letter dispatched to Sparta by Hippocrates , vice @-@ admiral under Mindarus , was intercepted and taken to Athens ; it ran as follows : " The ships are lost . Mindarus is dead . The men are starving . We know not what to do " . A short time later Sparta petitioned for peace , but their appeals were ultimately rejected by the Athenians . 
 = = = Further military successes = = = 
 After their victory , Alcibiades and Thrasybulus began the siege of Chalcedon in 409 BC with about 190 ships . Although unable to attain a decisive victory or induce the city to surrender , Alcibiades was able to win a small tactical land battle outside of the city gates and Theramenes concluded an agreement with the Chalcedonians . Afterwards they concluded a temporary alliance with Pharnabazus which secured some much needed immediate cash for the army , but despite this Alcibiades was still forced to depart in search for more booty to pay the soldiers and oarsmen of the fleet . 
 In pursuit of these funds he traveled to the Thracian Chersonese and attacked Selymbria . He plotted with a pro @-@ Athenian party within the city and offered the Selymbrians reasonable terms and imposed strict discipline to see that they were observed . He did their city no injury whatsoever , but merely took a sum of money from it , set a garrison in it and left . Epigraphical evidence indicates the Selymbrians surrendered hostages until the treaty was ratified in Athens . His performance is judged as skillful by historians , since it saved time , resources , and lives and still fully achieved his goal . 
 From here Alcibiades joined in the siege of Byzantium along with Theramenes and Thrasyllus . A portion of the citizens of the city , demoralized and hungry , decided to surrender the city to Alcibiades for similar terms as the Selymbrians had received . On the designated night the defenders left their posts , and the Athenians attacked the Peloponnesian garrison in the city and their boats in the harbor . The portion of the citizenry that remained loyal to the Peloponnesians fought so savagely that Alcibiades issued a statement in the midst of the fighting which guaranteed their safety and this persuaded the remaining citizens to turn against the Peloponnesian garrison , which was nearly totally destroyed . 
 = = Return to Athens , dismissal , and death = = 
 = = = Return to Athens = = = 
 It was in the aftermath of these successes that Alcibiades resolved to finally return to Athens in the spring of 407 BC . Even in the wake of his recent victories , Alcibiades was exceedingly careful in his return , mindful of the changes in government , the charges still technically hanging over him , and the great injury he had done to Athens . Thus Alcibiades , instead of going straight home , first went to Samos to pick up 20 ships and proceeded with them to the Ceramic Gulf where he collected 100 talents . He finally sailed to <unk> to make inquiries , partly about the reported preparations of the Spartans there , and partly about the feelings in Athens about his return . His inquiries assured him that the city was kindly disposed towards him and that his closest friends urged him to return . 
 Therefore , he finally sailed into Piraeus where the crowd had gathered , desiring to see the famous Alcibiades . He entered the harbor full of fear till he saw his cousin and others of his friends and acquaintance , who invited him to land . Upon arriving on shore he was greeted with a hero 's welcome . Nevertheless , some saw an evil omen in the fact that he had returned to Athens on the very day when the ceremony of the <unk> ( the feast where the old statue of Athena would get cleansed ) was being celebrated . This was regarded as the unluckiest day of the year to undertake anything of importance . His enemies took note of this and kept it in mind for a future occasion . 
 All the criminal proceedings against him were canceled and the charges of blasphemy were officially withdrawn . Alcibiades was able to assert his piety and to raise Athenian morale by leading the solemn procession to Eleusis ( for the celebration of the Eleusinian Mysteries ) by land for the first time since the Spartans had occupied Decelea . The procession had been replaced by a journey by sea , but this year Alcibiades used a detachment of soldiers to escort the traditional procession . His property was restored and the ecclesia elected him supreme commander of land and sea ( strategos autokrator ) . 
 = = = Defeat at Notium = = = 
 In 406 BC Alcibiades set out from Athens with 1 @,@ 500 hoplites and a hundred ships . He failed to take Andros and then he went on to Samos . Later he moved to Notium , closer to the enemy at Ephesus . In the meanwhile Tissaphernes had been replaced by Cyrus the Younger ( son of Darius II of Persia ) who decided to financially support the Peloponnesians . This new revenue started to attract Athenian deserters to the Spartan navy . Additionally the Spartans had replaced Mindarus with Lysander , a very capable admiral . These factors caused the rapid growth of the Peloponnesian fleet at the expense of the Athenian . In search of funds and needing to force another decisive battle , Alcibiades left Notium and sailed to help Thrasybulus in the siege of Phocaea . Alcibiades was aware the Spartan fleet was nearby , so he left nearly eighty ships to watch them under the command of his personal helmsman Antiochus , who was given express orders not to attack . Antiochus disobeyed this single order and endeavored to draw Lysander into a fight by imitating the tactics used at Cyzicus . The situation at Notium , however , was radically different from that at Cyzicus ; the Athenians possessed no element of surprise , and Lysander had been well informed about their fleet by deserters . Antiochus 's ship was sunk , and he was killed by a sudden Spartan attack ; the remaining ships of the decoy force were then chased headlong back toward Notium , where the main Athenian force was caught unprepared by the sudden arrival of the whole Spartan fleet . In the ensuing fighting , Lysander gained an entire victory . Alcibiades soon returned and desperately tried to undo the defeat at Notium by scoring another victory , but Lysander could not be compelled to attack the fleet again . 
 Responsibility for the defeat ultimately fell on Alcibiades , and his enemies used the opportunity to attack him and have him removed from command , although some modern scholars believe that Alcibiades was unfairly blamed for Antiochus 's mistake . Diodorus reports that , in addition to his mistake at Notium , Alcibiades was discharged on account of false accusations brought against him by his enemies . According to Anthony Andrewes , professor of ancient history , the extravagant hopes that his successes of the previous summer had created were a decisive element in his downfall . Consequently , Alcibiades condemned himself to exile . Never again returning to Athens , he sailed north to the castles in the Thracian Chersonese , which he had secured during his time in the Hellespont . The implications of the defeat were severe for Athens . Although the defeat had been minor , it occasioned the removal of not only Alcibiades but also his allies like Thrasybulus , Theramenes and Critias . These were likely the most capable commanders Athens had at the time , and their removal would help lead to the Athenian surrender only two years later , after their complete defeat at Aegospotami . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 With one exception , Alcibiades 's role in the war ended with his command . Prior to the Battle of Aegospotami , in the last attested fact of his career , Alcibiades recognized that the Athenians were anchored in a tactically disadvantageous spot and advised them to move to <unk> where they could benefit from a harbor and a city . Diodorus , however , does not mention this advice , arguing instead that Alcibiades offered the Generals Thracian aid in exchange for a share in the command . In any case , the Generals of the Athenians , " considering that in case of defeat the blame would attach to them and that in case of success all men would attribute it to Alcibiades " , asked him to leave and not come near the camp ever again . Days later the fleet would be annihilated by Lysander . 
 After the Battle of Aegospotami , Alcibiades crossed the Hellespont and took refuge in Phrygia , with the object of securing the aid of Artaxerxes against Sparta . 
 Much about Alcibiades 's death is now uncertain , as there are conflicting accounts . According to the oldest of these , the Spartans and specifically Lysander were responsible . Though many of his details cannot be independently corroborated , Plutarch 's version is this : Lysander sent an envoy to Pharnabazus who then dispatched his brother to Phrygia where Alcibiades was living with his mistress , Timandra . In 404 BC , as he was about to set out for the Persian court , his residence was surrounded and set on fire . Seeing no chance of escape he rushed out on his assassins , dagger in hand , and was killed by a shower of arrows . According to Aristotle , the site of Alcibiades 's death was <unk> , a mountain in Phrygia . 
 = = Assessments = = 
 = = = Political career = = = 
 In ancient Greece , Alcibiades was a polarizing figure . According to Thucydides , Alcibiades , being " exceedingly ambitious " , proposed the expedition in Sicily in order " to gain in wealth and reputation by means of his successes " . Alcibiades is not held responsible by Thucydides for the destruction of Athens , since " his habits gave offence to every one , and caused the Athenians to commit affairs to other hands , and thus before long to ruin the city " . Plutarch regards him as " the least scrupulous and most entirely careless of human beings " . On the other hand , Diodorus argues that he was " in spirit brilliant and intent upon great enterprises " . Sharon Press of Brown University points out that Xenophon emphasizes Alcibiades 's service to the state , rather than the harm he was charged with causing it . Demosthenes defends Alcibiades 's achievements , saying that he had taken arms in the cause of democracy , displaying his patriotism , not by gifts of money or by speeches , but by personal service . For Demosthenes and other orators , Alcibiades epitomized the figure of the great man during the glorious days of the Athenian democracy and became a rhetorical symbol . One of Isocrates ' speeches , delivered by Alcibiades the Younger , argues that the statesman deserved the Athenians ' gratitude for the service he had given them . Lysias , on the other hand , argued in one of his orations that the Athenians should regard Alcibiades as an enemy because of the general tenor of his life , as " he repays with injury the open assistance of any of his friends " . In the Constitution of the Athenians , Aristotle does not include Alcibiades in the list of the best Athenian politicians , but in Posterior Analytics he argues that traits of a proud man like Alcibiades are " equanimity amid the vicissitudes of life and impatience of dishonor " . Alcibiades excited in his contemporaries a fear for the safety of the political order . Therefore , Andocides said of him that " instead of holding that he ought himself to conform with the laws of the state , he expects you to conform with his own way of life " . Central to the depiction of the Athenian statesman is Cornelius Nepos ' famous phrase that Alcibiades " surpassed all the Athenians in grandeur and magnificence of living " . 
 Even today , Alcibiades divides scholars . For Malcolm F. McGregor , former head of the Department of Classics in the University of British Columbia , Alcibiades was rather a shrewd gambler than a mere opportunist . Evangelos P. <unk> , a prominent Greek philologist , asserts that Alcibiades was " a first class diplomat " and had " huge skills " . Nevertheless , his spiritual powers were not counterbalanced with his magnificent mind and he had the hard luck to lead a people susceptible to demagoguery . K. Paparrigopoulos , a major modern Greek historian , underlines his " spiritual virtues " and compares him with Themistocles , but he then asserts that all these gifts created a " traitor , an audacious and impious man " . Walter Ellis believes that his actions were outrageous , but they were performed with panache . For his part , David Gribble argues that Alcibiades 's actions against his city were misunderstood and believes that " the tension which led to Alcibiades 's split with the city was between purely personal and civic values " . Russell Meiggs , a British ancient historian , asserts that the Athenian statesman was absolutely unscrupulous despite his great charm and brilliant abilities . According to Meiggs his actions were dictated by selfish motives and his feud with Cleon and his successors undermined Athens . The same scholar underscores the fact that " his example of restless and undisciplined ambition strengthened the charge brought against Socrates " . Even more critically , Athanasios G. Platias and Constantinos Koliopoulos , professors of strategic studies and international politics , state that Alcibiades 's own arguments " should be sufficient to do away with the notion that Alcibiades was a great statesman , as some people still believe " . Writing from a different perspective , psychologist Anna C. Salter cites Alcibiades as exhibiting " all the classic features of psychopathy . " A similar assessment is made by Hervey Cleckley at the end of chapter 5 in his The Mask of Sanity . 
 = = = Military achievements = = = 
 Despite his critical comments , Thucydides admits in a short digression that " publicly his conduct of the war was as good as could be desired " . Diodorus and Demosthenes regard him as a great general . According to <unk> , Alcibiades was an invincible general and , wherever he went , victory followed him ; had he led the army in Sicily , the Athenians would have avoided disaster and , had his countrymen followed his advice at Aegospotami , Lysander would have lost and Athens would have ruled Greece . On the other hand , Paparrigopoulos believes that the Sicilian Expedition , prompted by Alcibiades , was a strategic mistake . In agreement with Paparrigopoulos , Platias and Koliopoulos underscore the fact that the Sicilian expedition was a strategic blunder of the first magnitude , resulting from a " frivolous attitude and an unbelievable underestimation of the enemy " . For his part , Angelos Vlachos , a Greek Academician , underlines the constant interest of Athens for Sicily from the beginning of the war . According to Vlachos the expedition had nothing of the extravagant or adventurous and constituted a rational strategic decision based on traditional Athenian aspirations . Vlachos asserts that Alcibiades had already conceived a broader plan : the conquest of the whole West . He intended to conquer Carthage and Libya , then to attack Italy and , after winning these , to seize Italy and Peloponnesus . The initial decision of the ecclesia provided however for a reasonable military force , which later became unreasonably large and costly because of Nicias 's demands . Kagan criticizes Alcibiades for failing to recognize that the large size of the Athenian expedition undermined the diplomatic scheme on which his strategy rested . 
 Kagan believes that while Alcibiades was a commander of considerable ability , he was no military genius , and his confidence and ambitions went far beyond his skills . He thus was capable of important errors and serious miscalculations . Kagan argues that at Notium , Alcibiades committed a serious error in leaving the fleet in the hands of an inexperienced officer , and that most of the credit for the brilliant victory at Cyzicus must be assigned to Thrasybulus . In this judgement , Kagan agrees with Cornelius Nepos , who said that the Athenians ' extravagant opinion of Alcibiades 's abilities and valor was his chief misfortune . 
 Press argues that " though Alcibiades can be considered a good General on the basis of his performance in the Hellespont , he would not be considered so on the basis of his performance in Sicily " , but " the strengths of Alcibiades 's performance as a General outweigh his faults " . 
 = = = Skill in oratory = = = 
 Plutarch asserts that " Alcibiades was a most able speaker in addition to his other gifts " , while Theophrastus argues that Alcibiades was the most capable of discovering and understanding what was required in a given case . Nevertheless , he would often stumble in the midst of his speech , but then he would resume and proceed with all the caution in the world . Even the lisp he had , which was noticed by Aristophanes , made his talk persuasive and full of charm . <unk> says that he was " prince of talkers , but in speaking most incapable " ; which is to say , more eloquent in his private discourses than when orating before the ecclesia . For his part , Demosthenes underscores the fact that Alcibiades was regarded as " the ablest speaker of the day " . Paparrigopoulos does not accept Demosthenes 's opinion , but acknowledges that the Athenian statesman could sufficiently support his case . Kagan acknowledges his rhetorical power , whilst Thomas <unk> , professor of Classics at the University of Southern California , believes that the orator Alcibiades seemed to be whatever his audience needed on any given occasion . According to <unk> , in the field of oratory , the people responded to Alcibiades 's affection with affection of their own . Therefore , the orator was " the institution of the city talking to — and loving — itself " . According to Aristophanes , Athens " yearns for him , and hates him too , but wants him back " . 
 = National Press Monument = 
 The National Press Monument ( Indonesian : <unk> Pers Nasional ) is a monument and museum to the national Indonesian press . Formally established in 1978 , more than 20 years after it was first proposed , the monument is located in Surakarta , Central Java , and operated by the Ministry of Communications and Information . The complex consists of an old society building , which was constructed in 1918 and used for the first meeting of the Reporters Association of Indonesia ( Persatuan Wartawan Indonesia , or PWI ) , as well as several subsequent expansions ; it is listed as a Cultural Property of Indonesia . 
 The National Press Monument has a collection of over a million newspapers and magazines , as well as a variety of exhibitions and artefacts related to the history of the press in Indonesia . Facilities include a multimedia room , free @-@ to @-@ read newspapers , and a library . It is promoted as a site for educational tourism through various exhibitions and Facebook , and in 2013 it was visited by over 26 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = History = = 
 The building in which the National Press Monument is now housed was constructed in 1918 under the orders of <unk> VII , Prince of Mangkunegaran Palace , as a society building and meeting hall . It was known as <unk> " Sasana <unk> " and designed by Mas Abu Kasan <unk> . In 1933 R.M. <unk> <unk> and several other engineers met in the building and formed the basis of the <unk> Radio Vereeniging ( <unk> ) , the first public radio operated by native Indonesians . Thirteen years later , on 9 February 1946 , the Reporters Association of Indonesia ( Persatuan Wartawan Indonesia , or PWI ) was formed in the building ; the date is commemorated in Indonesia as National Press Day . During the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies the building housed a clinic to treat troops , and during the Indonesian National Revolution it was used as an office of the Indonesian Red Cross Society . 
 On 9 February 1956 , during an event celebrating ten years of the PWI , high @-@ profile reporters such as Rosihan Anwar , B.M. <unk> , and S. <unk> suggested that a foundation be established which could manage a national press museum . This foundation was formalised on 22 May 1956 , with its collection mostly being donated by <unk> <unk> . Only some fifteen years later did the foundation begin plans for establishing a physical museum , the plans for which were formally announced by Minister of Information <unk> on 9 February 1971 . The name " National Press Monument " was formalised in 1973 , and in 1977 the land was donated to the government . The museum was formally opened on 9 February 1978 , after several new buildings were added . In his dedication speech , President Suharto warned the press about the dangers of freedom , stating " exercising freedom for freedom 's sake is a luxury we cannot afford " . 
 In 2012 the museum was headed by <unk> . That year David Kristian <unk> of Petra Christian University wrote that the museum was rarely visited and in some places poorly maintained . He posited this to be based on a popular view of museums as unexciting or boring places . In order to attract new visitors , the museum has initiated several competitions in 2012 and 2013 , including a photography contest on the museum 's Facebook page . It has also undertaken mobile exhibitions , showing some of its collection in cities such as Yogyakarta and Magelang . Between January and September 2013 the museum received 26 @,@ 249 visitors , an increase of 250 per cent over the previous year 's target ; this was credited to the various promotional efforts undertaken . The museum is now promoted as a site for educational tourism and accepts donations of materials related to the press in Indonesia . 
 = = Description = = 
 The National Press Monument is located at 59 Gajah Mada Street in Surakarta , Central Java , at the corner of Gajah Mada and <unk> Streets . It is west of Mangkunegaran Palace . The complex consists of the original Sasana <unk> building , two two @-@ story buildings , as well as a four @-@ story building ; these additions were constructed much later . At the front of the museum is a parking area and two public boards where the latest editions of local newspapers ( in 2013 , Solo Pos , Suara Merdeka , and Republika ) can be read freely . The front façade is decorated with a naga design symbolising the year 1980 , the year in which construction was completed . 
 Management of the museum is handled by the Ministry of Communications and Information ( <unk> <unk> dan <unk> ) . The administrative structure consists of the museum head and administrative manager , as well as divisions for customer service , conservation and preservation , and day @-@ to @-@ day activities . As of 2013 , the museum employs 24 civil servants . The building is listed as a Cultural Property of Indonesia . 
 The museum includes a media centre , where the general public can access the internet without charge on one of nine computers ; a library , with a collection of approximately 12 @,@ 000 books ; and a room in which <unk> copies of old newspapers and magazines can be read . <unk> of this media is completed on @-@ site . A microfilm room is available , though it is no longer used . 
 The National Press Monument regularly conducts seminars regarding the press , media , and communications . It holds themed exhibitions of media based on national holidays , including Independence Day , the anniversary of the Youth Pledge , and National Press Day ; the museum may also take some of its collection on a mobile exhibition . The digital collection and library is accessible to the general public , while researchers may access paper copies of the newspapers and magazines . 
 = = Holdings = = 
 The museum holds over a million newspapers and magazines published in various parts of the Indonesian archipelago from colonial times until the present day . It also has numerous pieces of communications technology and technology used in reporting , including aerials , typewriters , transmitters , telephones , and a large <unk> . The front of the main entrance hall holds ten busts of important figures in the history of journalism in Indonesia . This includes <unk> <unk> <unk> , Djamaluddin Adinegoro , Sam <unk> , and Ernest <unk> Dekker . 
 In the rear of the main entrance hall is a series of six dioramas illustrating communications and the press throughout Indonesian history . The first diorama shows various forms of communication and news @-@ sharing in pre @-@ colonial Indonesia . The second diorama shows the press in the colonial period , including the first newspaper in the Indies under the Dutch East India Company , Memories der Nouvelles ( 1615 ) ; the first printed newspaper in the Indies , the <unk> Nouvelles ( 1744 ) , and the first Javanese newspaper in the Indies , <unk> ( 1855 ) . The third diorama depicts the press during the Japanese occupation , whereas the fourth depicts the press during the National Revolution – including the formation of the PWI . The fifth diorama shows the state of the press during the New Order under President Suharto , a time of great press censorship . The final diorama depicts the press after the beginning of Reformasi in 1998 , in which greater freedom of the press has been granted . 
 The museum also holds various artefacts which belonged to journalists from pre- and post @-@ independence Indonesia . This includes an Underwood typewriter which once belonged to <unk> <unk> , a vocal journalist for the Bandung @-@ based <unk> ; a shirt in which Hendro Subroto was shot while covering the Indonesian occupation of East Timor in 1975 ; parachuting equipment used by <unk> in covering the solar eclipse of 11 June 1983 ; and a camera used by Fuad Muhammad Syafruddin , a journalist for the Yogyakarta @-@ based Bernas who was killed after covering a corruption scandal in 1995 . More artefacts , from journalists such as Mochtar Lubis , were still being acquired as of October 2013 . 
 = Blade Runner = 
 Blade Runner is a 1982 American tech noir science fiction film directed by Ridley Scott , and starring Harrison Ford , Rutger Hauer , Sean Young , and Edward James Olmos . The screenplay , written by Hampton Fancher and David Peoples , is a modified film adaptation of the 1968 novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ? by Philip K. Dick . 
 The film depicts a dystopian Los Angeles in which genetically engineered replicants , which are visually indistinguishable from adult humans , are manufactured by the powerful Tyrell Corporation . The use of replicants on Earth is banned and they are exclusively utilized for dangerous or menial work on off @-@ world colonies . Replicants who defy the ban and return to Earth are hunted down and killed ( " retired " ) by special police operatives known as " Blade Runners " . The plot focuses on a group of recently escaped replicants hiding in L.A. and the burnt @-@ out expert Blade Runner , Rick Deckard ( Harrison Ford ) , who reluctantly agrees to take on one more assignment to hunt them down . 
 Blade Runner initially polarized critics : some were displeased with the pacing , while others enjoyed its thematic complexity . The year following its release , the film won the prestigious Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation . Blade Runner underperformed in North American theaters , but has since become a cult film . Hailed for its production design , depicting a " retrofitted " future , it remains a leading example of the neo @-@ noir genre . It brought the work of Philip K. Dick to the attention of Hollywood and several later films were based on his work . Ridley Scott regards Blade Runner as " probably " his most complete and personal film . In 1993 , the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . Blade Runner is now regarded by many critics as one of the best science fiction films ever made . 
 Seven versions of the film have been shown for various markets as a result of controversial changes made by film executives . A Director 's Cut was released in 1992 after a strong response to workprint screenings . This , in conjunction with its popularity as a video rental , made it one of the first films released on DVD , resulting in a basic disc with mediocre video and audio quality . In 2007 , Warner Bros. released The Final Cut , a 25th anniversary digitally remastered version , which is the only one on which Scott had complete artistic freedom and was shown in selected theaters and subsequently released on DVD , HD DVD , and Blu @-@ ray . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Los Angeles in November 2019 , ex @-@ police officer Rick Deckard ( Harrison Ford ) is detained by officer Gaff ( Edward James Olmos ) and brought to his former supervisor , Bryant ( M. Emmet Walsh ) . Deckard , whose job as a " Blade Runner " was to track down bioengineered beings known as replicants and " retire " ( a euphemism for killing ) them , is informed that four have come to Earth illegally . As Tyrell Corporation Nexus @-@ 6 models , they have only a four @-@ year lifespan and may have come to Earth to try to extend their lives . 
 Deckard watches a video of a Blade Runner named Holden administering the " Voight @-@ Kampff " test designed to distinguish replicants from humans based on their emotional response to questions . The test subject , Leon ( Brion James ) , shoots Holden after Holden asks about Leon 's mother . Bryant wants Deckard to retire Leon and the other three replicants : Roy Batty ( Rutger Hauer ) , Zhora ( Joanna Cassidy ) , and Pris ( Daryl Hannah ) . Deckard initially refuses , but after Bryant ambiguously threatens him , he reluctantly agrees . 
 Deckard begins his investigation at the Tyrell Corporation to ensure that the test works on Nexus @-@ 6 models . While there , he discovers that Dr. Eldon Tyrell 's ( Joe <unk> ) assistant Rachael ( Sean Young ) is an experimental replicant who believes herself to be human . Rachael has been given false memories to provide an " emotional cushion " . As a result , a more extensive test is required to determine whether she is a replicant . 
 Events are then set into motion that pit Deckard 's search for the replicants against their search for Tyrell to force him to extend their lives . Roy and Leon investigate a replicant eye @-@ manufacturing laboratory and learn of J.F. Sebastian ( William Sanderson ) , a gifted genetic designer who works closely with Tyrell . Rachael visits Deckard at his apartment to prove her humanity by showing him a family photo , but after Deckard reveals that her memories are implants from Tyrell 's niece , she leaves his apartment in tears . Meanwhile , Pris locates Sebastian and manipulates him to gain his trust . 
 While searching Leon 's hotel room , Deckard finds a photo of Zhora and a synthetic snake scale that leads him to a strip club where Zhora works . Deckard kills Zhora and shortly after is told by Bryant to also retire Rachael , who has disappeared from the Tyrell Corporation . After Deckard spots Rachael in a crowd , he is attacked by Leon , but Rachael kills Leon using Deckard 's dropped pistol . The two return to Deckard 's apartment , and during an intimate discussion , he promises not to hunt her ; as she abruptly tries to leave , Deckard physically restrains her , forcing her to kiss him . 
 Arriving at Sebastian 's apartment , Roy tells Pris the others are dead . Sympathetic to their plight , Sebastian reveals that because of " Methuselah Syndrome " , a genetic premature aging disorder , his life will also be cut short . Sebastian and Roy gain entrance into Tyrell 's secure penthouse , where Roy demands more life from his maker . Tyrell tells him that it is impossible . Roy confesses that he has done " questionable things " which Tyrell dismisses , praising Roy 's advanced design and accomplishments in his short life . Roy kisses Tyrell , then kills him . Sebastian runs for the elevator followed by Roy , who then rides the elevator down alone . Though not shown , it is implied by Bryant via police radio that Roy also kills Sebastian . 
 Upon entering Sebastian 's apartment , Deckard is ambushed by Pris , but he manages to kill her just as Roy returns . As Roy starts to die , he chases Deckard through the building , ending up on the roof . Deckard tries to jump to an adjacent roof , but misses and is left hanging precariously between buildings . Roy makes the jump with ease , and as Deckard 's grip loosens , Roy hoists him onto the roof , saving him . As Roy 's life runs out , he delivers a monologue about how his memories " will be lost like tears in rain " ; Roy dies in front of Deckard , who watches silently . Gaff arrives and shouts across to Deckard , " It 's too bad she won 't live , but then again , who does ? " Deckard returns to his apartment and finds the door ajar , but Rachael is safe , asleep in his bed . As they leave , Deckard notices a small tin @-@ foil origami unicorn on the floor , a familiar calling card that brings back to him Gaff 's final words . Deckard and Rachael quickly leave the apartment block . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Although Blade Runner is ostensibly an action film , it operates on multiple dramatic and narrative levels . It is indebted to film noir conventions : the femme fatale ; protagonist @-@ narration ( removed in later versions ) ; dark and shadowy cinematography ; and the questionable moral outlook of the hero – in this case , extended to include reflections upon the nature of his own humanity . It is a literate science fiction film , thematically enfolding the philosophy of religion and moral implications of human mastery of genetic engineering in the context of classical Greek drama and hubris . It also draws on Biblical images , such as Noah 's flood , and literary sources , such as Frankenstein . Linguistically , the theme of mortality is subtly reiterated in the chess game between Roy and Tyrell , based on the famous Immortal Game of 1851 , though Scott has said that was coincidental . 
 Blade Runner delves into the implications of technology on the environment and on society by reaching to the past , using literature , religious symbolism , classical dramatic themes , and film noir . This tension between past , present , and future is mirrored in the retrofitted future of Blade Runner , which is high @-@ tech and gleaming in places but decayed and old elsewhere . Ridley Scott described the film as : " extremely dark , both literally and metaphorically , with an oddly masochistic feel " , in an interview by Lynn Barber for the British Sunday newspaper The Observer in 2002 . Scott " liked the idea of exploring pain " in the wake of his brother 's skin cancer death : " When he was ill , I used to go and visit him in London , and that was really traumatic for me . " 
 An aura of paranoia suffuses the film : corporate power looms large ; the police seem omnipresent ; vehicle and warning lights probe into buildings ; and the consequences of huge biomedical power over the individual are explored – especially the consequences for replicants of their implanted memories . Control over the environment is depicted as taking place on a vast scale , hand in hand with the absence of any natural life , with artificial animals substituting for their extinct predecessors . This oppressive backdrop explains the frequently referenced migration of humans to extra @-@ terrestrial ( " off @-@ world " ) colonies . The dystopian themes explored in Blade Runner are an early example of cyberpunk concepts expanding into film . Eyes are a recurring motif , as are manipulated images , calling into question reality and our ability to accurately perceive and remember it . 
 These thematic elements provide an atmosphere of uncertainty for Blade Runner 's central theme of examining humanity . In order to discover replicants , an empathy test is used , with a number of its questions focused on the treatment of animals – seemingly an essential indicator of someone 's " humanity " . The replicants appear to show compassion and concern for one another and are juxtaposed against human characters who lack empathy while the mass of humanity on the streets is cold and impersonal . The film goes so far as to put in doubt whether Deckard is human , and forces the audience to re @-@ evaluate what it means to be human . 
 The question of whether Deckard is intended to be a human or a replicant has been an ongoing controversy since the film 's release . Both Michael Deeley and Harrison Ford wanted Deckard to be human while Hampton Fancher preferred ambiguity . Ridley Scott has confirmed that in his vision Deckard is a replicant . 
 Deckard 's unicorn dream sequence , inserted into the Director 's Cut , coinciding with Gaff 's parting gift of an origami unicorn is seen by many as showing that Deckard is a replicant – as Gaff could have accessed Deckard 's implanted memories . The interpretation that Deckard is a replicant is challenged by others who believe the unicorn imagery shows that the characters , whether human or replicant , share the same dreams and recognize their affinity , or that the absence of a decisive answer is crucial to the film 's main theme . The inherent ambiguity and uncertainty of the film , as well as its textual richness , have permitted viewers to see it from their own perspectives . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting the film proved troublesome , particularly for the lead role of Deckard . Screenwriter Hampton Fancher envisioned Robert Mitchum as Deckard and wrote the character 's dialogue with Mitchum in mind . Director Ridley Scott and the film 's producers spent months meeting and discussing the role with Dustin Hoffman , who eventually departed over differences in vision . Harrison Ford was ultimately chosen for several reasons , including his performance in the Star Wars films , Ford 's interest in the Blade Runner story , and discussions with Steven Spielberg who was finishing Raiders of the Lost Ark at the time and strongly praised Ford 's work in the film . Following his success in films like Star Wars ( 1977 ) and Raiders of the Lost Ark ( 1981 ) , Ford was looking for a role with dramatic depth . According to production documents , several actors were considered for the role , including Gene Hackman , Sean Connery , Jack Nicholson , Paul Newman , Clint Eastwood , Tommy Lee Jones , Arnold Schwarzenegger , Al Pacino , and Burt Reynolds . 
 One role that was not difficult to cast was Rutger Hauer as Roy Batty , the violent yet thoughtful leader of the replicants . Scott cast Hauer without having met him , based solely on Hauer 's performances in Paul Verhoeven 's movies Scott had seen ( Katie <unk> , Soldier of Orange and Turkish Delight ) . Hauer 's portrayal of Batty was regarded by Philip K. Dick as , " the perfect Batty — cold , Aryan , flawless " . Of the many films Hauer has done , Blade Runner is his favorite . As he explained in a live chat in 2001 , " Blade Runner needs no explanation . It just [ is ] . All of the best . There is nothing like it . To be part of a real masterpiece which changed the world 's thinking . It 's awesome . " Hauer rewrote his character 's " tears in rain " speech himself and presented the words to Scott on set prior to filming . 
 Blade Runner used a number of then @-@ lesser @-@ known actors : Sean Young portrays Rachael , an experimental replicant implanted with the memories of Tyrell 's niece , causing her to believe she is human ; Nina Axelrod auditioned for the role . Daryl Hannah portrays Pris , a " basic pleasure model " replicant ; Stacey Nelkin auditioned for the role , but was given another part in the film , which was ultimately cut before filming . Casting Pris and Rachael was challenging , requiring several screen tests , with Morgan Paull playing the role of Deckard . Paull was cast as Deckard 's fellow bounty hunter Holden based on his performances in the tests . Brion James portrays Leon Kowalski , a combat replicant , and Joanna Cassidy portrays Zhora , an assassin replicant . 
 Edward James Olmos portrays Gaff . Olmos used his diverse ethnic background , and personal research , to help create the fictional " <unk> " language his character uses in the film . His initial address to Deckard at the noodle bar is partly in Hungarian and means , " Horse dick [ bullshit ] ! No way . You are the Blade ... Blade Runner . " M. Emmet Walsh plays Captain Bryant , a hard @-@ drinking , sleazy , and underhanded police veteran typical of the film noir genre . Joe <unk> portrays Dr. Eldon Tyrell , a corporate mogul who built an empire on genetically manipulated humanoid slaves . William Sanderson was cast as J. F. Sebastian , a quiet and lonely genius who provides a compassionate yet compliant portrait of humanity . J. F. sympathizes with the replicants , whom he sees as companions , and shares their shorter lifespan due to his rapid aging disease ; Joe Pantoliano was considered for the role . James Hong portrays Hannibal Chew , an elderly geneticist specializing in synthetic eyes , and Hy Pyke portrays the sleazy bar owner <unk> Lewis with ease and in a single take , something almost unheard @-@ of with Scott whose drive for perfection resulted at times in double @-@ digit takes . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Interest in adapting Philip K. Dick 's novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ? developed shortly after its 1968 publication . Director Martin Scorsese was interested in filming the novel , but never optioned it . Producer Herb Jaffe optioned it in the early 1970s , but Dick was unimpressed with the screenplay written by Herb 's son Robert : " Jaffe 's screenplay was so terribly done ... Robert flew down to Santa Ana to speak with me about the project . And the first thing I said to him when he got off the plane was , ' Shall I beat you up here at the airport , or shall I beat you up back at my apartment ? ' " 
 The screenplay by Hampton Fancher was optioned in 1977 . Producer Michael Deeley became interested in Fancher 's draft and convinced director Ridley Scott to film it . Scott had previously declined the project , but after leaving the slow production of Dune , wanted a faster @-@ paced project to take his mind off his older brother 's recent death . He joined the project on February 21 , 1980 , and managed to push up the promised Filmways financing from US $ 13 million to $ 15 million . Fancher 's script focused more on environmental issues and less on issues of humanity and religion , which are prominent in the novel and Scott wanted changes . Fancher found a cinema treatment by William S. Burroughs for Alan E. Nourse 's novel The <unk> ( 1974 ) , titled Blade Runner ( a movie ) . Scott liked the name , so Deeley obtained the rights to the titles . Eventually he hired David Peoples to rewrite the script and Fancher left the job over the issue on December 21 , 1980 , although he later returned to contribute additional rewrites . 
 Having invested over $ 2 @.@ 5 million in pre @-@ production , as the date of commencement of principal photography neared , Filmways withdrew financial backing . In 10 days Deeley had secured $ 21 @.@ 5 million in financing through a three @-@ way deal between The Ladd Company ( through Warner Bros. ) , the Hong Kong @-@ based producer Sir Run Run Shaw and Tandem Productions . 
 Philip K. Dick became concerned that no one had informed him about the film 's production , which added to his distrust of Hollywood . After Dick criticized an early version of Hampton Fancher 's script in an article written for the Los Angeles Select TV Guide , the studio sent Dick the David Peoples ' rewrite . Although Dick died shortly before the film 's release , he was pleased with the rewritten script and with a 20 @-@ minute special effects test reel that was screened for him when he was invited to the studio . Despite his well known skepticism of Hollywood in principle , Dick enthused to Ridley Scott that the world created for the film looked exactly as he had imagined it . He said , " I saw a segment of Douglas Trumbull 's special effects for Blade Runner on the KNBC @-@ TV news . I recognized it immediately . It was my own interior world . They caught it perfectly . " He also approved of the film 's script , saying , " After I finished reading the screenplay , I got the novel out and looked through it . The two reinforce each other , so that someone who started with the novel would enjoy the movie and someone who started with the movie would enjoy the novel . " The motion picture was dedicated to Dick . Principal photography of Blade Runner began on March 9 , 1981 and ended four months later . 
 In 1992 , Ford revealed , " Blade Runner is not one of my favorite films . I tangled with Ridley . " Apart from friction with the director , Ford also disliked the voiceovers : " When we started shooting it had been tacitly agreed that the version of the film that we had agreed upon was the version without voiceover narration . It was a f * * king [ sic ] nightmare . I thought that the film had worked without the narration . But now I was stuck re @-@ creating that narration . And I was obliged to do the voiceovers for people that did not represent the director 's interests . " " I went kicking and screaming to the studio to record it . " The narration monologues were written by an uncredited Roland Kibbee . 
 In 2006 , Scott was asked " Who 's the biggest pain in the arse you 've ever worked with ? " , he replied : " It 's got to be Harrison ... he 'll forgive me because now I get on with him . Now he 's become charming . But he knows a lot , that 's the problem . When we worked together it was my first film up and I was the new kid on the block . But we made a good movie . " Ford said of Scott in 2000 : " I admire his work . We had a bad patch there , and I 'm over it . " In 2006 Ford reflected on the production of the film saying : " What I remember more than anything else when I see Blade Runner is not the 50 nights of shooting in the rain , but the voiceover ... I was still obliged to work for these clowns that came in writing one bad voiceover after another . " Ridley Scott confirmed in the summer 2007 issue of Total Film that Harrison Ford contributed to the Blade Runner Special Edition DVD , having already done his interviews . " Harrison 's fully on board " , said Scott . 
 The Bradbury Building in downtown Los Angeles served as a filming location , and a Warner Bros. backlot housed the LA 2019 streets . Other locations included Ennis @-@ Brown House and the 2nd Street Tunnel . Test screenings resulted in several changes including adding a voice over , a happy ending and the removal of a Holden hospital scene . The relationship between the filmmakers and the investors was difficult , which culminated in Deeley and Scott being fired but still working on the film . Crew members created T @-@ shirts during filming saying , " Yes <unk> <unk> , My Ass " that mocked Scott 's unfavorable comparison of U.S. and British crews ; Scott responded with a T @-@ shirt of his own , " Xenophobia Sucks " making the incident known as the T @-@ shirt war . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Ridley Scott credits Edward Hopper 's painting Nighthawks and the French science fiction comic magazine Métal Hurlant ( " Heavy Metal " ) , to which the artist Moebius contributed , as stylistic mood sources . He also drew on the landscape of " Hong Kong on a very bad day " and the industrial landscape of his one @-@ time home in northeast England . The visual style of the movie is influenced by the work of Futurist Italian architect , Antonio Sant 'Elia . Scott hired Syd Mead as his concept artist who , like Scott , was influenced by Métal Hurlant . Moebius was offered the opportunity to assist in the pre @-@ production of Blade Runner , but he declined so that he could work on René <unk> 's animated film Les <unk> du temps – a decision that he later regretted . Production designer Lawrence G. Paull and art director David Snyder realized Scott 's and Mead 's sketches . Douglas Trumbull and Richard Yuricich supervised the special effects for the film . 
 Blade Runner has numerous deep similarities to Fritz Lang 's Metropolis , including a built @-@ up urban environment , in which the wealthy literally live above the workers , dominated by a huge building – the <unk> Tower in Metropolis and the Tyrell Building in Blade Runner . Special effects supervisor David Dryer used stills from Metropolis when lining up Blade Runner 's miniature building shots . 
 The extended end scene in the original theatrical release shows Rachel and Deckard traveling into daylight with pastoral aerial shots filmed by director Stanley Kubrick . Ridley Scott contacted Kubrick about using some of his surplus helicopter aerial photography from The Shining . 
 " Spinner " is the generic term for the fictional flying cars used in the film . A spinner can be driven as a ground @-@ based vehicle , and take off vertically , hover , and cruise using jet propulsion much like vertical take @-@ off and landing ( VTOL ) aircraft . They are used extensively by the police to patrol and survey the population , and it is clear that despite restrictions wealthy people can acquire spinner licenses . The vehicle was conceived and designed by Syd Mead who described the spinner as an " <unk> " — a vehicle which directs air downward to create lift , though press kits for the film stated that the spinner was propelled by three engines : " conventional internal combustion , jet , and anti @-@ gravity " Mead 's conceptual drawings were transformed into 25 working vehicles by automobile <unk> Gene Winfield . A spinner is on permanent exhibit at the Science Fiction Museum and Hall of Fame in Seattle , Washington . 
 = = = = Voight @-@ Kampff machine = = = = 
 The Voight @-@ Kampff machine is a fictional interrogation tool , originating in the novel where it is spelled Voigt @-@ Kampff . The Voight @-@ Kampff is a polygraph @-@ like machine used by Blade Runners to determine whether an individual is a replicant . It measures bodily functions such as respiration , blush response , heart rate and eye movement in response to questions dealing with empathy . In the film two replicants take the test , Leon and Rachael , and Deckard tells Tyrell that it usually takes 20 to 30 cross @-@ referenced questions to distinguish a replicant ; in contrast with the book , where it is stated it only takes " six or seven " questions to make a determination . In the film it takes more than one hundred questions to determine that Rachael is a replicant . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Blade Runner soundtrack by Vangelis is a dark melodic combination of classic composition and futuristic synthesizers which mirrors the film @-@ noir retro @-@ future envisioned by Ridley Scott . Vangelis , fresh from his Academy Award winning score for Chariots of Fire , composed and performed the music on his synthesizers . He also made use of various chimes and the vocals of collaborator <unk> Roussos . Another memorable sound is the haunting tenor sax solo " Love Theme " by British saxophonist Dick Morrissey , who performed on many of Vangelis 's albums . Ridley Scott also used " Memories of Green " from the Vangelis album See You Later , an orchestral version of which Scott would later use in his film Someone To Watch Over Me . 
 Along with Vangelis ' compositions and ambient textures , the film 's soundscape also features a track by the Japanese ensemble <unk> – " Ogi No Mato " or " The Folding Fan as a Target " from the Nonesuch Records release Traditional Vocal and Instrumental Music – and a track by harpist Gail Laughton from " Harps of the Ancient Temples " on Laurel Records . 
 Despite being well received by fans and critically acclaimed and nominated in 1983 for a BAFTA and Golden Globe as best original score , and the promise of a soundtrack album from Polydor Records in the end titles of the film , the release of the official soundtrack recording was delayed for over a decade . There are two official releases of the music from Blade Runner . In light of the lack of a release of an album , the New American Orchestra recorded an orchestral adaptation in 1982 which bore little resemblance to the original . Some of the film tracks would , in 1989 , surface on the compilation Vangelis : Themes , but not until the 1992 release of the Director 's Cut version would a substantial amount of the film 's score see commercial release . 
 These delays and poor reproductions led to the production of many bootleg recordings over the years . A bootleg tape surfaced in 1982 at science fiction conventions and became popular given the delay of an official release of the original recordings , and in 1993 " Off World Music , Ltd " created a bootleg CD that would prove more comprehensive than Vangelis ' official CD in 1994 . A set with three CDs of Blade Runner @-@ related Vangelis music was released in 2007 . Titled Blade Runner Trilogy , the first disc contains the same tracks as the 1994 official soundtrack release , the second features previously unreleased music from the movie , and the third disc is all newly composed music from Vangelis , inspired by , and in the spirit of the movie . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 The film 's special effects are generally recognized to be among the best of all time , using the available ( non @-@ digital ) technology to the fullest . In addition to matte paintings and models , the techniques employed included <unk> exposures . In some scenes , the set was lit , shot , the film rewound , and then rerecorded over with different lighting . In some cases this was done 16 times in all . The cameras were frequently motion controlled using computers . Many effects utilised techniques which had been developed during the production of Close Encounters of the Third Kind . 
 = = Release = = 
 Blade Runner was released in 1 @,@ 290 theaters on June 25 , 1982 . That date was chosen by producer Alan Ladd , Jr. because his previous highest @-@ grossing films ( Star Wars and Alien ) had a similar opening date ( May 25 ) in 1977 and 1979 , making the date his " lucky day " . Blade Runner grossed reasonably good ticket sales according to contemporary reports ; earning $ 6 @.@ 1 million during its first weekend in theaters . The film was released in close proximity to The Thing , Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan , Conan the Barbarian and , most significantly , E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial . These big @-@ budget science fiction / fantasy films all released in 1982 undoubtedly glutted the market . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Initial reactions among film critics were mixed . Some wrote that the plot took a back seat to the film 's special effects , and did not fit the studio 's marketing as an action / adventure movie . Others acclaimed its complexity and predicted it would stand the test of time . Negative criticism in the United States cited its slow pace . Sheila Benson from the Los Angeles Times called it " Blade Crawler , " and Pat Berman in The State and Columbia Record described it as " science fiction pornography " . Pauline Kael praised Blade Runner as worthy of a place in film history for its distinctive sci @-@ fi vision , yet criticized the film 's lack of development in " human terms " . 
 Academics began writing analyses of the film almost as soon as it was released , in particular its dystopic aspects , its questions regarding " authentic " humanity , its <unk> aspects , in genre studies and in recent years , popular culture . The film has been the subject of academic interest over decades . 
 Since its original release , the film has become a science fiction classic . Roger Ebert praised the visuals of both the original and the Director 's Cut versions and recommended it for that reason ; however , he found the human story clichéd and a little thin . He later added The Final Cut to his " Great Movies " list . Critic Chris Rodley and Janet Maslin theorized that Blade Runner changed cinematic and cultural discourse through its image repertoire , and subsequent influence on films . Blade Runner holds an 89 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , a website that rates films based on published reviews by critics , averaging a score of 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 from 104 reviews . The site 's main consensus reads " Misunderstood when it first hit theaters , the influence of Ridley Scott 's mysterious , neo @-@ noir Blade Runner has deepened with time . A visually remarkable , achingly human sci @-@ fi masterpiece . " Denis Villeneuve , who is to direct the Blade Runner sequel , cites the movie as a huge influence for him and many others . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Blade Runner has won and been nominated for the following awards : 
 = = = Versions = = = 
 Several different versions of Blade Runner have been shown . The original workprint version ( 1982 , 113 minutes ) was shown for audience test previews in Denver and Dallas in March 1982 . Negative responses to the previews led to the modifications resulting in the U.S. theatrical version . The workprint was shown as a director 's cut without Scott 's approval at the Los Angeles Fairfax Theater in May 1990 , at an AMPAS showing in April 1991 , and in September and October 1991 at the Los Angeles <unk> Theater and the San Francisco Castro Theatre . Positive responses pushed the studio to approve work on an official director 's cut . A San Diego Sneak Preview was shown only once , in May 1982 , and was almost identical to the U.S. theatrical version but contained three extra scenes not shown in any other version , including the 2007 Final Cut . 
 Two versions were shown in the film 's 1982 theatrical release : the U.S. theatrical version ( 117 minutes ) , known as the original version or Domestic Cut , released on Betamax , CED Videodisc and VHS in 1983 and Laserdisc in 1987 ; and the International Cut ( 117 minutes ) , also known as the " Criterion Edition " or " uncut version " , which included more violent action scenes than the U.S. version . Although initially unavailable in the U.S. , and distributed in Europe and Asia via theatrical and local Warner Home Video Laserdisc releases , it was later released on VHS and Criterion Collection Laserdisc in North America , and re @-@ released in 1992 as a " 10th Anniversary Edition " . 
 Scott 's Director 's Cut ( 1991 , 116 minutes ) was made available on VHS and Laserdisc in 1993 , and on DVD in 1997 . Significant changes from the theatrical version include : the removal of Deckard 's voice @-@ over ; re @-@ insertion of the unicorn sequence ; and removal of the studio @-@ imposed happy ending . Scott provided extensive notes and consultation to Warner Bros. through film preservationist Michael <unk> , who was put in charge of creating the Director 's Cut . Scott 's The Final Cut ( 2007 , 117 minutes ) was released by Warner Bros. theatrically on October 5 , 2007 , and subsequently released on DVD , HD DVD , and Blu @-@ ray Disc in December 2007 . This is the only version over which Scott had complete editorial control . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 While not initially a success with North American audiences , the film was popular internationally and garnered a cult following . The film 's dark style and futuristic designs have served as a benchmark and its influence can be seen in many subsequent science fiction films , anime , video games , and television programs . For example , Ronald D. Moore and David Eick , the producers of the re @-@ imagining of Battlestar Galactica , have both cited Blade Runner as one of the major influences for the show . Blade Runner continues to reflect modern trends and concerns , and an increasing number consider it one of the greatest science fiction films of all time . It was voted the best science fiction film ever made in a poll of 60 eminent world scientists conducted in 2004 . Blade Runner is also cited as an important influence to both the style and story of the Ghost in the Shell film series , which itself has been highly influential to the future @-@ noir genre . 
 The film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry in 1993 and is frequently used in university courses . In 2007 it was named the second most visually influential film of all time by the Visual Effects Society . 
 Blade Runner is one of the most musically sampled films of the 20th century . The 2009 album , I , Human , by Singaporean band Deus Ex Machina makes numerous references to the genetic engineering and cloning themes from the film , and even features a track titled " Replicant " . 
 Blade Runner has influenced adventure games such as the 2012 graphical text adventure Cypher , Rise of the Dragon , Snatcher , Beneath a Steel Sky , Flashback : The Quest for Identity , Bubblegum Crisis ( and its original anime films ) , the role @-@ playing game Shadowrun , the first @-@ person shooter Perfect Dark , and the Syndicate series of video games . The film is also cited as a major influence on Warren Spector , designer of the computer @-@ game Deus Ex , which displays evidence of the film 's influence in both its visual rendering and plot . The look of the film , darkness , neon lights and opacity of vision , is easier to render than complicated backdrops , making it a popular choice for game designers . 
 Blade Runner has also been the subject of parody , such as the comics Blade Bummer by Crazy comics , Bad Rubber by Steve <unk> , and the Red Dwarf 2009 three @-@ part miniseries , " Back to Earth " . 
 Among the folklore that has developed around the film over the years has been the belief that the film was a curse to the companies whose logos were displayed prominently as product placements in some scenes . While they were market leaders at the time , Atari , Bell , <unk> and Pan Am experienced setbacks after the film 's release . The Coca @-@ Cola Company suffered losses during its failed introduction of New Coke in 1985 , but soon afterwards regained its market share . 
 Media recognitions for Blade Runner include : 
 = = = = American Film Institute recognition = = = = 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills – # 74 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes & Villains : Roy Batty ( Villain ) – Nominated 
 Rick Deckard ( Hero ) – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : " I 've seen things you people wouldn 't believe . Attack ships on fire off the shoulder of Orion . I watched C @-@ beams glitter in the dark near the <unk> gate . All those moments will be lost in time , like tears in rain . Time to die . " – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) – # 97 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 – # 6 Science Fiction Film 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Before filming began , Cinefantastique magazine commissioned Paul M. Sammon to write an article about Blade Runner 's production which became the book Future Noir : The Making of Blade Runner . The book chronicles Blade Runner 's evolution , focusing on film @-@ set politics , especially the British director 's experiences with his first American film crew ; of which producer Alan Ladd , Jr. has said , " Harrison wouldn 't speak to Ridley and Ridley wouldn 't speak to Harrison . By the end of the shoot Ford was ' ready to kill Ridley ' , said one colleague . He really would have taken him on if he hadn 't been talked out of it . " Future Noir has short cast biographies and quotations about their experiences , and photographs of the film 's production and preliminary sketches . A second edition of Future Noir was published in 2007 . 
 Philip K. Dick refused a $ 400 @,@ 000 offer to write a Blade Runner novelization , saying : " [ I was ] told the cheapo novelization would have to appeal to the twelve @-@ year @-@ old audience " and " [ it ] would have probably been disastrous to me artistically . " He added , " That insistence on my part of bringing out the original novel and not doing the novelization – they were just furious . They finally recognized that there was a legitimate reason for reissuing the novel , even though it cost them money . It was a victory not just of contractual obligations but of theoretical principles . " Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ? was eventually reprinted as a tie @-@ in , with the film poster as a cover and the original title in parentheses below the Blade Runner title . Archie Goodwin scripted the comic book adaptation , A Marvel Super Special : Blade Runner , published in September 1982 . 
 There are two video games based on the film , one from 1985 for Commodore 64 , Sinclair ZX Spectrum and Amstrad CPC by <unk> Group PLC based on the music by Vangelis ( due to licensing issues ) , and another action adventure PC game from 1997 by Westwood Studios . The 1997 video game featured new characters and branching storylines based on the Blade Runner world . Eldon Tyrell , Gaff , Leon , Rachael , Chew , and J.F. Sebastian appear , and their voice files are recorded by the original actors . The player assumes the role of McCoy , another replicant @-@ hunter working at the same time as Deckard . 
 The PC game featured a non @-@ linear plot , non @-@ player characters that each ran in their own independent AI , and an unusual pseudo @-@ 3D engine ( which eschewed polygonal solids in favor of <unk> elements ) that did not require the use of a 3D accelerator card to play the game . 
 The television film Total Recall 2070 was initially planned as a spin @-@ off of the film Total Recall , and would eventually be transformed into a hybrid of Total Recall and Blade Runner . The Total Recall film was also based on a Philip K. Dick story , " We Can Remember It for You Wholesale " ; many similarities between Total Recall 2070 and Blade Runner were noted , as well as apparent inspiration from Isaac Asimov 's The Caves of Steel and the TV series Holmes & Yo @-@ Yo . 
 The film has been the subject of several documentaries . On the Edge of Blade Runner ( 2000 , 55 minutes ) was directed by Andrew Abbott and hosted / written by Mark Kermode . Interviews with production staff , including Scott , give details of the creative process and the turmoil during preproduction . Insights into Philip K. Dick and the origins of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ? are provided by Paul M. Sammon and Hampton Fancher . Future Shocks ( 2003 , 27 minutes ) is a documentary by <unk> . It includes interviews with executive producer Bud Yorkin , Syd Mead , and the cast , and commentary by science fiction author Robert J. Sawyer and from film critics . Dangerous Days : Making Blade Runner ( 2007 , 213 minutes ) is a documentary directed and produced by Charles de <unk> for The Final Cut version of the film . It was culled from over 80 interviews , including Ford , Young , and Scott . The documentary consists of eight chapters , each covering a portion of the film @-@ making – or in the case of the final chapter , the film 's controversial legacy . All Our Variant Futures : From <unk> to Final Cut ( 2007 , 29 minutes ) , produced by Paul <unk> , appears on the Blade Runner Ultimate Collector 's Edition and provides an overview of the film 's multiple versions and their origins , as well as detailing the seven @-@ year @-@ long restoration , enhancement and remastering process behind The Final Cut . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Dick 's friend , K. W. Jeter , wrote three authorized Blade Runner novels that continue Deckard 's story , attempting to resolve the differences between the film and Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ? : Blade Runner 2 : The Edge of Human ( 1995 ) , Blade Runner 3 : Replicant Night ( 1996 ) , and Blade Runner 4 : Eye and Talon ( 2000 ) . By 1999 , Stuart <unk> had written a sequel to Blade Runner based on The Edge of Human , titled Blade Runner Down ; the project was shelved due to rights issues . Blade Runner co @-@ author David Peoples wrote the 1998 action film Soldier , which was referred to by him as a " <unk> " or spiritual successor to the original film , set in the same shared universe . 
 Scott considered developing a sequel , tentatively titled Metropolis . At the 2007 Comic @-@ Con , Scott again announced that he was considering a sequel to the film . Eagle Eye co @-@ writer Travis Wright worked with producer Bud Yorkin for several years on the project . His colleague John Glenn , who left the project by 2008 , stated the script explores the nature of the off @-@ world colonies as well as what happens to the Tyrell Corporation in the wake of its founder 's death . 
 In June 2009 , The New York Times reported that Scott and his brother Tony Scott were working on a Blade Runner prequel , set in 2019 . The prequel , <unk> , was planned as a series of 5 – 10 minute shorts , aimed first at the web and then perhaps television . Due to rights issues , the proposed series was not to be linked too closely to the characters or events of the 1982 film . On February 7 , 2010 , it was announced that production on <unk> had ceased , due to funding problems . On March 4 , 2011 , io9 reported that Yorkin was developing a new Blade Runner film . It was also reported that month that director Christopher Nolan was the desired choice to make the film . 
