 = = Background and development = = 
 During the period in which he wrote Cryptonomicon , Stephenson read George Dyson 's Darwin Amongst the Machines , which led him to Gottfried Leibniz 's interest in a computing machine , the Leibniz – Newton feud , and Newton 's work at the Royal Treasury . He considered this " striking when [ he ] was already working on a book about money and a book about computers , " and became inspired to write about the period . Originally intended to be included in Cryptonomicon , Stephenson instead used the material as the foundation for Quicksilver , the first volume of the Baroque Cycle . The research for the sprawling historical novel created what Stephenson called " data management problems " , and he resorted to a system of notebooks to record research , track characters , and find material during the writing process . 
 = = = Historicity = = = 
 In Quicksilver , Stephenson places the ancestors of the Cryptonomicon 's characters in Enlightenment Europe alongside a cast of historical individuals from Restoration England and the Enlightenment . Amongst the cast are some of the most prominent natural philosophers , mathematicians and scientists ( Newton and Leibniz ) , and politicians ( William of Orange and Nassau ) of the age . In an interview , Stephenson explained he deliberately depicted both the historical and fictional characters as authentic representatives of historical classes of people , such as the Vagabonds as personified by Jack , and the Barbary slaves as personified by Eliza . In his research for the characters , he explored the major scholarship about the period . 
 Stephenson did extensive research on the Age of Enlightenment , noting that it is accessible for English speaking researchers because of the many well documented figures such as Leibniz , Newton and Samuel Pepys . In the course of his research he noted historiographic inconsistencies regarding characters of the period which he had to reconcile . Especially prominent was the deification of Newton , Locke and Boyle and their scientific method by Enlightenment and Victorian scholars . He considers the scientific work done during the Baroque period as crucial to the Enlightenment . From his research he concluded that the Enlightenment in general " is and should be a controversial event because although it led to the flourishing of the sciences and political liberties and a lot of good stuff like that , one can also argue that it played a role in the French Revolution and some of the negative events of the time as well . " The portrayal of a confusing and uncertain era develops throughout the book . 
 Some reviewers commented that Stephenson seems to carry his understanding of the period a little too far at times , delving into too much detail . Nick Hasted of The Independent wrote that this research made " descriptions of Restoration London feel leaden , and intellectual discourses between Newton and his contemporaries textbook @-@ dry . " Despite the thorough examination of the period , however , Stephenson does take liberty in depicting the Enlightenment . Both main and secondary fictional characters become prominent members of society who advise the most important figures of the period and affect everything from politics to economics and science . For example , he <unk> the real Cabal Ministry with fictional characters . 
 = = Style = = 
 Quicksilver is a historical fiction novel that occasionally uses fantasy and science fiction techniques . The book is written in " an omniscient modern presence occasionally given to wisecracks , with extensive use of the continuous present " . Mark Sanderson of The Daily Telegraph and Steven Poole of The Guardian both describe the novel as in the picaresque genre , a genre common to 17th- and 18th @-@ century Europe . Humor permeates the text , both situational and in the language itself , which emulates the picaresque style . 
 The narrative often presents protracted digressions . These digressions follow a multitude of events and subjects related to history , philosophy and scientific subjects . For example , USA Today , commented on the length of discussion of Newton 's interest in the nature of gravity . With these digressions , the narrative also rapidly changes between multiple perspectives , first and third person , as well as using multiple writing techniques , both those familiar to the modern reader and those popular during the Early Modern period . These techniques include letters , drama , cryptographic messaging , genealogies and " more interesting footnotes than found in many academic papers . " 
 Stephenson incorporates 17th century sentence structure and orthography throughout Quicksilver , most apparent in his use of <unk> and capitalization . He adapts a combination of period and anachronistic language throughout the books , mostly to good effect , while allowing diction from modern usage , such as " canal rage " an allusion to road rage . Stephenson chose not to adapt period language for the entire text ; instead he allowed such language to enter his writing when it was appropriate , often turning to modern English and modern labels for ideas familiar to modern readers . Stephenson said " I never tried to entertain the illusion that I was going to write something that had no trace of the 20th or the 21st century in it . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Quicksilver = = = 
 The first book is a series of flashbacks from 1713 to the earlier life of Daniel Waterhouse . It begins as Enoch Root arrives in Boston in October 1713 to deliver a letter to Daniel containing a summons from Princess Caroline . She wants Daniel to return to England and attempt to repair the feud between Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz . While following Daniel 's decision to return to England and board a Dutch ship ( the Minerva ) to cross the Atlantic , the book flashes back to when Enoch and Daniel each first met Newton . During the flashbacks , the book refocuses on Daniel 's life between 1661 and 1673 . 
 While attending school at Trinity College , Cambridge , Daniel becomes Newton 's companion , ensuring that Newton does not harm his health and assisting in his experiments . However , the plague of 1665 forces them apart : Newton returns to his family manor and Daniel to the outskirts of London . Daniel quickly tires of the radical Puritan rhetoric of his father , Drake Waterhouse , and decides to join Reverend John Wilkins and Robert Hooke at John Comstock 's Epsom estate . 
 There Daniel takes part in a number of experiments , including the exploration of the diminishing effects of gravity with changes in elevation , the transfusion of blood between dogs and Wilkins ' attempts to create a philosophical language . Daniel soon becomes disgusted with some of the practices of the older natural philosophers ( which include vivisection of animals ) and visits Newton during his experiments with color and white light . They attempt to return to Cambridge , but again plague expels the students . Daniel returns to his father ; however , his arrival on the outskirts of London coincides with the second day of the Fire of London . Drake , taken by religious fervour , dies atop his house as the King blows it up to create a fire break to prevent further spread of the fire . Soon after Drake 's death , Newton and Daniel then return to Cambridge and begin lecturing . 
 A flashforward occurs in the narration , to find Daniel 's ship under attack by the fleet of Edward Teach ( Blackbeard ) in 1713 . Then the story returns to the past as Daniel and Newton return to London : Newton is under the patronage of Louis Anglesey , the Earl of Upnor , and Daniel becomes secretary of the Royal Society when Henry Oldenburg is detained by the King for his active foreign correspondence . During his stint in London , Daniel encounters a number of important actors from the period . Daniel remains one of the more prominent actors in the Royal Society , close to Royal Society members involved in court life and politics . By 1672 both Daniel and Newton become fellows at Trinity College where they build an extensive alchemical laboratory which attracts other significant alchemists including John Locke and Robert Boyle . Daniel convinces Newton to present his work on calculus to the Royal Society . 
 In 1673 , Daniel meets Leibniz in England and acts as his escort , leading him to meetings with important members of British society . Soon , Daniel gains the patronage of Roger Comstock as his architect . While under Roger 's patronage , the actress Tess becomes Daniel 's mistress both at court and in bed . Finally the book returns to 1713 , where Daniel 's ship fends off several of Teach 's pirate ships . Soon they find out that Teach is after Daniel alone ; however , with the application of trigonometry , the ship is able to escape the bay and the pirate band . 
 = = = The King of the Vagabonds = = = 
 The King of Vagabonds focuses on the travels of " Half @-@ Cocked " Jack Shaftoe . It begins by recounting Jack 's childhood in the slums outside London where he pursued many disreputable jobs , including hanging from the legs of hanged men to speed their demise . The book then jumps to 1683 , when Jack travels to the Battle of Vienna to participate in the European expulsion of the Turks . While attacking the camp , Jack encounters Eliza , a European slave in the sultan 's harem , about to be killed by janissaries . He kills the janissaries and loots the area , taking ostrich feathers and acquiring a Turkish warhorse which he calls Turk . The two depart from the camp of the victorious European army and travel through Bohemia into the Palatinate . To sell the ostrich feathers at a high price , they decide to wait until the spring fair in Leipzig . Jack and Eliza spend the winter near a cave warmed by a hot water spring . In the springtime , they travel to the fair dressed as a noblewoman and her bodyguard where they meet Doctor Leibniz . They quickly sell their goods with the help of Leibniz , and agree to accompany him to his silver mine in the Harz Mountains . 
 Once they arrive at the mine , Jack wanders into the local town where he has a brief encounter with Enoch Root in an apothecary 's shop . Jack leaves town but gets lost in the woods , encountering pagan worshippers and witch hunters . He successfully escapes them by finding safe passage through a mine connecting to Leibniz 's . Eliza and Jack move on to Amsterdam , where Eliza quickly becomes embroiled in the trade of commodities . Jack goes to Paris to sell the ostrich feathers and Turk , leaving Eliza behind . When he arrives in Paris , he meets and befriends St. George , a professional rat @-@ killer and tamer , who helps him find lodging . While there , he becomes a messenger for bankers between Paris and Marseilles . However , during an attempt to sell Turk Jack is captured by nobles . Luckily , the presence of Jack 's former employer , John Churchill , ensures that he is not immediately killed . With Churchill 's help , Jack escapes from the barn where he has been held prisoner . During the escape , he rides Turk into a masquerade at the Hotel d 'Arcachon in a costume similar to that of King Louis . With the aid of St. George 's rats he escapes without injury but destroys the ballroom and removes the hand of Etienne d 'Arcachon . 
 Meanwhile , Eliza becomes heavily involved in the politics of Amsterdam , helping Knott <unk> and the Duke of Monmouth manipulate the trade of VOC stock . This causes a panic from which they profit . Afterwards , the French Ambassador in Amsterdam persuades Eliza to go to Versailles and supply him information about the French court . Eliza agrees after a brief encounter and falling @-@ out with Jack . William of Orange learns of Eliza 's mission and intercepts her , forcing her to become a double agent for his benefit and to give him oral sex . Meanwhile , Jack , with an injury caused by his encounter with Eliza , departs on the slaving trip , the ship filled with cowry shells which he and his accomplices , a Russian fur trader and an English pub owner . The ship is captured by Barbary pirates , and the end of the book has Jack as a captured galley @-@ slave . 
 = = = Odalisque = = = 
 This book returns to Daniel Waterhouse , who in 1685 , has become a courtier to Charles II because of his role as Secretary of the Royal Society . He warns James II , still Duke of York , of his brother Charles ' impending death , following which , Daniel quickly becomes an advisor to James II . He continues to be deeply involved with the English court , ensuring the passage of several bills which reduce restrictions on non @-@ conformists despite his detraction from the Francophile court . Meanwhile , Eliza becomes the governess of a widowers ' two children in Versailles . She catches the eye of the king and becomes the broker of the French nobility . With her help , the French court , supported by King Louis , creates several market trends from which they profit extensively . Her active involvement in the French court gains her a title of nobility : Countess of <unk> . 
 Daniel and Eliza finally meet during a visit to the Netherlands where Daniel acts as an intermediary between William of Orange and the detracting English nobility . Daniel realizes Eliza 's importance during a meeting at the house of Christiaan Huygens . Eliza woos Daniel and uses this connection to gain entrance into the English court and the Royal Society . Daniel also meets Nicholas Fatio while in Amsterdam . Soon after this meeting , Fatio and Eliza prevent the attempted kidnapping of William of Orange by an ambitious French courtier . Upon his return , Daniel is arrested by the notorious judge George Jeffreys , and later imprisoned in the Tower of London . Daniel escapes with the help of Jack Shaftoe 's brother Bob , whose infantry unit is stationed there . 
 After a brief return to Versailles , Eliza joins Elizabeth Charlotte of the Palatinate at her estate before the invasion of the Palatinate in her name . Eliza informs William of Orange of the troop movements caused by the French invasion which frees his forces along the border of the Spanish Netherlands , a region of stalemate between France and the Dutch Republic . During her flight from the Electorate of the Palatinate , Eliza becomes pregnant by Louis 's cryptographer , though popular knowledge suggested it was the French nobleman Etienne D 'Arcachon 's child . Meanwhile , William takes the free troops from the border on the Spanish Netherlands to England , precipitating the Glorious Revolution , including the expulsion of James II . James flees London and Daniel Waterhouse soon encounters him in a bar . Convinced that the Stuart monarchy has collapsed , Daniel returns to London and takes revenge on Jeffreys by inciting a crowd to capture him for trial and later execution . Though he plans to depart for Massachusetts , Daniel 's case of bladder stones increasingly worsens during this period . The Royal Society and other family friends are very aware of this and force Daniel to get the stone removed by Robert Hooke at Bedlam . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 A 2003 interview in Newsweek quotes Stephenson 's belief that " science fiction ... is fiction in which ideas play an important part . " Central to Quicksilver is the importance of the Enlightenment . By placing the reader among a world of ideas that change the course of science , Stephenson explores the development of the scientific method . One theme Stephenson explores in Quicksilver is the advancement of mathematical sciences which in turn led to important applications : Leibniz 's theory of binary mathematics became the foundation upon which to develop computers . As he did in Cryptonomicon , Stephenson highlights the importance of networks and codes , which in Quicksilver occur against a " backdrop of staggering diversity and detail " , writes Mark Sanderson in his review of the book for the Daily Telegraph . Also , returning to his cyberpunk roots , Stephenson emphasizes the manner in which information and ideas are dispersed in complex societies . Quicksilver uses the " interactions of philosophy , court intrigue , economics , wars , plagues and natural disasters " of the late 17th and early 18th century to create a historical backdrop . From one perspective , the characters are most useful in their roles as " carriers of information " . Although the characters use various techniques to disseminate information , the most prominent is cryptography . Elizabeth Weisse writes in USA Today that the use of cryptography is " Stephenson 's literary calling card " , as she compares Quicksilver to Cryptonomicon . 
 In Quicksilver Stephenson presents the importance of freedom of thought , the diversity required for new ideas to develop , and the manner in which new ideas are expressed . To explore or accept an idea such as the theory of gravity often resulted in dire consequences or even " grotesque punishment " in the early 17th century . Stephenson also points out that research , particularly as conducted at the Royal Society , resulted in a changing of views in some cases : 
 If you read the records of the Royal Society and what they were doing in the 1660s , it 's clear that at a certain point , some of these people – and I think Hooke was one of them – became a little bit disgusted with themselves and began excusing themselves when one of these vivisections was going to happen . I certainly don 't think they turned into hardcore animal rights campaigners , or anything close to that , but I think after a while , they got a little bit sick of it and started to feel conflicted about what they were doing . So I 've tried to show that ambivalence and complication in the book . 
 How to exist during a " time of dualities " is another important theme in Quicksilver , especially in their effects on Daniel Waterhouse , who is torn between " reason versus faith , freedom versus destiny , matter versus math . " 
 Frequent mention of alchemy indicates the shift from an earlier age to a newer transformative age . Newton was an alchemist , and one character compares finance to alchemy : " all goods — silk , coins , shares in mines — lose their hard dull gross forms and liquefy , and give up their true nature , as ores in an alchemist 's furnace sweat mercury " . The book focuses on a period of social and scientific transmutations , expanding upon the symbolism of the book 's title , Quicksilver , because it is a period in which the " principles governing transformation " are investigated and established . A commerce of different goods rapidly changing from one into another is a recurrent theme throughout the book . Also , the title Quicksilver connects the book to the method alchemists used to distill quicksilver , " the pure living essence of God 's power and presence in the world " , from , as one character put it , " the base , dark , cold , essentially fecal matter of which the world was made . " 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 In order of appearance : 
 Enoch Root – an elusive and mysterious alchemist who first appears at the beginning of the book and recurs throughout often in the company of Alchemists such as Newton and Locke . 
 Daniel Waterhouse – son of prominent Puritan Drake Waterhouse , roommate of Isaac Newton , friend of Gottfried Leibniz , and prominent member of the Royal Society . Waterhouse is both a savant and a strict Puritan . As Quicksilver progresses he becomes more and more involved in the inner workings of British politics . 
 " Half @-@ Cocked " Jack Shaftoe – an English vagabond , known as " The King of the Vagabonds " , who rescues Eliza and becomes the enemy of the Duke d 'Arcachon . 
 Eliza – a former harem slave who becomes a French countess , investor , and spy for William of Orange and Gottfried Leibniz . She originally became a slave when she and her mother were kidnapped from their homeland of <unk> by a European pirate with breath that smelled of rotten fish . 
 = = = Historical characters = = = 
 Robert Boyle , Irish natural philosopher 
 Caroline of Ansbach , an inquisitive child who loses her mother to smallpox 
 John Churchill , former employer of Jack and a prominent British politician 
 William Curtius , German Fellow of the Royal Society , and diplomat for the House of Stuart . 
 Nicolas Fatio de Duillier 
 Judge Jeffreys , Lord Chancellor of England 
 Robert Hooke , English natural philosopher and biologist 
 Christiaan Huygens , continental natural philosopher 
 Gottfried Leibniz 
 Louis XIV , King of France 
 Isaac Newton 
 Henry Oldenburg , founding member and secretary of the Royal Society 
 Bonaventure Rossignol , a French cryptologist 
 James Scott , 1st Duke of Monmouth 
 James Stuart , as the Duke of York and as James II , King of England 
 Edward Teach , aka Blackbeard 
 John Wilkins , Bishop of Chester , founding member of the Royal Society , and advocate of religious tolerance in Britain 
 William III of England , as William , Prince of Orange 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The reception to Quicksilver was generally positive . Some reviewers found the length cumbersome ; however , others found the length impressive in its quality and entertainment value . Paul Boutin at Slate Magazine comments that Quicksilver offers an insight into how advanced and complicated science was during the age of " alchemists and microscope @-@ makers " ; and that the scientists of the period were " the forerunners of the biotech and nanotech researchers who are today 's IT Geeks " . Entertainment Weekly rates Quicksilver an A- , stating that the book " makes you ponder concepts and theories you initially thought you 'll never understand " . The critic finds a parallel between Stephenson 's approach and a passage from the book describing an effort to put " all human knowledge ... in a vast Encyclopedia that will be a sort of machine , not only for finding old knowledge but for making new " . 
 The Independent places emphasis on the comparisons between the story that evolves in Quicksilver and Stephenson 's earlier novel Cryptonomicon , with the former " shaping up to be a far more impressive literary endeavour than most so @-@ called ' serious ' fiction . And it ends on a hell of a cliffhanger . No scholarly , and intellectually provocative , historical novel has been this much fun since The Name of the Rose " . Patrick Ness considers Quicksilver to be " entertaining over an impossible distance . This isn 't a book ; it 's a place to move into and raise a family . " His review focuses on the scope of the material and humour inherent in Quicksilver . Mark Sanderson calls the novel an " astonishing achievement " , and compares Quicksilver to " Thomas Pynchon 's Mason & Dixon and Lawrence Norfolk 's Lempriere 's Dictionary . " Although full of historical description and incredibly lengthy , Quicksilver is noticeably full of what Sanderson called " more sex and violence ... than any Tarantino movie " . Stephenson balances his desire to respect the period with a need to develop a novel which entertains modern readers . In The Guardian , Steven Poole commented that ' Quicksilver was : " A great fantastical boiling pot of theories about science , money , war and much else , by turns broadly picaresque and microscopically technical , sometimes over @-@ dense and sometimes too sketchy , flawed but unarguably magnificent , Quicksilver is something like a Restoration @-@ era Gravity 's Rainbow . " 
 Polly Shulman of The New York Times finds Quicksilver hard to follow and amazingly complex but a good read . However she notes that the complicated and clunky dialogue between the characters is a distraction . She thinks a full appreciation of the work is only possible within the context of the remaining novels of The Baroque Cycle , and compares the novel to works by Dorothy Dunnett , William Gibson and Bruce Sterling , calling it " history @-@ of @-@ science fiction " . In the post @-@ publication review for The New York Times , Edward Rothstein remarks that the scope of the novel is at times detrimental : " Unfortunately , in this novelistic cauldron it can sometimes seem as if mercury 's vapors had overtaken the author himself , as if every detail he had learned had to be anxiously crammed into his text , while still leaving the boundaries between fact and invention ambiguous " . He considers the novel to be an " experiment in progress " , although the historical background is compelling . 
 Deborah Friedell disliked Quicksilver . She mentions Stephenson 's poor writing and his lack of knowledge of the literary tradition , which she considers to be because " the greatest influences upon Stephenson 's work have been comic books and cartoons " . She dislikes his use of anachronism , his failure to be literary and his general approach to historical fiction . She writes of Stephenson and the reviewers who reviewed the work in a positive manner : 
 Stephenson is decidedly not a prodigy ; but his babe @-@ in @-@ the @-@ woods routine has proved irresistible for some , who are hailing his seemingly innate ability to meld the products of exhaustive historical research with what they see as a brilliant , idiosyncratic sense of humor and adventure . Time 's critic has declared that Stephenson has a " once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ generation gift " , and that Quicksilver " will defy any category , genre , precedent or label — except for genius " . This is promotional copy disguised as literary criticism . There is nothing category @-@ defying about this ridiculous book . 
 From the foreign press , the review in the Frankfurter Allgemeine points out the historical period of Quicksilver is one of the birth of science which corresponds with a period of language shift as English became the language of science . Moreover , the review focuses on Leibniz 's principles of mathematics which Stephenson claims established the framework for modern computing . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Based on the success of Cryptonomicon , a New York Times bestseller with sales of about 300 @,@ 000 copies , the initial print @-@ run for Quicksilver was 250 @,@ 000 copies . Five months before the release date , a web campaign was initiated to advertise the work . The novel was originally published in a single volume ; in 2006 HarperCollins republished the books in three separate paperback volumes . 
 = = = Editions = = = 
 September 23 , 2003 , US , William Morrow ( ISBN 0 @-@ 380 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 ) , hardback ( first edition ) , 944 pages 
 October 2 , 2003 , UK , Willian Heinemann ( ISBN 0 @-@ 434 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 ) , hardback 
 2003 , UK , Willian Heinemann ( ISBN 0 @-@ 434 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 ) , paperback 
 June 2004 , US , William Morrow ( ISBN 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 ) , hardback ( Special Edition ) , 968 pages 
 September 21 , 2004 , US , HarperCollins Perennial ( ISBN 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ) , trade edition , 927 pages 
 October 2004 , US <unk> ( ISBN <unk> ) , CD , abridged audiobook , 22 hours 1 minute , narrated by Simon Prebble and <unk> Nielson 
 November 2004 , US , HarperCollins ( ISBN <unk> ) , MP3 release of the abridged audio CD 
 Split into 3 volumes in 2006 
 Quicksilver , January 2006 , US , HarperCollins ( ISBN <unk> ) , mass market , 480 pages 
 The King of the Vagabonds , February 2006 , US , HarperCollins ( ISBN <unk> ) , mass market paperback , 400 pages 
 Odalisque , March 2006 , US , HarperCollins ( ISBN <unk> ) , mass market paperback , 464 pages 
 = Montana Highway 87 = 
 Montana Highway 87 ( MT 87 ) is a primary state highway located in the southwestern region of the U.S. state of Montana . The highway travels through mainly rural areas in Raynolds Pass , from the Montana – Idaho state line to an intersection with U.S. Route 287 ( US 287 ) . The route travels through a portion of Gallatin National Forest . In 1922 , a road in the location of MT 87 was added to the highway system , and a few years later the road was designated as portions of two early auto trails . In 1959 , the route was rapidly improved due to the collapse of US 287 nearby . During 1967 , much of the highway was reconstructed along its current location . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MT 87 begins at the Montana – Idaho state line , traveling through Raynolds Pass . The highway proceeds northward , intersecting a small road before entering rural areas within Gallatin National Forest . The route continues northeast , intersecting several forest roads before bending northwestward . The route intersects several small roads while it runs parallel to a small creek . It crosses over the Madison River after passing several small buildings . The highway continues northwestward to its northern terminus , an at @-@ grade intersection with US 287 . The highway is maintained by the Montana Department of Transportation ( MDT ) . Part of the job of the MDT is to measure traffic along the highway . These counts are taken using a metric called annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) . This is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles that travel along a portion of the highway . In 2011 , the highway had an AADT count of 583 vehicles . No portion of the highway is listed as part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 On October 9 , 1922 , a road located in the general location of MT 87 was added to the Montana State Highway system . By at least 1924 , an auto trail known as the Banff Grand Canyon Road ran along the highway in the general location of MT 87 . The next year , the highway had been given a graded dirt surface , and was designated as part of the Great White Way auto trail , as well as the Banff Grand Canyon Road . Between 1925 and 1927 , the auto trail designations were removed from the stretch of highway near present @-@ day MT 87 . By 1937 , the main highway had been shifted north of the location of MT 87 , and had been numbered as State Highway 1 . A road remained in the location of MT 87 , although it was unnumbered . This road had also been extended several miles northward to Lyon . 
 By 1951 , the highway had been reconstructed generally along MT 87 's present location , and it had been upgraded to an improved gravel road . In 1959 , the road in the location of MT 87 was rapidly improved in order to serve as an alternate routing to U.S. Route 287 . Portions of US 287 around Hebgen Lake collapsed and crumbled as a result of the 1959 Hebgen Lake earthquake . After US 287 was fixed , the highway 's importance decreased . In 1962 , the portions of the highway from the southern terminus to present @-@ day milepost 8 @.@ 395 were reconstructed along the current location . In 1967 , the rest of the highway was reconstructed along the present location . By 1987 , the highway had been numbered as MT 87 . The route had also been paved . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Rudolf Caracciola = 
 Otto Wilhelm Rudolf Caracciola ( 30 January 1901 – 28 September 1959 ) , more commonly Rudolf Caracciola ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] ) , was a racing driver from Remagen , Germany . He won the European Drivers ' Championship , the pre @-@ 1950 equivalent of the modern Formula One World Championship , an unsurpassed three times . He also won the European Hillclimbing Championship three times – twice in sports cars , and once in Grand Prix cars . Caracciola raced for Mercedes @-@ Benz during their original dominating Silver Arrows period , named after the silver colour of the cars , and set speed records for the firm . He was affectionately dubbed <unk> by the German public , and was known by the title of Regenmeister , or " Rainmaster " , for his prowess in wet conditions . 
 Caracciola began racing while he was working as apprentice at the Fafnir automobile factory in Aachen during the early 1920s , first on motorcycles and then in cars . Racing for Mercedes @-@ Benz , he won his first two Hillclimbing Championships in 1930 and 1931 , and moved to Alfa Romeo for 1932 , where he won the Hillclimbing Championship for the third time . In 1933 , he established the privateer team Scuderia C.C. with his fellow driver Louis Chiron , but a crash in practice for the Monaco Grand Prix left him with multiple fractures of his right thigh , which ruled him out of racing for more than a year . He returned to the newly reformed Mercedes @-@ Benz racing team in 1934 , with whom he won three European Championships , in 1935 , 1937 and 1938 . Like most German racing drivers in the 1930s , Caracciola was a member of the Nazi paramilitary group National Socialist Motor Corps ( NSKK ) , but never a member of the Nazi Party . He returned to racing after the Second World War , but crashed in qualifying for the 1946 Indianapolis 500 . A second comeback in 1952 was halted by another crash , in a sports car race in Switzerland . 
 After he retired , Caracciola worked as a Mercedes @-@ Benz salesman targeting North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) troops stationed in Europe . He died in the German city of Kassel , after suffering liver failure . He was buried in Switzerland , where he had lived since the early 1930s . He is remembered as one of the greatest pre @-@ 1939 Grand Prix drivers , a perfectionist who excelled in all conditions . His record of six German Grand Prix wins remains unbeaten . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Rudolf Caracciola was born in Remagen , Germany , on 30 January 1901 . He was the fourth child of Maximilian and Mathilde , who ran the Hotel Fürstenberg . His ancestors had migrated during the Thirty Years ' War from Naples to the German Rhineland , where Prince Bartolomeo Caracciolo ( nephew of Spanish @-@ allegiance Field Marshal Tommaso Caracciolo ) had commanded the Ehrenbreitstein Fortress near Koblenz . Caracciola was interested in cars from a young age , and from his fourteenth birthday wanted to become a racing driver . He drove an early Mercedes during the First World War , and gained his driver 's license before the legal age of 18 . After Caracciola 's graduation from school soon after the war , his father wanted him to attend university , but when he died Caracciola instead became an apprentice in the Fafnir automobile factory in Aachen . 
 Motorsport in Germany at the time , as in the rest of Europe , was an exclusive sport , mainly limited to the upper classes . As the sport became more professional in the early 1920s , specialist drivers , like Caracciola , began to dominate . Caracciola enjoyed his first success in motorsport while working for Fafnir , taking his NSU motorcycle to several victories in endurance events . When Fafnir decided to take part in the first race at the <unk> @-@ <unk> und <unk> @-@ Straße ( AVUS ) track in 1922 , Caracciola drove one of the works cars to fourth overall , the first in his class and the quickest Fafnir . He followed this with victory in a race at the <unk> in Rüsselsheim . He did not stay long in Aachen , however ; in 1923 , after punching a soldier from the occupying Belgian Army in a nightclub , he fled the city . He moved to Dresden , where he continued to work as a Fafnir representative . In April of that year , Caracciola won the 1923 ADAC race at the Berlin Stadium in a borrowed Ego 4 hp . In his autobiography , Caracciola said he only ever sold one car for Fafnir , but due to inflation by " the time the car was delivered the money was just enough to pay for the horn and two headlights " . 
 Later in 1923 , he was hired by the Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft as a car salesman at their Dresden outlet . Caracciola continued racing , driving a Mercedes 6 / 25 / 40 hp to victory in four of the eight races he entered in 1923 . His success continued in 1924 with the new supercharged Mercedes 1 @.@ 5 @-@ litre ; he won 15 races during the season , including the Klausenpass hillclimb in Switzerland . He attended the Italian Grand Prix at Monza as a reserve driver for Mercedes , but did not take part in the race . He drove his 1 @.@ 5 @-@ litre to five victories in 1925 , and won the hillclimbs at <unk> and Freiburg in a Mercedes 24 / 100 / 140 hp . With his racing career becoming increasingly successful , he abandoned his plans to study mechanical engineering . 
 = = 1926 – 1930 : Breakthrough = = 
 Caracciola 's breakthrough year was in 1926 . The inaugural German Grand Prix was held at the AVUS track on 11 July , but the date clashed with a more prestigious race in Spain . The newly merged company Mercedes @-@ Benz , conscious of export considerations , chose the latter race to run their main team . Hearing this , Caracciola took a short leave from his job and went to the Mercedes office in Stuttgart to ask for a car . Mercedes agreed to lend Caracciola and Adolf Rosenberger two 1923 2 @-@ litre <unk> , provided they enter not as works drivers but independents . Rosenberger started well in front of the 230 @,@ 000 spectators , but Caracciola stalled his engine . His riding mechanic , Eugen <unk> , jumped out and pushed the car to get it started , but by the time they began moving they had lost more than a minute to the leaders . It started to rain , and Caracciola passed many cars that had retired in the poor conditions . Rosenberger lost control at the North Curve on the eighth lap when trying to pass a slower car , and crashed into the timekeepers ' box , killing all three occupants ; Caracciola kept driving . In the fog and rain , he had no idea which position he was in , but resolved to keep driving so he could at least finish the race . When he finished the 20th and final lap , he was surprised to find that he had won the race . The German press dubbed him Regenmeister , or " Rainmaster " , for his prowess in the wet conditions . 
 Caracciola used the prize money — 17 @,@ 000 Reichsmarks — to set up a Mercedes @-@ Benz dealership on the prestigious Kurfürstendamm in Berlin . He also married his girlfriend , Charlotte , whom he had met in 1923 while working at the Mercedes @-@ Benz outlet in Dresden . He continued racing in domestic competitions , returning again to Freiburg to compete in the Flying Kilometre race where he set a new sports car record in the new Mercedes @-@ Benz 2 @-@ litre Model K , and finished first . Caracciola entered the Klausenpass hillclimb and set a new touring car record ; he also won the touring car class at the Semmering hillclimb before driving a newly supercharged 1914 Mercedes Grand Prix car over the same route to set the fastest time of the day for any class . The recently completed Nürburgring was the host of the 1927 Eifelrennen , a race which had been held on public roads in the Eifel mountains since 1922 . Caracciola won the first race on the track , and returned to the Nürburgring a month later for the 1927 German Grand Prix , but his car broke down and the race was won by Otto Merz . However , he won 11 competitions in 1927 , almost all of them in the Ferdinand Porsche @-@ developed Mercedes @-@ Benz Model S. 
 Caracciola regained his German Grand Prix title at the Nürburgring at the 1928 German Grand Prix , driving the new 7 @.@ 1 @-@ litre Mercedes @-@ Benz SS . He shared the driving with Christian Werner , who took over Caracciola 's car when the latter collapsed with heat exhaustion at a pit stop . The German Grand Prix , like many other races at the time , ignored the official Grand Prix racing rules set by the Association Internationale des Automobile Clubs Reconnus ( International Association of Recognized Auto Clubs , or AIACR ) , which limited weight and fuel consumption , and instead ran races under a Formula Libre , or free formula . As a result , Mercedes @-@ Benz focused less on producing Grand Prix cars and more on sports cars , and Caracciola drove the latest incarnation of this line , the SSK , at the Semmering hillclimb , and further reduced his own record on the course by half a second . 
 The inaugural Monaco Grand Prix was held on 14 April 1929 . Caracciola , driving a 7 @.@ 1 @-@ litre Mercedes @-@ Benz SSK , started from the back row of the grid ( which was allocated randomly ) , and battled Bugatti driver William Grover @-@ Williams for the lead early on . However , his pit stop , which took four and a half minutes to refill his car with petrol , left him unable to recover the time , and he eventually finished third . He won the RAC Tourist Trophy in slippery conditions , and confirmed his reputation as a specialist in wet track racing . He partnered Werner in the Mille Miglia and Le Mans endurance races in 1930 ; they finished sixth in the former but were forced to retire after leading for most of the race in the latter after their car 's generator burnt out . Caracciola took victory in the 1930 Irish Grand Prix at Phoenix Park , and won four hillclimbs to take the title of European <unk> Champion for the first time . However , he was forced to close his dealership in Berlin after the firm went bankrupt . 
 = = 1931 – 1932 : Move to Alfa Romeo = = 
 Mercedes @-@ Benz officially withdrew from motor racing in 1931 — citing the global economic downturn as a reason for their decision — although they continued to support Caracciola and a few other drivers covertly , retaining manager Alfred Neubauer to run the ' independent ' operation . In part because of the financial situation , Caracciola was the only Mercedes driver to appear at the 1931 Monaco Grand Prix , driving an SSKL ( a shorter version of the SSK ) . Caracciola and Maserati driver Luigi Fagioli challenged the <unk> of Louis Chiron and Achille Varzi for the lead early in the race , but when the SSKL 's clutch failed Caracciola withdrew from the race . A crowd of 100 @,@ 000 turned out for the German Grand Prix at the Nürburgring . Rain began to fall before the race , and continued as Caracciola chased Fagioli for the lead in the early laps . The spray from Fagioli 's Maserati severely impaired Caracciola 's vision , but he was able to pass to take the lead at the <unk> corner . The track began to dry on lap six , and Chiron 's Bugatti , which was by then running second , began to catch the heavier Mercedes . Caracciola 's pit stop , completed in record time , kept him ahead of Chiron , and despite the Bugatti lapping 15 seconds faster than the Mercedes late in the race , Caracciola won by more than one minute . 
 Caracciola was lucky to escape from a crash in the Masaryk Grand Prix . He and Chiron were chasing Fagioli when Fagioli crashed into a wooden footbridge , bringing it crashing down onto the road . Caracciola and Chiron drove into a ditch at the side of the road to avoid the debris ; while Chiron drove out of the ditch and was able to continue , Caracciola drove into a tree and retired . Despite this accident , Caracciola again performed strongly in the Hillclimbing Championship ; he won eight climbs in his SSKL to take the title . Perhaps his most significant achievement of 1931 was his win in the Mille Miglia . The local fleet of Alfa Romeos battled for the lead early in the race , but when they fell back Caracciola was able to take control . His win , in record time , made him and his co @-@ driver Wilhelm Sebastian ( who allowed Caracciola to drive the entire race ) the first foreigners to win the Italian race . The only other foreigners to win the race on the full course were Stirling Moss and Denis Jenkinson in 1955 . 
 Mercedes @-@ Benz withdrew entirely from motor racing at the start of 1932 in the face of the economic crisis , so Caracciola moved to Alfa Romeo with a promise to return to Mercedes if they resumed racing . His contract stipulated he would begin racing for the Italian team as a semi @-@ independent . Caracciola later wrote that the Alfa Romeo manager was defensive when he questioned him about this clause ; Caracciola believed it was because the firm 's Italian drivers did not believe he could change from the huge Mercedes cars to the much smaller Alfa Romeos . His first race for his new team was at the Mille Miglia ; he led early in the race , but retired when a valve connection broke . Caracciola later wrote , " I can still see the expression on [ Alfa Romeo driver Giuseppe ] Campari 's face when I arrived back at the factory . He smiled to himself as if to say , Well , didn 't I tell you that one wasn 't going to make it ? " 
 The next race was the Monaco Grand Prix , where Caracciola was again entered as a semi @-@ independent . He ran fourth early in the race , but moved to second as Alfa Romeo driver <unk> Borzacchini pitted for a wheel change and the axle on Achille Varzi 's Bugatti broke . Tazio Nuvolari , in the other Alfa Romeo , found his lead reduced rapidly as Caracciola closed in ; with ten laps remaining in the race Caracciola was so close he could see Nuvolari changing gears . He finished the race just behind Nuvolari . The crowd jeered Caracciola : they believed he had deliberately lost for the team , denying them a fight for the win . However , on the strength of his performance , Caracciola was offered a full spot on the Alfa Romeo team , which he accepted . 
 Alfa Romeo dominated the rest of the Grand Prix season . Nuvolari and Campari drove the newly introduced Alfa Romeo P3 at the Italian Grand Prix , while Borzacchini and Caracciola drove much heavier <unk> . Caracciola was forced to retired when his car broke down , but he took over Borzacchini 's car when the Italian was hit by a stone , and came third , behind Nuvolari and Fagioli . In the French Grand Prix , Caracciola , now driving a P3 , battled Nuvolari for the lead early on . Alfa Romeo 's dominance was so great and their cars so far ahead the team could choose the top three finishing positions , thus Nuvolari won from Borzacchini and Caracciola , with the two Italians ahead of the German . The order was different at the 1932 German Grand Prix , where Caracciola won from Nuvolari and Borzacchini . 
 Caracciola performed strongly in other races ; he won the Polish and Monza Grands Prix and the Eifelrennen at the Nürburgring , and took five more hillclimbs to win that Championship for the third and final time . He was , however , beaten by the Mercedes @-@ Benz of Manfred von Brauchitsch at the Avusrennen ( the yearly race at the AVUS track ) . Von Brauchitsch drove a privately entered SSK with streamlined bodywork , and beat Caracciola 's Alfa Romeo , which finished in second place . Caracciola was seen by the German crowd as having defected to the Italian team and was booed , while von Brauchitsch 's all German victory drew mass support . 
 = = 1933 – 1934 : Injury and return for Mercedes = = 
 Alfa Romeo withdrew its factory team from motor racing at the start of the 1933 season , leaving Caracciola without a contract . He was close friends with the Monegasque driver Louis Chiron , who had been fired from Bugatti , and while on vacation in Arosa in Switzerland the two decided to form their own team , Scuderia C.C. ( Caracciola @-@ Chiron ) . They bought three Alfa Romeo <unk> ( known as <unk> ) , and Daimler @-@ Benz provided a truck to transport them . Chiron 's car was painted blue with a white stripe , and Caracciola 's white with a blue stripe . The new team 's first race was at the Monaco Grand Prix . On the second day of practice for the race , while Caracciola was showing Chiron around the circuit ( it was Chiron 's first time in an Alfa Romeo ) , the German lost control heading into the Tabac corner . Three of the four brakes failed , which destabilised the car . Faced with diving into the sea or smashing into the wall , Caracciola instinctively chose the latter . Caracciola later recounted what happened after the impact : 
 Only the body of the car was smashed , especially around my seat . Carefully I drew my leg out of the steel trap . <unk> myself against the frame of the body , I slowly extricated myself from the seat ... I tried to hurry out of the car . I wanted to show that nothing had happened to me , that I was absolutely unhurt . I stepped to the ground . At that instant the pain flashed through my leg . It was a ferocious pain , as if my leg were being slashed by hot , glowing knives . I collapsed , Chiron catching me in his arms . 
 Caracciola was carried on a chair to the local tobacco shop , and from there he went to the hospital . He had sustained multiple fractures of his right thigh , and his doctors doubted he would race again . He transferred to a private clinic in Bologna , where his injured leg remained in a plaster cast for six months . Caracciola defied the predictions of his doctors and healed faster than expected , and in the winter Charlotte took her husband back to Arosa , where the altitude and fresh air would aid his recovery . 
 The rise to power of the Nazi Party on 30 January 1933 gave German motor companies , notably Mercedes @-@ Benz and Auto Union , an opportunity to return to motor racing . Having secured promises of funding shortly after the Nazis ' rise to power , both companies spent the better part of 1933 developing their racing projects . Alfred Neubauer , the Mercedes racing manager , travelled to the <unk> ' chalet in Lugano in November with a plan to sign him for the 1934 Grand Prix season if he was fit . Neubauer challenged Caracciola to walk , and although the driver laughed and smiled while he did so Neubauer was not fooled : Caracciola was not yet fit . Nevertheless , he offered him a contract , provided he prove his fitness in testing at the AVUS track early in the next year . Caracciola agreed and went to Stuttgart to sign the contract . The trip wore him out so much he spent much of his time lying on his hotel bed recuperating . 
 Upon his return to Lugano , another tragedy befell him . In February , Charlotte died when the party she was skiing with in the Swiss Alps was hit by an avalanche . Caracciola withdrew almost entirely from public life while he mourned , almost deciding to retire completely from motor racing . A visit from Chiron encouraged him to return to racing , and despite his initial reservations he was persuaded to drive the lap of honour before the 1934 Monaco Grand Prix . Although his leg still ached while he drove , the experience convinced him to return to racing . 
 Caracciola tested the new Mercedes @-@ Benz W25 at the AVUS track in April , and despite his injuries — his right leg had healed five 5 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) shorter than his left , leaving him with a noticeable limp — he was cleared to race . However , Neubauer withdrew the Mercedes team from their first race , also at the AVUS track , as their practice times compared too unfavourably to Auto Union 's . Caracciola was judged not fit to race for the Eifelrennen at the Nürburgring , but made the start for the German Grand Prix at the same track six weeks later . He took the lead from Auto Union driver Hans Stuck on the outside of the Karussel on the 13th lap , but retired a lap later when his engine failed . He had better luck at the 1934 Italian Grand Prix in September . In very hot weather , Caracciola started from fourth and moved to second , where he trailed Stuck . After 59 laps , the pain in his leg overwhelmed him , and he pitted , letting teammate Fagioli take over his car . Fagioli won from Stuck 's car which by then had been taken over by Nuvolari . His best results in the rest of the season were a second place in the Spanish Grand Prix — he led before Fagioli passed him , much to the anger of Neubauer , who had ordered the Italian to hold position — and first at the Klausenpass hillclimb . 
 = = 1935 – 1936 : First Championship and rivalry with Rosemeyer = = 
 Caracciola took the first of his three European Drivers ' Championships in 1935 . Five Grands Prix — the Belgian , German , Swiss , Italian and Spanish — would be included for Championship consideration . He opened the Championship season with a win in Belgium , ahead of Fagioli and von Brauchitsch , who shared the other Mercedes @-@ Benz W25 . Nuvolari won a surprise victory at the Nürburgring in his Alfa Romeo P3 , ahead of Stuck and Caracciola . The Swiss Grand Prix was held at the Bremgarten Circuit in Bern , and Caracciola won from Fagioli and the new Auto Union star Bernd Rosemeyer . Caracciola won the Spanish Grand Prix from Fagioli and von Brauchitsch ; although his transmission failed at the Italian Grand Prix and he was forced to retire , his three wins allowed him to take the Championship . 
 In the other races of the 1935 season , Caracciola won the Eifelrennen at the Nürburgring and finished second at the <unk> Rhin Grand Prix in Barcelona . He also won the Tripoli Grand Prix , organised by the Libyan Governor @-@ General Italo Balbo . The Grand Prix was held in the desert , around a salt lake , and because of the intense heat Neubauer was concerned that the tyres on the Mercedes @-@ Benz cars would not last . Caracciola started poorly , but moved to third , after four pit stops to change tyres , by lap 30 of 40 . He inherited the lead from Nuvolari and Varzi when the two Italians pitted , and held it to the finish , despite a late charge from Varzi . Caracciola later wrote that this was the race where he began to feel he had recovered from his crash in Monaco two years before , and he was now back among the contenders . 
 Remaining in such a position would require Mercedes @-@ Benz to produce a competitive car for the 1936 season . Although the chassis of the W25 was shortened , and the engine was significantly upgraded to 4 @.@ 74 litres , the car proved inferior to the Type C developed by Auto Union . Mercedes had not improved the chassis to match the engine , and the W25 proved uncompetitive and unreliable . Despite this , Caracciola opened the season with a win in the rain at the Monaco Grand Prix , after starting from third position . He led the Hungarian Grand Prix early but retired with mechanical problems . At the German Grand Prix , he retired with a failed fuel pump , before taking over his teammate Hermann Lang 's car ; he later retired that car with supercharger problems . Caracciola led the Swiss Grand Prix for several laps , Rosemeyer trailing him closely , but the Clerk of the Course ordered Caracciola to cede the lead to Rosemeyer on the ninth lap after he was found to be blocking the Auto Union . The two had a heated argument after the race despite Caracciola 's later retirement with a rear axle problem . Mercedes were so uncompetitive in 1936 — Caracciola won only twice , in Monaco and Tunis — that Neubauer withdrew the team mid @-@ season , leaving Rosemeyer to take the Championship for Auto Union . 
 = = 1937 : Second Championship = = 
 Mercedes @-@ Benz returned to Grand Prix racing at the start of the 1937 season with a new car . The W125 was a vast improvement on its predecessor , its supercharged eight cylinder 5 @.@ 6 @-@ litre engine delivered significantly more power than the W25 : 650 brake horsepower compared to 500 . The first major race of 1937 was the Avusrennen where 300 @,@ 000 people turned out to see the cars race on the newly re @-@ constructed track . In order to keep speeds consistently high , the north curve was turned into a steeply banked turn , apparently at the suggestion of Adolf Hitler . Driving a streamlined Mercedes @-@ Benz , Caracciola won his heat against Rosemeyer , averaging around 250 kilometres per hour ( 160 mph ) , although a transmission failure forced him to retire in the final . Following the AVUS race , Caracciola , along with Rosemeyer , Nuvolari and Mercedes ' new driver , Richard Seaman , went to race in the revived Vanderbilt Cup in America , and in doing so missed the Belgian Grand Prix , which took place six days later . Caracciola led until lap 22 , when he retired with a broken supercharger . 
 Caracciola started from the second row of the grid at the German Grand Prix , but was into the lead soon after the start . There he remained to the finish , in front of von Brauchitsch and Rosemeyer . He took pole position at the Monaco Grand Prix three weeks later , and was soon engaged in a hard fight with von Brauchitsch . The Mercedes @-@ Benz drivers took the lead from each other several times , but von Brauchitsch won after a screw fell into Caracciola 's induction system during a pit stop , costing him three and a half minutes . Caracciola won his second race of the season at the Swiss Grand Prix . Despite heavy rain which made the Bremgarten Circuit slippery and hazardous , Caracciola set a new lap record , at an average speed of 169 kilometres per hour ( 105 mph ) , and cemented his reputation as the Regenmeister . 
 For the first time , the Italian Grand Prix was held at the Livorno Circuit rather than the traditional venue of Monza . Caracciola took pole position , and despite two false starts caused by spectators pouring onto the track , held his lead for the majority of the race and won from his teammate Lang by just 0 @.@ 4 seconds . In doing so Caracciola clinched the European Championship for the second time . He backed up the win with another at the Masaryk Grand Prix two weeks later . He trailed Rosemeyer for much of the race until the Auto Union skidded against a kerb and allowed the Mercedes into the lead . 
 Caracciola married for the second time in 1937 , to Alice Hoffman @-@ <unk> , who worked as a timekeeper for Mercedes @-@ Benz . He had met her in 1932 , when she was having an affair with Chiron . She was , at that time , married to Alfred Hoffman @-@ <unk> , a Swiss businessman and heir to a pharmaceutical empire . She had taken care of Caracciola after Charlotte died , and shortly after began an affair with him , unbeknownst to Chiron . They were married in June in Lugano , just before the trip to America . 
 = = 1938 : Speed records and third Championship = = 
 On 28 January 1938 Caracciola and the Mercedes @-@ Benz record team appeared on the Reichs @-@ Autobahn A5 between Frankfurt and Darmstadt , in an attempt to break numerous speed records set by the Auto Union team . The system of speed records at the time used classes based on engine capacity , allowing modified Grand Prix cars , in this case a W125 , to be used to break records . Caracciola had broken previous records — he reached 311 @.@ 985 kilometres per hour ( 193 @.@ 858 mph ) in 1935 — but these had been superseded by Auto Union drivers , first Stuck and then Rosemeyer . Driving a Mercedes @-@ Benz W125 <unk> , essentially a W125 with streamlined bodywork and a larger engine , Caracciola set a new average speed of 432 @.@ 7 kilometres per hour ( 268 @.@ 9 mph ) for the flying kilometre and 432 @.@ 4 kilometres per hour ( 268 @.@ 7 mph ) for the flying mile , speeds which remain to this day as some of the fastest ever achieved on public roads . The day ended in tragedy however ; Rosemeyer set off in his Auto Union in an attempt to break Caracciola 's new records , but his car was struck by a violent gust of wind while he was travelling at around 400 kilometres per hour ( 250 mph ) , hurling the car off the road , where it rolled twice , killing its driver . Rosemeyer 's death had a profound effect on Caracciola , as he later wrote : 
 What was the sense in men chasing each other to death for the sake of a few seconds ? To serve progress ? To serve mankind ? What a ridiculous phrase in the face of the great reality of death . But then — why ? Why ? And for the first time , at that moment , I felt that every life is lived according to its own laws . And that the law for a fighter is : to burn oneself up to the last fibre , no matter what happens to the ashes . 
 The Grand Prix formula was changed again in 1938 , abandoning the previous system of weight restrictions and instead limiting piston displacement . Mercedes @-@ Benz ' new car , the <unk> , proved its abilities at the French Grand Prix , where von Brauchitsch won ahead of Caracciola and Lang to make it a Mercedes 1 – 2 – 3 . Caracciola won two races in the 1938 season : the Swiss Grand Prix and the Coppa <unk> ; finished second in three : the French , German and Pau Grands Prix ; and third in two : the Tripoli and Italian Grands Prix , to take the European Championship for the third and final time . The highlight of Caracciola 's season was his win in the pouring rain at the Swiss Grand Prix . His teammate Seaman led for the first 11 laps before Caracciola passed him ; he remained in the lead for the rest of the race , despite losing the visor on his helmet , severely reducing visibility , especially given the spray thrown up by tyres of the many lapped cars . 
 = = 1939 : Claims of favouritism towards Lang = = 
 The 1939 season took place under the looming shadow of the coming Second World War , and the schedule was only halted with the Invasion of Poland in September . The Championship season began with the Belgian Grand Prix in June . In heavy rain , Caracciola spun at La Source , got out and pushed his car off into the safety of the trees . Later in the race , Seaman left the track at the same corner , his car bursting into flames upon impact with the trees , where he was burnt alive in the cockpit . He died that night in hospital , after briefly regaining consciousness . The entire Mercedes team travelled to London for his burial . In the rest of the season , Caracciola won the German Grand Prix for the sixth and final time , again in the rain , after starting third on the grid . He finished second behind Lang at the Swiss and Tripoli Grands Prix . The latter race was seen as a major win for Mercedes @-@ Benz . In an effort to halt German dominance at the event , the Italian organisers decided to limit engine sizes to 1 @.@ 5 litres ( the German teams at the time ran 3 @-@ litre engines ) , and announce the change at the last moment . The change was , however , leaked to Mercedes @-@ Benz well in advance , and in just eight months the firm developed and built two W165s under the new restrictions ; both of them beat the combined might of 28 Italian cars , much to the disappointment of the organisers . Caracciola believed that the Mercedes @-@ Benz team were favouring Lang during the 1939 season ; in a letter sent to Mercedes ' brand owner Daimler @-@ Benz CEO Dr. Wilhelm Kissel , he wrote : 
 I see little chance of the situation changing at all . Starting with Herr Sailer [ Max Sailer , then the head of the Mercedes racing division ] through Neubauer , down to the mechanics , there is an obsession with Lang . Herr Neubauer admitted frankly to Herr von Brauchitsch that he was standing by the man who has good luck , and whom the sun shines on ... I really enjoy racing and want to go on driving for a long time . However , this presupposes that I fight with the same weapons as my stablemates . Yet this will be hardly possible in the future , as almost all the mechanics and engine specialists in the racing division are on Lang 's side ... 
 Despite Caracciola 's protests , Lang was declared the 1939 European Champion by the NSKK ( <unk> <unk> , or National Socialist Motor Corps ) — although this was never ratified by the AIACR , and Auto Union driver Hermann Paul Müller may have a valid claim to the title under the official scoring system — and motor racing was put on hold upon the outbreak of war . 
 = = War , comeback and later years = = 
 Caracciola and his wife Alice returned to their home in Lugano . For the duration of the war he was unable to drive ; the rationing of petrol meant motor racing was unfeasible . The pain in his leg grew worse , and they went back to the clinic in Bologna to consult a specialist . Surgery was recommended , but Caracciola decided against that option , deterred by the minimum three months it would take to recover from the operation . He spent much of the last part of the war — from 1941 onwards — attempting to gain possession of the two W165s used at the 1939 Tripoli Grand Prix , with a view to maintaining them for the duration of the hostilities . When they finally arrived in Switzerland in early 1945 , they were confiscated as German property by the Swiss authorities . 
 He was invited to participate in the 1946 Indianapolis 500 , and originally intended to drive one of the W165s , but was unable to have them released in time . Nevertheless , he headed to America to watch the race . Joe Thorne , a local team owner , offered him one of his Thorne Engineering Specials to drive , but during a practice session before the race Caracciola was hit on the head by an object , believed to be a bird , and crashed into the south wall . His life was saved by a tank driver 's helmet the organisers insisted he wear , in spite of which he suffered a severe concussion and was in a coma for several days . 
 Caracciola returned to racing in 1952 , when he was recalled to the Mercedes @-@ Benz factory team to drive the new Mercedes @-@ Benz <unk> in sports car races . The first major race with the car was the Mille Miglia , alongside Karl Kling and his old teammate Hermann Lang . Kling finished second in the race , Caracciola fourth . It later emerged that Caracciola had been given a car with an inferior engine to his teammates , perhaps because of a lack of time to prepare for the race . Caracciola 's career ended with his third major crash ; during a support race for the 1952 Swiss Grand Prix , the brakes on his <unk> locked and he skidded into a tree , fracturing his left leg . 
 After his retirement from racing , he continued to work for Daimler @-@ Benz as a salesman , targeting NATO troops stationed in Europe . He organised shows and demonstrations which toured military bases , leading in part to an increase in Mercedes @-@ Benz sales during that period . In early 1959 , he became sick and developed signs of jaundice , which worsened despite treatment . Later in the year he was diagnosed with advanced cirrhosis . On 28 September 1959 , in Kassel , Germany , he suffered liver failure and died , aged 58 . He was buried in his home town of Lugano . 
 = = Nazi connections = = 
 Caracciola first met Adolf Hitler , the leader of the Nazi Party , in 1931 . Hitler had ordered a Mercedes @-@ Benz 770 , at that point Mercedes ' most expensive car , but due to the amount of time spent upgrading the car in line with the Nazi leader 's wishes , the delivery was late . To mollify Hitler 's anger , Caracciola was dispatched by Mercedes to deliver the car to the Brown House in Munich . Caracciola drove Hitler and his niece Geli Raubal around Munich to demonstrate the car . He later wrote ( after the fall of the Nazi Party ) that he was not particularly awed by Hitler : " I could not imagine that this man would have the requirements for taking over the government someday . " 
 Like most German racing drivers in Nazi Germany , Caracciola was a member of the NSKK , a paramilitary organisation of the Nazi Party devoted to motor racing and motor cars ; during the Second World War it handled transport and supply . In reports on races by German media Caracciola was referred to as NSKK @-@ Staffelführer Caracciola , the equivalent of a Squadron Leader . After races in Germany the drivers took part in presentations to the crowd coordinated by NSKK leader Adolf <unk> and attended by senior Nazis . Although he wrote after the fall of the Nazi regime that he found such presentations dull and uninspiring , Caracciola occasionally used his position as a famous racing driver to publicly support the Nazi regime ; for example , in 1938 , while supporting the Nazi platform at the Reichstag elections , he said , " [ t ] he unique successes of these new racing cars in the past four years are a victorious symbol of our Führer 's ( Hitler 's ) achievement in rebuilding the nation . " 
 Despite this , when Caracciola socialised with the upper Nazi echelons he did so merely as an " accessory " , not as an active member , and at no time was he a member of the Nazi Party . According to his autobiography , he turned down a request from the NSKK in 1942 to entertain German troops , as he " could not find it in myself to cheer up young men so that they would believe in a victory I myself could not believe in " . Caracciola lived in Switzerland from the early 1930s , and despite strict currency controls , his salary was paid in Swiss francs . During the war , he continued to receive a pension from Daimler @-@ Benz , until the firm ceased his payments under pressure from the Nazi party in 1942 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Caracciola is remembered — along with Nuvolari and Rosemeyer — as one of the greatest pre @-@ 1939 Grand Prix drivers . He has a reputation of a perfectionist , who very rarely had accidents or caused mechanical failures in his cars , who could deliver when needed regardless of the conditions . His relationship with Mercedes racing manager Alfred Neubauer , one of mutual respect , is often cited as a contributing factor to his success . After Caracciola 's death , Neubauer described him as : 
 ... the greatest driver of the twenties and thirties , perhaps even of all time . He combined , to an extraordinary extent , determination with concentration , physical strength with intelligence . Caracciola was second to none in his ability to triumph over shortcomings . 
 His trophy collection was donated to the Indianapolis Hall of Fame Museum , and he was inducted into the International Motorsports Hall of Fame in 1998 . In 2001 , on the 100th anniversary of his birth , a monument to Caracciola was erected in his birth town of Remagen , and on the 50th anniversary of his death in 2009 Caracciola Square was dedicated off of the town 's <unk> . Karussel corner at the Nürburgring was renamed after him , officially becoming the Caracciola Karussel . As of 2014 , Caracciola 's record of six German Grand Prix victories remains unbeaten . 
 During the inaugural official meeting of the 200 Mile Per Hour Club on 2 September 1953 , Caracciola was inducted as one of the original three foreigners who met the club 's requirements of achieving an average of over 200 mph over two runs for his past achievements prior to the club 's foundation . 
 = = Complete European Championship results = = 
 = Ex parte Crow Dog = 
 Ex parte Crow Dog , 109 U.S. 556 ( 1883 ) , is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that followed the death of one member of a Native American tribe at the hands of another on reservation land . Crow Dog was a member of the Brulé band of the Lakota Sioux . On August 5 , 1881 he shot and killed Spotted Tail , a Lakota chief ; there are different accounts of the background to the killing . The tribal council dealt with the incident according to Sioux tradition , and Crow Dog paid restitution to the dead man 's family . However , the U.S. authorities then prosecuted Crow Dog for murder in a federal court . He was found guilty and sentenced to hang . The Supreme Court held that unless authorized by Congress , federal courts had no jurisdiction to try cases where the offense had already been tried by the tribal council . Crow Dog was therefore released . This case was the first time in history that an Indian was held on trial for the murder of another Indian . The case led to the Major Crimes Act in 1885 , which placed some major crimes ( initially seven , now 15 ) under federal jurisdiction if committed by an Indian against another Indian on a reservation or tribal land . This case was the beginning of the plenary power legal doctrine that has been used in Indian case law to limit tribal sovereignty . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Treaties and statutes = = = 
 Crow Dog was a Brulé <unk> who lived on the Great Sioux Reservation , in the part that is now the Rosebud Indian Reservation in south @-@ central South Dakota on its border with Nebraska . The tribe had made several treaties with the United States , the most significant being the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie . This treaty provided that Indians agreed to turn over those accused of crimes to the Indian agent , a representative of the U.S. government in Indian affairs . The treaty also stipulated that tribal members would stay on the reservation provided ( which included the Black Hills ) unless three @-@ fourths of the adult male tribal members agreed otherwise . In 1874 , Colonel George Armstrong Custer led a party into the Black Hills to investigate rumors of gold . Once he announced the discovery of gold on French Creek , the Black Hills Gold Rush brought prospectors into that area in violation of the Fort Laramie treaty . The Lakota protested in 1875 to no avail , as the United States demanded that the Lakota sell the Black Hills . The United States then declared the Lakota as hostile , which started the Black Hills War . The war included the Battle of the Rosebud , the Battle of the Little Bighorn and the Battle of Slim Buttes , among others . The war ended in 1877 . Crow Dog fought in this war , while the man he later killed , Spotted Tail , did not . Congress passed a law later in 1877 ( 19 Stat . 176 ) that took the Black Hills away from the tribe , contrary to the language of the treaty . 
 = = = Murder of Spotted Tail = = = 
 On August 5 , 1881 Crow Dog shot and killed Spotted Tail , who was the uncle of Oglala Lakota war leader Crazy Horse . Spotted Tail had not been selected as a chief by the tribe , but instead had been appointed by General George Crook in 1876 , which hurt him in the view of many of the tribe . He was viewed as an accommodationist and the Bureau of Indian Affairs ( BIA ) referred to him as the " great peace chief . " He also supervised the tribal police of about 300 men . In contrast , Crow Dog was a traditionalist and although he had been a captain in the tribal police , he was fired by Spotted Tail sometime after a July 4 , 1881 , confrontation during which Crow Dog pointed a rifle at Spotted Tail . 
 On August 5 , tensions further escalated at a tribal meeting where a number of tribal members criticized Spotted Tail for taking Light @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Lodge , the wife of Medicine Bear , a crippled man , into his household as his second wife . It was believed that the killing occurred that day as the result of Crow Dog and Spotted Tail meeting , both armed , and mistaking the other man 's intentions . In another version of the story , Crow Dog was appointed by the tribal council to head the tribal police , which undermined the authority of Spotted Tail . Crow Dog discovered that Spotted Tail was taking money from ranchers for " grazing rights " and he denounced him for it , while Spotted Tail defended the practice . A later conflict with the Indian agent forced the tribal police to disband , and Crow Dog lost his position . This version makes no mention of another man 's wife being the reason for the killing , and states that Crow Dog ambushed Spotted Tail to gain power in the tribe . There is no consensus among historians as to which events happened as described . 
 In either case , the matter was settled within the tribe , following longstanding tribal custom , by Crow Dog making a restitution payment of $ 600 , eight horses , and one blanket to Spotted Tail 's family . 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 Following the killing and the settlement under tribal customs , the Indian agent had Crow Dog arrested and taken to Fort Niobrara , Nebraska . Within 20 days , the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of the Interior concluded that the Federal Enclave Act of 1854 as modified by the Assimilative Crimes Act allowed the territorial death penalty to be applied to Crow Dog . In September 1881 , Crow Dog was indicted by a federal grand jury for murder and manslaughter under the laws of the Dakota Territory . In March 1882 the case was heard by Judge Gideon C. Moody at the First Judicial District Court of Dakota , located in Deadwood , South Dakota . The court appointed A. J. Plowman to represent Crow Dog , who claimed that he had been punished and made reparations according to the customs of the Brulé Sioux tribe . According to a contemporary news report of the Deadwood Times it was the first time " in the history of the country , [ that ] an Indian is held for trial for the murder of another Indian . " The trial was viewed at the time as a sham , and despite testimonies from Indian witnesses stating that Spotted Tail had killed a rival once before , that Spotted Tail drew a pistol on Crow Dog , and that Spotted Tail 's intention was to kill Crow Dog , Crow Dog was convicted and sentenced to be hanged on May 11 , 1882 . The prosecution had presented five Indian witnesses who stated that Spotted Tail was ambushed , and some witnesses stated he was unarmed . In an unusual move for a death penalty case , Moody released Crow Dog , allowing him to go home pending his appeal to the territorial Supreme Court . Surprising many of the white citizens of the area , Crow Dog returned to court as required . In May 1882 , the territorial Supreme Court affirmed the conviction , and the execution was rescheduled for May 11 , 1883 . Crow Dog then petitioned the United States Supreme Court for a writ of habeas corpus and the Supreme Court accepted the case . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 Justice Stanley Matthews delivered the opinion of the unanimous court . Matthews noted that Crow Dog was indicted for murder under a statute prohibiting murder on federal land . Matthews then looked at the federal laws dealing with Indians , including a statute that applied the prohibition on murder to Indian reservations and another covering exceptions to prosecution . The first statute prohibited murder on federal land , the second statute applied the first statute to reservations , and the last had specific exceptions to prosecution . Matthews felt that this last section was the most critical one in the case , with the section stating unequivocally that federal law : " shall not be construed to extend to [ crimes committed by one Indian against the person or property of another Indian , nor to ] any Indian committing any offense in the Indian country who has been punished by the local law of the tribe " ( brackets in original ) . Matthews rejected the contention of the United States that the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie implicitly repealed the exceptions to prosecution . He stated that since the law had not been amended or changed , and since implied repeals are not favored unless the implication is necessary , to allow such a repeal would be to reverse the general policy of the United States . Matthews said that such a repeal required a " clear expression of the intention of Congress , " which was not present in the case . In a clear evocation of the principle of tribal sovereignty , Matthews stated : 
 " It tries them , not by their peers , nor by the customs of their people , nor the law of their land , but by superiors of a different race , according to the law of a social state of which they have an imperfect conception , and which is opposed to the traditions of their history , to the habits of their lives , to the strongest prejudices of their savage nature ; one which measures the red man 's revenge by the maxims of the white man 's morality . " 
 As a result , the Court concluded , the First Judicial District Court of Dakota was without jurisdiction to hear the case . The writ of habeas corpus was issued , discharging Crow Dog from federal custody . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 = = = Major Crimes Act of 1885 = = = 
 Shocked by the Supreme Court 's decision and under strong pressure from the BIA , Congress passed the Major Crimes Act in response . The Major Crimes Act placed seven serious felony offenses ( with amendments over the years , now fifteen ) under the jurisdiction of the federal government . Those wishing to assimilate Indians into mainstream white society wanted to do away with the " heathen " tribal laws and apply white laws to the tribes . The BIA had also been attempting since 1874 to extend federal jurisdiction over major crimes to reservations , without any success . Beginning in 1882 , the Indian Rights Association ( IRA ) also tried to extend federal jurisdiction , but in a different manner . The IRA believed that the tribes would be better served by a completely separate court system , modeled after U.S. courts and called agency courts . The only appeal would be to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs . The BIA opposed that approach , preferring to try only major crimes in the nearest federal court . Ex parte Crow Dog provided the BIA a perfect example of why this was needed , along with an incident involving Spotted Tail 's son , Spotted Tail , Jr . , in which the younger Spotted Tail participated in a fight during which three Brulé were killed . The younger Spotted Tail was also confined pending murder charges , and it took a direct order of the Secretary of the Interior for the local BIA agents to comply with the Supreme Court decision before he was released . The BIA also implemented regulations in 1883 criminalizing traditional tribal practices such as war dances and polygamy . Between the BIA 's efforts and the IRA efforts , the law was passed in 1885 , making seven offenses federal crimes . Many members of the Indian tribes were bitter with this outcome for decades afterwards . Wayne <unk> , president of the National Congress of American Indians , testified before Congress on the matter in 1968 : 
 " Before all this came about we had our own method of dealing with law @-@ breakers and in settling disputes between members . That all changed when Crow Dog killed Spotted Tail . Of course , our method of dealing with that was Crow Dog should go take care of Spotted Tail 's family , and if he didn 't do that we 'd banish him from the tribe . But that was considered too barbaric , and thought perhaps we should hang him like civilized people do , so they passed the Major Crimes Act that said we don 't know how to handle murderers and they were going to show us . " 
 In 2000 , Larry Echo Hawk , a Pawnee who had been the Attorney General of Idaho and was later the Assistant Secretary of the Interior for Indian Affairs , noted that : " The Major Crimes Act was designed to give the federal government authority to criminally prosecute seven specific major crimes committed by Indians in Indian Country . It was a direct assault on the sovereign authority of tribal government over tribal members . " 
 = = = Tribal sovereignty = = = 
 Crow Dog had a tremendous impact on tribal sovereignty . The decision recognized two distinct concepts in addition to those related to criminal law . First , Justice Matthews had noted that under Cherokee Nation v. Georgia , ( 1831 ) the Brulé tribe had a right to its own law in Indian country . Part of this ruling was based on American constitutional tradition – at that time , Indians were not U.S. citizens and according to Matthews did not have a " voice in the selection of representatives and the framing of the laws . " The case held that Indian tribes retain sovereignty , and is still valid law . For example , United States v. Lara , ( 2004 ) cited Crow Dog when holding that both a tribe and the federal government could prosecute Lara , as they were separate sovereigns . Subsequent cases have supported the concept " that tribal Indians living in Indian country are citizens of the United States first ( under the plenary power doctrine ) , the tribes second , and the states third , and then only to the extent that Congress chooses . " 
 Currently the tribes are authorized to operate their own courts , not as a right of tribal sovereignty , but under a federal law . As of 2007 , about half of the federally recognized tribes have tribal courts . The power of these courts was limited to minor crimes with a maximum punishment of a $ 5 @,@ 000 fine and imprisonment of no more than one year until the passage of the Tribal Law and Order Act of 2010 . Under this new act , tribes may sentence offenders for up to three years per offense and a $ 15 @,@ 000 fine . As a result of Crow Dog and ensuing legislation , jurisdiction in Indian country is complex , as shown by the following table : 
 = = = Plenary power doctrine = = = 
 The court also created the plenary power doctrine , holding that the federal court did not have jurisdiction because Congress had not passed a law giving jurisdiction to the federal courts or taking away the rights of the tribe . Crow Dog was the last in a line of sovereignty cases that began with Cherokee Nation ; the next major case , United States v. Kagama , ( 1886 ) , upheld the plenary power of Congress to enact the Major Crimes Act . The plenary power doctrine allowed Congress to enact any law that it wanted to pass , over the opposition of the tribe or tribes affected . Congress subsequently used this power to breach the Medicine Lodge Treaty with the Kiowa by reducing the size of the Kiowa reservation without their consent . The use of this power led to complaints of being subject to a lawmaking body without representation , especially prior to being granted U.S. citizenship in 1924 . 
 = Gas metal arc welding = 
 Gas metal arc welding ( GMAW ) , sometimes referred to by its subtypes metal inert gas ( MIG ) welding or metal active gas ( MAG ) welding , is a welding process in which an electric arc forms between a consumable wire electrode and the workpiece metal ( s ) , which heats the workpiece metal ( s ) , causing them to melt and join . 
 Along with the wire electrode , a shielding gas feeds through the welding gun , which shields the process from contaminants in the air . The process can be semi @-@ automatic or automatic . A constant voltage , direct current power source is most commonly used with GMAW , but constant current systems , as well as alternating current , can be used . There are four primary methods of metal transfer in GMAW , called globular , short @-@ circuiting , spray , and pulsed @-@ spray , each of which has distinct properties and corresponding advantages and limitations . 
 Originally developed for welding aluminium and other non @-@ ferrous materials in the 1940s , GMAW was soon applied to steels because it provided faster welding time compared to other welding processes . The cost of inert gas limited its use in steels until several years later , when the use of semi @-@ inert gases such as carbon dioxide became common . Further developments during the 1950s and 1960s gave the process more versatility and as a result , it became a highly used industrial process . Today , GMAW is the most common industrial welding process , preferred for its versatility , speed and the relative ease of adapting the process to robotic automation . Unlike welding processes that do not employ a shielding gas , such as shielded metal arc welding , it is rarely used outdoors or in other areas of air volatility . A related process , flux cored arc welding , often does not use a shielding gas , but instead employs an electrode wire that is hollow and filled with flux . 
 = = Development = = 
 The principles of gas metal arc welding began to be understood in the early 19th century , after Humphry Davy discovered the short pulsed electric arcs in 1800 . Vasily Petrov independently produced the continuous electric arc in 1802 ( followed by Davy after 1808 ) . It was not until the 1880s that the technology became developed with the aim of industrial usage . At first , carbon electrodes were used in carbon arc welding . By 1890 , metal electrodes had been invented by Nikolay Slavyanov and C. L. Coffin . In 1920 , an early predecessor of GMAW was invented by P. O. Nobel of General Electric . It used a bare electrode wire and direct current , and used arc voltage to regulate the feed rate . It did not use a shielding gas to protect the weld , as developments in welding atmospheres did not take place until later that decade . In 1926 another forerunner of GMAW was released , but it was not suitable for practical use . 
 In 1948 , GMAW was developed by the Battelle Memorial Institute . It used a smaller diameter electrode and a constant voltage power source developed by H. E. Kennedy . It offered a high deposition rate , but the high cost of inert gases limited its use to non @-@ ferrous materials and prevented cost savings . In 1953 , the use of carbon dioxide as a welding atmosphere was developed , and it quickly gained popularity in GMAW , since it made welding steel more economical . In 1958 and 1959 , the short @-@ arc variation of GMAW was released , which increased welding versatility and made the welding of thin materials possible while relying on smaller electrode wires and more advanced power supplies . It quickly became the most popular GMAW variation . 
 The spray @-@ arc transfer variation was developed in the early 1960s , when experimenters added small amounts of oxygen to inert gases . More recently , pulsed current has been applied , giving rise to a new method called the pulsed spray @-@ arc variation . 
 GMAW is one of the most popular welding methods , especially in industrial environments . It is used extensively by the sheet metal industry and , by extension , the automobile industry . There , the method is often used for arc spot welding , thereby replacing riveting or resistance spot welding . It is also popular for automated welding , in which robots handle the workpieces and the welding gun to speed up the manufacturing process . GMAW can be difficult to perform well outdoors , since drafts can dissipate the shielding gas and allow contaminants into the weld ; flux cored arc welding is better suited for outdoor use such as in construction . Likewise , GMAW 's use of a shielding gas does not lend itself to underwater welding , which is more commonly performed via shielded metal arc welding , flux cored arc welding , or gas tungsten arc welding . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 To perform gas metal arc welding , the basic necessary equipment is a welding gun , a wire feed unit , a welding power supply , a welding electrode wire , and a shielding gas supply . 
 = = = Welding gun and wire feed unit = = = 
 The typical GMAW welding gun has a number of key parts — a control switch , a contact tip , a power cable , a gas nozzle , an electrode conduit and liner , and a gas hose . The control switch , or trigger , when pressed by the operator , initiates the wire feed , electric power , and the shielding gas flow , causing an electric arc to be struck . The contact tip , normally made of copper and sometimes chemically treated to reduce spatter , is connected to the welding power source through the power cable and transmits the electrical energy to the electrode while directing it to the weld area . It must be firmly secured and properly sized , since it must allow the electrode to pass while maintaining electrical contact . On the way to the contact tip , the wire is protected and guided by the electrode conduit and liner , which help prevent buckling and maintain an uninterrupted wire feed . The gas nozzle directs the shielding gas evenly into the welding zone . Inconsistent flow may not adequately protect the weld area . Larger nozzles provide greater shielding gas flow , which is useful for high current welding operations that develop a larger molten weld pool . A gas hose from the tanks of shielding gas supplies the gas to the nozzle . Sometimes , a water hose is also built into the welding gun , cooling the gun in high heat operations . 
 The wire feed unit supplies the electrode to the work , driving it through the conduit and on to the contact tip . Most models provide the wire at a constant feed rate , but more advanced machines can vary the feed rate in response to the arc length and voltage . Some wire feeders can reach feed rates as high as 30 @.@ 5 m / min ( 1200 in / min ) , but feed rates for semiautomatic GMAW typically range from 2 to 10 m / min ( 75 – 400 in / min ) . 
 = = = Tool style = = = 
 The most common electrode holder is a semiautomatic air @-@ cooled holder . Compressed air circulates through it to maintain moderate temperatures . It is used with lower current levels for welding lap or butt joints . The second most common type of electrode holder is semiautomatic water @-@ cooled , where the only difference is that water takes the place of air . It uses higher current levels for welding T or corner joints . The third typical holder type is a water cooled automatic electrode holder — which is typically used with automated equipment . 
 = = = Power supply = = = 
 Most applications of gas metal arc welding use a constant voltage power supply . As a result , any change in arc length ( which is directly related to voltage ) results in a large change in heat input and current . A shorter arc length causes a much greater heat input , which makes the wire electrode melt more quickly and thereby restore the original arc length . This helps operators keep the arc length consistent even when manually welding with hand @-@ held welding guns . To achieve a similar effect , sometimes a constant current power source is used in combination with an arc voltage @-@ controlled wire feed unit . In this case , a change in arc length makes the wire feed rate adjust to maintain a relatively constant arc length . In rare circumstances , a constant current power source and a constant wire feed rate unit might be coupled , especially for the welding of metals with high thermal conductivities , such as aluminum . This grants the operator additional control over the heat input into the weld , but requires significant skill to perform successfully . 
 Alternating current is rarely used with GMAW ; instead , direct current is employed and the electrode is generally positively charged . Since the anode tends to have a greater heat concentration , this results in faster melting of the feed wire , which increases weld penetration and welding speed . The polarity can be reversed only when special <unk> @-@ coated electrode wires are used , but since these are not popular , a negatively charged electrode is rarely employed . 
 = = = Electrode = = = 
 Electrode selection is based primarily on the composition of the metal being welded , the process variation being used , joint design and the material surface conditions . Electrode selection greatly influences the mechanical properties of the weld and is a key factor of weld quality . In general the finished weld metal should have mechanical properties similar to those of the base material with no defects such as discontinuities , entrained contaminants or porosity within the weld . To achieve these goals a wide variety of electrodes exist . All commercially available electrodes contain <unk> metals such as silicon , manganese , titanium and aluminum in small percentages to help prevent oxygen porosity . Some contain <unk> metals such as titanium and zirconium to avoid nitrogen porosity . Depending on the process variation and base material being welded the diameters of the electrodes used in GMAW typically range from 0 @.@ 7 to 2 @.@ 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 028 – 0 @.@ 095 in ) but can be as large as 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 in ) . The smallest electrodes , generally up to 1 @.@ 14 mm ( 0 @.@ 045 in ) are associated with the short @-@ circuiting metal transfer process , while the most common spray @-@ transfer process mode electrodes are usually at least 0 @.@ 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 035 in ) . 
 = = = Shielding gas = = = 
 Shielding gases are necessary for gas metal arc welding to protect the welding area from atmospheric gases such as nitrogen and oxygen , which can cause fusion defects , porosity , and weld metal embrittlement if they come in contact with the electrode , the arc , or the welding metal . This problem is common to all arc welding processes ; for example , in the older Shielded @-@ Metal Arc Welding process ( SMAW ) , the electrode is coated with a solid flux which evolves a protective cloud of carbon dioxide when melted by the arc . In GMAW , however , the electrode wire does not have a flux coating , and a separate shielding gas is employed to protect the weld . This eliminates slag , the hard residue from the flux that builds up after welding and must be chipped off to reveal the completed weld . 
 The choice of a shielding gas depends on several factors , most importantly the type of material being welded and the process variation being used . Pure inert gases such as argon and helium are only used for nonferrous welding ; with steel they do not provide adequate weld penetration ( argon ) or cause an erratic arc and encourage spatter ( with helium ) . Pure carbon dioxide , on the other hand , allows for deep penetration welds but encourages oxide formation , which adversely affect the mechanical properties of the <unk> <unk> low cost makes it an attractive choice , but because of the reactivity of the arc plasma , spatter is unavoidable and welding thin materials is difficult . As a result , argon and carbon dioxide are frequently mixed in a 75 % / 25 % to 90 % / 10 % mixture . Generally , in short circuit GMAW , higher carbon dioxide content increases the weld heat and energy when all other weld parameters ( volts , current , electrode type and diameter ) are held the same . As the carbon dioxide content increases over 20 % , spray transfer GMAW becomes increasingly problematic , especially with smaller electrode diameters . 
 Argon is also commonly mixed with other gases , oxygen , helium , hydrogen and nitrogen . The addition of up to 5 % oxygen ( like the higher concentrations of carbon dioxide mentioned above ) can be helpful in welding stainless steel , however , in most applications carbon dioxide is preferred . Increased oxygen makes the shielding gas oxidize the electrode , which can lead to porosity in the deposit if the electrode does not contain sufficient deoxidizers . Excessive oxygen , especially when used in application for which it is not prescribed , can lead to brittleness in the heat affected zone . Argon @-@ helium mixtures are extremely inert , and can be used on nonferrous materials . A helium concentration of 50 – 75 % raises the required voltage and increases the heat in the arc , due to helium 's higher ionization temperature . Hydrogen is sometimes added to argon in small concentrations ( up to about 5 % ) for welding nickel and thick stainless steel workpieces . In higher concentrations ( up to 25 % hydrogen ) , it may be used for welding conductive materials such as copper . However , it should not be used on steel , aluminum or magnesium because it can cause porosity and hydrogen embrittlement . 
 Shielding gas mixtures of three or more gases are also available . Mixtures of argon , carbon dioxide and oxygen are marketed for welding steels . Other mixtures add a small amount of helium to argon @-@ oxygen combinations , these mixtures are claimed to allow higher arc voltages and welding speed . Helium also sometimes serves as the base gas , with small amounts of argon and carbon dioxide added . However , because it is less dense than air , helium is less effective at shielding the weld than argon — which is denser than air . It also can lead to arc stability and penetration issues , and increased spatter , due to its much more energetic arc plasma . Helium is also substantially more expensive than other shielding gases . Other specialized and often proprietary gas mixtures claim even greater benefits for specific applications . 
 The desirable rate of shielding @-@ gas flow depends primarily on weld geometry , speed , current , the type of gas , and the metal transfer mode . Welding flat surfaces requires higher flow than welding grooved materials , since gas disperses more quickly . Faster welding speeds , in general , mean that more gas must be supplied to provide adequate coverage . Additionally , higher current requires greater flow , and generally , more helium is required to provide adequate coverage than if argon is used . Perhaps most importantly , the four primary variations of GMAW have differing shielding gas flow requirements — for the small weld pools of the short circuiting and pulsed spray modes , about 10 L / min ( 20 ft ³ / h ) is generally suitable , whereas for globular transfer , around 15 L / min ( 30 ft ³ / h ) is preferred . The spray transfer variation normally requires more shielding @-@ gas flow because of its higher heat input and thus larger weld pool . Typical gas @-@ flow amounts are approximately 20 – 25 L / min ( 40 – 50 ft ³ / h ) . 
 = = = = Flux @-@ cored wire @-@ fed = = = = 
 Flux @-@ cored , self @-@ shielding or <unk> wire @-@ fed welding had been developed for simplicity and portability . This avoids the gas system of conventional GMAW and uses a cored wire containing a solid flux . This flux vaporises during welding and produces a plume of shielding gas . Although described as a ' flux ' , this compound has little activity and acts mostly as an inert shield . The wire is of slightly larger diameter than for a comparable gas @-@ shielded weld , to allow room for the flux . The smallest available is 0 @.@ 8 mm diameter , compared to 0 @.@ 6 mm for solid wire . The shield vapor is slightly active , rather than inert , so the process is always <unk> but not MIG ( inert gas shield ) . This limits the process to steel and not aluminium . 
 <unk> the additional flux requires greater heat in the wire , so these <unk> machines operate as DCEP , rather than the DCEN usually used for GMAW to give deeper penetration . DCEP , or DC Electrode Positive , makes the welding wire into the positively @-@ charged anode , which is the hotter side of the arc . Provided that it is switchable from DCEN to DCEP , a gas @-@ shielded wire @-@ feed machine may also be used for flux @-@ cored wire . 
 Flux @-@ cored wire is considered to have some advantages for outdoor welding on @-@ site , as the shielding gas plume is less likely to be blown away in a wind than shield gas from a conventional nozzle . A slight drawback is that , like SMAW ( stick ) welding , there may be some flux deposited over the weld bead , requiring more of a cleaning process between passes . 
 Flux @-@ cored welding machines are most popular at the hobbyist level , as the machines are slightly simpler but mainly because they avoid the cost of providing shield gas , either through a rented cylinder or with the high cost of disposable cylinders . 
 = = Operation = = 
 For most of its applications gas metal arc welding is a fairly simple welding process to learn requiring no more than a week or two to master basic welding technique . Even when welding is performed by well @-@ trained operators weld quality can fluctuate since it depends on a number of external factors . All GMAW is dangerous , though perhaps less so than some other welding methods , such as shielded metal arc welding . 
 = = = Technique = = = 
 The basic technique for GMAW is quite simple , since the electrode is fed automatically through the torch ( head of tip ) . By contrast , in gas tungsten arc welding , the welder must handle a welding torch in one hand and a separate filler wire in the other , and in shielded metal arc welding , the operator must frequently chip off slag and change welding electrodes . GMAW requires only that the operator guide the welding gun with proper position and orientation along the area being welded . Keeping a consistent contact tip @-@ to @-@ work distance ( the stick out distance ) is important , because a long <unk> distance can cause the electrode to overheat and also wastes shielding gas . <unk> distance varies for different GMAW weld processes and applications . The orientation of the gun is also important — it should be held so as to bisect the angle between the workpieces ; that is , at 45 degrees for a fillet weld and 90 degrees for welding a flat surface . The travel angle , or lead angle , is the angle of the torch with respect to the direction of travel , and it should generally remain approximately vertical . However , the desirable angle changes somewhat depending on the type of shielding gas used — with pure inert gases , the bottom of the torch is often slightly in front of the upper section , while the opposite is true when the welding atmosphere is carbon dioxide . 
 = = = Quality = = = 
 Two of the most prevalent quality problems in GMAW are dross and porosity . If not controlled , they can lead to weaker , less ductile welds . <unk> is an especially common problem in aluminium GMAW welds , normally coming from particles of aluminium oxide or aluminum nitride present in the electrode or base materials . Electrodes and workpieces must be brushed with a wire brush or chemically treated to remove oxides on the surface . Any oxygen in contact with the weld pool , whether from the atmosphere or the shielding gas , causes dross as well . As a result , sufficient flow of inert shielding gases is necessary , and welding in volatile air should be avoided . 
 In GMAW the primary cause of porosity is gas entrapment in the weld pool , which occurs when the metal solidifies before the gas escapes . The gas can come from impurities in the shielding gas or on the workpiece , as well as from an excessively long or violent arc . Generally , the amount of gas entrapped is directly related to the cooling rate of the weld pool . Because of its higher thermal conductivity , aluminum welds are especially susceptible to greater cooling rates and thus additional porosity . To reduce it , the workpiece and electrode should be clean , the welding speed diminished and the current set high enough to provide sufficient heat input and stable metal transfer but low enough that the arc remains steady . <unk> can also help reduce the cooling rate in some cases by reducing the temperature gradient between the weld area and the base material . 
 = = = Safety = = = 
 Gas metal arc welding can be dangerous if proper precautions are not taken . Since GMAW employs an electric arc , welders wear protective clothing , including heavy leather gloves and protective long sleeve jackets , to avoid exposure to extreme heat and flames . In addition , the brightness of the electric arc is a source of the condition known as arc eye , an inflammation of the cornea caused by ultraviolet light and , in prolonged exposure , possible burning of the retina in the eye . Conventional welding helmets contain dark face plates to prevent this exposure . Newer helmet designs feature a liquid crystal @-@ type face plate that self @-@ darken upon exposure to high amounts of UV light . Transparent welding curtains , made of a polyvinyl chloride plastic film , are often used to shield nearby workers and bystanders from exposure to the UV light from the electric arc . 
 Welders are also often exposed to dangerous gases and particulate matter . GMAW produces smoke containing particles of various types of oxides , and the size of the particles in question tends to influence the toxicity of the fumes , with smaller particles presenting a greater danger . Additionally , carbon dioxide and ozone gases can prove dangerous if ventilation is inadequate . Furthermore , because the use of compressed gases in GMAW pose an explosion and fire risk , some common precautions include limiting the amount of oxygen in the air and keeping combustible materials away from the workplace . 
 = = Metal transfer modes = = 
 The three transfer modes in GMAW are globular , short @-@ circuiting , and spray . There are a few recognized variations of these three transfer modes including modified short @-@ circuiting and pulsed @-@ spray . 
 = = = Globular = = = 
 GMAW with globular metal transfer is considered the least desirable of the three major GMAW variations , because of its tendency to produce high heat , a poor weld surface , and spatter . The method was originally developed as a cost efficient way to weld steel using GMAW , because this variation uses carbon dioxide , a less expensive shielding gas than argon . Adding to its economic advantage was its high deposition rate , allowing welding speeds of up to 110 mm / s ( 250 in / min ) . As the weld is made , a ball of molten metal from the electrode tends to build up on the end of the electrode , often in irregular shapes with a larger diameter than the electrode itself . When the droplet finally detaches either by gravity or short circuiting , it falls to the workpiece , leaving an uneven surface and often causing spatter . As a result of the large molten droplet , the process is generally limited to flat and horizontal welding positions , requires thicker workpieces , and results in a larger weld pool . 
 = = = Short @-@ circuiting = = = 
 Further developments in welding steel with GMAW led to a variation known as short @-@ circuit transfer ( SCT ) or short @-@ arc GMAW , in which the current is lower than for the globular method . As a result of the lower current , the heat input for the short @-@ arc variation is considerably reduced , making it possible to weld thinner materials while decreasing the amount of distortion and residual stress in the weld area . As in globular welding , molten droplets form on the tip of the electrode , but instead of dropping to the weld pool , they bridge the gap between the electrode and the weld pool as a result of the lower wire feed rate . This causes a short circuit and extinguishes the arc , but it is quickly reignited after the surface tension of the weld pool pulls the molten metal bead off the electrode tip . This process is repeated about 100 times per second , making the arc appear constant to the human eye . This type of metal transfer provides better weld quality and less spatter than the globular variation , and allows for welding in all positions , albeit with slower deposition of weld material . Setting the weld process parameters ( volts , amps and wire feed rate ) within a relatively narrow band is critical to maintaining a stable arc : generally between 100 and 200 amperes at 17 to 22 volts for most applications . Also , using short @-@ arc transfer can result in lack of fusion and insufficient penetration when welding thicker materials , due to the lower arc energy and rapidly freezing weld pool . Like the globular variation , it can only be used on ferrous metals . 
 = = = Spray = = = 
 Spray transfer GMAW was the first metal transfer method used in GMAW , and well @-@ suited to welding aluminium and stainless steel while employing an inert shielding gas . In this GMAW process , the weld electrode metal is rapidly passed along the stable electric arc from the electrode to the workpiece , essentially eliminating spatter and resulting in a high @-@ quality weld finish . As the current and voltage increases beyond the range of short circuit transfer the weld electrode metal transfer transitions from larger globules through small droplets to a vaporized stream at the highest energies . Since this vaporized spray transfer variation of the GMAW weld process requires higher voltage and current than short circuit transfer , and as a result of the higher heat input and larger weld pool area ( for a given weld electrode diameter ) , it is generally used only on workpieces of thicknesses above about 6 @.@ 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 25 in ) . 
 Also , because of the large weld pool , it is often limited to flat and horizontal welding positions and sometimes also used for vertical @-@ down welds . It is generally not practical for root pass welds . When a smaller electrode is used in conjunction with lower heat input , its versatility increases . The maximum deposition rate for spray arc GMAW is relatively high — about 60 mm / s ( 150 in / min ) . 
 = = = Pulsed @-@ spray = = = 
 A variation of the spray transfer mode , pulse @-@ spray is based on the principles of spray transfer but uses a pulsing current to melt the filler wire and allow one small molten droplet to fall with each pulse . The pulses allow the average current to be lower , decreasing the overall heat input and thereby decreasing the size of the weld pool and heat @-@ affected zone while making it possible to weld thin workpieces . The pulse provides a stable arc and no spatter , since no short @-@ circuiting takes place . This also makes the process suitable for nearly all metals , and thicker electrode wire can be used as well . The smaller weld pool gives the variation greater versatility , making it possible to weld in all positions . In comparison with short arc GMAW , this method has a somewhat slower maximum speed ( 85 mm / s or 200 in / min ) and the process also requires that the shielding gas be primarily argon with a low carbon dioxide concentration . Additionally , it requires a special power source capable of providing current pulses with a frequency between 30 and 400 pulses per second . However , the method has gained popularity , since it requires lower heat input and can be used to weld thin workpieces , as well as nonferrous materials . 
 = Binaural ( album ) = 
 Binaural is the sixth studio album by the American alternative rock band Pearl Jam , released on May 16 , 2000 through Epic Records . Following a full @-@ scale tour in support of its previous album , Yield ( 1998 ) , Pearl Jam took a short break before reconvening toward the end of 1999 to begin work on a new album . During the production of the album , the band encountered hindrances such as singer Eddie Vedder 's writer 's block , and guitarist Mike McCready 's entrance into rehabilitation due to an addiction to prescription drugs . 
 The music on the record featured an experimental sound , evident on songs that used binaural recording techniques . The atmospheric tracks , mostly featuring somber lyrics dealing with social criticism , led the band to convey these themes with images of <unk> in the album artwork . Binaural received positive reviews , and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 . Although the record was certified gold by the RIAA , it became the first Pearl Jam studio album to fail to reach platinum status in the United States . The album 's 2000 tour spawned a large collection of official bootleg releases . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Similar to the process for Yield , the band members worked on material individually before starting the recording sessions together . Lead vocalist Eddie Vedder called the making of the album " a construction job . " Binaural was the first album since the band 's debut that was not produced by Brendan O 'Brien . Gossard stated that the band " felt like it was time to try something new , " and that they " were ready for a change . " Instead the band hired producer Tchad Blake , known for his use of binaural recording . Binaural recording techniques , which employ two microphones to create a 3 @-@ D stereophonic sound , were utilized on several tracks , such as the acoustic " Of the Girl . " Regarding Blake , Gossard said , " He was just there for us the whole time , wanting us to create different moods . " This was the first Pearl Jam studio album following the departure of drummer Jack Irons , and features drummer Matt Cameron of Soundgarden , who had previously drummed on Pearl Jam 's U.S. Yield Tour . 
 Binaural was recorded in late 1999 and early 2000 in Seattle , Washington at Studio Litho , which is owned by guitarist Stone Gossard . The album was initially mixed at Sunset Sound Factory in Los Angeles , California with Blake ; however , the band proved to be dissatisfied with how the mixes turned out . According to McCready , Blake 's work complemented the slower tracks such as " Nothing as It Seems " well , but faced trouble with others , which the band wanted to sound heavier . For the heavier songs , the group brought in former producer O 'Brien , who remixed the tracks at his mixing facility at Southern Tracks in Atlanta , Georgia . It was with O 'Brien that the band determined the final sequencing of the album . 
 During the writing and recording of the album , the band encountered several obstacles . Vedder has admitted that while working on the album he suffered from writer 's block , which made it difficult for him to come up with lyrics . This inspired the hidden track " Writer 's Block " - which consists of the sounds of a typewriter - that appears at the end of the album , starting at 6 minutes and 50 seconds on the track " Parting Ways " . Vedder had written music for several songs , including " Insignificance " and " Grievance " , but was having trouble coming up with lyrics for the songs . He decided to not write any more music , and to focus only on lyrics , even banning himself from playing guitar . Unable to write more lyrics , Vedder said he saw a ukulele and thought " that 's not a guitar , " and wrote the song " Soon Forget " using the ukulele . Guitarist Mike McCready went into rehabilitation to receive treatment for an addiction to prescription drugs . Gossard recalled that " everyone wasn 't on the same page " due to McCready 's absence and the familiarization with Cameron . 
 Three instrumentals featured on the Touring Band 2000 DVD ( " Thunderclap " , " <unk> " , and " Harmony " ) come from the early Binaural sessions . Several songs were rejected from the album that eventually found their way on to the 2003 Lost Dogs collection of rarities . These include " Sad " , " Hitchhiker " , " In the Moonlight " , " Education " , " Fatal " , and " Sweet Lew " . " Sad " , originally called " Letter to the Dead " , was called " a great pop song " by Ament , but he said the song did not fit the album because the band does not " really [ write ] very many pop records . " " Sweet Lew " , about Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar , was cut from Binaural because it did not fit the album according to Ament . " Fatal " was producer Tchad Blake 's favorite song to come out of the recording sessions . " Strangest Tribe " and " Drifting " were also recorded around the time of the album 's recording sessions , and both songs were released on the band 's 1999 fan club Christmas single as well as Lost Dogs . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Binaural opens with three up @-@ tempo songs before growing more diverse . Vedder explained , " We 'd rather challenge our fans and make them listen to our songs than give them something that 's easy to digest . There is a lot of music out there that is very easy to digest but we never wanted to be part of it . " As described by critic Jon Pareles on his review for Rolling Stone , Pearl Jam distances itself from the grunge that made them famous and " delve [ s ] elsewhere : jumpy post @-@ punk and somber meditations , tightly wound folk rock and turbulent , <unk> rockers that sound like they boiled out of jam sessions . " 
 A few songs on the album show classic rock influences . The intro to the opening track " <unk> " uses a guitar riff similar to The Who song " I Can See for Miles " ( from the 1967 album , The Who Sell Out ) . Additionally , " Soon Forget " , which features Vedder playing a ukulele , is heavily influenced by The Who song " Blue , Red and Grey " ( from the 1975 album , The Who by Numbers ) , with Vedder describing it as " 30 seconds of plagiarising " and thanking Pete Townshend on the lyric sheet . The song " Nothing as It Seems " has been compared to the style of Pink Floyd . 
 Bassist Jeff Ament wrote the lyrics for two songs on the album ( " Gods ' Dice " and " Nothing as It Seems " ) , and Gossard for three ( " Thin Air , " " Of the Girl " and " Rival " ) . The album is lyrically darker than the band 's previous album Yield , with Gossard describing the lyrics as " pretty somber . " Vedder addressed the social criticism contained in the album 's lyrics by stating , " I think what everyone 's looking for , y 'know , is freedom ... That 's part of being comfortable in your own skin . I know I had a problem with being told what to do , and had a problem with being mentally and physically constricted . All of humanity is searching for freedom and I think it 's important to know when you have it , too . " Ament stated that " Gods ' Dice " is about " judging anybody who has any sort of belief system whether they believe in God or not " , and that " Nothing as It Seems " is about his childhood growing up in a rural area of Northern Montana . Vedder called " Evacuation " a " song about change " , and stated in an interview that the moral of " Insignificance " is " the ineffectiveness of political struggle . " Vedder took inspiration from the 1999 World Trade Organization protests in Seattle when writing " Grievance " , and said the song is about the dangers of technology . Gossard has said that the song " Rival " is his reflection upon the 1999 Columbine High School massacre . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The album 's cover art is a modified Hubble Space Telescope photo of the Hourglass Nebula . Hubble Space Telescope photos of the Helix Nebula and Eagle Nebula are also featured in the inside cover and liner notes for this album , respectively . The photos were used with the permission of NASA . Regarding the artwork , Ament said , " The reason that we went with Tchad [ Blake ] is because he provides an amazing atmosphere to songs .... So , I think we wanted the artwork to represent that .... One of the themes that we 've been exploring ... is just realizing that in the big scheme of things , even the music that we make when we come together , no matter how powerful it is , it 's still pretty minuscule . I think for me the whole space theme has a lot to do with scale . You know , you look at some of those pictures , and there are thirteen light years in four inches in that picture . " Some claim the cover idea was inspired by Mother God <unk> 's self @-@ titled record , which was released on Interscope Records in May 1998 . 
 The album 's title is a reference to the binaural recording techniques that were utilized on several tracks . Binaural literally means " having or relating to two ears . " Regarding the choice of the title , Gossard said , " When we looked up the word ' binaural , ' it meant to listen with both ears . So it seemed like a fitting title for the album . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Binaural sold 226 @,@ 000 copies during its first week of release and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 album chart . It was held off the top spot by the Britney Spears album , Oops ! ... I Did It Again . Binaural became the first Pearl Jam studio album to fail to reach platinum status . Binaural has been certified gold by the RIAA , and , as of 2013 , has sold 850 @,@ 000 copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan . The album topped the charts in New Zealand , where it was certified gold , and Australia , where it went platinum and ended as the 36th best @-@ selling record of the year . 
 Two singles were released from Binaural . The lead single " Nothing as It Seems " was issued on April 11 , entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 49 , and reached number three on the Mainstream Rock charts . The album 's other commercially released single , " Light Years " , did not chart on the Hot 100 , but it did place on the Mainstream Rock and Modern Rock charts . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Binaural received generally favorable reviews from music critics according to Metacritic , where it holds a 69 after 16 reviews . NME gave Binaural a nine out of 10 . In the review , Binaural is called " a seething , furious album ; a declamatory statement against cynicism and passivity and the simple injustices of everyday life " and that " even when the band slow the pace , the songs are coloured by a heartfelt intensity . " AllMusic staff writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album four out of five stars , saying , " The songs are sharper , the production is layered , and the performances are as compassionate as ever , resulting in their finest album since Vitalogy . " Time reviewer Christopher John Farley noted that the album is " less impatient and rage filled than much of Pearl Jam 's earlier work . " Farley added that " Pearl Jam , rather quietly , is building a long @-@ term career to rival the rock legends of the past . " Jim Farber of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B + , considering that the " weighty subjects [ give ] Pearl Jam 's introspective lyrics and stone @-@ faced rock a refreshing edge " and adding that " if PJ long ago lost the zeitgeist , at least they 've kept a hold on their hearts . " Critic Robert Christgau described the album as " Rock as inner struggle , eternally externalized . " 
 Spin gave the album seven out of 10 stars , writing that " Everything you want is still there — goofy experimentalism , guitar frenzy , Eddie 's self @-@ abusive wail . It 's just more solid , more clear . " Q gave the album three out of five stars , commenting that " Grunge may have died , but Pearl Jam it seems will never be slayed . " Rolling Stone staff writer Jon Pareles gave the album three out of five stars , feeling that the album " comes across as part of an extended conversation among the five band members ... and fans loyal enough to check in for Pearl Jam 's latest musings on love , death and social responsibility . " The Guardian also gave the album three out of five stars , stating that Pearl Jam " are dignified , <unk> , sincere ... and a teensy bit dull " and observing that " Vedder 's affecting vocal angst drowns in a sea of pessimistic <unk> . " The review called Binaural " a warts @-@ and @-@ all album ; it has grabbers , songs that sink in slowly and a few absolute duds . " At the 2001 Grammy Awards , " Grievance " received a nomination for Best Hard Rock Performance . Regarding Binaural , Ament stated that " we look back and think we didn 't put some of the best songs on it " , adding that " I think there are some beautiful things that came out of it , but we 're never going to remember that record as one of the greats . " 
 = = Tour = = 
 Pearl Jam promoted the album with tours in Europe and North America . The tour started along with the album release on May 23 , with a show in Lisbon , Portugal . The European tour had 26 dates . The final concert of the European tour ended in tragedy , where an accident at the Roskilde Festival in Denmark on June 30 lead nine fans to be crushed underfoot and suffocated to death as the crowd rushed to the front . This led two additional concerts through July to be cancelled . A month after the European tour concluded , the band embarked on a two @-@ leg North American tour , starting on Virginia Beach , Virginia on August 3 . The first leg of the tour focused on the East Coast of the United States , and then the band moved to the Midwest and the West Coast for the tour 's second leg . The band considered disbanding after the Roskilde tragedy , but Vedder stated that " playing , facing crowds , being together " in the North American tour " enabled us to start processing it . " 
 On October 22 , 2000 , the band played the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas , Nevada , celebrating the 10th anniversary of its first live performance as a band . Vedder took the opportunity to thank the many people who had helped the band come together and make it to 10 years . He noted that " I would never do this accepting a Grammy or something . " The tour 's final night took place on November 6 , 2000 , in Seattle , Washington at KeyArena where the band performed for more than three hours . The European and North American tours were documented by a long series of official bootlegs , all of which were available in record stores as well as through the band 's fan club . The band released 72 live albums in 2000 and 2001 , and set a record for most albums to debut in the Billboard 200 at the same time . Following the conclusion of the 2000 tour , the band released Touring Band 2000 , a DVD which featured select performances from the North American legs of the tour . 
 Binaural was played in its entirety at the May 10 , 2016 show in Toronto at the Air Canada Centre , as a block and in sequence , during the first set of a longer performance . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Eddie Vedder , except where noted . 
 ^ I " Parting Ways " contains the hidden track " Writer 's Block " at 6 : 49 . 
 ^ * Asterisk denote the use of binaural recording techniques 
 Japanese bonus disc 
 All lyrics written by Vedder . 
 ^ * Live tracks recorded at the 1999 Bridge School Benefit . 
 = = = Original track listing = = = 
 When the track listing for Binaural was first released in late March 2000 , it was quite different from the final version . Some tracks that were originally on the album were dropped and not released until the 2003 rarities compilation , Lost Dogs , and " Gods ' Dice " was added to the final version . The original version is as follows : 
 " <unk> " 
 " Insignificance " 
 " Evacuation " 
 " Letter to the Dead " 
 Later renamed to " Sad " 
 " Rival " 
 " Grievance " 
 " Light Years " 
 " Of the Girl " 
 " Thin Air " 
 " Nothing as It Seems " 
 " Fatal " 
 " Sleight of Hand " 
 " Soon Forget " 
 " In the Moonlight " 
 " Parting Ways " 
 " Education " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Monarch @-@ class coastal defense ship = 
 The Monarch class was a class of three coastal defence ships , built by Austria @-@ Hungary at the end of the 19th century . The Monarchs were the first ships of their type to utilize turrets . The class comprised three ships : SMS Monarch , SMS Wien , and SMS Budapest , each armed with four 240 mm ( 9 in ) L / 40 guns in two turrets and capable of 15 @.@ 5 knots ( 28 @.@ 7 km / h ; 17 @.@ 8 mph ) at full speed . Budapest was fitted with slightly more modern and powerful engines , giving her a top speed of 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) . 
 Monarch was launched on 9 May 1895 , Wien on 7 July 1895 , and Budapest just over a year later on 24 July 1896 . The ships saw very little service during World War I in the V Division of the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet . Budapest and Wien took part in the bombardment of Italian positions along the Adriatic coast in 1915 and 1917 , but the three battleships went largely inactive for the remainder of war . 
 In 1917 , Wien was struck by Italian torpedoes and sank in her home port of Trieste . The remaining two ships were ceded to Great Britain following the end of the war and were scrapped between 1920 and 1922 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In the 1890s the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy consisted of two obsolescent ironclads , SMS Kronprinz Erzherzog Rudolf and SMS Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie . By 1893 , sufficient funds were available to build three replacement ships , but the Hungarian and Austrian parliaments authorized only the construction of a smaller class of coastal defense ships , as Austro @-@ Hungarian naval policy at that time was primarily concerned with coastal defense . The three new ships — Budapest , Wien , and Monarch — weighed about 5 @,@ 600 tonnes ( 5 @,@ 512 long tons ) , half the size of the battleships of other navies . Budapest was fitted with more powerful engines than her sister ships , giving her a higher top speed . Budapest and Wien were built in the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino yards in Trieste , and Monarch was constructed at the Naval Arsenal in Pula . 
 The first ship of the class , Wien , was laid down on 16 February 1893 . She was launched on 7 July 1895 , about a month after Monarch . Despite this , Wien was the first ship of the new class to be commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , on 13 May 1897 . The second ship of the class , Monarch , was laid down on 31 July 1893 , launched on 9 May 1895 , and was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy on 11 May 1898 . Budapest was the third and final ship of the class . She was laid down on the same day as Wien , on 16 February 1893 , and launched from the Naval Arsenal in Pula on 24 July 1896 . She was commissioned on 12 May 1898 , a day after Monarch . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The members of the Monarch class displaced 5 @,@ 878 tonnes ( 5 @,@ 785 long tons ) . Their armament consisted of four 240 mm ( 9 in ) L / 40 guns with two guns in each of the two turrets , six 150 mm ( 6 in ) L / 40 guns , 10 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) L / 44 guns , four 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) L / 33 guns , one 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) MG gun , and four torpedo tubes . 
 Ships of the Monarch class were fitted with Harvey armour throughout . Their belt armor was 270 mm ( 11 in ) thick except for the turrets , which had 203 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) . The conning tower was protected by armor 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) thick , and the deck by 64 mm ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) ; the redoubt and casemates had 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) of armor . 
 = = = Propulsion and crew = = = 
 Monarch @-@ class ships normally carried 300 tons of coal , but could hold up to 500 tons . Budapest was fitted with 12 coal @-@ fired Belleville boilers without economizers , giving an output of 9 @,@ 180 hp ( 6 @,@ 846 kW ) . Wien and Monarch had coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers and vertical triple expansion engines with an output of 8 @,@ 500 hp ( 6 @,@ 338 kW ) . Wien and Monarch had a maximum speed of 15 @.@ 5 knots ( 28 @.@ 7 km / h ; 17 @.@ 8 mph ) , compared to Budapest 's top speed of 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) . Each ship was manned by 26 officers and 397 crewmen , a total of 423 personnel per ship . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Peace time = = = 
 Upon being commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , the three ships of the Monarch class were used for a variety of purposes . All three ships of the Monarch class partook in a cruise around the Adriatic and Aegean in 1899 , to display the Austro @-@ Hungarian flag in foreign waters . The Monarch class formed the I Battleship Division of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . The battleship Wien participated in the Diamond Jubilee of the crowning of Queen Victoria in 1897 , as well as the international blockade off Crete during the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1897 . However , less than five years after their completion , the Monarch @-@ class battleships were rendered obsolete by the newly commissioned Habsburg class . The newly completed SMS Habsburg conducted a training cruise with the three Monarch @-@ class battleships in January 1903 ; they were joined by SMS Árpád the following year . During the 1904 training exercises , the three Habsburg @-@ class battleships engaged the three Monarchs in simulated combat ; the maneuver marked the first time two homogeneous squadrons consisting of modern battleships operated in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . The three Habsburg @-@ class ships took over the position of the I Division while the Monarchs formed the newly created II Division . With other new classes of pre @-@ dreadnoughts being built such as the Erzherzog Karl class , and later the Radetzky class , the Monarchs were demoted even further , and ended up in the V Battleship Division . They were serving as coastal defense ships by the beginning of World War I. 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I in July 1914 , the three ships of the Monarch class were serving as the V Battleship Division , deployed as coastal defense ships . They also served as training ships , and were used to bombard coastal positions during the early years of the war . In August 1914 , Budapest was transferred from Pula to Cattaro to shell Mount <unk> . On 9 August 1914 Monarch shelled the French radio station at Budva . She also bombarded the Montenegrin radio station off Bar on 17 August and another station off <unk> Point on 19 August where she attacked the local radio station and barracks . Following these operations , Monarch served as a harbor defense ship . On 28 – 29 December 1915 Budapest supported the cruisers and destroyers of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy that were to raid Durazzo , but the detachment returned to port without having opened fire on the enemy . On 9 January 1916 , Budapest again bombarded the fortifications on Mount <unk> , and helped to capture the enemy @-@ held mountain . In late 1917 Budapest and Wien were sent to Trieste , and participated in shelling Italian troops in the Gulf of Trieste . On 10 December 1917 , two Italian torpedo boats managed to penetrate the port of Trieste undetected , and fired torpedoes at the battleships Budapest and Wien . The torpedo fired at Budapest missed , but Wien was hit twice and sank in less than five minutes in the shallow water of the Trieste harbor . Forty @-@ six men serving on Wien were killed in the attack . Budapest was subsequently given the task that Monarch had been performing for over three years , and was demoted to a floating barrack for German U @-@ boat crews . In June 1918 Budapest was renovated and had a 380 mm ( 15 in ) L / 17 howitzer installed in her bow to use for coastal bombardment , but she never saw action with the new gun in place . At the end of the war in 1918 , the remaining Monarch @-@ class battleships , Budapest and Monarch , were handed over to Great Britain as war reparations . In 1920 the two ships were sold for scrap to Italy , and were broken up between 1920 and 1922 . 
 = Spike Spiegel = 
 Spike Spiegel ( Japanese : <unk> ・ <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) is the central protagonist of the 1998 anime series Cowboy Bebop . Spike is a former member of the criminal Red Dragon Syndicate , who left by faking his death after falling in love with a woman called Julia . He is first introduced as the partner of Jet Black , captain of the spaceship Bebop : the two are legalized bounty hunters pursuing criminals across the populated worlds . During his adventures on board the Bebop , he is drawn back into a bitter feud with Vicious , a rival from the Syndicate who seeks to kill him . 
 Spike was created by Shinichirō Watanabe and Toshihiro Kawamoto as part of the production entity Hajime Yatate . Created as a mirror image of Watanabe and based on Yusaku Matsuda 's character in Tantei Monogatari , he was designed as someone who would expect others to follow his lead . Kawamoto deliberately designed him to appear " uncool " to create the opposite effect for viewers . His final confrontation with Vicious was planned well in advance . His portrayal in the later movie adaptation displayed the character 's softer side and inner thoughts . Spike is voiced in Japanese by Kōichi Yamadera . In the English dub , he is voiced by Steven Blum . 
 In addition to the series , Spike has been featured in two manga adaptations , and been the main protagonist of two video game adaptations . Reception of Spike has been positive in Japan and the West , with multiple reviewers praising his portrayal . He has appeared on multiple reader and critic lists of the best anime characters . In addition to the series , many reviewers of the movie positively noted his expanded portrayal in The Movie . Both actors have been praised for their performances , with Blum commenting that it boosted his voice acting career . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Spike is a fictional bounty hunter who was born on Mars on June 26 , 2044 : he is 27 years old , has fluffy dark @-@ green hair and brown eyes . His right eye is artificial , and consequently lighter than the other . He stands 6 ' 1 " and weighs 155 lbs . Spike is a heavy smoker , and is frequently seen smoking despite rain or " no smoking " signs . A skilled martial artist who practices Jeet Kune Do , he is a devote follower of the philosophies of Bruce Lee . He also owns a converted antique Asteroid racer called the Swordfish II . During gunfights , he most often uses a Jericho 941 . In his younger days before joining the Bebop , Spike was part of the Red Dragon Syndicate , a Chinese criminal organization : during his time there , he was impetuous and volatile , but after leaving he became a calm and collected character with a love for combat . While holding little value in money or justice , he always holds true to his own values and fulfills his obligations . He also generally does this his way rather than following orders , which generally gets him into trouble . Watanabe has said that Spike has a habit of being very indirect with his emotions ; for example , he may behave antagonistically towards someone he actually likes . He says that this could apply to Spike 's relationship with Faye Valentine . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Cowboy Bebop = = = 
 Years before the beginning of the series , Spike is a rising member of the Red Dragon crime syndicate . While there , he becomes a partner and friend of Vicious , another member of the Syndicate . Wounded from a gun battle , Spike is nursed back to health by Vicious ' girlfriend Julia , and the two fall in love . They plan to elope and escape the Syndicate , but Vicious finds out and attempts to force Julia to kill Spike or risk her own death . After Spike fakes his death to escape the Syndicate , Julia goes into hiding and does not meet up with him . Spike eventually met and teamed up with former Inter Solar System Police officer Jet Black . As legalized bounty hunters , they travel the Solar System 's inhabited worlds hunting criminals . 
 During his time on the Bebop , he and Jet are joined by Ein , an intelligent Welsh corgi ; Faye Valentine , a gambler and original resident of Earth woken from cryogenic sleep ; and Edward " Ed " Wong Hau Pepelu <unk> IV , an eccentric girl from Earth who is a master hacker . Spike also has run @-@ ins with Vicious on two occasions : in " Ballad of Fallen Angels " , while pursuing a Red Dragon executive , Spike and Vicious battle in a derelict church and Spike is nearly killed . Later , in " Jupiter Jazz " , Spike hears that Julia was seen on Callisto and abandons the Bebop to look for her . Once there , he stumbles into a drug deal orchestrated by Gren , a man Vicious betrayed who is seeking revenge . During their confrontation , a three @-@ way battle ensues : Vicious escapes , and Gren is fatally injured , but he succeeds in telling Spike that Julia is alive and in hiding . 
 During the final story of the series , " The Real Folk Blues " , Julia comes out of hiding and sends a message to Spike through Faye : the two meet and resolve to flee as originally planned . Vicious , having staged a coup d 'état and taken over the Red Dragon Syndicate , sends assassins after the two . During a battle , Julia is shot and killed . After saying his goodbyes to Jet and Faye , Spike storms the headquarters of the Syndicate and has a final confrontation with Vicious : Spike is severely wounded and Vicious is killed . Shortly after this , Spike walks into and collapses in the entrance hall . Spike 's ultimate fate was deliberately left ambiguous , with Watanabe eventually unable to say whether he lived or died . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Spike is the main protagonist of Cowboy Bebop : The Movie , a story set between Episodes 22 and 23 of the original series while the Bebop crew are still working together . The crew of the Bebop take on a massive bounty for Vincent Volaju , who releases a cloud of deadly protean @-@ based nanomachines in Mars ' capital city . During his pursuit , Spike initially fights then allies with Elektra Ovirowa , a former comrade of Vincent 's . 
 Spike appears along with the other main characters in the manga adaptation of Cowboy Bebop and the alternate manga Cowboy Bebop : Shooting Star . In the PlayStation Cowboy Bebop , players control Spike as he pilots the Swordfish II during aerial battles through pre @-@ set courses . Spike appears as one of the playable characters in the PlayStation 2 action / beat ' em up video game Cowboy Bebop : <unk> no Serenade , a game set within the continuity of the series . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 During the first work by Shinichirō Watanabe on Cowboy Bebop , the first image that came to him was of Spike . Prior to that , Watanabe had the character of Spike in mind for a long time beforehand . From that point on , Watanabe " tried to build a story around him , trying to make him cool . " Watanabe created Spike as a mirror image of himself : in Watanabe 's words , " I don 't smoke or drink or fight , but I want to – so Spike does . " Spike forms the main focus on the series , with the central theme being his past and its karmic effect on him . Spike was portrayed as a very old @-@ fashioned type of man , who would simply do what he wanted and expect others to follow his lead and watch him from the sidelines . Spike 's artificial eye was included as Watanabe wanted his characters to have flaws . He was originally going to give Spike an eye patch , but the producers vetoed it . In order to portray him as cool , Toshihiro Kawamoto designed Spike to look " uncool " : when he stands still , he has a hunched appearance . This meant that when the character was moving vigorously , he came across as " extra cool " . Spike 's appearance was primarily based on the main protagonist of Tantei Monogatari , portrayed by famous Japanese actor Yusaku Matsuda . Spike 's Swordfish II spaceship was created by mecha designer Kimitoshi Yamane . Yamane liked the English biplane torpedo @-@ bomber Fairey Swordfish , which led him to name the Swordfish II after the bomber . The conclusion of Spike 's story and his final battle with Vicious were planned by Watanabe well in advance , with each episode featuring them meant to shadow their final confrontation . Some of the staff were unhappy about this approach as a continuation of the series would be difficult . While he considered altering the ending , he eventually settled with his original idea . 
 Spike 's Japanese voice actor , Kōichi Yamadera , was pleased to have gotten the part , but <unk> Ishizuka , Jet 's voice actor , was surprised that Yamadera was not cast as Jet . Spike and Jet were designed to be opposites , with Spike being thin and wearing smart attire , while Jet was bulky and wore more casual clothing . His English voice actor , Steven Blum , used film noir imagery to get himself in the right frame of mind to voice the character convincingly . Blum had some difficulty portraying the character in scenes where he was showing vulnerability . He called Spike an " example of a character [ he ] didn 't fully appreciate until the series was over " , also adding that he would like to reprise his role as the character if given the chance . Spike 's portrayal was expanded in Cowboy Bebop : The Movie . Specifically , according to Yamadera , the character displayed more of his inner thoughts and showed a gentler side than he did in the series . This was because the team had more time available to express such details . Blum found his performance in the movie one of his most difficult from an emotional standpoint , as there were scenes where Spike was portrayed quite differently from the version he had been playing in the series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Spike 's character has been well received in Japan . He won first place in the Best Male Character category at Animage 's annual Anime Grand Prix awards two consecutive times in 1998 and 1999 . In the August 2001 issue of Newtype , Spike was ranked first on the magazine 's list of " Top 10 Most Popular Male Anime Characters in Japan " . The next year in July 2002 , Spike was again placed at number one on Newtype 's anime list of " Favorite Male Character " . In a Newtype poll from March 2010 , Spike was voted by readers as the eighteenth most popular male anime character from the 1990s . In 2014 , Kōichi Yamadera was voted by fans as the third coolest " old guy " voice actor in a Goo Ranking poll , with his portrayal of Spike cited as one of the contributing factors . 
 Western critics have also directed significant praise towards Spike . In his review of Cowboy Bebop , Anime News Network 's Mike Crandol praised the character portrayals , especially Spike 's , stating that " Spike 's character in particular runs the gamut from goofy to blasé to teeth @-@ gnashing tough ; he is one of most three @-@ dimensional anime leads in recent memory . " Christi of THEM Anime Review 4 @.@ 0 complimented Spike 's story arc in the series , saying that " the underlying theme of Spike Spiegel and his motivations for what he does is absolutely intriguing . " DVDTalk 's Kyle Mills called Spike the epitome of a good lead protagonist , referring to him as " composed , always cool , and is essentially the ultimate badass " , although his true nature is gradually shown throughout the series . In an article in The Atlantic , writer Alex Suskind was positive about Spike 's portrayal and development , saying that the word " cool " was the most apt way of describing him and referring to him as " a space @-@ age samurai @-@ cum @-@ Marlboro Man " . Richard Eisenbeis of Kotaku , writing a retrospective on the series , praised the relationship between Spike and Faye , especially the way it evolved through the series without overt verbal expressions of affection . 
 His portrayal in The Movie has also received praise : IGN 's Andy Patrizio said that Spike " opens up his soul a little " during the film , while Chris Beveridge of Mania.com found Spike more likable in the film than in some parts of the series , comparing him to Lupin III and praising the moments where he could be himself and show more of his inner self . Carlos Ross of THEM Anime Review said that Spike 's portrayal was one of the things that worked in the film , and DVD Talk 's Neil Lumbard , alongside general praise of the characters , positively noted the further exploration of his personality . Anime News Network 's Mike Crandol was less enthusiastic , saying that while Spike was the only one who got much attention during the film , some sequences felt like they could work without him . 
 Blum 's portrayal as Spike has also drawn praise . Isler stated that " Steve Blum launched his career into new heights when he gave the performance of a lifetime in the English dub of the series , giving Spike a sense of smooth , effortless cool that many argue surpassed the original Japanese version . " While praising the whole principal cast of the series as one of the best English dubs , Serdar Yegulalp of About.com highlighted Blum as Spike as the standout performance of the series , stating that " Cynicism never sounded this suave or self @-@ assured " . Blum himself has called Spike a " gigantic benchmark " in his career and life , saying that " Spike changed everything " for him . He stated that his role as Spike opened up new opportunities for voicing characters , including <unk> on Toonami and Jamie on Megas XLR . 
 In 2009 and 2014 , IGN ranked Spike among the best anime characters of all time . In 2009 , Chris Mackenzie ranked Spike as the fourth greatest anime character behind Goku , Astro Boy , and Speed Racer . In 2014 , Ramsey Isler ranked him as second greatest behind Shinji Ikari of Neon Genesis Evangelion . At the 2005 Anime Awards from About.com , Spike was nominated in the category " Best Lead Male Character " , though he lost to Goku . In 2010 , Wired included Spike on its list of the " 6 Genre @-@ Tripping Gunfighters Jonah Hex Must Duel FTW ! " , with writer Scott Thill complimenting his abilities , while also commenting on his presence of heart compared to other equivalent protagonists . In 2013 , Complex ranked Spike the fourth most stylish anime character ever , with writer Jian DeLeon commenting that " The Mars @-@ born bounty hunter knows the benefit of a good uniform " . In 2014 , WatchMojo.com named Spike an honorable mention on its list of the " Top 10 Anime Anti @-@ Heroes " , and also ranked him at number nine on its list of the " Top 10 Anime Heroes " . 
 = Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech = 
 " ( I 'm a ) Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech " is the fight song of the Georgia Institute of Technology , better known as Georgia Tech . The composition is based on " Son of a Gambolier " , composed by Charles Ives in 1895 , the lyrics of which are based on an old English and Scottish drinking song of the same name . It first appeared in print in the 1908 Blueprint , Georgia Tech 's yearbook . The song was later sung by the Georgia Tech Glee Club on The Ed Sullivan Show in 1953 , and by Richard Nixon and Nikita Khrushchev during the 1959 Kitchen Debate . 
 " Ramblin ' Wreck " is played after every Georgia Tech score in a football game , directly after a field goal or safety , and preceded by " Up With the White and Gold " after a touchdown . It is also frequently played during timeouts at the team 's basketball games . 
 The term " Ramblin ' Wreck " has been used to refer to students and alumni of Georgia Tech much longer than the Model A now known as the Ramblin ' Wreck has been in existence . The expression has its origins in the late 19th century and was used originally to refer to the makeshift motorized vehicles constructed by Georgia Tech engineers employed in projects in the jungles of South America . Other workers in the area began to refer to these vehicles and the men who drove them as " Rambling Wrecks from Georgia Tech . " 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 = = Previous adaptations = = 
 The earliest rendition of the song is " Son of a Gambolier " ( also known as " A Son of a Gambolier " and " The Son of a Gambolier " ) , which is a lament to one 's own poverty ; a <unk> is " a worthless individual given to carousing , gambling , and general moral depravity . " The chorus goes : 
 The tune was first adapted as a school song by Dickinson College in southern Pennsylvania in the 1850s . Students at the college modified it to include a reference to their college bell by adding the following lyrics : 
 In 1857 , the Delta Kappa Epsilon Fraternity published a songbook that contained a heavily modified version of the song . The adapted chorus used the following lyrics : 
 The song was subsequently adapted by the Colorado School of Mines in the late 1870s and entitled " The Mining Engineer . " This version is the closest adaptation to " Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech . " 
 The Mines version also includes : 
 The song is also used by the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology , entitled " Ramblin ' Wreck " although on campus it is referred to simply as the " School Song . " This version is almost identical to the first four lines of " Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech . " 
 In the early 1890s , Ohio State University adapted it and called it " If I had a Daughter " . At the time Ohio Wesleyan University was their arch rival , hence the references to Delaware , Ohio and Methodists . One verse follows : 
 In 1895 , Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute adapted it and called it " A Son of Old <unk> " This version includes the lyrics : 
 Two different sources are claimed to have been the origin for the song 's music . The first is the marching tune " The Bonnie Blue Flag " , published in 1861 by Harry McCarthy . The second , and more widely cited , is Charles Ives ' composition of " Son of a Gambolier " in 1895 . 
 = = Creation at Georgia Tech = = 
 Georgia Tech 's use of the song is said to have come from an early baseball game against rival Georgia . Some sources credit Billy Walthall , a member of the school 's first four @-@ year graduating class , with the lyrics . According to a 1954 article in Sports Illustrated , " Ramblin ' Wreck " was written around 1893 by a Tech football player on his way to an Auburn game . 
 The " Rambling Wreck " had its beginning during the first year or two after Tech opened . Some of the frills were afterward added . We had no football team during the early days , but football was played on the campus . A round rubber ball was used and it was strictly football @-@ no holding the ball and running with it . We had a good baseball team and I remember on one occasion almost the whole school went over to Athens to play Georgia . Duke Black of Rome pitched and we brought home the bacon . This was the beginning of the Rambling Wreck . 
 In 1905 , Georgia Tech adopted the tune as its official fight song , though it had already been the unofficial fight song for several years . It was published for the first time in the school 's first yearbook , the 1908 Blueprint . Entitled " What causes Whitlock to Blush " , words such as " hell " and " helluva " were censored as " certain words [ are ] too hot to print " . 
 After Michael A. Greenblatt , Tech 's first bandmaster , heard the Georgia Tech band playing the song to the tune of Charles Ives 's " A Son of a Gambolier " , he wrote a modern musical version . In 1911 , Frank Roman succeeded Greenblatt as bandmaster ; Roman embellished the song with trumpet flourishes and publicized it . Roman copyrighted the song in 1919 . 
 = = Rise to fame = = 
 In 1920 , dance instructor Arthur Murray organized the world 's first " radio dance " while he attended Tech . A band on campus played " Ramblin ' Wreck " and other songs , which were broadcast to a group of about 150 dancers ( mostly Tech students ) on the roof of the Capital City Club in downtown Atlanta . Murray also opened the first Arthur Murray Dance Studio while in Atlanta . It was located at the Georgian Terrace Hotel . In 1925 , the Columbia Gramophone Company began selling a recording of Tech songs ( including " Ramblin ' Wreck " ) ; Tech was one of the first colleges in the Southern United States to have its songs recorded . The song became immensely popular and was known nationally because of its extensive radio play . In 1947 , the song was performed by The <unk> in a <unk> entitled " Let 's Sing A College Song " . 
 On October 11 , 1953 , the Georgia Tech Glee Club sang " Ramblin ' Wreck " on Ed Sullivan 's " Toast of the Town " program ( later known as The Ed Sullivan Show ) on CBS . The performance reached a television audience of approximately 30 million viewers . Because only 28 seats were available on the train to the show , Glee Club members auditioned for the available spots . The group prepared three songs — " Ramblin ' Wreck , " There 's Nothin ' Like a Dame , and the alma mater . Sullivan made them sing " heck " and " <unk> " instead of " hell " and " helluva , " and would not let them sing " dames . " According to The Technique , " The club sang ' Dames ' at rehearsal and brought down the house , only to have Sullivan give it the axe . " 
 Then @-@ Vice President Richard Nixon and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev sang the song together when they met in Moscow in 1959 to reduce the tension between them during the Kitchen Debate . As the story goes , Nixon did not know any Russian songs , but Khrushchev knew that one American song as it had been sung on the Ed Sullivan show . 
 " Ramblin ' Wreck " has had many other notable moments in history , including being the first school song played in space . Gregory Peck sang the song while strumming a mandolin in the movie The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit . John Wayne whistled it in The High and the Mighty . Tim Holt 's character sings a few bars of it in the movie His Kind of Woman . Gordon Jones sings a few stanzas several times in the movie My Sister Eileen . There are numerous stories of commanding officers in Higgins boats crossing the English Channel on the morning of D @-@ Day leading their men in the song to calm their nerves . 
 = = Modern history = = 
 The Edwin H. Morris & Company obtained a copyright to Roman 's version in 1931 ; that company was later acquired by Paul McCartney 's holding company , MPL Communications in 1976 . The copyright to that version expired in 1952 , so Greenblatt wrote a new arrangement and applied for a new copyright . In 1953 , Greenblatt sold the copyright for the new version to Georgia Tech for one dollar . There was some controversy when MPL Communications acquired the old copyright ; a law firm commissioned by Georgia Tech in 1984 , Newton , Hopkins & Ormsby , concluded that while there were copyrighted versions of the song , the version used by the school was not copyrighted and falls in the public domain . 
 Over the years , a few variations of the song have been created at Georgia Tech . In 1998 , a 19 @-@ member " Diversity Task Force " proposed that changes be made to the fight song because it discriminated against women . The proposal was widely and strongly opposed by students and alumni , and it was dropped . A different request to change the word cheer to join with respect to alumni daughters surfaced in 2015 . At the conclusion of the song there is a call of " Go Jackets ! " responded to with " Bust their ass ! " Following three of these calls and responses , the song was ended with a call of " Go Jackets ! Fight ! Win ! " Recently , however , the student body has yelled " Fight ! Win ! Drink ! Get Naked ! " 
 = <unk> migratory stream = 
 The rostral migratory stream ( RMS ) is a specialized migratory route found in the brain of some animals along which neuronal precursors that originated in the subventricular zone ( SVZ ) of the brain migrate to reach the main olfactory bulb ( OB ) . The importance of the RMS lies in its ability to refine and even change an animal 's sensitivity to smells , which explains its importance and larger size in the rodent brain as compared to the human brain , as our olfactory sense is not as developed . This pathway has been studied in the rodent , rabbit , and both the squirrel monkey and rhesus monkey . When the neurons reach the OB they differentiate into GABAergic interneurons as they are integrated into either the granule cell layer or <unk> layer . 
 Although it was originally believed that neurons could not regenerate in the adult brain , neurogenesis has been shown to occur in mammalian brains , including those of primates . However , neurogenesis is limited to the hippocampus and SVZ , and the RMS is one mechanism neurons use to relocate from these areas . 
 = = Brief history = = 
 The RMS was named and discovered by J. Altman in 1969 using 3H @-@ thymidine autoradiography in the rat brain . He traced the migration of labeled cells from the SVZ , which is situated throughout the lateral walls of the lateral ventricles , <unk> to the main olfactory bulb . He also quantitatively studied the effect of age on the size of the RMS . There is still some ongoing debate about the extent of the RMS and adult SVZ neurogenesis of new neurons in humans . 
 = = Cell biology = = 
 = = = Vascular cells = = = 
 Vascular cells are known to play a prominent role in regulating proliferation of adult neural precursors . In the adult <unk> zone ( SGZ ) , dense clusters of dividing cells were found to be anatomically close to the vasculature , especially capillaries . Contacts between adult SVZ neuronal precursors and blood vessels are unusually permeable and frequently devoid of astrocyte and <unk> interferences , suggesting that blood @-@ derived cues are gaining direct access to adult neural precursors and their progeny . The vasculature also provides the substrate for new neuron migration after injury in the adult striatum . In the RMS , vascular cells are arranged parallel to the route of the migrating cells and provide a scaffolding . Glial cells are also associated with the blood vessels ; communication between these cells may be important for RMS migration , for example , in BDNF ( brain @-@ derived neurotrophic factor ) , a growth factor that is thought to module RMS migration . 
 = = = Astrocytes = = = 
 Astrocytes form gap junctions and are closely associated with the vasculature and its basal lamina in the adult SVZ and subsequently in the RMS . They may serve as an interface to modulate influences of endothelial and circulation @-@ derived factors as well as the availability of cytokines and growth factors in this system . In addition , astrocytes derived from the neurogenic hippocampus and SVZ , but not from the non @-@ neurogenic spinal cord , promote proliferation and neuronal fate commitment of <unk> adult neural stem cells in culture , suggesting a role in the RMS . Astrocytes express a number of secreted and membrane @-@ attached factors both in vitro and in vivo that are known to regulate proliferation and fate specification of adult neural precursors as well as neuronal migration , maturation , and synapse formation . In the adult SVZ , astrocytes express Robo receptors and regulate the rapid migration of <unk> @-@ expressing neuroblasts through the RMS . Additionally , it has been proposed that the neuroblasts themselves play a role in modulating the astrocytes through Slit @-@ Robo interactions . In the absence of Slit , <unk> processes do not align correctly , or create the " tubes " , instead running across the migrating neurons . Adult SVZ astrocytes also appear to release glutamate to regulate the survival of neuroblasts . Unique to the adult SVZ , <unk> cells lining the ventricular wall are in close association with neural precursors and their progeny , acting like a shield to protect the " neurogenic niche " , a zone in which stem cells are retained after embryonic development for the production of new cells of the nervous system . 
 = = = Other glial cells = = = 
 <unk> cells actively regulate neuronal fate specification of adult neural precursors through release of Noggin . Beating of the cilia of <unk> cells appears to set up concentration gradients of guidance molecules , such as cytokines TNF @-@ α ( tumor necrosis factor ) and IGF @-@ 1 ( insulin @-@ like growth factor ) , to direct migration of neuroblasts , such as in the RMS . <unk> also actively regulate adult neurogenesis . Under basal conditions , apoptotic corpses of newly generated neurons are rapidly phagocytosed from the niche by unactivated microglia in the adult SGZ . Under inflammatory conditions , reactivated microglia can have both beneficial and detrimental effects on different aspects of adult neurogenesis , depending on the balance between secreted molecules with pro- and anti @-@ inflammatory action . In one study , the activation of microglia and recruitment of T cells were suggested to be required for enriched environment @-@ induced SGZ neurogenesis , suggesting a possible role in the RMS . 
 = = Migration mechanics = = 
 Cells in the RMS are believed to move by " chain migration " . These neuroblasts are connected by membrane specializations including gap junctions and <unk> junctions , moving along each other towards the olfactory bulb through glial tubes . The pathway and mechanisms behind this movement are a <unk> @-@ olfactory neurogenic system ( VONS ) , a glial framework , and a chemotaxic cell signalling system . 
 = = = <unk> @-@ olfactory neurogenic system ( VONS ) = = = 
 The olfactory system is made up in part of the RMS which stretches from the subventricular zone in the wall of the lateral ventricle , through the basal forebrain , to the olfactory bulb ( OB ) . VONS is the name given to this pathway , and it consists of the subventricular zone , the RMS , the olfactory tract and the olfactory bulb . Developing neurons leave the subventricular zone and enter the RMS and travel <unk> and ventrally along the undersurface of the caudate nucleus ; this is referred to as the descending limb . Upon reaching the ventral side of the caudate nucleus , the neurons follow the rostral limb and travel ventrally and <unk> , entering the anterior olfactory cortex ( AOC ) . The AOC gives rise to the olfactory tract , which ends in the olfactory bulb . 
 = = = Glial framework = = = 
 Developing neurons travel toward the olfactory bulb along the RMS via glial tubes , which mark the division between the differentiated nervous tissue and the tissue with embryonic characteristics . Uniquely , the cells travel tangential to the brain surface , parallel to the <unk> surfaces rather than radially like most developing neurons . Neurons that migrate tangentially are typically believed to migrate independently of radial glia but in the RMS researchers believe this is not the case . Adult rat glial tubes have been observed via light and electron microscopy and described as a meshwork of <unk> bodies and processes . They have been determined to be astrocytes based on the typical expression of <unk> ( glial <unk> acidic protein ) and more specifically as protoplasmic astrocytes based on their morphology . Furthermore , these glial cells were found to be positive for <unk> expression , a protein commonly found in embryonic or immature glial cells . The developing neurons are identified by their expression of the cell surface molecule , a <unk> ( PSA ) embryonic form of the neural cell adhesion molecule ( NCAM ) called PSA @-@ NCAM , as well as β @-@ tubulin , a protein often found in postmitotic neuroblasts , proving the cells of RMS are committed to developing into neurons and will do so upon entry into the olfactory bulb . With the removal of NCAM , the neuroblasts scatter , proving the importance of NCAM in chain formation . The neurons form both clusters and chains along the lumen of these glial tubes . Once the developing neurons reach the core of the olfactory bulb , they detach from the RMS , which is initiated by Reelin and <unk> and move radially toward glomeruli , this migration is dependent on <unk> @-@ R , and differentiate into subtypes of interneurons . These neurons have been studied in vivo via electrophysiology and <unk> imaging . 
 = = = Cell signaling = = = 
 The nature of the molecular cues involved in the correct targeting of the migrating precursors remains a question . The secretion of a <unk> factor by the OB appears as a possibility . <unk> and <unk> act on the migrating neurons by inducing changes in the growth cone to direct them . Nevertheless , tissue derived from this structure had no directive influence on the migration . On the other hand , a septum @-@ derived secreted factor showed a repulsive effect on the SVZ cells . More recently , it has been shown that the secreted molecule <unk> shows such a repelling effect on SVZ @-@ derived precursors . Furthermore , <unk> have been demonstrated to have a regulatory influence on precursor cell chain @-@ migration and regulation of their divisions . PSA @-@ NCAM appears as another candidate . Mice lacking NCAM show a dramatically size @-@ reduced OB and an accumulation of migrating precursors along the RMS . It is possible that lack of NCAM results in agitation of neuron – glia interactions , and modifications in these interactions might in turn be responsible for the inhibition of migration in the RMS . It has been demonstrated that a cross talk exists between neurons and glial cells and data in favor of an active role of PSA – NCAM in this process has been presented . The lack of PSA – NCAM on the surface of migrating precursors might alter the proliferative properties of this glial cell population , a scenario that appears reminiscent of <unk> occurring in neurodegenerative diseases even before any signs of neuronal damage . 
 = = Current research = = 
 = = = Existence in humans = = = 
 The presence of an analogous RMS in humans has been difficult to identify , possibly because the olfactory bulb is significantly less developed in humans than in rodents and thus harder to study , and much of the previous scientific work has been called into question concerning the RMS in humans . In the developing fetal brain and in young postnatal infants , chains of immature neurons typical of the RMS were observed . However , there was little evidence for the existence of a migrating chain along the SVZ or olfactory peduncle to the bulb in the adult human brain , even though there was a distinct population of adult neuronal stem cells in the SVZ . These researchers studied subjects from 0 to 84 years of age by analyzing brain sections that had been removed during surgery or during autopsies . They discovered that cells that expressed <unk> ( <unk> ) and PSA @-@ NCAM are present in the brain sections taken from infants , but have disappeared by 18 months . Yet further studies indicated the presence of a small population of migrating immature neurons , which originate solely from the SVZ . These neuroblasts appear singly or in pairs without forming chains , in contrast to the elongated chains of neuroblasts observed in the rodent RMS . This suggests that the RMS is drastically reduced beyond infancy and especially into adulthood , but is not absent . However , a direct correlation between stem cell quiescence and age has not yet been defined due to a high level of variability between individuals . Thus an RMS analogous structure in the adult human brain remains highly controversial . 
 = = = Age @-@ related decline = = = 
 The extent of age @-@ related RMS decline in humans has been the subject of significant debate . The decline of neurogenesis in and migration from the hippocampus in humans has already been well documented . Furthermore , age @-@ related declines in the activities of SVZ stem cells , which migrate to the OB via the RMS , are in place by middle age in rodents . In elderly mice , studies showed that the population of actively dividing SVZ cells and the rate of <unk> replacement in the OB are both drastically reduced , indicating an age @-@ related decline in neuronal proliferation and migration through the RMS . This decline was shown to be due to neuronal stem cell quiescence in the SVZ even by middle age , and not destruction , much like in the hippocampus . 
 = = = Pharmaceuticals = = = 
 Another topic in current RMS research pertains to pharmaceuticals . Scientists are still trying to tackle the difficult task of administering drugs into the brain and getting them past the selective blood – brain barrier . In a recent study , researchers tested the role of the RMS in “ intranasal delivery of drugs into the CNS ” . In this study , the experimenters disrupted the RMS in mice , which obstructed “ the uptake of intranasally administered <unk> into the CNS . ” Fluorescent tracers were also used to track the medicine throughout the brain . It was found that the medicine spread to all regions of the brain , including the olfactory bulb . The study concluded that the RMS was extremely prevalent and necessary in the central nervous system in order to deliver drugs intranasally . The study also noted that this research on the RMS is not sufficient , but instead needs to be expanded . Some of the limits and capabilities of the RMS are still unknown , as well as some of the hazards of it . If drugs are to be administered into the CNS through the RMS , all of the details of the RMS must be known in order to ensure safe delivery of the drugs to the brain . 
 = = = α6β1 integrin = = = 
 A study was conducted testing a specific integrin , alpha @-@ six @-@ beta @-@ one , and the role it plays in the RMS . The study researched the principle that <unk> molecules may play an important role in <unk> migration in the RMS . The study of this one particular integrin was conducted in mice . By using antibodies to bind to α6β1 integrin subunits , found on the neuroblasts , the researchers observed that the migration was disrupted . Furthermore , they investigated the mechanism through which α6β1 integrin functions and determined it was via the <unk> <unk> . This was completed by injecting <unk> perpendicular to the RMS and observing that doing so drew “ neuroblasts away from their normal course of migration ” . The researchers concluded with the idea that this research could prove useful for therapeutics purposes in that neuroblasts could potentially be drawn to locations of injury or disease . 
 = Magnificat ( Bach ) = 
 Johann Sebastian Bach 's Magnificat is a musical setting of the biblical canticle Magnificat . It is scored for five vocal parts ( two sopranos , alto , tenor and bass ) , and a Baroque orchestra including trumpets and timpani . It is the first major liturgical composition on a Latin text by Bach . 
 In 1723 , after taking up his post as Thomaskantor in Leipzig , Bach set the text of the Magnificat in a twelve movement composition in the key of E @-@ flat major . For a performance at Christmas he inserted four hymns ( laudes ) related to that feast . This version , including the Christmas interpolations , was given the number BWV 243a in the catalogue of Bach 's works . 
 For the feast of Visitation of 1733 , Bach produced a new version of his Latin Magnificat , without the Christmas hymns : instrumentation of some movements was altered or expanded , and the key changed from E @-@ flat major to D major , for performance reasons of the trumpet parts . This version of Bach 's Magnificat is known as BWV 243 . 
 After publication of both versions in the 19th century , the second became the standard for performance . It is one of Bach 's most popular vocal works . 
 = = History = = 
 In Leipzig , the Magnificat was regularly part of Sunday services , sung in German on ordinary Sundays but more elaborately and in Latin on the high holidays ( Christmas , Easter and Pentecost ) and on the three Marian feasts Annunciation , Visitation and Purification . 
 = = = Bach 's tenure as Thomaskantor in Leipzig = = = 
 All of Bach 's liturgical compositions in Latin were composed during his tenure as Thomaskantor in Leipzig , from 1723 until his death in 1750 . Compared to Lutheran practice elsewhere , an uncharacteristic amount of Latin was used in church services in Leipzig . An early account of Bach showing interest in liturgical practices in Leipzig dates from 1714 , when he noted down the order of the service on the first Sunday in Advent during a visit to the town . At the time Johann Kuhnau was the Cantor in Leipzig . When Kuhnau died in 1722 , one of the candidates applying for the post of Thomaskantor was Christoph Graupner , a former pupil of Kuhnau , who reused a Magnificat he had composed for Christmas 1722 as an audition piece in January 1723 , three weeks before Bach presented his audition cantatas Jesus nahm zu sich die Zwölfe , BWV 22 and Du wahrer Gott und Davids Sohn , BWV 23 . Bach assumed the position of Thomaskantor on 30 May 1723 , the first Sunday after Trinity , performing an ambitious cantata in 14 movements , Die Elenden sollen essen , BWV 75 , followed by a comparable cantata , Die Himmel erzählen die Ehre Gottes , BWV 76 the next Sunday . 
 = = = Traditional setting of the German Magnificat = = = 
 The traditional setting of Luther 's German translation of the Magnificat ( " Meine Seele erhebt den Herren " ) is a German variant of the tonus peregrinus , a rather exceptional psalm tone in Gregorian chant . The tonus peregrinus ( or ninth tone ) is associated with the ninth mode or Aeolian mode . For the traditional setting of Luther 's German Magnificat that is the minor mode for which the last note of the melodic formula is the tonic , a fifth below its opening note . 
 The tonus peregrinus variant that is associated with Luther 's German Magnificat appears in compositions by , among others , Johann Schein , Heinrich Schütz , Johann Pachelbel and Dietrich Buxtehude . Bach uses the melodic formula as an instrumental cantus firmus in movement 10 ( Suscepit Israel ) of his Latin Magnificat . He uses it again in his " German Magnificat " , i.e. the cantata Meine Seel erhebt den Herren BWV 10 composed for Visitation of 1724 , in the chorale harmonisations BWV 323 and 324 , and in the fourth <unk> Chorale BWV 648 . Also in BWV 733 , Fuga sopra il Magnificat , the melodic formula is used as a theme : this chorale prelude may however be the work of Bach pupil Johann Ludwig Krebs . 
 = = = Extended settings of the Magnificat = = = 
 Being a quintessential part of vespers , evensong or matins , the Magnificat was , already for over a century before Bach 's composition , the liturgical text that was most often set to music apart from the Mass ordinary . In Protestantism there was no Latin text more often set to music than the Magnificat . Also settings of the German text of the Magnificat were current from the early 17th century , without one form suppressing the other . 
 Extended settings of the Magnificat , also indicated as settings in a <unk> sectional construction , that is in several movements with chorus , orchestra and vocal soloists , and a non @-@ linear treatment of the text ( parts of the text repeated multiple times by the singers ) , go back to the old Italian school of music . Such an example can be found in Claudio Monteverdi 's Magnificat a 7 voci , one of two alternative Magnificat settings included in his <unk> della Beata <unk> . In a Lutheran tradition there is for example Schütz ' Latin Magnificat , SWV 468 . Magnificat composers like Johann <unk> , Antonio Lotti and Francesco Durante are cited as possible inspirations for Bach . Around Bach 's time there are also examples by Heinichen and by Vivaldi . 
 In many of these settings a single verse of the Magnificat can be sung by one or more soloists alternating with choral singing , as Bach does in his treatment of the third Magnificat verse : the soprano sings the first words of the verse , while the chorus concludes it . This particular split of the third verse , leaving only the last two words ( omnes generationes ) to the chorus , had been practised before by Ruggiero <unk> , and in a Magnificat in G minor from 1720 which Bach probably knew ( that Magnificat in G minor used to be attributed to Tomaso Albinoni ) . Also Graupner 's 1722 Magnificat had this split . 
 Another characteristic of Bach 's Magnificat is that it is set for a five @-@ part chorus . Extending a standard SATB choir with more voice parts was however no novelty for Magnificat compositions : for example Johann Pachelbel , the teacher of Johann Sebastian 's eldest brother , had composed half a dozen Magnificats for SSATB choir , and one for soli , SSATB double choir and orchestra . Kuhnau 's Magnificat setting also used a SSATB choir . Bach had already composed for a SSATB choir in Weimar ( Der Himmel <unk> ! Die Erde <unk> , BWV 31 , an Easter cantata from 1715 ) . He did the same in the year his Magnificat premiered , in his funeral motet Jesu , meine Freude . Ten years later , around the time when the D major version of the Magnificat originated , he composed for the same extended chorus in his Mass for the Dresden court . Other extended choral settings by Bach include his Sanctus for six vocal parts ( <unk> ) for Christmas 1724 , and compositions for double choir like the St Matthew Passion ( 1727 ) and the secular cantata Preise dein Glücke , <unk> Sachsen , BWV 215 ( 1734 ) . Such compositions with an extended choir are however outside Bach 's usual routine for liturgical music . 
 Bach was not the first to include mixed German / Latin Christmas interpolations in a Magnificat sung in Latin : Hieronymus Praetorius published a Magnificat with such interpolations in 1622 . Samuel Scheidt 's Geistliche <unk> III ( 1635 ) contained three Magnificats with interpolations , the first of these ( <unk> 299 for <unk> and basso continuo ) with the first stanza of " Vom Himmel hoch da komm ich her " as first interpolation . 
 = = = The Visitation version ( s ) = = = 
 In the Gospel of Luke the words of the Magnificat are spoken by Mary when she visits her cousin Elizabeth , both being pregnant , Mary with Jesus and Elisabeth with John the Baptist . In Christianity , the feast commemorating that visit is called Visitation . It is a chosen opportunity to give more than ordinary attention to the Magnificat canticle in liturgy , while the feast celebrates the event tied to its origin . In Bach 's time the feast day of Visitation fell on 2 July . The D major version of Bach 's Magnificat ( BWV 243 ) was first performed on 2 July 1733 , as part of the church service in the St. Thomas Church ( Thomaskirche ) in Leipzig . That year , Visitation fell on a Sunday ( fourth Sunday after Trinity ) and ended the period of mourning the death of the elector Augustus the Strong . 
 In 2003 Bach scholar Andreas Glöckner argued that the very first version of Bach 's Magnificat , that is the E ♭ major version before the four Christmas interpolations were added to the autograph , was first performed on 2 July 1723 . That would have been exactly ten years before the transposed version , and composed for the same Marian feast . Bach had taken up his post as Thomaskantor in Leipzig on 30 May , the first Sunday after Trinity in 1723 . Visitation was the first feast day of his tenure , which called for exceptionally festive music . 
 = = = The Christmas interpolations = = = 
 Before Glöckner 's 2003 article on the origin of the Magnificat , and for some authors still after that , it was generally assumed that Bach had composed his Magnificat in the quiet time of Advent 1723 for a first performance at the Christmas vespers . For that performance Bach composed four laudes , songs of praise partly in German , partly in Latin to be inserted at certain points in the E @-@ flat major version of the Magnificat . The E @-@ flat major version of the Magnificat including these interpolations is known as BWV 243a . 
 The text of these laudes had been used in Leipzig in a Christmas cantata by Bach 's predecessor Kuhnau . Possibly those settings in C major of the same four texts as the laudes Bach had included in his Christmas Magnificat were not a self @-@ contained cantata , but laudes Kuhnau had composed for insertion in his C major Magnificat when it was to be performed at Christmas . These laudes illustrate what the Gospels describe as the circumstances around Christ 's birth , and were embedded in an old tradition named <unk> ( rocking of the cradle ) . 
 As these laudes were to be performed with a very limited accompaniment of instruments , they were supposedly performed from the small loft in the high choir of the Thomaskirche , opposite to the large organ loft where the other movements of the Magnificat were performed . The autograph of the E @-@ flat major version of the Magnificat ( BWV 243a ) suggests that Bach intended to perform the first version of his Magnificat also without the laudes , depending on circumstances , for example on other feasts than Christmas . 
 = = = Other Magnificats by Bach ? = = = 
 Bach 's <unk> , the 1754 obituary written by Johann Friedrich Agricola and the composer 's son Carl Philipp Emanuel , mentions that he would have composed several Magnificats . Apart from the extant copies of BWV 243 / 243a , of the German Magnificat BWV 10 and of the chorale harmonisation BWV 324 , a Magnificat for soprano solo was considered lost in the 19th century . The score of that so @-@ called " little " Magnificat ( Kleine Magnificat ) being retrieved in the 20th century , and listed as BWV Anh . 21 , its authenticity was doubted . In 1982 Melchior Hoffmann was indicated as the composer of this German Magnificat Meine Seel erhebt den Herren . A similar cantata on a German paraphrase of the Magnificat , Meine Seele <unk> und <unk> , BWV 189 for tenor solo and composed for Visitation , has also been attributed to Hoffmann . 
 Another German libretto paraphrasing the Magnificat , published by Picander in his 1728 – 29 cantata cycle for performance on 2 July 1728 , may have been set by Bach . Similarly , a Meine Seele <unk> den Herrn cantata by an unknown librettist for Visitation 1725 . Further , Bach copied Latin Magnificats by other composers : 
 in the early 1740s Bach copied Antonio <unk> 's Magnificat in C major , arranging its Suscepit Israel movement ( BWV 1082 ) . 
 BWV Anh . 30 is a Magnificat in C major for <unk> choir and orchestra , copied by Bach around 1742 . The manuscript score indicates no composer , but according to a 2012 study it is a 17th @-@ century work , composed by Pietro Torri before his 25th birthday . An earlier attribution of the work had been to Antonio Lotti . 
 = = Structure and movements = = 
 Bach 's Magnificat consists of eleven movements for the text of Luke 1 : 46 – 55 , concluded by a twelfth doxology movement . Each verse of the canticle is assigned to one movement , except verse 48 ( the third verse of the Magnificat ) which begins with a soprano solo in the third movement and is concluded by the chorus in the fourth movement . The traditional division of the Magnificat , as used by composers since the late Middle Ages , was in 12 verses : it differs from Bach 's 12 movements in that Luke 's verse 48 is one verse in the traditional division , while the doxology is divided into two verses . 
 There is however no numbering of movements in Bach 's autographs , nor is there a caesura between the third and the fourth movement : the 25th measure of the Quia respexit ( where the soprano soloist sings her last note ) is the first measure of the Omnes generationes movement . The four Christmas interpolations are placed after the second , the fifth , the seventh and the ninth movement on the Magnificat text . These four laudes movements are usually indicated by the letters A to D , with these text sources : 
 A : Hymn by Martin Luther 
 B : Verse attributed to Sethus Calvisius 
 C : Luke 2 : 14 
 D : Fragment of a Christmas hymn 
 Performance time of the Magnificat lies typically between 25 and 30 minutes , with an additional five minutes for the Christmas interpolations . The duration of the version without Christmas hymns is comparable with that of an average Bach cantata . However , there are many differences : the Magnificat contains about twice as many movements as an average cantata , keeping it short by avoiding da capos in the arias , and altogether no recitatives . Also the text is in Latin ( not the usual language for a Bach cantata ) , the architecture of the movements is fairly complex , as opposed to the fairly simple structure of an average cantata , and the choral writing is in five parts , " outside the normal routine of Bach 's sacred vocal works " . 
 = = = Scoring and key signature = = = 
 The movements 1 ( Magnificat ) , 7 ( Fecit potentiam ) and 12 ( Gloria <unk> ) are the cornerstones of the composition : they are in the tonic key ( E ♭ major for BWV 243a , D major for BWV 243 ) , and are the only movements that feature a five @-@ part chorus as well as a tutti orchestra . The chorus also sings in movement 4 ( Omnes generationes ) , accompanied by an orchestra without trumpets and timpani . Each of these four choral movements are , in the version without the Christmas hymns , followed by two movements for a vocal soloist , the second one often with richer scoring . In the movements for vocal soloists the instrumentation is as usual in Bach 's cantata 's : the soloists are accompanied by an obbligato instrument , only strings and / or continuo . Movement A ( Vom Himmel hoch ) is the only a cappella movement . 
 As natural trumpets were usually tuned in D in Saxony , this is given as a reason why Bach transposed the initial E @-@ flat major version to D major . 
 = = = = Voices = = = = 
 Bach set the Magnificat for SSATB five @-@ part choir . Five vocal soloists are required : two sopranos ( <unk> , <unk> ) , alto ( a ) , tenor ( t ) and bass ( b ) . In movement 10 ( Suscepit Israel ) both sopranos sing together with the alto . 
 = = = = Orchestra = = = = 
 The Baroque orchestra for BWV 243a consists of " due violini , due oboe , tre <unk> , tamburi , <unk> , viola e basso continuo " , i.e. two violins ( Vl ) , two oboes ( Ob ) , three trumpets ( Tr , tonic ) , timpani ( Ti , tonic and dominant ) , bassoon , viola ( Va ) and basso continuo ( Bc ) . Two recorders ( flauto dolce , Fl ) are required for aria No. 9 Esurientes , but are not part of the tutti . 
 For the 1733 version , Bach used a somewhat more extended orchestra : the recorders are replaced by <unk> ( Fl ) and they get separate parts in all four choral movements . In movements three and four the oboes are replaced by oboes d 'amore ( Oa ) . In the 10th movement ( Suscepit Israel ) the oboes replace the trumpet for the obbligato instrumental part . 
 The continuo part is played by organ , bassoon , cello and violone in most movements . In the 1723 version movement 10 ( Suscepit Israel ) has a bassett ( Ba ) part played exclusively by violins and viola in <unk> . In the 1733 version this continuo line is given to a continuo that includes cello , but not bassoon and violone . 
 = = = Symmetrical structure = = = 
 Bach 's Magnificat is built symmetrically around the 7th movement ( Fecit potentiam ) : Between the first and the 7th movement there are four verses of the Magnificat , between the 7th and the last there are also four . First , seventh and last movement are in the tonic key , with full orchestra and choir . The second and 11th movement are in the same major key , the third and the 10th movement are in the relative minor key . The movement preceding , and the one following , the central 7th movement are also in a minor key . The fifth and the ninth are in a major key , different from the tonic . The Christmas additions are separated by two Magnificat verses , the first addition being after the second verse . The Christmas hymns are always in the same key as the preceding movement . By verse , this is what the harmonic structure looks like : 
 Verse 1 and 2 ( movements 1 and 2 , followed by movement A in the Christmas version ) : tonic key ( major ) 
 Verse 3 : starts in relative minor key ( movement 3 ) , moving to another minor key ( movement 4 ) 
 Verse 4 ( movement 5 , followed by movement B in the Christmas version ) : major key different from tonic 
 Verse 5 ( movement 6 ) : minor key 
 Verse 6 ( movement 7 , followed by movement C in the Christmas version ) : tonic key 
 Verse 7 ( movement 8 ) : minor key 
 Verse 8 ( movement 9 , followed by movement D in the Christmas version ) : major key different from tonic 
 Verse 9 ( movement 10 ) : relative minor key 
 Verse 10 and doxology ( movements 11 and 12 ) : tonic key 
 Regarding voices and orchestration the four Magnificat verses between the first and the seventh movement , and those between the seventh and the last , have a less symmetrical build @-@ up : here the idea is rather that after a tutti movement there are two or three arias building up to the next choral movement : 
 movements two and three , both for solo soprano , build up to the Omnes generationes choral movement No. 4 
 movements five ( solo ) and six ( duet ) , build up to the 7th tutti movement 
 movements eight and nine ( both solo movements ) , followed by an aria for vocal trio , build up to the final two choral movements 
 The last aria in each of these sets of arias is first a solo , then a duet , then a <unk> ( trio ) . When inserting the Christmas hymns , building up to the seventh movement alternates arias with choral movements , while in the second half of the composition the choral movements at the outer ends are separated by a set of four arias : solo → solo → duet → trio . In such sixteen @-@ movement performance there is however another symmetry : the third section ( movement A ) , and the third counting down from the last ( movement 10 ) both use a Lutheran chorale melody as cantus firmus : soprano voices in the first case ( " Vom Himmel hoch , da komm ich her " ) , instrumental in the second ( " Meine Seele erhebt den Herren " ) . The symmetry of the Christmas version can be pictured as follows : 
 Two movements ( 1 , 2 ) in tonic key → " cantus firmus " movement ( A ) 
 Verse in minor key ( mvt . 3 , 4 ) → two movements in the same major key ( 5 , B ) 
 Verse in minor key ( mvt . 6 ) → two movements in tonic key ( 7 , C ) 
 Verse in minor key ( mvt . 8 ) → two movements in the same major key ( 9 , D ) 
 Two movements in tonic key ( 11 , 12 ) ← " cantus firmus " movement ( 10 ) 
 This is also 5 times two verses of the Magnificat followed by a movement with a text that comes from elsewhere , the only bible quote of these other texts ( movement C , also a doxology like the last movement ) being coupled with the central 7th movement . 
 The structure of Bach 's Magnificat has been compared with that of Kuhnau 's , which he probably knew , and with that of Johann Philipp Krieger 's Magnificat of 1685 , which Kuhnau probably knew . Kuhnau 's Magnificat , his largest extant vocal work , has a similar orchestration as the first version of Bach 's Magnificat ( differences : Kuhnau 's has a second viola , Bach 's has two recorders in one movement ) , and it has the same " expandability " with settings of the same laudes for a Christmas performance . Kuhnau 's Magnificat has standard SATB soloists , but like Bach 's , a SSATB choir . All three Magnificats set verses 1 , 6 , 10 and 12 of the Magnificat text for chorus . Kuhnau 's has five choral movements , like Bach 's , but his second is verse 4 ( instead of 3b for Bach ) , and his last is only verse 12 , where for Bach that final chorus sets both verse 11 and 12 . In all three Magnificats the other verses are set for soloists , as a single voice or combined into duets and trios . 
 = = = The twelve movements of the Magnificat canticle = = = 
 = = = = 1 . Magnificat = = = = 
 Magnificat anima mea Dominum ( " My spirit gives great praise to the Lord , " Luke 1 : 46 ) is the text used for the opening chorus . The movement consists of 6 blocks of 15 measures , totalling 90 bars of music , exactly half of them with choral singing : 
 Measure 1 – 30 : the orchestra presents itself with what looks like a ritornello , but is in fact rather a concerto tutti . The movement has the form of an Italian aria , modelled after the concerto style Bach had developed in Köthen : in that style the material is presented in an instrumental <unk> 1 @-@ 15 : the motive played by oboe I in the first measure sets the jubilant tone of the tutti . It is the first of two main motives . 
 Measure 16 @-@ 30 : in measure 16 , almost imperceptible in the whirling movement of other instruments , violin I presents a new motive : it is the second main motive . The last measures before the entrance of the choir that motive is repeated by multiple instruments . 
 First motive ( as sung by sopranos I in measure 31 ) : 
 Second motive ( as sung by the tenors in measure 35 ) : 
 Measure 31 – 75 : accompanied by the continuo , the chorus enters as a concerto soloist , imitating the opening <unk> 31 – 45 : The sopranos enter first , with the first main motive , and from measure 32 alto and tenor imitate the same . The basses enter from measure 33 while the full orchestra plays a short intervention for two measures . In measures 35 @-@ 36 the chorus sings the second main motive from the opening tutti . After that the orchestra dominates again , with the chorus following or giving contrasting melodies . From the end of measure 37 voices one after another start singing " anima mea " , until in the last three measures of this block all singers take the text Dominum ( the Lord ) once , all of them with the last syllable of that word on the first beat of the 45th measure , after which the orchestra , apart from the continuo , is silent till the beginning of measure 47 : the singers bridge the central barline between measures 45 and 46 with the first main motive sung by altos , sopranos I and sopranos II consecutively . 
 Measure 46 @-@ 60 : after the sopranos recapitulate the start of the movement with their voices , and a brief intervention by the orchestra in measures 47 @-@ 48 , the second main motive is sung again , first by the highest voices in measure 49 , followed by the lower voices in measure 50 . In this block the chorus takes a leading role , limited groups of instruments accompanying with short ideas taken from the opening tutti , until in the last two measures all instruments join , ending with the second main motive played by trumpet I in measure 60 . In this second of three blocks for the singers , the only text they sing is a repetition of the word " <unk> " . 
 Measure 61 – 75 : in the first measure of this block the altos sing the first main motive while all instruments halt for at least a few beats . The singers keep the leading role , while groups of instruments play additional motives . Later the orchestral writing thickens , returning from the subdominant to the tonic . The text remains <unk> for most of this block , the conclusion " anima mea " ( my soul ) is heard by the alto for the first time , in measure 67 , embedded in the other voices ' Magnificat . All parts sing " Dominum " once again , soprano II beginning with a long note continued by a melisma in measure 73 , the others in 74 . 
 Measure 76 – 90 : after 45 measures of choral singing follow fifteen measures of instrumental postlude , with material condensed from the opening tutti . 
 = = = = 2 . Et exultavit = = = = 
 Et exultavit spiritus meus is an aria sung by soprano II , accompanied by the strings . The aria continues the feelings of joy from the first movement , but in a less extrovert way . In the Christmas 1723 version , this movement is followed by the first interpolation , the hymn " Vom Himmel hoch da komm ich her " . 
 = = = = 3 . Quia respexit = = = = 
 Quia respexit <unk> ( Because he has looked upon the humility ) is an aria sung by soprano I with an obbligato oboe ( oboe d 'amore in the D major version ) . It is the only movement for which Bach marked the tempo at the beginning : Adagio ( only D major version ) . Steinberg notes that voice and instrument first share the material in a " contemplative duet " , but on <unk> enim ex hoc beatam ( from henceforth shall call me blessed ) the voice changes to a " simpler , more declamatory style " . Spitta notes : " Scarcely ever has the idea of virgin purity , simplicity , and humble happiness found more perfect expression than in this German picture of the Madonna , translated , as it were , into musical language . " 
 = = = = 4 . Omnes generationes = = = = 
 The continuation of the verse and completion of the sentence , Omnes generationes ( all generations ) , is given to the chorus . The setting has been likened to a turba chorus as used by Bach in his Passions . Some commentators see an atmosphere close to aggression , others rather an evocation of multitude . The sound in the E @-@ flat major version is somewhat harsher than in the D major version , for example the bass line in measure three , and in measure 24 where the first version has a dissonant dominant ninth which was changed to a less dissonant harmony in the later version . 
 = = = = 5 . Quia fecit = = = = 
 Quia fecit mihi magna ( Because he did great things for me ) is an aria sung by the bass , accompanied only by the continuo . The motif , again beginning with repeated notes , is introduced by four measures of the continuo , then repeated by the voice . 
 = = = = 6 . Et misericordia = = = = 
 Et misericordia ( And mercy ) , a duet for alto and tenor , begins with an undulating movement in 12 / 8 time , played by violins and violas . In the D major version these strings play con sordino , flutes doubling the violins . 
 = = = = 7 . Fecit potentiam = = = = 
 Fecit potentiam ( He shows strength ) shares key and scoring with the first movement . The tenor is the first voice to enter , followed by alto , SII , bass and SI , leading to two calls without melismas near the middle of the movement . <unk> appears in various voices , but then isolated , in a sequence from the highest voice to the lowest . The conclusion , mente cordis sui , is marked Adagio and illustrates the text in long chords , with accents by the trumpets . 
 = = = = 8 . Deposuit = = = = 
 Deposuit potentes ( He hath put down the mighty ) is an aria for tenor , accompanied by continuo and <unk> violins , presenting material in a 14 measure ritornello . The second thought of the verse , beginning with et exaltavit humiles ( and exalted the humble ) , is sung without introduction . After a shorter ritornello , the tenor sings the complete text again , the first part in a slightly modified version , but the exaltation considerably expanded after which the ritornello in full length is repeated at the end . 
 = = = = 9 . Esurientes = = = = 
 Esurientes ( The hungry ) is sung by the alto , accompanied by two flutes . The ritornello of eight measures introduces a motiv moving up , on a continuo of steady quarter note , for four measures , later sung on Esurientes implevit bonis ( He hath filled the hungry with good things ) , while downward lines and a continuo moving in eighth notes later go with et <unk> dimisit ( and the rich he hath sent away ) . In Latin , the last word is <unk> ( empty @-@ handed ) . 
 = = = = 10 . Suscepit Israel = = = = 
 Suscepit Israel ( He hath <unk> his servant Israel ) is scored for an unusual combination of the three highest voices and two oboes in unison ( a single trumpet in the E @-@ flat major version ) . The wind instrument ( s ) cite the tonus peregrinus as a cantus firmus , on a continuo line that most of the time only changes every measure , moving one step down or up . The voices imitate each other , in gentle movement . Almost the only leaps in the whole measure occur on the word recordatus , with a downward quart on each syllable . 
 = = = = 11 . Sicut locutus est = = = = 
 Sicut locutus est ( As he spake [ to our fathers , to Abraham , and to his seed for ever ] ) , the last line of the Magnificat has a theme in four distinct measures : the first repeated notes , the second flowing eighth notes , the third quarter notes in leaps , the fourth half notes leaping up a sixth . When the theme is developed the first time , four voices enter from bottom to top . In the second development , soprano I begins , followed by alto , tenor and bass . The movements ends with a more homophonic section in which the bass has the theme once more , while soprano I sings long suspended notes in a descending scale covering almost an octave . 
 = = = = 12 . Gloria <unk> = = = = 
 The work is concluded by the doxology , Gloria Patri ( Glory to the father ) , performed by the complete ensemble . The first part of the text ends in a long cadenza . After changing the time signature from common time to triple metre , the second part of the text , Sicut erat in principio ( as it was in the beginning ) , repeats material from the beginning of the work . 
 = = = The hymns added in the Christmas 1723 version = = = 
 The first time the Christmas hymns of the E @-@ flat major version of Bach 's Magnificat were printed was in the same volume as the D major version of the Magnificat , in the 1862 Bach Gesellschaft XI / 1 publication , which presented the hymns in an annex . In that publication the hymns were however not transposed to fit in the D major setting of the Magnificat . More recently publishers offer such transposed ( and completed ) versions of the hymns , so that they can be performed as part of the D major version of the Magnificat , for instance Novello in 2000 ( Neil Jenkins ) and Bärenreiter in 2014 . 
 = = = = A. Vom Himmel hoch = = = = 
 The text is the first stanza of " Vom Himmel hoch da komm ich her , " a hymn by Martin Luther paraphrasing the annunciation to and adoration of the shepherds from Luke 2 : 8 – 18 . Bach sets this first laudes a cappella in four parts , and , like the two preceding movements , in the tonic key . The form is a chorale fantasia , with all sopranos singing the 1539 chorale melody attributed to Luther as a cantus firmus , while the lower voices make the counterpoint by imitating sections of the melody line in diminished time . Where the Latin of the preceding movements may have been largely incomprehensible for the congregation in Bach 's time , here is a first movement that was not only recognizable for the words , but also for the melody : the Vom Himmel hoch chorale would have been sung by the congregation the preceding evening during the Christmas Eve service . 
 Quarter of a century later Bach returned to the chorale melody of " Vom Himmel hoch da komm ' ich her " , writing a set of five canonic variations on that theme ( BWV 769 ) , one of a few compositions printed during the composer 's lifetime . Bach also included three settings of the chorale melody in his Christmas Oratorio . BWV 606 ( in the Orgelbüchlein ) , 700 , 701 , 738 and <unk> are chorale preludes based on the " Vom Himmel hoch " theme . 
 = = = = B. Freut euch und <unk> = = = = 
 The text of this movement is " Freut euch und jubilirt , Zu Bethlehem <unk> wird Das <unk> <unk> , Das soll <unk> Freud und <unk> sein " ( Rejoice with pious mind , To Bethlehem go now and find The fair and holy new @-@ born Boy , Who is your comfort peace , and joy ) , a verse by Sethus Calvisius . 
 For <unk> , B @-@ flat major , . 
 = = = = C. Gloria in excelsis = = = = 
 The text , " Gloria in excelsis Deo et in terra pax <unk> bona voluntas " , is a variant of the opening verse of the Gloria . The better known version from the Vulgate , ending on " ... bonae <unk> , " is an incorrect rendering of the original Greek version of Luke 2 : 14 , there said by angels in the Christmas night . The Vulgate version translates as " Glory to God in the highest , and on earth peace to people of good will , " while the end of the Greek version is rendered more correctly as " Peace on earth , and good will towards men , " as it was understood by Luther ( " Friede auf Erden und den Menschen ein <unk> " ) . Lutheran theologians thus rejected the Vulgate version ( they would have the verse end on " ... bonae <unk> " in Latin ) , while composers were attached to the classic formula for its melodious rhythm . This Magnificat interpolation is the only place where Bach uses a version of the Gloria text that differs from the Vulgate , more or less catching the spirit of the theologian @-@ approved version . 
 For SSATB and violins , E @-@ flat major , . Text : . 
 = = = = D. Virga Jesse floruit = = = = 
 The text is " Virga Jesse floruit , Emanuel noster <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> , Fit puer <unk> . Alleluja . " ( The stem of Jesse hath flourished , Our Emanuel hath appeared , And hath put on human flesh , And become a lovely child , Alleluja ! ) and is a fragment of a longer Christmas hymn that was printed in Gottfried <unk> ' Neu Leipziger <unk> . 
 For S B , F major , 12 / 8 . 
 = = Reception history = = 
 After the composer 's death the autographs of both the E @-@ flat major and the D major version of the Magnificat were owned by his son Carl Philipp Emanuel . Publication followed in the 19th century , including the Christmas hymns of the E @-@ flat major version , and a variety of vocal and instrumental scores adapted to contemporary performance practice for the D major version . By the end of that century " The Magnificat in D ( was ) considered one of the grandest illustrations of Bach 's genius . " Generally it was also the D major version without the Christmas hymns that was chosen for performance . 
 A new critical edition of both BWV 243 and 243a was published in 1955 as Series 2 , Volume 3 of the New Bach Edition . Although the D major version remained the standard for life performance and studio recordings , half a century later also the E @-@ flat major version had been published in new editions adapted to performance , it had been recorded several times , and its composition history had been further unravelled . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 In 1749 , a year before his father 's death , Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach 's Magnificat in D major had been performed in Leipzig , like his father 's an extended setting . When Johann Sebastian had died , Carl Philipp Emanuel owned the autograph of both versions of his father 's Magnificat , and staged the composition in Hamburg in 1786 . 
 Laudes A and B ( transposed to fit in a D major composition ) were combined with a movement of a <unk> by <unk> ( probably Carl Heinrich <unk> ) to form a Christmas motet , <unk> groß ist das <unk> Geheimnis , BWV Anh . 161 . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The score of the E @-@ flat major version of Bach 's Magnificat was first published by Simrock in 1811 , edited by Georg <unk> , however with printing errors , and without the Christmas hymns . It was the first composition of Bach for vocal soloists , chorus and orchestra that was printed in orchestral score , but at the time this publication had little success in sales . When in 1822 young Felix Mendelssohn composed a Magnificat in D major he showed that he knew Bach 's version . 
 The D major version of Bach 's Magnificat didn 't appear in print before the Bach @-@ revival that followed Mendelssohn 's 1829 performance of the St Matthew Passion . In the 1840s a piano reduction by Robert Franz of Bach 's D major version of the Magnificat appeared . In 1862 the orchestral and vocal score was published in Volume 11 / 1 of the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft edition . The same edition printed the Christmas interpolations for the first time . A year later Robert Franz complained the composition had still received too little attention from music critics and so remained virtually unknown to the general public . A year later he published the D major version of the Magnificat with an orchestral score in line with 19th century performance practice , for example expanding the " organ and continuo " single stave with annotated bass from the autograph and the Bach @-@ edition into several separate staves for organ , bassoon and celli . 
 Novello printed an Octavo edition of the D major Magnificat in 1874 , using a translation to English which John Troutbeck based on the text in The Book of Common Prayer . In 1880 , when Bach 's autographs of the composition were already kept in the Royal Library ( later State Library ) of Berlin , Philipp Spitta devoted many pages to the Magnificat in his Bach @-@ biography , considering it recognized as one of the greatest achievements of the composer 's genius . Bach 's Magnificat was performed several times in the last quarter of the 19th century , for instance in Germany and the Netherlands . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 In 1924 Arnold Schering edited the full orchestral score of the D major version of Bach 's Magnificat for publication by Ernst Eulenburg and Edition Peters . Performances of the Magnificat by , among others , Serge Koussevitzky and the Boston Symphony Orchestra were recorded in the 1940s and appeared on 78 rpm records . LP recordings of the early 1950s included live performances of the Magnificat directed by Otto Klemperer and by Herbert von Karajan , the last one with Elisabeth Schwarzkopf as soprano . 
 The Neue Bach Ausgabe published Bach 's Magnificat ( both BWV 243a and BWV 243 ) in 1955 , edited by Alfred Dürr . This <unk> score was reused in several ensuing publications by Bärenreiter , among which several with an English translation . More recordings of the Magnificat became available , for instance directed by Kurt <unk> , Leonard Bernstein , Karl Richter and Karl <unk> . The second half of the 1960s saw the first recordings of the Christmas version of the Magnificat BWV 243a including the laudes , and new recordings of the D major version by von Karajan , Karl <unk> and Daniel Barenboim . 
 The earliest LP @-@ releases that contained the Christmas laudes of BWV 243a inserted them , transposed , in the D major version BWV 243 of the Magnificat . In this form Helmuth Rilling 's recording with the Bach @-@ Collegium Stuttgart and the <unk> der <unk> Stuttgart appeared in 1967 with a performance time of 40 : 06 . Wolfgang <unk> 's Bach : Magnificat in D ( Including Christmas Interpolations ) , with the Deutsche <unk> and the <unk> <unk> appeared in the 1970s . 
 Bruno Maderna recorded BWV 243a , with the choir and orchestra of the <unk> Rundfunk , and Hedy Graf , Hildegard <unk> , Adalbert Kraus and Michael <unk> as vocal soloists , in 1971 . Its CD @-@ release as volume 8 of the Maderna Edition by Arkadia was in 1991 . The first recording on period instruments of Bach 's Magnificat , with the four choral Christmas interpolations ( BWV 243a ) , was released by Simon Preston and the Academy of Ancient Music in 1978 ( L 'Oiseau Lyre / Decca ) , coupled with Vivaldi 's Gloria . Nicolaus Harnoncourt 's first recording of the D major version followed in 1984 . Also Helmuth Rilling and John Eliot Gardiner had by then recorded the D major version of the Magnificat . 
 20th century Magnificat composers often refer to Bach 's composition in their new setting : Vaughan @-@ Williams ( 1932 ) and Rutter ( 1990 ) include hymns and songs outside the liturgical text in their extended settings , like Bach 's Christmas version ; Penderecki 's extended setting ( 1973 – 74 ) makes musical associations to Bach 's D major setting ; Pärt uses a SSATB choir in his a cappella setting ( 1989 ) . 
 Before the end of the century CD recordings of the D major version of Bach 's Magnificat by <unk> <unk> , Robert Shaw , Andrew Parrott , Philippe Herreweghe , Neville Marriner , Peter Schreier , Harry Christophers , Ton Koopman , and by the Bach Collegium Japan had been released . Philip Pickett 's 1995 recording of the E @-@ flat major version appeared on L 'Oiseau Lyre . Other CD releases with BWV 243a that became available before the end of the century include a recording by Rilling and the Gächinger Kantorei , one with the <unk> <unk> , and one with Rolf Schweizer , the <unk> Pforzheim and L <unk> <unk> playing on period instruments . 
 Novello published both the E @-@ flat major and the D major version of the Magnificat in a single publication in 2000 , edited by Neil Jenkins . This edition also offered a transposed version of the Christmas 1723 laudes so that they could be fitted in performances of the D major version of the Magnificat . The last measures of the Virga Jesse , missing from the autograph score , were in this edition completed on the base of a similar composition by Bach . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Philippe Herreweghe 's 2002 recording of BWV 243a with Collegium Vocale Gent was released by Harmonia Mundi in 2003 . In 2003 Ton Koopman recorded the Christmas version of Bach 's Magnificat with Amsterdam Baroque in the St. Thomas church in Leipzig . A DVD of the recording , which included a performance of Kuhnau 's Magnificat with his four Christmas interpolations , and of Bach 's German Magnificat BWV 10 , was released in 2004 . Thomas <unk> 's recording of BWV 243a , with the Balthasar @-@ Neumann @-@ Chor and Ensemble , was released by Deutsche Harmonia Mundi in 2008 . In 2009 Philippe Pierlot performed the D major version of the Magnificat with the <unk> Consort , with five vocal soloists without choir . 
 Facsimiles of Bach 's autographs of both versions of the Magnificat became available on @-@ line . Bärenreiter published a critical edition of all score versions , based on Dürr 's 1955 edition , again in 2014 / 15 . The " synthetic " D major version , that is the D major version of the Magnificat with the Christmas laudes transposed to fit in that version , now published both by Novello and Bärenreiter , found performers and audiences . 
 That the composition ranges among Bach 's most popular vocal works is illustrated by its regular appearance in classical music polls like Klara 's Top 75 / Top 100 . 
 = BP Pedestrian Bridge = 
 The BP Pedestrian Bridge , or simply BP Bridge , is a girder footbridge in the Loop community area of Chicago , Illinois , United States . It spans Columbus Drive to connect Maggie Daley Park ( formerly , Daley Bicentennial Plaza ) with Millennium Park , both parts of the larger Grant Park . Designed by Pritzker Prize @-@ winning architect Frank Gehry , it opened along with the rest of Millennium Park on July 16 , 2004 . Gehry had been courted by the city to design the bridge and the neighboring Jay Pritzker Pavilion , and eventually agreed to do so after the Pritzker family funded the Pavilion . 
 Named for energy firm BP , which donated $ 5 million toward its construction , it is the first Gehry @-@ designed bridge to have been completed . BP Bridge is described as snakelike because of its curving form . Designed to bear a heavy load without structural problems caused by its own weight , it has won awards for its use of sheet metal . The bridge is known for its aesthetics , and Gehry 's style is seen in its biomorphic allusions and extensive sculptural use of stainless steel plates to express abstraction . 
 The pedestrian bridge serves as a noise barrier for traffic sounds from Columbus Drive . It is a connecting link between Millennium Park and destinations to the east , such as the nearby lakefront , other parts of Grant Park and a parking garage . BP Bridge uses a concealed box girder design with a concrete base , and its deck is covered by hardwood floor boards . It is designed without handrails , using stainless steel parapets instead . The total length is 935 feet ( 285 m ) , with a five percent slope on its inclined surfaces that makes it barrier free and accessible . Although the bridge is closed in winter because ice cannot be safely removed from its wooden walkway , it has received favorable reviews for its design and aesthetics . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Preliminary plans = = = 
 Since the mid @-@ 19th century , Grant Park has been Chicago 's " front yard " , with Lake Michigan to the east and the Loop to the west . Columbus Drive runs north – south through Grant Park , with Daley Bicentennial Plaza in the northeast corner of the park . West of Columbus Drive , the northwest corner of the park had been Illinois Central rail yards and parking lots until 1997 , when it became available for development by the city as Millennium Park . Millennium Park is also north of Monroe Street and the Art Institute , east of Michigan Avenue , and south of Randolph Street . For 2007 , Millennium Park trailed only Navy Pier as a Chicago tourist attraction . 
 In February 1999 , the city announced it was negotiating with Frank Gehry to design a proscenium arch and orchestra enclosure for a band shell in the new park , as well as a pedestrian bridge crossing Columbus Drive between Millennium Park and Daley Bicentennial Plaza . The city also sought donors to cover the cost of Gehry 's work , which would eventually become Jay Pritzker Pavilion and the BP Pedestrian Bridge . At the time , the Chicago Tribune dubbed Gehry " the hottest architect in the universe " in reference to the acclaim for his Guggenheim Museum Bilbao . Millennium Park project manager Edward Uhlir said " Frank is just the cutting edge of the next century of architecture " , and noted that no other architect was being sought . Gehry was approached several times by Skidmore , Owings & Merrill architect Adrian Smith on behalf of the city . In April 1999 , the city announced that the Pritzker family had donated $ 15 million to fund Gehry 's band shell and an additional nine donors committed a total of $ 10 million more to the park . That same day , Gehry agreed to the design request . 
 In November 1999 , when he unveiled his initial plans for the bridge and band shell , Gehry admitted the bridge 's design was underdeveloped because funding for it was not yet committed . Even at this early point , the need for a sound barrier for Columbus Drive traffic noise was recognized , although Gehry indicated this might take the form of a berm , or raised barrier . The need to fund a bridge to span the eight @-@ lane Columbus Drive was evident , but some planning for the park was delayed in anticipation of details on the redesign of Soldier Field . In January 2000 , the city announced plans to expand the park to include features that became Cloud Gate , Crown Fountain , the McDonalds Cycle Center , and the BP Pedestrian Bridge . Later that month , Gehry unveiled his next design , which depicted a winding bridge . 
 While the neighboring Jay Pritzker Pavilion changed relatively little from Gehry 's 1999 design when built , the bridge went through several proposed designs . The proposal made in early 2000 , which was expected to be executed in 2002 , included a bridge that was a mere 170 feet ( 51 @.@ 8 m ) long and 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide . That design was not approved , and Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley 's disapproval of Gehry 's subsequent design of an 800 – 900 @-@ foot ( 240 – 270 m ) bridge caused Gehry to come up with ten more designs . The first of these plans was for a Z @-@ shaped bridge that would have run northwest – southeast with western ramps in Millennium Park , leading south , and eastern ramps in the empty north section of Daley Bicentennial Plaza , leading north . It would have required elevators to conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act . This plan was abandoned because it would have segregated the handicapped . Gehry had only designed two bridges previously , both in the mid @-@ 1990s ( <unk> <unk> Bridge in Hanover , Germany and Financial Times Millennium Bridge in London , United Kingdom ) but neither was built . 
 = = = Final plan = = = 
 The final design for the bridge was revealed in an exhibit at the Chicago Cultural Center on June 10 , 2000 . As designed and built , the bridge is 935 feet ( 285 @.@ 0 m ) long and 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide , with a 14 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 4 @.@ 42 m ) Columbus Drive clearance . The clearance was designed to slightly exceed the 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) standard set by the United States Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration for urban area interstate bridge clearances , and to allow for additional future layers of pavement below . This height is also greater than the maximum vehicle height of 13 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 1 m ) set by the Illinois Vehicle Code . According to the Chicago Tribune the width of the " <unk> " area spanned is approximately 150 feet ( 46 m ) , while The New York Times reports the bridge is over ten times longer than Columbus Drive is wide . 
 BP Bridge begins in Millennium Park between the trellis system over the Jay Pritzker Pavilion 's great lawn and the Lurie Garden ; the design was changed so that the west ramp coincided with the boardwalk of the Lurie Garden seam . The bridge winds its way northward along the eastern edge of Millennium Park before crossing Columbus Drive in a C @-@ shaped curve , above underground parking garage entrances . In Daley Bicentennial Plaza the bridge has an S @-@ shape , then turns east . BP Bridge is designed so that its inclined surfaces have a continuous five percent slope rather than landings and switchback ramps , which provides easy access for the physically challenged . The gently sloped ramp eliminates the need for lifts or any of the other common types of ramps ( L @-@ shaped , switchback , U @-@ shaped , straight ) , and helped the park earn the 2005 Barrier @-@ Free America Award for its exemplary barrier @-@ free design . 
 Gehry had hoped to design the bridge so that it could be constructed without a support column in the center of Columbus Drive . However , Chicago Tribune architecture critic Blair Kamin notes that if he had done so , the bridge might not have been as sleek . Building the bridge without the column would have required load @-@ bearing cantilevers ( beams supported only on one side ) from structural positions on opposite sides of the street ; this would have been expensive and labor @-@ intensive , because it would have required excavating large portions of the parking garages on both sides of the street . Moreover , on the Daley Bicentennial Plaza side , the optimal location for the supporting cantilever would have been at the location of the Monroe Street Garage . Thus , the preferred bridge design was altered to avoid problems related to the underground parking garages . 
 The bridge is both a connector and a viewing platform for the park . It was designed to link the Historic Michigan Boulevard District and the entire Loop to the west with the Lake Michigan lakefront to the east . It was also designed to be a berm noise barrier blocking noise on the eight @-@ lane Columbus Drive from the Park 's outdoor band shell ( Jay Pritzker Pavilion ) , by deflecting traffic sounds upward . 
 The bridge , which uses steel girders , reinforced concrete abutments and deck slabs , hardwood deck , and a stainless steel veneer , cost between $ 12 @.@ 1 and $ 14 @.@ 5 million . It contains large sculptural plates of curvilinear stainless steel instead of more standard flat plates . The bridge 's curvilinear design gives it a flowing , natural look , instead of the linear , rigid form of standard bridges . Although its steel girders rest on concrete pylons and most of the bridge is solid concrete , the bridge uses a hollow box girder design to minimize weight , as the ground that supports the bridge covers underground parking garages . The concrete base and box girder are flanked by a hollow stainless steel skeleton . Despite its hollow structure , and the fact that it is designed as a concealed beam bridge , the footbridge is built to highway standards and can support a full capacity load of pedestrians . The bridge is designed without standard handrails and uses waist @-@ high parapets as guard rails instead . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The bridge was built using 22 @-@ gauge stainless steel type 316 plates ( 0 @.@ 031 inches or 0 @.@ 79 millimeters thick ) , with an angel hair finish and a flat interlocking panel process . Stainless steel type 316 is known for its excellent welding characteristics , as well as for its resistance to pitting . According to the Chicago Tribune , the bridge materials used in construction include 2 @,@ 000 rot @-@ resistant Brazilian hardwood boards for the deck , 115 @,@ 000 stainless steel screws and 9 @,@ 800 stainless steel shingle plates . According to Architecture Metal <unk> , the bridge has " 10 @,@ 400 stainless steel trapezoidal panels in 17 different shop fabricated configurations [ which ] involved 1 @,@ 000 shop hours " . The sheet metal work totaled 5 @,@ 900 field hours over a six @-@ month period . During construction , about 200 shingles were installed per day . The bridge includes two types of structural steel : steel that is 2 @.@ 0 inches or 5 @.@ 1 centimetres thick and 20 @.@ 0 inches or 51 centimetres in diameter for the approaches and box girders for the span . 
 CATIA software was used to handle the complex geometric layout . To ensure accurate fitting and alignment to the sloping , curving sides of the bridge , 4 @,@ 400 custom @-@ made convex , concave and radiused cladding panels were fabricated on site by sheet metal contractor Custom Metal Fabricators ( CMF ) . CMF used 57 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 300 m2 ) of stainless steel sheet to cover the sides , which have a combined perimeter length of 1 @,@ 728 feet ( 526 @.@ 7 m ) . CMF built special heated enclosures so that work could continue on site through the winter . They designed , fabricated and installed custom type 4 brushed stainless steel parapets serving in the place of handrails on the bridge . CMF earned the 2005 Tom <unk> Memorial Architectural Sheet Metal Award , by the California chapter of the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors ' National Association for the project . In 2005 it received a Merit Award from the National Steel Bridge Alliance , and an Excellence in Structural Engineering award from the Structural Engineers Association of Illinois . 
 On the day that the two halves of the bridge were joined , each side of Columbus Drive was closed for a 12 @-@ hour period and a 360 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 320 @-@ long @-@ ton ; 330 t ) crane was used to install the girders . Before bringing the crane to the location , screw jacks were used to shore up the underground garage roof to hold the crane 's weight . 
 The landscaping surrounding the bridge was redesigned by landscape architect Terry Guen . Honey locusts , ash and maple trees were removed and replaced with three varieties of magnolia and more than two dozen ornamental and canopy trees along the eastern foot of the bridge in Daley Bicentennial Plaza . Other preliminary construction work included setting reinforcing rods for the bridge in the concrete roof deck of the parking garage located under the park . 
 = = Use and controversies = = 
 Before its official opening , the bridge had a May 22 , 2004 , private ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony attended by Gehry and Mayor Daley . During the weekend of the ribbon @-@ cutting , Gehry was awarded an honorary degree from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago . The BP Pedestrian Bridge officially opened , along with the rest of Millennium Park , on July 16 , 2004 . It remained unnamed at the ribbon @-@ cutting , but before the July park opening , energy firm BP had paid $ 5 million for the bridge sponsorship and naming rights . 
 Timothy Gilfoyle , author of Millennium Park : Creating a Chicago Landmark , notes that a controversy surrounds the " tasteless " corporate naming of several of the Park 's features , including the bridge , which was named after an oil company . It is well documented that naming rights were sold for high fees , and Gilfoyle was not the only one who chastised park officials for selling naming rights to the highest bidder . Public interest groups have crusaded against commercialization of Chicago parks . However , many of the donors have a long history of local philanthropy and the funds were essential to providing necessary financing for several features of the park . 
 After the park opened , some of the bridge 's foibles became apparent . The bridge has had to be closed during the winter because freezing conditions make it unsafe . Since the bridge is over an expressway @-@ like trench of Columbus Drive , shoveling the snow onto passing cars is not an option and the Brazilian hardwood would be damaged by rock salt . The city not only mandates that the bridge be swept and washed daily , but also that the parapets be wiped free of fingerprints . 
 The bridge has also had controversial closures in the summer , which were related to larger park concerns . On September 8 , 2005 , Toyota Motor Sales USA paid $ 800 @,@ 000 to rent the bridge and all but four venues in the park from 6 a.m. to 11 p.m. On August 7 , 2006 , Allstate paid $ 700 @,@ 000 to rent the bridge and most of the park for a day . The exclusion of commuters who normally walk through the park and tourists lured by its attractions was controversial , though the city said the money raised paid for free public programs in Millennium Park . 
 = = Aesthetics = = 
 The bridge is noted for its sculptural characteristics and Kamin describes it as a delightful pleasure that was designed to emphasize its artistic elements while de @-@ emphasizing its concrete and steel support system . The New York Times notes that the artist Anish Kapoor 's attempts to hide the seams of Cloud Gate were an interesting contrast to Gehry 's architectural efforts . Gehry took pride in making the BP Pedestrian Bridge flaunt its seams . 
 Beginning with Gehry 's earliest bridge designs , the bridge was expected to complement the neighboring Pritzker Pavilion . Some have suggested that the bridge and the pavilion are mere extensions of Gehry 's work in other cities . For example , according to Gilfoyle , both structures embody Gehry 's established asymmetrical style , evoking fluid , continuous motion and sculptural abstraction . They also feature metallic facades and aesthetic curves , but they are said to be more refined , reduced and dynamic than much of his other work . 
 Since the 1960s , Gehry has made artistic use of scaled animals such as fish and snakes , which first appeared in his architectural designs in the 1980s . Many references to the bridge describe it as snakelike for its winding path , and some even refer to the stainless steel plates as scales with discussion of reptilian forms . Kamin calls it " a bridge that resembles a giant silver snake , complete with a scaly skin " , while Gehry said he thought the bridge looked like a river , but added he might be the only one who thought that . 
 The way the bridge flows in a continuum of unexpected directions is a break from Gehry 's other work and other more traditional urban and architectural forms nearby . Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning architecture critic Kamin gave the bridge four stars ( out of a possible four ) in his review and admires how " computers have given Gehry unparalleled formal freedom " to design " the complexity of its geometry " and multidimensional curvatures . The bridge provides views of both the Historic Michigan Boulevard District and Lake Michigan in a way that Kamin says makes it a belvedere . Kamin also recommends anyone having a bad day to stroll across the bridge , adding , " You won 't get where you 're going quickly , but you 'll feel a whole lot better once you 're done . " 
 = = Credits = = 
 Commissioned by – The City of Chicago 
 Architect – Gehry Partners , LLP 
 Project manager – US Equities 
 Construction manager – URS Construction Services 
 Structural engineer – Skidmore , Owings and Merrill 
 Mechanical and electrical engineer – McDonough Associates 
 Contractor – Walsh Construction 
 <unk> – <unk> <unk> Technologies Ltd . 
 Steel supplier – Littell Steel Company 
 Steel construction – Imperial Construction Associates 
 Sheet metal contractor – Custom Metal Fabricators Inc . 
 = Rare ( company ) = 
 Rare is a British video game developer located in Twycross , Leicestershire . The company was established in 1985 by Tim and Chris Stamper , founders of Ultimate Play the Game . During its early years , Rare was backed by an unlimited budget from Nintendo , primarily concentrated on Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) games . During this time they created successful titles such as Wizards & Warriors , Battletoads , and R.C. Pro @-@ Am . Rare became a prominent second @-@ party developer for Nintendo , who came to own a large minority stake of the company . During this period , Rare received international recognition and critical acclaim for games such as Donkey Kong Country , GoldenEye 007 , Banjo @-@ Kazooie , Perfect Dark , and Conker 's Bad Fur Day . 
 In 2002 , Microsoft acquired Rare , who retained their original brand , logo , and most intellectual properties . It has since focused on developing games exclusively for Microsoft Studios ' video game consoles . Notable releases include Kameo : Elements of Power , Perfect Dark Zero and Viva Piñata . In 2007 , founders Tim and Chris Stamper left the company to pursue " other opportunities " and , in 2010 , the company 's focus shifted to the Xbox Live Avatar and Kinect , releasing three different Kinect Sports games . In 2015 , Rare released Rare Replay , a compilation of 30 games produced by the company to celebrate their 30th anniversary . Rare is currently working on Sea of Thieves , a multiplayer adventure game . 
 Several key employees left Rare to form their own companies , such as Free Radical Design and Playtonic Games . Rare was widely recognised by the gaming industry and received numerous accolades from critics and journalists . Rare 's operation was often held off from critics , and the company is often described as secretive and seclusive . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding ( 1985 – 1993 ) = = = 
 Rare evolved from Ashby Computers & Graphics Ltd , better known by the trade name Ultimate Play the Game , and founded in Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch , Leicestershire by former arcade game developers Tim and Chris Stamper . After multiple critically and commercially successful releases including Jetpac , Atic Atac , Sabre Wulf , and Knight Lore , Ultimate Play The Game was among one of the biggest UK @-@ based video game development companies . The ZX Spectrum home computer , the platform the company usually developed games for , was only popular in the UK , and they believed that working on that platform would not be beneficial to the company 's growth as they considered it a " dead end " . Meanwhile , the company inspected an imported console from Japan , the Famicom , and believed that it would be an ideal future platform of choice for the company as it was more sophisticated than the Spectrum , had a worldwide market , and its cartridges had no load times . As a result , a new subdivision named Rare Ltd was established by Ashby Computers and Graphics Ltd in 1985 . Its main goal was to reverse @-@ engineer the console and investigate the codes for Famicom 's games to learn more about the console 's programming . With successful results , the company decided to sell the Ultimate brand to U.S. Gold , and ceased games development for the ZX Spectrum in the following year . 
 Famicom 's owner , Nintendo , once claimed that it would be impossible for their console to be decoded . Using the information the Ashby Computers and Graphics team learnt from the Rare division , the team prepared several tech demos and showed them to the Nintendo executive Minoru Arakawa in Kyoto . Impressed with their efforts , Nintendo decided to grant the Ashby team an unlimited budget for them to work on games for the Famicom platform . After they returned to England , they moved from Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch to Twycross , and established a new studio using the name of the subdivision ; Rare . They set their headquarters in a Manor Farmhouse . Rare also set up another company known as Rare Inc . , in Miami , Florida . Headed by Joel Hochberg , the American company was involved in maintaining Rare 's operation in the US and contacting major US publishers . Famicom was eventually released in the UK under the name Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . 
 With the unlimited budget , the Rare studio could work a large variety of different games . The first project Rare worked on was Slalom , an ice @-@ skiing title . The company then worked with various gaming publishers that included Tradewest , Acclaim Entertainment , Electronic Arts , Sega , Mindscape and <unk> to produce over 60 games for the NES and several additional Game Boy conversions . They helped in creating new and original intellectual properties , including R.C. Pro @-@ Am , a vehicular combat game with racing elements , and Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll , an action platform game with Tim Stamper developing the game 's graphics . Rare also developed Battletoads , a beat 'em up inspired by the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise . The game became known for its extreme difficulty , and upon seeing success , publisher Tradewest published multiple ports for the game , and tasked Rare to develop sequels . Tradewest also gave their own Double Dragon licence to Rare , allowing them to develop a crossover game between the two franchises . Rare released three Battletoads games in 1993 , including Battletoads & Double Dragon : The Ultimate Team , Battletoads in Ragnarok 's World and Battletoads in <unk> . The last Battletoads game was released for the arcade . Several Battletoads games were also ported to Sega 's Mega Drive . 
 Rare worked on licensed properties such as A Nightmare on Elm Street and Hollywood Squares , and ports including Marble Madness , <unk> , and Sid Meier 's Pirates ! . The development of four Rare 's games were outsourced to Zippo Games , including Wizards & Warriors and the third instalment of the Jetpac series , Solar Jetman : Hunt for the Golden Warship . Rare eventually acquired Zippo Games and renamed them to Rare Manchester . According to Ste Pickford , a Rare team member through the late 80s and the early 90s , Rare just " wanted to make as many games as they could in their ' window of opportunity ' " . However , despite the huge catalogue of games , none became a critical success for the company while less creativity and innovation were shown despite the games making large profits . 
 When the Super Nintendo Entertainment System was conceived , the Rare studio was not yet ready for the change . Rare limited their releases to some Battletoads games and decided to invest their significant NES profit in purchasing expensive Silicon Graphics workstations to make three @-@ dimensional models . This move made Rare the most technologically advanced developer in the UK , and situated them high in the international market . Their priority also changed at that time , as the team decided to focus on quality instead of quantity . 
 = = = Partnership with Nintendo ( 1994 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Rare , using the SGI systems , created a boxing game demo and presented it to Nintendo . As the SNES system at that time could not render all of the SGI graphics at once , Rare used the SGI graphics to produce 3D models and graphics , before pre @-@ rendering these graphics onto the cartridge of the SNES system , a process known as " Advanced Computer Modelling " . Their progress with the 3D graphics on the SGI systems impressed Nintendo , and in 1994 , Nintendo bought a 25 % stake in the company that gradually increased to 49 % , making Rare a second @-@ party developer for Nintendo . During this period , Rare started selling their games under the trademark name " Rareware " . The company was considered one of Nintendo 's key developers and had enough recognition that Nintendo offered the Rare studio the Nintendo catalogue of characters to create a 3D CGI game . The Stampers asked for Donkey Kong . The resulting game was Donkey Kong Country , which was developed by a total of 20 people and enjoyed a 18 @-@ month development cycle . Rare staff also visited Twycross Zoo , observing and videotaping real gorillas . The game was a critical success , with critics praising the game 's highly advanced visuals and artstyle . Donkey Kong Country sold over eight million copies worldwide , making it the second best @-@ selling game in the SNES library . The game received several Game of the Year honours and was followed by two sequels , Donkey Kong Country 2 : Diddy 's Kong Quest and Donkey Kong Country 3 : Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! , as well as several handheld spin @-@ offs such as the Donkey Kong Land series . 
 Nintendo 's stake purchase allowed Rare to expand significantly . The number of staff members increased from 84 to 250 , and Rare moved out from their headquarters at the Manor Farmhouse . Rare also developed a CGI arcade fighting game , Killer Instinct , on their own custom @-@ built arcade machine . Killer Instinct was set to be released for Nintendo 's own 64 @-@ bit system , the Nintendo 64 in 1995 , but was forced to release the game for the 16 @-@ bit SNES system , and had to downgrade the game 's graphics . Killer Instinct sold 3 @.@ 2 million copies , and was followed by a sequel , Killer Instinct 2 . Killer Instinct Gold , the console version of Killer Instinct 2 , suffered from a graphical downgrade due to the compression technology used to fit the arcade version onto the smaller Nintendo 64 cartridge . 
 Rare then developed Blast Corps for the Nintendo 64 . The game sold one million copies , which was considered disappointing by Rare . At that time , Rare was split into several teams , working on different projects . A large @-@ scaled platformer was set to be released afterwards but was delayed . As a result , Rare changed their schedule and released their smaller projects first . The first project was GoldenEye 007 , a game based on the titular film . The project was led by Martin Hollis and development was conducted by an inexperienced team . Inspired by Sega 's Virtua Cop , Goldeneye 007 had originally been an on @-@ rail shooter before the team decided to expand the gameplay and turn it into a free @-@ roaming first @-@ person shooter . New elements , such as stealth , headshot mechanics and reloading , were introduced . A split @-@ screen multiplayer was added to the game by the end of its development . GoldenEye 007 was the first console first @-@ person shooter developed by Rare and it was released two years after the release of the film . The game received very high critical praise and received numerous awards . It is often credited for having revolutionised the genre of first @-@ person shooting video games . Goldeneye 007 remained as one of the best @-@ selling games for two years , and sold more than eight million units worldwide . 
 Rare then developed Diddy Kong Racing , their first self @-@ published game . Originally intended as a real @-@ time strategy game involving cavemen , the game was re @-@ imagined into a racing game prior to its release in 1997 . It was one of the fastest selling games at the time , as recorded by The Guinness Book of Records . Diddy Kong Racing also features protagonists from some future Rare games , including Banjo and Conker . At the time , Rare was still working on the large @-@ scale platform game . Originally codenamed Dream : Land of Giants , it was a game featuring a young boy named Edison and pirates . The protagonist was then replaced by a bear known as Banjo , and Rare expanded the role of Kazooie the bird . The two characters were inspired by characters from Walt Disney Animation Studios films and Rare hoped that they can appeal to a younger audience . Banjo @-@ Kazooie was released in June 1998 to critical acclaim . A sequel , Banjo Tooie , was released in 2000 . It was a critical success and it outsold the first game , selling 3 million copies . 
 Upon the completion of Banjo @-@ Kazooie 's development , Hollis immediately began another project . Originally set to be a tie @-@ in for Tomorrow Never Dies , Rare was significantly outbid by another publisher , forcing Rare to develop a new concept with new characters . With a major emphasis on lighting , the game was named Perfect Dark . Hollis left Rare for Nintendo 14 months after the start of Perfect Dark 's development . Around the same time , numerous employees left the company and formed new studios . With major project leads departing , a new team took over its development and diminished the role of lighting in the game , making it a more straightforward first @-@ person shooter . Despite the game 's troubled development , it did not affect the progress of Rare 's other teams . When Perfect Dark was still in development , Rare released two other titles , Jet Force Gemini and Donkey Kong 64 . In 1999 , Nintendo signed an agreement with Disney , and assigned Rare to develop several racing and adventure games featuring Mickey Mouse . The project later became Mickey 's Speedway USA and Mickey Racing Adventure . Perfect Dark eventually resurfaced and it was released in 2000 to critical acclaim . The game sold approximately 2 million copies . 
 Conker the Squirrel also had its own game . Originally named Conker 's Quest , the title was renamed to Twelve Tales : Conker 64 . However , the new title was criticised for being too family @-@ friendly and too similar to Banjo @-@ Kazooie . As a result , the team renamed the game to Conker 's Bad Fur Day and was re @-@ revealed again in 2000 . Conker 's Bad Fur Day , unlike Banjo @-@ Kazooie , was intended for a mature audience , and features violence , profanity and scatological humour . The game received positive reviews from critics , but was a commercial failure as the game was released at the end of the Nintendo 64 's life cycle and the game was not actively promoted by Nintendo . 
 After the completion of Diddy Kong Racing , another team was working on a new game known as Dinosaur Planet for the Nintendo 64 . However , Shigeru Miyamoto , a Nintendo executive , demanded the team to recreate the game as a Star Fox title for Nintendo 's new console , the GameCube . Unlike previous Star Fox games , Star Fox Adventures focused on ground @-@ based open world exploration . The game received positive reviews upon its launch in 2002 . Star Fox Adventures was the only game developed by Rare for GameCube . 
 = = = Microsoft era ( 2002 – present ) = = = 
 Game development costs gradually increased , and Nintendo did not provide Rare with more capital nor did they purchase the company 's remaining stake . According to Rare founders Tim and Chris Stamper , they were surprised that Nintendo did not directly acquire the studio . Rare then looked for potential buyers . In early 2000 , workers from Activision and Microsoft began visiting Rare with purchase offers . Rare was interested in Activision 's offer , but the deal collapsed and on 24 September 2002 Microsoft paid $ 375 million for the company . Rare became a first @-@ party developer for Microsoft 's Xbox . Character trademarks from games developed by Rare for Nintendo consoles , such as Conker of Conker 's Bad Fur Day and Banjo of the Banjo @-@ Kazooie series , were retained by Rare ; intellectual property created by Nintendo , such as Donkey Kong and Star Fox , were retained by Nintendo . This left Donkey Kong Racing , due for release for the GameCube , unreleased . 30 employees left Rare during the transition . 
 Since Microsoft is currently not part of the handheld video @-@ game console market , Rare continued to develop games for Nintendo handheld consoles after the acquisition . In August 2003 Rare and Microsoft entered an agreement with THQ for Rare to publish games for the Game Boy Advance , including Sabre Wulf , a game based on an Ultimate character ; Banjo @-@ Kazooie : Grunty 's Revenge , initially intended as a Game Boy Color game and It 's Mr. Pants ! , a puzzle game originally developed as Donkey Kong : Coconut Crackers . January 2005 saw the completion of this deal with the release of Banjo @-@ Pilot , known as " Diddy Kong Pilot " before the Microsoft acquisition . 
 In 2003 Rare released their first Microsoft game , Grabbed by the Ghoulies , a humorous action @-@ adventure game set in a haunted mansion full of supernatural creatures . Originally intended as a free @-@ roaming game , it was significantly streamlined in design and concept to attract a larger , more casual audience . The game received mixed reviews from critics , and was considered Rare 's worst and least @-@ popular game . At E3 2004 , Microsoft 's Ken Lobb said that Rare had obtained Nintendo DS development kits and was working on two games for the Nintendo DS . Shortly afterwards , Microsoft issued a statement that the company and its studios had no plans for Nintendo DS development . However , in July 2005 Rare posted job openings for Nintendo DS development on its website and said that it was creating " key " DS titles . The first of these games was Diddy Kong Racing DS , a remake of the Nintendo 64 title Diddy Kong Racing which was released in February 2007 . 
 Rare released Conker : Live & Reloaded , a remake of Conker 's Bad Fur Day , in 2005 with updated graphics and a reworked multiplayer option . The game received generally @-@ favourable reviews but , similar to Bad Fur Day , was a commercial failure . Xbox successor Xbox 360 was released in 2005 , and two of its launch titles were developed by Rare : Perfect Dark Zero and Kameo : Elements of Power . Zero , a prequel to the first Perfect Dark , was originally intended for GameCube before its redesign as an Xbox 360 game . Rare removed several features to meet the game 's release deadline . Kameo : Elements of Power was also intended for the GameCube . A new intellectual property , in it the player character shape @-@ shifts to solve puzzles . Although both games received generally @-@ positive reviews from critics and sold more than a million copies , they were considered disappointments . 
 In 2006 the company released Viva Piñata , a game involving gardening . Incorporating elements of several franchises including The Sims , Animal Crossing , and Harvest Moon , it was acclaimed as innovative . The game 's commercial performance was a disappointment , however , and some Rare team members questioned Microsoft Studios ' large marketing budget for Gears of War and its relative neglect of Viva Piñata . On 2 January 2007 , Rare founders Chris and Tim Stamper left the company to " pursue other opportunities " . Former lead designer Gregg Mayles became Rare 's creative director and Mark Betteridge the company 's studio director . That year saw the release of Jetpac Refuelled , a remake of Jetpac for Xbox Live Arcade . 
 Rare unveiled their work on Xbox Live avatars , Viva Piñata : Trouble in Paradise ( the next instalment in the Viva Piñata series ) , and Banjo @-@ Kazooie : Nuts & Bolts in 2008 . Made by the core team that developed the first Banjo @-@ Kazooie , Nuts & Bolts received significant criticism from players due to its focus on vehicle construction rather than traditional platforming . Despite generally positive reviews , the company 's titles for Microsoft sold poorly and Microsoft decided to restructure the studio at the end of the decade . In March 2010 Rare opened a new facility at <unk> Studios in Digbeth , Birmingham . Later that year Microsoft confirmed that Scott Henson , a developer who had worked on the hardware and software designs of the Xbox 360 console and Kinect for Xbox 360 , replaced Mark Betteridge as studio manager and announced a focus on Xbox Live avatars . Rare also shifted their focus to Kinect . According to Henson , " Kinect will be the main focus for Rare going forwards as it 's a very rich canvas . This is just the beginning of an experience that will touch millions of people " . Rare 's first Kinect project , Kinect Sports , was released in November 2010 . Originally titled Sports Star , a more @-@ complex sports simulation games , the game was streamlined into what Microsoft executive Don Mattrick hoped would be the Kinect equivalent of Wii Sports . According to a former Rare employee , the team was worried about the game during its development because of Kinect 's limitations . Despite average reviews it was a commercial success , selling three million units by May 2011 . Many non @-@ Kinect teams at Rare and <unk> , another Microsoft studio , collaborated on the development of sequel Kinect Sports : Season Two . Combining with the sales of the first Kinect Sports , the game sold more than 8 million copies . 
 In March 2011 Scott Henson announced that Craig Duncan , who had worked on Sonic & Sega All @-@ Stars Racing and the Colin McRae Rally series , was hired as senior studio director . Simon Woodroffe , who had worked at several studios ( including Adventure Soft , Midway Games , Ubisoft , and Sega ) , became the studio 's creative director in April 2012 . A Rare property , Killer Instinct , was revived in 2013 . The company had a supporting role in its development , assisting lead developer Double Helix Games . Another Rare mascot , Conker , was also featured in another Microsoft game , Project Spark as episodic downloadable content . Known as Conker 's Big Reunion , it was cancelled in 2015 . 
 Rare released Kinect Sports Rivals in 2014 . The game was worked on by 150 staff members and a new game engine was developed for it . The game was a commercial failure and following Microsoft 's announcement that Kinect would no longer be a priority , about 15 Rare employees were laid off . On 10 February 2015 a group of former Rare employees announced the formation of a new studio , Playtonic Games , and planned a " spiritual successor " to the Banjo @-@ Kazooie franchise entitled Yooka @-@ Laylee . According to Rare composer Robin Beanland , the year 2015 would be significant for the company . At E3 2015 , a new compilation game , Rare Replay celebrating the studio 's 30th anniversary , was introduced ; it was released in August . The compilation , with 30 of the studio 's published titles , lacked some popular Rare franchises , including Donkey Kong and Goldeneye 007 , due to licensing issues with Nintendo . Rare Replay became the most pre @-@ ordered game shown at E3 that year and received critical acclaim upon launch . A new game , Sea of Thieves , which was a multiplayer adventure game marketed as " The Best Game That Rare Has Ever Made " , was introduced at E3 that year . 
 = = Culture = = 
 According to Mark Betteridge , one of Rare 's main goals is to create games people will find enjoyable rather than just to earn profit . The Stamper brothers gave the team considerable creative freedom , although they would intervene if a product was technically flawed or under @-@ performing . Some employees noted that working for Rare in its early days could be difficult , with staff members allowed 30 minutes for lunch and possibly working more than 60 hours a week . Nintendo worked closely with Rare , and their relationship was described as a " creative partnership " by Viva Piñata designer Justin Cook . According to Hansen in 2010 , innovation is very important to the company , thus they focus on trying out new technology , such as Xbox 360 's Kinect . According to Duncan in 2014 , Rare would only develop games that had unique ideas , and will never develop a generic game with their owned intellectual properties . 
 Ed Fries , head of Microsoft Studios ' publishing division at the time of acquisition , said that the company attempted to preserve Rare 's culture so its staff could continue feeling that they worked for Rare rather than Microsoft . Rare employees differed about working conditions after the Microsoft acquisition . According to Star Fox Adventures lead engineer Phil Tossell , conditions became more stressful after an " imperceptible " start , and that the culture of the two companies began clashing with each other . Tossell said that Microsoft gradually imposed a corporate structure on Rare , including more performance reviews and meetings , to which some Rare members found difficulty in adapting . Some admitted that early changes , such as permitting team members to discuss projects they were not working on and allowing staff members to use the internet or listen to music during work hours , were beneficial to team morale . Betteridge called the overall change " positive " , saying that Microsoft 's capital could help Rare develop their projects . Former Rare employee Gavin Price said that some Microsoft executives , such as Phil Spencer , were supportive of the developer . Grant Kirkhope , a former composer at Rare , strongly criticized Microsoft for ruining Rare . <unk> Rare @-@ Extreme documented a day in the life at Rare in 2008 with two employees showing a 9 till 5 work schedule . Former Xbox executive Peter Moore voiced his disappointment with Rare 's works after the acquisition . He noted that Rare employees were attempting to " recreate the glory years " , but their skills had become outdated and were no longer " applicable in today 's market " . Duncan insisted that there were still a lot of talented people working at Rare , and they will have a " bright future " . 
 Unlike other software developers , Rare acquired a reputation for secrecy ; the approach to their office buildings , in Manor Park near Twycross , is monitored by cameras . Web video shows have been granted access in recent years , such as Eurogamer in November 2006 . The company is internally divided , operating slightly differently from other software houses . According to Tim Stamper , 
 Rare has a different philosophy . We don 't really have much contact with other game development companies and we just do things the way they 've evolved . We try to employ people who are great games players and games enthusiasts and they 're really interested in seeing the other games we 're developing in the Company , so it 's really a group of games enthusiasts all working together to produce the best games they can – that 's Rare . 
 Despite its secrecy , Rare allowed several exclusive tours of its studio by fan sites <unk> in 1999 and Rare @-@ Extreme in 2004 and again in 2009 . In 2010 , Rare declined an offer by fansite <unk> to film a documentary about their studios at <unk> 's expense . The film , to celebrate Rare 's 25th anniversary , would have been distributed on the internet and Xbox Live . Rare refused permission to shoot this film , saying that it was not " on message " . <unk> was shut down , and stated that the site could not support the company 's new corporate direction . Rare 's secrecy was criticised by Hardcore Gamer 's Alex Carlson , as they thought that it made them " disconnected " , and prompted them to develop games that " their fans don ’ t want " . 
 = = Related companies = = 
 Around 1997 , a number of Rare employees left to establish separate companies . The first was Eighth Wonder , underwritten by Sony Computer Entertainment Europe , which did not produce any games before it closed . After Martin Hollis left Rare , he joined Nintendo before founding his own company <unk> , releasing <unk> , Go ! Puzzle and Bonsai Barber . Other Perfect Dark team members , including David Doak and Steve Ellis , founded Free Radical Design and created the TimeSplitters series . It was acquired by Crytek and renamed Crytek UK before its 2014 closure , with most of its staff moving to Deep Silver Dambuster Studios . 
 Former Free Radical and Rare staff also formed Crash Labs , a studio specialising in developing iOS games . Chris Seavor , director of Conker 's Bad Fur Day , founded the Gory Detail studio and released 2D platform game The Unlikely Legend of Rusty Pup . Starfire Studios were founded by four former Rare employees and released Fusion Genesis , an Xbox Live Arcade title published by Microsoft Game Studios . Another group of former Rare employees formed a mobile @-@ game studio , <unk> Pixels . Former Rare employee Lee Schuneman headed Lift London , a Microsoft studio . Phil Tossell and Jennifer <unk> founded <unk> and released <unk> . Playtonic Games was founded by several former Rare employees ; their first project is Yooka @-@ Laylee , a spiritual successor to Banjo @-@ Kazooie . Chris and Tim Stamper joined <unk> , a mobile game company founded by Tim Stamper 's son , Joe Stamper . Their first game is That <unk> Thing ! The <unk> Game Ever for Android . 
 = = Games = = 
 Rare has developed a number of video games since its founding , with sales nearing 90 million copies by 2002 . The company is best known for its platform games , which include the Donkey Kong Country , Banjo @-@ Kazooie , and Conker series , and for its Nintendo 64 first @-@ person shooters GoldenEye 007 and Perfect Dark . Rare does not adhere to a few specific video @-@ game genres . They have also developed action @-@ adventure games , including Star Fox Adventures and Kameo : Elements of Power ; fighting games , such as the Killer Instinct series ; racing games , such as R.C. Pro @-@ Am and Diddy Kong Racing , and beat ' em up @-@ shoot ' em up games such as Battletoads and Captain Skyhawk . Since Rare has usually been associated with a video @-@ game console manufacturer ( such as Nintendo and Microsoft ) , most of their titles have been developed for a particular platform . Since E3 2015 , Rare has been working on Sea of Thieves , a pirate @-@ themed MMO for Xbox One and Windows 10 . 
 The company 's cancelled projects include Dream : Land of Giants , which became Banjo @-@ Kazooie ; Perfect Dark Core , originally the sequel of the first Perfect Dark ; Black Widow , an open world game that tasks players to control an eight @-@ legged robot ; Sundown , which featured a horde @-@ like survival mode ; The Fast And The <unk> , a mascot racer ; Tailwind , an action game featuring helicopters ; Urchin , a Fable @-@ style game which began development after the completion of Live & Reloaded ; Ordinary Joe ; Savannah , a Kinect @-@ based game ; Kinect equivalents of Wii Fit and Professor Layton , a sequel to Diddy Kong Racing , and a sequel to Kameo : Elements of Power . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Rare received numerous awards , including BAFTA award for " Best UK Developer " for its work on GoldenEye 007 . Rare was awarded the BAFTA Interactive Entertainment Moving Images Award for 2000 , for developing Perfect Dark . Conker 's Bad Fur Day won the 2001 BAFTA Interactive Entertainment Award for sound , Kinect Sports : Season Two won the BAFTA award for Best Sports / Fitness . Tim and Chris Stamper were named as Development Legends in the 2015 Develop Industry Excellence Awards . Rare was included as Gamasutra 's Top 30 Developers of All Time of all time , and was ranked as the 36th best video game maker by IGN . 
 = Willamette River = 
 The Willamette River ( / <unk> / wil @-@ LAM @-@ it ) is a major tributary of the Columbia River , accounting for 12 to 15 percent of the Columbia 's flow . The Willamette 's main stem is 187 miles ( 301 km ) long , lying entirely in northwestern Oregon in the United States . Flowing northward between the Oregon Coast Range and the Cascade Range , the river and its tributaries form the Willamette Valley , a basin that contains two @-@ thirds of Oregon 's population , including the state capital , Salem , and the state 's largest city , Portland , which surrounds the Willamette 's mouth at the Columbia . 
 Originally created by plate tectonics about 35 million years ago and subsequently altered by volcanism and erosion , the river 's drainage basin was significantly modified by the Missoula Floods at the end of the most recent ice age . Humans began living in the watershed over 10 @,@ 000 years ago . There were once many tribal villages along the lower river and in the area around its mouth on the Columbia . Indigenous peoples lived throughout the upper reaches of the basin as well . 
 Rich with sediments deposited by flooding and fed by prolific rainfall on the western side of the Cascades , the Willamette Valley is one of the most fertile agricultural regions in North America , and was thus the destination of many 19th @-@ century pioneers traveling west along the Oregon Trail . The river was an important transportation route in the 19th century , although Willamette Falls , just upstream from Portland , was a major barrier to boat traffic . In the 21st century , major highways follow the river , and roads cross it on more than 50 bridges . 
 Since 1900 , more than 15 large dams and many smaller ones have been built in the Willamette 's drainage basin , and 13 of them are operated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ( USACE ) . The dams are used primarily to produce hydroelectricity , to maintain reservoirs for recreation , and to prevent flooding . The river and its tributaries support 60 fish species , including many species of salmon and trout ; this is despite the dams , other alterations , and pollution ( especially on the river 's lower reaches ) . Part of the Willamette Floodplain was established as a National Natural Landmark in 1987 and the river was named as one of 14 American Heritage Rivers in 1998 . 
 = = Course = = 
 The upper tributaries of the Willamette originate in the mountains south and southeast of Eugene , Oregon . Formed by the confluence of the Middle Fork Willamette River and the Coast Fork Willamette River near Springfield , the main stem Willamette meanders generally north for 187 miles ( 301 km ) to the Columbia River . The river 's two most significant course deviations occur at Newberg , where it turns sharply east , and about 18 miles ( 29 km ) downstream from Newberg , where it turns north again . Near its mouth north of downtown Portland , the river splits into two channels that flow around Sauvie Island . Used for navigation purposes , these channels are managed by the U.S. federal government . The main channel , which is 40 feet ( 12 m ) deep and varies in width from 600 to 1 @,@ 900 feet ( 180 to 580 m ) ( although the river broadens to 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) in some of its lower reaches ) , enters the Columbia about 101 miles ( 163 km ) from the larger river 's mouth on the Pacific Ocean . The channel forms the primary navigational conduit for Portland 's harbor and riverside industrial areas . The smaller Multnomah Channel , a distributary , is 21 miles ( 34 km ) long , about 600 feet ( 180 m ) wide , and 40 feet ( 12 m ) deep . It ends about 14 @.@ 5 miles ( 23 @.@ 3 km ) further downstream on the Columbia , near St. Helens in Columbia County . 
 Proposals have been made for deepening the Multnomah Channel to 43 feet ( 13 m ) in conjunction with roughly 103 @.@ 5 miles ( 166 @.@ 6 km ) of tandem @-@ maintained navigation on the Columbia River . Between the 1850s and the 1960s , channel @-@ straightening and flood control projects , as well as agricultural and urban encroachment , cut the length of the river between the McKenzie River confluence and Harrisburg by 65 percent . Similarly , the river was shortened by 40 percent in the stretch between Harrisburg and Albany . 
 Interstate 5 and three branches of Oregon Route 99 are the two major highways that follow the river for its entire length . Communities along the main stem include Springfield and Eugene in Lane County ; Harrisburg in Linn County ; Corvallis in Benton County ; Albany in Linn and Benton counties ; Salem in Marion County ; Newberg in Yamhill County ; Oregon City , West Linn , Milwaukie , and Lake Oswego in Clackamas County ; and Portland in Multnomah and Washington counties . Significant tributaries from source to mouth include the Middle and Coast forks and the McKenzie , Long Tom , Marys , <unk> , Santiam , <unk> , Yamhill , <unk> , Tualatin , and Clackamas rivers . 
 Beginning at 438 feet ( 134 m ) above sea level , the main stem descends 428 feet ( 130 m ) between source and mouth , or about 2 @.@ 3 feet per mile ( 0 @.@ 4 m per km ) . The gradient is slightly steeper from the source to Albany than it is from Albany to Oregon City . At Willamette Falls , between West Linn and Oregon City , the river plunges about 40 feet ( 12 m ) . For the rest of its course , the river is extremely low @-@ gradient and is affected by Pacific Ocean tidal effects from the Columbia . The main stem of the Willamette varies in width from about 330 to 660 feet ( 100 to 200 m ) . 
 = = = Discharge = = = 
 With an average flow at the mouth of about 37 @,@ 400 cubic feet per second ( 1 @,@ 060 m3 / s ) , the Willamette ranks 19th in volume among rivers in the United States and contributes 12 to 15 percent of the total flow of the Columbia River . The Willamette 's flow varies considerably season to season , averaging about 8 @,@ 200 cubic feet per second ( 230 m3 / s ) in August to more than 79 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 2 @,@ 200 m3 / s ) in December . 
 The U.S. Geological Survey ( USGS ) operates five stream gauges along the river , at Harrisburg , Corvallis , Albany , Salem , and Portland . The average discharge at the lowermost gauge , near the Morrison Bridge in Portland , was 33 @,@ 220 cubic feet per second ( 941 m3 / s ) between 1972 and 2013 . Located at river mile ( RM ) 12 @.@ 8 or river kilometer ( RK ) 20 @.@ 6 , the gauge measures the flow from an area of 11 @,@ 200 square miles ( 29 @,@ 000 km2 ) , roughly 97 percent of the Willamette basin . The highest flow recorded at this station was 420 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 11 @,@ 893 m3 / s ) on February 9 , 1996 , during the Willamette Valley Flood of 1996 , and the minimum was 4 @,@ 200 cubic feet per second ( 120 m3 / s ) on July 10 , 1978 . The highest recorded flow of 635 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 18 @,@ 000 m3 / s ) for the Willamette at a different gauge in Portland occurred during a flood in 1861 . This and many other large flows preceded the Flood Control Act of 1936 and dam construction on the Willamette 's major tributaries . 
 The river below Willamette Falls , 26 @.@ 5 miles ( 42 @.@ 6 km ) from the mouth , is affected by <unk> tides , and gauges have detected reverse flows ( backwards river flows ) upstream from Ross Island at RM 15 ( RK 24 ) . The National Weather Service issues tide forecasts for the river at the Morrison Bridge . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Willamette River basin was created primarily by plate tectonics and volcanism and was altered by erosion and sedimentation , including some related to enormous glacial floods as recent as 13 @,@ 000 years ago . The initial trough @-@ like configuration was created about 35 million years ago as a forearc basin while the Pacific Plate subducted beneath the North American Plate . Marine deposits on top of older volcanics underlie the valley , which was initially part of the continental shelf , rather than a separate inland sea . About 20 to 16 million years ago , uplift formed the Coast Range and separated the basin from the Pacific Ocean . 
 Basalts of the Columbia River Basalt Group , from eruptions in eastern Oregon , flowed across large parts of the northern half of the basin about 15 million years ago . They covered the Tualatin Mountains ( West Hills ) , most of the Tualatin Valley , and the slopes of hills further south , with up to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) of lava . Later depositions covered the basalt with up to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) of silt in the Portland and Tualatin basins . During the Pleistocene , beginning roughly 2 @.@ 5 million years ago , volcanic activity in the Cascades combined with a cool , moist climate to produce further heavy sedimentation across the basin ; braided rivers created alluvial fans spreading down from the east . 
 Between about 15 @,@ 500 and 13 @,@ 000 years ago , the Missoula Floods — a series of large outpourings originating at Glacial Lake Missoula in Montana — swept down the Columbia River and backfilled the Willamette watershed . Each flood produced " discharges that exceeded the annual discharge of all the present @-@ day rivers of the world combined " . Filling the Willamette basin to depths of 400 feet ( 120 m ) in the Portland region , each flood created a temporary lake , Lake Allison , that stretched from Lake Oswego to near Eugene . The ancestral Tualatin Valley , part of the Willamette basin , flooded as well ; water depths ranged from 200 feet ( 61 m ) at Lake Oswego to 100 feet ( 30 m ) as far upstream ( west ) as Forest Grove . Flood deposits of silt and clay , ranging in thickness from 115 feet ( 35 m ) in the north to about 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) in the south , settled from this muddy water to form today 's valley floor . The floods carried Montana icebergs well into the basin , where they melted and dropped glacial erratics on the land 's surface . These rocks , composed of granite and other materials common to central Montana but not to the Willamette Valley , include more than 40 boulders , each at least 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) in diameter . Before being partly chipped away and removed , the largest of these originally weighed about 160 short tons ( 150 t ) . 
 The northern part of the watershed is underlain by a network of faults capable of producing earthquakes at any time , and many small quakes have been recorded in the basin since the mid @-@ 19th century . In 1993 , the Scotts Mills earthquake — the largest recent earthquake in the valley , measuring 5 @.@ 6 on the Richter scale — was centered near Scotts Mills , about 34 miles ( 55 km ) south of Portland . It caused $ 30 million in damage , including harm to the Oregon State Capitol in Salem . Evidence suggests that massive quakes of 8 or more on the Richter scale have occurred historically in the Cascadia subduction zone off the Oregon coast , most recently in 1700 CE , and that others as strong as 9 on the Richter scale occur every 500 to 800 years . The basin 's high population density , its nearness to this subduction zone , and its loose soils , which tend to amplify shaking , make the Willamette Valley especially vulnerable to damage from strong earthquakes . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The Willamette River drains a region of 11 @,@ 478 square miles ( 29 @,@ 730 km2 ) , which is 12 percent of the total area of Oregon . Bounded by the Coast Range to the west and the Cascade Range to the east , the river basin is about 180 miles ( 290 km ) long and 100 miles ( 160 km ) wide . Elevations within the watershed range from 10 @,@ 495 feet ( 3 @,@ 199 m ) at Mount Jefferson in the Cascade Range to 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) at the mouth on the Columbia River . Watersheds bordering the Willamette River basin are those of the Little Deschutes River to the southeast , the Deschutes River to the east , and the Sandy River to the northeast ; the North Umpqua and Umpqua rivers to the south ; coastal rivers including ( from south to north ) the <unk> , the <unk> , the <unk> , the Siletz , the <unk> , the Trask , and the Wilson to the west ; the Nehalem and the <unk> to the northwest , and the Columbia River to the north . 
 About 2 @.@ 5 million people lived in the Willamette River basin as of 2010 , about 65 percent of the population of Oregon . As of 2009 , the basin contained 20 of the 25 most populous cities in Oregon . These cities include Springfield , Eugene , Corvallis , Albany , Salem , Keizer , Newberg , Oregon City , West Linn , Milwaukie , Lake Oswego , and Portland . The largest is Portland , with more than 500 @,@ 000 residents . Other cities in the watershed ( but not on the main @-@ stem river ) with populations of 20 @,@ 000 or more are Gresham , Hillsboro , Beaverton , Tigard , McMinnville , Tualatin , Woodburn , and Forest Grove . 
 Sixty @-@ four percent of the watershed is privately owned , while 36 percent is publicly owned . The U.S. Forest Service manages 30 percent of the watershed , the U.S. Bureau of Land Management 5 percent , and the State of Oregon 1 percent . Sixty @-@ eight percent of the watershed is forested ; agriculture , concentrated in the Willamette Valley , makes up 19 percent , and urban areas cover 5 percent . More than 81 @,@ 000 miles ( 130 @,@ 000 km ) of roads criss @-@ cross the watershed . 
 In 1987 , the U.S. Secretary of the Interior designated 713 acres ( 289 ha ) of the watershed in Benton County as a National Natural Landmark . This area is the Willamette Floodplain , the largest remaining unplowed native grassland in the North Pacific geologic province , which encompasses most of the Pacific Northwest coast . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First inhabitants = = = 
 For at least 10 @,@ 000 years , a variety of indigenous peoples populated the Willamette Valley . These included the Kalapuya , the Chinook , and the Clackamas . The territory of the Clackamas encompassed the northeastern portion of the basin , including the Clackamas River ( with which their name is shared ) . Although it is unclear exactly when , the territory of the Chinook once extended across the northern part of the watershed , through the Columbia River valley . Indigenous peoples of the Willamette Valley were further divided into groups including the Yamhill , Atfalati ( Tualatin ) , Molala , Santiam , <unk> @-@ <unk> , Muddy Creek , Long Tom , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , many of which were part of the larger Kalapuya group . The name Willamette is of indigenous origin , deriving from the French pronunciation of the name of a Clackamas Native American village . However , Native American languages in Oregon were very similar , so the name may also be derived from Kalapuya dialects . 
 Around the year 1850 , the Kalapuya numbered between 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 and were distributed among several groups . These figures are only speculative ; there may have been as few as eight subgroups or as many as 16 . In that time period , the Clackamas ' tribal population was roughly 1 @,@ 800 . The U.S. Census Bureau estimated that the Chinook population was nearly 5 @,@ 000 , though not all of the Chinook lived on the Willamette . The Chinook territory encompassed the lower Columbia River valley and significant stretches of the Pacific coast on both the north and the south side of the Columbia 's mouth . At times , however , the Chinook territory extended even farther south in the Willamette Valley . The total native population was estimated at about 15 @,@ 000 . 
 The indigenous peoples of the Willamette River practiced a variety of life ways . Those on the lower river , slightly closer to the coast , often relied on fishing as their primary economic mainstay . Salmon was the most important fish to Willamette River tribes as well as to the Native Americans of the Columbia River , where white traders traded fish with the Native Americans . Upper @-@ river tribes caught steelhead and salmon , often by building weirs across tributary streams . Tribes of the northern Willamette Valley practiced a generally settled lifestyle . The Chinooks lived in great wooden lodges , practiced slavery , and had a well @-@ defined caste system . People of the south were more nomadic , traveling from place to place with the seasons . They were known for the controlled burning of woodlands to create meadows for hunting and plant gathering ( especially camas ) . 
 = = = Fur trade = = = 
 The Willamette River first appears in the records of outsiders in 1792 , when it was seen by British Lieutenant William Robert Broughton of the Vancouver Expedition , led by George Vancouver . From the 18th to the mid @-@ 19th century , much of the Pacific Northwest and most of its rivers were involved in the fur trade , in which fur trappers ( mostly French @-@ Canadians working for the Hudson 's Bay Company and the North West Company , which later merged ) hunted for beaver and sea otter on rivers , streams , and coastlines . The pelts of these animals commanded substantial prices in either the United States , Canada or eastern Asia , because of their " thick , luxurious and water @-@ repellent " qualities . 
 Fur traders heavily exploited the Willamette River and its tributaries . During this period , the Siskiyou Trail ( or California @-@ Oregon Trail ) was created . This trading path , over 600 miles ( 970 km ) long , stretched from the mouth of the Willamette River near present @-@ day Portland south through the Willamette Valley , crossing the Cascades and the Siskiyou Mountains , and south through the Sacramento Valley to San Francisco . 
 = = = 19th @-@ century development = = = 
 In 1805 , the Lewis and Clark Expedition traveled thousands of miles across central North America in an attempt to map and explore the Louisiana Territory of the United States and the Oregon Country , which were then occupied mainly by Native Americans and settlers from Great Britain . As the expedition traveled down and back up the Columbia River , it missed the mouth of the Willamette , one of the Columbia 's largest tributaries . It was only after receiving directions from natives along the Sandy River that the explorers learned about their oversight . William Clark returned down the Columbia and entered the Willamette River in April 1806 . The United States Exploring Expedition passed through the Willamette Valley in 1841 while traveling along the Siskiyou Trail . The expedition members noted extensive salmon fishing by natives at Willamette Falls , much like that at Celilo Falls on the Columbia River . 
 In the middle part of the 19th century , the Willamette Valley 's fertile soils , pleasant climate , and abundant water attracted thousands of settlers from the eastern United States , mainly the Upland South borderlands of Missouri , Iowa , and the Ohio Valley . Many of these emigrants followed the Oregon Trail , a 2 @,@ 170 @-@ mile ( 3 @,@ 490 km ) trail across western North America that began at Independence , Missouri , and ended at various locations near the mouth of the Willamette River . Although people had been traveling to Oregon since 1836 , large @-@ scale migration did not begin until 1843 , when nearly 1 @,@ 000 pioneers headed westward . Over the next 25 years , some 500 @,@ 000 settlers traveled the Oregon Trail , braving the rapids of the Snake and Columbia Rivers to reach the Willamette Valley . 
 Starting in the 1820s , Oregon City developed near Willamette Falls . It was incorporated in 1844 , becoming the first city west of the Rocky Mountains to have that distinction . John McLoughlin , a Hudson 's Bay Company ( HBC ) official , was one of the major contributors to the founding of the town in 1829 . McLoughlin attempted to persuade the British government ( which still held sway over the area ) to allow American settlers to live on the land , and provided significant help to American colonization of the area , all against the HBC 's orders . Oregon City prospered because of the paper mills that were run by the water power of Willamette Falls , but the falls formed an impassable barrier to river navigation . Linn City ( originally Robins Nest ) was established across the Willamette from Oregon City . 
 After Portland was incorporated in 1851 , quickly growing into Oregon 's largest city , Oregon City gradually lost its importance as the economic and political center of the Willamette Valley . Beginning in the 1850s , steamboats began to ply the Willamette , despite the fact that they could not pass Willamette Falls . As a result , navigation on the Willamette River was divided into two stretches : the 27 @-@ mile ( 43 km ) lower stretch from Portland to Oregon City — which allowed connection with the rest of the Columbia River system — and the upper reach , which encompassed most of the Willamette 's length . Any boats whose owners found it absolutely necessary to get past the falls had to be portaged . This led to competition for business among steam portage companies . In 1873 , the construction of the Willamette Falls Locks bypassed the falls and allowed easy navigation between the upper and lower river . Each lock chamber measured 210 feet ( 64 m ) long and 40 feet ( 12 m ) wide , and the canal was originally operated manually before it switched to electrical power . Today , the lock system is little used . 
 As commerce and industry flourished on the lower river , most of the original settlers acquired farms in the upper Willamette Valley . By the late 1850s , farmers had begun to grow crops on most of the available fertile land . The settlers increasingly encroached on Native American lands . Skirmishes between natives and settlers in the Umpqua and Rogue valleys to the southwest of the Willamette River led the Oregon state government to remove the natives by military force . They were first led off their traditional lands to the Willamette Valley , but soon were marched to the Coast Indian Reservation . In 1855 , Joel Palmer , an Oregon legislator , negotiated a treaty with the Willamette Valley tribes , who , although unhappy with the treaty , ceded their lands to non @-@ natives . The natives were then relocated by the government to a part of the Coast Reservation that later became the Grande Ronde Reservation . 
 Between 1879 and 1885 , the Willamette River was charted by Cleveland S. Rockwell , a topographical engineer and cartographer for the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey . Rockwell surveyed the lower Willamette from the foot of Ross Island through Portland to the Columbia River and then downstream on the Columbia to Bachelor Island . Rockwell 's survey was extremely detailed , including 17 @,@ 782 hydrographic soundings . His work helped open the port of Portland to commerce . 
 In the second half of the 19th century , the USACE dredged channels and built locks and levees in the Willamette 's watershed . Although products such as lumber were often transported on an existing network of railroads in Oregon , these advances in navigation helped businesses deliver more goods to Portland , feeding the city 's growing economy . Trade goods from the Columbia basin north of Portland could also be transported southward on the Willamette due to the deeper channels made at the Willamette 's mouth . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 By the early 20th century , major river @-@ control projects had begun to take place . Levees were constructed along the river in most urban areas , and Portland built concrete walls to protect its downtown sector . In the following decades , many large dams were built on Cascade Range tributaries of the Willamette . The Army Corps of Engineers operates 13 such dams , which affect flows from about 40 percent of the basin . Most of them do not have fish ladders . 
 With development in and near the river came increased pollution . By the late 1930s , efforts to stem the pollution led to formation of a state sanitary board to oversee modest cleanup efforts . In the 1960s , Oregon Governor Tom McCall led a push for stronger pollution controls on the Willamette . To enhance historical , natural , and recreational values along the river , the Oregon State Legislature established the Willamette Greenway program in 1967 . Through it , state and local governments cooperated in creating or improving a system of parks , trails , and wildlife refuges along the river . In 1998 , the Willamette became one of 14 rivers designated an American Heritage River by former U.S. President Bill Clinton . By 2007 the Greenway had grown to include more than 170 separate land parcels , including 10 state parks . Public uses of the river and land along its shores include camping , swimming , fishing , boating , hiking , bicycling , and wildlife viewing . 
 A 1991 agreement between the City of Portland and the State of Oregon to dramatically reduce combined sewer overflows ( <unk> ) led to Portland 's Big Pipe Project . The project , part of a related series of Portland CSO projects completed in late 2011 at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 44 billion , separates the city 's sanitary sewer lines from storm @-@ water inputs that sometimes overwhelmed the combined system during heavy rains . When that occurred , some of the raw sewage in the system flowed into the river instead of into the city 's wastewater treatment plant . The Big Pipe project and related work reduces CSO volume on the lower river by about 94 percent . 
 = = Dams and bridges = = 
 = = = Dams = = = 
 There are more than 20 major dams on the Willamette 's tributaries , as well as a complex series of levees , dikes , and channels to control the river 's flow . 
 The only dam on the Willamette 's main stem is the Willamette Falls Dam , a low weir @-@ type structure at Willamette Falls that diverts water into the <unk> of the adjacent mills and a power plant . The locks at Willamette Falls were completed in 1873 . Elsewhere on the main stem , numerous minor flow @-@ regulation structures force the river into a narrower and deeper channel to facilitate navigation and flood control . 
