 Although it is quite possible that the first work in the " war " was produced by Smart on 29 April 1751 , it is also possible that the origins of the dispute could be traced even further back to Hill 's publications between February and March 1751 . Fielding 's first paper in the " war " was also the first issue of The Covent @-@ Garden Journal on 4 January 1752 . In it , Fielding attacked all of the writers of Grub Street , which brought a quick response . Hill responded twice and claimed that Fielding was planning a fake dispute on 9 January 1752 , <unk> attacked Hill 's piece on 15 January 1752 , and Thornton soon responded against Fielding in Have At You All : or , The Drury Lane Journal on 16 January 1752 . 
 During this time , personal works , such as Fielding 's Amelia , became targets . On 11 January 1752 , Fielding responded to Hill and those who supported his view of Amelia in The Covent @-@ Garden Journal by ironically stating : 
 a famous Surgeon , who absolutely cured one Mrs Amelia Booth , of a violent Hurt in her Nose , insomuch , that she had scarce a Scar left on it , intends to bring Actions against several ill @-@ meaning and slanderous People , who have reported that the said Lady had no Nose , merely because the Author of her History , in a Hurry , forgot to inform his Readers of that Particular . 
 Hill was not the only one to attack the work ; Thornton wrote satires of Amelia in the Drury @-@ Lane Journal . Thornton 's satires were first published on 16 January 1752 and included a fake advertisement for a parody novel called " <unk> " , playing off of title of Fielding 's parody Shamela . He later parodied Amelia again on 13 February 1752 in a piece called " A New Chapter in Amelia . " Tobias Smollett joined in and published the pamphlet <unk> Hilding anonymously on 15 January 1752 . Although there were many attacks against Fielding 's novel , there was some support for the work , and an anonymous pamphlet was written to attack " Hill and ' the Town ' " while praising Amelia . On 25 January 1752 , Fielding defended his work again by bringing the novel before the imaginary " Court of Censorial Enquiry " , in which Hill and the other critics are the prosecutors and it is they , not Amelia , that are truly put on trial . 
 The Covent @-@ Garden Journal served Fielding well and he used it in his attacks upon Hill and Hill 's supporters in the Journal piece called " Journal of the present Paper War between the Forces under Sir Alexander Drawcansir , and the Army of Grub @-@ street " . The work was modelled after Jonathan Swift 's The Battle of the Books and Fielding pretended to be a military leader that would lead " English <unk> " against those who were compared to characters from the Greek and Roman classics along with those from modern French literature . However , he changed roles on the fourth issue , produced on 14 January 1752 , and transformed himself into a " judge " . By February , Kenrick joined in and " dramatized " the " Paper War " in a production called Fun and proceeded to defend Fielding . Charles Macklin followed suit by holding a benefit on 8 April 1752 at the Covent Garden with a two @-@ act play called The Covent Garden Theater , or Pasquin Turn 'd Drawcansir ; the play portrayed Fielding attacking the Hill and his followers , the " Town " . 
 A pamphlet in the London Daily Advertiser published on 29 January 1752 called The March of the Lion links various authors involved in the war and is the first to introduce Smart via a reference to his " Mrs. Mary Midnight " pseudonym , although Smart was not yet a participant . However , Smart did begin directly participating in the matter 4 August 1752 with the publication in The Midwife of a parody on Hill 's " Inspector " persona . In the piece , Smart responded to Hill 's attack on Smart 's " Old Woman 's Oratory " show and Hill 's claim that the show was dead . Hill was quick to respond ; he attacked both Fielding and Smart in a piece published on 13 August 1752 in the only issue of the The <unk> . In the work , Hill claimed that authors either write because " they have wit " or " they are hungry " . He further claimed that Smart , 
 wears a ridiculous <unk> of aspect , that makes people smile when they see him at a distance : His mouth opens , because he must be fed ; and the world often joins with the philosopher in laughing at the insensibility and <unk> that make him prick his lips with thistles . " 
 The work was published anonymously . Some tried to claim that Samuel Johnson was the author and Hill tried to hide his authorship by attacking the essay in the 25 August 1752 " The Inspector " ( No. 464 ) . However , he was soon exposed and it became commonly known that Hill produced both and he soon followed up the pamphlet in the London Daily Advertiser . 
 With his 25 August 1752 The Inspector column , Hill harshly criticised Smart 's Poems on Several Occasions . Although Hill claimed to praise Smart , he did so in a manner , as Betty Rizzo claims , " that managed to insult and degrade Smart with patronizing encouragement . " Arthur Murphy responded to this essay , and to Hill , in the 21 October 1752 edition of the Gray 's Inn Journal . Following Murphy , Thornton attacked both Hill and Fielding in The Spring @-@ Garden Journal on 16 November 1752 . The Gentleman 's Journal issue of November 1752 came out with a quick retort and claimed that those who supported Hill " espoused the cause of Gentleman " and those who sided with Fielding espoused the cause " of the comedian . " This essay accomplished little but to polarise both sides even more . Hill then responded to Murphy , and their dispute was printed in a supplement of the December issue of the Gentleman 's Journal . 
 On 1 February 1753 , Smart published The Hilliad , an attack upon Hill that one critic , Lance Bertelsen , describes as the " loudest broadside " of the war . The response to The Hilliad was swift : Samuel Derrick responded directly with his The <unk> , Arthur Murphy criticized Smart for his personally attacking Hill , and Rules for Being a Wit tried to provoke further response from Smart . However , Smart stopped responding to either of these assaults . Soon after , Hill ended his attacks with the final shot in December 1752 . 
 = Temperatures Rising = 
 Temperatures Rising is an American television sitcom that aired on the ABC network from September 12 , 1972 to August 29 , 1974 . During its 46 @-@ episode run , it was presented in three different formats and cast line @-@ ups . The series was developed for the network by William Asher and Harry Ackerman for Ashmont Productions and Screen Gems . Set in a fictional Washington , D.C. hospital , the series featured James Whitmore as the no @-@ nonsense chief @-@ of @-@ staff who is forced to deal with the outlandish antics of a young intern played by Cleavon Little , and three nurses ( Joan Van Ark , Reva Rose , and Nancy Fox ) . 
 For the first season , 26 episodes were produced and broadcast . Whitmore was replaced in the lead role by comedian Paul Lynde and Asher was replaced as producer by Duke Vincent and Bruce Johnson in the second season . The series was re @-@ titled The New Temperatures Rising Show , and featured a new supporting cast consisting of : Sudie Bond , Barbara Cason , Jennifer Darling , Jeff Morrow , and John Dehner . Cleavon Little was the only returning member of the original cast . In this season , Lynde was presented as the penny @-@ pinching chief @-@ of @-@ staff , with Bond as his nagging mother and owner of the hospital . 
 The New Temperatures Rising Show ran for 13 episodes before being placed on hiatus in January 1974 due to poor ratings . It returned in July in yet another incarnation . Asher returned as producer and restored the series to its original format — albeit with Paul Lynde continuing in the lead . Reverting to the original title of Temperatures Rising , Little remained in the show 's cast and a new line @-@ up of supporting players consisting of Alice Ghostley , Barbara Rucker and , returning from the first season 's cast , Nancy Fox . Offered as a summer replacement on Thursday nights , the third version of the sitcom ran for seven episodes after which it was cancelled permanently . 
 = = First season = = 
 = = = Concept and development = = = 
 Temperatures Rising was one of two sitcoms that the ABC network premiered in its 1972 – 73 prime time schedule , the other being The Paul Lynde Show . Both series were produced and developed by William Asher and his partner Harry Ackerman for Ashmont Productions and Screen Gems , which had scored a major success for the network with Bewitched , a fantasy sitcom that first aired in 1964 starring Asher 's wife , Elizabeth Montgomery . Asher and Screen Gems made a deal with ABC to cancel Bewitched a year earlier than contracts stipulated , thereby allowing them the opportunity to develop the two new sitcoms . Ackerman served as executive producer and Asher as producer . 
 Asher and Ackerman derived the format of the series from an unsold pilot they had produced for ABC in 1965 . Entitled This is a Hospital ? , and written by Sheldon Keller , it starred comedian Shecky Greene as a mischievous intern who Asher referred to as " Sgt. Bilko in a hospital " . Asher also drew on the British Carry On franchise as his inspiration for Temperatures Rising . 
 = = = Original cast = = = 
 Set in Capitol General , a fictional Washington , D.C. , hospital , the series centered on five characters . Cleavon Little starred as Dr. Jerry Noland , a ghetto @-@ raised intern who works on the side as the hospital bookie and finds humor in anything from an operation to a con job . Joan Van Ark played Annie Carlisle , the hospital 's beautiful , young , sexy , head nurse , who is " always covering up for the inept crew " . Reva Rose played Nurse Mildred " Millie " MacInerny , who offers satirical comments on the shenanigans going on in the hospital . Nancy Fox was cast as Ellen Turner , a shy student nurse who becomes Noland 's most faithful follower . James Whitmore starred as Dr. Vincent Campanelli , the hospital 's chief of surgery . Campanelli is presented as an Italian @-@ American , former combat surgeon , who looks upon Noland with both pride and shock , and refers to the young intern and nurses Carlisle , MacInerny , and Turner as the " Four Horsemen of <unk> " . 
 Cleavon Little 's guest appearance on All in the Family led to his casting in Temperatures Rising , which in turn led to the leading role in the Mel Brooks comedy film Blazing Saddles ( 1974 ) . Little 's casting reflected " pressure from the government and Negro organizations and concerned whites who believe that black representation on television was long overdue " . William Asher later stated that Temperatures Rising gave him a chance to work with a black actor . Nancy Fox was cast in Temperatures Rising after Elizabeth Montgomery spotted her in a commercial for Close @-@ Up toothpaste . Asher had considered her for a part in The Paul Lynde Show . During the time that Temperatures Rising was in production Fox declined an offer to leave the series and star in another , Needles and Pins . 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 In a 2000 interview , William Asher described Temperatures Rising as being about : " a young black surgeon who was always into mischief and things , but he was a very competent surgeon . James Whitmore was the head surgeon and he used to drive Whitmore crazy " . The pilot episode of Temperatures Rising was written by Sheldon Keller , who turned to his This is a Hospital ? script for inspiration . It features Noland broadcasting a bingo game in code over the hospital 's public @-@ address system . Jack Albertson guest starred as a United States Senator . Subsequent episodes feature Noland performing a secret operation on a young baseball player while Campanelli deals with a hospital inspector ( Ed Platt ) and John Astin as a gangster wanting Noland to be his personal physician . In another episode , Noland hypnotizes a patient ( Alice Ghostley ) and , accidentally , Nurse Turner as well . This nearly costs the hospital a large donation from a potential benefactor ( Charles Lane ) . In later episodes , Campanelli is seen having a brief romance with Nurse Turner 's aunt ( Beverly Garland ) , Noland helping out a new intern ( Bernie Kopell ) who has a reputation for being a jinx , and performing a witchcraft ritual on a patient ( Alan Oppenheimer ) who thinks he has been cursed . 
 Jack Albertson returned in a later episode that features Dr. Campanelli participating in a documentary film about hospital surgery . Unfortunately , Campanelli develops stage fright during filming . Noland then takes over the operation and receives all the acclaim . Bernie Kopell returned to his role as a hospital orderly in two episodes , one in which he causes a furor with a hospital scandal sheet , the other when Noland has to save him from being fleeced by a patient who is also a card sharp . 
 There was some racially tinged comic bantering in the series , such as scenes with Noland giving cotton to a nurse and stating , " Honey , picking cotton is part of my heritage , " or observing some adhesive strips labeled " flesh colored " and remarking , " Maybe this is your idea of flesh colored , but it wouldn 't make it in my neighborhood . " Aside from these , racial issues were avoided , as Asher and Ackerman felt that ABC was not interested in having them mixed into the comedy . 
 In discussing the series William Asher noted : 
 We too often forget the humanity of doctors and nurses . They become godlike to most of us and yet it is their humanity that makes them so interesting and enjoyable . We are not doing a drama and have no intention of doing anything like dealing with life and death issues . We want to make people laugh so we de @-@ emphasize the more serious elements of hospital life . It isn 't that he [ Noland ] just sees things differently , he also deals with them differently . That is why Noland will dream up a baby derby , a gambling night at the hospital , a variety show at Christmas and off @-@ truck betting when patients get bored with the hospital routine . 
 Production of Temperatures Rising was underway by August 1972 with filming done at the Burbank Studios in Burbank , California . 
 = = = Original reviews = = = 
 In his review of the premiere episode of Temperatures Rising for the Los Angeles Times , critic Don Page felt that James Whitmore was " totally wasted in this silly exercise " and that " guest Jack Albertson almost saves it with his portrayal of an annoyed senator . Otherwise , the diagnosis is terminal comedy " . Likewise , Cecil Smith , another writer for the Times , claimed it was the " worst show of the season . Avoid it like the plague " . 
 Other reviews were more favorable . Columnist Joan Crosby noted that " This is the kind of show you don 't think you 'll laugh at , but you do , mostly because the cast is so good . " She noted that Cleavon Little , Joan Van Ark , and Reva Rose were , respectively , " marvelous " , " pretty " , and " funny " , and that Nancy Fox " wins this year 's cute @-@ as @-@ a @-@ kitten award " . Barbara <unk> , TV and radio editor for the Pittsburgh Press , noted that " ABC did a gutsy turnabout in taking the heavy drama out of a hospital and replacing it with comedy . The venture worked well , thanks to excellent performances from the Temperatures Rising cast " . She praised Jack Albertson , noted that Whitmore " was little seen " , and that the series : " is the kind of tidy little show that brings chuckles " . Win Fanning , a syndicated columnist , stated that : " the comedy writing and performances by a beautifully integrated cast give Temperatures a bright , light quality so seldom achieved in a situation comedy " , and that it was : " loaded with one @-@ liners and sight gags , which , if kept on the level of the opener , promise many hours of hilarity " . Fanning praised Cleavon Little as " one of the comedy finds of any TV season " , and Nancy Fox as " a fresh new face and talent giving promise of a long , successful career ahead " . More praise for the series came after the broadcast of its fourth episode . An unidentified reviewer , writing for the Armored Sentinel ( of Temple , Texas ) , stated " If you 're suffering from the case of the ' downs , ' this series is a sure pick up ! " The reviewer went on to note that " the brightest spot of the series is wacky Nancy Fox . Her role applies the wackiness of Goldie Hawn , but in situation comedy form . I 'd watch the show just for her ! The whole series is wacky and funny ; it 's downright good . I highly recommend it . " 
 = = = First season ratings = = = 
 ABC placed Temperatures Rising in its 8 : 00 PM Tuesday night time @-@ slot , where it debuted on September 12 , 1972 . Because one of the stars was black , some of ABC 's affiliated stations in the southern and mid @-@ western parts of the United States refused to air the series or broadcast it in a different time slot . Airing opposite it were Bonanza on NBC , and the new sitcom Maude on CBS . Bonanza was entering its fourteenth year and offered up an ambitious two @-@ hour season premiere dealing with the marriage of Little Joe Cartwright ( Michael Landon ) . Maude , starring Beatrice Arthur in the title role , was a spin @-@ off of All in the Family . Both shows presented Temperatures Rising with stiff opposition in the " ratings game " . This turned out to be partly true , as the two @-@ hour season premiere of Bonanza performed exceptionally well in the ratings . Maude did much better than Temperatures Rising in the New York City area , while Temperatures Rising fared better than Maude in the Los Angeles area . In subsequent weeks , Bonanza 's ratings dropped sharply and NBC cancelled the series in November 1972 . According to Asher : " Temperatures Rising put Bonanza out of business and was beating Maude in the Los Angeles area until mid @-@ season , when NBC switched to some heavy movies which hurt us " . Despite this the series finished its first year with a consistent 29 share of the ratings at a time when a 30 share was enough to assure renewal for another season . ABC , however , wanted to improve the ratings and decided to make significant changes to Temperatures Rising for its second season . 
 = = Second season = = 
 = = = New premise and producers = = = 
 As early as November 1972 , James Whitmore expressed a desire to leave Temperatures Rising , claiming that " the show [ was ] basically a broad farce and I didn 't feel it was right for me " . Screen Gems head John Mitchell , and ABC chief programmer Barry Diller , decided to replace Whitmore with comedian Paul Lynde , whose sitcom , The Paul Lynde Show , was airing on Wednesday nights . At the time , Lynde was scoring second only to Peter Falk in TV popularity polls even though his sitcom , which aired opposite The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour on CBS , was floundering in the ratings . Asher was against making this change but was overruled as his contractual commitments to ABC had been used up . 
 Of the change Asher stated : 
 The network – ugh – they 're so stupid sometimes . The shows ( Temperatures Rising and The Paul Lynde Show ) were doing good , they weren 't big hits , but they were doing good . They felt that if they could put Paul [ Lynde ] and Cleavon Little together that they would have a big hit . I didn 't want to do that . I said I won 't do it , not at the sacrifice of the show . It 's wrong . I don 't think it 's a good idea . But they wanted to bring in somebody else as the head of the hospital . They wanted his [ Lynde 's ] mother to be head of the hospital and his conflicts would be with her and I just didn 't think it was right . I didn 't want to write it . I just didn 't want to do it [ and ] I didn 't . Someone else came in . It was a big thing with the network . They cancelled The Paul Lynde Show and put Paul in Temperatures Rising . " 
 Asher was replaced as producer by Bruce Johnson and Duke Vincent , whose previous credits included : Gomer Pyle – USMC , The Jim Nabors Hour , Arnie , and The Little People . They changed the title of the series to The New Temperatures Rising Show , and the tone went from lighthearted wackiness to a form of black comedy similar to The Hospital , a 1971 film written by Paddy Chayefsky , starring George C. Scott . The sitcom became : " a savage satire of the medical profession " with $ 185 @-@ a @-@ day hospital rooms , incompetent , fee @-@ splitting doctors , operations on the wrong patients , misread X @-@ rays , and rampant malpractice . Commenting on the series Vincent noted : 
 We 're not doing stories about a fouled @-@ up hospital . These things really happen . Every story we 've told is true . They 're the results of untrained people , inadequate staff , horrendous costs , worn @-@ out equipment , the demands of doctors . The doctors , not the patients , are the customers ; they 're the ones the hospitals have to please ... 
 = = = Revised cast = = = 
 For this new season , Johnson and Vincent dropped Joan Van Ark , Reva Rose , and Nancy Fox from the series , leaving Cleavon Little as the only returning cast member . His character , Dr. Jerry Noland , was now being presented as the hospital 's only sane figure . Paul Lynde played Dr. Paul Mercy , the sneering , unscrupulous , hospital administrator while Sudie Bond was cast as Martha Mercy , his obnoxious , overbearing mother and the owner , and permanent resident , of the hospital . She constantly calls him with her pager to complain about everything . Also in the new cast were Barbara Cason as Miss Tillis , the head of administrative and accounting : " ... who would let you bleed to death filling out forms " , Jennifer Darling as the romantically inclined nurse " Windy " Winchester , Jeff Morrow as Dr. Lloyd Axton , a fraudulent surgeon who has published two books , Profit in Healing and Malpractice and Its Defense , and John Dehner as " society " Dr. Charles Claver . 
 = = = Revised concept = = = 
 For the 1973 – 74 television season ABC continued to air the revamped Temperatures Rising on Tuesday nights at 8 : 00 PM . CBS continued to air Maude , and NBC introduced Chase , an hour @-@ long crime drama starring Mitchell Ryan , in the same time slot . Although the season premiere of Maude and Chase ' s debut aired on September 11 , 1973 , ABC delayed the premiere of The New Temperatures Rising Show until September 25 . 
 The episodes produced by Johnson and Vincent included Dr. Mercy exploiting a 125 @-@ year @-@ old American Civil War veteran and dealing with a strike by the doctors and nurses . Another episode saw Noland create a mythical patient and then claim that the patient died , the cause of death being the result of a lack of cardiac crash carts on each floor of the hospital . Johnson and Vincent 's favorite episode was one where the X @-@ rays of a professional footballer are misread , resulting in him being placed by mistake in " Crutchfield 's Traction " , in which holes are drilled in his head and tongs inserted in them . 
 = = = Second season reviews = = = 
 In reviewing The New Temperatures Rising Show , Associated Press television writer Jay <unk> noted : 
 First the hopeful note : There are faint signs the tinkering with Temperatures format could make the series funny later on , but only if the writing improves . The show now leaves most of the mugging to Lynde and no longer insists that each regular is wacky . It 's all feeble stuff but the cast is vastly improved and the new approach portends to better things ahead . 
 Likewise , Los Angeles Times critic Cecil Smith , who considered the original format " maybe the three worse shows on television rolled into one " now remarked : " Paul Lynde for the first time that I can recall has a part worthy of his mettle . The people surrounding him are first rate . " 
 = = = Sinking ratings = = = 
 Despite some heavy promotion the black comedy approach was not what audiences wanted to see , especially with Paul Lynde . As a result , the ratings for the series fell well below the levels of the previous season . The last of The New Temperatures Rising Show 's thirteen episodes aired on January 8 , 1974 . The following Tuesday , January 15 , ABC premiered Happy Days in its place . According to co @-@ producer Mitchell , " ... the audience didn 't buy that at all . They just didn 't get it . It was funny if you like black comedy , but if you don 't it would disturb you . So the show failed miserably and we lost the job and the show . " 
 = = Summer replacement = = 
 = = = Third concept = = = 
 When John Mitchell and Barry Diller noticed that The New Temperatures Rising Show was failing they contacted William Asher and asked him to salvage the series . According to Asher : 
 They asked if I 'd go back to the old Temperatures , only this time with Paul [ Lynde ] . At this point we were still hoping to make it for the midseason . After a couple of weeks we agreed that the show should go off the air in January , but continue production so that we would have 11 shows ready for airing any time they wanted them . Some of the nonsense and hijinks of the first season are gone and we have managed to keep a touch of reality of the second version . 
 As to why the series was not cancelled , Asher remarked , " I can answer that in two words : Paul Lynde . " 
 = = = Final cast = = = 
 For the third format , the show reverted to its original title Temperatures Rising and the proposed number of episodes was reduced from eleven to seven . The series ' production resumed on November 17 , 1973 , after a three week shutdown . Sudie Bond , Barbara Cason , Jennifer Darling , Jeff Morrow , and John Dehner were dropped from the cast and a new line @-@ up was assembled . Paul Lynde continued as Dr. Paul Mercy while Alice Ghostley played Edwina Moffitt , the admissions nurse and Dr. Mercy 's sister . She had appeared as a guest star in an episode in the first season of Temperatures Rising . Nancy Fox returned as student nurse Ellen Turner , and Barbara Rucker was introduced as Nurse Amanda Kelly . Cleavon Little returned for a third time as Dr. Jerry Nolan , whose character was now being presented as somewhere between the jive @-@ talking surgeon of the first season and the serious one of the second . 
 = = = Last format and cancellation = = = 
 Temperatures Rising returned to the ABC network on July 18 , 1974 after a six @-@ month hiatus . Its new time slot , Thursday nights at 8 : 00 PM , had previously been occupied by Chopper One , an adventure series . The situations presented this time around included Dr. Mercy saving the life of a popular country music singer ( Dick Gautier ) , and setting up a surveillance system so that staff would be kept on their toes . 
 The final episode of Temperatures Rising aired on August 29 , 1974 . The attempt to resurrect the series was unsuccessful and ABC finally cancelled it permanently . Andy Siegel , a comedy development executive for ABC at the time , felt the series failed because audiences did not want to watch a show displaying inadequate medical care , even though it was done in a humorous fashion . In reminiscing about the series he stated : " When people see doctors on television they really want to feel that they 're in good hands . That no matter what happens it is a reassuring experience . " William Asher , in a 2000 interview , summed up the demise of the series by saying : " It didn 't get on . It 's too late . You can 't do that to an audience . They won 't accept it . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = New York State Route 382 = 
 New York State Route 382 ( NY 382 ) was a state highway in the town of Red House in Cattaraugus County , New York , in the United States . The highway was 0 @.@ 8 miles ( 1 @.@ 3 km ) long and served as a connector between NY 17 and the Red House entrance of Allegany State Park , where it connected to Allegany State Park Route 2 ( ASP Route 2 ) . NY 382 was assigned in the early 1930s and removed in the early 1970s after the highway 's connection to the park was dismantled , and the hamlet it served evacuated , as part of the Southern Tier Expressway 's construction . The NY 382 designation is currently reserved by the New York State Department of Transportation as a replacement for NY 88 in Ontario and Wayne counties . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The western terminus of NY 382 was at an intersection with Bay State Road and NY 17 in the now abandoned hamlet of Red House , located 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) southwest of the city of Salamanca in the town of Red House . At the time , NY 17 was routed along an at @-@ grade highway that paralleled the future routing of the Southern Tier Expressway to the north and west . NY 382 headed southeast from the junction , passing through the center of what was then the hamlet of Red House before turning eastward ahead of Red House Brook , a small stream that branched off the nearby Allegheny River . NY 382 paralleled Red House Brook east to the Allegany State Park boundary , where the NY 382 designation ended and the highway continued east as Allegany State Park Route 2 . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 382 was assigned c . 1932 to a short roadway linking NY 17 to an entrance to Allegany State Park in Red House . 
 The route remained intact until the construction of the Southern Tier Expressway ( STE ) through Red House in the late 1960s and early 1970s . Unwanted tourism in <unk> Town , a newly built settlement northeast of Red House , prompted Seneca leaders to seek ways to reduce through traffic in the settlement ; to do so , the state built a trumpet interchange off the expressway where NY 382 used to be , which , coupled with the flooding of the roadway of old Route 17 to the west , effectively cut <unk> Town off from the highway system . The construction of the highway also allowed the state to claim eminent domain over most of the hamlet of Red House , leading to the hamlet 's destruction ; the few remaining private residences in the town as of 2015 are located southwest of what was Route 382 . When the interchange at exit 19 of the STE was constructed c . 1970 , NY 382 was disconnected from Allegany State Park Route 2 , which was realigned to meet the new exit . The NY 382 designation was removed around this time as a result . The roadway still runs from the former NY 17 ( now NY <unk> , which terminates near the former NY 382 's end at a dilapidated bridge ) to the Exit 19 on / off ramp , but due to safety concerns , the road was blocked off at its eastern terminus . 
 The former NY 382 was reopened in August 2014 after a washout on old NY 17 left several households unable to reach Salamanca . 
 The NY 382 designation is reserved by the New York State Department of Transportation for future use along what is now NY 88 in the Finger Lakes region of New York . Currently , NY 88 has the same numerical designation as Interstate 88 , an Interstate Highway in eastern New York . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Red House , Cattaraugus County . 
 = Zahir al @-@ Umar = 
 Zahir al @-@ Umar al @-@ Zaydani ( alternatively spelled <unk> al @-@ Omar or Dahir al @-@ Umar ) ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> عمر <unk> ; <unk> <unk> @-@ ʿUmar az @-@ <unk> , 1689 – 90 – 21 August 1775 ) was the virtually autonomous Arab ruler of northern Palestine in the mid @-@ 18th century , while the area was nominally part of the Ottoman Empire . For much of his reign , starting in the 1730s , his domain mainly consisted of Galilee , with successive headquarters in Tiberias , Arraba , Nazareth , Deir Hanna and finally Acre , in 1746 . He fortified Acre , and the city became a center of the cotton trade between Palestine and Europe . In the mid @-@ 1760s , he reestablished the port town of Haifa nearby . 
 Zahir successfully withstood assaults and sieges by the Ottoman governors of the Sidon and Damascus provinces , who attempted to limit or eliminate his influence . He was often supported in these confrontations by the rural Shia Muslim clans of Jabal Amil . In 1771 , in alliance with Ali Bey al @-@ Kabir of Egypt Eyalet and with backing from the Russian Empire , Zahir captured Sidon , while Ali Bey 's forces conquered Damascus , both acts in open defiance of the Ottoman sultan . At the peak of his power in 1774 , Zahir 's autonomous sheikhdom extended from Beirut to Gaza and included the Jabal Amil and Jabal Ajlun regions . By then , however , Ali Bey had been killed , the Ottomans entered into a truce with the Russians , and the Sublime Porte felt secure enough to check Zahir 's power . The Ottoman Navy attacked his Acre stronghold in the summer of 1775 and he was killed outside of its walls shortly after . 
 The wealth Zahir accumulated through monopolizing Palestine 's cotton and olive oil trade to Europe financed his sheikhdom . For much of his rule , he oversaw a relatively efficient administration and maintained domestic security , although he faced and suppressed several rebellions by his sons . The aforementioned factors , along with Zahir 's flexible taxation policies and his battlefield reputation made him popular among the local peasantry . Zahir 's tolerance of religious minorities encouraged Christian and Jewish immigration to his domain . The influx of immigrants from other parts of the empire stimulated the local economy and led to the significant growth of the Christian communities in Acre and Nazareth and the Jewish community in Tiberias . He and his family , the Zaydani clan , also patronized the construction of commercial buildings , houses of worship and fortifications throughout Galilee . Zahir 's founding of a virtually autonomous state in Palestine has made him a national hero among Palestinians today . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Zahir was born in the village of Arraba ( also called ' <unk> al @-@ <unk> ) in central Galilee . The date of his birth is not clear , with the dates 1686 , 1689 – 90 and 1694 listed as his birth year by Zahir 's contemporary biographers Volney , Mikha 'il Sabbagh and Khalil al @-@ Muradi , respectively . According to contemporary biographer Ahmad Hasan Joudah , 1689 – 1690 is the most likely year of his birth because he considers Sabbagh to be the most reliable source for Zahir 's personal life . The proper transliteration of his given name is <unk> , but in the local dialect of Arabic used in Galilee , his name was pronounced <unk> . Zahir 's family , the Zaydani clan , were Sunni Muslim notables from the Qaisi tribal confederation based in the Tiberias area who had strong connections to the Arab @-@ Bedouin tribesmen of Galilee , which at the time was part of the Ottoman Empire . Zahir was the youngest of four sons born to Sheikh Umar al @-@ Zaydani . <unk> brothers were Sa 'd , Salih " Abu Dani " and Yusuf , and his sister was <unk> . Zahir grew up in the village of Saffuriya . 
 Zahir 's father and grandfather had both served as the multazim ( chief tax collector ) of Tiberias , having been appointed by the Druze emirs ( princes ) of the Ma 'an dynasty which governed the region from their headquarters in Mount Lebanon . In 1698 , Umar az @-@ Zaydani was appointed multazim of the Safad region by Bashir Shihab I , the Sunni Qaisi emir who succeeded the Ma <unk> as governor of the Mount Lebanon Emirate . The Zaydani family maintained commercial trade relations extending from Galilee to Aleppo , and members of the family controlled tax farms in Galilee ; Zahir 's uncle Ali , for instance , held the tax farm of al @-@ Damun . Zahir 's elder brother Sa 'd became the head of the family when their father died in 1706 , but the family 's tax farms were transferred to Zahir , who was still a teenager . This was done as a precautionary measure , so that in the event of a default in tax payments , the Ottoman government would not be able to hold the practical owners of the tax farms accountable . Nonetheless , legal ownership of the Zaydani tax farms gave Zahir considerable power within his clan . 
 In 1707 , Zahir was involved in a brawl in Tiberias in which he killed a man . As a result , Sa 'd opted to move the family to Arraba after being offered safe haven there by the Bani Saqr tribe . It was in Arraba that Zahir gained a degree of formal education under the tutelage of a Muslim scholar named Abd al @-@ Qadir al @-@ <unk> . During his youth , Zahir also learned how to hunt and fight . When the village of Bi 'ina was attacked by forces dispatched by the governor of Sidon Eyalet sometime between 1713 and 1718 , Zahir played an important role in defending the village and managed to evade the governor 's troops . According to chroniclers of the time , this event , along with Zahir 's moderation , turned Zahir into a folk hero in the area . He continued to gain the respect of the local peasantry throughout the 1720s for his martial skills . Along with Sa 'd , he also gained prestige among the people of Damascus with whom he continued the commercial relationships his father had previously established . 
 The contacts Zahir made in Damascus included the Muslim scholar Abd al @-@ Ghaffar al @-@ <unk> , who introduced Zahir to Sayyid Muhammad of the al @-@ Husayni family , which provided the sharifs of Damascus at the time . Zahir married Sayyid Muhammad 's daughter and thereafter moved to Nazareth because she considered Arraba too small . When Sayyid Muhammad died , Zahir inherited his fortune . 
 = = Rule = = 
 = = = Consolidation of power in Galilee = = = 
 In the late 1720s , Zahir and his brother Yusuf took control of the town of Tiberias with the backing of the Bani Saqr by capturing its multazim . Concurrently , Zahir issued a letter to Köprülü Abdullah Pasha , governor of Sidon Eyalet , accusing the multazim of oppression and of imposing illegal taxes on the population . Zahir further wrote that if Abdullah Pasha appointed him multazim of Tiberias and Arraba , he would guarantee the timely payment of taxes and rule justly . Abdullah Pasha consented to Zahir 's rule and sent him an honorary robe . This marked a significant change from the past appointments of his relatives as <unk> of various Galilee subdistricts , because it came directly from the governor of Sidon rather than the semi @-@ autonomous rural chiefs of Mount Lebanon . Zahir made Tiberias his principle base and was joined by his Zaydani kinsmen . He appointed his cousin Muhammad ibn Ali , the multazim of al @-@ Damun , as commander of the family 's militia . 
 Zahir extended his rule southward toward Nazareth and the Marj Ibn Amer plain ( Jezreel Valley ) between Galilee and Jabal Nablus . Capturing these areas was likely a drawn @-@ out process , and Zahir 's efforts to wrest control of Nazareth ( a town in Safad Sanjak , but controlled by the Jarrar clan based in Nablus Sanjak ) caused the ruling clans of the Nablus hinterland ( Jabal Nablus ) , along with Zahir 's erstwhile allies in the Bani Saqr tribe , to challenge him . Zahir , meanwhile , relied on his Zaydani kinsmen , Maghrebi mercenaries who he commissioned in the mid @-@ 1730s under commander Ahmad Agha al @-@ Dinkizli , and Nazareth 's residents . In 1735 , Zahir 's forces , composed of 2 @,@ 000 men , routed the Jarrars and the Bani Saqr at a place called al @-@ <unk> in Marj Ibn Amer , killed their leader Sheikh Ibrahim al @-@ Jarrar , and captured Nazareth . According to historian Hanna <unk> , Zahir 's forces inflicted 8 @,@ 000 fatalities among the Jarrar @-@ Saqr coalition during the battle . 
 Following his victory at Marj Ibn Amer , 4 @,@ 000 locals , including many residents of Nazareth , joined Zahir 's forces to completely subdue Jabal Nablus . Among Zahir 's supporters were Christian women from Nazareth who supplied his troops with food and water . Zahir 's forces pursued the Jarrars to their throne village of Sanur , but ultimately withdrew after failing to subdue the fortress . This defeat marked the limit of Zahir 's influence south of Marj Ibn Amer and established the Jarrars as the dominant force of Jabal Nablus over their rivals , the Tuqans . While the Jarrars and Zahir eventually concluded a truce , the former continued to mobilize the clans of Jabal Nablus to prevent Zahir 's southward expansion . 
 In 1738 , Zahir 's forces captured the fortress at Jiddin and the villages in its political orbit , Abu <unk> and <unk> . Jiddin had been ruled by Ahmad al @-@ Husayn , whose family historically controlled it . The peasants under his rule complained that he governed oppressively and appealed to Zahir , who was known for treating the peasantry fairly , to relieve them of al @-@ Husayn . Zahir , eager to expand his control toward the Mediterranean , accepted their requests and obtained permission from the governor of Sidon , Ibrahim Pasha al @-@ Azm , to seize the fortress . Likewise , al @-@ Husayn had also approached the governor , who , hoping to see two powerful local leaders weakened , gave al @-@ Husayn his blessing as well . Zahir assembled a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ strong force and defeated al @-@ Husayn 's forces near the fortress . He was then appointed multazim of Jiddin 's subdistrict . 
 Bi 'ina , which was also fortified , withstood a siege by Zahir in 1739 , but Zahir later married the daughter of Bi 'ina 's mukhtar ( headman ) , and thus brought Bi 'ina into his domain . He also acquired the fortress of <unk> through diplomatic means . This further solidified his rule over northern and eastern Galilee . In 1740 , Zahir made an agreement with the neighboring Bedouin tribes to end their looting raids in the area . By then , Sa 'd had taken control of Deir Hanna and Muhammad ibn Ali captured Shefa- ' Amr , entrenching the presence of the Zaydani clan in western Galilee . After negotiations , Muhammad al @-@ <unk> 'i , the multazim of Safad , surrendered the city to Zahir . Safad was the administrative seat of the sanjak and situated on a strategic hill overlooking the Galilee countryside . He later acquired the fortified village of Deir al @-@ Qassi after marrying the daughter of its sheikh , Abd al @-@ Khaliq Salih . 
 Zahir 's conquest of the Safad region and western Galilee removed the barriers between him and the Metawali ( Shia Muslim ) clans of Jabal Amil . Zahir informed the Metawalis ' sheikh , Nasif al @-@ Nassar , of his intent to acquire the fortified villages of al @-@ Bassa and <unk> on the borders between the Zaydani and Metawali <unk> . In response , Sheikh Nasif launched an assault against Zahir and the two sides confronted each other in indecisive skirmishes in the border village of <unk> . Zahir then received reinforcements from his Maghrebi cavalry and defeated the Metawalis , pursuing Sheikh Nasif to his headquarters in <unk> . Zahir 's brother Sa 'd mediated an end to the fighting and thereafter a mutual defense pact was arranged between Zahir and Sheikh Nasif , whereby the former would receive control of al @-@ Bassa and <unk> and the Metawalis ' support in his confrontations with the governors of Damascus . In return , Sheikh Nasif 's sons , who were captured by Zahir 's troops , were released , the Metawalis ' tax payments to Sidon were reduced by some 25 percent , and Zahir guaranteed his backing of a Sheikh Nasif in any confrontation with the governors of Sidon . 
 Zahir , similar to other local strongmen in the Ottoman Empire who did not owe their power to the central Ottoman authorities , was disliked by the Ottoman administration . The Ottoman Sultan sent an order to the governor of Damascus Eyalet , Sulayman Pasha al @-@ Azm , to put an end to Zahir 's rule in Galilee . In September 1742 , a military force led by the governor of Damascus came to Galilee and laid siege to Tiberias . After 83 days , the siege was lifted due to the departure of the Hajj pilgrim caravan . Using this respite , Zahir reinforced the defenses of Tiberias and Shefa- ' Amr . In July 1743 , backed by the Bani Saqr , the wali of Tripoli and the district governors of Jerusalem , Gaza and Irbid , Sulayman Pasha renewed his expedition , this time seeking to reduce Deir Hanna and sever Tiberias 's links to the outside . Sulayman died suddenly in <unk> and Zahir used the opportunity to assault Sulayman 's troops , capturing their camp . In 1745 , Zahir had a fortress erected on a hill overlooking Saffuriya . 
 = = = Ruler of Acre = = = 
 Zahir consolidated his authority over Acre in a drawn @-@ out process starting in the 1730s . His Acre @-@ based partner , the Melkite merchant Yusuf al @-@ Qassis , served as an early link between Zahir and the French merchants of Acre . His first direct contact with the French merchants was in 1731 when he negotiated a settlement of his brother Sa 'd's debts to the merchants . In 1743 , as part of his bid to gain control of the town , Zahir had his cousin , Muhammad al @-@ Ali of al @-@ Damun , arrested and executed due to the latter 's ambitions in Acre . In 1743 , Zahir requested the tax farm of Acre from the governor of Sidon , Ibrahim Pasha al @-@ Azm , who , wary of Zahir 's growing power in the province , rejected the request . Instead , Zahir took Acre by force in July 1746 . 
 In the first few years following his takeover of Acre , Zahir resided in the fortress of Deir Hanna in the heart of Galilee . He began fortifying Acre by building walls around the city in 1750 . He built other fortifications and buildings in Acre as well . In 1757 he took control of the Mediterranean port cities of Haifa and <unk> , and nearby Mount Carmel , all of which had been part of Damascus Eyalet , unlike most of Zahir 's domain at the time , which was in Sidon Eyalet . He also captured the port village of al @-@ <unk> , between <unk> and Haifa , at that time . Zahir 's stated justification to the Ottoman authorities for conquering Palestine 's northern coastal plain was to protect the area from Maltese pirates . 
 In late 1757 , the Bani Saqr and <unk> tribes , who Zahir maintained ties with , launched an assault on the Hajj caravan as it coming back to Syria from Mecca . Thousands of Muslim pilgrims were killed in the raid , including Sultan Osman III 's sister . The attack shocked the Sublime Porte ( Ottoman imperial government ) , and discredited the governor of Damascus and amir al @-@ hajj , Husayn Pasha ibn Makki , for failing to ward off the Bedouin . Husayn Pasha had been serving his first term as governor , having replaced As 'ad Pasha al @-@ Azm , who Zahir had peaceful relations with , and among Husayn Pasha 's priorities were subduing Zahir and annexing his territories , which were part of Sidon Eyalet . Husayn Pasha lodged a complaint to the Sublime Porte alleging Zahir 's involvement in the raid . Zahir denied the allegation and pressed for an investigation into the assault . He also sought to earn the Sublime Porte 's favor by purchasing the looted goods of the caravan from the tribes , including the decorated banners representing Muhammad and the sovereignty of the sultan , and restoring them to Sultan Mustafa III ( Osman III had died on 30 October ) . Moreover , Zahir 's enemy Husayn Pasha was dismissed from office that year . 
 Husayn Pasha 's replacement , Uthman Pasha al @-@ Kurji , who took office in 1760 , sought to retrieve control of Haifa from Zahir . Uthman Pasha requested that the governor of Sidon , Nu 'man Pasha , recapture the port city on his behalf , to which Nu 'man Pasha complied , dispatching 30 Maghrebi soldiers on a vessel captained by a Frenchman on 20 May 1761 . The effort was a meager attempt and upon arrival , Zahir had the ship confiscated and its soldiers arrested , while the French captain paid a fine . The issue over Haifa 's annexation was smoothed over with the assistance of an Istanbul @-@ based Ottoman official and friend of Zahir , Yaqub Agha . Yaqub had a high @-@ ranking official named Sulayman Agha intervene in the matter and revoke Uthman Pasha 's orders . 
 = = = Intra @-@ family conflict = = = 
 In 1761 , Zahir ordered his son Uthman al @-@ Zahir to assassinate Zahir 's brother Sa 'd because the latter had been collaborating with Uthman Pasha and the Bani Saqr tribe to kill Zahir and replace him . Sa 'd's assassination indirectly led to the first conflict between Zahir and his sons , in this case Uthman . The latter had been promised control over Shefa- ' Amr in return for killing Sa 'd , but Zahir reneged due to pleas by Shefa- ' Amr 's residents not to appoint Uthman as their governor . Backed by his full @-@ brothers Ahmad and Sa 'd al @-@ Din , who were angered by Zahir 's refusal to cede them more territory , Uthman besieged Shefa- ' Amr in 1765 . However , under Zahir 's instructions , the locals in the vicinity defended the town and succeeded in preventing its capture . The three brothers then appealed to Zahir 's eldest and most loyal son , Salibi , to intervene on their behalf with Zahir , but Salibi was unable to persuade Zahir to make concessions . The four brothers then attempted to rekindle their alliance with the Bani Saqr , who Zahir had since routed at the Marj Ibn Amer plain in 1762 . 
 The brothers ' efforts to recruit the Bani Saqr failed when Zahir bribed the tribe not to back his sons and subsequently had Uthman imprisoned in Haifa for six months before exiling him to a village near Safad . Meanwhile , in 1765 , Zahir had Haifa demolished and then rebuilt and fortified at a site three kilometers to the southeast in 1769 . While the old village was situated on a plain , the new town , which remained a port along the Haifa Bay , was built on a narrow strip of land at the northern foot of Mount Carmel to make it easier to defend by land . In May 1766 , Uthman renewed his rebellion against Zahir with backing from the Druze clans of Galilee , but this coalition was defeated by Zahir near Safad . This conflict expanded to include competing Druze and Shia factions from Mount Lebanon and Jabal Amil , with Emir Mansur Shihab ( the Sunni leader of a Druze faction ) and the Metawali , Sheikh <unk> , siding with Zahir , while Emir Yusuf Shihab ( the leader of another Druze faction ) and Sheikh Nasif sided with Uthman . Mediation by Emir Isma 'il Shihab of <unk> culminated in a successful peace summit near Tyre between the two factions and a reconciliation between Zahir and Uthman , whereby the latter was granted control of Nazareth . 
 In September 1767 , conflict between Zahir and his son Ali al @-@ Zahir of Safad commenced over the former 's refusal to cede to the latter control of the strategic fortress of Deir Hanna or the village of Deir al @-@ Qassi . Prior to the dispute , Ali had been loyal to Zahir and proven himself effective in helping his father suppress dissent among his brothers and in battles against external enemies . Zahir 's forces intimidated Ali into surrendering later that month , and Zahir pardoned and ultimately ceded to him Deir al @-@ Qassi . However , conflict was renewed weeks later with Ali and his brother Sa 'id , backed by Sheikh Nasif , Emir Yusuf and Uthman Pasha poised against Zahir , Uthman , Sheikh <unk> and Muhammad Pasha al @-@ Azm , governor of Sidon . With mediation from Ibrahim Sabbagh , Zahir 's financial adviser , Zahir settled his dispute with Sa 'id , granting the latter control over Tur 'an and Hittin . 
 Ali refused to negotiate , gained the backing of Salibi , and the two defeated their father , who had since demobilized his troops and was relying on local civilian volunteers from Acre . When Zahir re @-@ mobilized his Maghrebi mercenaries in Acre he launched an offensive and defeated Ali , who subsequently fled Deir Hanna in October . Out of sympathy for Ali 's children , who remained in the fortress village , he pardoned Ali on the condition he pay 12 @,@ 500 piasters and 25 Arabian horses for the fortress . By December 1767 , Zahir 's intra @-@ family disputes were put to rest for several years ( until 1774 – 75 ) , and through the intercession of Uthman , a close and enduring alliance was established between Zahir and Sheikh Nasif . 
 In 1768 the central Ottoman authorities partially recognized or legitimized Zahir 's de facto political position by granting him the title of " Sheikh of Acre , Emir of Nazareth , Tiberias , Safed , and Sheikh of all Galilee " . However , this official recognition was tempered when Yaqub Agha was executed shortly after and Sulayman Agha died in 1770 , depriving Zahir of close allies in Istanbul . In November 1770 , Uthman Pasha had the governor of Sidon replaced by his son Darwish Pasha and had his other son , Muhammad Pasha , appointed governor of Tripoli Eyalet . Uthman Pasha was committed to ending Zahir 's rule , and Zahir 's position was left particularly vulnerable with the loss of support in Istanbul . In response to threats from Damascus , Zahir further strengthened Acre 's fortifications and armed every adult male in the city with a rifle , two pistols and a sabre . He also moved to mend ties with his sons , who held various tax farms in Galilee , and consolidate his relationship with the Shia clans of Jabal Amil , thereby strengthening his local alliances . 
 = = = Alliance with Ali Bey and war with Damascus = = = 
 Although Zahir was bereft of friends in Istanbul and Damascus , he was forging a new alliance with the increasingly autonomous Mamluk ruler of Egypt and the Hejaz , Ali Bey al @-@ Kabir . Ali Bey shared a common interest with Zahir to subdue Damascus as he sought to extend his influence to Syria for strategic purposes vis @-@ a @-@ vis his conflict with the Sublime Porte . He had dispatched 15 @,@ 000 @-@ 20 @,@ 000 Egyptian troops to the port cities of Gaza and Jaffa under commander Ismail Bey . Together , Zahir and Ismail crossed the Jordan Valley with their armies and moved north toward Damascus . They made it as far as <unk> , but Ismail abruptly halted his army 's advance after confronting Uthman Pasha as he was leading the Hajj caravan in order to avoid harming the Muslim pilgrims . Ismail considered attacking the governor at that point to be a grave religious offense . He subsequently withdrew to Jaffa . 
 Zahir was surprised and angered by Ismail 's reticence to attack . In a unilateral move to impose his authority in Uthman Pasha 's jurisdiction , Zahir had his son Ahmad and other subordinate commanders collect taxes from villages in Damascus Eyalet , including Quneitra , while he dispatched his other son Ali on a campaign against the Bani Nu 'aym tribe in Hauran , also part of Damascus . In response to Zahir 's indignation , Ali Bey sent him 35 @,@ 000 troops under Abu al @-@ Dhahab in May . Together with Ismail 's troops in Jaffa , the Egyptian army captured Damascus from Uthman Pasha in June , while Zahir and his Metawali allies captured the city of Sidon from Darwish Pasha . However , Abu al @-@ Dhahab was persuaded by Ismail that confronting the Ottoman sultan , who carried a high religious authority as the caliph of Islam , was " truly ... a scheme of the Devil " and a crime against their religion . A short time after capturing Damascus , Abu al @-@ Dhahab and Ismail subsequently withdrew from the city , whose inhabitants were " completely astonished at this amazing event " , according to a chronicler of the time period . The sudden turn of events compelled Zahir 's forces to withdraw from Sidon on 20 June . 
 Abu al @-@ Dhahab 's withdrawal frustrated Zahir who proceeded to make independent moves , first by capturing Jaffa in August 1771 , after driving out its governor Ahmad Bey Tuqan , and shortly thereafter , capturing the cotton @-@ producing Bani Sa 'b region ( centered around modern @-@ day Tulkarm ) , which was held by Mustafa Bey Tuqan . Zahir had Jaffa fortified and stationed 2 @,@ 000 troops there . By the end of August , Zahir remained in control of Jaffa , while Uthman Pasha had restored his control over Ramla and Gaza . 
 = = = Peak of power = = = 
 In an attempt to expand his zone of influence to Nablus , the commercial center of Palestine and its agriculturally @-@ rich hinterland , Zahir besieged Nablus in late 1771 . By then , Zahir had secured an alliance with the powerful Jarrar clan , who were incensed at Uthman Pasha 's assignment of Mustafa Bey Tuqan as the collector of the miri ( hajj pilgrimage tax ) . Nablus was under the de facto control of the Tuqan and Nimr clans , local rivals of the Jarrars . The loss of Jaffa and Bani Sa 'b stripped Nablus of its sea access . Nablus was defended by 12 @,@ 000 mostly peasant riflemen under Nimr and Tuqan commanders . After nine days of clashes , Zahir decided to withdraw and avoid a costly stalemate . As he departed Nablus , his forces raided many of the city 's satellite villages , from which its peasant defenders originated . 
 Uthman Pasha had resumed his governorship of Damascus at the end of June 1771 and was determined to eliminate Zahir . To that end , he assembled a coalition that included his sons Darwish Pasha al @-@ Kurji and Muhammad Pasha al @-@ Kurji , who were the governors of Sidon and Tripoli , respectively , and Emir Yusuf Shihab of Mount Lebanon . In late August Uthman Pasha reached Lake Hula at the head of 10 @,@ 000 Ottoman troops . Before Uthman Pasha could be joined by his allies , Zahir and Sheikh Nasif of the Metawalis confronted the governor 's troops on 2 September . Ali al @-@ Zahir , Zahir 's son and a commander of one of his four battlefield regiments , raided Uthman Pasha 's camp , while Zahir 's other troops blocked them from the west . Uthman Pasha 's troops hastily retreated towards the Jordan River , the only place where they were not surrounded . The overwhelming majority drowned in the river , with only 300 – 500 survivors , including Uthman Pasha who almost drowned but was rescued by one of his men . The Battle of Lake Hula marked a decisive victory for Zahir , who entered Acre triumphantly with the spoils of Uthman Pasha 's camp . He was celebrated by the residents of the city and on the way there , he was given honorary gun salutes by each of his fortified villages on the route between Tiberias and Acre . He also received congratulations from the French merchant ships at the port of Acre . Zahir 's victory encouraged Ali Bey to relaunch his Syrian campaign . 
 Following his victory against Uthman Pasha , Zahir demanded Darwish Pasha vacate Sidon , which he did on 13 October . He returned two days later after receiving the backing of Emir Yusuf . Zahir decided to move against Emir Yusuf , and together with his ally Sheikh Nasif , he confronted him at <unk> on 20 October . Emir Yusuf 's men numbered some 37 @,@ 000 . Zahir 's Metawali cavalry engaged in a maneuver where they fled the battlefield in apparent defeat , only to have the pursuant troops of Emir Yusuf surrounded by Zahir 's men , who dealt Emir Yusuf 's army a decisive blow . Emir Yusuf thereafter retreated to his mountain village of Deir al @-@ Qamar , while Sidon was left under the protection of Ali Jumblatt and 3 @,@ 000 Druze defenders . However , with news of Zahir 's victory , Ali Jumblatt and Darwish Pasha withdrew from Sidon , which was subsequently occupied by Zahir and Sheikh Nasif . Uthman Pasha and all of his sons were consequently dismissed from their posts by the Sublime Porte . Although , he could not capture Nablus and its hinterland , Zahir 's domain by the end of 1771 extended from Sidon to Jaffa and included an influential presence in the Hauran plain . 
 Muhammad Tuqan captured Jaffa from Zahir in May 1772 , the same month that Ali Bey arrived in Acre to seek Zahir 's protection after being forced out of Egypt by rival mamluks . In June , the Ottoman loyalist Jazzar Pasha sought to establish himself in Lebanon and took over Beirut from the local Druze chieftains . The Druze had previously been in conflict with Zahir , but due to Jazzar 's offensive , the circumstances fostered an alliance between them , Zahir and the Metawali clans of Jabal Amil . Zahir and Ali Bey sought to take back Jaffa and , with help from the Russian Fleet , succeeded after a nine @-@ month siege , in which they exhausted many of their resources . Prior to that , in late October 1772 , Zahir and his Lebanese allies captured Beirut from Jazzar , also with Russian naval support . 
 In March 1773 , Ali Bey left Palestine to reestablish himself in Egypt , but Abu al @-@ Dhahab had him killed when he arrived there . With this came an end to the alliance between Zahir and Ali Bey , which had brought together Egypt and Palestine politically and economically in a way that had not occurred since the early 16th century . While their attempts to unite their territories economically and politically were unsuccessful , their rule posed the most serious domestic challenge to Ottoman rule in the 18th century . As a consequence of Ali Bey 's death , Zahir moved to further strengthen his hold over Jaffa and capture Jerusalem , but he failed in the latter attempt . All of Ottoman Syria came under the official command of Uthman Pasha al @-@ Misri in 1774 in order to bring stability to the provinces of the region . Al @-@ Misri did not seek conflict with Zahir and sought to establish friendly terms with him . As such , he convinced the Sublime Porte to officially appoint Zahir as the governor of Sidon as long as Zahir paid all of the taxes the province had owed to the Porte . Al @-@ Misri further promoted Zahir in February by declaring him " Governor of Sidon , Nablus , Gaza , Ramla , Jaffa and Jabal Ajlun " , although this title was not officially sanctioned by the Porte . In effect , Zahir was the de facto ruler over Palestine ( with the exception of Nablus and Jerusalem ) , Jabal Amil , and the Syrian coast from Gaza to Beirut . 
 = = = Downfall = = = 
 Al @-@ Misri was recalled to Istanbul in the summer of 1774 and Muhammad Pasha al @-@ Azm was appointed governor of Damascus . Thus , Zahir 's governorship of Sidon was left vulnerable because it had largely depended on guarantees from al @-@ Misri . Al @-@ Azm sought peaceful relations with Zahir , but the Sublime Porte , having made peace with Russia and relieving itself from that conflict , aimed to undermine the rebellious rulers of its provinces , including Zahir . Al @-@ Azm managed to secure an official pardon of Zahir from the Porte in April 1775 , but not the governorship of Sidon . Meanwhile , conflict between Zahir and his sons had reignited , with Ali of Safad attempting to capture Zahir 's villages in Galilee in 1774 . Zahir defeated Ali with support from his other son , Ahmad of Tiberias . Afterward , Zahir 's rule was again challenged by one of his other sons , Sa 'id , later that year . In response to this challenge , Zahir armed and mobilized 300 of Acre 's civilian inhabitants to counter Sa 'id . Ali continued to undermine Zahir 's rule by encouraging defections by Zahir 's Maghrebi mercenaries through bribes . 
 On 20 May 1775 , Abu al @-@ Dhahab , having been encouraged by the Porte to eradicate Zahir 's influence , captured Jaffa and slaughtered its male inhabitants . News of the massacre spurred the people of Acre into a mass panic , with its residents fleeing and storing their goods in the city 's Khan al @-@ <unk> ( the French <unk> ) for safekeeping . On 24 May , Zahir also departed the city , leaving for Sidon . Ali al @-@ Zahir , subsequently entered it and declared himself governor . However , Ali 's Maghrebi troops abandoned him and looted the city as Abu al @-@ Dhahab 's troops approached it a few days later . They proceeded to conquer Sidon by sea , prompting Zahir to seek shelter with Shia allies in Jabal Amil . Some of Zahir 's sons attempted to secure their own peace with Abu al @-@ Dhahab , but the latter became ill and died on 10 June , causing the collapse and chaotic withdrawal of his Egyptian troops from Acre . Zahir re @-@ entered the city two days later and reestablished order with the assistance of Ahmad Agha al @-@ Dinkizli . However , the setback of Abu al @-@ Dhahab 's death did not preclude the Sublime Porte from attempting to check Zahir 's power and Sidon remained in Ottoman hands . 
 On 23 April , the Porte dispatched the Ottoman Navy admiral , Hasan Pasha al @-@ <unk> , to blockade Acre . He reached Haifa on 7 August taking Jaffa from Zahir 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Karim al @-@ Ayyubi . Hasan Pasha ordered Zahir to pay the miri dues he owed to the Sublime Porte dating back to 1768 . Zahir initially agreed to pay 500 @,@ 000 piasters of the total amount upfront and a further 50 @,@ 000 piasters to Hasan Pasha himself to " spare the blood of the people " . Hasan Pasha apparently accepted Zahir 's proposals , but the arrangements fell apart . 
 The accounts differ as to exactly how the negotiations collapsed , but sources agree that their failure was the result of disputes within Zahir 's inner circle between his financial adviser Ibrahim Sabbagh and his chief military commander , al @-@ Dinkizli . Most accounts claim that Sabbagh urged Zahir not to pay Hasan 's requested sums and agitated for war . Sabbagh argued that Zahir 's treasury did not have the funds to pay the miri dues and that Zahir 's forces were capable of defeating Hasan . Al @-@ Dinkizli pressed Zahir to pay the amount , arguing that mass bloodshed could be averted . He advised Zahir to force Sabbagh to pay the amount if Zahir could not afford to himself . When the negotiations dragged on , Hasan pressed for a full repayment of the miri dues , warning Zahir that he would be executed if he failed to satisfy the demand . Zahir was insulted by Hasan 's threat and in turn threatened to destroy Hasan 's entire fleet unless he withdrew his ships . 
 Hasan proceeded to bombard Acre , and Zahir 's Maghrebi artillerymen responded with cannon fire , damaging two of Hasan 's ships . The following day , Hasan 's fleet fired roughly 7 @,@ 000 shells against Acre without returning fire from the city 's artillerymen ; al @-@ Dinkizli had called on his Maghrebi forces to refrain from returning fire because as Muslims they were forbidden from attacking the sultan 's military . Realizing his long @-@ time deputy commander 's betrayal , he attempted to flee Acre on 21 August or 22 August . As he departed its gates , he was fired on by Ottoman troops , with a bullet striking his neck and causing him to fall off his horse . A Maghrebi soldier then decapitated him . Zahir 's severed head was subsequently delivered to Istanbul . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Following his death , Sabbagh and Zahir 's sons Abbas and Salih were arrested by Hasan Pasha 's men . The Sublime Porte also seized property belonging to Zahir , his sons and Sabbagh , which valued at 41 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 piasters . They were imprisoned in Istanbul , the Ottoman capital along with their physician , who was known to be talented in his profession . The physician was summoned by the sultan to treat his wife 's ailment , which he did successfully , earning him his freedom from incarceration and a medal of honor from the sultan . The physician used his influence with the authorities to have Zahir 's children and grandchildren released and returned to their hometowns . Sabbagh was executed by Hasan Pasha . Al @-@ Dinkizli was rewarded with the governorship of Gaza , but died on the way to his new headquarters , likely having been poisoned by Hasan . 
 Zahir 's sons Uthman , Ahmad , Sa 'id and Ali continued to put up resistance , with the latter putting up the longest fight from his fortress in Deir Hanna . The fortress eventually capitulated to the combined forces of Hasan Pasha and Jazzar Pasha on 22 July 1776 . Ali fled , but was killed later that year in the area between Tiberias and Safad . By then , the rest of Zahir 's sons had been arrested or killed . Abbas was later appointed by Sultan Selim III as the Sheikh of Safad . However , in 1799 , when Napoleon invaded Palestine , but withdrew after being defeated in Acre , Abbas and Salih both left Safad with the departing French forces . This marked the end of Zaydani influence in Galilee . 
 Constantin @-@ François Volney , who wrote the first European biography of Zahir in 1787 , lists three main reasons for Zahir 's failure . First , the lack of " internal good order and justness of principle " . Secondly , the early concessions he made to his children . Third , and most of all , the avarice of his adviser and confidant , Ibrahim Sabbagh . 
 = = Politics = = 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 Zahir appointed many of his brothers and sons as local administrators , particularly after he consolidated his control over Acre , which became the capital of his territory . Except for Acre and Haifa , Zahir divided the remainder of his territory between his relatives . His eldest brother was appointed to Deir Hanna , and his younger brothers Yusuf and Salih Abu Dani were installed in I 'billin and Arraba , respectively . Zahir appointed his eldest son Salibi as the multazim of Tiberias . Salibi was killed in 1773 fighting alongside Ali Bey 's forces in Egypt . His death deeply distressed Zahir , who was around 80 years old at the time . He appointed Uthman in Kafr Kanna then Shefa- ' Amr , Abbas in Nazareth , Ali in Safad , and Ahmad in Saffuriya . Ahmad replaced Salibi in Tiberias as well , and also conquered Ajlun and Salt in Transjordan . In addition , Ahmad was given authority over Deir Hanna after Sa 'd's death . Zahir appointed his nephew Ayyub al @-@ Karimi in Jaffa and Gaza , while al @-@ Dinkizli was made multazim in Sidon in 1774 . The appointment of Zahir 's relatives and close associates was meant to ensure the efficient administration of his expanding realm and the loyalty of his circle . Among their chief functions was to ensure the supply of cotton to Acre . It is not clear if these posts were recognized by the Ottoman government . 
 Zahir had an aide who jointly served in the capacity of mudabbir ( manager ) and wazir ( vizier ) to assist him throughout much of his rule in matters of finance and correspondence . This official had always been a Melkite ( local Greek Catholic ) . His first wazir was Yusuf al @-@ <unk> , followed by Yusuf Qassis in 1749 . Qassis continued in this role until the early 1760s when he was arrested for attempting to smuggle wealth he had accumulated during his service to Malta . He was succeeded by Ibrahim Sabbagh , who had served as a personal physician for Zahir in 1757 when he replaced Zahir 's longtime physician Sulayman <unk> . <unk> was a local Greek Orthodox Christian and when he failed to properly treat Zahir during a serious illness in 1757 , Qassis used the opportunity to replace him with Sabbagh , a friend and fellow Melkite . Sabbagh became the most influential figure in Zahir 's administration , particularly as Zahir grew old . This caused consternation among Zahir 's sons as they viewed Sabbagh to be a barrier between them and their father and an impediment to their growing power in Zahir 's territory . Sabbagh was able to gain increased influence with Zahir largely because of the wealth he amassed through his integral role in managing Zahir 's cotton monopoly . Much of this wealth was acquired through Sabbagh 's own deals where he would purchase cotton and other cash crops from the local farmers and sell them to the European merchants in the Syria 's coastal cities and to his Melkite partners in Damietta , Egypt . Sabbagh served other important roles as well , including as Zahir 's political adviser , main administrator and chief representative with European merchants and Ottoman provincial and imperial officials . 
 There were other officials in Zahir 's civil administration in Acre , including chief religious officials , namely the mufti and the qadi . The mufti was the chief scholar among the ulama ( Muslim scholarly community ) and oversaw the interpretation of Islamic law in Zahir 's realm . He was appointed by the Sublime Porte , but Zahir managed to maintain the same mufti for many years at a time in contrast with the typical Syrian province which saw its mufti replaced annually . Zahir directly appointed the qadi from Palestine 's local ulama , but his judicial decisions had to be approved by the qadi of Sidon . Zahir had a chief imam , who in the last years of his rule was Ali ibn Khalid al @-@ <unk> . An <unk> was also appointed to supervise the customs payments made by the European merchants in Acre and Haifa . 
 Zahir 's initial military forces consisted of his Zaydani kinsmen and the local inhabitants of the areas he ruled . They numbered about 200 men in the early 1720s , but grew to about 1 @,@ 500 in the early 1730s . During this early period of Zahir 's career , he also had the key military backing of the Bani Saqr and other Bedouin tribes . As he consolidated his hold over Galilee , his army rose to over 4 @,@ 000 men , many of the later recruits being peasants who supported Zahir for protecting them against Bedouin raids . This suppression of the Bedouin in turn caused the tribes to largely withdraw their military backing of Zahir . The core of his private army were the Maghrebi mercenaries . The <unk> ' commander , Ahmad Agha al @-@ Dinkizli , also served as Zahir 's top military commander from 1735 until al @-@ Dinkizli 's defection during the Ottoman siege of Acre in 1775 . From the time Zahir reconciled with Sheikh Nasif al @-@ Nassar of Jabal Amil in 1768 until most of the remainder of his rule , Zahir also had the support of Nasif 's roughly 10 @,@ 000 Metawali cavalrymen . However , the Metawalis did not aid Zahir during the Ottoman offensive of 1775 . Zahir 's fortified villages and towns were equipped with artillery installments and his army 's arsenal consisted of cannons , matchlock rifles , pistols and lances . Most of the firearms were imported from Venice or France , and by the early 1770s , from the Russian imperial navy . 
 = = = General security = = = 
 According to biographer Ahmad Hasan Joudah , the two principal conditions Zahir established to foster his sheikhdom 's prosperity and its survival were " security and justice " . Prior to Zahir 's consolidation of power , the villages of northern Palestine were prone to Bedouin raids and robberies and the roads were under constant threat from highway robbers and Bedouin attacks . Although following the looting raids , the inhabitants of these agrarian villages were left destitute , the Ottoman provincial government would nonetheless attempt to collect from them the miri ( hajj tax ) . To avoid punitive measures for not paying the miri , the inhabitants would abandon their villages for safety in the larger towns or the desert . This situation hurt the economy of the region as the raids sharply reduced the villages ' agricultural output , the government @-@ appointed <unk> ( tax farmers ) could not collect their impositions , and trade could not be safely conducted due to insecurity on the roads . 
 By 1746 , however , Zahir had established order in the lands he ruled . He managed to co @-@ opt the dominant Bedouin tribe of the region , the Bani Saqr , which greatly contributed to the establishment of security in northern Palestine . Moreover , Zahir charged the sheikhs of the towns and villages of northern Palestine with ensuring the safety of the roads in their respective vicinity and required them to compensate anyone who was robbed of his / her property . General security reached a level whereby " an old woman with gold in her hand could travel from one place to another without fear or danger " , according to biographer Mikhail Sabbagh . 
 This period of calm that persisted between 1744 and 1765 greatly boosted the security and economy of Galilee . The security established in the region encouraged people from other parts of the Ottoman Empire to immigrate to Galilee . Conflict between the local clans and between Zahir and his sons remained limited to periodic clashes , while there were no attacks against Zahir 's domain from outside forces . While Zahir used force to strengthen his position in the region , the local inhabitants generally took comfort in his rule , which historian Thomas Philip described as " relatively just and reasonably fair " . According to Richard Pococke who visited the area in 1737 , the local people had great admiration for Zahir , especially for his war against bandits on the roads . 
 = = = Economic policies = = = 
 In addition to providing security , Zahir and his local deputies adopted a policy of aiding the peasants cultivate and harvest their farmlands to further guarantee the steady supply of agricultural products for export . These benefits included loans to peasants and the distribution of free seeds . Financial burdens on the peasants were also reduced as Zahir offered tax relief during drought seasons or when the harvest seasons were poor . This same tax relief was extended to newcomers who sought to begin cultivating new farmlands . Moreover , Zahir assumed responsibility for outstanding payments the peasants owed to merchants from credit @-@ based transactions if the merchants could provide proof of unsatisfactory payment . According to historian Thomas Philipp , Zahir " had the good business sense not to exploit peasants to the point of destruction , but kept his financial demands to a more moderate level . " He regularly paid the Ottoman authorities their financial dues , ensuring a degree of stability in his relationship with the sultanate . 
 When Zahir conquered Acre , he transformed it from a decaying village into a fortified market hub for Palestinian products , including silk , wheat , olive oil , tobacco and cotton , which he exported to Europe . With cotton in particular , Zahir was able to monopolize the market for it and its foreign export . He did business with European merchants based in Galilee 's ports , who competed with one another for the cotton and grain cultivated in the rural villages under Zahir 's dominion or influence in Galilee 's hinterland and Jabal Amil . Previously , European merchants made direct transactions with local cotton growers , but Zahir , with the help of Ibrahim Sabbagh , put an end to this system of commerce by making himself the middleman between the merchants and the growers living under his rule . This allowed him to both monopolize cotton production and the merchants ' price for the product . Zahir 's designation of prices for the local cash crops also prevented " exploitation " of the peasants and local merchants by European merchants and their " manipulation of the prices " , according to Joudah . This caused financial losses to the European merchants who lodged numerous complaints to the French and English ambassadors to the Sublime Porte . A formal agreement to regulate commerce between Zahir and the European merchants was reached in 1753 . Zahir further encouraged trade by offering local merchants interest @-@ free loans . 
 The high European demand for the product enabled Zahir to grow wealthy and finance his autonomous sheikhdom . This control of the cotton market also allowed him to gain unofficial control over all of the Sidon Eyalet , outside the city of Sidon itself . With mixed success , Zahir attempted to have French merchant ships redirected from the ports of Tyre and Sidon to Haifa instead , in order to benefit from the customs fees he could exact . The city of Acre underwent an economic boom as a result of its position in the cotton trade with France , and became the fortified headquarters of Zahir 's sheikhdom . 
 = = = Relationship with religious minorities = = = 
 Zahir maintained tolerant policies and encouraged the involvement of religious minorities in the local economy . As part of his larger efforts to enlarge the population of Galilee , Zahir invited Jews to resettle in Tiberias around 1742 , along with Muslims . Zahir did not consider Jews to be a threat to his rule and believed that their connections with the Jewish diaspora would encourage economic development in Tiberias , which the Jews considered particularly holy . His tolerance towards the Jews , the cuts in taxes levied on them , and assistance in the construction of Jewish homes , schools and synagogues , helped foster the growth of the Jewish community in the area . The initial Jewish immigrants came from Damascus and were later followed by Jews from Aleppo , Cyprus and Smyrna . Many Jews in Safad , which was governed by Zahir 's son Ali , moved to Tiberias in the 1740s to take advantage of better opportunities in that city , which at the time was under Zahir 's direct rule . The villages of Kafr <unk> and Shefa- ' Amr also saw new Jewish communities spring up under Zahir 's rule . 
 Zahir encouraged local Christian settlement in Acre , in order to contribute to the city 's commercial dynamism in trade and manufacturing . Christians grew to become the largest religious group in the city by the late 18th century . Zahir 's territory became a haven for Melkite and Greek Orthodox Christians from other parts of Ottoman Syria who migrated there for better trade and employment opportunities . In Nazareth , the Christian community prospered and grew under Zahir 's rule , and saw an influx from the Maronite and Greek Orthodox communities of Lebanon and Transjordan , respectively . The Melkite patriarch lived in Acre between 1765 and 1768 . Along with the Jews , the Christians contributed to the economy of Zahir 's sheikhdom in a number of ways , including the relative ease with which they were able to deal with European merchants , the networks of support many of them maintained in Damascus or Istanbul , and their role in service industries . 
 Zahir allowed the Franciscan community of Nazareth to build churches in 1730 , 1741 and 1754 on sites Christians associated with Jesus 's life . He allowed the Greek Orthodox community to build St. Gabriel 's Church over a ruined Crusader church in Nazareth , and in 1750 they enlarged St. George 's Church . The largest Christian community in Acre , the <unk> , built the largest church in the city , St. Andrew 's Church , in 1764 , while the Maronites built St. Mary 's Church for their congregation in 1750 . As a testament to the prosperity that the Christians enjoyed under Zahir 's rule , no further churches were built under the auspices of Zahir 's less tolerant successors . 
 A strong relationship existed between Zahir and the Shia Muslim peasants of Jabal Amil and their sheikhs . Zahir maintained law and order in Jabal Amil , while leaving its mostly Shia inhabitants to their own devices . The Shia also benefited economically from Zahir 's monopoly of the cotton industry and their sheikhs provided him men of great military skill to support his struggle against the Ottoman authorities . Zahir was a key backer of the Shia in their war with the Druze Jumblatt clan and the Shihab dynasty under <unk> Shihab , and likewise , Shia forces were critical to the defense of Zahir 's sheikhdom against expeditions by the Ottoman governor of Damascus in 1771 and 1772 . 
 The relationship between Zahir and the rural sheikhs of the Druze of Mount Lebanon under the Shihab dynasty were mixed . While Sheikh Mansur Shihab of <unk> allied himself with Zahir , his nephew and rival , Yusuf Shihab of the Tripoli region remained supportive of the Ottomans . Owing largely to the conflict between Zahir and the Druze emirs of Mount Lebanon , he Druze of Galilee did not fare well under Zahir and his Zaydani clan . In the oral traditions of Galilee 's Druze inhabitants , Zahir 's reign was synonymous with oppression . During this period , many Druze villages were either destroyed or abandoned and there was a partial Druze exodus from Galilee , particularly from the villages around Safad , to the Hauran region east of the Jordan River . 
 = = Family = = 
 Zahir 's clan belonged to the Qaisi political faction in the centuries @-@ long struggle between the Qais and Yaman confederations . The Ma 'an and Shihab dynasties , who ruled Mount Lebanon ( and often Galilee ) semi @-@ autonomously , also belonged to the Qaisi faction . For the most part , Zahir respected the socio @-@ political system that prevailed in the region he ruled . The alliances between him and local notables were bolstered by a network of marriages between the influential families of the area , including Zahir 's Zaydani clan . Zahir 's own marriages were politically advantageous as they allowed him to consecrate his rule over certain areas or his relationships with certain Bedouin tribes , local clans or urban notables . Zahir had five wives during his lifetime . Among his wives was a woman from the <unk> , a Bedouin tribe active in Transjordan and Palestine . Zahir was also married to a daughter of Sayyid Muhammad , a wealthy religious notable from Damascus , a daughter of the mukhtar ( headman ) of Bi 'ina , and a daughter of the mukhtar of Deir al @-@ Qassi . 
 Zahir had eight sons from his wives , and according to Tobias Smollett , a daughter as well . His sons , from eldest to youngest , were Salibi , Ali , Uthman , Sa 'id , Ahmad , Salih , Sa 'd al @-@ Din and Abbas . His daughter 's husband 's name was Karim al @-@ Ayyubi , who was also Zahir 's cousin . By 1773 , Zahir had a total of 272 children , grandchildren and great @-@ grandchildren . 
 As Zahir consolidated his power and reduced external threats to his rule in the 1760s , his sons aspired for more influence and ultimately fought against their father and each other in order to secure their place as Zahir 's successor . Besides support from elements of the Zaydani clan , Zahir 's sons maintained their own power bases , largely derived from their mothers ' clans , and also made their own alliances with other powerful actors in the region . Zahir was victorious in the many conflicts he had with his sons , but their frequent dissent weakened his rule and played a contributory role to his downfall in 1775 . Prior to his sons ' individual rebellions , Zahir had eliminated other relatives who challenged his power . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Zahir 's rule radically changed the landscape of Galilee . With the restoration and re @-@ fortification of Acre and the establishment of the secondary port city of Haifa , Galilee significantly strengthened its ties with the Mediterranean world . Following Zahir 's death , his successor Jazzar Pasha maintained the cotton monopoly Zahir had established and Galilee 's economy remained almost completely dependent on the cotton trade . The region prospered for decades , but with the rise of the cotton market in the southern United States during the early @-@ mid 19th century , European demand shifted away from Palestine 's cotton and because of its dependency on the crop , the region experienced a sharp economic downturn from which it could not recover . The cotton crop was largely abandoned , as were many villages , and the peasantry shifted its focus to subsistence agriculture . 
 In the late 19th century , the Palestine Exploration Fund 's Claude <unk> Conder wrote that the Ottomans had successfully destroyed the power of Palestine 's indigenous ruling families who " had practically been their own masters " but had been " ruined so that there is no longer any spirit left in them " . Among these families were the " proud race " of Zahir , which was still held in high esteem , but was powerless and poor . Zahir 's modern @-@ day descendants in Galilee use the surname " <unk> " or " al @-@ <unk> " in Zahir 's honor . The <unk> clan constitute one of the traditional elite Muslim clans of Nazareth , alongside the <unk> , Zu <unk> and ' <unk> families . Other villages in Galilee where descendants of Zahir 's clan live are Bi 'ina and Kafr Manda and , prior to its 1948 destruction , al @-@ Damun . Many of the inhabitants of modern @-@ day northern Israel , particularly the towns and villages where Zahir or his family left an architectural legacy , hold Zahir in high regard . 
 Although he was mostly overlooked by historians of the Middle East , some scholars view Zahir 's rule as a forerunner to Palestinian nationalism . Among these scholars is Karl Sabbagh , who asserts the latter view in his book Palestine : A Personal History , which was widely reviewed in the British press in 2010 . Zahir was gradually integrated into Palestinian historiography . In Murad Mustafa <unk> 's <unk> Filastin ( 1965 ) , a multi @-@ volume work about Palestine 's history , Zahir is referred to as the " greatest Palestinian appearing in the eighteenth century " . The Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO ) radio station , Voice of Palestine , broadcast a series about Zahir in 1966 , praising him as a Palestinian national hero who fought against Ottoman imperialism . Zahir is considered by many Arab nationalists as a pioneer of Arab liberation from foreign occupation . According to Joudah 
 However historians may look at Shaykh Zahir al- ' Umar and his movement , he is highly respected by the Arabs of the East . In particular the Palestinians consider him a national hero who struggled against Ottoman authority for the welfare of his people . This praise is reflected in the recent academic , cultural and literary renaissance within Palestinian society that has elevated Zahir and his legacy to near @-@ iconic status . These re @-@ readings are not always bound to historical objectivity but are largely inspired by the ongoing consequences of the <unk> . Still it is precise to say that Shaykh Zahir had successfully established an autonomous state , or a " little Kingdom , " as Albert Hourani called it , in most of Palestine for over a quarter of a century . 
 = = = Building works = = = 
 Zahir and his family built fortresses , watchtowers , warehouses , and khans ( caravanserais ) . These buildings improved the domestic administration and general security of Galilee . Today , many of these structures are in a state of disrepair and remain outside the scope of Israel 's cultural preservation laws . 
 In Acre , Zahir rebuilt the Crusader @-@ era walls and built on top of various Crusader and Mamluk structures in the city . Among these were the caravanserais of Khan al @-@ <unk> and its Burj al @-@ Sultan tower and Khan al @-@ <unk> . In 1758 , he commissioned the construction of the al @-@ <unk> Mosque , He also built the <unk> government house in Nazareth , which served as that city 's municipal headquarters until 1991 . In Haifa , which Zahir founded , he built a wall with four towers and two gates around the new settlement . Within Haifa , he built the Burj al @-@ Salam fortress , a small mosque , a customs building , and a government residence ( <unk> ) . In Tiberias , he commissioned the building of a citadel ( now ruined ) and the al @-@ Amari Mosque . The latter was built with alternating white and black stone , typical of the architectural style of Zahir 's building works , and a minaret . 
 Fortifications and other structures were built in the rural villages under Zahir 's control . In Deir Hanna , Zahir 's brother Sa 'd built a large fortress and an adjacent mosque , both of which were severely damaged during a siege by Jazzar Pasha in 1776 . In Khirbat Jiddin , he rebuilt the demolished Crusader fortress with the addition of a mosque and <unk> ( bathhouse ) . The mosque was destroyed by Israeli forces when the village was captured during the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War . In Shefa- ' Amr , Zahir 's son Uthman built a large fortress with four towers , of which one remains standing . Another of his sons , Ahmad , rebuilt the Crusader fortress in Saffuriya . 
 In <unk> , in modern @-@ day Lebanon , and in Safad , Zahir or his son Ali had Crusader @-@ era fortresses rebuilt . Zahir fortified the village of <unk> , although the village and its fort were in ruins by the late 19th century . At <unk> on the Sea of Galilee , Zahir built five fountains , one of which remained standing by the 19th century . That remaining fountain was the largest of its kind in Galilee . In the village of I 'billin , Zahir 's brother Yusuf built fortifications and a mosque . The I 'billin fortress was later used as the headquarters of Aqil Agha , the 19th century semi @-@ autonomous Arab sheikh of Galilee . 
 = M @-@ 204 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 204 runs across the Leelanau Peninsula between Leland and Suttons Bay in the northwestern Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . The trunkline runs through a rural section of Leelanau County , connecting two villages with the county seat . Originally a gravel road in 1933 , it was later paved within the first three years of existence . Segments were realigned to straighten curves in the late 1930s and early 1970s near the villages of Lake Leelanau and Suttons Bay . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 204 starts at an intersection with M @-@ 22 ( Manitou Trail ) south of Leland next to Duck Lake . From there it follows Duck Lake Road along the south shore of Lake Leelanau 's northern lobe . The two @-@ lane roadway runs eastward and then southeasterly through a mixture of woods and fields to the village of Lake Leelanau . One there , M @-@ 204 follows Phillip Street across the Narrows and turns northeasterly . The bridge that the trunkline uses is eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places . Outside of town , the highway follows Duck Lake Road again past the county seat of Leelanau County . Near the intersection with Horn Road , M @-@ 204 turns southeasterly toward the village of Suttons Bay . As the trunkline descends a hill into the village , it passes through vineyards and woods . Inside town , M @-@ 204 follows Race Street and ends downtown at M @-@ 22 ( St. Joseph Avenue ) . 
 Like other state highways in Michigan , M @-@ 204 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 3 @,@ 397 vehicles used the highway daily in Suttons Bay and 2 @,@ 931 vehicles did so each day near the western terminus , the highest and lowest counts along the highway , respectively . No section of M @-@ 204 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 204 was first designated on July 12 , 1933 between Leland and Suttons Bay along what is today Duck Lake Road . The highway was paved by the middle of 1936 . The road was realigned on July 13 , 1939 , across the narrows of Lake Leelanau in the village of the same name . Another realignment near Suttons Bay was completed on March 26 , 1956 , to smooth out a curve in the road . A second completed on May 4 , 1956 , straightened a curve by Sylt Road east of Lake Leelanau . The western section was completely rebuilt between Duck Lake Corner and the Lake Leelanau Narrows Bridge to smooth out curves in the roadway . Sections not obliterated by the reconstruction were turned over to local control as Main Street or Old M @-@ 204 in Lake Leelanau when the project was finished on July 1 , 1970 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Leelanau County . 
 = What Goes Around ... Comes Around = 
 " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around ( Interlude ) " is a song recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter Justin Timberlake for his second studio album , FutureSex / LoveSounds ( 2006 ) . It was written and produced by Timberlake , Timbaland , and Danja . The song was said by Timberlake to be about betrayal and forgiveness , and was described by some music critics as a " sequel " to his 2002 single " Cry Me a River " . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics . 
 " What Goes Around ... " is about the love life of a friend of Timberlake , Trace Ayala , and his relationship with Elisha Cuthbert . It also is rumored that the song talks about the relationship the two had in the TV series 24 . 
 The song was retitled " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " for its December 19 , 2006 , release as the third single from FutureSex / LoveSounds . It became Timberlake 's third consecutive number @-@ one hit on the Billboard Hot 100 . Internationally the song was also successful , reaching the top ten in countries such as the United Kingdom , Canada , New Zealand , Germany , and Australia . The song was later certified two @-@ times platinum in Australia , gold in the United States and gold in New Zealand . The song won Best Male Pop Vocal Performance at the 50th Grammy Awards , where it also received a nomination for Record of the Year . 
 The Samuel Bayer @-@ directed music video for " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " was released February 7 , 2007 . Actress Scarlett Johansson plays Timberlake 's love interest in the video . The video received the award for Best Direction at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards and was also nominated for Video of the Year . 
 = = Production = = 
 When Timberlake began working on FutureSex / LoveSounds at Timbaland 's studio in Virginia Beach , Virginia , they had no idea of what the album would be like with no plan for it or even a title . He told his collaborators to do a remake of his previous single , " Cry Me a River " . Danja , a protégé of Timbaland , stated : " We had no direction at all other than ' Cry Me a River , ' and not in the sense of mimicking the track , but in how big the song was . There was no direction for how he wanted the song to sound , because there was no direction for how he wanted [ his album FutureSex / LoveSounds ] to sound . " 
 The song was written and produced by Justin Timberlake , Timbaland , and Nate " Danja " Hills . While in the studio , the three men were just " fooling around " and " freestyling " . When Danja began playing a guitar riff , it caught Timberlake 's attention . Timberlake started humming to the melody , and then the lyrics came . Timbaland , who was at his keyboards beside Danja , added drums to the melody . Danja commented that " everything was coming together at the same time " . After coming up with the music , Timberlake never wrote down the lyrics and , in an hour , he was ready to record it . By the time Timberlake was in the vocal booth , the basic track was done , then Timbaland produced a prelude of the song . Timberlake sang the song in a couple of takes and went back line by line to fill up the gaps . During the recording sessions , Timbaland and Danja added everything else , including the basses and strings . Danja compared the process to scoring to a movie , thinking the song was like a horror flick . 
 " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " was pivotal to the creation of FutureSex / LoveSounds . After finishing the production of the song , Timbaland teased Timberlake . Timberlake responded : " Let 's do something we would never do . Let 's go far left and just see what happens . " His answer motivated the collective , and they ended up producing ten songs for the album . 
 = = Composition and interpretation = = 
 " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " is a pop @-@ R & B song performed in a slow manner . It is composed in the key of A Dorian ( A Minor ) in common time . With a gentle and midtempo beat , the tempo is pacing to 76 beats per minute . The song features a two @-@ minute interlude titled " Comes Around " , featuring the album 's producer Timbaland , spanning to a seven @-@ minute and 28 @-@ second track . Timberlake 's voice ranges from B3 to D6 . Musically , the song is similar to the type of music produced on Timberlake 's Justified album ; however , it is the only link from FutureSex / LoveSounds to Justified . 
 In the beginning of the song , there is a five @-@ second harmony line of two <unk> ( one each panned far left and far right on respect octaves ) , a Turkish folk instrument . The beat is then changed to a more upbeat version of the same melody with more percussion . The basic ornamentation is loyal to characteristic Turkish string ornamentations . Timbaland also used the Turkish oud to mellow out the guitar riff . The chord series follows the Am @-@ C @-@ G @-@ D keys . Following the instrumental , Timberlake begins the verse at thirteenth bar . The original track had a bridge , including the pre @-@ verses , the verses and the choruses . After hearing the vocals of Timberlake , they decided to remove the bridge and follow a simple flow , because they felt its " too much " to have it and a break at the end of the song . Timbaland provides backing vocals on the song . 
 " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " is about betrayal and forgiveness . Timberlake revealed that the song was written for the experience his friend went through . However , the public came up with different interpretation of the lyrics , that being a sequel to " Cry Me A River " . Bill Lamb wrote that the song has a " cautionary tale in the lyrics " . According to him , many fans and critics alike , after hearing the song , insisted that it is similar in meaning to " Cry Me a River " , which allegedly accounts to Timberlake 's relationship with former girlfriend , pop singer Britney Spears . However , Timberlake 's account of the song 's meaning contradicts this . Spence D. of IGN commented that the song presents " some intriguing ambiance " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews from critics . Rolling Stone called the single " a soaring ballad featuring Timberlake 's falsetto , with verses and choruses that pile on top of one another with dizzying effect . " About.com reviewer Bill Lamb stated that the song " is one of the most gorgeous pop melodies of the year . " He complimented the string @-@ based arrangement of the song . Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly called it " superior " , along with " LoveStoned " . Zach Baron of Pitchfork Media referred to it " some real can 't @-@ let @-@ go shit that 'll save you the repeat stabs on the bad night . " Spence D. of IGN called it " annoying " but he complimented the use of echo vocals and swirling synths . 
 " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " placed at number twenty @-@ four on Rolling Stone 's list of the 100 Best Songs of 2007 . The song was nominated twice at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards , winning Best Male Pop Vocal Performance but lost to Amy Winehouse 's " Rehab " for Record of the Year . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " was commercially successful in the United States . The single debuted at number 64 on December 23 , 2006 on the Billboard Hot 100 , prior to its physical release . From number eight on February 24 , 2007 , it propelled to number one the following week . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " became Timberlake 's third consecutive number one hit on the Billboard Hot 100 from his FutureSex / LoveSounds album , becoming the first male artist since Usher in 2004 to have three or more consecutive number @-@ one hits from one album . The single charted on Hot 100 for 25 weeks . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America on June 7 , 2007 . By September 3 , 2010 , the song had passed the two million sales plateau , and has sold 2 @,@ 375 @,@ 000 copies as of April 2013 . 
 In the United Kingdom , " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " debuted at number 59 on the UK Singles Chart on January 28 , 2007 . The digital download sales helped propel the single to number 11 on February 25 , 2007 . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " peaked at number four on March 11 , to become his sixth top five single in the United Kingdom . It stayed on the chart for 22 weeks . The single entered the top five in Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Ireland , Norway , Romania , Sweden , Switzerland . In Australia , the single debuted and peaked at number three on the Australian ARIA singles chart on March 26 , 2007 , gaining the Highest Debut certification . It spent a total of 22 weeks on the chart . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " was certified two @-@ times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association for selling over 30 @,@ 000 units . The single peaked at number three in the New Zealand on April 9 , 2007 , and spent 16 weeks on the chart . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The music video for the " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " was produced as a short movie . The video was directed by Samuel Bayer , who had first directorial works with Nirvana 's 1991 single " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . The video features dialogues written by Alpha Dog writer and director Nick Cassavetes , who had previously worked with Timberlake in the film . Timberlake and Bayer enlisted American actress Scarlett Johansson after deciding on using " real " actors . The shooting went for three days between Christmas and New Year 's Eve in Los Angeles . The dawn scene was shot on January 8 , after the original sessions were done . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video starts off with Timberlake flirting with Johansson on the burlesque @-@ style club . She rejects with a tease at first but eventually leaves with him to go back to his place . In between cuts , they are shown in bed caressing each other . Johansson jumps into a pool outside the house , and floats below the surface as if she is drowning . Timberlake runs out and pulls her up ; she laughs at Timberlake and kisses him . 
 In another scene , Timberlake introduces her to a drunk Shawn Hatosy at the club calling her " The One " . Hatosy seems to be interested in Johansson and Timberlake asks him to " keep an eye on her for me " perhaps suspecting she has another man on the side . Timberlake returns and finds them kissing in the stairway . After punching Hatosy he chases after Johansson , who speeds off in her 1967 Chevrolet Corvette C2 Sting Ray ; Timberlake follows in his Porsche Carrera GT . Johansson runs into a fiery car crash pile up and is ejected from the car as it tumbles through the air and lands several feet away 2 times . Timberlake notices a motionless body lying supine on the ground . He gets out and kneels over her while the camera view moves toward the sky . 
 Some scenes shows Timberlake performing on the stairway with a microphone while a group of unknown girls with red paint on their eyes are seen dancing next to him while one ( Johansson ) is seen waving her batons with fire on them near the end of the video . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 The music video of " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " was exclusively premiered on February 9 , 2007 on the iTunes Store . The music video debuted on MTV 's Total Request Live at number nine on February 13 , 2007 . " What Goes Around ... " retired on May 7 at number seven . In Canada , the music video debuted on <unk> 's Top 30 countdown at number 22 on January 26 , 2007 . It peaked at number one on April 27 and stayed on the chart for seven non @-@ consecutive weeks . The video was commercially successful , becoming the fastest selling pop promo on iTunes . It has sold 50 @,@ 000 in downloads for four days . Timberlake was the first major artist to release a video on the download platform . 
 In September 2007 , " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " won an MTV Video Music Award for Best Direction . It was also nominated for Video of the Year but lost to singer Rihanna 's 2007 video " Umbrella " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Timberlake performed the song on Saturday Night Live . Timberlake performed twice at the 49th Annual Grammy Awards , once at the piano for " What Goes Around Comes Around " and later " My Love " and Bill Withers ' " Ain 't No Sunshine . " The song is featured in the set list of FutureSex / LoveShow ( 2007 ) , Legends of the Summer ( 2013 ) and the The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour ( 2013 / 14 ) . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 On May 23 , 2007 , Marilyn Manson and Tim Skold appeared on UK radio station BBC Radio 1 's program Live Lounge to promote Marilyn Manson 's 2007 album Eat Me , Drink Me . They performed an acoustic version of " Heart @-@ Shaped Glasses ( When the Heart Guides the Hand ) " , followed with an acoustic cover of " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " . The Manson cover does not include the interlude . French singer Myriam Abel , the winner of Nouvelle Star 3 , also recorded a non @-@ commercial cover of " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " with a <unk> influence , accessible through her official MySpace page . An a cappella rendition was recorded by Overboard for their 2007 album , Stranded . American post hardcore band <unk> recorded a cover for the Punk Goes ... compilation series , Punk Goes Pop 2 , released March 10 , 2009 . Benny Davis , of the Australian musical comedy act The Axis of Awesome , also heavily sampled the song on his track " Another Four Chords " on The Human Jukebox EP , released in 2013 . 
 Taylor Swift performed a mashup of " You 're Not Sorry " and " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " during her Fearless Tour ( 2009 − 10 ) . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from FutureSex / LoveSounds booklet : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Woodstock Library = 
 The Woodstock Library is a branch of the Multnomah County Library in southeast Portland , Oregon , United States . The library 's origins date back to 1908 , when the people of the Woodstock neighborhood established a reading room at the Woodstock Fire Station , which soon became one of fifteen " deposit stations " ( packing crates that turned into two @-@ shelf bookcases and could hold up to 50 books each ) . The Woodstock collection began as an assemblage of children 's books and was housed within a public school . In 1911 , the station was replaced by a " sub @-@ branch " library offering more books for adults and children , but without the reference works and services available at regular branches . The collection moved into a larger facility in 1914 , which became a full branch in 1917 , offering additional resources and services . 
 The library occupied a series of temporary locations during the 1920s – ' 40s . Construction began on Woodstock 's permanent library building in 1959 . It was dedicated on June 1 the following year , the fourth community library built by Multnomah County . Until the mid @-@ 1990s the library was maintained as @-@ is with only regular maintenance , though capacity strained as public use grew and new technologies demanded additional shelf space . In 1995 , the City of Portland 's Bureau of Planning released the " Adopted Woodstock Neighborhood Plan " , which included a policy to improve the branch and its services . In 1996 , the county adopted a $ 28 million bond measure to renovate some branches and upgrade technology throughout the system . Given multiple issues with the existing building , including structural problems and non @-@ compliance with building codes , Multnomah County Library determined reconstruction was necessary . The library was demolished in January 1999 . 
 The current 7 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 700 m2 ) Woodstock Library building was completed in 2000 . It has a " lantern @-@ like " quality and has received multiple awards for its design . In addition to offering the Multnomah County Library catalog , which contains two million books , periodicals and other materials , the library houses collections in Chinese and Spanish and employs Chinese @-@ speaking staff . 
 = = Early history = = 
 In 1906 , the Multnomah County Library began distributing books to neighborhoods outside downtown Portland . A reading room was established in the Woodstock neighborhood 's fire station building in 1908 ; later that year it was recognized as a branch of Multnomah County Library . Deposit stations , containing packing crates that turned into two @-@ shelf bookcases holding up to 50 books each , were often set up within fire stations or private homes . Woodstock received its deposit station , a collection of children 's books housed within a public school , in 1909 , becoming one of fifteen outlying service areas . On May 16 , 1911 , the Woodstock deposit station was replaced by a sub @-@ branch library , supplying more reading material for adults and children but without the reference works and other library services offered at regular branches . The collection was moved to a larger storefront facility , west of SE 44th on SE Woodstock Boulevard , on September 12 , 1914 . The library achieved full branch status in 1917 , offering a collection and services comparable to other branches . In 1918 , the Woodstock branch and several others were threatened with closure after employees received a $ 10 per month salary increase , but funding sources helped to defray the additional expense . Along with other county libraries , the branch closed between November 1 and November 16 in response to the 1918 flu pandemic . 
 During the 1920s – ' 40s the library occupied a series of temporary locations within rented storefronts . Library resources and services were used heavily by unemployed residents during the Great Depression as well as during and after World War II , as people requested information ranging from foreign locales to victory gardens to jobs . In the 1950s , responding to population changes and the rise in automobile use , Multnomah County Library divided the county into six regions , each of which had a single " Class A " branch offering extended operating hours and full services . Deposit stations and smaller branch libraries were to be eliminated or merged to house larger collections . 
 = = Original building = = 
 Multnomah County Library decided to consolidate the Woodstock and Sellwood @-@ Moreland branches , both of which had struggled to operate in rented spaces for years . Construction of Woodstock 's first permanent library building , located at <unk> SE 49th Avenue , began in 1959 . The new library , measuring 5 @,@ 640 square feet ( 524 m2 ) , was dedicated on June 1 the following year , the fourth community library built by Multnomah County . The president of the Library Association of Portland wrote in the organization 's annual report : " Community response to this fine example of an adequate extension agency has been gratifying . This accelerated use <unk> the principle that excellent , strong book collections , strategically placed , provide economical and satisfactory extension [ branch ] service . " 
 The library received regular maintenance and refurbishment from the 1970s through the mid @-@ 1990s , including repairs following a small fire . Capacity became strained as video and audiobook collections demanded additional shelf space and public use continued to grow . In 1995 , the City of Portland 's Bureau of Planning released the " Adopted Woodstock Neighborhood Plan " , which included a policy to enhance the branch . Objectives included promoting its use , upgrading the facility and its services , improving cyclist and pedestrian access , and strengthening its cultural and educational role within the community . In May 1996 , Multnomah County voters passed a $ 28 million bond measure to renovate some branches and upgrade technology throughout the system . Multnomah County Library determined building reconstruction was necessary given multiple issues including electrical , lighting , mechanical , plumbing and structural problems , mold growth within the walls and underneath flooring , and non @-@ compliance with earthquake engineering and Americans with Disabilities Act codes . Cost analysis revealed reconstruction was more effective than repairing the existing structure ; additional factors included data and communications upgrades and the need for meeting space . Woodstock Library closed on January 17 , 1999 and was demolished soon after . Many of its building materials were recycled or salvaged for reuse . 
 = = Current building = = 
 The current Woodstock Library building is at the intersection of one commercial street ( SE Woodstock Boulevard ) and one tree @-@ lined residential street ( SE 49th ) , which links to the Woodstock School and Woodstock Park . Measuring 7 @,@ 500 square feet ( 700 m2 ) , it opened on March 14 , 2000 , the first branch within the Multnomah County Library system to undergo complete reconstruction . Architects were Folger Johnson and Donald Mayer as well as Thomas Hacker and Associates P.C. ( also referred to as Thomas Hacker Architects Inc. or THA Architecture ) . Becca Cavell served as project architect , project manager and construction administrator . Some of the building 's architectural features were designed by the engineering firm Degenkolb Engineers . Contractor services were provided by McCarthy Building Companies , Inc . 
 Designers had in mind a " lantern @-@ like " quality for the library , " open , light and inviting " . THA said the goal was to create a " feeling of openness and availability " , with a focus on " books and people " . Most of the library 's collection is housed within a single large room level with the sidewalk outside . The building has an exposed gridded steel roof 19 feet ( 580 cm ) high , supported by six pairs of slender steel columns and lined with windows . From several column options , Degenkolb chose cantilevered columns designed in a cruciform shape , built from four steel angles measuring 6 by 6 inches ( 15 cm × 15 cm ) . The columns taper from the top and provide even distribution of loads , protecting the structure against wind and earthquakes without lateral bracing ( or the need for supporting walls ) . The library features a 32 @-@ person capacity meeting room for hosting community events at no charge on a first come , first served basis . The building houses original artwork , including a work by Margot Voorhies @-@ Thompson and , at the entrance , a 15 @-@ line poem by Kim Stafford titled " Open This Door of All Doors " . The exterior includes 36 stainless steel panels etched with words depicting the history of books . 
 Kari Hauge became the first librarian of the new facility . In addition to offering the Multnomah County Library catalog of two million books , periodicals and other materials , the Woodstock Library houses collections in Chinese and Spanish and employs Chinese @-@ speaking staff . Self @-@ checkout stations and radio frequency identification gates were installed in July 2010 . 
 The current building has received several design awards . In 2000 , the American Institute of Steel Construction awarded Degenkolb with the <unk> Merit Award for quality structural engineering . Thomas Hacker Architects was presented with the 2002 AIA Regional Honor Award by the Northwest and Pacific Region of the American Institute of Architects through its Design Awards Program ; jurors noted the library 's " rigorous but poetic " structure and its " outstanding tectonic harmony , from the smallest scale of details to the basic design concept " . The building also received the 2000 AIA Portland Chapter Honor Award , the 2000 Portland General Electric <unk> Award , the 2001 AIA American Library Association Award of Excellence ( for its " simple and elegant design " ) and the 2002 Chicago Athenaeum American Architecture Award . The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America presented an award for the library 's quality lighting design . Ginnie Cooper , director of libraries for Multnomah County , said of the recognition : " Library users love this building and we 're pleased with how much the architectural community has applauded it as well . " 
 The Woodstock Library became a model project for library branch reconstruction in the region . Other libraries designed and built by Thomas Hacker include the Beaverton City Library , the Belmont Library , the Bend Library and the Penrose Library ( Whitman College ) . 
 = = Community role = = 
 Over the years both Woodstock Library buildings have hosted numerous activities , clubs , events and programs . According to the " Adopted Woodstock Neighborhood Plan " , the Woodstock Library and Woodstock Community Center enhance the Village Center 's role within the community as a " gathering place " . Recent examples include appearances by actors and authors , a clown show , " conversation circles " for non @-@ native English speakers , crafting , cultural celebrations , knitting groups , a mobile zoo , and neighborhood organization meetings and storytelling . The library has also hosted town hall meetings and served as a ballot drop @-@ off site during elections . 
 = Ragnarök = 
 In Norse mythology , Ragnarök is a series of future events , including a great battle , foretold to ultimately result in the death of a number of major figures ( including the gods Odin , Thor , Týr , Freyr , Heimdallr , and Loki ) , the occurrence of various natural disasters , and the subsequent submersion of the world in water . Afterward , the world will resurface anew and fertile , the surviving and returning gods will meet , and the world will be repopulated by two human survivors . Ragnarök is an important event in the Norse canon , and has been the subject of scholarly discourse and theory . 
 The event is attested primarily in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In the Prose Edda , and in a single poem in the Poetic Edda , the event is referred to as Ragnarök or <unk> ( Old Norse " Fate of the Gods " and " Twilight of the Gods " respectively ) , a usage popularised by 19th @-@ century composer Richard Wagner with the title of the last of his Der Ring des Nibelungen operas , Götterdämmerung ( 1876 ) . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Old Norse compound <unk> has a long history of interpretation . Its first element , <unk> , is unproblematic , being the genitive plural of regin ( n. pl . ) " the ruling powers , gods " . The second element is more difficult , as it occurs in two variants , <unk> and <unk> . <unk> 's Old Icelandic Dictionary treats the two forms as two separate compounds , glossing ragnarök as " the doom or destruction of the gods " and <unk> as " the twilight of the gods " ( 1910 ) . 
 The plural noun rök , has several meanings , such as " development , origin , cause , relation , fate . " The word ragnarök as a whole is then usually interpreted as the " final destiny of the gods . " 
 The singular form <unk> ( k ) r is found in stanza 39 of the Poetic Edda poem Lokasenna , and in the Prose Edda . The noun <unk> ( k ) r means " twilight " ( from a verb <unk> " to grow dark " ) , suggesting a translation " twilight of the gods " . This reading was widely considered a result of folk etymology , or a learned reinterpretation , of the original term due to the merger of / <unk> / and / ø / in Old Icelandic after ca . 1200 ( nevertheless giving rise to the concept of Götterdämmerung " Twilight of the Gods " in the German reception of Norse mythology ) . Nevertheless , Haraldur <unk> in a 2007 paper suggested that the singular form <unk> " twilight " ( from a Proto @-@ Germanic * <unk> ) might have been the original reading . Haraldur <unk> argues instead that the words ragnarök and <unk> are closely related , etymologically and semantically , and suggests a meaning of " renewal of the divine powers . " 
 Other terms used to refer to the events surrounding Ragnarök in the Poetic Edda include aldar rök ( aldar means age , " end of an age " ) from stanza 39 of Vafþrúðnismál , <unk> rök from stanzas 38 and 42 of Vafþrúðnismál , <unk> er regin <unk> ( " when the gods die " ) from Vafþrúðnismál stanza 47 , <unk> um <unk> regin ( " when the gods will be destroyed " ) from Vafþrúðnismál stanza 52 , Lokasenna stanza 41 , and Sigrdrífumál stanza 19 , aldar <unk> ( " destruction of the age " ) from Helgakviða Hundingsbana II stanza 41 , regin <unk> ( " end of the gods " ) from Hyndluljóð stanza 42 , and , in the Prose Edda , <unk> er <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> ( " when the sons of Muspell move into battle " ) can be found in chapters 18 and 36 of Gylfaginning . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 The Poetic Edda contains various references to Ragnarök : 
 = = = = Völuspá = = = = 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Völuspá , references to Ragnarök begin from stanza 40 until 58 , with the rest of the poem describing the aftermath . In the poem , a völva recites information to Odin . In stanza 41 , the völva says : 
 The völva then describes three roosters crowing : In stanza 42 , the jötunn herdsman <unk> sits on a mound and cheerfully plays his harp while the crimson rooster <unk> ( Old Norse " <unk> , deceiver " ) crows in the forest <unk> . The golden rooster <unk> crows to the Æsir in Valhalla , and the third , unnamed soot @-@ red rooster crows in the halls of the underworld location of Hel in stanza 43 . 
 After these stanzas , the völva further relates that the hound Garmr produces deep howls in front of the cave of <unk> . Garmr 's bindings break and he runs free . The völva describes the state of humanity : 
 The " sons of <unk> " are described as being " at play " , though this reference is not further explained in surviving sources . Heimdall raises the Gjallarhorn into the air and blows deeply into it , and Odin converses with <unk> 's head . The world tree Yggdrasil shudders and groans . The jötunn Hrym comes from the east , his shield before him . The Midgard serpent Jörmungandr furiously writhes , causing waves to crash . " The eagle shrieks , pale @-@ beaked he tears the corpse , " and the ship Naglfar breaks free thanks to the waves made by <unk> and sets sail from the east . The fire jötnar inhabitants of <unk> come forth . 
 The völva continues that Jötunheimr , the land of the jötnar , is <unk> , and that the Æsir are in council . The dwarfs groan by their stone doors . Surtr advances from the south , his sword brighter than the sun . Rocky cliffs open and the jötnar women sink . 
 The gods then do battle with the invaders : Odin is swallowed whole and alive fighting the wolf Fenrir , causing his wife Frigg her second great sorrow ( the first being the death of her son , the god Baldr ) . Odin 's son Víðarr avenges his father by rending Fenrir 's jaws apart and stabbing it in the heart with his spear , thus killing the wolf . The serpent Jörmungandr opens its gaping maw , yawning widely in the air , and is met in combat by Thor . Thor , also a son of Odin and described here as protector of the earth , furiously fights the serpent , defeating it , but Thor is only able to take nine steps afterward before collapsing . The god Freyr fights Surtr and loses . After this , people flee their homes , and the sun becomes black while the earth sinks into the sea , the stars vanish , steam rises , and flames touch the heavens . 
 The völva sees the earth reappearing from the water , and an eagle over a waterfall hunting fish on a mountain . The surviving Æsir meet together at the field of Iðavöllr . They discuss Jörmungandr , great events of the past , and the runic alphabet . In stanza 61 , in the grass , they find the golden game pieces that the gods are described as having once happily enjoyed playing games with long ago ( attested earlier in the same poem ) . The reemerged fields grow without needing to be sown . The gods <unk> and Baldr return from Hel and live happily together . 
 The völva says that the god Hœnir chooses wooden slips for divination , and that the sons of two brothers will widely inhabit the windy world . She sees a hall thatched with gold in Gimlé , where nobility will live and spend their lives <unk> . Stanzas 65 , found in the Hauksbók version of the poem , refers to a " powerful , mighty one " that " rules over everything " and who will arrive from above at the court of the gods ( Old Norse <unk> ) , which has been interpreted as a Christian addition to the poem . In stanza 66 , the völva ends her account with a description of the dragon Níðhöggr , corpses in his jaws , flying through the air . The völva then " sinks down . " It is unclear if stanza 66 indicates that the völva is referring to the present time or if this is an element of the post @-@ Ragnarök world . 
 = = = = Vafþrúðnismál = = = = 
 The Vanir god Njörðr is mentioned in relation to Ragnarök in stanza 39 of the poem Vafþrúðnismál . In the poem , Odin , disguised as Gagnráðr faces off with the wise jötunn Vafþrúðnir in a battle of wits . Vafþrúðnismál references Njörðr 's status as a hostage during the earlier Æsir – Vanir War , and that he will " come back home among the wise Vanir " at " the doom of men . " 
 In stanza 44 , Odin poses the question to Vafþrúðnir as to who of mankind will survive the " famous " Fimbulwinter ( " Mighty Winter " ) . Vafþrúðnir responds in stanza 45 that those survivors will be Líf and Lífþrasir , and that they will hide in the forest of Hoddmímis holt , that they will consume the morning dew , and will produce generations of offspring . In stanza 46 , Odin asks what sun will come into the sky after Fenrir has consumed the sun that exists . Vafþrúðnir responds that Sól will bear a daughter before Fenrir <unk> her , and that after Ragnarök this daughter will continue her mother 's path . 
 In stanza 51 , Vafþrúðnir states that , after Surtr 's flames have been sated , Odin 's sons Víðarr and Váli will live in the temples of the gods , and that Thor 's sons Móði and Magni will possess the hammer Mjolnir . In stanza 52 , the disguised Odin asks the jötunn about Odin 's own fate . Vafþrúðnir responds that " the wolf " will consume Odin , and that Víðarr will avenge him by sundering its cold jaws in battle . Odin ends the duel with one final question : what did Odin say to his son before preparing his funeral pyre ? With this , Vafþrúðnir realizes that he is dealing with none other than Odin , whom he refers to as " the wisest of beings , " adding that Odin alone could know this . Odin 's message has been interpreted as a promise of resurrection to Baldr after Ragnarök . 
 = = = = Helgakviða Hundingsbana II = = = = 
 Ragnarök is briefly referenced in stanza 40 of the poem Helgakviða Hundingsbana II . Here , the valkyrie Sigrún 's unnamed maid is passing the deceased hero Helgi Hundingsbane 's burial mound . Helgi is there with a retinue of men , surprising the maid . The maid asks if she is witnessing a delusion since she sees dead men riding , or if Ragnarök has occurred . In stanza 41 , Helgi responds that it is neither . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 Snorri Sturluson 's Prose Edda quotes heavily from Völuspá and elaborates extensively in prose on the information there , though some of this information conflicts with that provided in Völuspá . 
 = = = = Gylfaginning chapters 26 and 34 = = = = 
 In the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , various references are made to Ragnarök . Ragnarök is first mentioned in chapter 26 , where the throned figure of High , king of the hall , tells Gangleri ( King Gylfi in disguise ) some basic information about the goddess Iðunn , including that her apples will keep the gods young until Ragnarök . 
 In chapter 34 , High describes the binding of the wolf Fenrir by the gods , causing the god Týr to lose his right hand , and that Fenrir remains there until Ragnarök . Gangleri asks High why , since the gods could only expect destruction from Fenrir , they did not simply kill Fenrir once he was bound . High responds that " the gods hold their sacred places and sanctuaries in such respect that they chose not to defile them with the wolf 's blood , even though the prophecies foretold that he would be the death of Odin . " 
 As a consequence of his role in the death of the god Baldr , Loki ( described as father of Fenrir ) is bound on top of three stones with the internal organs of his son Narfi ( which are turned into iron ) in three places . There , venom drops onto his face periodically from a snake placed by the jötunn Skaði , and when his wife Sigyn empties the bucket she is using to collect the dripping venom , the pain he experiences causes convulsions , resulting in earthquakes . Loki is further described as being bound this way until the onset of Ragnarök . 
 = = = = Gylfaginning chapter 51 = = = = 
 Chapter 51 provides a detailed account of Ragnarök interspersed with various quotes from Völuspá , while chapters 52 and 53 describe the aftermath of these events . In Chapter 51 , High states the first sign of Ragnarök will be Fimbulwinter , during which time three winters will arrive without a summer , and the sun will be useless . High details that , prior to these winters , three earlier winters will have occurred , marked with great battles throughout the world . During this time , greed will cause brothers to kill brothers , and fathers and sons will suffer from the collapse of kinship bonds . High then quotes stanza 45 of Völuspá . Next , High describes that the wolf will first swallow the sun , and then his brother the moon , and mankind will consider the occurrence as a great disaster resulting in much ruin . The stars will disappear . The earth and mountains will shake so violently that the trees will come loose from the soil , the mountains will topple , and all restraints will break , causing Fenrir to break free from his bonds . 
 High relates that the great serpent Jörmungandr , also described as a child of Loki in the same source , will breach land as the sea violently swells onto it . The ship Naglfar , described in the Prose Edda as being made from the human nails of the dead , is released from its mooring , and sets sail on the surging sea , steered by a jötunn named Hrym . At the same time , Fenrir , eyes and nostrils spraying flames , charges forward with his mouth wide open , his upper jaw reaching to the heavens , his lower jaw touching the earth . At Fenrir 's side , Jörmungandr sprays venom throughout the air and the sea . 
 During all of this , the sky splits into two . From the split , the " sons of Muspell " ride forth . Surtr rides first , surrounded by flames , his sword brighter than the sun . High says that " Muspell 's sons " will ride across Bifröst , described in Gylfaginning as a rainbow bridge , and that the bridge will then break . The sons of Muspell ( and their shining battle troop ) advance to the field of Vígríðr , described as an expanse that reaches " a hundred leagues in each direction , " where Fenrir , Jörmungandr , Loki ( followed by " Hel 's own " ) , and Hrym ( accompanied by all frost jötnar ) join them . While this occurs , Heimdallr stands and blows the Gjallarhorn with all his might . The gods awaken at the sound , and they meet . Odin rides to Mímisbrunnr in search of counsel from Mímir . Yggdrasil shakes , and everything , everywhere fears . 
 High relates that the Æsir and the Einherjar dress for war and head to the field . Odin , wearing a gold helmet and an intricate coat of mail , carries his spear Gungnir and rides before them . Odin advances against Fenrir , while Thor moves at his side , though Thor is unable to assist Odin because he has engaged Jörmungandr in combat . According to High , Freyr fiercely fights with Surtr , but Freyr falls because he lacks the sword he once gave to his messenger , Skírnir . The hound Garmr ( described here as the " worst of monsters " ) breaks free from his bonds in front of <unk> , and fights the god Týr , resulting in both of their deaths . 
 Thor kills Jörmungandr , yet is poisoned by the serpent , and manages to walk nine steps before falling to the earth dead . Fenrir swallows Odin , though immediately afterward his son Víðarr kicks his foot into Fenrir 's lower jaw , grips Fenrir 's upper jaw , and rips apart Fenrir 's mouth , killing Fenrir . Loki fights Heimdallr , and the two kill one another . Surtr covers the earth in fire , causing the entire world to burn . High quotes stanzas 46 to 47 of Völuspá , and additionally stanza 18 of Vafþrúðnismál ( the latter relating information about the battlefield Vígríðr ) . 
 = = = = Gylfaginning chapters 52 and 53 = = = = 
 At the beginning of chapter 52 , Gangleri asks " what will be after heaven and earth and the whole world are burned ? All the gods will be dead , together with the Einherjar and the whole of mankind . Didn 't you say earlier that each person will live in some world throughout all ages ? " 
 The figure of Third , seated on the highest throne in the hall , responds that there will be many good places to live , but also many bad ones . Third states that the best place to be is Gimlé in the heavens , where a place exists called <unk> that houses a hall called <unk> — where one can find plenty to drink . Third describes a hall made of red gold located in <unk> called <unk> , where " good and virtuous men will live . " Third further relates an unnamed hall in <unk> , the beaches of the dead , that he describes as a large repugnant hall facing north that is built from the spines of snakes , and resembles " a house with walls woven from branches ; " the heads of the snakes face the inside of the house and spew so much venom that rivers of it flow throughout the hall , in which oath breakers and murderers must wade . Third here quotes Völuspá stanzas 38 to 39 , with the insertion of original prose stating that the worst place of all to be is in Hvergelmir , followed by a quote from Völuspá to highlight that the dragon Níðhöggr harasses the corpses of the dead there . 
 Chapter 53 begins with Gangleri asking if any of the gods will survive , and if there will be anything left of the earth or the sky . High responds that the earth will appear once more from the sea , beautiful and green , where self @-@ sown crops grow . The field Iðavöllr exists where Asgard once was , and , there , untouched by Surtr 's flames , Víðarr and Váli reside . Now possessing their father 's hammer Mjölnir , Thor 's sons Móði and Magni will meet them there , and , coming from Hel , Baldr and <unk> also arrive . Together , they all sit and recount memories , later finding the gold game pieces the Æsir once owned . Völuspá stanza 51 is then quoted . 
 High reveals that two humans , Líf and Lífþrasir , will have also survived the destruction by hiding in the wood Hoddmímis holt . These two survivors consume the morning dew for sustenance , and from their descendants the world will be repopulated . Vafþrúðnismál stanza 45 is then quoted . The personified sun , Sól , will have a daughter at least as beautiful as she , and this daughter will follow the same path as her mother . Vafþrúðnismál stanza 47 is quoted , and so ends the foretelling of Ragnarök in Gylfaginning . 
 = = Archaeological record = = 
 Various objects have been identified as depicting events from Ragnarök . 
 = = = Thorwald 's Cross = = = 
 Thorwald 's Cross , a partially surviving runestone erected at Kirk Andreas on the Isle of Man , depicts a bearded human holding a spear downward at a wolf , his right foot in its mouth , while a large bird sits at his shoulder . Rundata dates it to 940 , while Pluskowski dates it to the 11th century . This depiction has been interpreted as Odin , with a raven or eagle at his shoulder , being consumed by Fenrir at Ragnarök . On the other side of the stone is a depiction of a large cross and another image parallel to the Odin figure that has been described as Christ triumphing over Satan . These combined elements have led to the cross as being described as " syncretic art " ; a mixture of pagan and Christian beliefs . 
 = = = Gosforth Cross = = = 
 The Gosforth Cross ( 920 – 950 ) , in Cumbria , England , is a standing cross of a typical Anglo @-@ Saxon form , carved on all sides of the long shaft , which is nearly square in section . Apart from panels of ornament , the scenes include a Christian crucifixion , and possibly another scene in Hell , but the other scenes are generally interpreted as narrative incidents from the Ragnarök story , even by a scholar as cautious of such interpretations as David M. Wilson . The Ragnarök battle itself may be depicted on the north side . The cross features various figures depicted in Borre style , including a man with a spear facing a monstrous head , one of whose feet is thrust into the beast 's forked tongue and on its lower jaw , while the other is placed against its upper jaw , a scene interpreted as Víðarr fighting Fenrir . 
 = = = Ledberg stone = = = 
 The 11th century Ledberg stone in Sweden , similarly to Thorwald 's Cross , features a figure with his foot at the mouth of a four @-@ legged beast , and this may also be a depiction of Odin being devoured by Fenrir at Ragnarök . Below the beast and the man is a depiction of a legless , helmeted man , with his arms in a prostrate position . The Younger Futhark inscription on the stone bears a commonly seen memorial dedication , but is followed by an encoded runic sequence that has been described as " mysterious , " and " an interesting magic formula which is known from all over the ancient Norse world . " 
 = = = <unk> stone = = = 
 On the early 11th century <unk> Stone , from Södermanland , Sweden , a father grieving his dead son used the same verse form , fornyrðislag , as in the Poetic Edda in the following engraving : 
 Jansson ( 1987 ) notes that at the time of the inscription , everyone who read the lines would have thought of Ragnarök and the allusion that the father found fitting as an expression of his grief . 
 = = Theories and interpretations = = 
 = = = Cyclic time and Hoddmímis holt = = = 
 Rudolf Simek theorizes that the survival of Líf and Lífþrasir at the end Ragnarök is " a case of reduplication of the <unk> , understandable from the cyclic nature of the Eddic eschatology " . Simek says that Hoddmímis holt " should not be understood literally as a wood or even a forest in which the two keep themselves hidden , but rather as an alternative name for the world @-@ tree Yggdrasill . Thus , the creation of mankind from tree trunks ( Askr , Embla ) is repeated after the <unk> as well " . Simek says that in Germanic regions , the concept of mankind originating from trees is ancient , and additionally points out legendary parallels in a Bavarian legend of a shepherd who lives inside a tree , whose descendants repopulate the land after life there has been wiped out by plague ( citing a retelling by F. R. Schröder ) . In addition , Simek points to an Old Norse parallel in the figure of <unk> @-@ Oddr , " who is rejuvenated after living as a tree @-@ man ( <unk> @-@ Odds saga 24 – 27 ) " . 
 = = = <unk> , Heliand , and Christianity = = = 
 Theories have been proposed about the relation between Ragnarök and the 9th century Old High German epic poem <unk> about the Christian Last Judgment , where the word <unk> appears , and the 9th century Old Saxon epic poem Heliand about the life of Christ , where various other forms of the word appear . In both sources , the word is used to signify the end of the world through fire . Old Norse forms of the term also appear throughout accounts of Ragnarök , where the world is also consumed in flames , and , though various theories exist about the meaning and origins of the term , its etymology has not been solved . 
 = = = Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European basis = = = 
 Parallels have been pointed out between the Ragnarök of Norse religion and the beliefs of other related Indo @-@ European peoples . Subsequently , theories have been put forth that Ragnarök represents a later evolution of a Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European belief along with other cultures descending from the Proto @-@ Indo @-@ Europeans . These parallels include comparisons of a cosmic winter motif between the Norse Fimbulwinter , the Iranian <unk> and <unk> . Víðarr 's stride has been compared to the Vedic god Vishnu in that both have a " cosmic stride " with a special shoe used to tear apart a beastly wolf . Larger patterns have also been drawn between " final battle " events in Indo @-@ European cultures , including the occurrence of a blind or semi @-@ blind figure in " final battle " themes , and figures appearing suddenly with surprising skills . 
 = = = Volcanic eruptions = = = 
 Hilda Ellis Davidson theorizes that the events in Völuspá occurring after the death of the gods ( the sun turning black , steam rising , flames touching the heavens , etc . ) may be inspired by the volcanic eruptions on Iceland . Records of eruptions on Iceland bear strong similarities to the sequence of events described in Völuspá , especially the eruption at Laki that occurred in 1783 . Bertha Phillpotts theorizes that the figure of Surtr was inspired by Icelandic eruptions , and that he was a volcano demon . Surtr 's name occurs in some Icelandic place names , among them the lava tube caves Surtshellir , a number of dark caverns in the volcanic central region of Iceland . 
 = = = <unk> þáttr = = = 
 Parallels have been pointed out between a poem spoken by a jötunn found in the 13th century þáttr <unk> þáttr ( " the tale of the mountain dweller " ) . In the tale , <unk> and his servant get lost while traveling to church in winter , and so take shelter for the night within a cave . Inside the cave they hear noises , witness a pair of immense burning eyes , and then the being with burning eyes recites a poem of 12 stanzas . The poem the being recites contains references to Norse mythology ( including a mention of Thor ) and also prophecies ( including that " mountains will tumble , the earth will move , men will be scoured by hot water and burned by fire " ) . Surtr 's fire receives a mention in stanza 10 . John Lindow says that the poem may describe " a mix of the destruction of the race of giants and of humans , as in Ragnarök " but that " many of the predictions of disruption on earth could also fit the volcanic activity that is so common in Iceland . " 
 = = Modern influence = = 
 In late 2013 and early 2014 , it was widely reported in English @-@ language media outlets that Ragnarök would occur on February 22 , 2014 . Apparently patterned after the 2012 phenomenon , the claim was at times attributed to a " Viking Calendar " . No such calendar is known to have existed , and the source was a " prediction " made to media outlets by the Jorvik Viking Centre in York , England , and intended to draw attention to an event that the institution was to hold on that date . The Jorvik Viking Centre was criticized for intentionally or unintentionally misleading the public ; however , in an article on the incident , Joseph S. Hopkins perceives the media response as an example of a broad revival of interest in the Viking Age and ancient Germanic topics . 
 = Chiswick Bridge = 
 Chiswick Bridge is a reinforced concrete deck arch bridge over the River Thames in west London . One of three bridges opened in 1933 as part of an ambitious scheme to relieve traffic congestion west of London , it carries the A316 road between Chiswick on the north bank of the Thames and Mortlake on the south bank . 
 Built on the site of a former ferry , the bridge is 606 feet ( 185 m ) long and faced with 3 @,@ 400 tons of Portland stone . At the time of its opening its 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) central span was the longest concrete span over the Thames . The bridge is possibly best known today for its proximity to the end of The Championship Course , the stretch of the Thames used for the Boat Race and other rowing races . 
 = = Background = = 
 The villages of Chiswick and Mortlake , about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) west of central London on the north and south banks of the River Thames , had been linked by a ferry since at least the 17th century . Both areas were sparsely populated , so there was little demand for a fixed river crossing at that point . 
 With the arrival of railways and the London Underground in the 19th century commuting to London became practical and affordable , and the populations of Chiswick and Mortlake grew rapidly . In 1909 the Great Chertsey Road scheme was proposed , which envisaged building a major new road from Hammersmith , then on the outskirts of London , to Chertsey , 18 miles ( 29 km ) west of central London , bypassing the towns of Kingston and Richmond . However , the scheme was abandoned due to costs and arguments between various interested parties over the exact route the road should take . 
 After the First World War , the population of the west London suburbs continued to grow , thanks to improved rail transport links and the growth in ownership of automobiles . In 1925 , the Ministry of Transport convened a conference between Surrey and Middlesex county councils with the aim of reaching a solution to the congestion problem , and the Great Chertsey Road scheme was revived . In 1927 , the Royal Commission on Cross @-@ River Traffic approved the scheme to relieve the by then chronic traffic congestion on the existing , mostly narrow , streets in the area , and on the narrow bridges at Richmond Bridge , Kew and Hammersmith . The Ministry of Transport agreed to pay heavy subsidies towards the cost . 
 A new arterial road , now the A316 road , was given Royal Assent on 3 August 1928 , and construction began in 1930 . The construction of the road required two new bridges to be built , at Twickenham and Chiswick . The proposal was authorised in 1928 and construction began in the same year . The bridge , along with the newly built Twickenham Bridge and the rebuilt Hampton Court Bridge , was opened by Edward , Prince of Wales on 3 July 1933 , and the ferry service was permanently closed . 
 = = Design = = 
 The new bridge was designed in reinforced concrete by architect Sir Herbert Baker and engineer Alfred <unk> , with additional input from <unk> Constructions , at the time Britain 's leading specialist in reinforced concrete construction . 
 The bridge has concrete foundations supporting a five @-@ arch cellular reinforced concrete superstructure . The deck is supported by a concealed lattice of columns and beams rising from the arched superstructure . The structure is faced with 3 @,@ 400 tons of Portland stone , except for underneath the arches . The bridge is 606 feet ( 185 m ) long , and carries two 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide walkways , and a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) wide road . At the time it was built , the 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) central span was the longest concrete span over the Thames . 
 Unusually for a Thames bridge , only three of Chiswick Bridge 's five spans cross the river ; the shorter spans at each end of the bridge cross the former towpaths . To allow sufficient clearance for shipping without steep inclines , the approach roads to the bridge are elevated from some distance back from the river . 
 The bridge was built by the Cleveland Bridge & Engineering Company at a cost of £ 208 @,@ 284 ( about £ 13 @,@ 335 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . Additional costs such as building the approach roads and purchasing land brought the total cost of the bridge to £ 227 @,@ 600 ( about £ 14 @,@ 572 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . The Ministry of Transport paid 75 % of the cost , with Surrey and Middlesex county councils paying the remainder . 
 The bridge was generally well received . Country Life praised the design as " reflecting in its general design the eighteenth century Palladian tradition of Lord Burlington 's famous villa at Chiswick " . 
 = = Present @-@ day = = 
 Chiswick Bridge is a major transport route , and the eighth busiest of London 's 20 Thames road bridges . It is possibly best known for its proximity to the finishing line of The Championship Course , the stretch of the Thames used for the Boat Race and other rowing events . A University Boat Race Stone on the south bank , and a brightly painted blue and black marker post near the north bank of the river , 370 feet ( 110 m ) downstream of the bridge , mark the end of the course . 
 The towpath under the bridge on the southern bank now forms part of the Thames Path . As at 2009 the northernmost arch was used by the Tideway Scullers sculling club as storage space . 
 = Kubah = 
 Kubah ( literally Cupola or Dome ) is an Indonesian novel written by Ahmad Tohari . It follows a poor man named Karman who becomes a member of the Indonesian Communist Party , only to find himself a victim of the ongoing political struggles in 1950s Indonesia . After the Party 's destruction he spends twelve years as a prisoner at Buru before returning to his hometown and becoming a devout Muslim . 
 Tohari 's second novel , Kubah was written in two months and based on the events surrounding the Communist Party and the 30 September Movement coup in 1965 . Published in 1980 by Pustaka Jaya , Kubah came at a time when literary works with similar themes – the victimisation of Communist Party members – were scarce . The novel has also been characterised as dawah ( Islamic preaching ) . Reception of Kubah was mostly mixed ; critics praised the novel for its subject matter and criticised it for its predictability . It received a literary award in 1981 , and in 1986 it was translated into Japanese . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After twelve years imprisoned at Buru Island , the former Communist Party of Indonesia ( Partai Komunis Indonesia , or PKI ) member Karman returns to Central Java . During his time at Buru , his wife Marni has remarried and the area has modernised considerably , rendering him uncertain where to go . He decides to stay at his cousin 's home for a while . Meanwhile , Marni has heard of Karman 's release and realises that she still loves him , and would thus feel uncomfortable if he returned to their hometown of Pegaten . However , their grown daughter Tini wishes to meet her father . 
 In a series of flashbacks , Karman 's life is told . He lost his pro @-@ Dutch father during the Indonesian National Revolution and was raised in poverty before going to work for the rich merchant Haji Bakir as a child , babysitting his daughter Rifah . In the two years Karman lived with them , the family raised him to be a devout Muslim ; Karman , for his part , was a diligent worker and cared deeply for Rifah . When his uncle returned from the front , Karman was brought back home and educated until junior high school , dropping out for a lack of funds . When he was in his twenties Karman found a job at the local village chief 's office with the help of a civil employee named <unk> and a teacher named Margo . 
 Unknown to Karman , both men were PKI members and intent on making him join the party . They gave him communist pamphlets and indoctrinated him in Party philosophy . When Karman was late in telling Rifah his feelings , losing her to another man , the PKI manipulated his emotions to make him leave Islam and hate Haji Bakir . Ultimately this was successful : Karman abandoned his mandatory prayers and began to espouse the Party 's politics . After Karman was refused marriage to Rifah a second time , following her husband 's death , he had Haji Bakir imprisoned . In this time Karman married Marni , intending to convert her family to communism . 
 By 1965 Karman had become a respected member of the PKI , although the public knew him as a member of <unk> . However , following the failure of the 30 September Movement ( Gerakan 30 September , or G30S ) coup in the national capital at Jakarta – orchestrated by the PKI – Karman realised that his position was unsound . He and his fellow PKI members began praying regularly , but many were ultimately killed – including <unk> and Margo . Karman escaped from Pegaten hours before soldiers came to arrest him and managed to avoid capture for nearly two months , generally hiding in cemeteries . After his capture Karman was exiled to Buru . 
 In the present day , Karman has returned to Pegaten to a warm reception . Marni , although she admits that she still loves Karman , insists that she will stay with her new husband ; Haji Bakir , Karman 's uncle , and Karman 's mother have likewise forgiven him . Tini and Haji Bakir 's grandson Jabir are betrothed as planned , and , when the villagers renovate the dilapidated mosque , Karman makes the cupola . He receives much praise for his work and finds a sense of belonging in the mosque . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Kubah was inspired by Indonesian history , beginning in the 1940s and continuing until the 1980s . Following the national revolution from 1945 to 1949 , the country was set in a state of political turmoil and abject poverty which became increasingly severe towards the end of the 1950s . By the early 1960s the PKI and other leftist parties had the support of President Sukarno , giving them greater power ; PKI membership grew quickly in this period , aided by a hyperinflation and widespread poverty . 
 On 1 October 1965 , a group of Indonesian National Armed Forces members calling themselves the 30 September Movement killed six Army generals and announced that the president was under their power ; the coup was quashed the following day . Contemporary reports indicated that the PKI had been behind the G30S , a position endorsed by the Indonesian government . As a result , hundreds of thousands of registered and suspected PKI members were killed or exiled over the following decade , effectively destroying the Party . By 1974 Buru held some 10 @,@ 000 prisoners , while others were held elsewhere or forced to stay abroad . Political prisoners began to be released by the 1970s , but saw systematic discrimination at all levels of society : they found themselves under surveillance and with little hope of employment . 
 Kubah was the second novel written by Ahmad Tohari , who had been in senior high school when the G30S announced its coup . A devout Muslim who had trained as a doctor and ran a pesantren ( Islamic boarding school ) in Central Java , Tohari began to focus on writing when his first novel , Di Kaki Bukit Cibalak ( On the Foothill of Cibalak ; 1978 ) , won a prize from the Jakarta Arts Council . He finished Kubah in two months , first making a thematic overview for each chapter and then developing it further while writing . He deliberately left the novel 's ending open to interpretation , intending for readers to think for themselves . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Kubah is an early example of literature dealing with the G30S and PKI , although earlier examples exist . Former Indonesian president Abdurrahman Wahid described it as the first to deal with reconciliation between PKI members and general Indonesian society after G30S , an issue which was " hyper @-@ sensitive " at the time . The historian Anna @-@ Greta Nilsson Hoadley writes that Kubah explored why a person would be motivated to join the party , emphasizing poverty , cultural pressure , and active propaganda by the PKI . In the end , Karman is ultimately an " innocent victim " , who only joined the Party to improve his own standing . Even after his release Karman remains in a state of fear , " marked by a prisoner 's vulnerability . " The literary critics Maman S. Mahayana , <unk> Sofyan , and Achmad Dian wrote that , in this sense , Karman becomes representative of all PKI members who were arrested following G30S . 
 Mahayana , writing elsewhere , sees Karman as undergoing an existential quest to establish his identity , seemingly finding an answer in the PKI but ultimately becoming trapped by them . Mahayana indicates that a religious message is evident beginning with the novel 's opening , in which Tohari provides a four @-@ line quote from an old Javanese text regarding faith and becoming more explicit later on . He finds Karman 's dealing with the <unk> <unk> while escaping from the government the most explicit expression of Tohari 's intent ; unlike Karman , <unk> is a devout yet simple man who is happy in his poverty , leading Karman to question his own views before ultimately finding his identity in Islam . Mahayana thus argued that Kubah was meant as dawah , or Islamic preaching , with its message that humans should recognise their status as creatures of God conveyed through characters ' dialogue and actions . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Kubah was originally published by the Jakarta @-@ based Pustaka Jaya in 1980 ; unlike Di Kaki Bukit Cibalak and most of Tohari 's later novels , it had not been serialised first . Since 1995 it has been published by Gramedia , seeing four printings as of 2012 . The work was translated into Japanese by Shinobu Yamane in 1986 , under the title Shinsei . 
 The novel 's reception was mixed . It was awarded the <unk> Utama Prize in 1981 for " increasing knowledge , spreading manners , and maturing Indonesian culture , " an award which included a trophy and Rp . 1 million in prize money . Mahayana found it worthy of this prize , praising Kubah 's use of flashback and the complicated issues it raised . Wahid , at the time an active Islamic intellectual with the Nahdlatul Ulama , wrote in 1980 that Kubah had poorly realised its potential ; he characterised it as a beginner 's work : lacking suspense , overly moralistic , and predictable . 
 Tohari 's trilogy Ronggeng Dukuh Paruk ( The Dancer of Paruk Village ; 1981 – 1985 ) , which has proven to be his most famous , also dealt with the G30S and the PKI . However , unlike Kubah , parts of Ronggeng Dukuh Paruk remained censored until 2003 . Numerous novels dealing with G30S and the PKI , written by other authors , have also been published since Kubah . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Broaching ( metalworking ) = 
 Broaching is a machining process that uses a toothed tool , called a broach , to remove material . There are two main types of broaching : linear and rotary . In linear broaching , which is the more common process , the broach is run linearly against a surface of the workpiece to effect the cut . Linear broaches are used in a broaching machine , which is also sometimes shortened to broach . In rotary broaching , the broach is rotated and pressed into the workpiece to cut an axis symmetric shape . A rotary broach is used in a lathe or screw machine . In both processes the cut is performed in one pass of the broach , which makes it very efficient . 
 Broaching is used when precision machining is required , especially for odd shapes . Commonly machined surfaces include circular and non @-@ circular holes , splines , keyways , and flat surfaces . Typical workpieces include small to medium @-@ sized castings , forgings , screw machine parts , and stampings . Even though broaches can be expensive , broaching is usually favored over other processes when used for high @-@ quantity production runs . 
 <unk> are shaped similar to a saw , except the height of the teeth increases over the length of the tool . Moreover , the broach contains three distinct sections : one for roughing , another for semi @-@ finishing , and the final one for finishing . Broaching is an unusual machining process because it has the feed built into the tool . The profile of the machined surface is always the inverse of the profile of the broach . The rise per tooth ( RPT ) , also known as the step or feed per tooth , determines the amount of material removed and the size of the chip . The broach can be moved relative to the workpiece or vice versa . Because all of the features are built into the broach no complex motion or skilled labor is required to use it . A broach is effectively a collection of single @-@ point cutting tools arrayed in sequence , cutting one after the other ; its cut is analogous to multiple passes of a shaper . 
 = = Process = = 
 The process depends on the type of broaching being performed . Surface broaching is very simple as either the workpiece is moved against a stationary surface broach , or the workpiece is held stationary while the broach is moved against it . 
 Internal broaching is more involved . The process begins by clamping the workpiece into a special holding fixture , called a <unk> , which mounts in the broaching machine . The broaching machine elevator , which is the part of the machine that moves the broach above the <unk> , then lowers the broach through the workpiece . Once through , the broaching machine 's puller , essentially a hook , grabs the pilot of the broach . The elevator then releases the top of the pilot and the puller pulls the broach through the workpiece completely . The workpiece is then removed from the machine and the broach is raised back up to reengage with the elevator . The broach usually only moves linearly , but sometimes it is also rotated to create a spiral spline or gun @-@ barrel rifling . 
 Cutting fluids are used for three reasons ; 
 to cool the workpiece and broach 
 to lubricate cutting surfaces 
 to flush the chips from the teeth . 
 Fortified petroleum cutting fluids are the most common . However , heavy @-@ duty water @-@ soluble cutting fluids are being used because of their superior cooling , cleanliness , and non @-@ flammability . 
 = = Usage = = 
 Broaching was originally developed for machining internal keyways . However , it was soon discovered that broaching is very useful for machining other surfaces and shapes for high volume workpieces . Because each broach is specialized to cut just one shape either the broach must be specially designed for the geometry of the workpiece or the workpiece must be designed around a standard broach geometry . A customized broach is usually only viable with high volume workpieces , because the broach can cost US $ 15 @,@ 000 to US $ 30 @,@ 000 to produce . 
 Broaching speeds vary from 20 to 120 surface feet per minute ( <unk> ) . This results in a complete cycle time of 5 to 30 seconds . Most of the time is consumed by the return stroke , broach handling , and workpiece loading and unloading . 
 The only limitations on broaching are that there are no obstructions over the length of the surface to be machined , the geometry to be cut does not have curves in multiple planes , and that the workpiece is strong enough to withstand the forces involved . Specifically for internal broaching a hole must first exist in the workpiece so the broach can enter . Also , there are limits on the size of internal cuts . Common internal holes can range from 0 @.@ 125 to 6 in ( 3 @.@ 2 to 152 @.@ 4 mm ) in diameter but it is possible to achieve a range of 0 @.@ 05 to 13 in ( 1 @.@ 3 to 330 @.@ 2 mm ) . Surface broaches ' range is usually 0 @.@ 075 to 10 in ( 1 @.@ 9 to 254 @.@ 0 mm ) , although the feasible range is 0 @.@ 02 to 20 in ( 0 @.@ 51 to 508 @.@ 00 mm ) . 
 <unk> are usually ± 0 @.@ 002 in ( ± 0 @.@ 05 mm ) , but in precise applications a tolerance of ± 0 @.@ 0005 in ( ± 0 @.@ 01 mm ) can be held . Surface finishes are usually between 16 and 63 <unk> ( <unk> ) , but can range from 8 to 125 <unk> . There may be minimal <unk> on the exit side of the cut . 
 Broaching works best on softer materials , such as brass , bronze , copper alloys , aluminium , graphite , hard rubbers , wood , composites , and plastic . However , it still has a good machinability rating on mild steels and free machining steels . When broaching , the machinability rating is closely related to the hardness of the material . For steels the ideal hardness range is between 16 and 24 Rockwell C ( HRC ) ; a hardness greater than HRC 35 will dull the broach quickly . Broaching is more difficult on harder materials , stainless steel and titanium , but is still possible . 
 = = Types = = 
 <unk> can be categorized by many means : 
 Use : internal , or surface 
 Purpose : single , or combination 
 Motion : push , pull , or stationary 
 Construction : solid , built @-@ up , hollow or shell 
 Function : roughing , sizing , or burnishing 
 If the broach is large enough the costs can be reduced by using a built @-@ up or modular construction . This involves producing the broach in pieces and assembling it . If any portion wears out only that section has to be replaced , instead of the entire broach . 
 Most broaches are made from high speed steel ( HSS ) or an alloy steel ; <unk> coatings are common on HSS to prolong life . Except when broaching cast iron , tungsten carbide is rarely used as a tooth material because the cutting edge will crack on the first pass . 
 = = = Surface broaches = = = 
 The slab broach is the simplest surface broach . It is a general purpose tool for cutting flat surfaces . 
 Slot broaches ( G & H ) are for cutting slots of various dimensions at high production rates . Slot broaching is much quicker than milling when more than one slot needs to be machined , because multiple broaches can be run through the part at the same time on the same broaching machine . 
 Contour broaches are designed to cut concave , convex , cam , contoured , and irregular shaped surfaces . 
 Pot broaches are cut the inverse of an internal broach ; they cut the outside diameter of a cylindrical workpiece . They are named after the pot looking fixture in which the broaches are mounted ; the fixture is often referred to as a " pot " . The pot is designed to hold multiple broaching tools concentrically over its entire length . The broach is held stationary while the workpiece is pushed or pulled through it . This has replaced <unk> for some involute gears and cutting external splines and slots . 
 <unk> broaches use two slab broaches to cut parallel surfaces on opposite sides of a workpiece in one pass . This type of broaching holds closer tolerances than if the two cuts were done independently . It is named after the fact that the broaches " straddle " the workpiece on multiple sides . 
 = = = Internal broaches = = = 
 Solid broaches are the most common type ; they are made from one solid piece of material . For broaches that wear out quickly shell broaches are used ; these broaches are similar to a solid broach , except there is a hole through the center where it mounts on an arbor . Shell broaches cost more initially , but save the cost overall if the broach must be replaced often because the pilots are on the <unk> and do not have to be reproduced with each replacement . 
 Modular broaches are commonly used for large internal broaching applications . They are similar to shell broaches in that they are a multi @-@ piece construction . This design is used because it is cheaper to build and <unk> and is more flexible than a solid design . 
 A common type of internal broach is the keyway broach ( C & D ) . It uses a special fixture called a horn to support the broach and properly locate the part with relation to the broach . 
 A concentricity broach is a special type of spline cutting broach which cuts both the minor diameter and the spline form to ensure precise concentricity . 
 The cut @-@ and @-@ recut broach is used to cut thin @-@ walled workpieces . Thin @-@ walled workpieces have a tendency to expand during cutting and then shrink afterward . This broach overcomes that problem by first broaching with the standard roughing teeth , followed by a " breathing " section , which serves as a pilot as the workpiece shrinks . The teeth after the " breathing " section then include roughing , semi @-@ finishing , and finishing teeth . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 For defining the geometry of a broach an internal type is shown below . Note that the geometries of other broaches are similar . 
 where : 
 The most important characteristic of a broach is the rise per tooth ( RPT ) , which is how much material is removed by each tooth . The RPT varies for each section of the broach , which are the roughing section ( tr ) , semi @-@ finishing section ( ts ) , and finishing section ( tf ) . The roughing teeth remove most of the material so the number of roughing teeth required dictates how long the broach is . The semi @-@ finishing teeth provide surface finish and the finishing teeth provide the final finishing . The finishing section 's RPT ( tf ) is usually zero so that as the first finishing teeth wear the later ones continue the sizing function . For free @-@ machining steels the RPT ranges from 0 @.@ 006 to 0 @.@ 001 in ( 0 @.@ 152 to 0 @.@ 025 mm ) . For surface broaching the RPT is usually between 0 @.@ 003 to 0 @.@ 006 in ( 0 @.@ 076 to 0 @.@ 152 mm ) and for diameter broaching is usually between 0 @.@ 0012 to 0 @.@ 0025 in ( 0 @.@ 030 to 0 @.@ 064 mm ) . The exact value depends on many factors . If the cut is too big it will impart too much stress into the teeth and the workpiece ; if the cut is too small the teeth rub instead of cutting . One way to increase the RPT while keeping the stresses down is with chip breakers . They are notches in the teeth designed to break the chip and decrease the overall amount of material being removed by any given tooth ( see the drawing above ) . For broaching to be effective , the workpiece should have 0 @.@ 020 to 0 @.@ 025 in ( 0 @.@ 51 to 0 @.@ 64 mm ) more material than the final dimension of the cut . 
 The hook ( α ) angle is a parameter of the material being cut . For steel , it is between 15 and 20 ° and for cast iron it is between 6 and 8 ° . The back @-@ off ( γ ) provides clearance for the teeth so that they don 't rub on the workpiece ; it is usually between 1 and 3 ° . 
 When radially broaching workpieces that require a deep cut per tooth , such as forgings or castings , a rotor @-@ cut or jump @-@ cut design can be used ; these broaches are also known as free egress or nibbling broaches . In this design the RPT is designated to two or three rows of teeth . For the broach to work the first tooth of that cluster has a wide notch , or undercut , and then the next tooth has a smaller notch ( in a three tooth design ) and the final tooth has no notch . This allows for a deep cut while keeping stresses , forces , and power requirements low . 
 There are two different options for achieving the same goal when broaching a flat surface . The first is similar to the rotor @-@ cut design , which is known as a double @-@ cut design . Here four teeth in a row have the same RPT , but each progressive tooth takes only a portion of the cut due to notches in the teeth ( see the image gallery below ) . The other option is known as a progressive broach , which completely machines the center of the workpiece and then the rest of the broach machines outward from there . All of these designs require a broach that is longer than if a standard design were used . 
 For some circular broaches , burnishing teeth are provided instead of finishing teeth . They are not really teeth , as they are just rounded discs that are 0 @.@ 001 to 0 @.@ 003 in ( 0 @.@ 025 to 0 @.@ 076 mm ) oversized . This results in burnishing the hole to the proper size . This is primarily used on non @-@ ferrous and cast iron workpieces . 
 The pitch defines the tooth construction , strength , and number of teeth in contact with the workpiece . The pitch is usually calculated from workpiece length , so that the broach can be designed to have at least two teeth in contact with the workpiece at any time ; the pitch remains constant for all teeth of the broach . One way to calculate the pitch is : 
 <formula> 
 = = Broaching machines = = 
 Broaching machines are relatively simple as they only have to move the broach in a linear motion at a predetermined speed and provide a means for handling the broach automatically . Most machines are hydraulic , but a few specialty machines are mechanically driven . The machines are distinguished by whether their motion is horizontal or vertical . The choice of machine is primarily dictated by the stroke required . Vertical broaching machines rarely have a stroke longer than 60 in ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . 
 Vertical broaching machines can be designed for push broaching , pull @-@ down broaching , pull @-@ up broaching , or surface broaching . Push broaching machines are similar to an arbor press with a guided ram ; typical capacities are 5 to 50 tons . The two ram pull @-@ down machine is the most common type of broaching machine . This style machine has the rams under the table . Pull @-@ up machines have the ram above the table ; they usually have more than one ram . Most surface broaching is done on a vertical machine . 
 Horizontal broaching machines are designed for pull broaching , surface broaching , continuous broaching , and rotary broaching . Pull style machines are basically vertical machines laid on the side with a longer stroke . Surface style machines hold the broach stationary while the workpieces are clamped into fixtures that are mounted on a conveyor system . Continuous style machines are similar to the surface style machines except adapted for internal broaching . 
 Horizontal machines used to be much more common than vertical machines ; however , today they represent just 10 % of all broaching machines purchased . Vertical machines are more popular because they take up less space . 
 Broaching is often impossible without the specific broaching or keyway machines unless you have a system that can be used in conjunction with a modern machining centre or driven tooling lathe ; these extra bits of equipment open up the possibility of producing keyways , splines and <unk> through one @-@ hit machining . 
 = = Rotary broaching = = 
 A somewhat different design of cutting tool that can achieve the irregular hole or outer profile of a broach is called a rotary broach or wobble broach . One of the biggest advantages to this type of broaching is that it does not require a broaching machine , but instead is used on lathes , milling machines , screw machines or Swiss lathes . 
 Rotary broaching requires two tooling components : a tool holder and a broach . The leading ( cutting ) edge of the broach has a contour matching the desired final shape . The broach is mounted in a special tool holder that that allows it to freely rotate . The tool holder is special because it holds the tool so that its axis of rotation is inclined slightly to the axis of rotation of the work . A typical value for this misalignment is 1 ° . This angle is what produces a rotating edge for the broach to cut the workpiece . Either the workpiece or the tool holder is rotated . If the tool holder is rotated , the misalignment causes the broach to appear as though it is " wobbling " , which is the origin of the term wobble broach . 
 For internal broaching the sides of the broach are drafted inward so it becomes thinner ; for external broaching the sides are drafted outward , to make the pocket bigger . This draft keeps the broach from jamming ; the draft must be larger than the angle of misalignment . If the work piece rotates , the broach is pressed against it , is driven by it , and rotates synchronously with it . If the tool holder rotates , the broach is pressed against the workpiece , but is driven by the tool holder . 
 Ideally the tool advances at the same rate that it cuts . The ideal rate of cut is defined as : 
 Rate of cut [ inches per rotation ( IPR ) ] = ( diameter of tool [ inches ] ) × sin ( Angle of misalignment [ degrees ] ) 
 If it advances much faster , then the tool becomes choked ; conversely , if it advances much slower , then an interrupted or zig @-@ zag cut occurs . In practice the rate of cut is slightly less than the ideal rate so that the load is released on the non @-@ cutting edge of the tool . 
 There is some spiraling of the tool as it cuts , so the form at the bottom of the workpiece may be rotated with respect to the form at the top of the hole or profile . <unk> may be undesirable because it binds the body of the tool and prevents it from cutting sharply . One solution to this is to reverse the rotation in mid cut , causing the tool to spiral in the opposite direction . If reversing the machine is not practical , then interrupting the cut is another possible solution . 
 In general , a rotary broach will not cut as accurately as a push or pull broach . However , the ability to use this type of cutting tool on common machine tools is highly advantageous . 
 = = History = = 
 The concept of broaching can be traced back to the early 1850s , with the first applications used for cutting keyways in pulleys and gears . After World War I , broaching was used to rifle gun barrels . In the 1920s and 30s the tolerances were tightened and the cost reduced thanks to advances in form grinding and broaching machines . 
 = Uncanny Tales ( Canadian pulp magazine ) = 
 Uncanny Tales was a Canadian science fiction pulp magazine edited by Melvin R. Colby that ran from November 1940 to September 1943 . It was created in response to the wartime reduction of imports on British and American science @-@ fiction pulp magazines . Initially it contained stories only from Canadian authors , with much of its contents supplied by Thomas P. Kelley , but within a few issues Colby began to obtain reprint rights to American stories from Donald A. Wollheim and Sam Moskowitz . Paper shortages eventually forced the magazine to shut down , and it is now extremely rare . 
 = = Publication history and contents = = 
 By the end of the 1930s the science fiction magazine field was booming , with multiple new magazines launched in a short period . Most of the publishers also printed versions of their magazines for the Canadian market , but with the outbreak of World War II , paper shortages and import restrictions reduced the availability of these magazines in Canada . Uncanny Tales was begun in response to these conditions ; the editor was Melvin R. Colby , and the first issue was dated November 1940 . 
 The first issue was digest @-@ sized , and was printed in green ink . Colby initially focused on weird fiction , with Thomas P. Kelley , a Canadian writer whose work had appeared in Weird Tales , a prolific contributor . For the first four issues the format remained unchanged , and almost all the stories were by Kelley or other Canadian writers . Colby subsequently began to obtain reprint rights to U.S. stories from both Donald A. Wollheim and Sam Moskowitz , though Wollheim 's and Moskowitz 's accounts of the events differ . In Wollheim 's account , he happened to meet Colby early in 1941 in New York ; Wollheim had been editing Cosmic Stories and Stirring Science Stories but both magazines had ceased publication at the time of the meeting . Colby , who worked for a Toronto newspaper , told Wollheim that he was editing Uncanny Tales to make extra money , and asked if Wollheim knew where he might be able to obtain stories at a low word rate . Since Stirring and Cosmic had never been distributed in Canada , Wollheim was able to offer him Canadian rights to the stories in those magazines , and Colby agreed to pay a quarter of a cent per word . According to Moskowitz , Wollheim heard rumors of the new magazine , perhaps via Nils Frome , a Canadian fan whom he knew . Wollheim obtained more details from Chester Cuthbert , a Canadian author he was in correspondence with , and contacted Colby to arrange reprints of stories from Stirring and Cosmic . Moskowitz had also heard of Uncanny Tales and wrote to him separately , arranging reprints at a tenth of a cent per word . He sent Colby several stories , which were duly printed , but subsequent correspondence with Colby failed to elicit payment , and eventually Colby stopped responding to his letters . The manuscripts were never returned . A few months later , Moskowitz spoke to John B. Michel — an author associated with Wollheim 's group of writers — and found out that a long @-@ standing feud between Wollheim and Moskowitz was at least partly responsible for his problems . Wollheim and many of the group of writers he represented held very left @-@ wing political positions ; Moskowitz was strongly opposed , and Michel told Moskowitz that Colby was politically left @-@ wing and had been put off by indications from Moskowitz that he was anti @-@ communist . However , the main reason that Colby stopped responding , according to Michel , was that once Wollheim found out that Moskowitz was also supplying stories , he offered Colby further material for free on condition that Colby stopped accepting Moskowitz 's submissions . 
 The sixth issue saw a story by Wollheim appear , and in the seventh issue there were three by Wollheim and one by Robert W. Lowndes . In total , 37 stories from Uncanny Tales have been identified as reprints from either Stirring or Cosmic . There were also a handful of new stories from the same group of authors , including three by Wollheim and two by Lowndes , one of which , " Lure of the Lily " , had been rejected by Wollheim for the American magazines for being too risqué . The stories supplied by Sam Moskowitz included Moskowitz 's own " The Way Back " ( reprinted from Comet ) , which appeared in the February 1942 issue ; Stanton Coblentz 's novel After 12 @,@ 000 Years , and James Taurasi 's story " Magician of Space " , which was not a reprint . Canadian writers continued to appear in the magazine , including C.V. Tench , who had sold a story to the very first issue of Astounding Stories in January 1930 . The stories of Canadian origin were generally unmemorable , and in some cases the stories may have been plagiarized or rewritten versions of other works . 
 Paper shortages caused by the war forced the magazine to a bimonthly schedule in 1942 , and only four more issues appeared . The last issue was dated September − October 1943 . Over the lifetime of the magazine its focus shifted from weird fiction to include both science fiction and fantasy . The magazine is now hard to find and complete runs are very rare . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Uncanny Tales was published by Adam Publishing Co. of Toronto for the first 17 issues , and by Norman Book Co. of Toronto for the last four issues . The publisher may have been owned by Valentine , of the Toronto publishers Valentine , <unk> and Chamberlain . The editor , who was not credited in the magazine , was Melvin R. Colby . The first four issues were digest @-@ sized and 64 pages long ; the format then switched to a large pulp size with 96 pages for all the remaining issues except the last , which had 128 pages . The price was 15 cents throughout except for the last issue , which was 25 cents . There was no volume numbering . A complete index by Dennis Lien of the contents of all issues can be found in issue 9 of <unk> , a science fiction and fantasy bibliography magazine . 
 In the early 1950s an anthology titled Brief Fantastic Tales appeared from Studio Publications in Toronto ; it consisted mostly of reprints from Uncanny Tales . 
 = Playmate to Jesus = 
 " Playmate to Jesus " is a song by Danish @-@ Norwegian pop band Aqua from their third studio album , Megalomania . The song , which was released in 2011 , is about universal love and " what goes around comes around " . The song was published the same day as their other single , " Like a Robot " , which was originally planned to be released in July 2011 . Despite the song 's positive critical reaction , it only charted in Denmark , becoming the group 's second lowest @-@ charting single . The music video , directed by Michael Sauer Christensen and filmed in Lyngby , Denmark , premiered on 22 September 2011 . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " Playmate to Jesus " was written by Aqua members Søren Rasted , Claus Norreen , René Dif and Lene <unk> , and produced by Norreen and Rasted . The song was recorded at Electron Studio in Copenhagen , and later mixed and mastered by Anders Schumann at C4 Studio . It is a midtempo pop song played in an E major key and following the chord progression E − B − C ♯ m − A. The song is about universal love and " what goes around comes around " . The sounds in the first seconds of the song are recorded on the spacecraft Discovery . A piano and violins start the song , before the beat kicks in . A Vocoder synth come 's through Nystrom 's vocal in certain parts of the song , and a synth bass and distorted snare drum are also played . Dif 's bridge only appears on the album version . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 A preview of " Playmate to Jesus " was uploaded to Universal Music 's Danish YouTube account on 6 September 2011 . It was released as the album 's second single and as a radio single on 12 September , the same day as their club single " Like a Robot " , which was originally planned to be released in July . " Playmate to Jesus " is the first track of their third album Megalomania . The track was Aqua 's second @-@ lowest charting single . It debuted at number twenty @-@ six on the Danish Singles Chart , issue dated 7 October 2011 . The following week the song peaked at number thirteen . In its third and final week on the chart it fell to number thirty @-@ three . It is the group 's third single not to chart within the top 10 in Denmark , the others being " We Belong to the Sea " and " Spin Me a Christmas " . The song has been certified gold in Denmark by the IFPI for sales of 300 @,@ 000 units . 
 Despite the song 's commercial performance , critical reactions to the song were mixed to positive . Jon O 'Brien of Allmusic , in a review of Megalomania , viewed " Playmate to Jesus " as one of the highlight songs of the album saying , " The sweeping strings , inspired sound effects , and driving country @-@ pop melodies of the lushly produced opener ' Playmate to Jesus ' , [ ... ] shows the reunion hasn 't been completely without merit . " Time said the song " has the dubious distinction of sounding vaguely like a Lady Gaga track that didn ’ t pass quality control , " but was " relatively catchy , boasting the kind of musical infectiousness that causes you to hum it under your breath on the subway . " Gaffa 's Signe <unk> <unk> considered the song to be " among the best tracks on the album " , along with " Dirty Little <unk> " , " Sucker for a Superstar " and " Like A Robot " . Idolator considered the song to be a knock @-@ off of Far East Movement 's " Like a G6 " , and more old school than " How R U Doin ? . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 Pictures of shooting the music video in Lyngby , Denmark were released on Aqua 's Facebook page on 14 September 2011 . A take of the video was also uploaded on their YouTube channel . The video was officially uploaded on YouTube on 22 September . Directed by Michael Sauer Christensen , it is set in an eerie , empty house that is reminiscent of a horror film , where a black cloud wanders through the halls of the house . The members wear black and gray clothing in the video , with Nystrom 's costume gradually changing throughout . The video ends by the members exiting the house through the roof and transforming into a beam of light shooting into the sky . The video uses a shortened radio edit of the original song , omitting the bridge . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Playmate to Jesus " – 4 : 46 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Adapted from liner notes of Megalomania : 
 Writers : Søren Rasted , Claus Norreen , René Dif , Lene <unk> 
 Producers : Claus Norreen , Søren Rasted 
 Mixing and mastering : Anders Schumann 
 = = Sales and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = A Perfect Circle = 
 A Perfect Circle is an American rock supergroup formed in 1999 by guitarist Billy Howerdel and Tool vocalist Maynard James Keenan . The original incarnation of the band also included Paz Lenchantin on bass , Troy Van Leeuwen on guitar , and Tim Alexander on drums , with Josh Freese as the primary drummer after the band 's initial round of touring prior to their first album . The latest lineup features Puscifer and Ashes Divide bassist Matt <unk> ; former The Smashing Pumpkins guitarist James Iha ; and Puscifer and Ashes Divide touring drummer , Jeff Friedl . Despite having a varied cast since inception , the stylistic content of the songs has remained consistent with Howerdel as composer , and Keenan penning the lyrics and melodies . 
 A Perfect Circle has released three albums : their debut Mer de Noms in 2000 , a follow up , Thirteenth Step in 2003 , and an album of cover songs titled Emotive in 2004 . Shortly after Emotive 's release , the band went into hiatus while members focused on other projects , the most notably being Keenan 's work with Tool and Puscifer , and Howerdel 's putting out a solo album , Keep Telling Myself It 's Alright , under the moniker Ashes Divide . 
 In late 2008 , Keenan and Howerdel announced the band would reform , though the band 's activity would ultimately be sporadic in the coming years . The band toured in 2011 and 2013 , and then released a live album , A Perfect Circle Live : Featuring Stone and Echo , and a greatest hits album , Three Sixty in late 2013 . Work on new material has been alluded to by members since 2008 , though progress has been slow due to Keenan 's other commitments and uncertainty in the direction of the releases . The only new studio material released since the band 's hiatus was the single " By and Down " in 2013 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Mer de Noms ( 1999 – 2001 ) = = = 
 A Perfect Circle was conceived by Billy Howerdel , a former guitar technician for Nine Inch Nails , The Smashing Pumpkins , Fishbone and Tool . Howerdel met singer Maynard James Keenan in 1992 , when Tool was opening for Fishbone , and the two became friends . Three years later , Keenan offered Howerdel , who was looking for lodging , a room in his North Hollywood home . This provided Howerdel the opportunity to play demos of his music for Keenan . Pleased with what he heard , Keenan remarked , " I can hear myself singing [ those songs ] . " Although he originally desired a female vocalist , Howerdel agreed that Keenan would be a good fit , and A Perfect Circle was formed a short time later . They were then joined by bassist and violinist Paz Lenchantin , former Failure guitarist Troy Van Leeuwen , and previous Primus drummer Tim Alexander . The band played their first show at LA 's Viper Club Reception on August 15 , 1999 . After playing shows in L.A. , the band entered the studio to begin work on their first album . Alexander was soon replaced with session drummer and member of The Vandals , Josh Freese , who previously worked with Howerdel on the Guns N ' Roses album , Chinese Democracy . Alexander 's performance can still be heard on the album version of the song , " The Hollow " . 
 The band 's debut album , Mer de Noms ( French for " Sea of Names " ) , was released on May 23 , 2000 . The album is distinctive in that it is the highest ever debut for a rock band , selling over 188 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , and appearing at number four on the Billboard 200 . Howerdel had been working on some of the music , including tracks " The Hollow " and " <unk> " , as far back as 1988 . The band began touring soon after recording for the album was finished . Initially , they served as the opening act for Nine Inch Nails on the 2000 Fragility <unk> tour , but subsequently embarked on a number of headlining tours all over the world , including the Canadian festival , Summersault . As Keenan was well known through his other band , he would often wear long wigs on his otherwise bald head when performing , to distinguish himself from his Tool persona . Mer de Noms went certified platinum by the RIAA on October 31 , 2000 , while the band was on tour . 
 The album produced three singles : " Judith " , " 3 <unk> " , and " The Hollow " . " Judith " is named after , and is about , Keenan 's mother , who suffered a stroke and was left paralyzed when he was 11 . The song " Renholdër " is a reference to guitarist and sound engineer Danny Lohner and reads Re : <unk> backwards . Lohner did not know the song was about him despite his first name being sung — albeit in a distorted fashion — in the song . 
 In the album review by Rolling Stone , Pat Blashill wrote that Keenan " added an almost operatic angst to Howerdel 's songs " and concluded that " A Perfect Circle sound like a desperate dream of what rock used to be . Maybe that 's the point . " AllMusic 's review expressed that " there 's little question that the addicting combination of Keenan 's aching voice and Howerdel 's accomplished songs and production skills made for one of 2000 's best splashes in whatever was left of ' modern rock ' . " 
 = = = Thirteenth Step and Emotive ( 2002 – 2004 ) = = = 
 During the recording , release and tour for Tool 's album Lateralus , from 2000 to 2002 the band experienced a considerable amount of downtime . This made the band extremely dynamic in terms of its members . During the recording of Thirteenth Step , A Perfect Circle lost two of its members , Paz Lenchantin and Troy Van Leeuwen . Lenchantin left to join Billy Corgan 's new band Zwan in April 2002 , while Van Leeuwen left to handle touring duties as the new guitarist for Queens of the Stone Age . Ex @-@ Marilyn Manson bassist Jeordie White , formerly known as Twiggy Ramirez , replaced Lenchantin on bass in January 2003 , with Danny Lohner taking the reins on guitar . However , Lohner did not quite fit as a second guitarist , and former The Smashing Pumpkins guitarist James Iha eventually replaced him . 
 The band released their second album , Thirteenth Step , on September 16 , 2003 . With the new album came a new sound . While Mer de Noms had a heavier , deeper sound , Thirteenth Step was more melodic and straightforward . After the release of the album , John <unk> from The Hollywood Reporter wrote , " They were never a band who beat the listener over the head with metal brutality , but now they 're even more song @-@ oriented than before — a move that illustrates that the band has a knack for writing instrumental hooks that show off a melodic talent that was not as apparent on the first album . " This different sound can be heard in the three singles that came off the album : " Weak and Powerless " , " The Outsider " and " Blue " . Following the release of the album , the band toured throughout the U.S. until the year 's end . Then , in January 2004 , the group left the country to play shows in Europe , Australia , New Zealand and Japan . They headed home in mid @-@ March and finished touring in mid @-@ June . 
 The album received mostly positive reviews . AllMusic 's review stated the album " is the sound of a musical and lyrical maturity that normally doesn 't occur until a band 's third or fourth albums " . The review by Yahoo ! Music expressed that the album " has its share of anthemic moments , but the real passion spills over in the moody overtures where menacing danger feels seconds away " . Rolling Stone wrote in an attempt to summarize the album that it " sounds more like the dusky thrum of Disintegration @-@ era Cure than it does any of the members ' previous bands " , and continued " Thirteenth Step doesn 't bludgeon listeners into submission — it lulls them with droning guitars , dub @-@ deep bass and simmering vocals . " 
 A third album , Emotive , was released on November 2 , 2004 ( election day in the United States ) , and contains covers of anti @-@ war songs by artists such as John Lennon ( " Imagine " ) and Joni Mitchell ( " Fiddle and the Drum " ) . Emotive was recorded with current and former members of the band , but is mostly the work of Keenan and Howerdel . The single " Passive " was adapted from the defunct band Tapeworm , a project composed mainly of Keenan , Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails , and Danny Lohner . " Passive " first appeared under the title " Vacant " at a show played by A Perfect Circle in Portland , Oregon on January 31 , 2001 , notably , without the blessing of Reznor to play the song . The song remained unreleased by any artist until it appeared on Emotive as the song " Passive " . The single " Passive " can also be heard in the 2005 movie Constantine when John Constantine ( Keanu Reeves ) enters Papa Midnite 's office in his club in the second half of the movie . The song " Counting Bodies Like Sheep to the Rhythm of the War Drums " is used in the teaser trailer for The Fantastic Four as well as the trailer for The Taking of Pelham 123 . 
 The album received mixed reviews . An AllMusic review stated the album " falls flat and fails to raise the bar set so high by the quality of their previous two releases " . Rolling Stone praised half the album while criticizing the other , as did The Guardian which stated " cover versions are often hobbled by the artist 's inability to step outside the original and find a fresh perspective , but some of these treatments verge on the visionary . " Ken Micallef of Yahoo ! Music wrote " the band builds on the power of the previous Thirteenth Step , applying hypnotic arrangements , brooding melodies , and droning rhythms to a collection that sounds absurd on its surface , but is woven together by A Perfect Circle 's heavy and dark @-@ lidded instrumental approach . " 
 On November 16 , 2004 , the CD @-@ DVD set entitled <unk> was released . The DVD contains music videos for six singles ; previously unreleased videos for other songs , including three contest runner @-@ up videos and the winning video for " Blue " ; and three trailers for Bikini Bandits . The CD is composed entirely of remixes of the singles from Mer de Noms and Thirteenth Step . The songs were retooled by Danny Lohner , Joshua Eustis , Massive Attack , and James Iha among others . 
 = = = Hiatus and other projects ( 2005 – 2009 ) = = = 
 The future of A Perfect Circle remained uncertain and wobbled between " done for now " and " alive and well . " The band became inactive after they played their last show in Denver , Colorado on June 13 , 2004 . Keenan left to work on Tool 's album 10 @,@ 000 Days while Howerdel began work on a side @-@ project with Josh Freese that flourished into Ashes Divide . In addition to Keenan 's work with Tool , his side @-@ project Puscifer released its first album , V is for Vagina on October 30 , 2007 . The rest of the band also went their separate ways . Freese once again took up the reins as drummer for Nine Inch Nails . White moved on to rejoin Marilyn Manson at guitar under his pseudonym Twiggy Ramirez , and while there was talk of Iha joining Billy Corgan for The Smashing Pumpkins reunion tour in 2007 , this idea was rebuffed and he instead began work on a solo record . 
 Both Howerdel and Keenan discussed the future of the band in various mediums from 2006 through 2008 . During a February 2006 interview with Rock Hard , Keenan remarked , " I think [ APC ] is over . ... We pushed this project as far as it could go , and I see ourselves playing again together only in a few years to make one or two songs , nothing more . " Howerdel 's thoughts on the reunion of the band were similar to those of Keenan in a May 2006 interview with MTV . In a November 2007 issue of Spin featuring Keenan , when asked " Will there ever be another APC album , " he reiterated his comments from 2006 replying , " Um , no . Maybe , someday , a song on a soundtrack . But an album ? No . " Despite these comments , in an interview with Revolver the following month , Keenan discussed the other members of A Perfect Circle 's recent activities and also hinted at the possibility of a reunion . During the interview , Keenan stated : 
 The real problem with running Tool and A Perfect Circle at the same time was they both operate the same way . They 're both live touring bands with a label , still working under the old contract mentality . So I thought it was time to let A Perfect Circle go for now and let Billy explore himself . It 's tough for a guy who went from being a guitar tech [ for Tool ] to being in a band with a pretentious , famous singer and having to live in that shadow . It was important for Billy to go and do his own thing and really explore his own sound and let people hear what he has to say and how he would do it on his own , and then we 'll get back and do some A Perfect Circle stuff . 
 Although the band 's official website had offered no insight as to whether or not the group would reunite , news continued to arrive through Keenan about the existence of the band . In Puscifer 's May 2008 newsletter , Keenan remarked on the status of A Perfect Circle : " As many of you may have heard , Billy and I are engaged in our own little projects for the moment . His is called Ashes Divide and mine is called Puscifer ... Please be advised that A Perfect Circle and Tool are still alive and well . This is simply more . " 
 = = = Return and touring ( 2010 – 2012 ) = = = 
 As early as December 2008 , Keenan had announced that he and Howerdel had been writing new music for A Perfect Circle , although it wasn 't until over year and a half later , mid @-@ 2010 , when various band members began teasing a return on respective Twitter accounts , that the band actually became active . This led up to a September announcement of tour dates in which they would be playing the entirety of each of their three albums at each concert , with one album being played per night . The new touring lineup was announced Maynard James Keenan , Billy Howerdel , Josh Freese , Matt <unk> , and James Iha . 
 There have been conflicting reports as to what degree the band will be releasing new material . Keenan 's initial thoughts in 2008 referred to focusing on " one or two songs at a time " , which would most likely be released digitally via the internet , rather than a full album release on compact disc . Keenan jokingly mentioned that CDs have become " plastic discs that no one cares about anymore . " In June 2010 , Keenan stated that he was working on a fourth LP for A Perfect Circle . However , when asked about an album again in August , his response focused on single songs again , stating that he 's " ... not really into albums anymore . Might be more going back to the singles . The days of the singles market makes a lot more sense at this point . " and that " We have no label , so neither Billy nor I are really into kicking down hundreds of thousands of dollars to record a record and put it out . " Howerdel , in a September 2010 interview , said that he had been working on demos for the last three to four years , and he presents them to Keenan , who decides which he would like to develop into A Perfect Circle songs , or leave for Howerdel to develop into Ashes Divide songs . No new songs were played at the initial reunion concerts , as no songs were finished yet , and the band was still trying to " remind everybody " who they are at these concerts . The possibility of a live concert DVD was discussed , but ultimately not released . 
 In addition the initial 2010 concerts , the band also played a few songs on live television programs Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and Last Call with Carson Daly in October and November 2010 respectively . 
 The band continued touring into 2011 , stopping in 24 cities and performing at events such as Rock on the Range Festival in Columbus , Ohio on May 21 and 22 , 2011 , <unk> Music Festival in Edmonton , Alberta on July 2 , 2011 , Edgefest in Toronto , Canada on July 9 , 2011 , Bluesfest in Ottawa , Canada on July 10 , 2011 . <unk> Music Festival in Kansas City , KS on August 6 , 2011 @.@ and Lollapalooza in Chicago , IL , on August 5 – 7 , 2011 . Freese was unavailable for the 2011 touring due to a scheduling conflict with Weezer . Jeff Friedl , drummer for Ashes Divide , filled in for him . 
 The band continued to allude to working on new music throughout 2011 , referring to the process as " Slow but steady . " Howerdel also referred to " road testing " new songs during touring , that could ultimately be placed on a future album . On June 29 , 2011 , The sole new song , " By and Down " , was debuted in Portland , Oregon . After this , Howerdel reiterated the band 's stance on a new album , stating " Right now the intention is not to put out a ( full album ) but just to release some songs along the way , and then they might be re @-@ imagined and put together in some collection ... If you need to have an album then there will be something more like a photo album where you collect these things and you put them in . " 
 After the 2011 tour , Keenan said that new material still was not ready , and that for the time , he and Howerdel were turning back to their respective side projects , Puscifer and Ashes Divide . During this time , in October 2012 , Freese left the band without any intentions of returning . 
 The band returned to touring in 2013 , playing Soundwave Music Festival and Lollapalooza Chile in early 2013 . In February 2013 , Keenan again stated that a new album was still " currently off the table " , due to his continued work with Puscifer , and Howerdel 's commitment to working on a second yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ released Ashes Divide album . He shortly after appended that they are still working on new material , but it is still mostly just " jamming " and working on bits and pieces , not entire songs . 
 = = = Compilations and future releases ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 In September 2013 , it was announced that the band would release two separate compilations in November 2013 . The first , a greatest hits album entitled Three Sixty , containing one new song , " By and Down " , the second , a box set entitled A Perfect Circle Live : Featuring Stone and Echo . The box set contains their three concerts in 2011 where they played one album in its entirety each night , and a performance of the band at Red Rocks . 
 In regards to future material from the band , Keenan stated " Of course , there 's always writing going on constantly . It 's just stuff that 's not quite sitting right yet , so you don 't know about it " . In November 2013 , Howerdel stated that " there are fully developed songs without lyrics and melody ... as far as the music end goes , I ’ ve got 75 % of the foundation of [ the next ] A Perfect Circle record ready to go . " He did concede that this could change depending on Keenan 's stance on music , and that Keenan prefers smaller releases , while Howerdel prefers the form of a full album . While the band was quiet over the course of 2014 and 2015 , in March 2016 , Keenan stated that he still hopes to make and release new music with the band . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 A Perfect Circle 's music has been described mainly as alternative rock , alternative metal , hard rock and nu metal . The band is also associated with various music styles , including art rock , art metal , progressive rock and progressive metal . Troy J. Augusto of Variety wrote that the band 's music combines equal parts of " ’ 80s Goth , contemporary alt metal and progressive art rock . " 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Mer de Noms ( 2000 ) 
 Thirteenth Step ( 2003 ) 
 Emotive ( 2004 ) 
 = Nguyễn Chánh Thi = 
 Nguyễn Chánh Thi ( 23 February 1923 – 23 June 2007 ) was an officer in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) . He is best known for being involved in frequent coups in the 1960s and wielding substantial influence as a key member of various juntas that ruled South Vietnam from 1964 until 1966 , when he was overpowered by Vietnam Air Force chief and Prime Minister Nguyễn Cao Kỳ in a power struggle and exiled to the United States . Known for his flamboyant style and hostility to U.S. advice , Thi 's ouster was supported by the American leadership , who backed Kỳ 's pro @-@ U.S. regime . Thi joined the French Army at the age of 17 and was captured by Japan after they invaded French Indochina during World War II . After several months he escaped . He later transferred to the Vietnamese National Army of the French @-@ backed State of Vietnam , which , in October 1955 , became the ARVN and Republic of Vietnam ( South Vietnam ) , respectively . A paratrooper , he fought for then @-@ Prime Minister Ngô Đình Diệm against the Bình Xuyên organized crime syndicate in the 1955 Battle for Saigon . Impressed by Thi 's performance , Diệm referred to him as " my son " and put him in command of the Airborne Brigade . 
 In November 1960 , Thi led the paratroopers in a coup against Diệm , citing political interference in the military . The rebels gained the upper hand but Thi was reluctant to push for a complete victory , and the coup was defeated after Diệm falsely promised to make reforms in order to buy time for loyalists to rescue him . Thi fled into exile in Cambodia , but returned after Diệm was deposed and executed in November 1963 . He became the deputy commander of I Corps under Nguyễn Khánh , and helped his superior to overthrow Diệm 's <unk> three months later . Thi became the commander of the 1st Division , before taking control of I Corps later in the year . 
 During the year after Khánh 's rise to power , Thi helped Khánh stage or put down several coup attempts , making him a key player in South Vietnamese military politics . In September 1964 , he and Kỳ helped rescue Khánh from a coup attempt by two disgruntled Catholic Diệmist generals , Lâm Văn Phát and Dương Văn Đức . This gave Kỳ and Thi increased leverage in the junta . Two months later , he was prominent in shutting down a junta @-@ appointed civilian advisory body after they disapproved of a plan by younger officers to compulsorily retire old generals . In January 1965 , he helped Khánh depose the junta @-@ appointed civilian Prime Minister Trần Văn Hương , but by this time he had turned against Khánh . In February 1965 , he helped defeat a coup attempt by Phát and Phạm Ngọc Thảo , and helped to force Khánh 's resignation at the same time . Over the next year , Kỳ and Thi were the foremost officers in the junta , and in June 1965 , Thi declined an opportunity to serve as prime minister after being nominated by his fellow officers following the resignation of civilian Phan Huy Quát . Thi wanted to let a rival take the job and then step in after they had failed , but he never received a second opportunity . 
 Thi oversaw I Corps with a great deal of autonomy , and the other officers felt threatened , which was accentuated by Thi 's alignment with Buddhist activist movements in his region , traditionally a Buddhist stronghold . The Buddhists were opposed to expansion of the Vietnam War and the American leadership viewed Thi negatively . In early 1966 , feeling more confident about his hold on power , Kỳ orchestrated Thi 's removal , and announced that Thi would be going to the US for medical treatment , but in reality into exile . Thi refused to go along with Kỳ 's false story and wanted to stay in Vietnam , and this led to civil unrest in I Corps , where Thi was popular . The disquiet escalated into open rebellion by pro @-@ Thi military units , allied to Buddhist anti @-@ junta activists who were calling for civilian government and an end to the US @-@ driven war expansion policy . After three months of virtual secession , Kỳ 's forces quelled the dissidents , and Thi emigrated to the U.S. , where he lived for the rest of his life . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thi was born on 23 February 1923 in Huế , then the capital of Vietnam and the seat of the Nguyễn dynasty . At the time , Vietnam was part of the colony of French Indochina and his father was a low @-@ level mandarin in the French @-@ controlled monarchy and had served in the French Army during World War I. Thi joined the French Army at 17 ; a few months later , Imperial Japan invaded Indochina during World War II , wresting control from France . Thi was a Japanese prisoner of war for several months until he escaped amidst the confusion of an Allied bombing raid on the Japanese military jail . According to family documents , Thi was captured and imprisoned by the communist Viet Minh of Ho Chi Minh for three months at the end of the war in 1945 as they declared independence during the August Revolution . At the time , a power vacuum emerged as the defeated Japanese withdrew from Vietnam . France attempted to reassert its colonial grip over Indochina , while various Vietnamese groups jockeyed for power at the head of an independent country . In 1946 , full @-@ scale conflict erupted between the Vietminh , who had declared the Democratic Republic of Vietnam ( DRV ) independent , and France . As part of their political effort , the French created the State of Vietnam ( SoV ) , an associated state in the French Union , and installed former Emperor Bảo Đại as the head of state . Thi served in the SoV 's Vietnamese National Army ( VNA ) , and rose steadily up the ranks . 
 = = Diệm era = = 
 In 1954 , the Vietminh defeated the French Union forces at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and France decided to withdraw from Vietnam . Under the provisions of the Geneva Accords , the Vietminh 's DRV would take control of the northern half of the country , and the SoV the south , pending national reunification elections in 1956 . In the meantime , the State of Vietnam remained unstable . The Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo religious sects had their own private armies and de facto states in the Mekong Delta , while the Bình Xuyên organized crime syndicate controlled the national police , had their own military , and dominated the rampant drug trade , prostitution and illegal gambling in the southern capital Saigon . In April and May 1955 , Thi fought in VNA airborne units for Prime Minister Diệm against the Binh Xuyen in the Battle for Saigon after Diệm gave them an ultimatum to surrender . When they did not , the VNA attacked and decisively dispersed the Binh Xuyen after a few days of heavy street fighting . This performance so impressed the lifelong bachelor Diệm that he thereafter referred to Thi as " my son " . Diệm promoted Thi to the rank of colonel and put him in charge of the Airborne Brigade , which was expanded into a division a few years later . The Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) was not as impressed . One of their reports described Thi as " an opportunist and a man lacking strong convictions " . An American military advisor assessed Thi as " tough , unscrupulous , and fearless , but dumb " . In October 1955 , Diệm deposed Bảo Đại in a fraudulent referendum overseen by his brother Ngô Đình Nhu and declared himself President of the newly proclaimed Republic of Vietnam . The VNA thus became the Army of the Republic of Vietnam , and after Diệm canceled the reunification elections , the Vietnam War ensued . 
 = = Failed coup against Diệm = = 
 In 1960 , Thi led a revolt against Diệm after lobbying by his Airborne Division deputy commander , Lieutenant Colonel Vương Văn Đông . Đông had become discontented with Diệm 's arbitrary rule and constant meddling in military affairs . Diệm , who promoted officers on religion and loyalty , rather than skill , gave orders directly to individual commanders , and played senior officers against one another in order to weaken the military leadership and prevent them from becoming effective , lest they try to challenge his rule . Đông later claimed his sole objective was to force Diệm to improve the governance of the country . Đông was clandestinely supported by his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Lieutenant Colonel Nguyễn Triệu Hồng , and Hong 's uncle , Hoang Co Thuy , members of the Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng ( VNQDĐ , the Vietnamese Nationalist Party ) , which was an anti @-@ communist political organization whose members had been marginalized by Diệm . The coup was organized with the help of some VNQDĐ and Đại Việt Quốc Dân Đảng ( Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam , known as Đại Việt ) members , civilians and officers <unk> enlisted the cooperation of an armored regiment , a marine unit and three paratrooper battalions . The operation was launched on November 11 at 05 : <unk> coup was executed ineffectually ; although the rebels captured the headquarters of the Joint General Staff at Tan Son Nhut Air Base , they failed to block the roads leading into Saigon and cut off loyalist reinforcements . Thi 's men also failed to disconnect phone lines into the palace , which allowed Diệm to appeal for aid from loyal units . After taking the key military points , the paratroopers headed towards Independence Palace . At first , they did not attack , believing that Diệm would capitulate . Most of Thi 's soldiers had been tricked into thinking that they were attacking in order to save Diệm from a Presidential Guard mutiny . When the attack finally started , Diệm was nearly killed in the opening salvoes when gunfire hit his bed , but he had arisen just a few minutes earlier . Despite their numerical advantage , the paratroopers ' first assault was repelled by the loyalists . Thi and Dong held fire ; they brought in reinforcements and attacked again , but the loyalists held firm . In the meantime , Thi 's rebels had captured the national police offices , the studios of Radio Saigon and the Presidential Guard barracks . They had also put most of the Saigon @-@ based generals under house arrest . 
 Apparently poised for a military victory , the rebels hesitated . Đông wanted to storm the palace and capture the president and his family . Thi was worried Diệm could be killed in an attack and thus felt that despite Diệm 's shortcomings , he was South Vietnam 's best available leader . Thi thought that enforced reform was the best outcome . The rebels wanted Nhu , Diệm 's younger brother and chief advisor , and his wife , Madame Nhu , who were widely regarded as the powers behind Diệm 's rule , out of the government , although they disagreed over whether to assassinate or deport the couple . Thi demanded that Diệm appoint an officer as Prime Minister and remove Madame Nhu from the palace . Saigon Radio broadcast a speech authorized by Thi 's Revolutionary Council , claiming that Diệm was being removed for corruption and suppression of liberty . Worried by the uprising , Diệm sent representatives to negotiate . After lengthy talks , the parties agreed to a ceasefire . In the meantime , loyalist forces headed towards the capital . Diệm promised to end press censorship , liberalize the economy , and hold free and fair elections . Diệm refused to sack Nhu , but agreed to dissolve the cabinet and form a new government which would accommodate members of the Revolutionary Council . In the early hours of 12 November , Diệm taped a speech detailing the concessions , and Thi broadcast the message on Saigon Radio . 
 When the loyalist reinforcements rolled into the capital aboard tanks and armored vehicles and began to wrest the initiative , the rebels began to break . After a brief , violent battle that killed around 400 people , the coup attempt was crushed . The casualties included a large number of anti @-@ Diệm civilians ; Thi exhorted them to bring down the Ngô family by charging the palace ; 13 were gunned down by the loyalist soldiers as they invaded the grounds . After the failed coup , Đông , Thi and other prominent officers fled to Tan Son Nhut and climbed aboard a C @-@ 47 . They fled to Cambodia , where they were given asylum by Prince Norodom Sihanouk , a long @-@ time Diệm opponent . Diệm promptly reneged on his promises , and intensified his authoritarian rule and crackdowns on dissidents . Almost three years after the incident , Diệm opened the trial for those involved in the coup on 8 July 1963 . Thi and his fellow exiled officers were found guilty and sentenced to death in absentia . In the meantime , Thi lived self @-@ sufficiently in Cambodia for three years . 
 = = 1964 coups with Khánh = = 
 Diệm was killed in a November 1963 coup , allowing Thi to return to South Vietnam and resume his military service . Soon after arriving home , Thi found himself involved in another coup plot , acting as the link between Khánh and Đỗ Mậu , two generals disgruntled with their position under the military junta of Minh , who oversaw the overthrow of Diệm . Mau was one of the principal tacticians in the 1963 coup ; although he did not command troops , he had a thorough knowledge of the backgrounds of the ARVN officers and their strengths , weaknesses and characteristics through his role as Diệm 's director of military security , and this understanding had allowed him to engineer the previous coup . Minh 's junta feared Mau 's shrewdness and tried to sideline him by making him the Minister of Information , a relatively unimportant position . 
 Disgruntled , Mau began recruiting for a coup , targeting Khánh , who had been moved to the I Corps in the far north of South Vietnam to keep him far away from Saigon . Khanh made no attempt to hide his annoyance at not being given a more important job , and had long been regarded as an ambitious and unscrupulous officer by his colleagues . Mau persuaded the junta to install Thi as Khanh 's deputy in I Corps . He tricked the junta by telling them that as Khánh had played a large part in putting down the 1960 coup attempt , Thi would still be harboring resentment . According to Mau , Thi would thus be an ideal mechanism for keeping the disliked Khánh in check . Privately , Mau predicted that Thi would act as a bridge between him in Saigon , and Khánh in Huế . He was correct in thinking the 1960 conflict would be irrelevant as allegiances shifted over time and that the pair would work together for their current aims . 
 The trio were joined by General Trần Thiện Khiêm , the disaffected commander of the III Corps that surrounded Saigon , and an assortment of Marine , Air Force and Special Forces officers and their units . Other notable recruits were Diem loyalist and former chief of the Civil Guard , Duong Ngoc Lam , who was under investigation for corruption , and General Đức , who had recently returned from exile in Paris . The cabal scheduled the coup for 04 : 00 , 30 January . On 29 January , Thi followed Khanh to the capital . The plotters and their agents met in obscure locations spots around town . On the night of 29 January , the rebel troops assumed their positions around Saigon . A number of American officers and embassy officials were alerted to be in their offices at 2 : 00 . At 03 : 00 , Khánh took over the Joint General Staff Headquarters at Tan Son Nhut , and by dawn , the coup had succeeded without a shot being fired as Minh 's junta was caught unaware . The popular Minh was allowed to stay on as a ceremonial but powerless head of state , but his colleagues were taken into custody . Nevertheless , Minh remained disgruntled and persistently tried to regain his influence through political means . On 2 February 1964 , Thi was appointed to be commander of the 1st Division based in Huế , as part of I Corps . He stayed in the post until 21 October and on 14 November , he took control of the entire corps . This corps oversaw the five northernmost provinces of central Vietnam and the 1st and 2nd Divisions . 
 = = = Defeating the September 1964 coup = = = 
 In August , Khánh gave himself more powers , provoking widespread riots and demonstrations across the nation , with Buddhist activists prominent in expressing opposition against Khánh . The anarchy forced Khánh to back down and make concessions , and he ended up in a weaker position than before . Among the concessions he made was to remove or demote some Catholic officials who had been close to Diệm 's religiously discriminatory rule , angering the minority Catholic community . Among those demoted were Generals Phát and Đức , both Catholic . They launched a coup attempt backed mainly by Catholic elements against Khánh before dawn on 13 September . They took over the city without firing a shot , and used the national radio station to proclaim the deposing of Khanh 's junta . There was little initial reaction from most of the military commanders , including Thi . 
 However , Phát and Đức could not apprehend Khánh , and the Americans decided to support the incumbent after concluding that the rebels did not have a satisfactory plan to rule . Thi and Air Force chief Kỳ were then prominent in helping to crush the coup . Kỳ and Thi 's role in putting down the coup attempt gave them more leverage in Saigon 's military politics . <unk> to Kỳ , Thi and their so @-@ called Young Turks for maintaining his hold on power , Khánh was now in a weaker position . This group of young officers were headlined by Thi , Kỳ , IV Corps commander General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu , and Admiral Chung Tấn Cang , the head of the Republic of Vietnam Navy . They publicly called on Khanh to remove " corrupt , dishonest and counterrevolutionary " officers , civil servants and <unk> , and threatened to remove him if he did not enact their proposed reforms . 
 Some observers accused Kỳ and Thi of either allowing or deliberately orchestrating the plot to embarrass Khánh , portray themselves as heroes , and therefore gain prominence on the political stage . In later years , Cao Huy Thuan , a professor and Buddhist activist based in the city of Đà Nẵng in I Corps , claimed Kỳ and Thi met with him a few days before the coup , and had discussed their plans for joining a coup against Khánh . At the subsequent military trial of Phát and Đức 's faction , the plotters were acquitted . According to the historian George McTurnan Kahin , Khánh rigged the trial so that Đức and Phát were acquitted so they would be used as a Catholic counterweight to the Young Turks faction of Kỳ and Thi , who in Khánh 's eyes had become increasingly strong and ominous . Khánh decided to build an alliance with the generals from Minh 's junta by releasing them from house arrest and recalling them to active roles . However , Thi and Kỳ were aware of the motives for these moves and adjusted accordingly . 
 = = = Dissolution of the High National Council = = = 
 The Young Turks and Khánh wanted to forcibly retire officers with more than 25 years of service , ostensibly because they thought them to be lethargic , out of touch , and ineffective . However , the unspoken and most important reason was because they viewed the older generals as rivals for power . Specific targets of this proposed policy were Minh and other senior officers in his short @-@ lived junta , Trần Văn Đôn , Lê Văn Kim and Mai Hữu Xuân . 
 The signature of the military @-@ appointed civilian Chief of State Phan Khắc Sửu was required to pass the ruling , but Sửu referred the matter to the High National Council ( HNC ) , a junta @-@ appointed civilian advisory body , to get their opinion . The HNC turned down the request . This was speculated to be because many HNC members were old , and did not appreciate the generals ' negativity towards seniors . On 19 December , the generals dissolved the HNC . The operation was commanded by Thi — who had traveled into Saigon from I Corps — and Kỳ . The national police , which was under the control and command of the military , moved through the streets before dawn , arresting five HNC members and other politicians and student leaders they deemed to be an obstacle to military rule . Minh and the other aging generals were arrested and flown to Pleiku , a Central Highlands town in a Montagnard area and forcibly retired , while other officers were simply imprisoned in the capital . The junta 's forces also arrested around 100 members of the National Salvation Council ( NSC ) of the anti @-@ war Lê Khắc <unk> party . The NSC was a new political party active in the I Corps region that opposed the expansion of the war and was aligned with Thi and the Buddhist activist monk Thích Trí Quang . As Thi was active in the purge , it was believed that the Quyen had fallen out with Thi . 
 The deposal prompted US Ambassador Maxwell D. Taylor to angrily berate Thiệu , Thi , Kỳ and Cang in a private meeting and threaten to cut off aid if they did not reverse their decision . Although <unk> by the outburst , Thi took a perverse pleasure in riling Taylor . He was seen by a CIA officer soon after , grinning . When asked why he was happy , Thi said " Because this is one of the happiest days of my life ... Today I told the American ambassador that he could not dictate to us . " The dispute escalated for a few days as the junta threatened to expel Taylor , and Khanh went on a media offensive . A CIA informant reported that the arguments with Taylor had incensed the volatile Thi so much he privately vowed to " blow up everything " and " kill Phan Khac Suu , Trần Văn Hương and Nguyen Khanh and put an end to all this . Then we will see what happens . " However , the dispute galvanized the officers ' nationalist sentiments and they rallied around the embattled Khánh for a time . They ignored Taylor 's threats without suffering repercussions because the Americans were too intent on defeating the communists to cut funding in an attempt to force policy change in Saigon . Thi became notorious for his involvement in infighting . A CIA dossier compiled in the 1960s said that Thi " is like a card player , placing his bets now on this leader , then on another ; he plays his subordinates in the same manner . His only real objective is to continue the game . " Time described him as " vain , ambitious , an inveterate intriguer " . The New York Times described him as " a coup specialist " . 
 In late January 1965 , Buddhist protests against junta @-@ appointed civilian Prime Minister Trần Văn Hương broke out across South Vietnam . The unrest came after Huong had unveiled plans to expand conscription and the war against the communists , and demonstrations were at their largest in I Corps , a Buddhist and anti @-@ war escalation stronghold . In Huế , matters degenerated into a riot as 5 @,@ 000 demonstrators attacked the United States Information Service Library and burned 8 @,@ 000 books . Khánh and Thi were thought to have turned a blind eye to the rioting in order to allow the disorder to ruin the Huong government and allow them to inherit power . Khánh decided to have the armed forces replace Huong , and on the morning of 27 January , Khánh staged a bloodless putsch with the support of Thi and Kỳ . However , many of the officers had agreed to Khánh 's plan in hopes he would fail and discredit himself . 
 = = 1965 coup against Nguyen Khanh = = 
 By this time , Taylor 's relationship with Khánh had already broken down irreparably over the issue of the HNC , and the US became increasingly intent on a regime change as Khánh was becoming increasingly reliant on Buddhist support , which they saw as an obstacle to their war expansion plans . In the first week of February , Taylor told the leading South Vietnamese officers that the US was " in no way propping up General Khánh or backing him in any fashion " . Despite their mutual alignment with Buddhist activists , Thi was known to have become personally hostile to Khánh by this time . During this time , many officers were organizing separate plots against Khánh . 
 Shortly before noon on 19 February , the undetected communist agent , Colonels Thảo and Phát used tanks and some infantry battalions to seize control of the national military headquarters , post office and the radio station of Saigon . The rebels failed to capture Kỳ , who fled to Tan Son Nhut , where he ran into Khánh , and the pair flew off together , while some junta figures were arrested there . Thao made a radio announcement stating his desire to get rid of Khánh , whom he described as a " dictator " , while some of his fellow rebels made comments eulogizing Diem and indicating that they would start a hardline Catholic regime . This alarmed Thi , as the tone of the comments indicated that the rebels might punish people who had fought against Diệm in the past , such as those involved in the 1960 and 1963 coups . 
 The Americans decided that while they wanted Khánh out , they did not approve of Thảo and Phát , and their polarizing policies , so they began to lobby Kỳ and Thi , the two most powerful officers apart from Khánh , to defeat both sides . While Kỳ used air power to stop the two sides from confrontation by threatening to bomb them if they opened fire , the Americans consulted with Thi and General Cao Văn Viên , the commander of III Corps surrounding Saigon . They wanted Thi and Vien to assemble units hostile to both Khánh and the rebels into a Capital Liberation Force . The Americans provided Thi with a plane so that he could fly in from his I Corps headquarters in Đà Nẵng to lead ground forces against both Khanh and the rebels . 
 Late in the night , Thảo and Phát met with Kỳ in a meeting organized by the Americans , and insisted that Khanh be removed from power . The coup collapsed when , between midnight and dawn , anti @-@ coup forces swept into the city ; it was generally thought that the rebels did not put up a fight after being assured that Khánh would be ousted . Early in the morning , Thi , who gained the support of Kỳ , proposed a motion within the junta to remove Khánh and force him into exile , and the final vote was unanimous — Khanh was absent from the meeting . Kỳ , Thi and Thiệu then became the key figures in a junta that continued with Sửu and Prime Minister Phan Huy Quát as a civilian front , although General Minh became the nominal commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the armed forces . 
 Thi was a senior member in the ten @-@ man ruling junta , which wanted to expand the military effort against the communists , something that was opposed by the Buddhist protestors . Thi performed a balancing act and accommodated the Buddhists , wanting them to see him as a friend . He allowed the students to publish a magazine that was highly critical of military rule . Thi also manoeuvred to have his trusted subordinate Colonel Pham Van Lieu installed as the head of the national police — a body controlled by the army and effectively a military unit — increasing his political power . Following his ascension , Lieu replaced most of the Saigon district police chiefs with Thi supporters , raising the ire of some other prominent officers . The Buddhist activist leader Thích Trí Quang said that " Thi is nominally a Buddhist , but does not really care about religion " . In June 1965 , Quat and Sửu resigned because of persistent disputes with the military and one another ; Thi had an opportunity to take power . Quat resigned and tried to directly hand over power to Thi , but this was not allowed by the generals . Nevertheless , Thi was offered the prime ministerial position by his colleagues . He was seen as having a similar level of political influence to Kỳ , and was voted in as prime minister by the ten @-@ man junta . However , he declined the job offer on the private advice of Lieu , who told him that the political conditions were not ideal and that he should let a rival take control and fail before stepping in himself . According to Kahin , " to his [ Thi 's ] own bitter disappointment , he was never given a second chance " . Thi 's blunder was a great relief to the Americans , who were aware of the fact that Thi — despite being anti @-@ communist — had a hostility towards American advice . Kỳ and Thiệu , both pro @-@ American and supportive of a drastic escalation in anti @-@ communist military activity , became prime minister and head of state respectively , the latter post being largely ceremonial . Regardless of who held the top jobs , no officer had firm control over his peers , and the respective corps commanders were effectively allowed to independently rule their own regions in return for ongoing support of the junta . 
 In the same year , U.S. ground forces were introduced into combat roles in large numbers , and the first US Marines came ashore at Da Nang in Thi 's I Corps . The flamboyant Thi organized for the American troops to be greeted by military bands , welcoming banners and teenage girls who garlanded them with flowers . This caused embarrassment to US military officials who felt the introduction of combat troops and resultant American casualties would not be received well by the public when contrasted with Thi 's celebratory fanfare . Soon after the Americans were in position , Thi tipped off Marine Lieutenant General Lewis W. Walt about a major movement of Việt Cộng insurgents near Chu Lai in Quảng Trị Province near the border with North Vietnam . This resulted in Operation Starlite , generally regarded as the first offensive action undertaken by the Americans in the Vietnam War . Occurring between 18 – 24 August , it resulted in the 1st Việt Cộng Regiment being pushed to the coast . 
 = = Buddhist Uprising of 1966 = = 
 Air Marshal Kỳ , the prime minister and the most powerful member of the junta feared Thi as a rival . Many political observers in Saigon thought Thi actively wanted to depose Kỳ , and regarded him as the biggest threat to the other officers ' factions and the junta 's stability . According to Kỳ 's memoirs , Thi was a " born intriguer " who had " left @-@ wing inclinations " . Time magazine published a piece in February 1966 claiming Thi was more dynamic than Kỳ and could seize power at any time . Historian Robert <unk> thought Kỳ may have seen the article as destabilizing and therefore decided to move against Thi , who was known to have the " deep @-@ rooted " loyalty of his soldiers . A large part of the South Vietnamese military was the Regional and Popular Forces , militia that served in their native areas , and they appreciated a commander with whom they had a <unk> rapport . The support from the Buddhists , his troops and the <unk> tendencies gave Thi a strong power base and made it hard for the other generals and the Americans to move against him . The outspoken Thi was also known as the general most likely to question and speak out against US policy . 
 The historian Stanley Karnow said of Kỳ and Thi : " Both flamboyant characters who wore gaudy uniforms and sported sinister moustaches , the two young officers had been friends , and their rivalry seemed to typify the personal struggles for power that chronically afflicted South Vietnam . But their dispute mirrored more than individual ambition . " Both were also known for their colorful red berets . There were reports Thi was showing insubordination towards Kỳ . The US military commander in Vietnam , General William Westmoreland , said that Thi once refused to report to Kỳ in Saigon when requested . On one occasion , when Kỳ came to I Corps to remonstrate with him , Thi turned to address his staff and mockingly asked " Should we pay attention to this funny little man from Saigon or should we ignore him ? " Thi made this comment rather loudly , within earshot of Ky , and the Vietnamese politician Bùi <unk> thought that Kỳ viewed Thi 's comment as a direct and calculated challenge to his authority . Time said Thi " ran it [ I Corps ] like a warlord of yore , obeying those edicts of the central government that suited him and blithely disregarding the rest " . Of the four corps commanders , Thi was seen as the one with the most power and independence from Saigon . Kahin thought Kỳ may have feared that Thi would secede from Saigon and turn central Vietnam into an independent state . The CIA analyst Douglas Pike , who worked in Vietnam , speculated that this would have been a large part of Ky 's thinking , as Vietnamese people have often had strong regional tendencies . 
 Knowing that Westmoreland and the US Embassy were hostile to Thi and supportive of his leadership , Kỳ mustered the support of eight generals on the 10 @-@ man junta , meaning that along with his vote , there were nine officers in favor of Thi 's removal . With Thi the only non @-@ supporter , Kỳ and his colleagues removed Thi from the junta and his corps command on 10 March 1966 . Thi claimed that during this meeting , knowing the other generals ' antipathy to him , he <unk> them by chastising their commitment to the country . He said the populace would never support the generals ' war effort as long as they lived so comfortably , and he mocked them for ostentatiously flying their wives and mistresses to Hong Kong for shopping expeditions . The junta put Thi under house arrest pending his deportation from the country , and appointed General Nguyễn Văn <unk> , the erstwhile commander of 1st Division and a Thi subordinate , as the new I Corps commander . 
 The Americans supported Thi 's removal as they regarded him as being soft on communism , and a " virtual warlord " . US Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr . , Westmoreland and the Defense Secretary Robert McNamara were supportive of the Kỳ @-@ Thiệu regime , their prosecution of the war against the communists and support of a US escalation , and they opposed Thi , regarding him as lacking firmness against communism . At a White House meeting after news of the dismissal came through , Taylor said that Thi was " a bad character and good riddance " . Lodge wrote in a report that Thi " cherished some resentment against the Americans in respect of what he considers political and military interference and infringement of sovereignty " , claiming he had contemplated " the possibility of establishing a government in the south which would be of such a character that the bulk of the population including the Vietcong would support it — and presumably neutralization of the country and possibly federation with the North would soon be possible " . The Americans wanted to ease Thi out of the corridors of power by offering him an economic future in the US and free education for his children , and Lodge and Westmoreland personally spoke to him in an attempt to convince him to accept , but they were unsuccessful . On the other hand , Thi had the support of Walt , who commanded American forces in I Corps and was the senior advisor to Thi 's forces . Unlike his countrymen , Walt thought highly of Thi , and his ability as an officer . 
 Kỳ claimed Thi was leaving the country to receive medical treatment for his nasal passages , as well as a general health examination . An official announcement said that the junta " had considered and accepted General Thi 's application for a vacation " . Thi retorted that " The only sinus condition I have is from the stink of corruption . " With the health story exposed as a sham , Kỳ gave a series of reasons for dismissing Thi , accusing him of being too left @-@ wing , ruling I Corps like a warlord , having a mistress who was suspected of being a communist , and being too conspiratorial . Kỳ knew that Thi supported negotiations with the communists as a means of ending the war , and had a history of consistently removing officials and military figures who promoted such a policy , but did not publicly mention this as a reason . Thi 's dismissal provoked the Buddhist Uprising , led by the " Struggle Movement " . Thi was immensely popular in the Buddhist stronghold of Huế , a city of approximately 120 @,@ 000 , and civil unrest erupted throughout the region . When he returned to the former imperial capital five days after being relieved of his command , around 20 @,@ 000 supporters mobbed him , shouting and trying to touch him . This was part of a gamble by Kỳ to allow Thi back to his home city in an attempt to placate the dismayed locals , but it did not work . A general strike <unk> 90 % of Da Nang , the second biggest city in South Vietnam and the main port in central Vietnam . 
 During a rally , a Buddhist student leader cried " Do you want the general to stay with us ? " to which the students and other protestors answered , " Yes ! Yes ! " Thi told the large crowd to " Think about our country , not about me " . During the tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek speech , he made sarcastic references about his need to go to the US for health treatment . He told a journalist that he would accept " any position which is useful for the country " , leading some to think that he wanted Kỳ or Thiệu 's job . According to Time magazine , Thi 's speeches showed he " was obviously torn between a desire to rally support for a comeback and his soldier 's distaste for adding to dissension " . Kahin said that " despite the circumspection of his public addresses , [ they ] undoubtedly helped encourage the Struggle Movement . " 
 The various dissidents formed a pro @-@ Thi , anti @-@ Kỳ organization called the Military @-@ Civilian Struggle Committee , better known as the Struggle Movement . Their message and influence quickly spread as they called for the end of military rule and took over radio stations and government buildings in I Corps . They intensified their calls for Kỳ to fulfil his promise to hold democratic elections . Some I Corps units supportive of Thi then decided to join the Struggle Movement and ceased military operations against the Vietcong , instead starting a stand @-@ off against Kỳ . Throughout April and May there were tense incidents as units loyal to the junta were flown in from Saigon , and the factions came close to warfare . 
 Thi publicly disassociated himself from the Struggle Movement . However , he remained in I Corps and was still regarded as a significant political influence and motivating factor for the Struggle Movement . Regardless of what he may have thought , the discontent against Kỳ was by then too much for him to control even if he had wanted to . By June , ARVN loyalists , with the help of the American forces , prevailed . Their superior numbers convinced many in the Struggle Movement to back down and realign with the government , and those who refused were militarily defeated , often in bitter street @-@ to @-@ street fighting . While the Struggle Movement was finally ebbing away , Thi agreed to meet with Kỳ at an American air base in Chu Lai to reach a settlement , seeing as the junta was going to prevail in any case . Thi agreed to the original offers of subsidies and the cover story of a medical trip . 
 = = Exile = = 
 After the uprising was crushed , Thi was deported to the USA , and lived in a small apartment on Connecticut Avenue on Dupont Circle , Washington , D.C. Although the apartment was small , Kahin , who interviewed Thi after his exile , described it as " handsome " . However , The New York Times called it " shabby " . Thi left his uniforms in his closet in Vietnam and disposed of all his medals . The only thing he kept from his military career was an army blanket . As part of his removal from South Vietnam , the American government gave him a substantial living allowance and paid for all his children 's education fees . Around 1973 , the payments were suddenly discontinued . In Washington , Thi spent much of his time at the Library of Congress , reading books about Asian history . Outspoken and still supported by many Buddhists , Thi tried to return to South Vietnam in February 1972 , but troops loyal to the Diệmist President Thiệu surrounded his plane on the tarmac and prevented him from disembarking ; the aircraft eventually took off and returned to the U.S. 
 Thi lived in the American capital until 1975 , when he moved to Arkansas . He lived in the southern state for a short period before settling in Lancaster , Pennsylvania . He worked in a variety of jobs and occasionally made speeches at universities and to Vietnamese American organizations and meetings . According to his relatives , Thi remained popular among the Vietnamese American community , most of whom had come to the US after the fall of Saigon and were stridently anti @-@ communist . His family said their refugee compatriots often recognized him , and usually refused to let him pay for meals at their restaurants . Thi 's second marriage , to <unk> Nguyen , ended in divorce . They had five children , four sons and a daughter . He later remarried , to Catherine Nguyen , who bore him a daughter . In all , Thi had six children and 12 grandchildren . He died at the Hospice of Lancaster County from heart ailments on 23 June 2007 . 
 = James Newland = 
 James Ernest Newland , VC ( 22 August 1881 – 19 March 1949 ) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . Newland was awarded the Victoria Cross following three separate actions in April 1917 , during attacks against German forces retreating to the Hindenburg Line . While in command of a company , Newland successfully led his men in several assaults on German positions and repulsed subsequent counter @-@ attacks . 
 Born in the Victorian town of Highton , Newland joined the Australian military in 1899 and saw active service during the Second Boer War . He continued to serve in the Australian Army 's permanent forces on his return to Australia , and completed several years service in the artillery . Transferring to the militia in 1907 , Newland became a police officer in Tasmania before re @-@ joining the permanent forces in 1910 . Following the outbreak of the First World War , he was appointed to the Australian Imperial Force and was among the first wave of men to land at Gallipoli . In the days following the landing , Newland was wounded and evacuated to Egypt where he was commissioned as a second lieutenant . 
 Transferring to the Western Front in 1916 , Newland was Mentioned in Despatches for his leadership while commanding a company during an attack at Mouquet Farm . He was wounded twice more during the war and medically discharged in March 1918 ; he returned to service with the permanent army . Newland held various appointments between the two world wars , and retired with the rank of lieutenant colonel in 1941 . He died of heart failure in 1949 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Newland was born in the Geelong suburb of Highton , Victoria , on 22 August 1881 to William Newland , a labourer , and his wife Louisa Jane ( née Wall ) . In 1899 , he enlisted in the Commonwealth Military Forces and was assigned to the 4th Battalion , Australian Commonwealth Horse , as a private . The unit later embarked for South Africa , where Newland saw active service in Cape Town during the Second Boer War . 
 Returning to Australia in 1902 , Newland re @-@ settled in Victoria and joined the Royal Australian Artillery in July the following year . He served in the artillery for over four years , before transferring to the militia in September 1907 . In 1909 , he became a police officer in the Tasmanian Police Force , where he remained until August 1910 , when he re @-@ enlisted in the permanent army . He was posted to the Australian Instructional Corps ; he served with this unit until the outbreak of the First World War . In a ceremony at Sheffield , Tasmania on 27 December 1913 , Newland married Florence May Mitchell . 
 = = First World War = = 
 On 17 August 1914 , Newland transferred to the newly raised Australian Imperial Force following the British Empire 's declaration of war on Germany and her allies . Assigned to the 12th Battalion , he was made its Regimental Quartermaster Sergeant and embarked from Hobart aboard HMAT Geelong on 20 October , bound for Egypt . Following a brief stop in Western Australia , the troopship arrived at its destination seven weeks later . The 12th Battalion spent the following four months training in the Egyptian desert . 
 At the commencement of the Gallipoli Campaign , the 3rd Australian Brigade — of which the 12th Battalion was part — was designated as the covering force for the ANZAC landing , and as such was the first unit ashore on 25 April 1915 , at approximately 04 : 30 . Newland was wounded in the days following the landing , suffering a gunshot wound to his arm , and was evacuated to the 1st General Hospital . While at the hospital , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 22 May , before returning to the 12th Battalion four days later . 
 Newland was engaged in operations on the Gallipoli Peninsula until 9 June , when he was withdrawn from the area and placed in command of the 12th Battalion 's transport elements stationed in Egypt . Promoted to lieutenant on 15 October , he was hospitalised for ten days in November due to dengue fever . Following the Allied evacuation of Gallipoli in December , the 12th Battalion returned to Egypt where Newland continued as transport officer . Promoted to captain on 1 March 1916 , he was made adjutant of the 12th Battalion fifteen days later . It embarked for France and the Western Front later that month . 
 Disembarking at Marseilles , the 12th Battalion was initially posted to the Fleurbaix sector of France . After involvement in minor operations , it transferred to the Somme in July , where it participated in the Battle of Pozières , its first major French action . Newland was posted to command A Company from 8 August , and was subsequently moved to Sausage Valley along with the rest of the 12th Battalion in preparation for an attack on Mouquet Farm . 
 Mouquet Farm was a ruined complex connected to several German strongpoints , and formed part of the Thiepval defences . On 21 August , Newland led his company in an assault on a series of trenches slightly north east of the farm . By 18 : 30 , the company had captured its objectives and several of Newland 's men rushed off in pursuit of the retreating Germans . Newland immediately stopped them and organised the company into a defensive position ; the trench was consolidated by 05 : 00 the next morning . Praised for his " ... great coolness and courage under heavy fire " during the attack , he was recommended for the Military Cross . The award , however , was downgraded to a Mention in Despatches , the announcement of which was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 4 January 1917 . 
 Following its involvement at Pozières and Mouquet Farm , the 12th Battalion was briefly transferred to the Ypres sector in Belgium in September , before returning to <unk> Wood on the Somme late the following month . Newland was admitted to the 38th Casualty Clearing Station with <unk> on 4 December . He was moved to the 2nd General Hospital at Le Havre , and returned to the 12th Battalion two weeks later following recuperation . On the same day , he was attached to the headquarters of the 2nd Australian Brigade for duty as a staff officer . He was granted leave on 21 January 1917 on completion of this stint . 
 Re @-@ joining the 12th Battalion , Newland once again assumed command of A Company . On 26 February 1917 , he was tasked with leading it during the 12th Battalion 's attack on the village of La Barque during the German retreat to the Hindenburg Line . At Bark Trench , a position on the north side of the centre of La Barque , the company encountered a German strongpoint and Newland received a gunshot wound to the face . He was admitted to the 1st Australian Field Ambulance , and returned to the 12th Battalion on 25 March after a period of hospitalisation at the 7th Stationary Hospital in Boulogne . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 By early April 1917 , there remained three German @-@ held outpost villages — Boursies , Demicourt and Hermies — between the area to the south of the I Anzac Corps position and the Hindenburg Line . An attack by the 1st Australian Division to capture them was planned for 9 April , the same day the British offensive opened at Arras . For his actions on three separate occasions during the assault , Newland was awarded the Victoria Cross . 
 On the night of 7 / 8 April , the 12th Battalion was tasked with the capture of Boursies , on the Bapaume – Cambrai road . The attack was a feint to mislead the German forces on the direction from which Hermies was to be assaulted . Leading A Company as well as an attached platoon from B Company , Newland began his advance on the village at 03 : 00 . The company was soon subject to heavy rifle and machine gun fire from a derelict mill approximately 400 metres ( 440 yd ) short of the village , and began to suffer heavy casualties . Rallying his men , Newland charged the position and bombed the Germans with grenades . The attack dislodged the Germans , and the company secured the area and continued its advance . 
 Throughout 8 April , the Australians were subjected to heavy shellfire from German forces . At approximately 22 : 00 , the Germans launched a fierce counter @-@ attack under the cover of a barrage of bombs and trench mortars against A Company 's position at the mill . They had some initial success and entered the forward posts of the mill , which were occupied by a platoon of Newland 's men under the command of Sergeant John Whittle . Newland , bringing up a platoon from the battalion 's reserve company , charged the attackers and re @-@ established the lost ground with Whittle 's assistance . The 12th Battalion was relieved by the 11th Battalion on 10 April , having succeeded in capturing Boursies at the cost of 240 casualties , of which 70 were killed or missing . 
 After a four @-@ day reprieve from the frontline , the 12th Battalion relieved the 9th Battalion at Lagnicourt on 14 April . Around dawn the next day , the Germans launched a severe counter @-@ attack against the 1st Australian Division 's line . Breaking through , they forced back the 12th Battalion 's D Company , which was to the right of Newland 's A Company . Soon surrounded and under attack on three sides , Newland withdrew the company to a sunken road which had been held by Captain Percy Cherry during the capture of the village three weeks earlier , and lined the depleted company out in a defensive position on each bank . 
 The German forces attacked Newland 's company several times during the battle , but were repulsed each time . During one of the assaults , Newland observed that the German attack was weakening and gathered a party of twenty men . Leading the group , he charged the Germans and seized forty as prisoners . As reinforcements from the 9th Battalion began to arrive , a combined counter @-@ attack was launched and the line recaptured by approximately 11 : 00 . During the engagement , the 12th Battalion suffered 125 casualties , including 66 killed or missing . Newland and Whittle were both awarded the Victoria Cross for their actions at Boursies and Lagnicourt ; they were the only two permanent members of the Australian military to receive the decoration during the war . At 35 years and 7 months old , Newland was also the oldest Australian Victoria Cross recipient of the First World War . 
 The full citation for Newland 's Victoria Cross appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette on 8 June 1917 : 
 War Office , 8th June , 1917 . 
 His Majesty the KING has been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officers , Non @-@ commissioned Officers and Men : — 
 Capt. James Ernest Newlands , [ sic ] Inf . Bn . , Aus . Imp . Force . 
 For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty , in the face of heavy odds , on three separate occasions . 
 On the first occasion he organised the attack by his company on a most important objective , and led personally , under heavy fire , a bombing attack . He then rallied his company , which had suffered heavy casualties , and he was one of the first to reach the objective . 
 On the following night his company , holding the captured position , was heavily counter @-@ attacked . By personal exertion , utter disregard of fire , and judicious use of reserves , he succeeded in dispersing the enemy and regaining the position . 
 On a subsequent occasion , when the company on his left was overpowered and his own company attacked from the rear , he drove off a combined attack which had developed from these directions . 
 These attacks were renewed three or four times , and it was Capt. Newland 's tenacity and disregard for his own safety that encouraged the men to hold out . 
 The stand made by this officer was of the greatest importance , and produced far @-@ reaching results . 
 = = = Later war service = = = 
 In early May 1917 , the 12th Battalion was involved in the British and Australian attempt to capture the village of Bullecourt . While engaged in this operation on 6 May , Newland was wounded for the third and final time of the war by a gunshot to his left armpit . Initially admitted to the 5th Field Ambulance , he was transferred to No 1 Red Cross Hospital , Le Touquet , the next day . The injury necessitated treatment in England , and Newland was shipped to a British hospital eight days later . 
 On recovering from his wounds , Newland attended an investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 21 July , where he was decorated with his Victoria Cross by King George V. Later the same day , Newland boarded a ship to Australia . It arrived in Melbourne on 18 September , and Newland travelled to Tasmania . He was discharged from the Australian Imperial Force as medically unfit on 2 March 1918 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following his discharge , Newland retained the rank of captain and returned to service with the permanent military forces . Between the two world wars , he held various appointments in the army , including adjutant and quartermaster of the 8th , 49th , 52nd , 38th and 12th Battalions , as well as area officer and recruiting officer . In 1924 , Newland 's wife Florence died of tuberculosis . On 30 April 1925 , he married Heather Vivienne Broughton in a ceremony at St Paul 's Anglican Church , Bendigo ; the couple would later have a daughter . Promoted to major on 1 May 1930 , Newland was awarded the Meritorious Service Medal in 1935 . 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War , Newland was seconded for duties as quartermaster instructor at the 4th Division headquarters . On 10 May 1940 , he assumed his final army appointment as quartermaster , A Branch , at Army Headquarters in Melbourne . He served in this position until August 1941 , when he was placed on the retired list with the honorary rank of lieutenant colonel . 
 In retirement , Newland served as Assistant Commissioner of the Australian Red Cross Society in the Northern Territory during the later months of 1941 . He joined the inspection staff at Ammunition Factory , Footscray on 2 January 1942 . At his home in Caulfield , Victoria on 19 March 1949 , he died suddenly of heart failure at the age of 67 . He was accorded a funeral with full military honours , and was buried at Brighton Cemetery . In 1984 , Newland 's daughter , Dawn , donated her father 's medals to the Australian War Memorial in Canberra , where they currently reside . 
 = Japanese battleship Yamashiro = 
 Yamashiro ( <unk> , " Mountain castle " , named for Yamashiro Province ) was the second of two Fusō @-@ class dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy . Launched in 1915 and commissioned in 1917 , she initially patrolled off the coast of China , playing no part in World War I. In 1923 , she assisted survivors of the Great Kantō earthquake . 
 Yamashiro was modernized between 1930 and 1935 , with improvements to her armor and machinery and a rebuilt superstructure in the pagoda mast style . Nevertheless , with only 14 @-@ inch guns , she was outclassed by other Japanese battleships at the beginning of World War II , and played auxiliary roles for most of the war . 
 By 1944 , though , she was forced into front @-@ line duty , serving as the flagship of Vice @-@ Admiral Shōji Nishimura 's Southern Force at the Battle of Surigao Strait , the southernmost action of the Battle of Leyte Gulf . During fierce night fighting in the early hours of 25 October against a superior American force , Yamashiro was sunk by torpedoes and naval gunfire . Nishimura went down with his ship , and only 10 crewmembers survived . 
 = = Description = = 
 The ship had a length of 192 @.@ 024 meters ( 630 @.@ 00 ft ) between perpendiculars and 202 @.@ 7 meters ( 665 ft ) overall . She had a beam of 28 @.@ 7 meters ( 94 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 7 meters ( 29 ft ) . Yamashiro displaced 29 @,@ 326 long tons ( 29 @,@ 797 t ) at standard load and 35 @,@ 900 long tons ( 36 @,@ 500 t ) at full load . Her crew consisted of 1 @,@ 198 officers and enlisted men in 1915 and about 1 @,@ 400 in 1935 . 
 During the ship 's modernization during 1930 – 35 , her forward superstructure was enlarged with multiple platforms added to her tripod foremast . Her rear superstructure was rebuilt to accommodate mounts for 127 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns and additional fire @-@ control directors . Yamashiro was also given torpedo bulges to improve her underwater protection and to compensate for the weight of the additional armor . In addition , her stern was lengthened by 7 @.@ 62 meters ( 25 @.@ 0 ft ) . These changes increased her overall length to 212 @.@ 75 m ( 698 @.@ 0 ft ) , her beam to 33 @.@ 1 m ( 108 ft 7 in ) and her draft to 9 @.@ 69 meters ( 31 ft 9 in ) . Her displacement increased nearly 4 @,@ 000 long tons ( 4 @,@ 100 t ) to 39 @,@ 154 long tons ( 39 @,@ 782 t ) at deep load . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had two sets of Brown @-@ Curtis direct @-@ drive steam turbines , each of which drove two propeller shafts . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 40 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 30 @,@ 000 kW ) , using steam provided by 24 Miyahara @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers , each of which consumed a mixture of coal and oil . Yamashiro had a stowage capacity of 4 @,@ 000 long tons ( 4 @,@ 100 t ) of coal and 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 000 t ) of fuel oil , giving her a range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . The ship exceeded her designed speed of 22 @.@ 5 knots ( 41 @.@ 7 km / h ; 25 @.@ 9 mph ) during her sea trials , reaching 23 @.@ 3 knots ( 43 @.@ 2 km / h ; 26 @.@ 8 mph ) at 47 @,@ 730 shp ( 35 @,@ 590 kW ) . 
 During her modernization , the Miyahara boilers were replaced by six new Kanpon oil @-@ fired boilers fitted in the former aft boiler room , and the forward funnel was removed . The Brown @-@ Curtis turbines were replaced by four geared Kanpon turbines with a designed output of 75 @,@ 000 shp ( 56 @,@ 000 kW ) . On her trials , Yamashiro 's sister ship Fusō reached a top speed of 24 @.@ 7 knots ( 45 @.@ 7 km / h ; 28 @.@ 4 mph ) from 76 @,@ 889 shp ( 57 @,@ 336 kW ) . The fuel storage of the ship was increased to a total of 5 @,@ 100 long tons ( 5 @,@ 200 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 11 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 21 @,@ 900 km ; 13 @,@ 600 mi ) at a speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The twelve 45 @-@ calibre 14 @-@ inch guns of Yamashiro were mounted in six twin @-@ gun turrets , numbered one through six from front to rear , each with an elevation range of − 5 to + 30 degrees . The turrets were arranged in an unorthodox 2 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 @-@ 2 style with superfiring pairs of turrets fore and aft ; the middle turrets were not superfiring , and had a funnel between them . The main guns and their turrets were modernized during the ship 's 1930 reconstruction ; the maximum elevation of the main guns was increased to + 43 degrees , increasing their maximum range from 25 @,@ 420 to 32 @,@ 420 metres ( 27 @,@ 800 to 35 @,@ 450 yd ) . Initially , the guns could fire at a rate of 1 @.@ 5 rounds per minute , and this was also improved during her first modernization . 
 Originally , Yamashiro was fitted with a secondary armament of sixteen 50 @-@ caliber 6 @-@ inch guns mounted in casemates on the upper sides of the hull . Each gun could fire a high @-@ explosive projectile to a maximum range of 22 @,@ 970 yards ( 21 @,@ 000 m ) at up to six shots per minute . She was later fitted with six high @-@ angle 40 @-@ caliber three @-@ inch AA guns , in single mounts on both sides of the forward superstructure and both sides of the second funnel , as well as on both sides of the aft superstructure . These guns had a maximum elevation of + 75 degrees , and could fire a 5 @.@ 99 @-@ kilogram ( 13 @.@ 2 lb ) shell at a rate of 13 to 20 rounds per minute to a maximum height of 7 @,@ 200 meters ( 23 @,@ 600 ft ) . The ship was also fitted with six submerged 533 @-@ millimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes , three on each broadside . 
 During Yamashiro 's modernization in the early 1930s , all six three @-@ inch guns were removed and replaced with eight 40 @-@ caliber 127 @-@ millimeter dual @-@ purpose guns , fitted on both sides of the fore and aft superstructures in four twin @-@ gun mounts . When firing at surface targets , the guns had a range of 14 @,@ 700 meters ( 16 @,@ 100 yd ) ; they had a maximum ceiling of 9 @,@ 440 meters ( 30 @,@ 970 ft ) at their maximum elevation of + 90 degrees . Their maximum rate of fire was 14 rounds a minute , but their sustained rate of fire was around eight rounds per minute . 
 The improvements made during the reconstruction increased Yamashiro 's draft by 1 meter ( 3 ft 3 in ) ; the two foremost six @-@ inch guns were removed , as the same guns on her sister ship Fusō had gotten soaked in high seas after that ship 's reconstruction . The ship 's light @-@ AA armament was augmented by eight 25 mm Type 96 light AA guns in twin @-@ gun mounts . Four of these mounts were fitted on the forward superstructure , one on each side of the funnel and two on the rear superstructure . This was the standard Japanese light @-@ AA gun during World War II , but it suffered from severe design shortcomings that rendered it a largely ineffective weapon . According to historian Mark Stille , the twin and triple mounts " lacked sufficient speed in train or elevation ; the gun sights were unable to handle fast targets ; the gun exhibited excessive vibration ; the magazine was too small , and , finally , the gun produced excessive muzzle blast " . The configuration of the AA guns varied significantly over time ; in 1943 , 17 single and two twin @-@ mounts were added for a total of 37 . In July 1944 , the ship was fitted with another 24 single , nine twin and eight triple @-@ mounts , for a total of 92 anti @-@ aircraft guns in her final configuration . The 25 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) gun had an effective range of 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 300 yd ) , and an effective ceiling of 5 @,@ 500 meters ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) at an elevation of 85 degrees . The maximum effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute because of the frequent need to change the fifteen @-@ round magazines . 
 Also in July 1944 , the ship was provided with three twin @-@ gun and 10 single mounts for the license @-@ built 13 @.@ 2 mm Hotchkiss machine gun . The maximum range of these guns was 6 @,@ 500 meters ( 7 @,@ 100 yd ) , but the effective range against aircraft was only 1 @,@ 000 meters ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) . The cyclic rate was adjustable between 425 and 475 rounds per minute , but the need to change 30 @-@ round magazines reduced the effective rate to 250 rounds per minute . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The ship 's waterline armor belt was 229 to 305 millimeters ( 9 to 12 in ) thick ; below it was a strake of 102 mm ( 4 in ) armor . The deck armor ranged in thickness from 32 to 51 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) . The turrets were protected with an armor thickness of 279 @.@ 4 mm ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) on the face , 228 @.@ 6 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 in ) on the sides , and 114 @.@ 5 mm ( 4 @.@ 51 in ) on the roof . The barbettes of the turrets were protected by armor 305 mm thick , while the casemates of the 152 mm guns were protected by 152 mm armor plates . The sides of the conning tower were 351 millimeters ( 13 @.@ 8 in ) thick . Additionally , the vessel contained 737 watertight compartments ( 574 underneath the armor deck , 163 above ) to preserve buoyancy in the event of battle damage . 
 During her first reconstruction Yamashiro 's armor was substantially upgraded . The deck armor was increased to a maximum thickness of 114 mm ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) . A longitudinal bulkhead of 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) of high @-@ tensile steel was added to improve the underwater protection . 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 Yamashiro was briefly fitted with an aircraft flying @-@ off platform on Turret No. 2 in 1922 . She successfully launched Gloster Sparrowhawk and Sopwith Camel fighters from it , the first Japanese ship to do so . During her modernization in the 1930s , a catapult and a collapsible crane were fitted on the stern , and the ship was equipped to operate three floatplanes , although no hangar was provided . The initial Nakajima E4N2 biplanes were replaced by Nakajima E8N2 biplanes in 1938 and then by Mitsubishi F1M biplanes , from 1942 on . 
 = = = Fire control and sensors = = = 
 The ship was originally fitted with two 3 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 11 ft 6 in ) and two 1 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 4 ft 11 in ) rangefinders in her forward superstructure , a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 14 ft 9 in ) rangefinder on the roof of Turret No. 2 , and 4 @.@ 5 @-@ meter rangefinders in Turrets 3 , 4 , and 5 . 
 While in drydock in July 1943 , a Type 21 air search radar was installed on the roof of the 10 @-@ meter rangefinder at the top of the pagoda mast . In August 1944 , two Type 22 surface search radar units were installed on the pagoda mast and two Type 13 early warning radar units were fitted on her mainmast . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Yamashiro , named for Yamashiro Province , the former province of Kyoto , was laid down at the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal on 20 November 1913 and launched on 3 November 1915 . She was completed on 31 March 1917 with Captain <unk> Nakajima in command , and was assigned to the 1st Division of the 1st Fleet in 1917 – 18 . She did not take part in any combat during World War I , as there were no longer any forces of the Central Powers in East Asia by the time she was completed , but she did patrol off the coast of China briefly during the war . On 29 March 1922 , a Gloster Sparrowhawk fighter successfully took off from the ship . She aided survivors of the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake , in September 1923 . Little detailed information is available about Yamashiro 's activities during the 1920s , although she did make a port visit to <unk> Guard District , in Manchuria , on 5 April 1925 and also conducted training off the coast of China . 
 The ship 's reconstruction began on 18 December 1930 at the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal where her machinery was replaced , her armor was reinforced , and torpedo bulges were fitted . Yamashiro 's armament was also upgraded and her torpedo tubes were removed . Captain Chuichi Nagumo assumed command of the ship on 15 November 1934 , her modernization was completed on 30 March 1935 , and she became flagship of the Combined Fleet . Captain <unk> <unk> relieved Nagumo on 15 November and he , in turn , was replaced by Captain Masami Kobayashi on 1 December 1936 . Yamashiro began a lengthy refit on 27 June 1937 and Captain <unk> Abe assumed command on 20 October . Her refit was completed on 31 March 1938 and Captain Kakuji Kakuta relieved Abe on 15 November . In early 1941 , the ship experimentally launched radio @-@ controlled Kawanishi E7K2 floatplanes . Captain <unk> Obata assumed command on 24 May 1941 and Yamashiro was assigned to the 1st Fleet 's 2nd Division , consisting of the two Fusō @-@ class and the two Ise @-@ class battleships . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Yamashiro and her sister ship Fusō spent most of the war around Japan , mostly at the anchorage at Hashirajima in Hiroshima Bay . When the war started for Japan on 8 December , the division , reinforced by the battleships Nagato and Mutsu and the light carrier Hōshō , sortied from Hashirajima to the Bonin Islands as distant support for the 1st Air Fleet attacking Pearl Harbor , and returned six days later . On 18 April 1942 , Yamashiro chased the Doolittle Raider force that had just launched an air raid on Tokyo , but returned four days later without having made contact . On 28 May , she set sail , commanded by Captain Gunji Kogure , with the rest of the 2nd Battleship Division and the Aleutian Support Group at the same time that most of the Imperial Fleet began an attack on Midway Island ( Operation MI ) . Commanded by Vice @-@ Admiral Shirō Takasu , the division was composed of Japan 's four oldest battleships , including Yamashiro , accompanied by two light cruisers , 12 destroyers , and two oilers . Official records do not show the squadron as part of the larger Midway operation , known as Operation AL ; they were to accompany the fleet under Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto , but were only to provide support to the Aleutian task force if needed . They were not needed , and Yamashiro returned to home waters where she was employed mostly for training duties , in the Inland Sea till 1 February 1943 and at Yokosuka until September , when she became a training ship for midshipmen . 
 In an effort to replace the aircraft carriers lost at the Battle of Midway , the Navy made plans to convert the two Fusō @-@ class ships to hybrid battleship / carriers , but the two Ise @-@ class battleships were chosen instead . In July 1943 , Yamashiro was at the Yokosuka drydock for fitting of a radar and additional 25 mm AA guns . The ship was briefly assigned as a training ship on 15 September before loading troops on 13 October bound for Truk Naval Base , arriving with the battleship Ise on the 20th . The two battleships sailed for Japan , accompanied by the carriers Jun 'yō and Unyō , on 31 October . On 8 November , the submarine USS Halibut fired torpedoes at Jun 'yo that missed , but hit Yamashiro with a torpedo that failed to detonate . Yamashiro resumed her training duties in Japan , and Captain <unk> <unk> assumed command . He was promoted to Rear Admiral on 1 May , but died of natural causes four days later , and Captain <unk> Shinoda was appointed to replace him . 
 During the US invasion of Saipan in June 1944 , Japanese troop ships attempting to reinforce the defenses were sunk by submarines . Shigenori Kami , chief of operations of the Navy Staff , volunteered to command Yamashiro to carry troops and equipment to Saipan . If the ship actually reached the island , he intended to deliberately beach the ship before it could be sunk and to use its artillery to defend the island . After Ryūnosuke Kusaka , Chief of Staff of the Combined Fleet , also volunteered to go , Prime Minister Hideki Tōjō approved the plan , known as Operation Y @-@ GO , but the operation was cancelled after the decisive defeat in the Battle of the Philippine Sea on 19 and 20 June . 
 The ship was refitted in July at Yokosuka , where additional radar systems and light AA guns were fitted . Yamashiro and her sister ship were transferred to Battleship Division 2 of the 2nd Fleet on 10 September . The ship briefly became the division 's flagship under Vice Admiral Shōji Nishimura until 23 September when he transferred his flag to Fusō . They departed Kure on 23 September for Lingga Island , carrying the Army 's 25th Independent Mixed Regiment , and escaped an attack by the submarine Plaice the next day . They arrived on 4 October , where Nishimura transferred his flag back to Yamashiro . The ships then transferred to Brunei to offload their <unk> and refuel in preparation for Operation Shō @-@ Gō , the attempt to destroy the American fleet conducting the invasion of Luzon . 
 = = = = Battle of Surigao Strait = = = = 
 As flagship of Nishimura 's Southern Force , Yamashiro left Brunei at 15 : 30 on 22 October 1944 , heading east into the Sulu Sea and then to the northeast into the Mindanao Sea . Intending to join Vice @-@ Admiral Takeo Kurita 's force in Leyte Gulf , they passed west of Mindanao Island into Surigao Strait , where they met a large force of battleships and cruisers lying in wait . The Battle of Surigao Strait would become the southernmost action in the Battle of Leyte Gulf . 
 At 09 : 08 on 24 October , Yamashiro , Fusō and the heavy cruiser Mogami spotted a group of 27 planes , including Grumman TBF Avenger torpedo bombers and Curtiss SB2C Helldiver dive bombers escorted by Grumman F6F Hellcat fighters , coming from the carrier Enterprise . Around 20 sailors on Yamashiro were killed by strafing and rocket attacks , and the ship listed by almost 15 degrees after a bomb 's near miss damaged the hull and flooded the starboard bilge , until counter @-@ flooding in the port bilge righted the ship . 
 Nishimura issued a telegram to Admiral Soemu Toyoda at 20 : 13 : " It is my plan to charge into Leyte Gulf to [ reach ] a point off Dulag at 04 : 00 hours on the 25th . " At 22 : 52 , his force opened fire , damaging PT 130 and PT 152 and forcing them to retreat before they could launch their torpedoes . Three American destroyers launched torpedoes at 03 : 00 that morning , hitting Fusō at 03 : 08 and forcing her to fall out of formation . Yamashiro opened fire with her secondary battery seven minutes later . Around 03 : 11 , the destroyers Monssen and Killen fired their torpedoes , one or two of which hit Yamashiro amidships . The resulting damage temporarily slowed the ship down , gave her a list to port and forced the flooding of the magazines for the two aft turrets . Yamashiro may have been hit a third time near the bow at 03 : 40 . 
 At 03 : 52 , the battleship was attacked by a large formation to the north commanded by Rear Admiral Jesse Oldendorf . First came 6- and 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) shells from three heavy cruisers , Louisville , Portland , and Minneapolis , and four light cruisers , Denver , Columbia , Phoenix and Boise . Six battleships formed a battle line ; the Pearl Harbor veteran West Virginia was the first to open fire a minute later , scoring at least one hit with 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) shells in the first 20 @,@ 800 @-@ meter ( 22 @,@ 700 yd ) salvo , followed by Tennessee and California . Hampered by older radar equipment , Maryland joined the fight late , Pennsylvania never fired , and Mississippi managed to fire exactly one salvo — the last of the engagement . The Australian heavy cruiser HMAS Shropshire also had radar problems and did not begin firing until 03 : 56 . 
 The main bombardment lasted 18 minutes , and Yamashiro was the only target for seven of them . The first rounds hit the forecastle and pagoda mast , and soon the entire battleship appeared to be ablaze . Yamashiro 's two forward turrets targeted her assailants , and the secondary armament targeted the American destroyers plaguing Mogami and the destroyer Asagumo . The ship continued firing in all directions , but was not able to target the battleships with the other four operable 14 @-@ inch guns of her amidships turrets until almost 04 : 00 , after turning west . There was a big explosion at 04 : 04 , possibly from one of the middle turrets . Yamashiro increased her firing rate between 04 : 03 and 04 : 09 , despite the widespread fires and damage , and was hit during this time near the starboard engine room by a torpedo . By 04 : 09 , her speed was back up to 12 knots , and Nishimura wired to Kurita : " We proceed till totally annihilated . I have definitely accomplished my mission as pre @-@ arranged . Please rest assured . " At the same time , Oldendorf issued a brief cease @-@ fire order to the entire formation after hearing that the destroyer Albert W. Grant was taking friendly fire , and the Japanese ships also ceased fire . 
 Yamashiro increased speed to 15 knots in an attempt to escape the trap , but she had already been hit by two to four torpedoes , and after two more torpedo hits near the starboard engine room , she was listing 45 degrees to port . Shinoda gave the command to abandon ship , but neither he nor Nishimura made any attempt to leave the conning tower as the ship capsized within five minutes and quickly sank , stern first , vanishing from radar between 04 : 19 and 04 : 21 . Only 10 crewmembers of the estimated 1 @,@ 636 officers and crew on board survived . 
 John Bennett claimed to have discovered Yamashiro 's wreck in April 2001 , but confirmation of the wreck 's identity has not been made as of 2013 . 
 = Stuyvesant High School = 
 Stuyvesant High School / <unk> / , commonly referred to as <unk> / <unk> / or Stuyvesant , is one of nine specialized high schools in New York City , United States . Operated by the New York City Department of Education , these schools offer tuition @-@ free accelerated academics to city residents . Stuyvesant is a college preparatory science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( STEM ) focused liberal arts high school . 
 Admission to Stuyvesant involves passing the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test . Each November , about 27 @,@ 000 eighth and ninth graders take the 2 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ hour exam , and roughly 950 students , or 3 @.@ 5 % of applicants , are accepted to Stuyvesant each year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original building = = = 
 Stuyvesant High School is named after Peter Stuyvesant , the last Dutch governor of New Netherland before the colony was transferred to England in 1664 . The school was established in 1904 as a manual training school for boys , hosting 155 students and 12 teachers . In 1907 , it moved from its original location at 225 East 23rd Street to a building designed by C. B. J. Snyder at 345 East 15th Street . The building , built in 1905 for $ 1 @.@ 5 million , housed the Stuyvesant campus for the next 85 years . The school became renowned for excellence in math and science , and enrollment continued to grow so that by 1919 , admission began to be restricted based on scholastic achievement . Stuyvesant went on a double session plan in 1919 to accommodate the rising number of students , with some students attending in the morning and others in the afternoon and early evening . All students studied a full set of courses . These double sessions ran until 1956 . 
 The school implemented a system of entrance examinations starting in 1934 . The examination program was later expanded to include the newly founded Bronx High School of Science , and was developed with the assistance of Columbia University . During the 1950s , the building underwent a $ 2 million renovation to update its classrooms , shops , libraries and cafeterias . In 1956 , a team of six students designed and began construction of a cyclotron , and a low @-@ power test of the device succeeded six years later . A later attempt at full @-@ power operation , however , knocked out the power to the school and surrounding buildings . 
 Prior to 1969 , Stuyvesant did not accept female students . That year , 14 girls were admitted to Stuyvesant and 12 enrolled at the start of September , marking the school 's first co @-@ educational year . By 2002 , female enrollment had grown to 42 % . 
 New York State Legislature passed the Hecht @-@ Calandra act in 1972 , designating Brooklyn Tech , Bronx Science , Stuyvesant , and The High School of Music & Art ( now Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts ) as specialized high schools of New York City . The act called for a uniform exam to be administered for admission to Brooklyn Tech , Bronx Science and Stuyvesant High School . The exam , named the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test ( SHSAT ) , tested students in math and verbal abilities for students entering all of New York City 's specialized high schools , except for students applying for entry to LaGuardia High School , who are accepted by audition rather than examination . 
 The school building , meanwhile , deteriorated over the years . Although Stuyvesant was a top @-@ notch school even through the 1970s and 1980s , when New York City public schools in general were marked by violence and low grades among their students , Stuyvesant 's school building was in a broken @-@ down state . A New York Times report stated that the building had " held out into old age with minimal maintenance and benign neglect until its peeling paint , creaking floorboards and antiquated laboratories became an embarrassment . " The five @-@ story building could not cater adequately to the several thousand students , leading the New York City Board of Education to secure an agreement with the Battery Park City Authority for a new building to be built in Battery Park City , near lower Manhattan 's Financial District . 
 The 15th Street building remains in use as of 2012 , as " Old Stuyvesant Campus " , and houses three schools : the Institute for Collaborative Education , the High School for Health Professions and Human Services , and P.S. 226 . During the 2003 – 4 school year , Stuyvesant celebrated the 100th anniversary of its founding with a full year of activities . Events included a procession from the 15th Street building to the Chambers Street one ; a meeting of the National Consortium for Specialized Secondary Schools of Mathematics , Science and Technology ; an all @-@ class reunion ; and visits and speeches from notable alumni . In recent years , keynote graduation speakers have included Attorney General Eric Holder ( 2001 ) , former President Bill Clinton ( 2002 ) , United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan ( 2004 ) , Late Night comedian Conan O 'Brien ( 2006 ) , and the founder of Humans of New York , Brandon Stanton ( 2015 ) . 
 = = = New building = = = 
 Construction on the new ten @-@ floor , $ 150 million building located in Lower Manhattan began in 1989 . The new building was designed by Cooper , Robertson & Partners . When it opened in 1992 , the building was New York City 's first new high school building in ten years and , at the time , was the costliest high school building ever built in the city . 
 = = = = Aftermath of September 11 , 2001 = = = = 
 The new building is 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) from the site of the World Trade Center , which was destroyed on September 11 , 2001 . The school was evacuated during the attack . Although the smoke cloud coming from the World Trade Center engulfed the building at one point , there was no structural damage to the building , and there were no reports of physical injuries . Less than an hour after the collapse of the second WTC tower , concern over a bomb threat at the school prompted an evacuation of the surrounding area , as reported live by NBC news reporter Pat Dawson on the Today show . When classes resumed on September 21 , 2001 , students were moved to Brooklyn Technical High School while the Stuyvesant building served as a base of operations for rescue and recovery workers . This caused serious congestion at Brooklyn Tech , and required the students to attend in two shifts , with the Stuyvesant students attending the evening shift . Normal classes resumed three weeks later on October 9 . 
 Because Stuyvesant was so close to the World Trade Center site , there were concerns of asbestos exposure . The US EPA indicated at that time that Stuyvesant was safe from asbestos , and conducted a thorough cleaning of the Stuyvesant building , but the Stuyvesant High School Parents ' Association has contested the accuracy of the assessment . Some problems , including former teacher Mark <unk> 's respiratory problems , have been reported — he accepted a transfer to The Bronx High School of Science after having difficulty continuing his work at Stuyvesant . Other isolated cases include Stuyvesant 's 2002 Class President Amit Friedlander , who received local press coverage in September 2006 after he was diagnosed with cancer . While there have been other cases linked to the same dust cloud that emanated from Ground Zero , a spot precariously close to Stuyvesant , there is no definitive evidence that such cases have directly affected the Stuyvesant community . Stuyvesant students did spend a full year in the building before the theater and air systems were cleaned , however , and a group of Stuyvesant alumni is currently lobbying for health insurance as a result . 
 Nine alumni were killed in the World Trade Center attack . Another alumnus , Richard Ben @-@ <unk> ' 60 , was on the 9 / 11 Commission . On October 2 , 2001 , the school paper , The Spectator , under Editor in Chief Jeff Orlowski and Faculty Advisor Holly <unk> , created a special 24 @-@ page full @-@ color 9 / 11 insert containing student photos , reflections and stories . On November 20 , 2001 , the magazine was distributed for free in 830 @,@ 000 copies of The New York Times to the entire New York Greater Metropolitan Area . In the months after the attacks , Annie Thoms ( 1993 ) , an English teacher at Stuyvesant and the theater adviser at the time , suggested that the students take accounts of staff and students ' reactions during and after September 11 , 2001 and turn them into a series of monologues . Thoms then published these monologues as With Their Eyes : September 11 — The View from a High School at Ground Zero . 
 = = = Enrollment = = = 
 Stuyvesant has a total enrollment of over 3 @,@ 000 students , and is open to residents of New York City entering either ninth or tenth grade . Enrollment is based solely on performance on the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test ( SHSAT ) . The list of schools using the SHSAT has since grown to include all of New York 's specialized high schools except LaGuardia High School , where entry is by audition rather than examination . The test score necessary for admission to Stuyvesant has consistently been higher than that needed for admission to the other schools using the test . Admission is currently based on an individual 's score on the examination and his or her pre @-@ submitted ranking of Stuyvesant among the other specialized schools . Each year , about 26 @,@ 000 of New York City 's eighth @-@ graders sit for the test . Ninth and rising tenth graders are also eligible to take the test for enrollment , though far fewer students are admitted this way . The test covers math ( word problems and computation ) and verbal ( reading comprehension , logical reasoning , unscrambling paragraphs ) skills . 
 According to Article 12 of New York education law , " Admissions to the Bronx High School of Science , Stuyvesant High School , and Brooklyn Technical High School shall be solely and exclusively by taking a competitive , objective , and scholastic achievement examination , which shall be open to each and every child in the city of New York . " The current admission policy is available from the NYC Department of Education . According to the Department of Education , Stuyvesant accepts students solely based on their performance on the SHSAT , although former Mayor John Lindsay and community activist group ACORN have argued that the exam may be biased against African and Hispanic Americans . A major cheating scandal on another standardized test , which eventually implicated seventy students , emerged in late June 2012 . According to the Department of Education , a student used a smartphone to send text messages to other students during a state Regents examination . Some students involved were suspended as a result . The ring leader , <unk> Ahsan , was said to be the source of the cheating . This scandal would lead to the retirement of the Principal Stanley <unk> . 
 = = = = Accusations of bias in admission tests = = = = 
 The paucity of Black and Hispanic students at Stuyvesant has often been an issue for some city administrators . As of the 2014 @-@ 15 school year , Asian students made up 73 % of the school 's population ; White students , 20 % ; Latinos , 3 % ; Blacks , 1 % ; and unknown / other , 7 % . 
 In 1971 , Mayor John Lindsay argued that the test was culturally biased against black and Hispanic students and sought to implement an affirmative action <unk> " am . However , protests by parents forced the plan to be scrapped and led to the passage of the Hecht @-@ Calandra Act , which preserved admissions by examination only . A small number of students judged to be economically disadvantaged and who come within a few points of the cut @-@ off score were given an extra chance to pass the test . 
 Community activist group Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now ( ACORN ) published two reports in 1996 , titled Secret Apartheid and Secret Apartheid II . In these reports , ACORN called the SHSAT " permanently suspect " and a " product of an institutional racism " , and claimed that black and Hispanic students did not have access to proper test preparation materials . Along with Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew , they began an initiative for more diversity in the city 's gifted and specialized schools , in particular demanding that since only a few districts send the majority of Stuyvesant 's and Bronx Science 's students , that the SHSAT be suspended altogether " until the Board of Education can show that the students of each middle school in the system have had access to curricula and instruction that would prepare them for this test regardless of their color or economic status . " Jesse Shapiro , Stuyvesant valedictorian , and Alan Van Dyke and Micah C. Lasher , then sophomores , published several editorials in response , and change was averted . 
 A number of students take preparatory courses offered by private companies such as The Princeton Review and Kaplan , in order to perform better on the SHSAT , often leaving those unable to afford such classes at a disadvantage . To bridge this gap and boost minority admissions , the Board of Education started the Math Science Institute in 1995 , a free program to prepare students for the admissions test . Students attend preparatory classes through the program , now known as the Specialized High School Institute , at several schools around the city from the summer after 6th grade until the 8th grade exam . Despite these free programs , the black and Hispanic enrollment continue to decline . 
 = = School building = = 
 The new 10 @-@ story building opened in 1992 . It housed 2 @,@ 700 students and 103 faculty members initially . With five gymnasiums , an enormous swimming pool , modern computers , 12 science labs , multiple escalators , spacious studios , and Hudson River views , the school building was considered a paragon at the time of its opening . 
 In 1997 , the eastern end of the mathematics floor was dedicated to Dr. Richard Rothenberg , the math @-@ department chairman who had died from a sudden heart attack earlier that year . Sculptor Madeleine Segall @-@ Marx was commissioned to create the Rothenberg Memorial in his honor . She created a mathematics wall entitled " Celebration " , consisting of 50 wooden boxes — one for each year of his life — behind a glass wall , featuring mathematical concepts and reflections on Rothenberg . 
 In 2006 , Robert Ira Lewy ' 60 made a gift worth $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to found the Dr. Robert Ira Lewy M.D. Multimedia <unk> and donated his personal library in 2007 . The school 's library has a capacity of 40 @,@ 000 volumes and overlooks Battery Park City . In late 2010 , the school library merged with the New York Public Library ( NYPL ) network in a four @-@ year pilot program , in which all students of the school received a student library card that can check books out of the school library or any other public library in the NYPL system . 
 In early 2011 , Stuyvesant conducted a pilot program in conjunction with Amazon.com , IBM , the City University of New York , and the New York City Department of Education . One hundred freshmen from the class of 2014 , as well as three teachers , were given electronic textbooks on Kindle <unk> instead of traditional paper textbooks . The students received textbooks for Geometry , Biology , and World History and shared the same teachers for each of those subjects . While many universities have experimented with ebooks , Stuyvesant was the first high school to do so . Stanley <unk> , the principal at the time , told the Spectator he hoped to expand the program school @-@ wide if the pilot program proved successful , but the program was discontinued at the end of the 2011 spring term after a focus group was conducted five months after the start of the program . The group revealed that many students found the Kindles difficult to study from because of the small screen and the lag while flipping pages ; the teachers also complained saying the textbooks provided were below Stuyvesant 's level of study . 
 The New York City Department of Education reports that public per student spending at Stuyvesant is slightly lower than the city average . Stuyvesant also receives private contributions . Shortly after the new building was completed , the $ 10 million Tribeca Bridge was built to allow students to enter the building without having to cross the busy West Street . The new school building was designed to be fully compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act , and is listed as such by the New York City Department of Education . As a result , the building is one of the 5 additional sites of <unk> , a school for older ( aged 15 – 21 ) students with multiple disabilities . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 During construction , the Battery Park City Authority ( in conjunction with the Percent for Art Program of the City of New York , the Department of Cultural Affairs and the New York City Board of Education ) commissioned <unk> , an artwork by public artists Kristin Jones and Andrew <unk> . Four hundred hollow glass blocks were dispersed randomly from the basement to the tenth floor of the new Stuyvesant High School building . Each block contains relics providing evidence of geographical , natural , cultural and social worlds , from antiquity to the present time . 
 The blocks are set into the hallway walls and scattered throughout the building . Each block is inscribed with a brief description of its contents or context . The items displayed include a section of the Great Wall of China , fragments of the Mayan pyramids , leaves from the sacred Bo tree , water from the Nile and Ganges Rivers , a Revolutionary War button , pieces of the 15th Street Stuyvesant building , a report card of a student who studied in the old building , and fragments of monuments from around the world , various chemical compounds , and memorabilia from each of the 88 years ' history of the 15th Street building . As an ongoing work , empty blocks were installed , to be filled with items chosen by the 88 graduating classes following its installation , up through 2080 . The installation received the Award for Excellence in Design from the Art Commission of the City of New York . 
 = = Academics = = 
 Stuyvesant students undertake a college preparatory curriculum that includes four years of English , history , and laboratory @-@ based sciences , of which biology , chemistry , and physics are required . In addition , students take four years of mathematics , changed from three beginning with the class of 2015 . Students also take three years of a single foreign language ; a semester each of introductory art , music , health , and technical drawing ; two semesters of computer science ( changed from one for the class of 2015 ) ; and two lab @-@ based technology courses . Several exemptions from technology education exist for seniors . Stuyvesant offers students a broad selection of elective courses . Some of the more unusual offerings include robotics , astronomy , New York City history , Women 's Voices , and the mathematics of financial markets . Most students complete the New York City Regents courses by junior year and take calculus during their senior year . However , the school offers math courses through differential equations for the more advanced students . A year of technical drawing used to be required ; students learned how to draft by hand in its first semester and how to draft using a computer ( CAD ) in the second . Now , students take a one @-@ semester technical drawing class ( a compacted version of the former drafting course ) , and a semester of introductory computer science , which introduces <unk> and Racket . For the class of 2015 , the one @-@ semester computer science course was replaced with a two @-@ semester course . 
 Students can choose from 55 Advanced Placement courses to earn college credits ; a few are thus able to start college as sophomores . Such courses include an AP English course focusing on literature and media in the realm of physics and mechanics . Computer science enthusiasts can take three additional computer programming courses after the completion of Advanced Placement computer science : systems level programming , computer graphics , and software development . There is also a one @-@ year computer networking class which can earn students Cisco Certified Network Associate ( <unk> ) certification . 
 Stuyvesant 's foreign language offerings include Mandarin Chinese , French , German , Hebrew , Italian , Latin , Japanese , and Spanish . The school 's Muslim Student Association raised funds to support courses in Arabic , which began in 2005 . Stuyvesant 's Biology and Geo @-@ science department offers courses in molecular biology ( a course sequence composed of a molecular science class in the Fall and a molecular genetics class in the Spring ) , human physiology , medical ethics , medical and veterinary diagnosis , human disease , anthropology and sociobiology , vertebrate zoology , laboratory techniques , medical human genetics , botany , the molecular basis of cancer , nutrition science , and psychology . The Chemistry and Physics department offers organic chemistry , physical chemistry , astronomy , engineering mechanics , and electronics . 
 Although Stuyvesant is primarily known for its math and science focus , the school also has a comprehensive humanities program , offering students courses in British and classical literature , Shakespearean literature , science fiction , philosophy , existentialism , debate , acting , journalism , creative writing , and poetry . The history core requires two years of global history ( or one year of global followed by one year of European history ) , one year of American history , as well as a semester each of economics and government . Humanities electives include American foreign policy , civil and criminal law , prejudice and persecution , race , ethnicity and gender issues , small business management , and Wall Street . 
 Stuyvesant entered into an agreement with City College of New York in 2004 , in which the college funds advanced after @-@ school courses that are taken for college credit but taught by Stuyvesant teachers . Some of these courses include physical chemistry , linear algebra , advanced Euclidean geometry , and women 's history . Before the 2005 revision of the SAT , Stuyvesant graduates had an average score of 1408 out of 1600 ( 685 verbal , 723 math ) . In 2010 , the average score on the SAT for Stuyvesant students was <unk> out of 2400 , or 674 , 735 , and 678 on the Reading , Math and Writing sections , respectively . The class of 2013 had an average SAT score of <unk> . Stuyvesant also was the high school with the highest number of Advanced Placement exams taken , and also the highest number of students reaching the mastery level . 
 = = Public recognition = = 
 Stuyvesant is noted for its academic programs , having produced many notable alumni including four Nobel laureates . U.S. News & World Report ranked it as one of the best high schools nationwide in their 2012 list of America 's best " Gold @-@ Medal " public high schools and fifth best in its 2012 list of STEM schools . 
 According to a September 2002 high school ranking by Worth magazine , 3 @.@ 67 % of Stuyvesant students went on to attend Harvard , Princeton , and Yale Universities , ranking it as the 9th top public high school in the United States and 120th among all schools , public or private . In December 2007 , The Wall Street Journal studied the freshman classes at eight selective colleges ( Harvard , Princeton , MIT , Williams College , Pomona College , Swarthmore College , U. Chicago , and Johns Hopkins ) , and reported that Stuyvesant sent 67 , or 9 @.@ 9 % of its 674 seniors , to them . 
 Stuyvesant , along with other similar schools , has regularly been excluded from Newsweek 's annual list of the Top 100 Public High Schools . The May 8 , 2008 issue states the reason as being , " because so many of their students score well above average on the SAT and ACT . " U.S. News & World Report , however , included Stuyvesant on its list of " Best High Schools " published in December 2009 , ranking 31st . In its 2010 progress report , the New York City Department of Education assigned it the highest possible grade of " A " . 
 = = Extracurricular activities = = 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Stuyvesant fields 32 varsity teams , including a swimming team , as well as golf , bowling , volleyball , soccer , basketball , gymnastics , wrestling , fencing , baseball / softball , handball , tennis , track / cross country , cricket , football , and starting in Spring 2008 , lacrosse teams . In addition , Stuyvesant club teams include boys ' varsity and junior varsity , and girls ' varsity Ultimate teams . The boys ' Ultimate team , the Stuyvesant Sticky Fingers , won the UPA New York State Championships in 2002 , 2009 , 2010 , 2014 , and 2015 . The girls ' Ultimate team , Sticky Fingers , won the UPA Junior National tournament in 1998 . In 2016 , both the boys and girls Ping Pong teams won the city championship . 
 In September 2007 the Stuyvesant football team was given a home field at Pier 40 , located north of the school at Houston Street and West Street . In 2008 , the baseball team was granted use of the pier after construction and delivery of an artificial turf pitching mound that met <unk> specifications . Stuyvesant does not , however , have its own track or tennis court , although the new building does have a pool . Unlike most American high schools , most sports teams at Stuyvesant are individually known by different names . Only the football , cheerleading , badminton , girls ping pong , baseball , girls handball , girls bowling , and boys ' lacrosse teams retain the traditional <unk> moniker ; other teams have their own unique names , such as the Runnin ' Rebels ( boys ' basketball ) , Vixens ( girls ' volleyball ) , Lemurs ( boys ' gymnastics ) , Phoenix ( girls ' basketball ) , Renegades ( girls ' softball ) , Felines ( girls ' gymnastics ) , <unk> ( girls ' golf ) , Eagles ( boys ' golf ) , Hookers ( boys ' bowling ) , Huskies ( girls ' lacrosse ) , Penguins ( girls ' swimming ) , Pirates ( boys ' swimming ) , Centaurs ( boys ' soccer ) , <unk> ( girls ' soccer ) , Dragons ( boys ' handball ) , Smokin ' Aces ( boys ' tennis ) , Sticky Fingers ( boys ' and girls ' Ultimate ) , Lobsters ( girls ' tennis ) , Vipers ( girls ' fencing ) , Flying Dutchmen ( hockey ) , <unk> ( track ) , Tigers ( cricket ) and Spartans ( wrestling and roller hockey ) . 
 = = = ARISTA = = = 
 The Stuyvesant chapter of ARISTA , the National Honor Society , was founded in 1910 . It is an organization dedicated to upholding the four pillars of Character , Scholarship , Leadership , and Service . ARISTA is highly selective . Once selected , ARISTA 's members are asked to complete a service requirement of 10 credits per month and to uphold all the pillars for which this organization stands . The ARISTA Executive Council consists of the President , Vice President , Vice President of Events and Services , Vice President of Tutoring , and Vice President of Communications . The ARISTA office is located in the Student Government Room , behind the Senior Bar . ARISTA provides a number of important and useful programs to the community , the school , and the student body . 
 ARISTA 's Tutoring Service includes many programs both inside and outside of school and online . First of these programs is the Peer Tutoring Service , sponsored by the Tutoring Committee and directed by the Vice President of Tutoring . Peer tutoring allows any student who is having trouble in any subject to get help . Also , The Tutoring Committee sponsors numerous Peer Study Workshops throughout the year . New this year is tutoring online . 
 ARISTA 's Events and Service Committee , headed by the Vice President of Events and Services , offer many volunteer opportunities both in school and out of school . Their activities include but are not limited to : monitoring for department offices , ushering for school theater productions , volunteering at parent teacher conferences , working at Soup Kitchens , tutoring at local elementary schools , participating in various walks ( such as the MS Walk and the AIDS Walk ) , and volunteering at Stuyvesant 's Open House Events . 
 = = = Student government = = = 
