 = One Day in History = 
 One Day in History was a single @-@ day initiative by several UK heritage organisations that aimed to provide a historical record of the everyday life of the British public in the early 21st century . Described as the " world 's biggest blog " , it encouraged UK citizens to write diary entries of 100 – 650 words of what they had done on 17 October 2006 , and then upload them to the official website of the initiative . The project formed a part of History Matters : Pass It On , a history campaign led by several UK heritage organisations . Submissions were received until 1 November , and 46 @,@ 000 entries were uploaded in this time , many of which were from students and celebrities . After being available to view on the History Matters website , the archive of the diary entries was moved to the UK Web Archive at the British Library and the library of the University of Sussex . The campaign received mixed reviews , with Institute of Historical Research 's David Cannadine and The Guardian 's Dave Hill speaking positively of it , whereas journalist John Plunkett termed it to be a " historical record of people with computers " . 
 = = Project = = 
 One Day in History was launched as a part of History Matters , a campaign led by several heritage organisations such as the National Trust , English Heritage and the Historic Houses Association , in order to draw attention towards the importance of history in everyday life . Its aim was to record for posterity what day @-@ to @-@ day life was like in the UK during 2006 . British people were invited to write a blog of what they did on 17 October 2006 , and to submit it to become a part of a large online diary . The project was open to all UK citizens and individuals of British origin , and was inspired by Mass Observation , a similar social research project founded in 1937 . The date was chosen to be 17 October by History Matters in the hope that it would be " an ordinary day much like any other of no particular national significance " , and would therefore reflect the everyday life of its participants . Historian Dan Snow explained that the project was intended to be " a detailed account of people 's normal lives when they 're doing nothing out of the ordinary . ... It 's those mundane details , those boring details that will seem extraordinary to people hundreds of years in the future . " The organisers hoped that the contributors could also discuss the impact of history or heritage on their lives that day in their submissions . 
 Each entry was limited to a length of 100 – 650 words . To allow some time for drafting and proofreading , participants were allowed to upload their diary entries until the end of the month . Schoolchildren were encouraged to take part , with all 29 @,@ 000 UK schools being invited to participate . On the day itself , the homepages of the 2 @,@ 000 computers in the <unk> network were all set to the History Matters website , and several celebrities and public figures also voiced their support of the initiative , including Stephen Fry , Bob Geldof and Tony Robinson . 
 = = = Public response = = = 
 By the afternoon of 17 October , the One Day in History website had received more than 5 @,@ 000 submissions , at a rate of three per second , and by 1800 BST ( 1700 GMT ) this number grew to 8 @,@ 000 . Within three days , 41 @,@ 250 blogs were posted to the site , and by 1 November , a final total of 46 @,@ 000 submissions were received . The entries were briefly displayed on the History Matters website , before being archived in both the UK Web Archive at the British Library and in the library of the University of Sussex . The National Trust described the project and its response from the public as " hugely successful " . 
 = = = Media response = = = 
 David Cannadine of the Institute of Historical Research spoke positively of One Day in History , remarking : " The wonderful thing about these records is we don 't yet know what it is about them that will be interesting in the future . " In promotion of the project , Fiona Reynolds , the Director @-@ General of the National Trust , stated : " We want this day to have its own place in history and be a snapshot of everyday life at the beginning of the 21st century . " Journalist John Plunkett expressed scepticism of this aim , writing in The Guardian that , despite the intentions of the campaign , it was only going to be " a historical record of people with computers " . He was also critical of History Matters in general , saying that he had " no idea how history [ was ] going to impact on [ him ] " . Dave Hill , also writing for The Guardian , described the campaign as a " brilliant idea " . Following the publication of the diary entries , Robert Booth , a journalist for The Sunday Times , remarked that the " monotony of most of [ the British public 's ] lives was all too painfully obvious . " 
 = Blacktip reef shark = 
 Not to be confused with the blacktip shark , Carcharhinus limbatus . 
 The blacktip reef shark ( Carcharhinus melanopterus ) is a species of requiem shark , in the family Carcharhinidae , easily identified by the prominent black tips on its fins ( especially on the first dorsal fin and its caudal fin ) . Among the most abundant sharks inhabiting the tropical coral reefs of the Indian and Pacific Oceans , this species prefers shallow , inshore waters . Its exposed first dorsal fin is a common sight in the region . Most blacktip reef sharks are found over reef ledges and sandy flats , though they have also been known to enter brackish and freshwater environments . This species typically attains a length of 1 @.@ 6 m ( 5 @.@ 2 ft ) . 
 Blacktip reef sharks have extremely small home ranges and exhibit strong site fidelity , remaining within the same local area for up to several years at a time . They are active predators of small bony fishes , cephalopods , and crustaceans , and have also been known to feed on sea snakes and seabirds . Accounts of the blacktip reef shark 's life history have been variable and sometimes contradictory , in part reflecting geographical differences within the species . Like other members of its family , this shark is viviparous , with females giving birth to two to five young on a biennial , annual , or possibly biannual cycle . Reports of the gestation period range from 7 – 9 , through 10 – 11 , to possibly 16 months . Mating is preceded by the male following closely behind the female , likely attracted by her chemical signals . Newborn sharks are found further inshore and in shallower water than adults , frequently roaming in large groups over areas flooded by high tide . 
 Timid and skittish , the blacktip reef shark is difficult to approach and seldom poses a danger to humans unless roused by food . However , people wading through shallow water are at risk of having their legs mistakenly bitten . This shark is used for its meat , fins , and liver oil , but is not considered to be a commercially significant species . The International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed the blacktip reef shark as Near Threatened . Although the species as a whole remains widespread and relatively common , overfishing of this slow @-@ reproducing shark has led to its decline at a number of locales . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 French naturalists Jean René Constant Quoy and Joseph Paul Gaimard originally described the blacktip reef shark during the 1817 – 1820 exploratory voyage of the corvette Uranie . In 1824 , their account was published as part of Voyage autour du monde ... sur les corvettes de S.M. l <unk> et la <unk> , Louis de Freycinet 's 13 @-@ volume report on the voyage . The type specimen was a 59 cm ( 23 in ) -long juvenile male caught off the island of Waigeo , west of New Guinea . Quoy and Gaimard chose the name Carcharias melanopterus , from the Greek melas meaning " black " and pteron meaning " fin " or " wing " , in reference to this shark 's prominent fin markings . 
 Subsequent authors moved the blacktip reef shark to the genus Carcharhinus ; in 1965 the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature designated it as the type species for the genus . In some earlier literature , the scientific name of this shark was mistakenly given as C. <unk> , now recognized as a synonym of the spottail shark ( C. sorrah ) . Other common names for this species include <unk> reef shark , black @-@ finned shark , blacktip shark , reef blacktip shark , and <unk> . 
 = = Phylogeny = = 
 Like most other members of its genus , the phylogenetic position of the blacktip reef shark remains indeterminate . Based on morphology , Jack Garrick proposed in 1982 that the closest relative of the blacktip reef shark was the nervous shark ( C. cautus ) . Leonard Compagno 's 1988 morphological analysis suggested affinity not only between this species and the nervous shark , but also four other species , and could not resolve their relationships further . A 1998 allozyme analysis by Gavin Naylor again yielded ambiguous results , finding that the blacktip reef shark forms a polytomy ( irresolvable group ) with 10 other Carcharhinus species . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The blacktip reef shark is found throughout nearshore waters of the tropical and subtropical Indo @-@ Pacific . In the Indian Ocean , it occurs from South Africa to the Red Sea , including Madagascar , Mauritius , and the Seychelles , and from there eastward along the coast of the Indian Subcontinent to Southeast Asia , including Sri Lanka , the Andaman Islands , and the Maldives . In the Pacific Ocean , it is found from southern China and the Philippines to Indonesia , northern Australia and New Caledonia , and also inhabits numerous oceanic islands , including the Marshall , Gilbert , Society , and Hawaiian Islands and Tuamotu . Contrary to what most sources state , there are no confirmed records of this species from Japanese waters , and purported Japanese specimens likely came from Taiwan . A Lessepsian migrant , this shark has colonized the eastern Mediterranean Sea by way of the Suez Canal . 
 Although it has been reported from a depth of 75 m ( 246 ft ) , the blacktip reef shark is usually found in water only a few meters deep , and can often be seen swimming close to shore with its dorsal fin exposed . Younger sharks prefer shallow , sandy flats , while older sharks are most common around reef ledges and can also be found near reef drop @-@ offs . This species has also been reported from brackish estuaries and lakes in Madagascar , and freshwater environments in Malaysia , though it is not able to tolerate low salinity to the same degree as the bull shark ( C. leucas ) . At Aldabra in the Indian Ocean , blacktip reef sharks congregate in the channels between reef flats during low tide and travel to the mangroves when the water rises . There is equivocal evidence that sharks from the northern and southern extremes of its distribution are migratory . 
 = = Description = = 
 A robustly built species with a streamlined " typical shark " form , the blacktip reef shark has a short , wide , rounded snout and moderately large , oval eyes . Each nostril has a flap of skin in front that is expanded into a nipple @-@ shaped lobe . Not counting small symphysial ( central ) teeth , the tooth rows number 11 – 13 ( usually 12 ) on either side of the upper jaw and 10 – 12 ( usually 11 ) on either side of the lower jaw . The upper teeth are upright to angled and narrowly triangular in shape , bearing serrations that are more coarse on the bases ; the lower teeth are similar , but more finely serrated . The teeth of adult males are more abruptly curved than those of females . 
 The pectoral fins are large and narrowly falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) , tapering to points . The sizable first dorsal fin is high with a curving " S " -shaped rear margin , and originates over the free rear tips of the pectoral fins . The second dorsal fin is relatively large with a short rear margin , and is placed opposite the anal fin . There is no ridge between the dorsal fins . This shark is a pale grayish @-@ brown above and white below , with an obvious white band on the sides extending forward from above the anal fin . All the fins have black tips highlighted by lighter @-@ colored borders , which are especially striking on the first dorsal fin and lower caudal fin lobe . Most blacktip reef sharks are no more than 1 @.@ 6 m ( 5 @.@ 2 ft ) long , though rarely individuals may reach 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) or possibly 2 @.@ 0 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) . The maximum weight on record is 13 @.@ 6 kg ( 30 lb ) . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Along with the grey reef shark ( C. <unk> ) and the whitetip reef shark ( Triaenodon obesus ) , the blacktip reef shark is one of the three most common sharks inhabiting coral reefs in the Indo @-@ Pacific . This species predominates in shallow habitats , while the other two are mostly found deeper . Fast @-@ swimming and active , the blacktip reef shark may be encountered alone or in small groups ; large " social " aggregations have also been observed . For the most part , juvenile and adult sharks are not segregated by sex , save for the movements of pregnant females to give birth . Individuals exhibit strong fidelity to particular areas , where they may remain for several years . 
 A tracking study off Palmyra Atoll in the central Pacific has found the blacktip reef shark has a home range of around 0 @.@ 55 km2 ( 0 @.@ 21 sq mi ) , among the smallest of any shark species . The size and location of the range does not change with time of day . Within this range , 3 – 17 % of the area constitute favored hunting patches that are disproportionately occupied by the resident shark . The sharks spend most of their time swimming back and forth along reef ledges , making occasional short forays onto sandy flats . Their average swimming speed decreases when the tide rises at night , possibly because the influx of cooler water reduces their metabolism , or the accompanying movement of prey fishes makes foraging easier . Blacktip reef sharks at Aldabra tend to be more mobile than those at Palmyra , with recorded individual movements of up to 2 @.@ 5 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) over 7 hours . 
 Blacktip reef sharks , particularly small individuals , fall prey to larger fishes , including groupers , grey reef sharks , tiger sharks ( Galeocerdo cuvier ) , and members of their own species . At Palmyra Atoll , adults avoid patrolling tiger sharks by staying out of the central , deeper lagoon . Their known parasites include the tapeworms Anthobothrium <unk> , Nybelinia <unk> , Otobothrium <unk> , and Platybothrium <unk> , a myxosporidian in the genus <unk> , and the monogenean Dermophthirius <unk> . One of the few documented examples of infectious disease in a shark was a fatal case of hemorrhagic septicemia in a blacktip reef shark , caused by the bacterium Aeromonas <unk> subsp. <unk> . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 As often the most abundant apex predator within its ecosystem , the blacktip reef shark plays a major role in structuring inshore ecological communities . Its diet is composed primarily of small teleost fishes , including mullet , groupers , grunters , jacks , mojarras , wrasses , surgeonfish , and smelt @-@ whitings . Groups of blacktip reef sharks in the Indian Ocean have been observed herding schools of mullet against the shore for easier feeding . Squid , octopus , cuttlefish , shrimp , and mantis shrimp are also taken , as well as carrion and smaller sharks and rays , though this is rare . Off northern Australia , this species is known to consume sea snakes , including Acrochordus granulatus , <unk> <unk> , Hydrophis spp. and Lapemis <unk> . Sharks off Palmyra Atoll have been documented preying on seabird chicks that have fallen out of their nests into the water . Miscellaneous items that have been found inside the stomachs of this species include algae , turtle grass , coral , <unk> , bryozoa , rats , and stones . 
 Researchers working at Enewetak Atoll in the Marshall Islands have found the blacktip reef shark can be readily attracted by splashing or striking metal tools against hard objects underwater , as well as by the scent of both healthy and injured fish . As with most sharks , the blacktip reef shark does not have any cone cells in its retina , limiting its ability to discriminate colors and fine details . Instead , its vision is adapted for sensitivity to movement or contrast under low light conditions , which is further enhanced by the presence of a reflective tapetum lucidum . Experiments have shown that this shark is capable of detecting small objects up to 1 @.@ 5 – 3 m ( 5 – 10 ft ) away , but is unable to clearly discern the shape of the object . Electroreception is another means by which this shark can locate prey ; its ampullae of Lorenzini have a sensitivity of approximately 4 nV / cm and an effective range of 25 cm ( 10 in ) . Similar to the grey reef shark , this species becomes more excited and " confident " in the presence of other individuals of its species , and in extreme situations can be roused into a feeding frenzy . Feeding activity may be greater at night than during the day . 
 = = Life history = = 
 Like the other members of its family , the blacktip reef shark is viviparous , though the details of its life history vary across its range . Its reproductive cycle is annual off northern Australia , with mating taking place from January to February , as well as off Moorea in French Polynesia , where mating occurs from November to March . The cycle is biennial off Aldabra , where intense competition within and between species for food may constrain females to only bearing young every other year . Earlier accounts from the Indian Ocean by Johnson ( 1978 ) , Madagascar by <unk> ( 1961 ) , and the Red Sea by Gohar and Mazhar ( 1964 ) , indicated a biannual cycle in these regions with two breeding seasons per year from June to July and December to January . If accurate , the shorter reproductive cycles of these subpopulations may be a consequence of warmer water . 
 When receptive to mating , a female blacktip reef shark swims slowly in a sinusoidal pattern near the bottom with her head pointed down ; observations in the wild suggest female sharks release chemical signals that allow males to track them . Once the male finds her , he closes to around 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and follows her with his snout oriented towards her vent . A courting male may also bite the female behind her gills or on her pectoral fins ; these mating wounds heal completely after 4 – 6 weeks . After a period of synchronous swimming , the male pushes the female on her side and positions her so her head is against the bottom and her tail is raised . Once the female is in position , the male inserts one of his claspers into her cloaca . Copulation lasts for several minutes , after which the sharks separate and resume their regular behavior . Off Moorea , individual older females mate and give birth at a consistent time every year , often to within a week 's precision , whereas younger females exhibit more variability in their timing . Younger females are also more likely to fail to become pregnant after mating . 
 The gestation period has been reported as 10 – 11 months long in the Indian Ocean and Pacific islands , and 7 – 9 months long off northern Australia . Earlier authors , such as <unk> ( 1957 ) , have estimated a gestation period as long as 16 months , though the validity of this figure has subsequently been challenged . The female has a single functional ovary ( on the right ) and two functional uteruses , divided into separate compartments for each embryo . Newly ovulated egg cases measure 3 @.@ 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) by 2 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) ; after hatching the embryos are sustained by a yolk sac during the first stage of development . After two months , the embryo measures 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) long and has well @-@ developed external gills . After four months , the yolk sac has begun to be converted into a placental connection that attaches to the uterine wall ; at this time , the embryo 's dark fin markings develop . By five months , the embryo measures 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) and has resorbed its external gills ; the placenta is fully formed , though some yolk remains until seven months into gestation . 
 Parturition occurs from September to November , with females making use of shallow nursery areas interior of the reef . Newborn pups measure 40 – 50 cm ( 16 – 20 in ) long in the Indian Ocean and off northern Australia , while free @-@ swimming pups as small as 33 cm ( 13 in ) long have been observed in the Pacific islands . The litter size is 2 – 5 ( typically 4 ) , and is not correlated with female size . Young blacktip reef sharks commonly form large groups in water barely deep enough to cover their bodies , over sand flats or in mangrove swamps close to shore . During high tide , they also move onto flooded coral platforms or seaweed beds . Growth is initially rapid ; one documented captive shark grew an average of 23 cm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) per year in its first two years of life . The growth rate slows to around 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) per year in juveniles and adults . Males and females mature sexually at lengths of 95 cm ( 37 in ) and 97 cm ( 38 in ) respectively off northern Australia , and 105 cm ( 41 in ) and 110 cm ( 43 in ) , respectively , off Aldabra . Males mature at 97 cm ( 38 in ) long off Palmyra Atoll . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Under most circumstances , the blacktip reef shark has a timid demeanor and is easily frightened away by swimmers . However , its inshore habitat preferences bring it into frequent contact with humans , and thus it is regarded as potentially dangerous . As of early 2009 , 11 unprovoked attacks and 21 attacks total ( none fatal ) were listed on the International Shark Attack File that are attributable to the blacktip reef shark . Most attacks involve sharks biting the legs or feet of waders , apparently mistaking them for their natural prey , and do not result in serious injury . In the Marshall Islands , native islanders avoid blacktip reef shark attacks by swimming rather than wading through shallow water , and a way of discouraging these sharks is to submerge one 's body . The blacktip reef shark has also been known to become aggressive in the presence of bait , and may pose a threat while attempting to steal the catches of spear fishers . 
 The blacktip reef shark is a regular catch of coastal fisheries , such as those operating off Thailand and India , but is not targeted or considered commercially important . The meat ( sold fresh , frozen , dried and salted , or smoked for human consumption ) , liver oil , and fins are used . The International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed the blacktip reef shark as Near Threatened . Though it remains widespread and common overall , substantial local declines due to overfishing have now been documented in many areas . This species has a low reproductive rate , limiting its capacity for recovering from depletion . Blacktip reef sharks are popular subjects of public aquarium exhibits , because of their stereotypically " shark @-@ like " appearance and modest size , and are also attractions for ecotourism divers . 
 = Much Apu About Nothing = 
 Not to be confused with Much Apu About Something 
 " Much Apu About Nothing " is the 23rd episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 5 , 1996 . In the episode , a referendum is created that will require all illegal immigrants from Springfield to be deported . After learning that his friend Apu Nahasapeemapetilon will be deported , Homer decides to help Apu prepare for a United States citizenship test so that he can become a legal citizen . 
 The episode was written by David S. Cohen , and directed by Susie Dietter . Joe Mantegna guest stars in the episode as Fat Tony . The title of the episode is a parody of William Shakespeare 's play Much Ado About Nothing . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from fans and television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 2 , and was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 The phrase " Won 't somebody please think of the children " was used by character Helen Lovejoy for the first time in this episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On an ordinary day , a brown bear strolls onto the streets of Springfield , frightening the town . The bear is eventually subdued by the police , who <unk> it ( despite the bear being relatively docile ) . Homer convinces Springfield that something needs to be done to protect them from bears , and the town takes their complaint to Mayor Quimby , who gives in easily . Soon , the Bear Patrol is created . Homer is then shocked to see taxes have been raised five dollars to maintain the patrol , and this warrants another visit by the town to the Mayor 's office . To appease them , Mayor Quimby blames the high taxes on illegal immigrants . He then creates Proposition 24 , which will require all illegal immigrants in Springfield to be deported . 
 Springfield starts to harass and hate all immigrants . At the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , Apu confides in Homer that he is an illegal immigrant . Apu explains that if Proposition 24 passes , he will have to leave the United States , as his visa expired many years earlier . Apu is forced to go to Fat Tony to obtain a false United States citizenship , and on Fat Tony 's advice , he starts acting American , by doing things like speaking with an American accent . However , feeling guilty and embarrassed about taking the fraudulent route and forging documents ( Apu is shown remembering his parents bidding him farewell , telling him to " make us proud , son , " as he set forth his journey to the USA , for his education and eventual Ph.D ) , he realizes he has disgraced his parents by turning his back on his Indian heritage , and tears up the fake passport . 
 After Homer sees how devastated was Apu about being deported , he changes his mind about the immigration proposition and vows that he and his family will help Apu . Lisa discovers that Apu will not have to leave if he can pass a United States citizenship test . Homer agrees to be Apu 's tutor to help prepare for the exam . Apu demonstrates excellent knowledge of the United States , but Homer is a terrible tutor and replaces Apu 's knowledge with false information . Apu falls asleep while studying Homer 's notes , but forgets it all when he wakes up which Lisa says is good . Apu then goes to take the test , and because he originally knew a lot about the history of the United States , he passes the test and becomes a citizen of the United States . At a congratulatory party , Homer tells his guests how terrible it would be if immigrants were deported , explaining they make the United States thrive . He inspires them to vote no on Proposition 24 , but it still passes , with 95 % of voters voting yes . After the ballot is passed , the only person deported is Groundskeeper Willie . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Much Apu About Nothing " was written by David S. Cohen and directed by Susie Dietter . Joe Mantegna guest stars in the episode as Fat Tony . Much of the inspiration for the episode came from news reports of bears roaming streets in Southern California around the time when the episode was in production . Cohen said that when a bear swims in somebody 's pool or goes in somebody 's garbage can , it becomes a popular news item in California . The show runner of The Simpsons at the time , Bill Oakley , commented that the news reports often create an anti @-@ bear hysteria , and that is one of the inspirations for the episode . 
 Another inspiration for the episode came from California 's Proposition 187 , which proposed the rescinding of employment rights and benefits from illegal immigrants . Cohen decided to name the referendum " Proposition 24 " because 24 was the number he had on his Little League Baseball uniform . Cohen commented that " the main theme of the episode is illegal immigration and anti @-@ immigration sentiment , which is a big issue here in California . So both the intro with the bear and the main theme are yanked from the California headlines . " 
 The final script of the episode was " very close " to Cohen 's first draft . " I was looking at the old drafts and this episode probably changed as little as any script I 've written from the original inception to the final aired version , " Cohen said . Oakley commented that some writer 's scripts get rewritten many times but Cohen 's " usually do not get rewritten that much because they are so good " . Oakley added that Cohen has a very distinctive comedy style so there are certain jokes in the episode that " just really sound like Cohen " . 
 Something Oakley and his partner Josh Weinstein wanted to do while they were show runners of The Simpsons was to explore side @-@ characters , such as Apu , " a little deeper " . Apu 's origin is revealed in this episode , and Oakley is proud of being the one who suggested that . Another character that was explored deeper in their period as show runners was Ned Flanders in the episode " Hurricane Neddy " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's title is based on William Shakespeare 's play Much Ado About Nothing . The original title for the episode was going to be " The Anti @-@ Immigrant Song " , in reference to Led Zeppelin 's song " Immigrant Song " . A sign held by a protester outside the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart says " The only good foreigner is Rod Stewart ! " , a reference to the British singer . Brad Bird , an American director who has worked as executive consultant and director on The Simpsons , can briefly be seen in the crowd that complains to Mayor Quimby . One of the signs outside the citizenship exam reads " Homer Say Get Out " a reference to " Frankie Say Relax " T @-@ shirts that were sold following the release of Relax ( song ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Much Apu About Nothing " finished 49th in the ratings for the week of April 29 to May 5 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 2 . The episode was the fourth @-@ highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Beverly Hills , 90210 and Melrose Place . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented positively on the episode , and said that " if any show 's taken a more unusual path to a story about xenophobia , I 've not seen it . " He praised the bear scenes , which he thought was the episode 's most " amusing " part . The review continued , " The parts with the immigrants are also good , especially since they make their point deftly . Add to that the hilarious sound of ' American Apu ' and this is a strong program . " Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict considered the best part of the episode to be when Homer tries to teach Apu American history , noting that you should watch for Homer 's " relevant and complex " diagram of a stovepipe hat . The website concluded its review by giving the episode a grade of B + . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote : " One of the most outspoken , and certainly angriest of episodes succeeds as a savage satire on the scapegoating of immigrants . Homer has never been so frighteningly dumb , although he does come through with a rousing liberal speech . " The episode is The Simpsons creator Matt Groening 's third favorite episode of the show . The episode received a negative review from Dave Foster of DVD Times . He considered " Much Apu About Nothing " to be one of the season 's most " tiring " episodes , " mostly because Apu is not a strong enough character to focus an episode on no matter how much writer David Cohen develops him " . Foster commented that the episode deals with a political issue which is " difficult to broach in twenty minutes and is therefore reached and sewn up in a rather haphazard manner " . 
 The episode has become study material for sociology courses at University of California Berkeley , where it is used to " examine issues of the production and reception of cultural objects , in this case , a satirical cartoon show " , and to figure out what it is " trying to tell audiences about aspects primarily of American society , and , to a lesser extent , about other societies . " Some questions asked in the courses include : " What aspects of American society are being addressed in the episode ? What aspects of them are used to make the points ? How is the satire conveyed : through language ? Drawing ? Music ? Is the behavior of each character consistent with his / her character as developed over the years ? Can we identify elements of the historical / political context that the writers are satirizing ? What is the difference between satire and parody ? " 
 In the episode , after the creation of the Bear Patrol , bear sightings decrease to zero , so Homer concludes that the Bear Patrol must be working . Lisa attempts to demonstrate Homer 's logical fallacy by the example of a tiger @-@ repellent rock , but it goes over his head . Scott Anthony of the Harvard Business Review describes this scene as a " classic example " of the informal fallacy of assuming that correlation implies causation . Mike Moffatt also called it " the best all @-@ time discussion of faulty reasoning " . 
 = William Henry Barlow = 
 William Henry Barlow FRS FRSE <unk> <unk> ( 10 May 1812 – 12 November 1902 ) was an English civil engineer of the 19th century , particularly associated with railway engineering projects . Barlow was involved in many engineering enterprises . He was engineer for the Midland Railway on its London extension and designed the company 's London terminus at St Pancras . 
 With John Hawkshaw , he completed Isambard Kingdom Brunel 's Clifton Suspension Bridge . Following the Tay Bridge disaster he sat on the commission which investigated the causes and designed the replacement Tay Bridge . Barlow was also an inventor and experimenter , patenting a design for a rail and carrying out investigations on the use and design of steel structures . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Barlow was born on 10 May 1812 in Woolwich , Kent ( now in south @-@ east London ) , the son of mathematician and physicist Professor Peter Barlow , who taught at the Royal Military Academy in Woolwich . William Barlow was the younger brother of Peter William Barlow . After a private education , Barlow began to study civil engineering with his father at the age of sixteen . After a year he , went on to a pupillage at the machinery department of the Royal Navy 's Woolwich Dockyard close to his family home . He then worked at the London Docks for Henry Robinson Palmer . 
 Barlow married Selina Crawford <unk> ( date unknown ) . The couple had four sons and two daughters . Their son Crawford Barlow became a civil engineer and was in practice with his father . 
 = = Career = = 
 From 1832 , he spent six years working as an engineer in Constantinople , Turkey , helping build an ordnance factory on behalf of machine tool manufacturers Maudslay , Sons & Field . He also produced a report for the Turkish government on lighthouses in the Bosphorus , which led to his first two scientific papers . For his services to the Turkish government he was awarded the Order of Nishan Iftikhar ( Order of Glory ) . 
 Barlow returned to Britain in 1838 to take up a post as assistant engineer on the Manchester and Birmingham Railway working for George W. Buck . In 1842 , he joined the Midland Counties Railway as resident engineer for the section between Rugby and Derby . When the Midland Counties Railway became part of the Midland Railway in 1844 , he retained the position , later becoming chief engineer of the larger railway . On 1 April 1845 , Barlow was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers and on 6 June 1850 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society . 
 Whilst working on the Midland Railway 's main line , Barlow established that the replacement of sleepers was a larger part of the cost of track maintenance than the replacement of rails because the sleepers decayed more quickly than the rails wore @-@ out and needed renewal more often . To remove the cost of providing and replacing sleepers , he developed and patented his own rail design in 1849 . It had a wide flanged profile which could be laid directly on to track ballast without the need for sleepers , with just periodic tie @-@ bars to maintain the correct gauge . Known as the Barlow rail , it was widely used , especially by the Great Western Railway . 
 Joseph Paxton , designer of the cast iron and glass Crystal Palace for The Great Exhibition of 1851 , was a director of the Midland Railway and he asked Barlow for his help in the preparation of the structural calculations for the frame of the building . 
 In 1857 , Barlow left the Midland Railway to form his own consultant engineering practice in London , with the Midland Railway as a significant client . Following the death of Isambard Kingdom Brunel in 1859 , Barlow was commissioned with John Hawkshaw to complete the Clifton Suspension Bridge , Bristol , construction of which had been stalled since 1843 due to insufficient funds to finish it . Reusing the chains from Brunel 's earlier Hungerford Suspension Bridge in London , demolished in 1860 , Barlow and Hawkshaw completed the bridge in 1864 with a more robust deck than Brunel had planned and other variations caused by the reuse of the existing chains . Its 702 @-@ foot ( 214 m ) span was the longest in Britain at the time . 
 Between 1862 and 1869 , Barlow was consultant engineer for the Midland Railway 's southern extension from Bedford to London , including the layout of the London terminus station at St Pancras on Euston Road . To deal with the sloping site and the need to cross the Regent 's Canal a short distance to the north , the platforms were constructed on a raised structure supported on cast iron columns and girders . Under this storage was laid out for beer from the breweries at Burton upon Trent . With assistance from Rowland Mason Ordish , Barlow also designed the arched , cast iron station canopy which spans 240 feet ( 73 m ) across the platforms without intermediate support – then the widest of its kind in the world . It was designed as a cost effective and efficient means of avoiding the need for additional solid structure in the lower level . George Gilbert Scott designed the hotel in front of the train shed . 
 On 28 December 1879 , the central section of the North British Railway 's bridge across the River Tay near Dundee collapsed in the Tay Bridge disaster as an express train crossed it in a heavy storm . All 75 passengers and crew on the train were killed . As the newly elected President of the Institution of Civil Engineers , Barlow was appointed as a member of the Board of Trade 's Court of Inquiry into the disaster . He sat with Henry Cadogan Rothery and William Yolland , co @-@ authoring one of the final reports with Yolland recommending a commission be established to examine wind loads on bridges . In its report dated 30 June 1880 , the Court of Inquiry concluded that the bridge , designed by Sir Thomas Bouch and opened only the year before its collapse , had been " badly designed , badly built and badly maintained " . The entire central box truss section of the bridge known as the " High <unk> " collapsed along with the thirteen trestles supporting it , leaving a gap of nearly half @-@ a @-@ mile in the 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) long bridge . 
 His reputation destroyed , Bouch died in October 1880 . Work on the suspension bridge he had designed to cross the Firth of Forth was stopped after the Tay Bridge collapse and Barlow , Sir John Fowler and Thomas Elliot Harrison , consultant engineers for the three railway companies involved in the construction , were asked to choose a replacement design . The solution was the cantilevered Forth Bridge by Fowler and Sir Benjamin Baker . 
 In 1881 Barlow sat as member of the Wind Pressure ( Railway Structures ) Commission established at the recommendation of the Tay Bridge report . He led the design of the replacement Tay Bridge ( 1882 – 87 ) with his son Crawford Barlow as engineer . The new design used large monocoque piers to support a double railway track . The old brick and masonry piers from the first bridge were retained as breakwaters for the new piers upstream . They can still be seen today as a forlorn reminder of the tragedy of 1879 . 
 Barlow was an early experimenter with civil engineering uses for steel , carrying out research at Woolwich Arsenal in the 1850s and being a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers ' committee on the subject . From 1873 he was a member of a Board of Trade committee which produced the first recommendations on safe working loads for steel in railway structures in 1877 . 
 Barlow also experimented with sound recording . In February 1874 he presented the Royal Society with a talk On the Pneumatic Action which accompanies the <unk> of Sounds by the Human Voice , as exhibited by a Recording Instrument . He called his ' recording instrument ' a <unk> . 
 Barlow was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh , a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and the Society of Arts . He served as Vice President of the Royal Society in 1881 and was an honorary member of the Société des <unk> Civil de France . He was also a Lieutenant @-@ Colonel in the Railway Volunteer Staff Corps . 
 With his health failing , he retired from practice in 1896 , along with his son . He died on 12 November 1902 from exhaustion after breaking his leg , and was buried in Charlton Cemetery in a plot adjacent to that of his father 's grave . His home " High Combe " , Charlton Road , Greenwich , is marked with a blue plaque . 
 = Jerk De Soleil = 
 " Jerk De Soleil " is the 8th episode of the first season of the animated television series Phineas and Ferb . In the episode , stepbrothers Phineas and Ferb and their friends host a cirque in their backyard , attracting much attention from the neighborhood . The boys ' sister , Candace , tries to expose the cirque to her mother while experiencing an allergic reaction to wild parsnips . 
 " Jerk De Soleil " was written by Bobby Gaylor and Martin Olson , and directed by series co @-@ founder Dan Povenmire . Povenmire additionally provided the voice for Candace on scenes where the character was experiencing an allergic reaction , as the crew was unable to lower the voice of her regular actress , Ashley Tisdale , to the necessary degree . The episode was originally broadcast on February 10 , 2008 , as part of the special marathon event " Phineas and Ferb @-@ urary . " It received generally positive reviews . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Plans for Phineas , his stepbrother Ferb , and their friends Isabella , Baljeet , Buford , and Django to go to the local circus , " Cirque de lune " are ruined after the performance is canceled after Baljeet comes from his mom 's car at the start of the episode . Undeterred , the boys and their friends decide to build their own circus in their backyard and have themselves and their other friends act as performers . The cirque tent is speedily put up and the group prepare their costumes . 
 Candace discovers the boy 's circus and has set out to tell their mother , Linda , when Jeremy , a boy who has romantic feelings for her , stops by to give her a basket of plants . Unfortunately they include some wild parsnips , which give Candace an allergic reaction : to hide her hives and deep , scratchy voice she dons a <unk> and a paper bag before going to the mall to tell Linda about the boys ' plans , and then sings <unk> B.O.Y.S. where Linda , Vivian Garcia @-@ Shapiro , and Jeremy 's mom are . 
 Exasperated , Candace returns to the circus , where Jeremy has saved a spot for her , only for the boys to mistake her for Buford and include her in his act . She is sent flying through the roof of the tent , just as Doofenshmirtz and Perry are flying overhead . Doofenshmirtz 's machine activates , giving everyone in the cirque audience high @-@ pitched voices that cause the tent to rupture . The high velocity of Doofenshmirtz 's flying machine propels the tent up into the air , destroying the machine and sending Doofenshmirtz flying off ( with a high voice ) . Jeremy gives a CD to Candace , but Candace is not at the house , but Candace then gets the CD from Jeremy . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Jerk De Soleil " was written by Bobby Gaylor and Martin Olson . It was storyboarded by artists J.G. Quintel and Kim Roberson , and directed by Phineas and Ferb co @-@ creator Dan Povenmire . The crew was unable to lower the pitch of actress Ashley Tisdale 's delivery enough for the scenes in which allergies give Candace a deep voice ; instead , Povenmire voiced the character in her place . 
 " Jerk De Soleil " was originally broadcast in the United States on Disney Channel on February 10 , 2008 , as part of the special month @-@ long marathon event " Phineas and Ferb @-@ urary . " It was released on the DVD compilation The Daze of Summer on its first anniversary , alongside nine other episodes , including the previously unaired " Unfair Science Fair " and " Unfair Science Fair Redux ( Another Story ) . " <unk> B.O.Y.S. — the episode 's featured musical number — became available along with several other songs on the official Phineas and Ferb soundtrack later in 2009 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Phineas and Ferb 's elaborate backyard cirque is a parody of Cirque du Soleil , a real @-@ life Canadian traveling company which performs circus arts and street entertainment . The scene where Candace jumps onto the stage and sings about her hardships , mainly concerning her inability to successfully tattle on her brothers , references a scene in the film Adventures in <unk> ( 1987 ) in which Elisabeth Shue 's character sings about her hardships in a similar manner . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Jerk De Soleil " received generally positive reviews from television critics . The Kidzworld website called Phineas and Ferb 's cirque " magical . " Writing for DVD Town , reviewer James Plath wrote that the subplot with Doofenshmirtz and Perry " absolutely evokes the old Boris and Natasha plans on Rocky and Bullwinkle . " USA Today blogger Whitney Matheson , reviewing the episode , described the entire series as " a short ' toon that zooms all over the place in 15 minutes " and " an animated version of Parker Lewis Can 't Lose , " calling the writing " clever without being too cute . " 
 The song " <unk> B.O.Y.S. " also received a generally favorable reception . Wired magazine called it an " ever @-@ pleasing blues banger . " Fan reaction to the song was also positive , and in the 2009 television event " Phineas and Ferb 's Musical Cliptastic Countdown , " voters ranked it the series ' sixth best musical feature . 
 = Thompson Capper = 
 Major General Sir Thompson Capper KCMG CB DSO ( 20 October 1863 – 27 September 1915 ) was a highly decorated and senior British Army officer who served with distinction in the Second Boer War and was a divisional commander during the First World War . At the Battle of Loos in 1915 , Capper was shot by a sniper as he reconnoitred the front line during an assault by his division on German positions . He died the next day in a casualty clearing station from wounds to both lungs ; his grave is in the nearby Lillers Communal Cemetery . 
 Capper was an active and vigorous soldier who had been wounded just six months before his death in an accidental grenade detonation . Shortly before this wound he had been knighted by King George V for his service in command of his division during the First Battle of Ypres . Field Marshal Sir John French commented upon his death that " he was a most distinguished and capable leader and his death will be severely felt . " He was also a keen military historian and his collected papers are currently stored at the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives at King 's College London . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Thompson Capper was born in October 1863 to William and Sarah Capper ( neé Copeland ) . William Capper was a civil servant with the Bengal Civil Service and Sarah was the daughter of industrialist William Copeland . Thompson and his elder brother John were born in Lucknow but at a young age were sent to England for their education . Thompson Capper attended Haileybury and Imperial Service College and the Royal Military College , Sandhurst before being commissioned into the East Lancashire Regiment as a junior officer in 1882 . 
 He was employed on home service for the next ten years and whilst serving as regimental adjutant was made up to captain in 1891 , attending Staff College before being transferred with his unit to India . It was in India that Capper saw his first action , when in 1895 his regiment was attached to a force sent to the Indian @-@ Afghan border to relieve a trapped British force in Chitral . Three years later as a Brevet major , he was again in action as an advisor to an Egyptian unit of the Anglo @-@ Egyptian army under Horatio Kitchener which travelled down the Nile in the final campaign of the Mahdist War . During these operations , Capper participated in the battle of <unk> and was with the force which fought in the culminating Battle of Omdurman . 
 = = = South African service = = = 
 The following year , 1899 , Capper and his regiment were again engaged in Africa , being transported to South Africa to serve in the Second Boer War . There Capper performed his duties with distinction for the next three years , being heavily engaged at the defeat of Spion Kop and participating in the relief of Ladysmith in 1900 . He remained in South Africa engaged in guerilla operations against the Boer forces until the armistice of 1902 , commanding a flying column in the Cape Colony . He was promoted to substantive major in December 1901 . Following the war 's conclusion , Capper was promoted and awarded the Distinguished Service Order on his return home . He was also awarded the Queen 's South Africa Medal with six clasps and the King 's South Africa Medal with two clasps in recognition of his long service in the colony , and was twice Mentioned in Despatches . 
 = = = Staff career = = = 
 As an experienced staff officer , he was given a post as a professor at the Staff College , Camberley from 1902 to 1904 . He was promoted to Brevet Colonel on 11 December 1904 . He was then transferred to the Staff College , Quetta in India as commandant ( and substantive colonel ) . It has been suggested that this move was initiated by jealous colleagues at the college due to his ability as a teacher and tactician . He retained this position until 1911 , teaching the lessons of the Russo @-@ Japanese War and emphasising the importance of " attacking dash " as the best means of overcoming entrenched positions . He came into contact with numerous important figures of the First World War through this work , including Douglas Haig , with whom he did not get on and Hubert Gough , who admired his " spirit of self @-@ sacrifice and duty , instead of the idea of playing for safety and seeking only to avoid getting into trouble " . He also amassed a prodigious collection of military literature during his research and teaching . 
 In 1906 he was promoted to temporary Brigadier – General and in 1908 he married <unk> Mary , with whom he would have one son . In 1910 his work at the staff college was recognised with the award of the Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) in the King 's Birthday Honours . In 1911 , after a brief period of half @-@ pay in his permanent rank of Colonel , Capper was transferred from India to Ireland , where he commanded the 13th Infantry Brigade until 1913 . He returned to Ireland briefly a year later in the aftermath of the Curragh Incident , to support his friend Hubert Gough . During early 1914 , Capper was briefly the Inspector of Infantry but in the emergency of the summer of 1914 he was promoted to substantive Major @-@ General and posted to the regular 7th Division , which was sent to the Western Front . 
 = = First World War = = 
 During the opening months of the war , Capper busied himself with organising the new division placed under his command ; the work involved in this task meant that the division was not ready for action until October 1914 . On 6 October 7th Division arrived at Zeebrugge just as the German forces began to push into that area as part of the " Race for the Sea " . Initially forced back , Capper 's division covered the Belgian withdrawal to the Yser and then held the line near the town of Ypres . For the next two months , the 7th Division was embroiled in bitter fighting at the First Battle of Ypres , when they were crucial in stopping the German advance but lost over 10 @,@ 000 men . The Times later stated that " no one but Capper himself could , night after night , by the sheer force of his personality , have reconstituted from the shattered fragments of battalions a fighting line that could last through tomorrow " . For the service he and his men provided during the battle , Capper was awarded a knighthood as a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George in early 1915 . 
 Remaining on the front lines during the winter of 1914 – 1915 , Capper 's men held the German advance and were given some respite in early 1915 with the arrival of territorial divisions . It was during one of these rest periods that Capper was seriously wounded when in April 1915 he was struck in the shoulder by shrapnel from a " Jam @-@ tin bomb " during a demonstration of improvised grenades being held behind the lines . He was temporarily replaced by General Gough and returned to England to convalesce , but was back with the 7th Division on 19 July 1915 . 
 = = = Battle of Loos = = = 
 In late September 1915 , the division was assigned to participate in the Battle of Loos against fortified German positions at Loos @-@ en @-@ Gohelle and <unk> . Advancing on 26 September against furious German opposition , the 7th Division was held up several times and Capper visited the frontline to view the enemy for himself from the captured trenches . Urging his men into a final assault , Capper stayed behind to view the field and was struck by a sniper 's bullet fired from houses along the line of advance which were thought to have been abandoned . The assault failed and Capper was discovered by his retreating units and taken to Number 6 Casualty Clearing Station to the rear of British lines . The bullet had penetrated both lungs , and doctors gave no hope of survival . Major @-@ General Sir Thompson Capper died the following day , on 27 September 1915 in the casualty clearing station . His division had lost over 5 @,@ 200 men killed or wounded in just three days of fighting . 
 Following his death , a rumour abounded that he had been killed charging the German lines on horseback . This story has persisted despite eye @-@ witness accounts to the contrary . Capper was buried in Lillers Communal Cemetery behind British lines and his grave is surmounted by a Commonwealth War Graves Commission headstone . He is also commemorated on the War Memorial in Rayne , Essex , where he spent much of his boyhood with his uncle , the Rector of Rayne , Rev W S Hemming . His collected papers were donated to King 's College in 1971 , where they are still available to researchers and contain a wide selection of primary materials concerning the warfare of the early twentieth century . 
 = Angie Bolen = 
 Angela de Luca , known in the series by the alias Angie Bolen , is a fictional character played by Drea de Matteo on the ABC television series Desperate Housewives . The character was created by television producer and screenwriter Marc Cherry and appeared throughout the series ' sixth season from September 27 , 2009 to May 16 , 2010 . Cherry describes Angie as a " loving but tough Italian woman . " Her gritty and blunt demeanor contrasts from the domesticated leading characters . 
 Angie 's storylines mostly deal with her family — husband Nick Bolen ( Jeffrey Nordling ) and son Danny Bolen ( Beau Mirchoff ) — and their attempts to escape their mysterious past , which is explored throughout the season . Although critics initially welcomed the character as a diverse addition to the cast , they grew frustrated with the slow pace of her storyline as the season progressed . Critics compared Angie to Betty Applewhite ( Alfre Woodard ) , a character whose lagging storyline was slow in developing during the series ' second season . 
 = = Development and departure = = 
 While developing new characters for the sixth season of Desperate Housewives , showrunner Marc Cherry and his writing staff aimed to create a housewife who would be different from the other female characters on the series . Cherry stated that he " wanted someone who didn 't seem suburban , who has a tough , blue @-@ collar exterior . " The staff ultimately decided upon an Italian New Yorker . Cherry stated that part of his inspiration for the character came from his childhood neighbors . He explained , " When I was growing up in Huntington , Calif . , two Italian families from the Bronx moved in across the street . We were so <unk> , so middle American . They had their own ethnic identity . It was an interesting juxtaposition . " Cherry insisted that Angie was not replacing the deceased Edie Britt character ( Nicollette Sheridan ) as a main housewife but would instead be the focus of the season 's mystery . 
 Drea de Matteo , known for her role on The Sopranos , an HBO television series about the Italian @-@ American Mafia , was immediately offered the role in July 2009 . De Matteo did not know the character 's name or storyline when she accepted the role . She acknowledged that the character was similar to her previous television roles and admitted that while she initially feared being typecast , she decided to accept the role . She explained , " Now that I am old and don 't really care , and remember how much fun I had playing that character — I 'd rather be playing a character like that than some straight , normal , non @-@ accented person . " The character 's name was reported by several media outlets as Angie Vitale following the news of de Matteo 's casting . 
 In November 2009 , rumors surfaced that de Matteo was being released from her contract due to budgetary concerns . However , Cherry denied them and the actress appeared in 20 of the season 's 23 episodes . However , de Matteo did depart from the series in May 2010 after one season . Cherry explained , " Part of the deal when we hired Drea was she was only interested in doing one season . She has a baby and is eager to get back to her life in New York . " 
 = = Personality and characteristics = = 
 Before the character 's debut , de Matteo described Angie as " brassy " and a " liberal New Yorker , " which she said contrasts with the more conservative nature of the other characters . She commented that Angie " is less of a housewife than the rest of them . She 's a real broad . " However , de Matteo also noted that Angie is " not just the brassy smart @-@ talker " and has a vulnerable side , which would be explored in the show . Cherry boosted Angie as " a loving but tough Italian woman ... who will do what she has to protect her family . " He also described her as " brilliant " and " shielded , " which leaves her largely detached from the other women on the series . Michael Ausiello of Entertainment Weekly described the character as " icy . " Entertainment Weekly 's Tanner Stransky wrote that Angie was " very real and very gritty , " noting that the character was capable " of doing what they need to survive , no matter what the price . " Within the series , Bree Hodge ( Marcia Cross ) describes Angie as blunt and tactless . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Past = = = 
 The character 's backstory is explored throughout the sixth season of Desperate Housewives . Angela de Luca lived in New York City with her mother , Rose De Luca ( Suzanne <unk> ) . At age eighteen , she dropped out of college , where she was enrolled as an engineering major , and joined a band of eco @-@ terrorists , led by Patrick Logan ( John Barrowman ) , with whom she became romantically involved . Patrick asked her to build a bomb that would be used against a corporate company . On November 10 , 1991 , the eco @-@ terrorist group bombed a building that was supposedly empty ; however , they unintentionally killed a man named Shawn . Angela sustained a large scar on her back as a result of the explosion . Consumed with guilt over having killed an innocent man , Angela agreed to run away with a private investigator ( Jeffrey Nordling ) who had been pursuing the terrorist group . Later , Angie discovered she was pregnant with Patrick 's child . She and the private investigator raised Patrick 's son as their own and moved several times , living under various aliases , in an attempt to evade both Patrick and the FBI . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 In the sixth season premiere , the fugitive couple , now under the aliases of Angie and Nick Bolen , buys a house on Wisteria Lane in Fairview , Eagle State , with their nineteen @-@ year @-@ old son , Danny ( Beau Mirchoff ) . While Angie hesitantly befriends the other women on the street , Danny takes a liking to Julie Mayer ( Andrea Bowen ) , a neighbor who eventually rejects his attempts to form a romantic relationship . When Julie falls into a coma after being strangled , Danny is the prime suspect , thus creating tension between Angie and Julie 's mother , Susan Mayer ( Teri Hatcher ) . However , Danny is cleared of all charges when his alibi is validated . Meanwhile , neighbor Katherine Mayfair ( Dana Delany ) befriends Angie while experiencing a nervous breakdown as a result of Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) marrying Susan rather than her . When Katherine begins to question Angie 's past , Angie tells Susan that Katherine may have strangled Julie as an act of revenge . 
 Angie takes a job at the catering company of her neighbor , Bree Hodge ( Marcia Cross ) , and a friendship develops . Later , Angie learns that Nick had an affair with Julie prior to her attack , but she forgives him for this betrayal . When Julie rejects Danny once more , he attempts suicide by swallowing a large amount of pills . Angie and Nick admit him to the hospital , where he awakens with temporary memory loss and tells Nurse Mona Clark ( Maria <unk> ) , that his name is Tyler . Mona assumes that the family is in the witness relocation program , but Danny fully reveals his family 's secret . Mona demands $ 67 @,@ 000 from the Bolens in return for her silence but is killed by a plane that makes an emergency landing on Wisteria Lane soon after . 
 Later , Danny begins to date Ana Solis ( Maiara Walsh ) , the fun @-@ loving niece of Gabrielle ( Eva Longoria Parker ) and Carlos Solis ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) . Gabrielle and Carlos overhear Angie and Nick fighting about their secret , which prompts them to send Ana to a modeling academy in New York for her safety . Danny follows Ana without his parents ' knowledge . Angie and Gabrielle travel to New York to bring Danny home and Angie confesses her past to Gabrielle in confidence . Patrick tracks Angie back to Fairview , where he hits Nick with his car . While Nick is in the hospital , Patrick moves into the Bolen home and takes Angie and Danny hostage and forces Angie to build him a second bomb . He plants the bomb inside the house and activates it with a detonator from down the street . However , the bomb in the house was a decoy ; Angie had planted the actual bomb in the detonator . Patrick dies in the explosion and Angie and Nick , still on the run from the FBI , relocate to Atlanta , Georgia while Danny moves to New York to be closer to his grandmother and Ana . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Both Drea de Matteo 's performance and the Angie character received positive reviews upon the season premiere . Stransky said " it 's great to see Drea de Matteo back on screen " and praised the contrast between Angie and the other characters . In her review of the season premiere , Isabelle Carreau of TV Squad called the character promising . TV Guide 's Mickey O 'Connor noted that the chemistry between Angie and the other characters was " a little off , " but predicted it would improve throughout the season . Four episodes into the season , Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly declared that Angie 's storyline was suffering from the lack of interaction between the character and the other leading women , similar to the Betty Applewhite ( Alfre Woodard ) storyline of season two . 
 By the middle of the season , Gael Fashingbauer Cooper of MSNBC complained that the Angie storyline was lagging , opining that the revelation that Angie is an eco @-@ terrorist " sounds like a plot summary dreamed up by The Onion wanting to spoof the ultimate suburban show . " Stransky declared that he was " tired of even wondering what 's up with the Bolens , " as their " who @-@ cares @-@ anyway mystery " storyline continued to move too slowly . However , his interest in the storyline was renewed when John Barrowman joined the show as Patrick Logan , stating that the storyline had " finally gotten hotter and , subsequently , better . " Stransky praised the " sweet <unk> " of the conclusion to Angie 's storyline in the season finale . Cooper also enjoyed the conclusion of Angie 's storyline , scoring her plot in the season finale with a ' B. ' She wrote that de Matteo " brought some needed fire and Italian backbone to a very bland street " and was disappointed that the character was written off the series . However , Robert Bianco of USA Today dismissed the finale 's devotion to resolving the Bolen family storyline , stating that the audience and other characters were not invested enough in the Bolens to care about their life @-@ threatening predicament or departure . Following the announcement of de Matteo 's departure , Ausiello reported that fans had not " warmed to " the character of Angie . 
 = Flight 19 = 
 Flight 19 was the designation of five Grumman TBM Avenger torpedo bombers that disappeared over the Bermuda Triangle on December 5 , 1945 during a United States Navy overwater navigation training flight from Naval Air Station Fort Lauderdale , Florida . All 14 airmen on the flight were lost , as were all 13 crew members of a Martin PBM Mariner flying boat that subsequently launched from Naval Air Station Banana River to search for Flight 19 . The PBM aircraft was known to collect flammable aviation gasoline vapors in its bilges and professional investigators have assumed that the PBM most likely exploded in mid @-@ air while searching for the flight . Navy investigators could not determine the cause of the loss of Flight 19 , but said the airmen may have become disoriented and ditched in rough seas after running out of fuel . 
 = = Navigation training flight = = 
 Flight 19 undertook a routine navigation and combat training exercise in TBM @-@ type aircraft . The assignment was called " Navigation problem No. 1 " , a combination of bombing and navigation , which other flights had completed or were scheduled to undertake that day . The flight leader was United States Navy Lieutenant Charles Carroll Taylor , who had about 2 @,@ 500 flying hours , mostly in aircraft of this type , while his trainee pilots each had 300 total , and 60 flight hours in the Avenger . Taylor had completed a combat tour in the Pacific theatre as torpedo bomber pilot on the aircraft carrier USS Hancock and had recently arrived from NAS Miami where he had also been a <unk> instructor . The student pilots had recently completed other training missions in the area where the flight was to take place . They were US Marine Captains Edward Joseph Powers and George William Stivers , US Marine Second Lieutenant Forrest James Gerber and USN Ensign Joseph Tipton Bossi ; their callsigns started with ' Fox Tare ' . 
 The aircraft were four TBM @-@ <unk> , BuNo <unk> , ' <unk> ' , BuNo <unk> , ' <unk> ' , BuNo <unk> , ' <unk> ' , BuNo <unk> , ' <unk> ' , and one TBM @-@ 3 , BuNo <unk> , ' <unk> ' . Each was fully fueled , and during pre @-@ flight checks it was discovered they were all missing clocks . Navigation of the route was intended to teach dead reckoning principles , which involved calculating among other things elapsed time . The apparent lack of timekeeping equipment was not a cause for concern as it was assumed each man had his own watch . Takeoff was scheduled for 13 : 45 local time , but the late arrival of Taylor delayed departure until 14 : 10 . Weather at NAS Fort Lauderdale was described as " favorable , sea state moderate to rough . " Taylor was supervising the mission , and a trainee pilot had the role of leader out front . 
 Called " Naval Air Station , Fort Lauderdale , Florida , navigation problem No. 1 , " the exercise involved three different legs , but the actual flight should have flown four . After take off , they flew on heading 091 ° ( almost due east ) for 56 nmi ( 64 mi ; 104 km ) until reaching Hen and Chickens Shoals where low level bombing practice was carried out . The flight was to continue on that heading for another 67 nmi ( 77 mi ; 124 km ) before turning onto a course of 346 ° for 73 nmi ( 84 mi ; 135 km ) , in the process over @-@ flying Grand Bahama island . The next scheduled turn was to a heading of 241 ° to fly 120 nmi ( 140 mi ; 220 km ) at the end of which the exercise was completed and the Avengers would turn left to then return to NAS Ft . Lauderdale . 
 Radio conversations between the pilots were overheard by base and other aircraft in the area . The practice bombing operation is known to have been carried out because at about 15 : 00 a pilot requested and was given permission to drop his last bomb . Forty minutes later , another flight instructor , Lieutenant Robert F. Cox in FT @-@ 74 , forming up with his group of students for the same mission , received an unidentified transmission . 
 An unidentified crew member asked Powers , one of the students , for his compass reading . Powers replied : " I don 't know where we are . We must have got lost after that last turn . " Cox then transmitted ; " This is FT @-@ 74 , plane or boat calling ' Powers ' please identify yourself so someone can help you . " The response after a few moments was a request from the others in the flight for suggestions . FT @-@ 74 tried again and a man identified as FT @-@ 28 ( Taylor ) came on . " FT @-@ 28 , this is FT @-@ 74 , what is your trouble ? " " Both of my compasses are out " , Taylor replied , " and I am trying to find Fort Lauderdale , Florida . I am over land but it 's broken . I am sure I 'm in the Keys but I don 't know how far down and I don 't know how to get to Fort Lauderdale . " 
 FT @-@ 74 informed the NAS that aircraft were lost , then advised Taylor to put the sun on his port wing and fly north up the coast to Fort Lauderdale . Base operations then asked if the flight leader 's aircraft was equipped with a standard YG ( IFF transmitter ) , which could be used to triangulate the flight 's position , but the message was not acknowledged by FT @-@ 28 . ( Later he would indicate that his transmitter was activated . ) Instead , at 16 : 45 , FT @-@ 28 radioed : " We are heading 030 degrees for 45 minutes , then we will fly north to make sure we are not over the Gulf of Mexico . " During this time no bearings could be made on the flight , and IFF could not be picked up . Taylor was told to broadcast on <unk> <unk> . This order was not acknowledged so he was asked to switch to 3 @,@ 000 <unk> , the search and rescue frequency . Taylor replied – " I cannot switch frequencies . I must keep my planes intact . " 
 At 16 : 56 , Taylor was again asked to turn on his transmitter for YG if he had one . He did not acknowledge but a few minutes later advised his flight " Change course to 090 degrees ( due east ) for 10 minutes . " About the same time someone in the flight said " Dammit , if we could just fly west we would get home ; head west , dammit . " This difference of opinion later led to questions about why the students did not simply head west on their own . It has been explained that this can be attributed to military discipline . 
 As the weather deteriorated , radio contact became intermittent , and it was believed that the five aircraft were actually by that time more than 200 nmi ( 230 mi ; 370 km ) out to sea east of the Florida peninsula . Taylor radioed " We 'll fly 270 degrees west until landfall or running out of gas " and requested a weather check at 17 : 24 . By 17 : 50 several land @-@ based radio stations had triangulated Flight 19 's position as being within a 100 nmi ( 120 mi ; 190 km ) radius of 29 ° N 79 ° W ; Flight 19 was north of the Bahamas and well off the coast of central Florida , but nobody transmitted this information on an open , repetitive basis . 
 At 18 : 04 , Taylor radioed to his flight " Holding 270 , we didn 't fly far enough east , we may as well just turn around and fly east again " . By that time , the weather had deteriorated even more and the sun had since set . Around 18 : 20 , Taylor 's last message was received . ( It has also been reported that Taylor 's last message was received at 19 : 04 . ) He was heard saying " All planes close up tight ... we 'll have to ditch unless landfall ... when the first plane drops below 10 gallons , we all go down together . " 
 = = PBM @-@ 5 ( Bureau Number 59225 ) = = 
 As it became obvious the flight was lost , air bases , aircraft , and merchant ships were alerted . A Consolidated PBY Catalina departed after 18 : 00 to search for Flight 19 and guide them back if they could be located . After dark , two Martin PBM Mariner seaplanes originally scheduled for their own training flights were diverted to perform square pattern searches in the area west of 29 ° N 79 ° W. PBM @-@ 5 BuNo 59225 took off at 19 : 27 from Naval Air Station Banana River ( now Patrick Air Force Base ) , called in a routine radio message at 19 : 30 and was never heard from again . 
 At 21 @.@ 15 , the tanker SS Gaines Mills reported it had observed flames from an apparent explosion leaping 100 ft ( 30 m ) high and burning for 10 minutes , at position 28 @.@ 59 ° N 80 @.@ 25 ° W ﻿ / 28 @.@ 59 ; <unk> . Captain <unk> Stanley reported unsuccessfully searching for survivors through a pool of oil and aviation gasoline . The escort carrier USS Solomons also reported losing radar contact with an aircraft at the same position and time . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 A 500 @-@ page Navy board of investigation report published a few months later made several observations : 
 Flight leader Lt. Charles C. Taylor had mistakenly believed that the small islands he passed over were the Florida Keys , so his flight was over the Gulf of Mexico and heading northeast would take them to Florida . It was determined that Taylor had passed over the Bahamas as scheduled , and he did in fact lead his flight to the northeast over the Atlantic . The report noted that some subordinate officers did likely know their approximate position as indicated by radio transmissions stating that flying west would result in reaching the mainland . 
 Taylor was not at fault because the compasses stopped working . 
 The loss of PBM @-@ 5 BuNo 59225 was attributed to an explosion . 
 This report was subsequently amended " cause unknown " by the Navy after Taylor 's mother contended that the Navy was unfairly blaming her son for the loss of five aircraft and 14 men , when the Navy had neither the bodies nor the airplanes as evidence . 
 Had Flight 19 actually been where Taylor believed it to be , landfall with the Florida coastline would have been reached in a matter of 10 to 20 minutes or less , depending on how far down they were . However , a later reconstruction of the incident showed that the islands visible to Taylor were probably the Bahamas , well northeast of the Keys , and that Flight 19 was exactly where it should have been . The board of investigation found that because of his belief that he was on a base course toward Florida , Taylor actually guided the flight farther northeast and out to sea . Further , it was general knowledge at NAS Fort Lauderdale that if a pilot ever became lost in the area to fly a heading of 270 ° west ( or in evening hours toward the sunset if the compass had failed ) . By the time the flight actually turned west , they were likely so far out to sea they had already passed their aircraft 's fuel endurance . This factor combined with bad weather , and the ditching characteristics of the Avenger , meant that there was little hope of rescue , even if they had managed to stay afloat . 
 It is possible that Taylor overshot Castaway Cay and instead reached another land mass in southern Abaco Island . He then proceeded northwest as planned . He fully expected to find the Grand Bahama Island lying in front of him as planned . Instead , he eventually saw a land mass to his right side , the northern part of Abaco Island . Believing that this landmass to his right was the Grand Bahama Island and his compass was malfunctioning , he set a course to what he thought was southwest to head straight back to Fort Lauderdale . However , in reality this changed his course farther northwest , toward open ocean . 
 To further add to his confusion , he encountered a series of islands north of Abaco Island , which looks very similar to the Key West Islands , but he was still over the ocean instead of over Fort Lauderdale . The control tower then suggested that Taylor 's team should fly west , which would have taken them to the landmass of Florida eventually . Taylor headed for what he thought was west , but in reality was northwest , almost parallel to Florida . 
 After trying that for a while and no land in sight , Taylor decided that it was impossible for them to fly so far west and not reach Florida . He believed that he might have been near the Key West Islands . What followed was a series of serious confusions between Taylor , his team and the control tower . Taylor was not sure whether he was near Bahama or Key West , and he was not sure which direction was which due to compass malfunction . The control tower informed Taylor that he could not be in Key West since the wind that day did not blow that way . Some of his teammates believed that their compass was working . Taylor then set a course northeast according to their compass , which should take them to Florida if they were in Key West . When that failed , Taylor set a course west according to their compass , which should take them to Florida if they were in Bahama . If Taylor stayed this course he would have reached land before running out of fuel . However , at some point Taylor decided that he had tried going west enough . He then once again set a course northeast , thinking they were near Key West after all . Finally , his flight ran out of fuel and may have crashed into the ocean somewhere north of Abaco Island and east of Florida . 
 = = Unrelated Avenger wreckage = = 
 In 1986 , the wreckage of an Avenger was found off the Florida coast during the search for the wreckage of the Space Shuttle Challenger . Aviation archaeologist Jon Myhre raised this wreck from the ocean floor in 1990 . He mistakenly believed it was one of the missing planes . 
 In 1991 , a treasure @-@ hunting expedition led by Graham Hawkes announced that the wreckage of five Avengers had been discovered off the coast of Florida , but that tail numbers revealed they were not Flight 19 . In 2004 a BBC documentary showed Hawkes returning with a new submersible 12 years later and identifying one of the planes by its bureau number ( a clearly readable <unk> ) as a flight lost at sea on 9 October 1943 , over two years before Flight 19 ( its crew all survived ) , but he was unable to definitively identify the other planes ; the documentary concluded that " Despite the odds , they are just a random collection of accidents that came to rest in the same place 12 miles from home . " But in March 2012 Hawkes was reported as stating that it had suited both him ( and indirectly his investors ) and the Pentagon to make the story go away because it was an expensive and time @-@ consuming distraction , and that , while admitting he had found no conclusive evidence , he now thought he had in fact found Flight 19 . 
 Records showed training accidents between 1942 and 1945 accounted for the loss of 95 aviation personnel from NAS Fort Lauderdale In 1992 , another expedition located scattered debris on the ocean floor , but nothing could be identified . In the last decade , searchers have been expanding their area to include farther east , into the Atlantic Ocean , but the remains of Flight 19 have still never been confirmed found . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s near Sebastian , Florida , wreckage was found of a warplane with two bodies inside . The Navy retrieved the aircraft and bodies , saying it was from Flight 19 . However , the Navy later recanted its statement and has not identified the bodies , even after Freedom of Information Act requests in 2013 . 
 = = Crews of Flight 19 and PBM @-@ 5 BuNo 59225 = = 
 = = = Charles Carroll Taylor = = = 
 The flight leader , Lieutenant Charles Carroll Taylor ( born October 25 , 1917 ) , graduated from Naval Air Station Corpus Christi in February 1942 and became a flight instructor in October of that year . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The pulp magazine Argosy published an account of the incident in 1974 . 
 The 1977 science fiction film Close Encounters of the Third Kind featured a depiction of the Flight 19 planes being discovered in the desert and later their pilots are returned to Earth by peaceful alien captors . In the film , the returned fliers are depicted at the age they would have been at the time of their disappearance , but have fictional names . 
 In 1977 , the English experimental rock band 801 wrote and recorded the song " Flight 19 " , with the chorus : " Saint Serene , get me on Flight 19 " . 
 In The Invincible Iron Man # 504 ( July 2011 ) , Bethany <unk> finds a plane on the ocean floor while diving , a find she referred to as " Flight 19 " . 
 In 1980 , Scottish singer / songwriter B. A. Robertson released a single , " Flight 19 " . 
 In a chapter of a 1980 work of science fiction by Peter J. Hammond , Corporal Allan <unk> , who had successfully asked to be excused from Flight 19 , has been said to have done so because he had had a strong premonition of danger . 
 The supporters group of the Fort Lauderdale Strikers is named after Flight 19 . 
 = USS Osage ( 1863 ) = 
 USS Osage was a single @-@ turreted Neosho @-@ class monitor built for the Union Navy during the American Civil War . After completion in mid @-@ 1863 , the ship patrolled the Mississippi River against Confederate raids and ambushes as part of Rear Admiral David Porter 's Mississippi Squadron . Osage participated in the Red River Campaign in March – May 1864 , during which she supported the capture of Fort DeRussy in March and participated in the Battle of Blair 's Landing in April . The ship was grounded on a sandbar for six months after the end of the campaign and badly damaged . Osage , after being refloated and repaired , was transferred to the West Gulf Blockading Squadron in early 1865 for the campaign against Mobile , Alabama . During the Battle of Spanish Fort in March 1865 she struck a mine and rapidly sank . The ship was later salvaged and sold in 1867 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The steam @-@ powered gun turret of the Osage was at the bow and she had a deckhouse between the funnel and the sternwheel , although another was later added between the turret and the funnel . Her pilothouse was positioned above the rear deckhouse , next to the forward face of the sternwheel . The ship was 180 feet ( 54 @.@ 9 m ) long overall and had a beam of 45 feet ( 13 @.@ 7 m ) . When launched she proved to have a draft 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 3 m ) deeper than planned and she measured 523 tons burthen . Osage had four steam boilers powering a two @-@ cylinder , western steamboat @-@ type engine that drove the sternwheel . The ship had a maximum speed of 12 miles per hour ( 19 km / h ) in service and she carried 50 long tons ( 51 t ) of coal . Her crew numbered 100 officers and enlisted men . 
 Osage 's main armament consisted of two smoothbore 11 @-@ inch ( 279 mm ) Dahlgren guns mounted in a single turret that had an arc of fire of 300 ° . Firing the guns tended to jam the turret until modifications were made to the guns ' recoil system . Each gun weighed approximately 16 @,@ 000 pounds ( 7 @,@ 300 kg ) . They could fire a 136 @-@ pound ( 61 @.@ 7 kg ) shell up to a range of 3 @,@ 650 yards ( 3 @,@ 340 m ) at an elevation of 15 ° . The turret was protected by 6 inches ( 152 mm ) of wrought iron while the hull had 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) of armor . The armor plates of the deck and paddle housing were 1 @.@ 25 inches ( 32 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service = = 
 Osage , named after the American Indian tribe , was laid down in mid @-@ 1862 and launched 13 January 1863 by James Eads at his Union Iron Works , Carondelet , Missouri . She was commissioned at Cairo , Illinois on 10 July 1863 , with Acting Volunteer Lieutenant Joseph <unk> <unk> in command . 
 After completion , the ship was assigned to Rear Admiral David Porter 's Mississippi Squadron and patrolled the Mississippi River against Confederate raids and ambushes . During the Red River Campaign Osage was commanded by Lieutenant Commander Thomas O. Selfridge , Jr . She supported the Union Army when it captured Fort DeRussy and captured Alexandria , Louisiana by herself on 15 March 1864 without firing a shot . She successfully defended the navy transports attacked during the Battle of Blair 's Landing on 12 April , driving off the Confederate forces with heavy losses after having run aground and freed herself . After the end of the campaign in May she was assigned to patrol the Mississippi River . During that month she grounded on a sandbar near Helena , Arkansas and could not be refloated due to the rapidly falling water level even when some of her armor was removed . As the water receded Osage began to hog at the ends because only her middle was supported by the sand . This caused her longitudinal bulkheads to split and broke many rivets in her hull and on her deck . She was repaired in place before being refloated at the end of November . 
 After being towed to Mound City for more permanent repairs , Osage was transferred to the West Gulf Blockading Squadron on 1 February 1865 for the attack on Mobile , Alabama . She participated in the Battle of Spanish Fort , defending Mobile from the east , but struck a mine in a previously swept channel and sank rapidly on 29 March . Two crewmen were killed and some others wounded . The ship was later refloated and sold at auction at New Orleans on 22 November 1867 , along with three ex @-@ Confederate ships , for $ 20 @,@ 467 . 
 = Orphanotrophos = 
 Orphanotrophos ( Greek : <unk> ) was a Byzantine title for the curator of an orphanage ( <unk> , orphanotropheion ) . The director of the most important orphanage , the imperial orphanage in Constantinople , established in the 4th century and lasting until the 13th century , eventually rose to become an office of particular significance and ranked among the senior ministers of the Byzantine state . 
 = = History = = 
 In the spirit of Christian philanthropy , the Byzantine world showed particular care towards the weaker members of society , including widows , orphans , the sick or the elderly . Orphans were either adopted by foster parents , or sheltered in monasteries or in orphanages , the latter often run by monasteries . 
 In Constantinople , the Byzantine capital , there was a particularly large orphanage in the northeastern corner of the city , at the site of the ancient acropolis of Byzantium , which eventually came under imperial patronage . According to the Patria of Constantinople , it traced its antecedents to a series of charitable establishments founded in the reign of Constans II ( ruled 337 – 361 ) by the patrikios and protovestiarios Zotikos , for which the latter was canonized by the Church . According to a novel by Emperor Leo I the Thracian in 469 , Zotikos was the first to bear the title of orphanotrophos . In the 5th century , the priest Nikon and Acacius , later Patriarch of Constantinople ( 472 – 488 ) , are known to have been successively orphanotrophoi in the capital , while another future patriarch , Euphemius ( 489 – 495 ) held the post in the provincial town of Neapolis . 
 The legislation of Justinian I ( r . 527 – 565 ) often mentions the orphanages and the office of orphanotrophos , but it was not until the reign of his successor Justin II ( r . 565 – 578 ) that the institution in the capital acquired its definite characteristics : Justin and his wife Sophia , with the aid of a protovestiarios also named Zotikos , built an orphanage near the Church of St. Paul ( or SS . Peter and Paul according to Theophanes the Confessor ) — probably the church of the same name near the Gate of Eugenios on the sea @-@ wall of the Golden Horn mentioned by Nikephoros Gregoras — and restored the foundation of the first Zotikos , which was possibly converted into a leprosarium . Justin bequeathed an annual stipend of 443 nomismata to the orphanage and made its possessions inalienable . It was probably then that the capital 's orphanotrophos began to be appointed by the emperors . As a result , while in the provinces , the post of orphanotrophos continued to be occupied by clergymen , in the capital , it soon became a formal office and was held by members of the secular administrative hierarchy . 
 In the 9th – 11th centuries , the orphanotrophos ' role seems to have been limited to the imperial orphanage in the capital , while the provincial charitable foundations were under the supervision of two other officials , the chartoularios tou <unk> and the megas <unk> . The orphanotrophos was responsible for his wards and steward of their fortune until the age of 20 , unless they married earlier ; he was forbidden from selling his wards ' possessions unless by special authorisation ; and in case of maladministration was answerable to the Eparch of the City . According to the 10th @-@ century De <unk> , the orphanotrophos had the following subordinate officials : 
 the secretaries of the house ( <unk> τοῦ <unk> , <unk> tou <unk> ) , probably administering the new orphanage founded by Justin II and Sophia 
 the secretaries of the saint ( <unk> τοῦ <unk> , <unk> tou <unk> ) , probably in charge of the original orphanage founded by Zotikos 
 a treasurer ( <unk> , <unk> ) , apparently in common for both establishments 
 a number of curators ( <unk> , <unk> ) of unspecified function , perhaps administering affiliated institutions 
 In the Taktikon Uspensky of ca . 843 , the orphanotrophos holds the exalted rank of patrikios and comes 37th in precedence , immediately after the chartoularios tou <unk> , while in the Kletorologion of 899 he comes in 56th place among the dignities conferred by decree , after the epi ton <unk> . The De <unk> describes the orphanotrophos ' role in certain imperial ceremonies , often along with his wards , who were led to the Emperor 's presence , sung chants and received gifts from him . The court ranks conferred to the orphanotrophoi in the 9th – 11th centuries were those of anthypatos , patrikios and protospatharios ; this was restricted to the secular holders of the office , however , since as a rule , ecclesiastics did not hold a court rank . Several holders of the office , however , combined it with other secular administrative offices . Most famously , the eunuch John the Orphanotrophos rose to become the virtual regent of the Empire in the late reign of Romanos III Argyros ( r . 1028 – 34 ) , before raising his brother Michael IV ( r . 1034 – 41 ) and nephew Michael V ( r . 1041 – 42 ) to the throne . John was named orphanotrophos already under Romanos III , and after becoming a monk soon after , he divested himself of his other secular titles and maintained only the former , by which he is known . 
 The imperial orphanage was restored after being damaged by earthquakes in the late reign of Romanos III Argyros , but had once more fallen into disrepair by the time of Alexios I Komnenos ( r . 1081 – 1118 ) , whose manifold charitable activities included its restoration and the foundation of a veritable township of charitable institutions around it for the blind , lamed and crippled , or elderly . Alexios endowed the institution with considerable revenue , and founded a school where the orphans could receive a free tuition . Alexios ' son and successor , John II Komnenos ( r . 1118 – 43 ) , enlarged it further . During the period of the Latin Empire , its fate is unknown , but it is likely that like most Byzantine public buildings it fell into disrepair . As part of his wide @-@ scale reconstruction of the city following its reconquest in 1261 , Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos ( r . 1259 – 82 ) erected a school " on the grounds of the old orphanotropheion " , likely indicating that it had ceased to function for some time by then . 
 Despite the dissolution of the imperial orphanage , the office of the orphanotrophos survived into the Palaiologan period in its fiscal capacity . As early as the Kletorologion , the orphanotrophos was classed among the fiscal secretaries , the <unk> ( occupying the 11th place among them ) , and he apparently succeeded an earlier fiscal official , the " <unk> of the Mangana " , in his functions . In the early 14th century , Manuel Philes still calls him " the treasurer of imperial means " , but the mid @-@ 14th century Book of Offices of pseudo @-@ Kodinos records that the office , although still occupying the 56th place in the palace hierarchy , no longer had a particular function . According to Kodinos , his court dress consisted of a long silk kabbadion , and a domed skaranikon hat covered in velvet and topped by a small red tassel . 
 = = List of known orphanotrophoi = = 
 A number of seals of otherwise unidentified holders of the office have also survived . One records a <unk> , " orphanotrophos and <unk> " , while the others cannot be certainly dated . Two seals also survive of subordinate officials , one of the deacon Michael <unk> , clerk and functionary of the orphanage , and another , dated to the 13th century , of Niketas , Bishop of <unk> and chartoularios of the mega orphanotropheion ( " great orphanage " ) . 
 = The Temple at Thatch = 
 The Temple at Thatch was an unpublished novel by the British author Evelyn Waugh , his first adult attempt at full @-@ length fiction . He began writing it in 1924 at the end of his final year as an undergraduate at Hertford College , Oxford , and continued to work on it intermittently in the following 12 months . After his friend Harold Acton commented unfavourably on the draft in June 1925 , Waugh burned the manuscript . In a fit of despondency from this and other personal disappointments he began a suicide attempt before experiencing what he termed " a sharp return to good sense " . 
 In the absence of a manuscript or printed text , most information on the novel 's subject comes from Waugh 's diary entries and later reminiscences . The story was evidently semi @-@ autobiographical , based on Waugh 's Oxford experiences . The protagonist was an undergraduate and the work 's main themes were madness and black magic . Some of the novel 's ideas may have been incorporated into Waugh 's first commercially published work of fiction , his 1925 short story " The Balance " , which includes several references to a country house called " Thatch " and is partly structured as a film script , as apparently was the lost novel . " The Balance " contains characters , perhaps carried over from The Temple at Thatch , who appear by name in Waugh 's later fiction . 
 Acton 's severe judgement did not deter Waugh from his intention to be a writer , but it affected his belief that he could succeed as a novelist . For a time he turned his attention away from fiction , but with the gradual recovery of his self @-@ confidence he was able to complete his first novel , Decline and Fall , which was published with great success in 1928 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Evelyn Waugh 's literary pedigree was strong . His father , the publisher Arthur Waugh ( 1866 – 1943 ) , was a respected literary critic for the Daily Telegraph ; his elder brother Alec ( 1899 – 1981 ) was a successful novelist whose first book The Loom of Youth became a controversial best seller in 1917 . Evelyn wrote his first extant story " The Curse of the Horse Race " in 1910 , when he was seven years old . In the years before the First World War he helped to edit and produce a handwritten publication called The Pistol Troop Magazine , and also wrote poems . Later , as a schoolboy at Lancing College , he wrote a parody of Katherine Mansfield 's style , entitled " The Twilight of Language " . He also tried to write a novel , but soon gave this up to concentrate on a school @-@ themed play , Conversion , which was performed before the school in the summer of 1921 . 
 At Hertford College , Oxford , where Waugh arrived in January 1922 to study history , he became part of a circle that included a number of future writers and critics of eminence — Harold Acton , Christopher Hollis , Anthony Powell and Cyril Connolly , among others . He also formed close personal friendships with aristocratic and near @-@ aristocratic contemporaries such as Hugh Lygon and Alastair Graham , either of whom may have been models for Sebastian Flyte in Waugh 's later novel Brideshead Revisited . From such companions Waugh acquired the fascination with the aristocracy and country houses that would embellish much of his fiction . At Oxford Waugh did little work and dedicated himself largely to social pleasures : " The record of my life there is essentially a catalogue of friendships " . However , he developed a reputation as a skilful graphic artist , and contributed articles , reviews and short stories to both the main university magazines , The Isis and The Cherwell . One of the Isis stories , " <unk> Exercise : A Nature Story " , describes the performance of a magical ceremony by which an undergraduate is transformed by his fellows into a werewolf . Waugh 's interest in the occult is further demonstrated by his involvement , in the summer of 1924 , in an amateur film entitled 666 , in which he certainly appeared and which he may have written . He appears to have been in a state of some mental confusion or turmoil ; the writer Simon Whitechapel cites a letter from Waugh to a friend , written at this time : " I have been living very intensely the last three weeks . For the past fortnight I have been nearly insane . I am a little <unk> now . " However , most scholars take this as a referring to Waugh 's homosexuality rather than black magic . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The earliest record of Waugh 's intention to attempt a novel appears in a letter dated May 1924 , to his schoolfriend Dudley Carew . Waugh writes : " Quite soon I am going to write a little book . It is going to be called The Temple at Thatch and will be all about magic and madness " . This writing project may have been a reaction to Waugh 's immediate circumstances ; he was in the last weeks of his Oxford career , contemplating failure in his examinations and irritated by the fact that most of his contemporaries appeared to be on the verge of brilliant careers . On 22 June 1924 he spent time working out the plot , a continuation of the supernatural theme explored in " <unk> Exercise " . The basic premise was an undergraduate inheriting a country house of which nothing was left except an 18th @-@ century folly , where he set up house and practised black magic . 
 Waugh 's diary indicates that he began writing the story on 21 July , when he completed a dozen pages of the first chapter ; he thought it was " quite good " . He appears to have done no more work on the project until early September , when he confides to his diary that it is " in serious danger of becoming dull " , and expresses doubts that it will ever be finished . However , Waugh apparently found fresh inspiration after reading A Cypress Grove , an essay by the 17th @-@ century Scots poet William Drummond of Hawthornden , and considered retitling his story The Fabulous Paladins after a passage in the essay . 
 The autumn of 1924 was spent largely in the pursuit of pleasure until , shortly before Christmas , the pressing need to earn money led Waugh to apply for teaching jobs in private schools . His diary entry for 17 December 1924 records : " Still writing out letters in praise of myself to obscure private schools , and still attempting to rewrite The Temple " . He eventually secured a job as assistant master at Arnold House Preparatory School in Denbighshire , North Wales , at a salary of £ 160 a year , and left London on 22 January to take up his post , carrying with him the manuscript of The Temple . 
 During his first term at Arnold House Waugh found few opportunities to continue his writing . He was tired by the end of the day , his interest in The Temple flagged , and from time to time his attention wandered to other subjects ; he contemplated a book on Silenus , but he admitted that it " may or may not ... be written " . After the Easter holidays he felt more positively about The Temple : " I am making the first chapter a cinema film , and have been writing furiously ever since . I honestly think that it is going to be rather good " . He sometimes worked on the book during classes , telling any boys who dared to ask what he was doing that he was writing a history of the Eskimos . By June he felt confident enough to send the first few chapters to his Oxford friend Harold Acton , " asking for criticism and hoping for praise " . Earlier that year Waugh had commented warmly on Acton 's book of poems , An Indian Ass , " which brought back memories of a life [ at Oxford ] infinitely remote " . 
 = = Rejection = = 
 While waiting for Acton 's reply , Waugh heard that his brother Alec had arranged a job for him based in Pisa , Italy , as secretary to the Scottish writer Charles Kenneth Scott Moncrieff who was working on the first English translation of Marcel Proust 's novel sequence À la recherche du temps perdu . Waugh promptly resigned his position at Arnold House , in anticipation of " a year abroad drinking Chianti under olive trees . " Then came Acton 's " polite but chilling " response to The Temple at Thatch . This letter has not survived ; its wording was recalled by Waugh 40 years later , in his biography A Little Learning . Acton wrote that the story was " too English for my exotic taste ... too much <unk> @-@ nodding over port . " He recommended , facetiously , that the book be printed " in a few elegant copies for the friends who love you " , and gave a list of the least elegant of their mutual acquaintances . Many years later Acton wrote of the story : " It was an airy <unk> trifle , totally unworthy of Evelyn , and I brutally told him so . It was a misfired jeu d 'esprit . 
 Waugh did not query his friend 's judgement , but took his manuscript to the school 's furnaces and unceremoniously burnt it . Immediately afterwards he received the news that the job with Scott Moncrieff had fallen through . The double blow affected Waugh severely ; he wrote in his diary in July : " The phrase ' the end of the tether ' <unk> me with unshakeable persistence " . In his biography Waugh writes : " I went down alone to the beach with my thoughts full of death . I took off my clothes and began swimming out to sea . Did I really intend to drown myself ? That was certainly in my mind " . He left a note with his clothes , a quotation from Euripides about the sea washing away all human ills . A short way out , after being stung by jellyfish , he abandoned the attempt , turned round and swam back to the shore . He did not , however , withdraw his resignation from the school , returning instead to London . 
 = = " The Balance " = = 
 Although he had destroyed his novel , Waugh still intended to be a writer , and in the late summer of 1925 completed a short story , called " The Balance " . This became his first commercially published work when Chapman and Hall , where his father was managing director , included it in a short stories collection the following year . " The Balance " has no magical themes , but in other respects has clear references to The Temple at Thatch . Both works have Oxford settings , and the short story is written in the film script format that Waugh devised for the first chapter of the novel . There are several references in " The Balance " to a country house called " Thatch " , though this is a fully functioning establishment in the manner of Brideshead rather than a ruined folly . Imogen Quest , the protagonist Adam 's girlfriend , lives at Thatch ; a watercolour of the house is displayed in Adam 's undergraduate 's rooms ; the end of the story describes a house party at Thatch , during which the guests gossip maliciously about Adam . The names " Imogen Quest " and " Adam " were used by Waugh several years later in his novel Vile Bodies , leading to speculation as to whether these names , like that of the house , originated in The Temple at Thatch . 
 = = Afterwards = = 
 Acton 's dismissal of The Temple at Thatch had made Waugh nervous of his potential as an imaginative writer — he deferred to Acton 's judgement on all literary issues — and he did not for the time being attempt to write another novel . After " The Balance " he wrote a humorous article , " Noah , or the Future of Intoxication " , which was first accepted and then rejected by the publishers Kegan Paul . However , a short story called " A House of Gentle Folks " , was published in The New Decameron : The Fifth Day , edited by Hugh Chesterman ( Oxford : Basil . Blackwell , 1927 ) . Thereafter , for a time , Waugh devoted himself to non @-@ fictional work . An essay on the Pre @-@ Raphaelites was published in a limited edition by Waugh 's friend Alastair Graham ; this led to the production of a full @-@ length book , Rossetti , His Life and Works , published in 1928 . 
 The desire to write fiction persisted , however , and in the autumn of 1927 Waugh began a comic novel which he entitled Picaresque : or the Making of an Englishman . The first pages were read to another friend , the future novelist Anthony Powell , who found them very amusing , and was surprised when Waugh told him , just before Christmas , that the manuscript had been burned . This was not in fact the case ; Waugh had merely put the work aside . Early in 1928 he wrote to Harold Acton , asking whether or not he should finish it . On this occasion Acton was full of praise ; Waugh resumed work , and completed the novel by April 1928 . It was published later that year under a new title , Decline and Fall . According to his recent biographer Paula Byrne , Waugh had " found his vocation as a writer , and over the next few years his career would rise spectacularly . " The Temple of Thatch was quickly forgotten , and as Whitechapel points out , has failed to arouse much subsequent interest from scholars . Whitechapel , however , considers it a loss to literature , and adds : " Whether or not it matched the quality of his second novel , Decline and Fall , if it were still extant it could not fail to be of interest to both scholars and general readers . " 
 = Cyril Stanley Smith = 
 Cyril Stanley Smith ( 4 October 1903 – 25 August 1992 ) was a British metallurgist and historian of science . He is most famous for his work on the Manhattan Project where he was responsible for the production of fissionable metals . A graduate of the University of Birmingham and Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , Smith worked for many years as a research metallurgist at the American Brass Company . During World War II he worked in the Chemical @-@ Metallurgical Division of the Los Alamos Laboratory , where he purified , cast and shaped uranium @-@ 235 and plutonium , a metal hitherto available only in microgram amounts , and whose properties were largely unknown . After the war he served on the Atomic Energy Commission 's influential General Advisory Committee , and the President 's Science Advisory Committee . 
 Smith founded the Institute for the Study of Metals at the University of Chicago , the first interdisciplinary academic organization devoted to the study of metals in the United States . He studied the details of faults and grain boundaries in metals , and developed theoretical models of them . In 1961 , he moved to MIT as an Institute Professor with appointments in both the Departments of Humanities and Metallurgy . He applied the techniques of metallurgy to the study of the production methods used to create artefacts such as samurai swords . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Smith was born in Birmingham , England , on 4 October 1903 , the third of four children of Joseph Seymour Smith , a commercial traveller for Camp Coffee , and his wife , Frances , née Norton . He was educated at Bishop Vesey 's Grammar School in Sutton Coldfield . He read metallurgy at the University of Birmingham , having not met the requirements in mathematics to study his first choice , which was physics , and was awarded a second @-@ class BSc in 1924 . 
 That year Smith entered the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , where he earned a <unk> in 1926 . He was a research associate at MIT from 1926 to 1927 , then left to take up a position as a research metallurgist at the American Brass Company . His research there was mainly involved with the electrical , thermal , and mechanical and magnetic properties of copper alloys . He published numerous papers , and was awarded 20 patents . 
 He married Alice Marchant Kimball , a student of English social history at Yale University , from which she earned a PhD in 1936 , on 16 March 1931 . Of the marriage , Alice 's sister remarked that : " If he didn 't go to Oxford or Cambridge , isn 't Church of England , and doesn 't like sports , you might as well marry an American " . He became a naturalized American citizen in 1939 . His wife sparked an interest in history , a subject that he had disliked at school . He acquired old texts , and in 1945 he produced a translation of a classic metallurgical text , <unk> Biringuccio 's <unk> ( 1540 ) . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In 1942 , during World War II , he was called into service at the War Metallurgy Committee in Washington , D.C. In April 1943 he went to work on the Manhattan Project , joining the Chemical @-@ Metallurgical Division at the Los Alamos Laboratory as the head of its Metallurgy Group . When the laboratory was reorganized in April 1944 , he became the Associate Division Leader in charge of metallurgy . His first task was recruiting metallurgists , who were in great demand by the war effort . He also had to arrange for the transport of their metallurgical equipment to Los Alamos under wartime conditions . 
 Smith 's metallurgists found ways of fabricating boron , producing beryllium bricks , and heat @-@ treating steel . They also had to work with uranium . Frank Spedding had developed a large @-@ scale process for producing pure uranium metal at the Ames Laboratory which was fine for producing tons of feed for the nuclear reactors , but enriched uranium could not be handled in this way , as it would form a critical mass . Smith was initially asked to produce cubes of uranium hydride , which he did , but a uranium hydride bomb was found to be inefficient , and the idea was set aside for the duration , although further work was carried out after the war . By July 1944 , they were producing pure uranium metal in <unk> amounts with a newly devised process . 
 But by far the biggest challenge for Smith and his group was plutonium , a metal hitherto available only in microgram amounts , and whose properties were largely unknown . It was initially assumed that plutonium would have properties similar to that of uranium , but this assumption turned out to be invalid . Plutonium proved to be " the most complicated metal known to man " . There were found to be six allotropes of plutonium , more than any other metal , and its melting point turned out to be hundred of degrees lower than uranium . The metallurgists found that at around 125 ° C , plutonium expanded in volume by 20 percent , which is unusual . 
 Plutonium was delivered to Los Alamos in the form of what was found to be a mixture of plutonium trifluoride ( <unk> ) and plutonium tetrafluoride ( <unk> ) . Work with plutonium was carried out in gloveboxes for safety reasons . The metallurgists figured out how to purify the plutonium , and found that heating it to 250 ° allowed them to work it in the malleable γ phase . It was also found that alloying it with 3 percent gallium would stabilize it in the δ phase . When plutonium at last began to arrive in quantity from the Hanford Site in February 1945 , they were ready for production . In a race against the clock , the metallurgists produced plutonium spheres for the Trinity nuclear test by July 23 , 1945 . 
 Smith was awarded the Medal for Merit by President Harry S. Truman for these activities in 1946 . 
 = = University of Chicago = = 
 After the war Smith founded the Institute for the Study of Metals at the University of Chicago , the first interdisciplinary academic organization devoted to the study of metals in the United States . He considered it " a natural outgrowth of the close association of metallurgists with chemists and physicists on the Manhattan Project . " He developed methods for deriving the three @-@ dimensional shapes of the crystalline structures of metals from the two @-@ dimensional microscope images of the grains of the metals . He also studied the propagation of induced phase changes in metals . He was fascinated by the details of faults and grain boundaries in metals , and developed theoretical models of them . Perhaps his most influential paper was on " Grain Shapes and Other Metallurgical Applications of Topology " ( 1952 ) , an explanation of metallic microstructure . He was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1955 to study the History of Science and Technology . 
 From 12 December 1946 to 10 January 1952 , Smith served on the influential General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) . Chaired by Robert Oppenheimer , the wartime director of the Los Alamos Laboratory , the General Advisory Committee provided policy as well as technical advice to the commissioners . One of Smith 's first papers for the commission recommended that it concentrate on the development of fast breeder reactors and high flux reactors . A 1948 visit to England to discuss plutonium metallurgy with British scientists nearly escalated into an international incident , as Senator Bourke Hickenlooper and Secretary of Defense James Forrestal feared that he would give atomic secrets away to the British . Smith did no such thing ; but AEC Commissioner Sumner Pike faced severe criticism for authorizing Smith 's visit . In common with other members of the General Advisory Committee , Smith opposed the development of the hydrogen bomb on technical and moral grounds . He also served on the National Academy of Sciences ' Committee on Science , Engineering , and Public Policy and the President 's Science Advisory Committee . 
 = = Massachusetts Institute of Technology = = 
 In 1961 , Smith moved to MIT as an Institute Professor with appointments in both the Departments of Humanities and Metallurgy . His focus was to transplant the techniques of metallurgy into the study of the production methods used to create artefacts discovered by archaeologists such as samurai swords . In his role of teaching the history of science , he argued that important advances were often the result of curiosity rather than the pursuit of defined goals . He was interested in the scientific aspects of fine arts , and published several works linking the arts with the sciences . He lectured about this at the Smithsonian Institution 's Freer Gallery of Art and the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery in Washington , DC . 
 Smith received numerous awards , including the Franklin Institute 's Francis J. <unk> Medal in 1952 , and the History of Science Society 's Pfizer Medal and American Society for Metals ' Gold Medal in 1961 . He was awarded the Society for the History of Technology 's Leonard da Vinci Medal in 1966 , and the Institute of Metals ' Platinum Medal in 1970 . In 1991 he received the American Institute of Physics ' Andrew <unk> Award for " pioneering the use of solid state physics in the study of ancient art and artefacts to reconstruct their cultural , historical and technological significance . " He was also a member of the editorial board of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . 
 On retirement from MIT in 1969 , Smith became a professor emeritus of the History of Science and Technology , professor emeritus of Metallurgy and Humanities and Institute Professor Emeritus , an unusual title " reserved for only a few whose work transcends the boundaries of traditional departments and disciplines " . He died of colonic cancer in his Cambridge , Massachusetts home on 25 August 1992 . He was survived by his wife of sixty years , Alice Kimball Smith , his two children , Anne Smith Denman , chair of the Department of Anthropology at Central Washington University , and Stuart Marchant Smith , a marine geologist at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography , and a sister , Mary Smith . His papers are in the Niels Bohr Library in College Park , Maryland . His collection of antiquarian metallurgical texts was left to the <unk> Library at the <unk> Institute for the History of Science and Technology . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Smith , Cyril S. ( 1952 ) . " Grain Shapes and Other Metallurgical Applications of Topology " . Metal interfaces : a seminar on metal interfaces held during the Thirty @-@ third National Metal Congress and Exposition , Detroit , October 13 to 19 , 1951 ; sponsored by the American Society for Metals . Cleveland : American Society for <unk> pp. 65 – 108 . 
 Smith , Cyril S. ( 1968 ) . Sources for the History of the Science of Steel 1532 – 1786 . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Society for the History of Technology . 
 Smith , Cyril S. ( 1980 ) . From Art to Science . Cambridge , Massachusetts : MIT Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Smith , Cyril S. ( 1981 ) . A Search for Structure : Selected Essays on Science , Art and History . Cambridge , Massachusetts : MIT Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Smith , Cyril S. ( 1988 ) . History of <unk> : The Development of Ideas on the Structure of Metals Before 1890 . Cambridge , Massachusetts : MIT Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> Biringuccio . The <unk> of <unk> Biringuccio ( in Italian ) . Dover . ISBN 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 20th Century translation by Cyril Stanley Smith and Martha Teach <unk> 
 = Mana ( series ) = 
 The Mana series , known in Japan as Seiken Densetsu ( 聖剣伝説 , lit . " Legend of the Sacred Sword " ) , is a medieval @-@ fantasy action role @-@ playing game series from Square ( now Square Enix ) , created by Koichi Ishii . The series began as a handheld side story to Square 's flagship franchise Final Fantasy , though the Final Fantasy @-@ inspired elements were subsequently dropped starting with the second installment , Secret of Mana , as the games became their own series . It has since grown to include games of various genres within the fictional world of Mana , with recurring stories involving a world tree , its associated holy sword , and the fight against forces that would steal their power . Several character designs , creatures , and musical themes reappear frequently . 
 Four games were released in the series between 1991 and 1999 : the original Seiken Densetsu ( 1991 ) — Final Fantasy Adventure in North America and Mystic Quest in Europe — for the Game Boy , Secret of Mana ( 1993 ) for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System , Seiken Densetsu 3 ( 1995 ) for the Super Famicom , and Legend of Mana for the PlayStation , though Seiken Densetsu 3 was not released outside Japan . A remake of the original game , Sword of Mana ( 2003 ) , was published for the Game Boy Advance . All of the original games were action role @-@ playing games , though they included a wide variety of gameplay mechanics , and the stories of the games were connected only thematically . In 2006 and 2007 , four more games were released as part of the World of Mana subseries , an attempt by Square Enix to release games in a series over a variety of genres and consoles . These were Children of Mana ( 2006 ) , an action @-@ oriented dungeon crawler game for the Nintendo DS ; Dawn of Mana ( 2006 ) , a 3D action @-@ adventure game for the PlayStation 2 ; Friends of Mana ( 2006 ) , a Japan @-@ only multiplayer role @-@ playing game for mobile phones ; and Heroes of Mana ( 2007 ) , a real @-@ time strategy game for the DS . Children was developed by Nex Entertainment and Heroes by Brownie Brown , founded by several developers of Legends , though Ishii oversaw development of all four games . Three more games have been released since the World of Mana subseries ended : Circle of Mana ( 2013 ) , a Japan @-@ only card battle game for the GREE mobile platform , Rise of Mana ( 2014 ) , a Japan @-@ only free @-@ to @-@ play action role @-@ playing game for iOS , Android , and PlayStation Vita , and Adventures of Mana ( 2016 ) , a 3D remake of Final Fantasy Adventure for the PlayStation Vita , iOS , and Android . In addition to the games , four manga series and one novelization have been released in the Mana franchise . 
 The Mana series reception has been very uneven , with early games rated higher by critics than more recent titles . Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 have been regarded as some of the best 2D action role @-@ playing games ever made , and their music has inspired several orchestral concerts , while the games from the World of Mana series have been rated considerably lower . As of March 2011 , Mana series titles have sold over 6 million units . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 Square trademarked Seiken Densetsu in 1989 , intending to use it for a game project subtitled The Emergence of Excalibur , and led by Kazuhiko Aoki for the Famicom Disk System . According to early advertisements , the game would consist of an unprecedented five floppy disks , making it one of the largest titles developed for the Famicom up until that point . Although Square solicited pre @-@ orders for the game , Kaoru Moriyama , a former Square employee , affirms that management canceled the ambitious project before it advanced beyond the early planning stages . In October 1987 , customers who had placed orders were sent a letter informing them of the cancellation and had their purchases refunded . The letter also suggested to consider placing an order on another upcoming Square role @-@ playing game in a similar vein : Final Fantasy . 
 In 1991 , Square reused the Seiken Densetsu trademark for an unrelated Game Boy action role @-@ playing game directed by Koichi Ishii . Originally developed under the title Gemma Knights , the game was renamed Seiken Densetsu : Final Fantasy Gaiden ( published in North America as Final Fantasy Adventure and in Europe as Mystic Quest ) . Beginning with the sequel , Secret of Mana , Seiken Densetsu was subsequently " spun off " into its own series of action role @-@ playing games distinct from Final Fantasy , named the Mana series outside Japan . Four titles in the series were released between 1993 and 2003 . Secret of Mana was originally intended to be a launch title for the Super NES CD @-@ ROM Adapter , but when the add @-@ on was cancelled it was cut down into a standard Super NES cartridge , with many of the cut ideas appearing in other Square titles . It was followed in 1995 by the Japan @-@ only Seiken Densetsu 3 ; the game was originally planned to be released in English as Secret of Mana 2 , but technical issues and localization costs prohibited the release . The final new game in the series ' initial run was the 1999 Legend of Mana , developed for the PlayStation . Legend was a 2D game like its predecessors , despite the PlayStation 's 3D focus , because the console could not handle the full 3D world Ishii envisioned where one could interact with natural shaped objects . 2003 saw the release of Sword of Mana , a remake of the original Seiken Densetsu for the Game Boy Advance . The remake was outsourced to Brownie Brown , which was composed of many of the Square employees who had worked on Legend . 
 In 2003 , Square , now Square Enix , began a drive to begin developing " polymorphic content " , a marketing and sales strategy to " [ provide ] well @-@ known properties on several platforms , allowing exposure of the products to as wide an audience as possible " . The first of these was the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , and Square Enix intended to have campaigns for other series whereby multiple games in different genres would be developed simultaneously . Although no such project for the Mana series had been announced by this point , it was announced in late 2004 that an unnamed Mana game was in development for the upcoming Nintendo DS platform . In early 2005 , Square Enix announced a " World of Mana " project , the application of this " polymorphic content " idea to the Mana franchise , which would include several games across different genres and platforms . These games , as with the rest of the series , would not be direct sequels or prequels to one another , even if appearing so at first glance , but would instead share thematic connections . The first release in this project and the sixth release in the Mana series was announced in September 2005 as Children of Mana for the DS . Four games were released in 2006 and 2007 in the World of Mana subseries : Children of Mana , Dawn of Mana , and Friends of Mana in 2006 , and Heroes of Mana in 2007 . 
 Each game in the World of Mana series was different , both from each other and from the previous games in the series . Children is an action @-@ oriented dungeon crawler game for the DS , developed by Nex Entertainment ; Dawn is a 3D action @-@ adventure game for the PlayStation 2 ; Friends is a Japan @-@ only multiplayer role @-@ playing game for mobile phones ; and Heroes is a real @-@ time strategy game for the DS , developed by Brownie Brown . While Ishii was the designer for all four games , he served as the director and producer for Dawn , which was considered the main game of the four and was released as Seiken Densetsu 4 in Japan . The theme of the subseries for Ishii , especially Dawn , was about exploring how to add " the feeling of touch " to a game . He had held off on designing new Mana games after Legend was unable to meet his desires , until he felt that technology had improved enough to let him create what he envisioned . A fifth game for the subseries was considered for the Wii in 2006 , but did not enter development . In April 2007 , a month after the release of the final game of the World of Mana , Ishii left Square Enix to lead his own development company , named Grezzo . 
 No further games were made in the Mana series until 2013 , when Square Enix released Circle of Mana , a Japan @-@ only card battle game for the GREE mobile platform . It was followed in 2014 by Rise of Mana , a Japan @-@ only free @-@ to @-@ play action role @-@ playing game for iOS , Android , and PlayStation Vita , and in 2016 by Adventures of Mana , a 3D remake of Final Fantasy Adventure for the PlayStation Vita , iOS , and Android . 
 = = = Creation and design = = = 
 The Mana series is the result of Koichi Ishii 's desire to create a fictional world . In Ishii 's opinion , Mana is not a series of video games , but rather a world which is illustrated by and can be explored through video games . When working on the series , Koichi Ishii draws inspiration from abstract images from his memories of childhood , as well as movies and fantasy books that captivated him as a child . Ishii takes care to avoid set conventions , and his influences are correspondingly very wide and non @-@ specific . Nonetheless , among his literary influences , he acknowledges Tove Jansson 's <unk> , Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , and J. R. R. Tolkien 's Lord of the Rings . 
 While some titles of the World of Mana series do share direct connections with other installments , the games of the series have few concrete links . There is no overall explicit in @-@ game chronological order . Further , according to Koichi Ishii in 2006 the games do not take place in exactly the same world , and characters or elements who appear in different titles are best considered alternate versions of each other . Instead , the connections between each title are more abstract than story @-@ based , linked only on the karmic level . Contradicting this assertion , Ishii has also said in an interview that Children is set ten years after Dawn , while Heroes is set one generation prior to Seiken Densetsu 3 . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = Common elements = = 
 A common element of the series is its seamless , real @-@ time battle system . The system was developed by Koichi Ishii and improved upon by Hiromichi Tanaka , out of a desire to create a system different from the one featured in the first few Final Fantasy titles . While action @-@ based , the Mana battle system is intended to be playable even by newcomers as well as veterans . The system is coupled with the distinctive hierarchical " Ring Command " menu system , featured prominently in Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 , and to a lesser extent in later installments . Each ring is a set of icons with a textual infobox explanation which , upon selection , allow the player to use an item , cast a spell , look up in @-@ game statistics , or change the game 's settings . Navigation within a menu is achieved by rotating the ring through the cursor left or right , while switching to a different menu is achieved by pressing the up or down buttons . Although not part of the series , the spin @-@ off Secret of Evermore , developed by the North American Square Soft , was also built upon the " Ring Command " system . 
 The Mana series features several recurring characters and beings , including Final Fantasy creatures such as Chocobos in Final Fantasy Adventure and Legend of Mana , as well as Moogles in Secret of Mana and as a status ailment in Seiken Densetsu 3 and Sword of Mana . Watts is a dwarf blacksmith wearing a horned helmet who upgrades the player 's weaponry . Usually , an anthropomorphic cat merchant is found outside of town areas and allows a player to save the game and buy supplies at high prices . This role is played by Neko in Secret of Mana , and Niccolo in Legend of Mana and Sword of Mana . In the Japanese games these merchants share the name Nikita . 
 The Mana Tree and the Mana Sword , called Excalibur in Final Fantasy Adventure 's English version , are recurring plot devices which have been featured in every game of the series . The mystical Mana Tree is a source of magic which sustains the balance and nature of the series ' world . The Mana Sword is typically used to restore this balance when it becomes lost in the games . Final Fantasy Adventure explains that if the Mana Tree dies , a member of the Mana Family will become the " seed " of a new Tree . A sprout of the Mana Tree is called a Gemma , while protectors of the Tree , who wield the Mana Sword , are called Gemma Knights . In Seiken Densetsu 3 , a Goddess is said to have turned into the Mana Tree after creating the world with the Mana Sword . The Mana Tree is destroyed near the game ending in Final Fantasy Adventure and Secret of Mana , but a character becomes the new Mana Tree in the former game . 
 Elemental Spirits , also called Mana Spirits , are beings who govern the magic elements of the series ' world , and are at the core of the games ' magic system as they are used to cast magic spells . Eight types of spirits have appeared in the series since Secret of Mana , and each embodies a different element . Their names are homonyms of mythological beings or phenomena . In Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 , usage of their power is enabled upon the main characters ' meeting with them . In Legend of Mana , the spirits serve as factors in the Land Creation System . In Legend of Mana and Sword of Mana , multiple spirits of the same elemental type appear . In terms of storyline , in Seiken Densetsu 3 and Heroes of Mana , the spirits are charged to protect the Mana Stones in which the Mana Goddess sealed eight elemental <unk> ( God @-@ Beasts in the fan @-@ translation of <unk> ) . In Dawn of Mana 's North American version , each spirit speaks with a particular European accent , such as French or Scottish . 
 Rabites , known as Rabi ( <unk> ) in the Japanese versions of the games , are cute , fictional , rabbit @-@ like creatures appearing as a common enemy in the series since its beginning . The Rabite has become a sort of mascot for the Mana series , much the same way as the Chocobo represents Final Fantasy , and is one of its most recognizable icons . The Rabite resembles a bodiless , one @-@ toothed rabbit with large ears that curve upward and form a point at the tip , and a round , puffy pink tail that moves by hopping along the ground . It is most commonly yellow colored , but also pink , lilac , black , and white , and are variously minor enemies , " <unk> " characters and even friendly units and pets . Rabites are also mentioned in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 with an accessory comically named " Rabite 's Foot " , which increases a character 's luck statistic ; as well as Final Fantasy Tactics Advance , where they appear in the description of one of the game 's optional missions as an endangered species due to being poached for good luck charms . Rabites have appeared prevalently in several pieces of Mana merchandise , including plush dolls , cushions , lighters , mousepads , straps , telephone cards , and T @-@ shirts . 
 Flammie , sometimes spelled <unk> , is the name of a fictional species of flying dragons , as well as the proper name of some its members , featured in several games of the series . A Flammie 's appearance is a mixture of draconian , mammalian , and reptilian features , and its coloring has varied throughout the series . Flammies typically serve as a means of transportation in the game by allowing a player 's characters to ride on a Flammie 's back to different locations in the game 's world . In Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 , the Super NES 's Mode 7 graphic capabilities allows the player to control a Flammie from either a " behind the back " third @-@ person or top @-@ down perspective , and fly over the landscape as it scrolls beneath them . In terms of story , the Flammies were created by the Moon Gods , and are part of an endless cycle of destruction and rebirth as the stronger versions of Flammies — known as Mana Beasts , or God Beasts ( <unk> , <unk> ) in Japanese — destroy the world and the Mana Sword and Tree restore the world . 
 = = Music = = 
 The Mana series has had several different composers . Final Fantasy Adventure was composed by Kenji Ito ; it was his second original score . Ito 's music is mainly inspired by images from the game rather than outside influences . The scores for Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 were both composed by Hiroki Kikuta . Despite difficulties in dealing with the hardware limitations , Kikuta tried to express , in the music of Secret of Mana , two " contrasting styles " , namely himself and the game . This was to create an original score which would be neither pop music nor standard game music . Kikuta worked on the music for the two games mostly by himself , spending nearly 24 hours a day in his office , alternating between composing and editing to create an immersive three @-@ dimensional sound . Kikuta considers the score for Secret of Mana his favorite creation . His compositions for Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 were partly inspired by natural landscapes . In 1995 , Kikuta released an experimental album of arranged music from the two installments , titled Secret of Mana + , which features one 50 @-@ minute long track . 
 Legend of Mana 's score was composed by Yoko Shimomura , and of all her compositions , she considers it the one that best expresses herself . Kenji Ito returned to the series with Sword of Mana . He also composed roughly one third of the Children of Mana soundtrack , while the rest was composed by Masaharu Iwata and Takayuki Aihara . Ito was the main composer for Dawn of Mana , assisted by Tsuyoshi Sekito , Masayoshi Soken , and Junya Nakano , as well as main theme composer Ryuichi Sakamoto . In North America , purchasers of Dawn of Mana from participating retailers were offered a sampler disc , titled Breath of Mana , which features a selection of tracks from the game . Shimomura has returned to the series with Heroes of Mana , while also contributing one song to Rise of Mana . 
 = = Printed adaptations = = 
 A five @-@ volume manga based on Legend of Mana was drawn by Shiro Amano and published in Japan by Enterbrain between 2000 and 2002 . It features a comedic story about the game 's main character , here named Toto . A German version was published by Egmont Manga & Anime in 2003 . A collection of four @-@ panel comic strips , drawn by various authors and titled Sword of Mana Yonkoma Manga Theatre , was published in Japan by Square Enix on January 16 , 2004 . It included a questionnaire that , if sent back , allowed participants to win illustrations signed by Koichi Ishii and Shinichi Kameoka , as well as special T @-@ shirts . Enterbrain also published a Sword of Mana manga adaptation in Japan on February 25 , 2004 , drawn by a collaboration of authors led by Shiro Amano . Two days later , Square Enix published a two @-@ volume novelization of Sword of Mana in Japan written by Matsui <unk> . An original manga , named Seiken Densetsu : Princess of Mana , was drawn by Satsuki Yoshino and published in the Japanese magazine Gangan Powered on February 22 , 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Mana series has been mostly well received , though each title has seen varied levels of success . RPGFan called Final Fantasy Adventure one of the best things to happen to the Game Boy , while IGN considered it the best action RPG on the console after The Legend of Zelda : Link 's Awakening . GameSpot referred to Secret of Mana as " one of Square 's masterpieces on the SNES " . The game has appeared on several list of top games , including ranked number 97 on Famitsu 's top 100 games of all time . Seiken Densetsu 3 was called " easily one of the best RPGs to come out of the 16 @-@ bit era " by Nintendo Life . Famitsu rated Legend of Mana at 31 / 40 and Heroes of Mana at 32 / 40 . The NPD Group ranked Legend of Mana as the top seller the week of its release , and in 2006 was re @-@ released as part of the Ultimate Hits series . 
 Many of the World of Mana titles have not been as critically successful as the original five games in the series , and though the franchise has been praised for their attempts at trying new ways of experiencing the games ' fictional world , there have been various gameplay design flaws that have hindered the later games . 1UP.com commented that despite the game 's excellent presentation and storytelling , Dawn of Mana did not match the level of gameplay of the early Mana games . Prior to the World of Mana games , RPGamer called the series a " treasured favorite " . After the release of Heroes of Mana , they commented that the World of Mana series is " cursed " , and the future of the series looked " bleak " . 
 The music of the Mana series , especially Secret of Mana , has received wide acclaim and fan enthusiasm . The Secret of Mana soundtrack was one of the first official soundtracks of video games music released in the United States and thus before fully mainstream interest in RPGs . The Secret of Mana 's opening theme , " Angel 's Fear " , was rated at number 7 on IGN 's Top Ten RPG Title tracks , calling it a " magical title song that captures our hearts " . It was also featured in the third Orchestral Game Concert . Secret of Mana is also the number 6 most remixed soundtrack on the popular video game music site OverClocked ReMix , with Seiken Densetsu 3 tied at 18 . The music of the other titles have also been well received . RPGFan called the music to Final Fantasy Adventure " addictive " , despite its low , MIDI @-@ like quality . GameSpy called Children of Mana 's music some of the best Nintendo DS music yet and referred to it as " beautiful " . Game Informer complimented Dawn of Mana 's music , calling it good . IGN referred to Legend of Mana 's music as " beautiful " and stated the background music brought " intensity " , " suspense " , and " subtle nuance " to the game . Other reviewers echoed similar praise with GameSpot calling it " excellently orchestrated " and RPGFan calling the music one of the game 's good points . 
 The Mana series has sold well overall , and as of March 2011 , series titles have sold over 6 million units . The original Seiken Densetsu sold over 700 @,@ 000 units , and its remake Sword of Mana sold over 277 @,@ 000 copies in Japan . Secret of Mana has shipped over 1 @.@ 83 million copies worldwide , Legend of Mana sold over 400 @,@ 000 units in its first week alone as the highest @-@ selling release that week in <unk> and over 700 @,@ 000 copies in Japan by the end of the year . Children of Mana sold over 281 @,@ 000 copies in Japan , and Dawn of Mana sold over 410 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . Heroes of Mana sold over 178 @,@ 000 copies <unk> . The PlayStation Vita version of Rise of Mana downloaded over 100 @,@ 000 times . 
 = Fallen Angel ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Fallen Angel " is the tenth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on November 19 , 1993 . It was written by Howard Gordon and Alex Gansa , and directed by Larry Shaw . The episode featured the first of three guest appearances by Scott Bellis as Max Fenig , and saw Jerry Hardin reprise his role as Deep Throat . The episode helped explore the series ' overarching mythology . The episode was mostly well received . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who work on cases called X @-@ Files , which are linked to the paranormal . When Mulder and Scully investigate a mysterious crash site , they find that the official reports of the incident may be covering up the crash of a UFO . Meanwhile , Mulder meets a <unk> who he believes may be a former abductee . 
 The episode introduced the UFO fanatic character Max Fenig , who would go on to be a minor recurring character . Fenig would later appear in the fourth season episodes " Tempus Fugit " and " Max " . In addition , Fenig also laid the template for the introduction of The Lone Gunmen in the later first @-@ season episode " E.B.E. " 
 = = Plot = = 
 Near Townsend , Wisconsin , a UFO crashes in the woods . When the deputy sheriff arrives on the scene , he is killed by an invisible figure while surrounded by bright white light . As the Air Force monitors the crash , Colonel Calvin Henderson , the military 's UFO reclamations expert , launches an operation to clean up the site . 
 After consulting with Deep Throat , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) travels to Townsend and takes photos of the crash site , only to be captured . After being interrogated by Henderson , Mulder is detained alongside an eccentric NICAP member named Max Fenig ( Scott Bellis ) , who was also captured in the woods . The next morning , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) arrives to retrieve Mulder , telling him that FBI Section Chief Joseph McGrath is threatening to shut down the X @-@ Files because of his behavior . She also claims that the wreckage has been identified as a downed Libyan fighter jet ; Mulder dismisses this explanation . Meanwhile , the invisible occupant of the UFO passes through an electronic fence set up around the crash site , escaping into the outside world . 
 The agents return to Mulder 's motel room , finding it ransacked by Max . He turns out to be a fan of Mulder 's , having followed NICAP 's research into his work on the X @-@ Files . Max brings the agents to his Airstream trailer , where he shows them audio transmissions from the deputy , as well as a fire crew that arrived at the crash site . Mulder and Scully visit the deputy 's widow , who claims the government won 't release her husband 's body and has threatened her into silence . They also meet a doctor who treated the deputy and the fire crew , revealing that they died of abnormally severe burns ; he claims that he was also threatened . Henderson arrives at the hospital with a group of burned soldiers , who were attacked after they cornered the invisible alien at their base . 
 Mulder returns to the motel and finds Max inside his trailer , having an apparent epileptic seizure . As Mulder tends to Max , he discovers a mysterious scar behind Max 's ear . Mulder reviews earlier X @-@ Files , discovering similar scars on two reported alien abductees . Scully believes that whatever abduction experience Max had was a schizophrenic delusion , having noticed medication in his trailer . But Mulder believes that Max , despite his interest in UFOs , is completely unaware of his experiences and was guided to Townsend by his abductors on the night of the crash . 
 The Air Force tracks a larger UFO as it hovers over Townsend . The invisible alien enters Max 's trailer and abducts him . When the agents visit the trailer and find Max missing , an Army radio transmission reveals that he has been transported to a waterfront . They race to save Max as Henderson 's men scour the area searching for him . The alien kills two soldiers who encounter Max , causing him to flee into a warehouse . As Mulder finds Max inside , the building is surrounded by Henderson 's forces . Mulder tries to comfort Max , but is attacked and injured by the alien . Mulder then sees Max floating in a pillar of light before vanishing . When Henderson finds that Max is missing , he orders Mulder arrested . 
 Back in Washington , both Scully and Mulder report to Section Chief McGrath , who does not believe their claims . McGrath offers an especially harsh reprimand to Mulder , and presents written testimony by Henderson claiming that Max 's body was found in a cargo container . McGrath and his disciplinary board decide to shut down the X @-@ Files and dismiss Mulder from the FBI , but the decision is vetoed by Deep Throat , who feels it would be more dangerous for them to allow Mulder to turn whistleblower than to let him continue his work . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Fallen Angel " was written by Howard Gordon and Alex Gansa , and directed by Larry Shaw . The episode foreshadows the closing of the X @-@ Files , which would occur in the season finale of the first season , " The Erlenmeyer Flask " . The UFO fanatic character Max Fenig also laid the template for the introduction of The Lone Gunmen in the later first season episode " E.B.E. " . Scott Bellis would reprise his role as Max in the fourth season episodes " Tempus Fugit " and " Max " , which explained the fate of the character after his disappearance in this episode . Max 's NICAP baseball cap would make a brief appearance in Mulder 's office in " Beyond the Sea " , later in the first season . 
 The scenes depicting Washington , D.C. in the episode were filmed at Simon Fraser University on Burnaby Mountain in British Columbia . Shooting at this location was made difficult by the confined space available in which to set up the necessary equipment . The invisible alien featured in this episode appears to be inspired by the movie Predator . The alien was deliberately made invisible in order for it to be scarier to the audience , with series creator Chris Carter noting that " what you don 't see is scarier than what you do see " . Casting director Lynne Carrow was proud of Scott Bellis ' performance as Max , calling him in 1995 perhaps her proudest find in casting the show , saying that he " Just knocked our socks off " . Carter also praised the performance of guest star Marshall Bell as Colonel Henderson and was proud that the episode permitted the producers to expand the role of Deep Throat . Actor Brent <unk> , who plays Corporal Taylor in the episode , teaches alongside series regular William B. Davis at the William Davis Centre for Actors Study in Vancouver . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Fallen Angel " premiered on the Fox network on November 19 , 1993 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on September 24 , 1994 . This episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 4 , with a nine share , meaning that in the United States , roughly 5 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and nine percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 5 @.@ 1 million households . It was , and would thereafter permanently remain , the lowest @-@ rated episode of the series ever broadcast . 
 The episode was mostly well @-@ received , with a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly rating it a B + , describing it as " A very cool @-@ looking episode that does the best job so far of illuminating the agents ' position with relation to the government " ; also noting the character of Max Fenig as a precursor to those of The Lone Gunmen . Keith Phipps , writing for The A.V. Club , also rated the episode a B + , calling it " a strong entry " , finding that it served as a " slow reveal " of the series ' themes . Phipps also noted the importance of Max Fenig as a sign of " the human toll exacted by all the dark goings on " in the series , claiming that " without Max we just get Mulder and Scully chasing a mysterious downed object and coming up empty @-@ handed . With Max , we start to realize the stakes for which they 're playing " . Matt Haigh , writing for Den of Geek , reviewed the episode negatively , calling it " a mundane forty minutes " that " really fails to impress " , and noting that the plot follows " more or less the same pattern " , as the series ' previous mythology episodes . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five . Shearman described " Fallen Angel " as having been produced " with style and wit " , feeling that it featured a relatively static plot but was nevertheless entertaining . He found Duchovny 's performance in the episode , and its final scene featuring Deep Throat 's ambiguous motivations , to have been the highlights of an episode otherwise filled with " smoke and mirrors " ; comparing it to the earlier episode " Conduit " in this regard . 
 = History of Western role @-@ playing video games = 
 Western role @-@ playing video games are role @-@ playing video games developed in the Western world , including North America and , in more recent years , Europe . They originated on mainframe university computer systems in the 1970s , were later popularized by titles such as Ultima and Wizardry in the early- to mid @-@ 1980s , and continue to be produced for modern home computer and video game console systems . The genre 's " Golden Age " occurred in the mid- to late @-@ 1980s , and its popularity suffered a downturn in the mid @-@ 1990s as developers struggled to keep up with hardware changes and increasing development costs . A later series of isometric role @-@ playing games , published by Interplay Productions and Blizzard Entertainment , was developed over a longer time period and set new standards of production quality . 
 Computer role @-@ playing games ( CRPGs ) are once again popular . Recent titles , such as BioWare 's Mass Effect series and Bethesda Softworks ' The Elder Scrolls series , have been produced for console systems and have received multi @-@ platform releases , although independently developed games are frequently created as personal computer ( PC ) exclusives . Developers of role @-@ playing games have continuously experimented with various graphical perspectives and styles of play , such as real @-@ time and turn @-@ based time @-@ keeping systems , axonometric and first @-@ person graphical projections , and single @-@ character or multi @-@ character parties . Subgenres include action role @-@ playing games , roguelikes and tactical role @-@ playing games . 
 = = Early American computer RPGs ( late 1970s – mid @-@ 1980s ) = = 
 = = = Mainframe computers ( late 1970s – early 1980s ) = = = 
 The earliest role @-@ playing video games were created in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1970s , as offshoots of early university mainframe text @-@ based RPGs that were played on PDP @-@ 10 , PLATO and Unix @-@ based systems . These included Dungeon , written in 1975 or 1976 , <unk> , created in 1975 , and dnd , also from 1975 . These early games were inspired by pen @-@ and @-@ paper role @-@ playing games , particularly Dungeons & Dragons , which was published in 1974 , and J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings trilogy . Some of the first graphical computer RPGs ( CRPGs ) after <unk> and dnd included <unk> ( 1978 ) , which was named after Saruman 's tower in Lord of the Rings , <unk> ( 1979 ) , later renamed avatar , oubliette ( 1977 ) , named after the French word for " dungeon " , <unk> ( 1975 ) , dungeons of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , sorcery , and <unk> . All of these were developed and became popular on the PLATO system during the late 1970s , in large part due to PLATO 's speed , fast graphics , and large number of players with access to its nationwide network of terminals . PLATO was a mainframe system that supported multiple users and allowed them to play simultaneously , a feature not commonly available to owners of home personal computer systems at the time . These were followed by games on other platforms , such as Temple of Apshai , written in 1979 for the TRS @-@ 80 and followed by two add @-@ ons ; Akalabeth : World of Doom ( 1980 ) , which gave rise to the well @-@ known Ultima series ; Wizardry ( 1981 ) , and Sword of Fargoal ( 1982 ) . Games of this era were also influenced by text adventures such as Colossal Cave Adventure ( 1976 ) and Zork ( 1976 ) ; early <unk> , tabletop wargames such as Chainmail ( 1971 ) , and sports games such as Strat @-@ O @-@ Matic . 
 The popular dungeon crawler Rogue was developed in 1980 , for Unix @-@ based systems , by two students at Berkeley . It used ASCII graphics , and featured a deep system of gameplay and a multitude of randomly generated items and locations . Rogue was later distributed as free software with the BSD operating system , and was followed by an entire genre of " roguelikes " that were inspired by and emulated the original game 's mechanics , and by later titles such as Diablo . Later examples of roguelikes include Angband ( 1990 ) , Ancient Domains of Mystery ( 1993 ) and Linley 's Dungeon Crawl ( 1997 ) . 
 The keyboard was frequently the only input supported by these games , and their graphics were simple and often monochromatic . Some titles , like Rogue , represented objects through text characters , such as ' @ ' for the main character and ' Z ' for zombies . No single game featured all of the characteristics expected in a modern CRPG , such as exploration of subterranean dungeons , use of weapons and items , " leveling up " and quest completion , but it is possible to see the evolution of these features during this era and that which followed . 
 = = = Ultima and Wizardry ( early – mid @-@ 1980s ) = = = 
 The early Ultima and Wizardry were definitive games which began to build the genre . Although simplified for use with the console gamepad , many innovations of the early Ultimas — in particular Ultima III : Exodus ( 1983 ) by developer Richard Garriott — became standard among later RPGs in both the personal computer and console markets . These ideas included the use of tiled graphics and party @-@ based combat , a mix of fantasy and science @-@ fiction elements , and time travel . The game 's written narrative was an innovative feature that allowed it to convey a larger story than was found in the minimal plots common at the time . Most games , including Garriott 's own Akalabeth , focused primarily on basic gameplay mechanics like combat , and paid little attention to story and narrative . 
 Garriott introduced a system of chivalry and code of conduct in Ultima IV : Quest of the Avatar ( 1985 ) that persisted throughout later Ultimas . The player 's Avatar tackles such problems as fundamentalism , racism and xenophobia , and based on his or her actions is tested periodically in ways that are sometimes obvious and sometimes unseen . This code of conduct was in part a response to the efforts among some Christian groups to mitigate the rising popularity of Dungeons & Dragons . Continuing until Ultima IX : Ascension ( 1999 ) , it covered a range of virtues that included compassion , justice , humility and honor . This system of morals and ethics was unique at the time , as other video games allowed players to be lauded as " heroes " by the game worlds ' denizens , no matter what the player 's actions had been . In Ultima IV , on the other hand , players were forced to consider the moral consequences of their actions . According to Garriott , Ultima was now " more than a mere fantasy escape . It provided a world with a framework of deeper meaning [ , ] a level of detail [ , and ] diversity of interaction [ , ] that is rarely attempted . " " I thought people might completely reject this game because some folks play just to kill , kill , kill . To succeed in this game , you had to radically change the way you 'd ever played a game before . " 
 Ultima III is considered by many to have been the first modern CRPG . It was originally published for the Apple II , but was ported to many other platforms and influenced the development of later titles , including such console RPGs as Excalibur ( 1983 ) and Dragon Quest ( 1986 ) . The series went on to span over a dozen titles , including the spin @-@ off series Worlds of Ultima ( 1990 – 1991 ) and Ultima Underworld ( 1992 – 1993 ) , and the multiplayer online series , Ultima Online ( 1997 ) . Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss ( 1992 ) offered players a full 360 degree view of the game world . Ultima VII : The Black Gate ( 1992 ) was the first real @-@ time title in the series , and was fully playable with the computer mouse . Garriott later left Origin Systems and Electronic Arts to form Destination Games , under publisher <unk> . He was involved with a number of <unk> 's MMORPGs , including Lineage ( 1998 ) and Tabula Rasa ( 2007 ) , before his 2009 departure . 
 The Wizardry series was created for the Apple II at roughly the same time , in 1981 . Wizardry featured a 3D , first @-@ person view , an intuitive interface , party @-@ based combat , and pre @-@ constructed levels that encouraged players to draw their own maps . It allowed players to import characters from previous games , albeit with reduced experience levels , and introduced a moral alignment feature that limited the areas players could visit . The series was extremely difficult when compared to other RPGs of the time , possibly because they were modeled after pen @-@ and @-@ paper role @-@ playing games of similar difficulty . Wizardry IV ( 1986 ) in particular is considered one of the most difficult CRPGs ever created . It is unique in that the player controls the villain of the first game in an attempt to escape his prison dungeon and gain freedom in the above world . Unlike Ultima , which evolved with each installment , the Wizardry series retained and refined the same style and core mechanics over time , and improved only its graphics and level design as the years progressed . The series ' most famous titles did not appear until years later , and installments were published as recently as 2001 . Wizardry VII ( 1992 ) has been said to possess one of the best character class systems of any CRPG . 
 By June 1982 , Temple of Apshai had sold 30 @,@ 000 copies , Wizardry 24 @,@ 000 copies , and Ultima 20 @,@ 000 . Ultima and Wizardry dominated the industry in the early 1980s ; a historian later wrote that " there seemed to be very little oxygen for anyone else ; their serious competition during this period was largely limited to one another . Otherwise there were only ... workmanlike derivatives " like <unk> and <unk> " that all but advertised themselves as ' games to play while you wait for the next Ultima or Wizardry ' " . Garriott even discussed collaborating with Wizardry 's Andrew C. Greenberg on " the ultimate fantasy role @-@ playing game " . The first Wizardry outsold ( more than 200 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first three years ) the first Ultima and received better reviews , but over time Ultima became more popular by improving its technology and making games more friendly , while Wizardry required new players to play the first game before its first two sequels , and the very difficult Wizardry IV sold poorly . 
 Telengard , a BASIC port of the earlier PDP @-@ 10 game DND , and Dungeons of <unk> , both released in 1982 , introduced real @-@ time gameplay . Earlier dungeon crawl games had used turn @-@ based movement , in which the enemies only moved when the adventuring party did . Tunnels of Doom , produced the same year , introduced separate screens for exploration and combat . Dragon Quest is most commonly claimed as the first role @-@ playing video game produced for a console , though journalist Joe Fielder cites the earlier <unk> . 
 = = Golden Age ( late 1980s – early 1990s ) = = 
 The Might and Magic series , highly popular in the 1980s and onward , began with the 1986 release of Might and Magic Book One : The Secret of the Inner Sanctum for the Apple II . It encompasses a total of ten games , the most recent of which was released in 2014 , as well as the popular turn @-@ based strategy series Heroes of Might and Magic . The series featured a mix of complex statistics , large numbers of weapons and spells , and enormous worlds in which to play . It was among the longest @-@ lived CRPG series , alongside Ultima and Wizardry , It is also notable for making race and gender an important aspect of gameplay . 
 Strategic Simulations , Inc . ' s series of " Gold Box " CRPGs , which began in 1988 with Pool of Radiance for the Apple II and Commodore 64 , was the first widely successful official video game adaptation of TSR 's Advanced Dungeons & Dragons license and rules . These games featured a first @-@ person display for movement and exploration , combined with an overhead tactical display for combat that tried to model D & D 's turn @-@ based mechanics . Better known for producing computer wargames , SSI created one of the defining series of the period . The games spawned a series of novels , and titles continued to be published until the game engine was retired in 1993 , although users who had purchased Forgotten Realms : Unlimited Adventures were able to create their own adventures and play them using the Gold Box engine . The later titles were developed by Stormfront Studios , who also produced Neverwinter Nights , a multi @-@ player implementation of the Gold Box engine which ran on America Online from 1991 to 1997 . As in the Wizardry series , characters could be imported from one game into another . 
 SSI had already published many RPGs based on original properties . Its " hardcore " RPG Wizard 's Crown ( 1985 ) presaged the Gold Box games ' design , with eight @-@ character parties , a skill @-@ based experience system , highly detailed combat mechanics , dozens of commands , injuries and bleeding , and strengths and weaknesses versus individual weapon classes . The game did not , however , offer much in terms of role @-@ playing or narrative beyond buying , selling and killing . Wizard 's Crown was followed by The Eternal Dagger in 1987 , a similar game that removed some of its predecessor 's more complicated elements . 
 Interplay Productions developed a string of hits in the form of The Bard 's Tale ( 1985 ) and its sequels under publisher Electronic Arts , originally for the Apple II and Commodore 64 . The series became the first outside Wizardry to challenge Ultima 's sales . It combined colorful graphics with a clean interface and simple rules , and was one of the first CRPG series to reach a mainstream audience . It spawned a series of novels by authors such as Mercedes Lackey , something that arguably did not occur again until the release of Diablo in 1997 . The series allowed players to explore cities in detail , at a time when many games relegated them to simple menu screens with " buy " / " sell " options . A construction set released in 1991 allowed players to create their own games , and Interplay re @-@ used the engine in its 1988 post @-@ apocalyptic CRPG Wasteland . 
 FTL Games ' Dungeon Master ( 1987 ) for the Atari ST introduced several user @-@ interface innovations , such as direct manipulation of objects and the environment using the mouse . Unusually for the era , it features the real @-@ time , first @-@ person viewpoint now common in first @-@ person shooters and more recent games such as The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion . The game 's complex magic system used runes that could be combined in specific sequences to create magical spells . These sequences were not detailed in the game manual , instead players were required to discover them through trial and error . Sequels followed in 1989 and 1993 . The game 's first @-@ person , real @-@ time mechanics were copied in SSI 's " Black Box " series , from Eye of the Beholder ( 1990 ) onward . Dungeon Master sold 40 @,@ 000 copies in its first year of release , and became the best @-@ selling Atari ST title . 
 Times of Lore , released by Origin Systems in 1988 , introduced the action @-@ adventure and action role @-@ playing game formula of console titles such as The Legend of Zelda to the American computer RPG market . Times of Lore directly inspired several later titles by Origin Systems , including the 1990 games Bad Blood , an action RPG based on the same engine , and Ultima VI : The False Prophet , which used the same interface . 
 Quest for Glory ( 1992 ) was produced by Sierra Entertainment , known for point @-@ and @-@ click adventure games , and combined CRPG and adventure @-@ game mechanics into a unique , genre @-@ bending mix . The series featured involved stories , complex puzzles , and arcade @-@ like combat . The last of its five titles was released in 1998 . It was originally conceived as a tetralogy built around the themes of the four cardinal directions , the four classical elements , the four seasons and the four mythologies . The designers felt that the series ' storyline made Shadows of Darkness too difficult , and so inserted a fifth game , Wages of War , into the canon and renumbered the series . 
 Legends of Valour ( 1992 ) provided an early example of open @-@ world , non @-@ linear gameplay in an RPG . It was cited as an influence on The Elder Scrolls series . 
 Sierra 's Betrayal at Krondor ( 1993 ) was based upon author Raymond E. Feist 's <unk> setting . It featured turn @-@ based , semi @-@ tactical combat , a skill @-@ based experience system , and a magic system similar to that of Dungeon Master , but suffered due to outdated , polygonal graphics . Feist was heavily consulted during development , and later created his own novelization based upon the game . The sequel Betrayal in Antara ( 1997 ) re @-@ used the first game 's engine but — as Sierra had lost its license for Krondor — was set in a different universe . Return to Krondor ( 1998 ) used a new game engine , but returned to Feist 's setting . 
 Westwood Studios 's Lands of Lore series ( 1993 ) featured a story @-@ based approach to RPG design . It served as a stylistic " mirror " to Japanese RPGs of the time , with brightly colored , cheerful graphics , a simple combat system borrowed from Dungeon Master , and a semi @-@ linear story . These elements contrasted with Western RPGs ' stereotype as dark , gritty and rules @-@ centric games . 
 = = Decline ( mid @-@ 1990s ) = = 
 Western RPGs faced a sharp decline circa 1995 , as developers lost their ability to keep up with hardware advances . RPGs had been at or near the forefront of gaming technology , but the improved computer graphics and increased storage space facilitated by CD @-@ ROM technology created expectations that developers struggled to meet . This caused lengthy delays between releases , and closures among less popular franchises . A few years later , one magazine wrote that " [ d ] uring the now @-@ infamous mid @-@ nineties CRPG lull , the toughest dungeons were the bottomless pits of failed designs , and the fiercest beasts the deadly @-@ dull CRPG releases . " 
 Increases in development budgets and team sizes meant that sequels took three or more years to be released , instead of the almost @-@ yearly releases seen in SSI 's Gold Box series . The growth of development teams increased the likelihood that software bugs would appear , as code produced by programmers working in different teams was merged into a whole . A lack of technical standards among hardware manufacturers forced developers to support each manufacturer 's implementation , or risk losing players . 
 Competition arose from other genres . Players turned away from RPGs , flight simulators and adventure games in favor of action @-@ oriented titles , such as first @-@ person shooters and real @-@ time strategy games . Later RPGs would draw influences from action genres , but would face new challenges in the form of massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing games ( MMORPGs ) , a late @-@ 1990s trend that may have siphoned players away from single @-@ player RPGs . They also faced competition from Japanese console RPGs , which were becoming increasingly dominant around that time , for reasons such as more accessible , faster @-@ paced action @-@ adventure @-@ oriented gameplay , and a stronger emphasis on storytelling and character interactions . 
 Western RPGs changed following this period . Non @-@ player characters were given more dialogue , as in Baldur 's Gate , party sizes became smaller , as in Fallout , and combat became faster , as in Diablo . Games became more accessible . Their feel became more cinematic rather than novelistic , and they focused on a single player @-@ made character who progressed through the game as the player 's sole avatar . Video games became darker and more thematically consistent . Designers abandoned or reconciled some of the eccentric elements and pastiche of the 8 @-@ bit and 16 @-@ bit titles . Diablo , for instance , displayed a consistent Gothic style throughout the series , and the Elder Scrolls series downplayed its <unk> and lizard @-@ people in favor of the more recognizable Dark Elves and Nords . 
 = = North American computer RPGs ( late 1990s ) = = 
 = = = Diablo and action RPGs = = = 
 The dark fantasy @-@ themed RPG Diablo was released by Blizzard Entertainment on December 31 , 1996 , in the midst of a stagnant PC RPG market . Diablo is set in the fictional kingdom of <unk> , in the world of Sanctuary , and has the player take control of a lone hero who battles to rid the world of Diablo , the Lord of Terror . Its development was influenced by Moria and Angband , and Diablo resembles a roguelike due to its focus on dungeon crawling , and its procedurally generated levels . Major differences include the commercial quality of the game 's graphics , its simplified character development , and its fast , real @-@ time action . A factor in Diablo 's success was its support for online , collaborative play over a local area network or through its Battle.net online service . This greatly extended its replay value , though cheating was a problem . While not the first RPG to feature real @-@ time combat , Diablo 's effect on the market was significant , a reflection of the changes that took place in other genres following the release of the action titles , Doom and Dune II . It had many imitators , and its formula of simple , fast combat and replayability were used by what were later referred to as " Diablo clones " , and more broadly " action RPGs " . 
 Action RPGs typically give each player real @-@ time control of a single character . Combat and action are emphasized , while plot and character interaction are kept to a minimum , a formula referred to as " the Fight , Loot , and Level cycle " . The inclusion of any content beyond leveling up and killing enemies becomes a challenge in these " hack and slash " games , because the sheer number of items , locations and monsters makes it difficult to design an encounter that is unique and works regardless of how a character has been customized . On the other hand , a game that omits technical depth can seem overly streamlined . The result in either case is a repetitive experience that does not feel tailored to the player . 
 RPGs can suffer in the area of exploration . Traditional RPGs encourage exploration of every detail of the game world , and provide for a more organic experience in which NPCs are distributed according to the internal logic of the game world or plot . Action games reward players for quick movement from location to location , and tend to ensure that no obstacles occur along the way . Games such as Mass Effect streamline the player 's movements across the game world by indicating which NPCs can be interacted with , and by making it easier for players to find locations and shopkeepers who can exchange items for money or goods . Some of the best characteristics of RPGs can be lost when these road blocks are eliminated in the name of streamlining the player 's experience . 
 One action RPG that avoided these limitations is Deus Ex ( 2000 ) , which offered multiple solutions to problems through intricately layered dialogue choices , a deep skill tree , and hand @-@ crafted environments . Players were challenged to act in character through dialog choices appropriate to his or her chosen role , and by intelligent use of the surrounding environment . This produced a unique experience that was tailored to each player . 
 Diablo was followed by the Diablo : Hellfire expansion pack in 1997 , and a sequel , Diablo II , in 2000 . Diablo II received its own expansion , Diablo II : Lord of Destruction , in 2001 . Diablo , Diablo II , Diablo II : Lord of Destruction and the Diablo II strategy guide are sold together as the Diablo Battle Chest , and are still sold over a decade later . A third game , Diablo III , was announced on June 28 , 2008 , and released on May 15 , 2012 . Examples of " Diablo clones " include Fate ( 2005 ) , Sacred ( 2004 ) , Torchlight ( 2009 ) , Din 's Curse ( 2011 ) and Hellgate : London ( 2007 ) . Like Diablo and Rogue before them , Torchlight , Din 's Curse , Hellgate : London and Fate use procedural generation to create new game levels dynamically . 
 = = = Interplay , BioWare , and Black Isle = = = 
 Interplay , now known as Interplay Entertainment and a publisher in its own right , produced several late 1990s RPG titles through two new developers , Black Isle Studios and BioWare . Black Isle released the groundbreaking Fallout ( 1997 ) which , reminiscent of Interplay 's earlier Wasteland , was set in an alternate history future America following a nuclear holocaust . One of the few successful late @-@ 1990 video game RPGs not set in a swords @-@ and @-@ sorcery environment , Fallout was notable for its open @-@ ended and largely non @-@ linear gameplay and quest system , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek humor , and pervasive sense of style and imagery . Players were afforded numerous moral choices to shape the game world based on how NPCs reacted to the player , much like the original Ultimas . Fallout was nearly as influential on post @-@ crash RPGs as Ultima was on Golden Age RPGs , and is considered by some to be the first " modern " CRPG . Black Isle produced a sequel , Fallout 2 , in 1998 . Third @-@ party developer Micro Forté produced Fallout Tactics : Brotherhood of Steel , a tactical RPG based on the franchise , which was published in 2001 under Interplay 's strategy division 14 Degrees East . 
 BioWare 's Baldur 's Gate series was no less important , the most significant D & D series to be released since the Gold Box era . The games created the most accurate and in @-@ depth D & D simulation yet , and featured support for up to six @-@ players in cooperative mode . Baldur 's Gate ( 1998 ) provided an epic story with NPC followers and written dialogue that continued through both titles and two expansion packs . Black Isle produced a more combat @-@ oriented series , Icewind Dale , soon thereafter . 
 The critically acclaimed D & D title , Planescape : Torment , was developed by Black Isle and published by Interplay in 1999 , and became known for its moody , artistic air and extensive writing . Interplay 's Fallout , Planescape : Torment and particularly , Baldur 's Gate are considered by critics to be some of the finest RPGs ever made . 
 Black Isle 's games during this time period often shared engines to cut down on development time and costs , and most feature an overhead <unk> projected third @-@ person interface . Their titles , apart from the two Fallout games , used various versions of the Infinity Engine that had been developed by BioWare for Baldur 's Gate . Interplay 's collapse resulted in the shutdown of Black Isle and the cancellation of the third games in both the Fallout and Baldur 's Gate series , as well as of an original title , Torn . Instead , they published a trio of console @-@ only action RPGs based on the two franchises : Baldur 's Gate : Dark Alliance ( 2001 ) , Baldur 's Gate : Dark Alliance II ( 2004 ) , and Fallout : Brotherhood of Steel ( 2004 ) . One of the last CRPGs released before Interplay seemingly went defunct was the poorly received Lionheart : Legacy of the Crusader ( 2003 ) by developer <unk> Entertainment , notable for using the SPECIAL system introduced in Fallout . 
 Interplay announced in 2008 that money from its sale of the Fallout intellectual property to Bethesda Softworks and the sale of its controlling interests to a Luxembourg @-@ based firm would be used to relaunch its game development studio . The plan was to develop Wii Virtual Console and sequel versions of some of its classic console series , including Baldur 's Gate : Dark Alliance and Earthworm Jim . A massively multiplayer online game based on the Fallout franchise has been in development , a project for which Interplay retained the creation rights , though Bethesda has filed several injunctions against Interplay in an attempt to prevent this . Development of the game is on hold , pending the outcome of the dispute . 
 = = Resurgence ( 2000s – present ) = = 
 The new century saw an increasing number of multi @-@ platform releases . The move to 3D game engines , along with constant improvements in graphic quality , led to progressively detailed and realistic game worlds . 
 BioWare produced Neverwinter Nights ( 2002 ) for Atari , the first CRPG to fuse the third @-@ edition Dungeons & Dragons rules with a 3D display in which the user could vary the viewing angle and distance . New game content could be generated using the Aurora toolset supplied as part of the game release , and players could share their modules and play cooperatively with friends online . Based in part on experiences while playing Ultima Online , one of the goals during development was to reproduce the feel of a live pen @-@ and @-@ paper RPG experience , complete with a human Dungeon Master . Neverwinter Nights ( <unk> ) was very successful commercially , and spawned three official expansion packs and a sequel developed by Obsidian Entertainment . BioWare later produced the acclaimed Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic , which married the d20 system with the Star Wars franchise ; as well as the original titles Jade Empire ( 2005 ) , Mass Effect ( 2007 ) , Dragon Age : Origins ( 2009 ) , Mass Effect 2 ( 2010 ) , Dragon Age II ( 2011 ) , Mass Effect 3 ( 2012 ) , and Dragon Age Inquisition ( 2014 ) all which were released for multiple platforms . With the Mass Effect and the Dragon Age titles , Bioware also utilized a save import system where decisions in the earlier games impact the story in the later games . 
 During the production of Fallout 2 , some of Black Isle 's key members left the studio to form Troika Games , citing disagreements the development team structure . The new studio 's first title was Arcanum : Of Steamworks and Magick Obscura ( 2001 ) , an original , nonlinear steampunk @-@ themed RPG with fantasy elements . Several Arcanum designers worked on Fallout , and the two titles share an aesthetic and sense of irony and humor . Arcanum was followed by The Temple of Elemental Evil ( 2003 ) , based on the Dungeons & Dragons 3 @.@ 5 Edition rules and set in the Greyhawk universe ; and Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines ( 2004 ) , based on White Wolf 's Vampire : The Masquerade . All three games received positive reviews — as well as a cult following in the case of Arcanum — but were criticized for shipping with numerous bugs . Troika 's reputation became " Great Ideas . Never Enough Testing " , and by 2005 the studio was in financial trouble , no longer able to secure funding for additional titles . Most of the developers left for other studios . 
 When Black Isle closed down , several employees formed Obsidian Entertainment , who released Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic II – The Sith Lords ( 2005 ) , a sequel to BioWare 's successful Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic . Obsidian later created a sequel to another BioWare game : Neverwinter Nights 2 was released on Halloween of 2006 , and featured the 3 @.@ 5 Edition D & D ruleset . It was followed by two expansions and an " adventure pack " , in 2007 and 2008 . Obsidian Entertainment began development of a role @-@ playing game based on the Alien film franchise in 2006 , but it was canceled , along with an original title under the working name of Seven Dwarves . Obsidian 's most recent RPGs are Alpha Protocol ( 2010 ) , a modern @-@ day spy thriller released for multiple platforms , and Fallout : New Vegas ( 2010 ) , the latest installment in the Fallout franchise . The company released Dungeon Siege III on June 17 , 2011 . 
 The Gothic series , by German developer Piranha Bytes , began with the first title in 2001 . Lauded for its complex interaction with other in @-@ game characters and attractive graphics , it was criticized for its difficult control scheme and high system requirements . The third game in particular was notable for a " ton of quests " , rewarding exploration , and approachable combat , but also for its high system requirements , unfinished feel and " atrocious " voice acting . Piranha Bytes split from publisher JoWood Productions in 2007 , and due to a contract between the two companies , <unk> retained some rights to the Gothic name and to current and future games released under that trademark . Piranha Bytes have since developed Risen , with publisher Deep Silver . A fourth , " casual " installment of the Gothic series , this time by developer Spellbound Entertainment , was released by JoWood in 2010 . The rights to the Gothic series may revert to Piranha Bytes following the release of Risen II . 
 = = = Bethesda = = = 
 Bethesda Softworks has developed RPGs since 1994 , in its The Elder Scrolls series . Daggerfall ( 1996 ) is notable as a 3D first @-@ person RPG with an expansive world . The series drew attention to sandbox gameplay , which gives the player wide choices of free @-@ roaming activities unrelated to the game 's main storyline . The Elder Scrolls series was seen as an alternative to the " highly linear , story @-@ based games " that dominated the computer RPG genre at the time , and the series ' freedom of play inspired comparisons to Grand Theft Auto III . According to Todd Howard , " I think [ Daggerfall is ] one of those games that people can ' project ' themselves on . It does so many things and allows [ for ] so many play styles that people can easily imagine what type of person they 'd like to be in game . " 
 The series ' popularity exploded with the release of The Elder Scrolls III : Morrowind ( 2002 ) , for the Xbox and PC . Morrowind became a successful and award @-@ winning RPG due to its open @-@ ended play , richly detailed game world , and flexibility in character creation and advancement . Two expansions were released : Tribunal in 2002 and Bloodmoon in 2003 . The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion ( 2006 ) , released for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 as well as the PC , was a much @-@ enhanced sequel that featured scripted NPC behaviors , significantly improved graphics , and the company 's first foray into micro transactions , a recent trend among Western RPG makers . Two expansion packs , Shivering Isles and Knights of the Nine , were developed , as were several smaller downloadable packages that each cost between $ 1 – 3 . Oblivion 's immediate successor , The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim , was released to critical acclaim on 11 November 2011 and remains one of the most successful , favourably reviewed RPGs ( or video games in general ) to date . 
 Interplay 's decision to scrap plans for Fallout 3 and Bethesda 's subsequent acquisition of the Fallout brand created mixed feelings among that series ' fan community . Bethesda released Fallout 3 in North America on October 28 , 2008 , to critical acclaim and much fanfare , and the game was followed by five " content packs " . The sequel Fallout : New Vegas , created by Obsidian Entertainment , used the same engine as Fallout 3 and was released to generally favorable reviews in 2010 . 
 = = = Video game consoles and multi @-@ platform titles = = = 
 Multi @-@ platform releases were common in the early days of RPGs , but there was a period during the 1990s when this was not generally the case . The sixth generation of home gaming consoles led many game developers to resume the practice , and some opted to develop primarily or exclusively for consoles . The combination of the Xbox and DirectX technologies proved especially popular due to the two systems ' architectural similarities , as well as their common set of programming tools . Multimedia and art assets , which account for a greater proportion of the development budget than in the past , are easily transferable between multiple platforms . 
 This affected several major PC RPG releases , mostly due to console exclusivity publishing deals with Microsoft . BioWare 's Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic was developed primarily for the Xbox , and ported to the PC several months later . Their original IP , Jade Empire ( 2005 ) was also an Xbox exclusive , and did not receive a Windows version until Jade Empire – Special Edition ( which included bonus content ) was released on Feb 26 , 2007 . Obsidian 's <unk> sequel was released in December 2004 for the Xbox and followed by a PC version in February 2005 , and Fable ( 2004 ) by Lionhead Studios received a PC port along with its reissue as a Platinum Hit in 2005 . 
 Sequels to many of the above titles were also developed for next @-@ gen systems , including Lionhead 's Fable II ( 2008 ) and Fable III ( 2010 ) . The Fallout and Baldur 's Gate series of PC RPGs spawned console @-@ friendly , Diablo @-@ style action titles for the PS2 and Xbox as their respective PC series ended . Bethesda 's Oblivion was released simultaneously for console and PC , but was considered a major launch title for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 . 
 The change of focus from the PC platform to console systems has been criticized , due to the concessions required to adapt games to the altered interfaces and control systems , as well as a need to appeal to a wider demographic . Developer Josh Sawyer lamented the decline of high @-@ profile computer @-@ exclusive RPGs , and claimed that the collapse of Troika Games meant that there were " no pure CRPG developers left " , outside of small companies like Spiderweb Software . Other criticisms include the increasing emphasis on video quality and voiceovers , and their effect on development budgets and the amount and quality of dialogue offered . BioWare was considered the " savior " of the Western RPG following the drought in the mid @-@ 1990s , but its prominent Mass Effect series now sheds the novel @-@ like writing style , and other conventions of Western RPGs , in favor of the cinematic style and streamlined action of Japanese console RPGs and other video game genres . These changes raise debate as to whether games such as Mass Effect and its sequels are truly RPGs . On the other hand , BioWare 's success has been attributed to successfully " marrying western mechanics with Japanese @-@ style character interactions " . 
 There have been more subtle shifts away from the core influences of Dungeons & Dragons that existed in the 1980s and 1990s . Games were originally closely tied to the system 's basic mechanics such as dice rolls and turn @-@ based tactical combat , but are now moving in the direction of real @-@ time modes , simplified mechanics and skill @-@ based interfaces . Dungeons & Dragons itself is diverging from its roots , as the 4th Edition D & D rules have been compared to role @-@ playing video games like World of Warcraft and Fire Emblem . Even as some non @-@ role @-@ playing games adopt RPG elements , developers and publishers are concerned that the term " role @-@ playing game " might alienate non @-@ RPG gamers . 
 Development for multiple platforms is profitable , but difficult . <unk> needed for one platform architecture do not necessarily translate to others . Individual platforms such as the Sega Genesis and PlayStation 3 are seen as difficult to develop for compared to their competitors , and developers are not yet fully accustomed to new technologies such as multi @-@ core processors and hyper @-@ threading . Multi @-@ platform releases are increasingly common , but not all differences between editions on multiple platforms can be fully explained by hardware alone , and there remain franchise stalwarts that exist solely on one system . Developers for new platforms such as handheld and mobile systems do not have to operate under the pressure of $ 20 million budgets and the scrutiny of publishers ' marketing experts . 
 = = = Independent games and European game studios = = = 
 The technical sophistication required to make modern video games and the high expectations of players make it difficult for independent developers to impress audiences viscerally , to the degree that large game makers with extensive budgets and development teams are able to , but innovation and quality need not necessarily be stymied . Europe , and Germany in particular , remains more receptive to PC @-@ exclusives and , in general , to older , more " hardcore " design decisions . Like the movie industry , the indie video game scene plays a crucial role in formulating new ideas and concepts that mainstream publishers and marketing departments , stuck in their old ways , might otherwise deem unworkable or too radical . There are many examples that movies that never gained approval with the corporate decision makers were financially successful or became iconic on the film industry . Indie video game developers can provide more development time and effort whereas larger corporate enterprises are constrained by the expenses and expectations of voice @-@ overs and advanced graphics . Independent developers can be successful in focusing on niche markets . 
 The new millennium saw a number of independently published RPGs for the PC , as well as a number of CRPGs developed in Europe and points farther east , which led some to call Eastern Europe a hotbed of RPG development in recent years . Examples of independently produced RPGs include Spiderweb Software 's Geneforge ( 2001 – 2009 ) and Avernum ( 2000 – 2010 ) series , Pyrrhic Tales : Prelude to Darkness ( 2002 ) by Zero Sum Software , <unk> : Book I ( 2007 ) and Book II ( 2010 ) by Basilisk Games , Depths of Peril ( 2007 ) and Din 's Curse ( 2010 ) by <unk> Entertainment , and Knights of the Chalice ( 2009 ) . Examples of Eastern and Central European RPGs include Belgian developer <unk> Studios ' Divinity series , starting with Divine Divinity ( 2002 ) ; Russian developer <unk> Interactive 's series of tactical RPGs , starting with Silent Storm ( 2003 ) ; German developer <unk> Entertainment 's Sacred series of action RPGs , starting with Sacred ( 2004 ) ; Polish developer CD Projekt RED 's The Witcher ( 2007 ) , The Witcher 2 : Assassins of Kings ( 2011 ) , The Witcher 3 : Wild Hunt ( 2015 ) , and another Polish developer Reality Pump 's Two Worlds ( 2007 ) and Two Worlds 2 ( 2010 ) . Hybrid RPGs include Russian developer Elemental Games ' multi @-@ genre Space Rangers ( 2002 ) and Space Rangers 2 : Dominators ( 2004 ) , Ukrainian developer GSC Game World 's hybrid RPG / first @-@ person shooter <unk> : Shadow of Chernobyl ( 2007 ) , and Turkish developer <unk> ' hybrid RPG / medieval combat simulator , Mount & Blade ( 2008 ) . 
 The Finnish independent development studio Almost Human released Legend of <unk> , a Dungeon Master @-@ inspired game , in 2012 . A reboot of the long @-@ abandoned tile @-@ based dungeon @-@ crawler subgenre , it was a commercial success that reached the top of Steam 's " Top Sellers list " in April 2012 . Examples exist in which developers leave larger studios to form their own , independent development houses . For instance , in 2009 , a pair of developers left Obsidian to form <unk> Productions , and began development of a post @-@ apocalyptic zombie RPG , Dead State , using Iron Tower Studios ' The Age of Decadence game engine . Three employees left BioWare in 2012 to form Stoic Studio and develop the tactical RPG The Banner Saga ( TBA ) . Dead State and The Banner Saga are both supported in part by the public , through the crowd funding website Kickstarter , a recent trend in independent gaming . 
 = Uncle Tom 's Cabin ( 1910 Thanhouser film ) = 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film was adapted by from the 1852 novel Uncle Tom 's Cabin by Harriet Beecher Stowe . The plot of the Thanhouser production streamlined the actual story to portray the film over the course of a single reel . The film was released on July 26 , 1910 , on the same day that Vitagraph released the first reel of their own three reel version of Uncle Tom 's Cabin . This prompted the Thanhouser Company to advertise against the Vitagraph film by referring to the other as being overly drawn out . The film garnered mixed , but mostly positive reception in trade publications . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from July 30 , 1910 . It states : " The story opens in winter when Mr. Shelby has to sell some of his slaves due to business problems . Until this time they have lived all their lives with him , and he has been noted for his kindness to them .... Unfortunately the person to whom he was compelled to sell is the slave owner of the other sort , brutal , heartless , and a hard master - Simon Legree . Legree agrees to buy as many slaves as he desires , provided that Mr. Shelby gives him his choice . The slaves are passed and reviewed , and Legree selects Uncle Tom , one of the oldest and trusted , and the young son of Eliza , also a slave who has been with Shelby for many years . Despite the protestations of Mr. Shelby and the entreaties of the slaves themselves , these two are heartlessly taken from their homes and families . Legree refuses to buy any of the others , and as Shelby needs immediate money , he is forced to sell these two . The small boy is torn from his mother 's arms and placed in Uncle Tom 's care to be taken with him to Legree 's plantation . But Uncle Tom cannot resist a mother 's pleading , and when Eliza entreats him to give her back her child he does so and aids her to escape with him . " 
 " For this deed he is beaten by Legree and forced to join the bloodhounds in which Legree institutes to recover the slave . Eliza , with her boy in her arms , escapes over the Kentucky border to Ohio , a free state , making a perilous crossing on one block of ice to another on the Ohio River . Terribly overcome by the cold and faint from exposure , Eliza is carried unconscious to the home of Senator Bird of Ohio . Tracked down by the purchaser , Simon Legree , to Bird 's home , Mr. Bird out of goodness buys the boy and , giving him his freedom , gives him to his mother . Uncle Tom is not fortunate enough to find another purchaser and is taken by Legree to the plantation in Mississippi , finding on the trip that the new owner has taken a dislike to him and treats him with great brutality . " 
 During his journey , while waiting for a Mississippi steamboat , Uncle Tom first meets little Eva , who with her father is also taking the boat south . Tom is at once attracted to the beautiful little girl , and she in turn talks to the kindly old <unk> . While looking at the boats , the little one accidentally falls into the swiftly flowing river and escapes drowning only through the bravery of Uncle Tom . He of all the crowd has the courage to jump in and rescue the little girl . Eva 's father to reward Tom for his bravery , buys him from Legree , and once more Tom knows what it is to be treated kindly . He lives happily as little Eva 's special bodyguard until the little one is seized with a sudden sickness and dies . She had become greatly attached to Uncle Tom , and the last act of her life was to present him with a little locket containing her picture . Once more Uncle Tom is sold and again falls into the hands of Simon Legree . He is taken to Legree 's plantation in Mississippi , where he is overworked and ill treated to the point of death . Just before he dies he presses to his lips the locket with the picture of his beloved little girl and in a vision sees her in the clouds holding out her arms to him that he , too , may enter with her the pearly gates , inside of which all souls are equal , and all free . The comedy of the story is furnished by little Eva 's Aunt Ophelia , a queer old lawyer named Marx , and his stubborn donkey , to say nothing of Topsy , a wicked little colored girl , who Aunt Ophelia tries hard to convert . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Frank H. Crane as Uncle Tom 
 Anna Rosemond as Eliza 
 Marie Eline as Little Eva 
 Grace Eline as Topsy 
 = = Production = = 
 The 1852 publication of Uncle Tom 's Cabin by Harriet Beecher Stowe was the best @-@ selling novel of the 19th century and the second best @-@ selling book of that century , following the Bible . It is credited with helping fuel the abolitionist cause in the 1850s . The writer of the adapted scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The director of the film was Barry O 'Neil , whose real name was Thomas J. McCarthy . He would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . 
 Marie Eline , popularly known as " The Thanhouser Kid " played the role of Little Eva . Marie Eline would also play this role in the five @-@ reel World Film Corporation version of Uncle Tom 's Cabin , released on August 10 , 1914 . The role of Eliza was played by Anna Rosemond , one of two leading ladies of the Thanhouser company in this era . Frank H. Crane , cast in the role of Tom , was a leading male actor of the company . Crane was also involved in the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company and would later become a director at Thanhouser . Surviving film stills , from advertisements in Moving Picture World , show Crane in blackface in order to portray the part of Uncle Tom . The other players in the production are uncredited because their identities are unknown . Bowers states that most of the credits are fragmentary for 1910 Thanhouser productions . The cast and credits of this film are sometimes erroneously given because of confusion with other films of the same name . Robert K. Klepper , Silent Films , 1877 @-@ 1996 : A Critical Guide to 646 Movies , misidentifies the Thanhouser release as " Thanhouser / Minot " and lists the director as William Robert Daly . The 1914 Minot Films Inc. release was not produced by Thanhouser . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The one reel drama , approximately 1000 feet long , was released on July 26 , 1910 . The release of the film fell on the same date of Vitagraph 's Uncle Tom 's Cabin . Vitagraph had previously released multi @-@ reel works , but a three reel drama was considered a bold innovation by The New York Dramatic Mirror . The Mirror article stated the multi @-@ reel release was risky because Pathé 's two reel adaptation of Drink was not followed by other two reel releases . The sudden competition prompted Thanhouser to advertise against Vitagraph 's production in The Moving Picture World by declaring the three reel film as being overly drawn out and that audiences could get the full story in a single reel from Thanhouser . Edward Wagenknecht , author of The Movies in the Age of Innocence , refers to Thanhouser advertising against a two reel version with , " You can see the whole thing in one reel - why buy two ? " This is actually an erroneous reference to the three reel Vitagraph version by Edwin Thanhouser that was published in The Moving Picture World on March 10 , 1917 . H. Philip Bolton , author of Women Writers <unk> : A Calendar of Performances from Narrative Works Published in English to 1900 , would identify the Thanhouser and Vitagraph release , but is unable to identify and attribute the directorial and casting credits to the productions . A third 1910 adaptation , also named Uncle Tom 's Cabin , release by Pathé is cited in the The Complete Index to Literary Sources in Film . According to Bowers , most Thanhouser posters of this era were of one @-@ sheet size , but an additional six @-@ sheet format poster was created for Uncle Tom 's Cabin . The film likely had a wide national release , but specific identification of the Thanhouser film is muddied by the prevalence of Vitagraph 's production and stage plays . Two advertisements in Indiana and Kansas specifically note that the film to be shown will be the Thanhouser production . 
 By the time of the film 's release , the quality of the Thanhouser films in general stood out amongst the Independent producers . An editorial by " The Spectator " in the Mirror contained specific praise for Thanhouser productions by stating , " ... practically all other Independent American companies , excepting Thanhouser , show haste and lack of thought in their production . Crude stories are crudely handled , giving the impression that they are rushed through in a hurry - anything to get a thousand feet of negative ready for the market . Such pictures , of course , do not cost much to produce , but they are not of a class to make reputation . The Thanhouser company , alone of the Independents , shows a consistent effort to do things worthwhile ... " The editorial was written by Frank E. Woods of the American Biograph Company , a Licensed company , and like the publication itself had a considerable slant to the Licensed companies . 
 Still , the film received mixed praise from trade publications . The Mirror commended the film for the clever adaptation which preserved coherency in the story , the good acting and adequate costuming despite a few flaws in the production . Among the errors highlighted by the Mirror was Eliza 's ice scene and another scene where the black actors wore inaccurate attire such as a laborer who wore a fine shirt and tie . The The Morning Telegraph reviewer did not care for the production much , finding issues with the adaptation , the acting and the scenes . The Moving Picture News was more positive in its review , praising the photography and the sensible adaptation of the book to the film format . Three different reviews in The Moving Picture World were published , each of which were positive . In contrast to the fault found in the Mirror , one of the reviewers specifically praised the ice scene by stating , " This part of the picture seems to have been conceived and carried out with extraordinary realism . You see the snow falling , the ice floes cracking and moving , you felt the danger that the woman and child were running as they made their escape across the ice , pursued by their remorseless enemy through the blinding snowstorm . This is one of the finest effects I have seen on the moving picture screen , and the whole story , so far as I have seen it , is worked out with wonderful realism , effect and verisimilitude . It 's as good a rendering of the subject as I have ever seen , and I have seen Uncle Tom 's Cabin played several times . " The Leavenworth Times of Leavenworth , Kansas had an article reviewing the production and offered much praise for adaptation . 
 = Sun = 
 The Sun is the star at the center of the Solar System . It is a nearly perfect sphere of hot plasma , with internal convective motion that generates a magnetic field via a dynamo process . It is by far the most important source of energy for life on Earth . Its diameter is about 109 times that of Earth , and its mass is about 330 @,@ 000 times that of Earth , accounting for about 99 @.@ 86 % of the total mass of the Solar System . About three quarters of the Sun 's mass consists of hydrogen ; the rest is mostly helium , with much smaller quantities of heavier elements , including oxygen , carbon , neon , and iron . 
 The Sun is a G @-@ type main @-@ sequence star ( G2V ) based on spectral class and is informally referred to as a yellow dwarf . It formed approximately 4 @.@ 6 billion years ago from the gravitational collapse of matter within a region of a large molecular cloud . Most of this matter gathered in the center , whereas the rest flattened into an orbiting disk that became the Solar System . The central mass became so hot and dense , that it eventually initiated nuclear fusion in its core . It is thought that almost all stars form by this process . 
 The Sun is roughly middle @-@ aged and has not changed dramatically for over four billion years , and will remain fairly stable for more than another five billion years . However , after hydrogen fusion in its core has stopped , the Sun will undergo severe changes and become a red giant . It is calculated that the Sun will become sufficiently large to engulf the current orbits of Mercury , Venus , and possibly Earth . 
 The enormous effect of the Sun on Earth has been recognized since prehistoric times , and the Sun has been regarded by some cultures as a deity . The synodic rotation of Earth and its orbit around the Sun are the basis of the solar calendar , which is the predominant calendar in use today . 
 = = Name and etymology = = 
 The English proper noun Sun developed from Old English sunne and may be related to south . <unk> to English sun appear in other Germanic languages , including Old Frisian sunne , sonne , Old Saxon sunna , Middle Dutch sonne , modern Dutch <unk> , Old High German sunna , modern German Sonne , Old Norse sunna , and Gothic <unk> . All Germanic terms for the Sun stem from Proto @-@ Germanic * <unk> . 
 The English weekday name Sunday stems from Old English ( <unk> ; " Sun 's day " , from before 700 ) and is ultimately a result of a Germanic interpretation of Latin dies solis , itself a translation of the Greek <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . The Latin name for the Sun , Sol , is not common in general English language use ; the adjectival form is the related word solar . The term sol is also used by planetary astronomers to refer to the duration of a solar day on another planet , such as Mars . A mean Earth solar day is approximately 24 hours , whereas a mean Martian ' sol ' is 24 hours , 39 minutes , and 35 @.@ 244 seconds . 
 = = = Religious aspects = = = 
 Solar deities and Sun worship can be found throughout most of recorded history in various forms , including the Egyptian Ra , the Hindu Surya , the Japanese Amaterasu , the Germanic Sól , and the Aztec <unk> , among others . 
 From at least the 4th Dynasty of Ancient Egypt , the Sun was worshipped as the god Ra , portrayed as a falcon @-@ headed divinity surmounted by the solar disk , and surrounded by a serpent . In the New Empire period , the Sun became identified with the dung beetle , whose spherical ball of dung was identified with the Sun . In the form of the Sun disc Aten , the Sun had a brief resurgence during the Amarna Period when it again became the preeminent , if not only , divinity for the Pharaoh <unk> . 
 The Sun is viewed as a goddess in Germanic paganism , Sól / Sunna . Scholars theorize that the Sun , as a Germanic goddess , may represent an extension of an earlier Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European Sun deity because of Indo @-@ European linguistic connections between Old Norse Sól , Sanskrit Surya , Gaulish Sulis , Lithuanian <unk> , and Slavic <unk> . 
 In ancient Roman culture , Sunday was the day of the Sun god . It was adopted as the Sabbath day by Christians who did not have a Jewish background . The symbol of light was a pagan device adopted by Christians , and perhaps the most important one that did not come from Jewish traditions . In paganism , the Sun was a source of life , giving warmth and illumination to mankind . It was the center of a popular cult among Romans , who would stand at dawn to catch the first rays of sunshine as they prayed . The celebration of the winter solstice ( which influenced Christmas ) was part of the Roman cult of the unconquered Sun ( Sol Invictus ) . Christian churches were built with an orientation so that the congregation faced toward the sunrise in the East . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Sun is a G @-@ type main @-@ sequence star that comprises about 99 @.@ 86 % of the mass of the Solar System . The Sun has an absolute magnitude of + 4 @.@ 83 , estimated to be brighter than about 85 % of the stars in the Milky Way , most of which are red dwarfs . The Sun is a Population I , or heavy @-@ element @-@ rich , star . The formation of the Sun may have been triggered by shockwaves from one or more nearby supernovae . This is suggested by a high abundance of heavy elements in the Solar System , such as gold and uranium , relative to the abundances of these elements in so @-@ called Population II , heavy @-@ element @-@ poor , stars . The heavy elements could most plausibly have been produced by endothermic nuclear reactions during a supernova , or by transmutation through neutron absorption within a massive second @-@ generation star . 
 The Sun is by far the brightest object in the sky , with an apparent magnitude of − 26 @.@ 74 . This is about 13 billion times brighter than the next brightest star , Sirius , which has an apparent magnitude of − 1 @.@ 46 . The mean distance of the Sun 's center to Earth 's center is approximately 1 astronomical unit ( about 150 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ; 93 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 mi ) , though the distance varies as Earth moves from perihelion in January to aphelion in July . At this average distance , light travels from the Sun 's horizon to Earth 's horizon in about 8 minutes and 19 seconds , while light from the closest points of the Sun and Earth takes about two seconds less . The energy of this sunlight supports almost all life on Earth by photosynthesis , and drives Earth 's climate and weather . 
 The Sun does not have a definite boundary , and in its outer parts its density decreases exponentially with increasing distance from its center . For the purpose of measurement , however , the Sun 's radius is considered to be the distance from its center to the edge of the photosphere , the apparent visible surface of the Sun . By this measure , the Sun is a near @-@ perfect sphere with an oblateness estimated at about 9 millionths , which means that its polar diameter differs from its equatorial diameter by only 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . The tidal effect of the planets is weak and does not significantly affect the shape of the Sun . The Sun rotates faster at its equator than at its poles . This differential rotation is caused by convective motion due to heat transport and the Coriolis force due to the Sun 's rotation . In a frame of reference defined by the stars , the rotational period is approximately 25 @.@ 6 days at the equator and 33 @.@ 5 days at the poles . Viewed from Earth as it orbits the Sun , the apparent rotational period of the Sun at its equator is about 28 days . 
 = = Sunlight = = 
 The solar constant is the amount of power that the Sun deposits per unit area that is directly exposed to sunlight . The solar constant is equal to approximately 1 @,@ 368 W / m2 ( watts per square meter ) at a distance of one astronomical unit ( AU ) from the Sun ( that is , on or near Earth ) . Sunlight on the surface of Earth is attenuated by Earth 's atmosphere , so that less power arrives at the surface ( closer to 1 @,@ 000 W / m2 ) in clear conditions when the Sun is near the zenith . Sunlight at the top of Earth 's atmosphere is composed ( by total energy ) of about 50 % infrared light , 40 % visible light , and 10 % ultraviolet light . The atmosphere in particular filters out over 70 % of solar ultraviolet , especially at the shorter wavelengths . Solar ultraviolet radiation ionizes Earth 's dayside upper atmosphere , creating the electrically conducting ionosphere . 
 The Sun 's color is white , with a CIE color @-@ space index near ( 0 @.@ 3 , 0 @.@ 3 ) , when viewed from space or when the Sun is high in the sky . When measuring all the photons emitted , the Sun is actually emitting more photons in the green portion of the spectrum than any other . When the Sun is low in the sky , atmospheric scattering renders the Sun yellow , red , orange , or magenta . Despite its typical whiteness , most people mentally picture the Sun as yellow ; the reasons for this are the subject of debate . The Sun is a G2V star , with G2 indicating its surface temperature of approximately 5 @,@ 778 K ( 5 @,@ 505 ° C , 9 @,@ 941 ° F ) , and V that it , like most stars , is a main @-@ sequence star . The average luminance of the Sun is about 1 @.@ 88 giga candela per square metre , but as viewed through Earth 's atmosphere , this is lowered to about 1 @.@ 44 <unk> / m2 . However , the luminance is not constant across the disk of the Sun ( limb darkening ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Sun is composed primarily of the chemical elements hydrogen and helium ; they account for 74 @.@ 9 % and 23 @.@ 8 % of the mass of the Sun in the photosphere , respectively . All heavier elements , called metals in astronomy , account for less than 2 % of the mass , with oxygen ( roughly 1 % of the Sun 's mass ) , carbon ( 0 @.@ 3 % ) , neon ( 0 @.@ 2 % ) , and iron ( 0 @.@ 2 % ) being the most abundant . 
 The Sun inherited its chemical composition from the interstellar medium out of which it formed . The hydrogen and helium in the Sun were produced by Big Bang nucleosynthesis , and the heavier elements were produced by stellar nucleosynthesis in generations of stars that completed their stellar evolution and returned their material to the interstellar medium before the formation of the Sun . The chemical composition of the photosphere is normally considered representative of the composition of the primordial Solar System . However , since the Sun formed , some of the helium and heavy elements have gravitationally settled from the photosphere . Therefore , in today 's photosphere the helium fraction is reduced , and the metallicity is only 84 % of what it was in the protostellar phase ( before nuclear fusion in the core started ) . The protostellar Sun 's composition is believed to have been 71 @.@ 1 % hydrogen , 27 @.@ 4 % helium , and 1 @.@ 5 % heavier elements . 
 Today , nuclear fusion in the Sun 's core has modified the composition by converting hydrogen into helium , so the innermost portion of the Sun is now roughly 60 % helium , with the abundance of heavier elements unchanged . Because heat is transferred from the Sun 's core by radiation rather than by convection ( see Radiative zone below ) , none of the fusion products from the core have risen to the photosphere . 
 The reactive core zone of " hydrogen burning " , where hydrogen is converted into helium , is starting to surround an inner core of " helium ash " . This development will continue and will eventually cause the Sun to leave the main sequence , to become a red giant . 
 The solar heavy @-@ element abundances described above are typically measured both using spectroscopy of the Sun 's photosphere and by measuring abundances in meteorites that have never been heated to melting temperatures . These meteorites are thought to retain the composition of the protostellar Sun and are thus not affected by settling of heavy elements . The two methods generally agree well . 
 = = = <unk> ionized iron @-@ group elements = = = 
 In the 1970s , much research focused on the abundances of iron @-@ group elements in the Sun . Although significant research was done , until 1978 it was difficult to determine the abundances of some iron @-@ group elements ( e.g. cobalt and manganese ) via spectrography because of their hyperfine structures . 
 The first largely complete set of oscillator strengths of singly ionized iron @-@ group elements were made available in the 1960s , and these were subsequently improved . In 1978 , the abundances of singly ionized elements of the iron group were derived . 
 = = = Isotopic composition = = = 
 Various authors have considered the existence of a gradient in the isotopic compositions of solar and planetary noble gases , e.g. correlations between isotopic compositions of neon and xenon in the Sun and on the planets . 
 Prior to 1983 , it was thought that the whole Sun has the same composition as the solar atmosphere . In 1983 , it was claimed that it was fractionation in the Sun itself that caused the isotopic @-@ composition relationship between the planetary and solar @-@ wind @-@ implanted noble gases . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Core = = = 
 The core of the Sun extends from the center to about 20 – 25 % of the solar radius . It has a density of up to 150 g / cm3 ( about 150 times the density of water ) and a temperature of close to 15 @.@ 7 million kelvins ( K ) . By contrast , the Sun 's surface temperature is approximately 5 @,@ 800 K. Recent analysis of SOHO mission data favors a faster rotation rate in the core than in the radiative zone above . Through most of the Sun 's life , energy is produced by nuclear fusion in the core region through a series of steps called the p – p ( proton – proton ) chain ; this process converts hydrogen into helium . Only 0 @.@ 8 % of the energy generated in the Sun comes from the CNO cycle , though this proportion is expected to increase as the Sun becomes older . 
 The core is the only region in the Sun that produces an appreciable amount of thermal energy through fusion ; 99 % of the power is generated within 24 % of the Sun 's radius , and by 30 % of the radius , fusion has stopped nearly entirely . The remainder of the Sun is heated by this energy as is transferred outwards through many successive layers , finally to the solar photosphere where it escapes into space as sunlight or the kinetic energy of particles . 
 The proton – proton chain occurs around 9 @.@ 2 × 1037 times each second in the core , converting about 3 @.@ 7 × 1038 protons into alpha particles ( helium nuclei ) every second ( out of a total of ~ 8 @.@ 9 × 1056 free protons in the Sun ) , or about 6 @.@ 2 × 1011 kg / s . Fusing four free protons ( hydrogen nuclei ) into a single alpha particle ( helium nuclei ) releases around 0 @.@ 7 % of the fused mass as energy , so the Sun releases energy at the mass – energy conversion rate of 4 @.@ 26 million metric tons per second , for 384 @.@ 6 <unk> ( 3 @.@ 846 × 1026 W ) , or 9 @.@ 192 × 1010 megatons of TNT per second . Theoretical models of the Sun 's interior indicate a power density of approximately 276 @.@ 5 W / m3 , a value that more nearly approximates reptile metabolism than a thermonuclear bomb . 
 The fusion rate in the core is in a self @-@ correcting equilibrium : a slightly higher rate of fusion would cause the core to heat up more and expand slightly against the weight of the outer layers , reducing the density and hence the fusion rate and correcting the perturbation ; and a slightly lower rate would cause the core to cool and shrink slightly , increasing the density and increasing the fusion rate and again reverting it to its present rate . 
 = = = Radiative zone = = = 
 From the core out to about 0 @.@ 7 solar radii , thermal radiation is the primary means of energy transfer . The transfer of energy through this zone is by radiation not by thermal convection . The temperature drops from approximately 7 million to 2 million kelvins with increasing distance from the core . This temperature gradient is less than the value of the adiabatic lapse rate and hence cannot drive convection , hence , energy is transferred by radiation . Ions of hydrogen and helium emit photons , which travel only a brief distance before being reabsorbed by other ions . The density drops a hundredfold ( from 20 g / cm3 to only 0 @.@ 2 g / cm3 ) from 0 @.@ 25 solar radii to the 0 @.@ 7 radii , the top of the radiative zone . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The radiative zone and the convective zone are separated by a transition layer , the tachocline . This is a region where the sharp regime change between the uniform rotation of the radiative zone and the differential rotation of the convection zone results in a large shear between the two — a condition where successive horizontal layers slide past one another . The fluid motion of the convection zone above , slowly disappears from the top of this layer to its bottom where it matches that of the radiative zone . Presently , it is hypothesized ( see Solar dynamo ) that a magnetic dynamo within this layer generates the Sun 's magnetic field . 
 = = = Convective zone = = = 
 The Sun 's convection zone extends from 0 @.@ 7 solar radii ( 200 @,@ 000 km ) to near the surface . In this layer , the temperature is lower than in the radiative zone and heavier atoms are not fully ionized . As a result , radiative heat transport is less effective and convection moves the Sun 's energy outward through this layer . The density of the plasma is low enough to allow convective currents to develop . Material heated at the tachocline picks up heat and expands , thereby reducing its density and allowing it to rise . As a result , an orderly motion of the mass develops into thermal cells that carry the majority of the heat outward to the Sun 's photosphere above . Once the material <unk> and radiatively cools just beneath the photospheric surface , its density increases , and it sinks to the base of the convection zone , where it again picks up heat from the top of the radiative zone and the convective cycle continues . At the photosphere , the temperature has dropped to 5 @,@ 700 K and the density to only 0 @.@ 2 g / m3 ( about 1 / 6 @,@ 000 the density of air at sea level ) . 
 The thermal columns of the convection zone form an imprint on the surface of the Sun giving it a granular appearance called the solar granulation at the smallest scale and <unk> at larger scales . Turbulent convection in this outer part of the solar interior sustains " small @-@ scale " dynamo action over the near @-@ surface volume of the Sun . The Sun 's thermal columns are <unk> cells and take the shape of hexagonal prisms . 
 = = = Photosphere = = = 
 The visible surface of the Sun , the photosphere , is the layer below which the Sun becomes opaque to visible light . Above the photosphere visible sunlight is free to propagate into space , and its energy escapes the Sun entirely . The change in opacity is due to the decreasing amount of H − ions , which absorb visible light easily . Conversely , the visible light we see is produced as electrons react with hydrogen atoms to produce H − ions . The photosphere is tens to hundreds of kilometers thick , and is slightly less opaque than air on Earth . Because the upper part of the photosphere is cooler than the lower part , an image of the Sun appears brighter in the center than on the edge or limb of the solar disk , in a phenomenon known as limb darkening . The spectrum of sunlight has approximately the spectrum of a black @-@ body radiating at about 6 @,@ 000 K , interspersed with atomic absorption lines from the tenuous layers above the photosphere . The photosphere has a particle density of ~ 1023 m − 3 ( about 0 @.@ 37 % of the particle number per volume of Earth 's atmosphere at sea level ) . The photosphere is not fully ionized — the extent of ionization is about 3 % , leaving almost all of the hydrogen in atomic form . 
 During early studies of the optical spectrum of the photosphere , some absorption lines were found that did not correspond to any chemical elements then known on Earth . In 1868 , Norman Lockyer hypothesized that these absorption lines were caused by a new element that he dubbed helium , after the Greek Sun god Helios . Twenty @-@ five years later , helium was isolated on Earth . 
 = = = Atmosphere = = = 
 During a total solar eclipse , when the disk of the Sun is covered by that of the Moon , parts of the Sun 's surrounding atmosphere can be seen . It is composed of four distinct parts : the chromosphere , the transition region , the corona and the heliosphere . 
 The coolest layer of the Sun is a temperature minimum region extending to about 500 km above the photosphere , and has a temperature of about 4 @,@ 100 K. This part of the Sun is cool enough to allow the existence of simple molecules such as carbon monoxide and water , which can be detected via their absorption spectra . 
 The chromosphere , transition region , and corona are much hotter than the surface of the Sun . The reason is not well understood , but evidence suggests that Alfvén waves may have enough energy to heat the corona . 
 Above the temperature minimum layer is a layer about 2 @,@ 000 km thick , dominated by a spectrum of emission and absorption lines . It is called the chromosphere from the Greek root chroma , meaning color , because the chromosphere is visible as a colored flash at the beginning and end of total solar eclipses . The temperature of the chromosphere increases gradually with altitude , ranging up to around 20 @,@ 000 K near the top . In the upper part of the chromosphere helium becomes partially ionized . 
 Above the chromosphere , in a thin ( about 200 km ) transition region , the temperature rises rapidly from around 20 @,@ 000 K in the upper chromosphere to coronal temperatures closer to 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 K. The temperature increase is facilitated by the full ionization of helium in the transition region , which significantly reduces radiative cooling of the plasma . The transition region does not occur at a well @-@ defined altitude . Rather , it forms a kind of nimbus around chromospheric features such as spicules and filaments , and is in constant , chaotic motion . The transition region is not easily visible from Earth 's surface , but is readily observable from space by instruments sensitive to the extreme ultraviolet portion of the spectrum . 
 The corona is the next layer of the Sun . The low corona , near the surface of the Sun , has a particle density around 1015 m − 3 to 1016 m − 3 . The average temperature of the corona and solar wind is about 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 K ; however , in the hottest regions it is 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 K. Although no complete theory yet exists to account for the temperature of the corona , at least some of its heat is known to be from magnetic reconnection . The corona is the extended atmosphere of the Sun , which has a volume much larger than the volume enclosed by the Sun 's photosphere . A flow of plasma outward from the Sun into interplanetary space is the solar wind . 
 The heliosphere , the tenuous outermost atmosphere of the Sun , is filled with the solar wind plasma . This outermost layer of the Sun is defined to begin at the distance where the flow of the solar wind becomes <unk> — that is , where the flow becomes faster than the speed of Alfvén waves , at approximately 20 solar radii ( 0 @.@ 1 AU ) . Turbulence and dynamic forces in the heliosphere cannot affect the shape of the solar corona within , because the information can only travel at the speed of Alfvén waves . The solar wind travels outward continuously through the heliosphere , forming the solar magnetic field into a spiral shape , until it impacts the heliopause more than 50 AU from the Sun . In December 2004 , the Voyager 1 probe passed through a shock front that is thought to be part of the heliopause . In late 2012 Voyager 1 recorded a marked increase in cosmic ray collisions and a sharp drop in lower energy particles from the solar wind , which suggested that the probe had passed through the heliopause and entered the interstellar medium . 
 = = = Photons and neutrinos = = = 
 High @-@ energy gamma @-@ ray photons initially released with fusion reactions in the core are almost immediately absorbed by the solar plasma of the radiative zone , usually after traveling only a few millimeters . Re @-@ emission happens in a random direction and usually at a slightly lower energy . With this sequence of emissions and absorptions , it takes a long time for radiation to reach the Sun 's surface . Estimates of the photon travel time range between 10 @,@ 000 and 170 @,@ 000 years . In contrast , it takes only 2 @.@ 3 seconds for the neutrinos , which account for about 2 % of the total energy production of the Sun , to reach the surface . Because energy transport in the Sun is a process that involves photons in thermodynamic equilibrium with matter , the time scale of energy transport in the Sun is longer , on the order of 30 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 years . This is the time it would take the Sun to return to a stable state , if the rate of energy generation in its core were suddenly changed . 
 Neutrinos are also released by the fusion reactions in the core , but , unlike photons , they rarely interact with matter , so almost all are able to escape the Sun immediately . For many years measurements of the number of neutrinos produced in the Sun were lower than theories predicted by a factor of 3 . This discrepancy was resolved in 2001 through the discovery of the effects of neutrino oscillation : the Sun emits the number of neutrinos predicted by the theory , but neutrino detectors were missing 2 ⁄ 3 of them because the neutrinos had changed flavor by the time they were detected . 
 = = Magnetism and activity = = 
 = = = Magnetic field = = = 
 The Sun has a magnetic field that varies across the surface of the Sun . Its polar field is 1 – 2 gauss ( 0 @.@ 0001 – 0 @.@ 0002 T ) , whereas the field is typically 3 @,@ 000 gauss ( 0 @.@ 3 T ) in features on the Sun called sunspots and 10 – 100 gauss ( 0 @.@ 001 – 0 @.@ 01 T ) in solar prominences . 
 The magnetic field also varies in time and location . The quasi @-@ periodic 11 @-@ year solar cycle is the most prominent variation in which the number and size of sunspots waxes and wanes . 
 Sunspots are visible as dark patches on the Sun 's photosphere , and correspond to concentrations of magnetic field where the convective transport of heat is inhibited from the solar interior to the surface . As a result , sunspots are slightly cooler than the surrounding photosphere , and , so , they appear dark . At a typical solar minimum , few sunspots are visible , and occasionally none can be seen at all . Those that do appear are at high solar latitudes . As the solar cycle progresses towards its maximum , sunspots tend form closer to the solar equator , a phenomenon known as <unk> 's law . The largest sunspots can be tens of thousands of kilometers across . 
 An 11 @-@ year sunspot cycle is half of a 22 @-@ year Babcock – Leighton dynamo cycle , which corresponds to an oscillatory exchange of energy between toroidal and poloidal solar magnetic fields . At solar @-@ cycle maximum , the external poloidal dipolar magnetic field is near its dynamo @-@ cycle minimum strength , but an internal toroidal <unk> field , generated through differential rotation within the tachocline , is near its maximum strength . At this point in the dynamo cycle , buoyant upwelling within the convective zone forces emergence of toroidal magnetic field through the photosphere , giving rise to pairs of sunspots , roughly aligned east – west and having footprints with opposite magnetic polarities . The magnetic polarity of sunspot pairs alternates every solar cycle , a phenomenon known as the Hale cycle . 
 During the solar cycle ’ s declining phase , energy shifts from the internal toroidal magnetic field to the external poloidal field , and sunspots diminish in number . At solar @-@ cycle minimum , the toroidal field is , correspondingly , at minimum strength , sunspots are relatively rare , and the poloidal field is at its maximum strength . With the rise of the next 11 @-@ year sunspot cycle , differential rotation shifts magnetic energy back from the poloidal to the toroidal field , but with a polarity that is opposite to the previous cycle . The process carries on continuously , and in an idealized , simplified scenario , each 11 @-@ year sunspot cycle corresponds to a change , then , in the overall polarity of the Sun 's large @-@ scale magnetic field . 
 The solar magnetic field extends well beyond the Sun itself . The electrically conducting solar wind plasma carries the Sun 's magnetic field into space , forming what is called the interplanetary magnetic field . In an approximation known as ideal magnetohydrodynamics , plasma particles only move along the magnetic field lines . As a result , the outward @-@ flowing solar wind stretches the interplanetary magnetic field outward , forcing it into a roughly radial structure . For a simple dipolar solar magnetic field , with opposite hemispherical polarities on either side of the solar magnetic equator , a thin current sheet is formed in the solar wind . At great distances , the rotation of the Sun twists the dipolar magnetic field and corresponding current sheet into an Archimedean spiral structure called the Parker spiral . The interplanetary magnetic field is much stronger than the dipole component of the solar magnetic field . The Sun 's dipole magnetic field of 50 – 400 μT ( at the photosphere ) reduces with the inverse @-@ cube of the distance to about 0 @.@ 1 nT at the distance of Earth . However , according to spacecraft observations the interplanetary field at Earth 's location is around 5 nT , about a hundred times greater . The difference is due to magnetic fields generated by electrical currents in the plasma surrounding the Sun . 
 = = = Variation in activity = = = 
 The Sun 's magnetic field leads to many effects that are collectively called solar activity . Solar flares and coronal @-@ mass ejections tend to occur at sunspot groups . Slowly changing high @-@ speed streams of solar wind are emitted from coronal holes at the photospheric surface . Both coronal @-@ mass ejections and high @-@ speed streams of solar wind carry plasma and interplanetary magnetic field outward into the Solar System . The effects of solar activity on Earth include auroras at moderate to high latitudes and the disruption of radio communications and electric power . Solar activity is thought to have played a large role in the formation and evolution of the Solar System . 
 With solar @-@ cycle modulation of sunspot number comes a corresponding modulation of space weather conditions , including those surrounding Earth where technological systems can be affected . 
 = = = Long @-@ term change = = = 
 Long @-@ term secular change in sunspot number is thought , by some scientists , to be correlated with long @-@ term change in solar irradiance , which , in turn , might influence Earth 's long @-@ term climate . For example , in the 17th century , the solar cycle appeared to have stopped entirely for several decades ; few sunspots were observed during a period known as the Maunder minimum . This coincided in time with the era of the Little Ice Age , when Europe experienced unusually cold temperatures . Earlier extended minima have been discovered through analysis of tree rings and appear to have coincided with lower @-@ than @-@ average global temperatures . 
 A recent theory claims that there are magnetic instabilities in the core of the Sun that cause fluctuations with periods of either 41 @,@ 000 or 100 @,@ 000 years . These could provide a better explanation of the ice ages than the Milankovitch cycles . 
 = = Life phases = = 
 The Sun today is roughly halfway through the most stable part of its life . It has not changed dramatically for over four billion years , and will remain fairly stable for more than five billion more . However , after hydrogen fusion in its core has stopped , the Sun will undergo severe changes , both internally and externally . 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The Sun formed about 4 @.@ 6 billion years ago from the collapse of part of a giant molecular cloud that consisted mostly of hydrogen and helium and that probably gave birth to many other stars . This age is estimated using computer models of stellar evolution and through nucleocosmochronology . The result is consistent with the radiometric date of the oldest Solar System material , at 4 @.@ 567 billion years ago . Studies of ancient meteorites reveal traces of stable daughter nuclei of short @-@ lived isotopes , such as iron @-@ 60 , that form only in exploding , short @-@ lived stars . This indicates that one or more supernovae must have occurred near the location where the Sun formed . A shock wave from a nearby supernova would have triggered the formation of the Sun by compressing the matter within the molecular cloud and causing certain regions to collapse under their own gravity . As one fragment of the cloud collapsed it also began to rotate because of conservation of angular momentum and heat up with the increasing pressure . Much of the mass became concentrated in the center , whereas the rest flattened out into a disk that would become the planets and other Solar System bodies . Gravity and pressure within the core of the cloud generated a lot of heat as it accreted more matter from the surrounding disk , eventually triggering nuclear fusion . Thus , the Sun was born . 
 = = = Main sequence = = = 
 The Sun is about halfway through its main @-@ sequence stage , during which nuclear fusion reactions in its core fuse hydrogen into helium . Each second , more than four million tonnes of matter are converted into energy within the Sun 's core , producing neutrinos and solar radiation . At this rate , the Sun has so far converted around 100 times the mass of Earth into energy , about 0 @.@ 03 % of the total mass of the Sun . The Sun will spend a total of approximately 10 billion years as a main @-@ sequence star . The Sun is gradually becoming hotter during its time on the main sequence , because the helium atoms in the core occupy less volume than the hydrogen atoms that were fused . The core is therefore shrinking , allowing the outer layers of the Sun to move closer to the centre and experience a stronger gravitational force , according to the inverse @-@ square law . This stronger force increases the pressure on the core , which is resisted by a gradual increase in the rate at which fusion occurs . This process speeds up as the core gradually becomes denser . It is estimated that the Sun has become 30 % brighter in the last 4 @.@ 5 billion years . At present , it is increasing in brightness by about 1 % every 100 million years . 
 = = = After core hydrogen exhaustion = = = 
 The Sun does not have enough mass to explode as a supernova . Instead it will exit the main sequence in approximately 5 billion years and start to turn into a red giant . As a red giant , the Sun will grow so large that it will engulf Mercury , Venus , and probably Earth . 
 Even before it becomes a red giant , the luminosity of the Sun will have nearly doubled , and Earth will be hotter than Venus is today . Once the core hydrogen is exhausted in 5 @.@ 4 billion years , the Sun will expand into a subgiant phase and slowly double in size over about half a billion years . It will then expand more rapidly over about half a billion years until it is over two hundred times larger than today and a couple of thousand times more luminous . This then starts the red @-@ giant @-@ branch phase where the Sun will spend around a billion years and lose around a third of its mass . 
 After the red @-@ giant branch the Sun has approximately 120 million years of active life left , but much happens . First , the core , full of degenerate helium ignites violently in the helium flash , where it is estimated that 6 % of the core , itself 40 % of the Sun 's mass , will be converted into carbon within a matter of minutes through the triple @-@ alpha process . The Sun then shrinks to around 10 times its current size and 50 times the luminosity , with a temperature a little lower than today . It will then have reached the red clump or horizontal branch , but a star of the Sun 's mass does not evolve <unk> along the horizontal branch . Instead , it just becomes moderately larger and more luminous over about 100 million years as it continues to burn helium in the core . 
 When the helium is exhausted , the Sun will repeat the expansion it followed when the hydrogen in the core was exhausted , except that this time it all happens faster , and the Sun becomes larger and more luminous . This is the asymptotic @-@ giant @-@ branch phase , and the Sun is alternately burning hydrogen in a shell or helium in a deeper shell . After about 20 million years on the early asymptotic giant branch , the Sun becomes increasingly unstable , with rapid mass loss and thermal pulses that increase the size and luminosity for a few hundred years every 100 @,@ 000 years or so . The thermal pulses become larger each time , with the later pulses pushing the luminosity to as much as 5 @,@ 000 times the current level and the radius to over 1 AU . According to a 2008 model , Earth 's orbit is shrinking due to tidal forces ( and , eventually , drag from the lower chromosphere ) , so that it is engulfed by the Sun near the end of the asymptotic @-@ giant @-@ branch phase . Models vary depending on the rate and timing of mass loss . Models that have higher mass loss on the red @-@ giant branch produce smaller , less luminous stars at the tip of the asymptotic giant branch , perhaps only 2 @,@ 000 times the luminosity and less than 200 times the radius . For the Sun , four thermal pulses are predicted before it completely loses its outer envelope and starts to make a planetary nebula . By the end of that phase – lasting approximately 500 @,@ 000 years – the Sun will only have about half of its current mass . 
 The post @-@ asymptotic @-@ giant @-@ branch evolution is even faster . The luminosity stays approximately constant as the temperature increases , with the ejected half of the Sun 's mass becoming ionised into a planetary nebula as the exposed core reaches 30 @,@ 000 K. The final naked core , a white dwarf , will have a temperature of over 100 @,@ 000 K , and contain an estimated 54 @.@ 05 % of the Sun 's present day mass . The planetary nebula will disperse in about 10 @,@ 000 years , but the white dwarf will survive for trillions of years before fading to a hypothetical black . 
 = = Motion and location = = 
 = = = Orbit in Milky Way = = = 
 The Sun lies close to the inner rim of the Milky Way 's Orion Arm , in the Local Interstellar Cloud or the Gould Belt , at a distance of 7 @.@ 5 – 8 @.@ 5 kpc ( 25 @,@ 000 – 28 @,@ 000 light @-@ years ) from the Galactic Center . The Sun is contained within the Local Bubble , a space of rarefied hot gas , possibly produced by the supernova remnant <unk> . The distance between the local arm and the next arm out , the Perseus Arm , is about 6 @,@ 500 light @-@ years . The Sun , and thus the Solar System , is found in what scientists call the galactic habitable zone . The Apex of the Sun 's Way , or the solar apex , is the direction that the Sun travels relative to other nearby stars . This motion is towards a point in the constellation Hercules , near the star Vega . Of the 50 nearest stellar systems within 17 light @-@ years from Earth ( the closest being the red dwarf Proxima Centauri at approximately 4 @.@ 2 light @-@ years ) , the Sun ranks fourth in mass . 
 The Sun is orbiting the center of the Milky Way , going in the direction of Cygnus . The Sun 's orbit around the Milky Way is expected to be roughly elliptical with the addition of perturbations due to the galactic spiral arms and non @-@ uniform mass distributions . In addition the Sun oscillates up and down relative to the galactic plane approximately 2 @.@ 7 times per orbit . It has been argued that the Sun 's passage through the higher density spiral arms often coincides with mass extinctions on Earth , perhaps due to increased impact events . It takes the Solar System about 225 – 250 million years to complete one orbit through the Milky Way ( a galactic year ) , so it is thought to have completed 20 – 25 orbits during the lifetime of the Sun . The orbital speed of the Solar System about the center of the Milky Way is approximately 251 km / s ( 156 mi / s ) . At this speed , it takes around 1 @,@ 190 years for the Solar System to travel a distance of 1 light @-@ year , or 7 days to travel 1 AU . 
 The Milky Way is moving with respect to the cosmic microwave background radiation ( CMB ) in the direction of the constellation Hydra with a speed of 550 km / s , and the Sun 's resultant velocity with respect to the CMB is about 370 km / s in the direction of Crater or Leo . 
 = = Theoretical problems = = 
 = = = Coronal heating problem = = = 
 The temperature of the photosphere is approximately 6 @,@ 000 K , whereas the temperature of the corona reaches 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 K. The high temperature of the corona shows that it is heated by something other than direct heat conduction from the photosphere . 
 It is thought that the energy necessary to heat the corona is provided by turbulent motion in the convection zone below the photosphere , and two main mechanisms have been proposed to explain coronal heating . The first is wave heating , in which sound , gravitational or magnetohydrodynamic waves are produced by turbulence in the convection zone . These waves travel upward and dissipate in the corona , depositing their energy in the ambient matter in the form of heat . The other is magnetic heating , in which magnetic energy is continuously built up by photospheric motion and released through magnetic reconnection in the form of large solar flares and myriad similar but smaller events — <unk> . 
 Currently , it is unclear whether waves are an efficient heating mechanism . All waves except Alfvén waves have been found to dissipate or refract before reaching the corona . In addition , Alfvén waves do not easily dissipate in the corona . Current research focus has therefore shifted towards flare heating mechanisms . 
 = = = Faint young Sun problem = = = 
 Theoretical models of the Sun 's development suggest that 3 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 5 billion years ago , during the Archean period , the Sun was only about 75 % as bright as it is today . Such a weak star would not have been able to sustain liquid water on Earth 's surface , and thus life should not have been able to develop . However , the geological record demonstrates that Earth has remained at a fairly constant temperature throughout its history , and that the young Earth was somewhat warmer than it is today . The consensus among scientists is that the atmosphere of the young Earth contained much larger quantities of greenhouse gases ( such as carbon dioxide , methane and / or ammonia ) than are present today , which trapped enough heat to compensate for the smaller amount of solar energy reaching it . 
 = = History of observation = = 
 The enormous effect of the Sun on Earth has been recognized since prehistoric times , and the Sun has been regarded by some cultures as a deity . 
 = = = Early understanding = = = 
 The Sun has been an object of veneration in many cultures throughout human history . Humanity 's most fundamental understanding of the Sun is as the luminous disk in the sky , whose presence above the horizon creates day and whose absence causes night . In many prehistoric and ancient cultures , the Sun was thought to be a solar deity or other supernatural entity . Worship of the Sun was central to civilizations such as the ancient Egyptians , the Inca of South America and the Aztecs of what is now Mexico . In religions such as Hinduism , the Sun is still considered a god . Many ancient monuments were constructed with solar phenomena in mind ; for example , stone megaliths accurately mark the summer or winter solstice ( some of the most prominent megaliths are located in <unk> Playa , Egypt ; <unk> , Malta and at Stonehenge , England ) ; Newgrange , a prehistoric human @-@ built mount in Ireland , was designed to detect the winter solstice ; the pyramid of El Castillo at Chichén Itzá in Mexico is designed to cast shadows in the shape of serpents climbing the pyramid at the vernal and autumn equinoxes . 
 The Egyptians portrayed the god Ra as being carried across the sky in a solar barque , accompanied by lesser gods , and to the Greeks , he was Helios , carried by a chariot drawn by fiery horses . From the reign of Elagabalus in the late Roman Empire the Sun 's birthday was a holiday celebrated as Sol Invictus ( literally " Unconquered Sun " ) soon after the winter solstice , which may have been an antecedent to Christmas . Regarding the fixed stars , the Sun appears from Earth to revolve once a year along the ecliptic through the zodiac , and so Greek astronomers considered it to be one of the seven planets ( Greek <unk> , “ wanderer ” ) , after which the seven days of the week are named in some languages . 
 = = = Development of scientific understanding = = = 
 In the early first millennium BC , Babylonian astronomers observed that the Sun 's motion along the ecliptic is not uniform , though they did not know why ; it is today known that this is due to the movement of Earth in an elliptic orbit around the Sun , with Earth moving faster when it is nearer to the Sun at perihelion and moving slower when it is farther away at aphelion . 
 One of the first people to offer a scientific or philosophical explanation for the Sun was the Greek philosopher Anaxagoras , who reasoned that it is a giant flaming ball of metal even larger than the Peloponnesus rather than the chariot of Helios , and that the Moon reflected the light of the Sun . For teaching this heresy , he was imprisoned by the authorities and sentenced to death , though he was later released through the intervention of Pericles . Eratosthenes estimated the distance between Earth and the Sun in the 3rd century BC as " of stadia myriads 400 and 80000 " , the translation of which is ambiguous , implying either 4 @,@ 080 @,@ 000 stadia ( 755 @,@ 000 km ) or 804 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 stadia ( 148 to 153 million kilometers or 0 @.@ 99 to 1 @.@ 02 AU ) ; the latter value is correct to within a few percent . In the 1st century AD , Ptolemy estimated the distance as 1 @,@ 210 times the radius of Earth , approximately 7 @.@ 71 million kilometers ( 0 @.@ 0515 AU ) . 
 The theory that the Sun is the center around which the planets orbit was first proposed by the ancient Greek Aristarchus of Samos in the 3rd century BC , and later adopted by Seleucus of Seleucia ( see <unk> ) . This view was developed in a more detailed mathematical model of a heliocentric system in the 16th century by Nicolaus Copernicus . 
 Observations of sunspots were recorded during the Han Dynasty ( 206 BC – AD 220 ) by Chinese astronomers , who maintained records of these observations for centuries . Averroes also provided a description of sunspots in the 12th century . The invention of the telescope in the early 17th century permitted detailed observations of sunspots by Thomas Harriot , Galileo Galilei and other astronomers . Galileo posited that sunspots were on the surface of the Sun rather than small objects passing between Earth and the Sun . 
 Arabic astronomical contributions include <unk> ' discovery that the direction of the Sun 's apogee ( the place in the Sun 's orbit against the fixed stars where it seems to be moving slowest ) is changing . ( In modern heliocentric terms , this is caused by a gradual motion of the aphelion of the Earth 's orbit ) . Ibn Yunus observed more than 10 @,@ 000 entries for the Sun 's position for many years using a large astrolabe . 
 From an observation of a transit of Venus in 1032 , the Persian astronomer and polymath Avicenna concluded that Venus is closer to Earth than the Sun . In 1672 Giovanni Cassini and Jean Richer determined the distance to Mars and were thereby able to calculate the distance to the Sun . 
 In 1666 , Isaac Newton observed the Sun 's light using a prism , and showed that it is made up of light of many colors . In 1800 , William Herschel discovered infrared radiation beyond the red part of the solar spectrum . The 19th century saw advancement in spectroscopic studies of the Sun ; Joseph von Fraunhofer recorded more than 600 absorption lines in the spectrum , the strongest of which are still often referred to as Fraunhofer lines . In the early years of the modern scientific era , the source of the Sun 's energy was a significant puzzle . Lord Kelvin suggested that the Sun is a gradually cooling liquid body that is radiating an internal store of heat . Kelvin and Hermann von Helmholtz then proposed a gravitational contraction mechanism to explain the energy output , but the resulting age estimate was only 20 million years , well short of the time span of at least 300 million years suggested by some geological discoveries of that time . In 1890 Joseph Lockyer , who discovered helium in the solar spectrum , proposed a meteoritic hypothesis for the formation and evolution of the Sun . 
 Not until 1904 was a documented solution offered . Ernest Rutherford suggested that the Sun 's output could be maintained by an internal source of heat , and suggested radioactive decay as the source . However , it would be Albert Einstein who would provide the essential clue to the source of the Sun 's energy output with his mass @-@ energy equivalence relation E = mc2 . In 1920 , Sir Arthur Eddington proposed that the pressures and temperatures at the core of the Sun could produce a nuclear fusion reaction that merged hydrogen ( protons ) into helium nuclei , resulting in a production of energy from the net change in mass . The preponderance of hydrogen in the Sun was confirmed in 1925 by Cecilia Payne using the ionization theory developed by Meghnad Saha , an Indian physicist . The theoretical concept of fusion was developed in the 1930s by the astrophysicists Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar and Hans Bethe . Hans Bethe calculated the details of the two main energy @-@ producing nuclear reactions that power the Sun . In 1957 , Margaret Burbidge , Geoffrey Burbidge , William Fowler and Fred Hoyle showed that most of the elements in the universe have been synthesized by nuclear reactions inside stars , some like the Sun . 
 = = = Solar space missions = = = 
 The first satellites designed to observe the Sun were NASA 's Pioneers 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 and 9 , which were launched between 1959 and 1968 . These probes orbited the Sun at a distance similar to that of Earth , and made the first detailed measurements of the solar wind and the solar magnetic field . Pioneer 9 operated for a particularly long time , transmitting data until May 1983 . 
 In the 1970s , two Helios spacecraft and the Skylab Apollo Telescope Mount provided scientists with significant new data on solar wind and the solar corona . The Helios 1 and 2 probes were U.S. – German collaborations that studied the solar wind from an orbit carrying the spacecraft inside Mercury 's orbit at perihelion . The Skylab space station , launched by NASA in 1973 , included a solar observatory module called the Apollo Telescope Mount that was operated by astronauts resident on the station . Skylab made the first time @-@ resolved observations of the solar transition region and of ultraviolet emissions from the solar corona . Discoveries included the first observations of coronal mass ejections , then called " coronal transients " , and of coronal holes , now known to be intimately associated with the solar wind . 
 In 1980 , the Solar Maximum Mission was launched by NASA . This spacecraft was designed to observe gamma rays , X @-@ rays and UV radiation from solar flares during a time of high solar activity and solar luminosity . Just a few months after launch , however , an electronics failure caused the probe to go into standby mode , and it spent the next three years in this inactive state . In 1984 Space Shuttle Challenger mission STS @-@ 41C retrieved the satellite and repaired its electronics before re @-@ releasing it into orbit . The Solar Maximum Mission subsequently acquired thousands of images of the solar corona before re @-@ entering Earth 's atmosphere in June 1989 . 
 Launched in 1991 , Japan 's <unk> ( Sunbeam ) satellite observed solar flares at X @-@ ray wavelengths . Mission data allowed scientists to identify several different types of flares , and demonstrated that the corona away from regions of peak activity was much more dynamic and active than had previously been supposed . <unk> observed an entire solar cycle but went into standby mode when an annular eclipse in 2001 caused it to lose its lock on the Sun . It was destroyed by atmospheric re @-@ entry in 2005 . 
 One of the most important solar missions to date has been the Solar and <unk> Observatory , jointly built by the European Space Agency and NASA and launched on 2 December 1995 . Originally intended to serve a two @-@ year mission , a mission extension through 2012 was approved in October 2009 . It has proven so useful that a follow @-@ on mission , the Solar Dynamics Observatory ( SDO ) , was launched in February 2010 . Situated at the Lagrangian point between Earth and the Sun ( at which the gravitational pull from both is equal ) , SOHO has provided a constant view of the Sun at many wavelengths since its launch . Besides its direct solar observation , SOHO has enabled the discovery of a large number of comets , mostly tiny sungrazing comets that incinerate as they pass the Sun . 
 All these satellites have observed the Sun from the plane of the ecliptic , and so have only observed its equatorial regions in detail . The Ulysses probe was launched in 1990 to study the Sun 's polar regions . It first travelled to Jupiter , to " slingshot " into an orbit that would take it far above the plane of the ecliptic . Once Ulysses was in its scheduled orbit , it began observing the solar wind and magnetic field strength at high solar latitudes , finding that the solar wind from high latitudes was moving at about 750 km / s , which was slower than expected , and that there were large magnetic waves emerging from high latitudes that scattered galactic cosmic rays . 
 Elemental abundances in the photosphere are well known from spectroscopic studies , but the composition of the interior of the Sun is more poorly understood . A solar wind sample return mission , Genesis , was designed to allow astronomers to directly measure the composition of solar material . 
 The Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory ( <unk> ) mission was launched in October 2006 . Two identical spacecraft were launched into orbits that cause them to ( respectively ) pull further ahead of and fall gradually behind Earth . This enables stereoscopic imaging of the Sun and solar phenomena , such as coronal mass ejections . 
 The Indian Space Research Organisation has scheduled the launch of a 100 kg satellite named Aditya for 2017 – 18 . Its main instrument will be a coronagraph for studying the dynamics of the Solar corona . 
 = = Observation and effects = = 
 The brightness of the Sun can cause pain from looking at it with the naked eye ; however , doing so for brief periods is not hazardous for normal non @-@ dilated eyes . Looking directly at the Sun causes <unk> visual artifacts and temporary partial blindness . It also delivers about 4 milliwatts of sunlight to the retina , slightly heating it and potentially causing damage in eyes that cannot respond properly to the brightness . UV exposure gradually yellows the lens of the eye over a period of years , and is thought to contribute to the formation of cataracts , but this depends on general exposure to solar UV , and not whether one looks directly at the Sun . Long @-@ duration viewing of the direct Sun with the naked eye can begin to cause UV @-@ induced , sunburn @-@ like lesions on the retina after about 100 seconds , particularly under conditions where the UV light from the Sun is intense and well focused ; conditions are worsened by young eyes or new lens implants ( which admit more UV than aging natural eyes ) , Sun angles near the zenith , and observing locations at high altitude . 
 Viewing the Sun through light @-@ concentrating optics such as binoculars may result in permanent damage to the retina without an appropriate filter that blocks UV and substantially dims the sunlight . When using an attenuating filter to view the Sun , the viewer is cautioned to use a filter specifically designed for that use . Some improvised filters that pass UV or IR rays , can actually harm the eye at high brightness levels . Herschel wedges , also called Solar <unk> , are effective and inexpensive for small telescopes . The sunlight that is destined for the eyepiece is reflected from an <unk> surface of a piece of glass . Only a very small fraction of the incident light is reflected . The rest passes through the glass and leaves the instrument . If the glass breaks because of the heat , no light at all is reflected , making the device fail @-@ safe . Simple filters made of darkened glass allow the full intensity of sunlight to pass through if they break , endangering the observer 's eyesight . Unfiltered binoculars can deliver hundreds of times as much energy as using the naked eye , possibly causing immediate damage . It is claimed that even brief glances at the midday Sun through an unfiltered telescope can cause permanent damage . 
 Partial solar eclipses are hazardous to view because the eye 's pupil is not adapted to the unusually high visual contrast : the pupil dilates according to the total amount of light in the field of view , not by the brightest object in the field . During partial eclipses most sunlight is blocked by the Moon passing in front of the Sun , but the uncovered parts of the photosphere have the same surface brightness as during a normal day . In the overall gloom , the pupil expands from ~ 2 mm to ~ 6 mm , and each retinal cell exposed to the solar image receives up to ten times more light than it would looking at the non @-@ eclipsed Sun . This can damage or kill those cells , resulting in small permanent blind spots for the viewer . The hazard is insidious for inexperienced observers and for children , because there is no perception of pain : it is not immediately obvious that one 's vision is being destroyed . 
 During sunrise and sunset , sunlight is attenuated because of Rayleigh scattering and Mie scattering from a particularly long passage through Earth 's atmosphere , and the Sun is sometimes faint enough to be viewed comfortably with the naked eye or safely with optics ( provided there is no risk of bright sunlight suddenly appearing through a break between clouds ) . Hazy conditions , atmospheric dust , and high humidity contribute to this atmospheric attenuation . 
 An optical phenomenon , known as a green flash , can sometimes be seen shortly after sunset or before sunrise . The flash is caused by light from the Sun just below the horizon being bent ( usually through a temperature inversion ) towards the observer . Light of shorter wavelengths ( violet , blue , green ) is bent more than that of longer wavelengths ( yellow , orange , red ) but the violet and blue light is scattered more , leaving light that is perceived as green . 
 Ultraviolet light from the Sun has antiseptic properties and can be used to sanitize tools and water . It also causes sunburn , and has other biological effects such as the production of vitamin D and sun tanning . Ultraviolet light is strongly attenuated by Earth 's ozone layer , so that the amount of UV varies greatly with latitude and has been partially responsible for many biological adaptations , including variations in human skin color in different regions of the globe . 
 = Windows Server 2012 = 
 Windows Server 2012 , codenamed " Windows Server 8 " , is the sixth release of Windows Server . It is the server version of Windows 8 and succeeds Windows Server 2008 R2 . Two pre @-@ release versions , a developer preview and a beta version , were released during development . The software was generally available to customers starting on September 4 , 2012 . 
 Unlike its predecessor , Windows Server 2012 has no support for Itanium @-@ based computers , and has four editions . Various features were added or improved over Windows Server 2008 R2 ( with many placing an emphasis on cloud computing ) , such as an updated version of Hyper @-@ V , an IP address management role , a new version of Windows Task Manager , and ReFS , a new file system . Windows Server 2012 received generally good reviews in spite of having included the same controversial Metro @-@ based user interface seen in Windows 8 . 
 The successor to Windows Server 2012 , called Windows Server 2012 R2 , was released along with Windows 8 @.@ 1 in October 2013 . A service pack , formally designated Windows Server 2012 R2 Update , was released in April 2014 . 
 = = History = = 
 Windows Server 2012 , codenamed " Windows Server 8 " , is the sixth release of Windows Server family of operating systems developed concurrently with Windows 8 . It was not until April 17 , 2012 that the company announced that the final product name would be " Windows Server 2012 " . 
 Microsoft introduced Windows Server 2012 and its developer preview in the BUILD 2011 conference on September 9 , 2011 . However , unlike Windows 8 , the developer preview of Windows Server 2012 was only made available to <unk> subscribers . It included a graphical user interface ( GUI ) based on Metro design language and a new Server Manager , a graphical application used for server management . On February 16 , 2012 , Microsoft released an update for developer preview build that extended its expiry date from April 8 , 2012 to January 15 , 2013 . 
 Before Windows Server 2012 was finalized , two test builds were made public . A public beta version of Windows Server 2012 was released along with the Windows 8 Consumer Preview on February 29 , 2012 . The release candidate of Windows Server 2012 was released on May 31 , 2012 , along with the Windows 8 Release Preview . 
 The product was released to manufacturing on August 1 , 2012 and became generally available on September 4 , 2012 . However , not all editions of Windows Server 2012 were released at the same time . Windows Server 2012 Essentials was released to manufacturing on October 9 , 2012 and was made generally available on November 1 , 2012 . As of September 23 , 2012 , all students subscribed to <unk> program can download Windows Server 2012 Standard or Datacenter free of charge . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Installation options = = = 
 Unlike its predecessor , Windows Server 2012 can switch between " Server Core " and " Server with a GUI " installation options without a full reinstallation . Server Core - an option with a command @-@ line interface only - is now the recommended configuration . There is also a third installation option that allows some GUI elements such as MMC and Server Manager to run , but without the normal desktop , shell or default programs like File Explorer . 
 = = = User interface = = = 
 Server Manager has been redesigned with an emphasis on easing management of multiple servers . The operating system , like Windows 8 , uses the Metro @-@ based user interface unless installed in Server Core mode . Windows Store is available in this version of Windows but is not installed by default . Windows PowerShell in this version has over 2300 <unk> , compared to around 200 in Windows Server 2008 R2 . 
 = = = Task Manager = = = 
 Windows Server 2012 includes a new version of Windows Task Manager together with the old version . In the new version the tabs are hidden by default , showing applications only . In the new Processes tab , the processes are displayed in varying shades of yellow , with darker shades representing heavier resource use . It lists application names and status , as well as CPU , memory , hard disk and network utilization . The process information found in the older versions are now moved to the new Details tab . The Performance tab shows " CPU " , " Memory " , " Disk " , " Wi @-@ Fi " and " Ethernet " graphs . The CPU tab no longer displays individual graphs for every logical processor on the system by default , although that remains an option . Additionally , it can display data for each non @-@ uniform memory access ( NUMA ) node . When displaying data for each logical processor for machines with more than 64 logical processors , the CPU tab now displays simple utilization percentages on heat @-@ mapping tiles . The color used for these heat maps is blue , with darker shades again indicating heavier utilization . Hovering the cursor over any logical processor 's data now shows the NUMA node of that processor and its ID , if applicable . Additionally , a new Startup tab has been added that lists startup applications , however this tab does not exist in Windows Server 2012 . The new task manager recognizes when a Windows Store app has the " Suspended " status . 
 = = = IP address management ( IPAM ) = = = 
 Windows Server 2012 has an IP address management role for discovering , monitoring , auditing , and managing the IP address space used on a corporate network . The IPAM is used for the management and monitoring of Domain Name System ( DNS ) and Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol ( DHCP ) servers . Both IPv4 and IPv6 are fully supported . 
 = = = Active Directory = = = 
 Windows Server 2012 has a number of changes to Active Directory from the version shipped with Windows Server 2008 R2 . The Active Directory Domain Services installation wizard has been replaced by a new section in Server Manager , and a GUI has been added to the Active Directory Recycle Bin . Multiple password policies can be set in the same domain . Active Directory in Windows Server 2012 is now aware of any changes resulting from virtualization , and virtualized domain controllers can be safely cloned . Upgrades of the domain functional level to Windows Server 2012 are simplified ; it can be performed entirely in Server Manager . Active Directory Federation Services is no longer required to be downloaded when installed as a role , and claims which can be used by the Active Directory Federation Services have been introduced into the Kerberos token . Windows <unk> commands used by Active Directory Administrative Center can be viewed in a " <unk> History Viewer " . 
 = = = Hyper @-@ V = = = 
 Windows Server 2012 , along with Windows 8 , includes a new version of Hyper @-@ V , as presented at the Microsoft BUILD event . Many new features have been added to Hyper @-@ V , including network virtualization , multi @-@ tenancy , storage resource pools , cross @-@ premises connectivity , and cloud backup . Additionally , many of the former restrictions on resource consumption have been greatly lifted . Each virtual machine in this version of Hyper @-@ V can access up to 64 virtual processors , up to 1 terabyte of memory , and up to 64 terabytes of virtual disk space per virtual hard disk ( using a new <unk> format ) . Up to 1024 virtual machines can be active per host , and up to 8000 can be active per <unk> cluster . <unk> is a required processor feature for Hyper @-@ V on Windows 8 , while for Windows Server 2012 it is only required for the supplementary <unk> role . 
 = = = ReFS = = = 
 <unk> File System ( ReFS ) , codenamed " <unk> " , is a new file system in Windows Server 2012 initially intended for file servers that improves on NTFS in some respects . Major new features of ReFS include : 
 Improved reliability for on @-@ disk structures 
 ReFS uses B + trees for all on @-@ disk structures including metadata and file data . Metadata and file data are organized into tables similar to a relational database . The file size , number of files in a folder , total volume size and number of folders in a volume are limited by 64 @-@ bit numbers ; as a result ReFS supports a maximum file size of 16 <unk> , a maximum of 18 @.@ 4 × 1018 folders and a maximum volume size of 1 <unk> ( with 64 KB clusters ) which allows large scalability with no practical limits on file and folder size ( hardware restrictions still apply ) . Free space is counted by a hierarchical allocator which includes three separate tables for large , medium , and small chunks . File names and file paths are each limited to a 32 KB Unicode text string . 
 Built @-@ in resilience 
 ReFS employs an allocation @-@ on @-@ write update strategy for metadata , which allocates new chunks for every update transaction and uses large IO batches . All ReFS metadata has built @-@ in 64 @-@ bit <unk> which are stored independently . The file data can have an optional <unk> in a separate " integrity stream " , in which case the file update strategy also implements allocation @-@ on @-@ write ; this is controlled by a new " integrity " attribute applicable to both files and directories . If nevertheless file data or metadata becomes corrupt , the file can be deleted without taking the whole volume offline . As a result of built @-@ in resiliency , administrators do not need to periodically run error @-@ checking tools such as <unk> when using ReFS . 
 Compatibility with existing APIs and technologies 
 ReFS does not require new system APIs and most file system filters continue to work with ReFS volumes . ReFS supports many existing Windows and NTFS features such as <unk> encryption , Access Control Lists , USN Journal , change notifications , symbolic links , junction points , mount points , <unk> points , volume snapshots , file IDs , and <unk> . ReFS seamlessly integrates with Storage Spaces , a storage virtualization layer that allows data mirroring and striping , as well as sharing storage pools between machines . ReFS resiliency features enhance the mirroring feature provided by Storage Spaces and can detect whether any mirrored copies of files become corrupt using background data scrubbing process , which periodically reads all mirror copies and verifies their <unk> then replaces bad copies with good ones . 
 Some NTFS features are not supported in ReFS , including named streams , object IDs , short names , file compression , file level encryption ( EFS ) , user data transactions , hard links , extended attributes , and disk quotas . Sparse files are supported . ReFS does not itself offer data deduplication . Dynamic disks with mirrored or striped volumes are replaced with mirrored or striped storage pools provided by Storage Spaces . However , in Windows Server 2012 , automated error @-@ correction is only supported on mirrored spaces , and booting from ReFS is not supported either . 
 = = = IIS 8 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Windows Server 2012 includes version 8 @.@ 0 of Internet Information Services ( IIS ) . The new version contains new features such as SNI , CPU usage caps for particular websites , centralized management of SSL certificates , <unk> support and improved support for NUMA , but few other substantial changes were made . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Windows Server 2012 supports the following maximum hardware specifications . Windows Server 2012 improves over its predecessor Windows Server 2008 R2 : 
 = = System requirements = = 
 Windows Server 2012 runs only on x64 processors . Unlike its predecessor , Windows Server 2012 does not support Itanium . 
 Upgrades from Windows Server 2008 and Windows Server 2008 R2 are supported , although upgrades from prior releases are not . 
 = = Editions = = 
 Windows Server 2012 has four editions : Foundation , Essentials , Standard and Datacenter . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews of Windows Server 2012 have been generally positive . Simon Bisson of ZDNet described it as " ready for the <unk> , today , " while Tim Anderson of The Register said that " The move towards greater modularity , stronger automation and improved <unk> makes perfect sense in a world of public and private clouds " but remarked that " That said , the capability of Windows to deliver obscure and time @-@ consuming errors is unchanged " and concluded that " Nevertheless , this is a strong upgrade overall . " 
 InfoWorld noted that Server 2012 's use of Windows 8 's panned " Metro " user interface was countered by Microsoft 's increasing emphasis on the Server Core mode , which had been " fleshed out with new depth and ease @-@ of @-@ use features " and increased use of the " practically mandatory " PowerShell . However , Michael <unk> of Windows IT Pro expressed dislike with the new Metro interface and the lack of ability to use the older desktop interface alone , saying that most users of Windows Server manage their servers using the graphical user interface rather than PowerShell . The Australian construction company <unk> found the OS stable . 
 Paul <unk> wrote that " Windows Server 2012 Essentials provides all the pieces necessary to provide centralized file storage , client backups , and remote access , " but Tim Anderson contended that " Many businesses that are using <unk> and earlier will want to stick with what they have " , citing the absence of Exchange , the lack of ability to synchronize with Active Directory Federation Services and the 25 @-@ user limit , while Paul <unk> wrote " you should choose Foundation only if you have at least some in @-@ company IT staff and / or are comfortable outsourcing management to a Microsoft partner or solution provider " and " Essentials is , in my mind , ideal for any modern startup of just a few people . " 
 = = Windows Server 2012 R2 = = 
 Windows Server 2012 R2 was released on October 18 , 2013 . It was unveiled on June 3 , 2013 at <unk> North America . According to Windows Server 2012 R2 <unk> published on May 31 , 2013 , there are four editions of this operating system : Foundation , Essentials , Standard and Datacenter . As with Windows Server 2012 , the Datacenter and Standard editions are feature identical , varying only based on licensing ( particularly licensing of virtual instances ) . The Essentials edition has the same features as the Datacenter and Standard products , with some restrictions . 
 A further update , formally designated Windows Server 2012 R2 Update , was released in April 2014 , a cumulative set of security updates , critical updates and updates . 
 Windows Server 2012 R2 is succeeded by Windows Server 2016 . 
 = = = Changes from Windows Server 2012 = = = 
 Microsoft has confirmed the following changes introduced by Windows Server 2012 R2 : 
 Automated <unk> : Storage Spaces stores most frequently accessed files on fastest physical media 
 <unk> for VHD : <unk> the storage space for VHD files with largely similar contents by storing the similar contents only once 
 Windows PowerShell v4 , which now includes a Desired State Configuration ( DSC ) feature 
 Integrated Office 365 support ( Essentials edition ) 
 User interface changes from Windows 8 @.@ 1 , including visible Start button . 
 UEFI @-@ based virtual machines 
 Upgrades from driver emulators to synthetic hardware drivers to minimize legacy support 
 Faster VM deployment ( approximately half the time ) 
 Internet Information Services 8 @.@ 5 : Support for logging to Event Tracing for Windows and the ability to log any request / response headers . To improve scalability , if IIS is configured with 100 or more web sites , by default it will not automatically start any of them . Alongside this , a new " Idle Worker Process Page @-@ Out " configuration option has been added to application pools to instruct Windows to page @-@ out the process if it has been idle for the idle time @-@ out period ( by default , 20 minutes ) . 
 Server Message Block : Performance and event logging quality improvements , support for Hyper @-@ V Live Migration over SMB , bandwidth prioritization management , and the ability to remove SMB 1 @.@ 0 support 
 Windows Deployment Services : Support for managing WDS via PowerShell . 
 Windows Defender is available in a Server Core installation , and is installed and enabled by default . 
 IP Address Management ( IPAM ) : Extended to support role @-@ based access control , allowing for fine @-@ grained control over which users can view or change configurations for DHCP reservations , scopes , IP address blocks , DNS resource records , etc . Additionally , IPAM can integrate with System Center Virtual Machine Manager 2012 R2 to have coordinated IP policy across both physical and virtual environments . The IPAM database can be stored in a SQL Server instance instead of Windows Internal Database . 
 Group Policy has a new " Policy Cache " setting which allows domain @-@ joined machines to store a copy of the group policy settings on the client machine and , depending on the speed of access to the domain controller , use those at startup time instead of waiting for the policy settings to download . This can improve startup times on machines that are disconnected from the company network . New Group Policy settings have been added to cover new features in Windows 8 @.@ 1 and Internet Explorer 11 , such as enabling / disabling <unk> / 3 support , configuring start screen layouts , and detecting phone numbers in web pages . 
 TLS support is extended to support RFC <unk> , " Transport Layer Security ( TLS ) Session Resumption without Server @-@ Side State " , which improves performance of long @-@ running TLS @-@ secured connections that need to reconnect due to session expiration . 
 Hyper @-@ V role and Hyper @-@ V management console are added to the Essentials edition . 
 Windows Server Update Services was made available for Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials edition . 
 = Darah dan Doa = 
 Darah dan Doa ( [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; Indonesian for Blood and Prayer , released internationally as The Long March ) is a 1950 Indonesian war film directed and produced by Usmar Ismail . Telling the story of the Siliwangi Division and its leader Captain Sudarto on a march to West Java , Darah dan Doa is often cited as the first " Indonesian " film , and the film 's first day of shooting – 30 March – is celebrated in Indonesia as National Film Day . 
 Produced on a budget of 350 @,@ 000 rupiah and intended to be screened at the Cannes Film Festival , financial difficulties led production of Darah dan Doa to almost stop before the director received financial backing . After raising controversy for its subject material , the film underwent censorship and was finally released to commercial failure . Retrospective analysis has , however , been more positive , and Ismail has been dubbed the " father of Indonesian film " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Siliwangi Division , originally headquartered in West Java , is temporarily based in Central Java owing to the Renville Agreement . After putting down a communist rebellion in Madiun , killing numerous members of the Communist Party of Indonesia in the process , they are on a break . The division 's leader , Captain Sudarto , meets with an Indo woman named Connie , who is originally from Bandung . The two become friendly , but after a Dutch attack is launched on the capital at Yogyakarta , they must separate as the division heads westwards . Captain Sudarto leads his men – together with women and children – over more than 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) , resting during the day and travelling in the morning and evening . They face hunger , a shortage of supplies , and Dutch air strikes . Along the way , Sudarto begins falling in love with a nurse named Widya . 
 The division comes across a village which has been razed to the ground by Dutch forces , killing almost all of its inhabitants . Upon directions from the sole survivor , they go to a nearby village and are warmly received , being given much needed food . As the men settle for the night , Sudarto goes for a walk with Widya , raising the men 's ire . That night the men sleep comfortably in beds while the villagers stand guard . In the morning , however , the villagers – who are revealed to be related to the Darul Islam militant group – turn on them . The men successfully fight back , though Sudarto is shot by the village chief . 
 Sudarto orders the chief executed , a deed which ultimately falls on the man 's son . Afterwards the division continues west . One night , Sudarto 's second @-@ in @-@ command Adam tells him that the men are restless over his relationship with Widya . They argue , and Widya – who has overheard everything – says that she will go . The following morning Dutch soldiers launch an ambush in which many are killed , including Widya and Adam . The division in dire straits , Sudarto offers to go to nearby Bandung on his own for the much @-@ needed supplies , leaving his fellow officer Leo in charge . After meeting with resistance fighters who offer supplies , Sudarto goes to visit Connie and is captured by Dutch forces . 
 While in prison Sudarto is tortured and begins to regret his actions , especially his womanising . After the Dutch recognise Indonesia 's independence , Sudarto is released from prison , only to learn that his wife has left him and he is under investigation for poor leadership . After meeting with Leo , he realises that the division had reached safety . One night , as he reads his diary , Sudarto is accosted by a man whose relatives were killed in Madiun . After the two argue , Sudarto is shot dead . 
 = = Production = = 
 Darah dan Doa was directed by Usmar Ismail , a former soldier who had previously served as assistant director on Andjar Asmara 's Gadis Desa ( Village Maiden ) and directed two films on his own , <unk> ( Image ) and Harta Karun ( Treasure ; all 1949 ) . Creative control for these works , all of which were produced for the Dutch @-@ sponsored South Pacific Film Corporation ( SPFC ) , was held by cameraman A.A. Denninghoff @-@ Stelling ; Ismail served more as a dialogue coach . When the Netherlands recognised Indonesia 's independence following several months of conferences in 1949 , Ismail and other SPFC staff discussed establishing their own studio , though steps were not taken to do so until the following year . For his first production , Ismail chose to adapt a short story by the poet <unk> <unk> , which the latter man had brought to him ; Ismail later wrote that he considered it interesting because it " honestly told the story of a man without descending into cheap propaganda " . 
 Crew for the production consisted of cameraman Max Tera , a former SPFC employee , with makeup by <unk> ' , artistic design by Basuki Resobowo , G. R. W. <unk> on music , and <unk> and E. <unk> responsible for the sound effects . Ismail , using his military connections , received technical assistance from various members of the Indonesian Army , particularly Captain <unk> . The film 's cast mostly consisted of newcomers who had responded to newspaper advertisements , a conscious decision by Ismail who was searching for " new faces with fresh talent " Ismail adapted this technique from Italian directors such as Roberto Rossellini and Vittorio De Sica . Ultimately Del <unk> , a law student , was cast as Sudarto , with other spots going to Ella Bergen , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> Djamin , Rd Ismail , Suzana , Muradi , and Rosihan Anwar . 
 Twenty @-@ nine years old , Ismail began shooting on 30 March 1950 in Subang , West Java . The following day he established his own studio , Perfini , to produce the film . Unlike his earlier films , Ismail had severe technical limitations . Though <unk> had cost 67 @,@ 500 rupiah , when the filming of Darah dan Doa began Ismail had only collected 30 @,@ 000 – more than half of which was spent to rent the SPFC ( since renamed Produksi Film Negara [ State Film Company , or PFN ] ) studios and facilities . For their trip to Subang , the cast and crew rented a decrepit <unk> ; filming was completed using an aged ( " decades @-@ old " ) Akeley camera ; and the crew had to hold more than one role . 
 Human factors also led to delays in production . Ismail and the other crew members attempted to achieve realism by ensuring everything in the film was as it was in life , a decision which he later recanted after realising that " film was truly the art of make @-@ believe , making people believe something , creating a new reality from what is . " Cast @-@ wise , three actors ( including the lead , Del <unk> ) , competed for the affections of <unk> , leading to frictions between the actors . The cast also argued about interpretations of their roles , with Ismail insisting on them following his direction . 
 During filming , Ismail typed his shooting scripts every night , expanding on the source material . After each day of filming had concluded , Ismail sent the results back to PFN in Jakarta and obtained rush prints which he screened for the cast and crew . One such showing spurred a deal between Ismail and local cinema owner Tong Kim Mew , in attendance at the time : Tong would lend funds the production , heavily in debt ( Ismail notes that , by this point , they had not paid their lodgings in " a while " ) , needed , while Ismail would allow Tong to handle distribution . This funding allowed the crew to finish shooting , including further scenes in <unk> . Upon returning to Jakarta , Ismail and the crew found that some of the footage was unusable , as the " story did not work " . As such , additional footage was shot in West Javan mountains , including Mounts Lawu and Gede . Other scenes were filmed at the banks of Citarum River . Ultimately the film cost 350 @,@ 000 rupiah ( then approximately $ 90 @,@ 000 USD ) , over three times that of an average contemporary production . 
 = = Release = = 
 Darah dan Doa was released in 1950 and distributed by Spectra Film Exchange . It was given the English title The Long March , which the American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider suggests is a reference to the Chinese Long March of 1934 . Not long after the film 's release , a two @-@ pronged controversy grew around it , which resulted in the film being banned in parts of the country . Members of other military divisions considered the film to put too much emphasis on Siliwangi 's role , while members of the general public had difficulty believing that Darul Islam could have betrayed the national cause . Ultimately the film required President Sukarno 's permission to be re @-@ released in September 1950 , after he received a private screening at the Presidential Palace in mid @-@ 1950 . However , several scenes had to be cut . 
 Domestic critical reception of Darah dan Doa , which was advertised as showing " fierce fighting against the colonials ! " and " the joys and sorrows in guerrilla warfare " , was predominantly negative . A review in the newspaper Merdeka considered Darah dan Doa unsatisfying , with only a few acceptable scenes . Armijn Pane , writing four years after the film 's release , criticised the troops ' neatness during their march , writing that their uniforms should have become progressively dirtier . Foreign reception , however , has been more positive . The Japanese film critic Tadao Sato , for instance , praised the film 's concept , comparing it to the work of Andrzej Wajda . 
 The Indonesian film critic Salim Said writes that Ismail intended to " not consider commercial aspects " and send the film to the Cannes Film Festival in France . Ultimately Darah dan Doa was both a financial failure , with losses that were not recouped until after Ismail released his next film the following year . The film was not screened at Cannes . In a 1960 retrospective , the company attributed the film 's failure to a conflict of what the people wanted and what was provided ; the write @-@ up stated that Ismail had not meant to portray the military as it should be , but as it was – as well as individuals within it . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ismail considered Darah dan Doa reflective of a " national personality " , and , in a 1962 letter , he wrote that he considered it his first film because he had had little creative control in his 1949 productions . After directing the film he went on to make twenty @-@ five more films as director , including two ( Enam Djam di Jogja [ Six Hours in Jogja ; 1951 ] and Pedjuang [ Warriors for Freedom ; 1959 ] ) dealing with the Indonesian National Revolution ; competing companies also released films in a similar vein , though Biran argues that they did not touch on the essence of the revolution . For his role as Darah dan Doa 's director and his subsequent work , Ismail has been dubbed the " father of Indonesian film " , though the film scholar Thomas Barker suggests that his role in the film industry 's development was exaggerated by the New Order for their anti @-@ communist , pro @-@ nationalistic purposes . 
 Darah dan Doa is often considered the first " national " Indonesian film , although the first movie produced in the area , L. Heuveldorp 's Loetoeng Kasaroeng , had been released 24 years prior . According to the Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran , the films released between 1926 and 1949 could not be called Indonesian films , for there was no sense of national identity . The film critic Nova Chairil stated likewise , considering the film the first to be " directed by a native Indonesian , produced by an Indonesian production house , and filmed in Indonesia " . Barker and the doctoral candidate Charlotte <unk> @-@ Dunn , however , argue that films by ethnic Chinese producers – generally dismissed as profit oriented in mainstream studies – already contained an Indonesian identity , citing examples such as Njoo Cheong Seng 's Kris Mataram ( Keris of Mataram ; 1940 ) . They note that , unlike the homogenous national identity offered in Darah dan Doa , these Chinese @-@ produced films offered the possibility of a heterogeneous identity . 
 The Indonesian film community began celebrating the first day of Darah dan Doa 's shooting , 30 March , as National Film Day in 1950 . In a 1962 conference of the National Film Board of Indonesia , the date was given more formal recognition as National Film Day , and Darah dan Doa was recognised as the first " national film " . National Film Day was formally established in 1999 , when President B. J. Habibie passed Presidential Decree no . 25 / 1999 . According to actor turned film director Slamet Rahardjo , the commemoration is so that " Indonesians acknowledge their local film industry and are willing to develop it " . 
 The Siliwangi Division 's long march was the subject of another film , Mereka Kembali ( They Return ) in 1972 . Directed by Nawi Ismail , it starred Sandy <unk> Hassan , <unk> Effendi , Rina Hasyim , and <unk> <unk> . Mereka Kembali won a single award , Runner @-@ Up for Best Actor ( Arman <unk> ) , at the 1972 Indonesian Film Festival . Heider , contrasting the two films , suggests that Darah dan Doa portrayed communists in a more sympathetic light and " ignored " Darul Islam , while Mereka Kembali did not depict the events in Madiun and demonised Darul Islam . He suggests that the earlier film was released in " a time for healing , a time to consolidate the new republic , to reincorporate even those who ... had fought against it . " He further suggests that Darah dan Doa was more Europeanised and individualistic , with a focus of Sudarto , while Mereka Kembali emphasised the importance of the group and represented an " <unk> of the national cinema " . 
 The Indonesian video archive Sinematek Indonesia holds both 35 mm and VHS copies of Darah dan Doa . It is also held at the Cinémathèque Française . The film continues to be screened at festivals . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Brian McGrattan = 
 Brian McGrattan ( born September 2 , 1981 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey player . He is currently an unrestricted free agent who most recently was a member within the Anaheim Ducks organization of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . McGrattan was a fourth round selection of the Los Angeles Kings ( 104th overall ) at the 1999 NHL Entry Draft but never signed with the team . He signed with the Ottawa Senators organization in 2002 and made his NHL debut with the team three years later . McGrattan has also played in the NHL with the Phoenix Coyotes , Nashville Predators and Calgary Flames , and as a career journeyman , with five American Hockey League ( AHL ) teams . 
 An enforcer , he holds the AHL record for most penalty minutes in one season with 551 , set in 2004 – 05 with the Binghamton Senators . McGrattan overcame an alcohol abuse problem that plagued him early in his career and has become a partner with the NHL 's substance abuse program and mentor to fellow players . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 A native of Hamilton , Ontario , McGrattan played minor hockey in the city where he was one of his teams ' best scorers before moving to Toronto to play bantam and junior hockey . He played five seasons in the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) between 1997 and 2002 . He appeared in 25 games with the Guelph Storm in 1997 – 98 , and although he did not appear in any playoff games , he was a member of the Storm 's J. Ross Robertson Cup winning team as OHL champions . After only six games with Guelph the following season , McGrattan was sent to the Sudbury Wolves where he recorded 153 penalties in minutes ( PIM ) in 53 games to go along with 17 points . He followed that season up by scoring 32 points and recording 245 PIM in 1999 – 2000 in a season split between Sudbury and the Mississauga IceDogs . 
 Playing the entire 2000 – 01 season with Mississauga , McGrattan led the IceDogs with 20 goals despite playing only 31 games . He missed the majority of the season after suffering a knee injury in a January 1 , 2001 , game against the Kingston Frontenacs . He began the 2001 – 02 OHL season as Mississauga 's captain , but was traded to the Owen Sound Attack in October 2001 , then to the Oshawa Generals a few days later . He was traded again , to the Sault Ste . Marie Greyhounds in January 2002 . Split between the four teams , McGrattan appeared in 60 games , scored 20 goals and 35 points , and had 159 PIM . 
 = = = Ottawa Senators = = = 
 McGrattan was selected by the Los Angeles Kings in the fourth round , 104th overall , of the 1999 NHL Entry Draft , but the Kings opted not to sign him to a contract following his knee injury . He attended the Detroit Red Wings ' development camp prior to the 2001 – 02 season , before signing a contract with the Ottawa Senators on June 2 , 2002 . He spent three seasons in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) with Ottawa 's affiliate , the Binghamton Senators . McGrattan scored his first professional point on October 11 , 2002 , against the Bridgeport Sound Tigers ; an assist on a Jeff Ulmer goal that also stood as the first goal in Binghamton 's history . 
 Due to his size , McGrattan believed his best chance of making it to the NHL was as an enforcer . Dennis <unk> , the all @-@ time penalty leader in professional hockey , taught him to be a better fighter while the two were teammates in Binghamton . After posting 173 PIM in 2002 – 03 , McGrattan finished second in the AHL with 327 in 2003 – 04 . He then set an AHL single @-@ season record for penalties with 551 in 2004 – 05 . 
 Having established himself as an enforcer , and with the Senators seeking to add physical toughness to their lineup , McGrattan earned a spot on Ottawa 's roster for the 2005 – 06 season . He appeared in 60 games with Ottawa where he recorded five points and 141 PIM . McGrattan scored his first NHL goal on November 19 , 2005 , against goaltender Martin Brodeur of the New Jersey Devils , and led the league with 19 fights . His most famous battle came against Tie Domi of the Toronto Maple Leafs . McGrattan knocked his opponent down with one punch , which the Toronto Star called Domi 's " most decisive loss in 10 years " . 
 His role with the team diminished over the following two seasons , as McGrattan appeared in only 45 games in 2006 – 07 and 38 in 2007 – 08 . He had only five points and 146 PIM combined between the two seasons . McGrattan made headlines midway through the 2007 – 08 campaign when he fought teammate and goaltender Ray Emery – himself a noted fighter – in practice . McGrattan 's on @-@ ice performance had suffered over time in Ottawa as a result of a worsening drinking problem he had developed beginning early in his career with Binghamton . 
 = = = Phoenix , Calgary and Nashville = = = 
 The Senators struggled late in the 2007 – 08 season , leading general manager Bryan Murray to make changes to the team . Both Emery and McGrattan were sent from Ottawa in separate transactions . McGrattan , a pending free agent , was traded to the Phoenix Coyotes on June 25 , 2008 , in exchange for a fifth round draft pick in the 2009 NHL Entry Draft . The Coyotes subsequently signed him to a one @-@ year contract for the 2008 – 09 season . However , he played only three games with Phoenix before he voluntarily entered the league 's substance abuse program . McGrattan 's struggles with alcohol abuse reached its lowest point and he spent over two months at an Arizona rehab centre as he worked toward changing his life . He returned to the Coyotes late in the season but played only two additional games before he suffered a shoulder injury that required surgery to repair . 
 McGrattan was six months sober when he signed with the Calgary Flames for the 2009 – 10 season . He recorded his first career " Gordie Howe hat trick " – a goal , assist and fight – on October 16 , 2009 , in a 5 – 3 victory over the Vancouver Canucks . The goal was his first NHL marker in three years . He added only two assists to finish with four points in 34 games . McGrattan also fought 14 times and was allowed to go to free agency following the season . 
 McGrattan attended the Boston Bruins camp on a try @-@ out basis , and earned a one @-@ year contract with the team . He was assigned to the Providence Bruins to begin the 2010 – 11 season and spent the entire campaign in the AHL . The Bruins traded him to the Anaheim Ducks , along with Sean Zimmerman , in exchange for David Laliberte and Stefan Chaput on February 27 , 2011 . He was assigned to the Syracuse Crunch , where he set a franchise record for shots in one game with 13 in a March 12 game against the Rochester Americans . McGrattan scored 10 goals combined between Providence and Syracuse , the highest single @-@ season total of his AHL career . 
 After beginning the 2011 – 12 NHL season in the Ducks ' organization , McGrattan was claimed off waivers by the Nashville Predators on October 11 , 2011 . The transaction resurrected his NHL career and earned praise from his former teammates who praised him as being a " great guy " and a hard worker . McGrattan appeared in 30 games for Nashville , including his 200th career game on December 8 against the Columbus Blue Jackets . After two games with the Predators in the lockout @-@ shortened 2012 – 13 season , McGrattan was assigned to the AHL 's Milwaukee Admirals . 
 After only six games in Milwaukee , McGrattan was traded back to the Flames , in exchange for Joe <unk> , on February 28 , 2013 . McGrattan 's positive influence in the locker room as a player always prepared to play was cited as a reason why Calgary re @-@ acquired him . The Flames also expected he would add a physical presence to the team , which he did in his re @-@ debut with the Flames , a 4 – 2 victory over Vancouver that included several hits and a fight with Tom Sestito – his first NHL fight in over a year . He gave the crowd a salute following the fight , sending the fans into a frenzy and earning a ten @-@ minute misconduct . He finished the season with three goals and 49 PIM in 19 games with the Flames , and earned a two @-@ year contract extension from the team . 
 McGrattan was a regular in the Flames lineup throughout 2013 – 14 . He set career highs in games played ( 76 ) , goals ( 4 ) and points ( 8 ) in a season . He appeared in his 300th NHL game late in the campaign . Though best known for his fighting skills , McGrattan played a prominent role as a peacekeeper during a January 18 , 2014 , incident between the Flames and Canucks . Vancouver coach John Tortorella , upset over a line brawl between the two teams at the start of the game , attempted to accost Calgary 's coach Bob Hartley in the hallway between the two team 's locker rooms during the first intermission . McGrattan stepped between Tortorella and members of the Flames to ensure that the dispute did not develop into a violent altercation . 
 A league @-@ wide change in philosophy prior to the 2014 – 15 NHL season favouring speed over strength for a team 's role players resulted in the near elimination of the enforcer role . As a consequence , McGrattan appeared in only 8 of Calgary 's first 42 games . The team ultimately placed him on waivers , and upon clearing , demoted him to the AHL 's Adirondack Flames in mid @-@ January . With Adirondack , McGrattan abandoned fighting and tried to play an all @-@ round game in the hopes of returning to the NHL . 
 Leaving the Flames organization , McGrattan signed a one year contract with the Anaheim Ducks , and was subsequently assigned to the AHL 's San Diego Gulls for the 2015 – 16 season . During a January 19 , 2016 , game against the San Antonio Rampage , McGrattan was knocked unconscious in a fight with Daniel Maggio . The incident , in which he fell face @-@ first to the ice and had to be stretchered off the ice , renewed the debate over the place of fighting in hockey . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McGrattan married his wife Michelle in 2012 . His nickname is " Big Ern " , after the Bill Murray character " Big Ern McCracken " in the movie Kingpin . 
 Sober for four years by the time he began his second tenure with the Flames in 2013 , McGrattan had also become a mentor and friend to former Nashville teammate Jordin <unk> in his own efforts to overcome similar addictions . McGrattan 's experiences led to a desire to help others ; he partnered with the NHL substance abuse program to act as a mentor for others who wanted the advice of a fellow player , and plans to spend his off @-@ seasons earning a university degree in addiction counseling . McGrattan is also an advocate for anti @-@ bullying charities and volunteers with Be The Game , a camp that supports underprivileged kids . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Michael Shishman of Bulgaria = 
 Michael Asen III ( Bulgarian : <unk> Асен III , Mihail Asen III , commonly called Michael Shishman ( <unk> Шишман , Mihail Šišman ) ) , ruled as emperor ( tsar ) of Bulgaria from 1323 to 1330 . The exact year of his birth is unknown but it was between 1280 and 1292 . He was the founder of the last ruling dynasty of the Second Bulgarian Empire , the Shishman dynasty . After he was crowned , however , Michael used the name Asen to emphasize his connection with the Asen dynasty , the first one to rule over the Second Empire . 
 An energetic and ambitious ruler , Michael Shishman led an aggressive but opportunistic and inconsistent foreign policy against the Byzantine Empire and the Kingdom of Serbia , which ended in the disastrous battle of Velbazhd which claimed his own life . He was the last medieval Bulgarian ruler who aimed at military and political hegemony of the Bulgarian Empire over the Balkans and the last one who attempted to seize Constantinople . He was succeeded by his son Ivan Stephen and later by his nephew Ivan Alexander , who reversed his policy by forming an alliance with Serbia . 
 = = Rise to the throne = = 
 Born between 1280 and 1292 Michael Shishman was the son of the despot Shishman of Vidin by an unnamed daughter of the sebastokrator Peter and Anna ( Theodora ) , herself daughter of Ivan Asen II ( r . 1218 @-@ 1241 ) and Irene Komnene of Epirus . He was also a distant cousin of his predecessors on the Bulgarian throne , Theodore Svetoslav ( r . 1300 @-@ 1321 ) and George Terter II ( r . 1321 @-@ 1322 ) . After the peace between his father and Stefan Milutin in 1292 , Michael Shishman was engaged to Milutin 's daughter Anna Neda and they married in 1298 or 1299 . 
 Since the middle of the 13th century , the area of Vidin had been autonomous under ineffective Bulgarian overlordship , and was ruled successively by Yakov Svetoslav ( died 1276 ) , Shishman ( died between 1308 and 1313 ) , and then Michael Shishman . Shishman and his son received the high courtly title of despotēs from their cousin Theodore Svetoslav and the latter was referred to in a contemporary Venetian source as a Despot of Bulgaria and Lord of Vidin . With the death of the Serbian king Stefan Milutin , Michael Shishman was able to follow a more active policy in the Bulgarian capital Tarnovo . He soon became a leading noble in the internal affairs of the country and , on the childless death of young George Terter II in 1323 , Michael Shishman was elected emperor of Bulgaria by the nobility . According to some historians he was chosen because he was a descendant of the Asen dynasty and interpret his <unk> to the throne not as the beginning of a new dynasty but rather as a continuation of the House of Asen . His half @-@ brother , Belaur , succeeded him as despot of Vidin . 
 = = Relations with the Byzantine Empire = = 
 = = = War against Byzantium = = = 
 The sudden death of George Terter II had been followed by a brief period of confusion and uncertainty , which was exploited by the Byzantine emperor Andronikos III Palaiologos . The Byzantines overran northeastern Thrace and captured a number of important cities including Yambol , <unk> , <unk> , Rusokastro , Anchialus , Sozopol and <unk> . At the same time , a Byzantine @-@ sponsored pretender , Voysil , brother of the former Bulgarian emperor Smilets ( r . 1292 @-@ 1298 ) , ensconced himself in <unk> , controlling the valleys between the Balkan mountains and Sredna Gora from Sliven to Kopsis . At this point the newly elected Michael Shishman marched south against Andronikos III , while another Byzantine army led by Andronikos III himself was besieging Philippopolis ( Plovdiv ) . Defended by a Bulgarian garrison led by Ivan the Russian , the siege was a failure despite the Byzantines use of a 100 @-@ soldier , five @-@ story siege tower . While the Byzantine army was engaged at <unk> , Michael Shishman led his troops to north @-@ eastern Thrace and quickly retook the lost cities thus forcing the Byzantines to pull back . 
 Although Michael Shishman forced Andronikos III to retreat , the Byzantines managed to take the Philippopolis while the Bulgarians were changing garrisons . Despite the loss , Michael Shishman was able to expel Voysil and fully recover Bulgarian control over northern and northeastern Thrace in 1324 which had been taken by the Byzantines in the previous year during the interregnum . Again in 1324 , the Bulgarian emperor invaded Byzantium advancing as far as <unk> and Vira in the lower course of the Maritsa river . Andronikos III was unable to engage the Bulgarian army because his troops were outnumbered . He offered Michael Shishman a duel to solve the conflict . The Bulgarian emperor answered with the words cited by John Kantakouzenos : 
 The Byzantine emperor was said to have been infuriated with the answer and the fact that he was outsmarted . However , Michael III who was informed of the conflict between Andronikos III and Andronikos II hinted him that he could help Andronikos III against his grandfather in case of war and returned to Bulgaria promising that soon he would begin negotiations . 
 = = = Peace agreement and involvement in Byzantine civil war = = = 
 On a council held in Constantinople on the relations with Bulgaria it was decided that the two countries should begin negotiations despite the calls for punishing the Bulgarians for the invasion . Michael Shishman divorced his wife Anna Neda and married Theodora Palaiologina , the 35 @-@ year @-@ old widow of emperor Theodore Svetoslav . The exact reasons for that act are unclear . Many historians suggest that the deterioration of the Bulgarian @-@ Serbian relations was rooted in the Serbian penetration in Macedonia . The marriage cemented the peace treaty with the Byzantine Empire but the need for an ally against the Serbs made Michael Shishman prone to make concessions . It was decided that the border should follow the Philippopolis @-@ Chernomen @-@ Sozopol line . The agreement was finally signed in the autumn of 1324 and Michael Shishman spent the next several years at peace with his neighbors . 
 In 1327 Michael Shishman became involved in the renewed civil war in the Byzantine Empire , taking the side of his brother @-@ in @-@ law Andronikos III , while his grandfather and rival Andronikos II obtained the support of the Serbian king . Andronikos III and Michael Shishman met at Chernomen ( according to Nicephorus Gregoras at <unk> ) and concluded an aggressive alliance against Serbia . The Byzantine emperor promised to Bulgaria territory with several towns and large amount of money if he would become a sole emperor . Based on that alliance , Andronikos III gained control of Macedonia but his success made Michael Shishman , who aimed at a prolonged conflict within the Byzantine Empire , enter into negotiations with Andronikos II , offering military support in exchange for money and the cession of some border lands . The Bulgarian ruler sent a detachment of 3 @,@ 000 cavalry , commanded by Ivan the Russian , from Yambol to guard the Imperial Palace in Constantinople and Andronikos II but his intentions were to capture the old emperor and the city . Forewarned by his grandson , Andronikos II prudently kept the Bulgarians away from the capital and his person . When Michael Shishman understood that his plans were revealed he sent Ivan a letter to retreat with a singe feather which meant that the orders had to be promptly executed . 
 Following the victory of Andronikos III over his grandfather , Michael Shishman attempted to gain some lands by force . He invaded Thrace in June 1328 and pillaged the vicinities of Viza but retreated before the advance of Andronikos III . Another showdown in front of Adrianople 60 days later ended without battle and with the renewal of the peace treaty in October 1328 , after which Michael Shishman returned to his country , but not before securing a large payoff . In return , the Bulgarians gave back the fortress of <unk> which they had taken during the initial stages of the campaign . In the beginning of the next year the Bulgarian emperor requested a personal meeting with his Byzantine counterpart to negotiate a definitive treaty and joint military operations against the growing power of Serbia . In the locality known as <unk> between Sozopol and Anchialus the two signed " lasting peace and eternal alliance " . 
 = = Relations with Serbia = = 
 The divorce with Anna Neda in 1324 worsened the relations between Bulgaria and Serbia which had been cordial since the beginning of the 14th century . Anna Neda had to leave the capital Tarnovo with her sons and sought refuge from her brother Stephen Dečanski , the king of Serbia . Dečanski , who was engaged in war against his cousin Stephen Vladislav II , was in no position to oppose Michael Shishman . The Bulgarian emperor even acknowledged his rival as King of Serbia but his help to Vladislav was insufficient . In the spring of 1324 Dečanski sent the future Serbian archbishop Danilo II to negotiate with the Bulgarian emperor in Tarnovo but his mission was inconclusive . The two countries were again on the opposite sides in the Byzantine civil war when the Bulgarians allied with Andronikos III while the Serbs supported his grandfather . 
 After the agreement with Andronikos III in 1329 , Michael Shishman started preparations to attack while the Serbs were pillaging the areas around Ohrid . According to the Serbian chroniclers , he arrogantly demanded the submission of the Serbian king and threatened to " set up his throne in the middle of the Serbian land " . In 1330 , expecting to join the army of Andronikos III advancing from the south , Michael Shishman marched on Serbia with a large force of 15 @,@ 000 troops , including reinforcements from his vassals and allies from Wallachia and Moldavia . At first he headed to Vidin , where historians believe he wanted to join forces with the soldiers of his brother Belaur , and then marched to the south . Due to poor coordination with the Byzantines , the Bulgarian army met the Serbs , whose army numbered 15 @,@ 000 men as well , alone near Velbazhd ( Kyustendil ) . On a personal meeting , the two rulers agreed to a one @-@ day truce as both were expecting reinforcements . Backed on the agreement , Michael Shishman allowed his army to disperse in search for provisions . However , in the morning of 28 July , the main Serbian reinforcements , 1 @,@ 000 heavily armed Catalan horsemen under the command of the King 's son Stephen Dušan arrived , and the Serbs broke their word and attacked the Bulgarians . Despite the unexpected assault , Michael Shishman tried to bring his army to order but it was too late and the Serbs were victorious . The outcome of the battle shaped the balance of power in the Balkans for the next decades to come and although Bulgaria did not lose territory , the Serbs could occupy much of Macedonia . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 The circumstances around the death of Michael Shishman are unclear . According to the Byzantine emperor and historian John Kantakouzenos the emperor was mortally wounded in the battle and soon died while another Byzantine historian suggests that Michael Shishman lived for three more days not able to gain consciousness and died on the fourth day . The Serbian chronicles state that his horse fell during the battle and crashed his body . When his body was taken to Dečanski , he mourned him but pointed out that he preferred war to peace . The early 15th @-@ century Bulgarian scholar and cleric Gregory Tsamblak says that Michael Shishman was captured and killed by the son of the Serbian king , Stephen Dušan . He was buried in the Church of St George in Staro <unk> . 
 Michael Shishman is considered a vain , aggressive , and opportunistic ruler , whose Protean foreign policy perhaps contributed to the battle that put an end to his life . At the same time he was clearly forceful and energetic , overcoming and reversing Bulgaria 's losses during the uncertainty that preceded his accession , and managing to maintain internal peace and security within Bulgaria during his short reign . Andreev calls him the most remarkable 14th @-@ century Bulgarian monarch . According to <unk> he desired to expand the country from Byzantium to the <unk> , i. e. from Constantinople to the Danube which makes him the last medieval Bulgarian ruler who effectively attempted to capture the Byzantine capital . He was also the first Bulgarian ruler for decades who tried to lead a more active policy in Macedonia . Michael Shishman 's seal is depicted on the reverse of the Bulgarian 2 <unk> banknote , issued in 1999 and 2005 . 
 = = Family = = 
 Michael Shishman was married first to Anna Neda of Serbia , a daughter of Stefan Uroš II Milutin of Serbia . By this marriage he had several children , including Ivan Stefan , who succeeded as emperor of Bulgaria ( r . 1330 @-@ 1331 ) , Michael who ruled shortly as despot of Vidin and Shishman . By his second marriage to Theodora Palaiologina , a daughter of Michael IX Palaiologos of Byzantium , Michael Shishman had several children whose names are unknown . 
