 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Timeline = = 
 1291 — Michael Shishman is engaged to Anna Neda of Serbia 
 1298 or 1299 — <unk> Anna Neda 
 By 1308 — Becomes Despot of Vidin 
 1323 — Elected Emperor of Bulgaria by the nobility , uses the name Michael Asen 
 1324 — Successful war with the Byzantine Empire ; divorces his first wife to marry Theodora Palaiologina 
 1327 — Involvement into the Byzantine civil war ; Treaty of Chernomen 
 1329 — Definitive peace treaty with the Byzantines ; anti @-@ Serbian agreement 
 28 July 1330 — Battle of Velbazhd ; Michael Shishman is mortally wounded and dies 
 = Cloud Gate = 
 Cloud Gate is a public sculpture by Indian @-@ born British artist Anish Kapoor , that is the centerpiece of AT & T Plaza at Millennium Park in the Loop community area of Chicago , Illinois . The sculpture and AT & T Plaza are located on top of Park Grill , between the Chase Promenade and McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink . Constructed between 2004 and 2006 , the sculpture is nicknamed The Bean because of its shape . Made up of 168 stainless steel plates welded together , its highly polished exterior has no visible seams . It measures 33 by 66 by 42 feet ( 10 by 20 by 13 m ) , and weighs 110 short tons ( 100 t ; 98 long tons ) . 
 Kapoor 's design was inspired by liquid mercury and the sculpture 's surface reflects and distorts the city 's skyline . Visitors are able to walk around and under Cloud Gate 's 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) high arch . On the underside is the " omphalos " ( Greek for " navel " ) , a concave chamber that warps and multiplies reflections . The sculpture builds upon many of Kapoor 's artistic themes , and it is popular with tourists as a photo @-@ taking opportunity for its unique reflective properties . 
 The sculpture was the result of a design competition . After Kapoor 's design was chosen , numerous technological concerns regarding the design 's construction and assembly arose , in addition to concerns regarding the sculpture 's upkeep and maintenance . Various experts were consulted , some of whom believed the design could not be implemented . Eventually , a feasible method was found , but the sculpture 's construction fell behind schedule . It was unveiled in an incomplete form during the Millennium Park grand opening celebration in 2004 , before being concealed again while it was completed . Cloud Gate was formally dedicated on May 15 , 2006 , and has since gained considerable popularity , both domestically and internationally . 
 = = Design = = 
 Lying between Lake Michigan to the east and the Loop to the west , Grant Park has been Chicago 's front yard since the mid @-@ 19th century . Its northwest corner , north of Monroe Street and the Art Institute , east of Michigan Avenue , south of Randolph Street , and west of Columbus Drive , had been Illinois Central rail yards and parking lots until 1997 , when it was made available for development by the city as Millennium Park . For 2007 , the park was Chicago 's second largest tourist attraction , trailing only Navy Pier . 
 In 1999 , Millennium Park officials and a group of art collectors , curators and architects reviewed the artistic works of 30 different artists and asked two for proposals . American artist Jeff Koons submitted a proposal to erect a permanent 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) sculpture of a playground slide ; his glass and steel design featured an observation deck 90 feet ( 27 m ) above the ground that was accessible via an elevator . The committee chose the second design by internationally acclaimed artist Anish Kapoor . Measuring 33 by 66 by 42 feet ( 10 by 20 by 13 m ) and weighing 110 short tons ( 100 t ; 98 long tons ) , the proposal featured a seamless , stainless steel surface inspired by liquid mercury . This mirror @-@ like surface would reflect the Chicago skyline , but its elliptical shape would distort and twist the reflected image . As visitors walk around the structure , its surface acts like a fun @-@ house mirror as it distorts their reflections . 
 In the underside of the sculpture is the omphalos , an indentation whose mirrored surface provides multiple reflections of any subject situated beneath it . The apex of the omphalos is 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) above the ground . The concave underside allows visitors to walk underneath to see the omphalos , and through its arch to the other side so that they view the entire structure . During the grand opening week in July 2004 , press reports described the omphalos as the " spoon @-@ like underbelly " . The stainless steel sculpture was originally envisioned as the centerpiece of the Lurie Garden at the southeast corner of the park . However , Park officials believed the piece was too large for the Lurie Garden and decided to locate it at AT & T Plaza , despite Kapoor 's objections . Skyscrapers to the north along East Randolph Street , including The Heritage , the Smurfit @-@ Stone Building , Two Prudential Plaza , One Prudential Plaza , and Aon Center are visible , reflected on both the east and west sides of the sculpture . 
 Although Kapoor does not draw with computers , computer modeling was essential to the process of analyzing the complex form , which created numerous issues . Since the sculpture was expected to be outdoors , concerns arose that it might retain and conduct heat in a way that would make it too hot to touch during the summer and so cold that one 's tongue might stick to it during the winter . The extreme temperature variation between seasons was also feared to weaken the structure . Graffiti , bird droppings and fingerprints were also potential problems , as they would affect the aesthetics of the surface . The most pressing issue was the need to create a single seamless exterior for the external shell , a feat architect Norman Foster once believed to be nearly impossible . 
 While the sculpture was being constructed , public and media outlets nicknamed it " The Bean " because of its shape , a name that Kapoor described as " completely stupid " . Months later , Kapoor officially named the piece " Cloud Gate " . Critical reviews describe the sculpture as a passage between realms . Three @-@ quarters of the sculpture 's external surface reflects the sky and the name refers to it acting as a type of gate that helps bridge the space between the sky and the viewer . The sculpture and plaza are sometimes referred to jointly as " Cloud Gate on the AT & T Plaza " . It is Kapoor 's first public outdoor work in the United States , and is the work by which he is best known in the country according to the Financial Times . 
 = = Construction and maintenance = = 
 The British engineering firm Atelier One and freelance engineer Chris <unk> @-@ Jones ( who later went on to form the engineering firm <unk> in 2005 ) provided the sculpture 's structural design , and Performance Structures , Inc . ( PSI ) was chosen to fabricate it because of their ability to produce nearly invisible welds . The project began with PSI attempting to recreate the design in miniature . A high @-@ density polyurethane foam model was selected by Kapoor , which was then used to design the final structure , including the interior structural components . Initially , PSI planned to build and assemble the sculpture in Oakland , California , and ship it to Chicago through the Panama Canal and St. Lawrence Seaway . However , this plan was discarded after park officials deemed it too risky , so the decision was made to transport the individual panels by truck and to assemble the structure on @-@ site , a task undertaken by MTH Industries . 
 The sculpture 's weight raised concerns . Estimating the thickness of the steel needed to create the sculpture 's desired aesthetics before fabrication was difficult . Cloud Gate was originally estimated to weigh 60 short tons ( 54 t ; 54 long tons ) when completed . However , the final figure was almost twice as heavy at 110 short tons ( 100 t ; 98 long tons ) . This extra weight required engineers to reconsider the sculpture 's supporting structures . The roof of the Park Grill , upon which Cloud Gate sits , had to be built strong enough to bear the weight . The large retaining wall separating Chicago 's Metra train tracks from the North Grant Park garage supports much of the weight of the sculpture and forms the back side of the restaurant . This wall , along with the rest of the garage 's foundation , required additional bracing before the piece was erected . Cloud Gate is further buttressed by lateral members underneath the plaza that are anchored to the sculpture 's interior structure by tie rods . 
 Inside Cloud Gate 's polished exterior shell are several steel structures that keep the sculpture standing . The first structural pieces , two type 304 stainless steel rings , were put into place in February 2004 . As construction continued , crisscrossing pipe trusses were assembled between the two rings . The trusses and supporting structures were only present for the construction phases . The finished sculpture has no inner bracing . The supporting structural components were designed and constructed to ensure that no specific point was overloaded , and to avoid producing unwanted indentations on the exterior shell . The frame was also designed to expand and contract with the sculpture as temperatures fluctuate . As a result , the two large rings supporting the sculpture move independently of each other , allowing the shell to move independently of the rings . 
 When Cloud Gate 's interior components were completed , construction crews prepared to work on the outer shell ; this comprises 168 stainless steel panels , each 3 ⁄ 8 inch ( 10 mm ) thick and weighing 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 to 910 kg ) . They were fabricated using three @-@ dimensional modeling software . Computers and robots were essential in the bending and shaping of the plates , which was performed by English wheel and a robotic scanning device . Metal stiffeners were welded to each panel 's interior face to provide a small degree of rigidity . About a third of the plates , along with the entire interior structure , were fabricated in Oakland . The plates were polished to 98 percent of their final state and covered with protective white film before being sent to Chicago via trucks . Once in Chicago , the plates were welded together on @-@ site , creating 2 @,@ 442 linear feet ( 744 m ) of welded seams . Welders used keyhole welding machines rather than traditional welding guns . The plates were fabricated so precisely that no on @-@ site cutting or filing was necessary when lifting and fitting them into position . 
 When construction of the shell began in June 2004 , a large tent was erected around the piece to shield it from public view . Construction began with the omphalos , where plates were attached to the supporting internal steel structure , from the inside ( underside ) of the sculpture downward to the outermost surfaces . This sequence caused the structure to resemble a large sombrero when the bottom was complete . 
 The shell of Cloud Gate was fully erected for the grand opening of Millennium Park on July 15 , 2004 , although it was unpolished and thus unfinished , because its assembly had fallen behind schedule . The piece was temporarily uncovered on July 8 for the opening , although Kapoor was unhappy with this as it allowed the public to see the sculpture in an unfinished state . The original plan was to re @-@ erect the tent around the sculpture for polishing on July 24 , but public appreciation for the piece convinced park officials to leave it uncovered for several months . The tent was again erected in January 2005 as a 24 @-@ person crew from <unk> Local 63 polished the seams between each plate . In order to grind , sand and polish the seams , six levels of scaffolding were erected around the sides of the sculpture , while climbing ropes and harnesses were used to polish harder @-@ to @-@ reach areas . When the upper and side portions of the shell were completed , the tent was once again removed in August 2005 . On October 3 , the omphalos was closed off as workers polished the final section . Every weld on the Cloud Gate underwent a five @-@ stage process , required to produce the sculpture 's mirror @-@ like finish . 
 The sculpture was finally completed on August 28 , 2005 , and officially unveiled on May 15 , 2006 . The cost for the piece was first estimated at $ 6 million ; this had escalated to $ 11 @.@ 5 million by the time the park opened in 2004 , with the final figure standing at $ 23 million in 2006 . No public funds were involved ; all funding came from donations from individuals and corporations . 
 Kapoor 's contract states that the constructed piece should be expected to survive for 1 @,@ 000 years . The lower 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of Cloud Gate is wiped down twice a day by hand , while the entire sculpture is cleaned twice a year with 40 U.S. gallons ( 33 imp gal ; 150 L ) of liquid detergent . The daily cleanings use a Windex @-@ like solution , while the semi @-@ annual cleanings use Tide . A notable February 2009 rare incident saw two names etched in letters about 1 inch ( 25 mm ) tall on the northeast side of the curved sculpture . The graffiti was removed by the same firm that did the original polishing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley declared the day of the sculpture 's dedication , May 15 , 2006 , to be " Cloud Gate Day " . Kapoor attended the celebration , while local jazz trumpeter and bandleader <unk> Davis and the Chicago Jazz Philharmonic played " Fanfare for Cloud Gate " , which Davis composed . The public took an instant liking to the sculpture , affectionately referring to it as " The Bean " . Cloud Gate has become a popular piece of public art and is now a fixture on many souvenirs such as postcards , sweatshirts , and posters . The sculpture has attracted a large number of locals , tourists , and art aficionados from around the world . The sculpture is now the piece by which Kapoor is most identified in the United States . 
 Time describes the piece as an essential photo opportunity , and more of a destination than a work of <unk> New York Times writes that it is both a " tourist magnet " and an " extraordinary art object " , while USA Today refers to the sculpture as a monumental abstract work . Chicago art critic Edward Lifson considers Cloud Gate to be among the greatest pieces of public art in the world . The American Welding Society recognized Cloud Gate , MTH Industries and PSI with the group 's Extraordinary Welding Award . Time named Millennium Park one of the ten best architectural achievements of 2004 , citing Cloud Gate as one of the park 's major attractions . 
 When the park first opened in 2004 , Metra police stopped a Columbia College Chicago journalism student who was working on a photography project in Millennium Park and confiscated his film because of fears of terrorism . In 2005 , the sculpture attracted some controversy when a professional photographer without a paid permit was denied access to the piece . As is the case for all works of art currently covered by United States copyright law , the artist holds the copyright for the sculpture . This allows the public to freely photograph Cloud Gate , but permission from Kapoor or the City of Chicago ( which has licensed the art ) is required for any commercial reproductions of the photographs . The city first set a policy of collecting permit fees for photographs . These permits were initially set at $ 350 per day for professional still photographers , $ 1 @,@ 200 per day for professional videographers and $ 50 per hour for wedding photographers . The policy has been changed so permits are only required for large @-@ scale film , video and photography requiring ten @-@ person crews and equipment . 
 In addition to restricting photography of public art , closing a public park for a private event has also been controversial . In 2005 and 2006 , almost all of Millennium Park was closed for a day for corporate events . On both occasions , as one of the park 's primary attractions , Cloud Gate was the focus of controversy . On September 8 , 2005 , Toyota Motor Sales USA paid $ 800 @,@ 000 to rent most venues in the park including Cloud Gate on AT & T Plaza from 6 a.m. to 11 p.m. On August 7 , 2006 , Allstate paid $ 700 @,@ 000 to rent the park . For this price , Allstate acquired the visitation rights to a different set of features and only had exclusive access to Cloud Gate after 4 p.m. These corporate closures denied tourists access to Kapoor 's public sculpture , and commuters who walk through the park were forced to take alternative routes . City officials stated that the money would help to finance free public programs in Millennium Park . 
 In 2015 , a sculpture similar to Cloud Gate was reported in <unk> , China at the site of an oil discovery , which according to Eduardo <unk> , the Dean of Cornell Law School , " very probably " is a copyright infringement against Cloud Gate . Though designed to resemble an oil bubble , Kapoor hoped that legal action would be taken against what he termed a Chinese knockoff . Mayor Rahm Emanuel was less concerned and said that it was a flattering imitation . 
 = = Artistic themes = = 
 = = = Relevant Kapoor themes = = = 
 Anish Kapoor has a reputation for creating spectacles in urban settings by producing works of extreme size and scale . Before creating Cloud Gate , Kapoor had created art that distorted images of the viewer instead of portraying images of its own . In so doing , he acquired experience blurring the boundary between the limit and the limitless . Kapoor drew on past experience to design Cloud Gate , in particular the designing of Sky Mirror ( 2001 ) , a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) 10 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 9 t ; 9 @-@ long @-@ ton ) concave stainless steel mirror that also used a theme of distorted perception on a grand scale . 
 Kapoor 's objects often aim to evoke <unk> and the spiritual , an outcome he achieves either by carving dark voids into stone pieces , or more recently , through the sheer shine and reflectivity of his objects . This Indian artist 's works have no fixed identity , but rather occupy an illusionary space that is consistent with eastern theologies shared by Buddhism , Hinduism and Taoism , as well as Albert Einstein 's views of a non @-@ three @-@ dimensional world . Kapoor explores the theme of ambiguity with his works that place the viewer in a state of " in @-@ <unk> " . The artist often questions and plays with such dualities as solidity – emptiness or reality – reflection , which in turn allude to such paired opposites as flesh – spirit , the here – the beyond , east – west , sky – earth , etc. that create the conflict between internal and external , superficial and subterranean , and conscious and unconscious . Kapoor also creates a tension between masculine and feminine within his art by having concave points of focus that invite the entry of visitors and multiplies their images when they are positioned correctly . 
 = = = Cloud Gate themes = = = 
 Kapoor often speaks of removing both the signature of the artist from his works as well as any traces of their fabrication , or what he refers to as " traces of the hand " . He aspires to make his works look like they have independent realities that he reveals rather than creates . For him , removing all the seams from Cloud Gate was necessary in order to make the sculpture seem as though it was " perfect " and ready @-@ made . These effects increase the viewer 's fascination with it and makes them wonder what it is and where it came from . His attempts to hide his works ' seams as an artist stand in contrast to Frank Gehry 's architectural designs in the park , Jay Pritzker Pavilion and BP Pedestrian Bridge , which display their seams prominently . 
 Cloud Gate is described as a transformative , iconic work . It is similar to many of Kapoor 's previous works in the themes and issues it addresses . While the sculpture 's mirror effects are reminiscent of fun @-@ house fairground mirrors , they also have a more serious intent ; they help <unk> this very large object , making it seem light and almost weightless . Cloud Gate is considered Kapoor 's most ambitious use of complex mirrored form dynamics . Kapoor challenges his viewers to internalize his work through intellectual and theoretical exercise . By reflecting the sky , visiting and non @-@ visiting pedestrians and surrounding architecture , Cloud Gate limits its viewers to partial comprehension at any time . The interaction with the viewer who moves to create his own vision gives it a spiritual dimension . The sculpture is described as a disembodied , luminous form , which is also how his earlier 1000 Names ( 1979 – 80 ) was described when it addressed the metaphysical and mystical . 
 The viewer physically enters the art when he walks underneath it into its " navel " . The omphalos is a " warped dimension of fluid space " . In this dimension , solid is transformed into fluid in a disorienting multiplicative manner that intensifies the experience . It is emblematic of Kapoor 's work to deconstruct empirical space and venture into manifold possibilities of abstract space . The experience is described as a displaced or virtual depth that is composed of multiplied surfaces . 
 According to project manager Lou Cerny of MTH Industries , " When the light is right , you can 't see where the sculpture ends and the sky begins . " The sculpture challenges perception by distorting and deforming the surrounding architecture . The skyscrapers along East Randolph Street to the northeast ( Two Prudential Plaza , and Aon Center ) , north ( One Prudential Plaza ) and northwest ( The Heritage , Crain Communications Building ) are reflected on Cloud Gate 's surface when viewed from either the east or the west . The sculpture also warps viewers ' perception of time by changing the speed of movements such as the passing of clouds . 
 Although in the conventional sense Cloud Gate is not an opening that leads anywhere in the same way that monumental gates do , it frames a view and is celebratory in the way it creates a ceremonial place . The work is credited with achieving a new level or understanding described as a transubstantiation of material , reminiscent of that which the artist experienced during a 1979 trip to India . Kapoor 's 1000 Names evolved immediately after this trip ; twenty @-@ five years later he created Cloud Gate , an object that emerged from material forms to become immaterial . 
 Kapoor often relies on tenets of Hinduism in his art and says that " The experience of opposites allows for the expression of wholeness . " Primal dualities that are one , such as the lingam and yoni , are important to Indian culture , and Cloud Gate represents both the male and female in one entity by symbolizing both the vagina and testicles . Thus , it represents the tension between the masculine and the feminine . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The sculpture has been used as a backdrop in commercial films , notably in the 2006 Hollywood film The Break @-@ Up , which had to reshoot several scenes because the sculpture was under cover for the initial filming . It is also prominently featured in the ending scene of Source Code . Director Duncan Jones felt the structure was a metaphor for the movie 's subject matter and aimed for it to be shown at the beginning and end of the movie . The sculpture served as an aesthetic and symbolic setting for the 2012 film The Vow when the lead characters share a kiss under it . It also appears in the video to " Homecoming " , a song by Chicago native Kanye West , featuring Chris Martin of the band Coldplay . The sculpture is also featured in the 2008 <unk> film Nights and Weekends . It was also featured in the Bollywood film Dhoom 3 and the 2014 movie , Transformers : Age of Extinction , the fourth installment in the Transformers series . A modified reproduction of Cloud Gate is also included in Watch Dogs , a video game released in 2014 that takes place in Chicago . Unlike the real sculpture , the in @-@ game replica is a curved , white torus . 
 = Anfield = 
 Anfield is a football stadium in Anfield , Liverpool , England which has a seating capacity of 44 @,@ 742 making it the seventh largest football stadium in England . It has been the home of Liverpool F.C. since their formation in 1892 . It was originally the home of Everton F.C. from 1884 to 1891 , before they moved to Goodison Park after a dispute with the club president . 
 The stadium has four stands : the Spion Kop , Main Stand , Centenary Stand and Anfield Road . The record attendance of 61 @,@ 905 , was set at a match between Liverpool and Wolverhampton Wanderers in 1952 . The ground converted to an all @-@ seater stadium in 1994 as a result of the Taylor Report which greatly reduced its capacity . 
 Two gates at the ground are named after former Liverpool managers : Bill Shankly and Bob Paisley . A statue of Shankly is situated outside the stadium . The ground is 2 miles ( 3 km ) from Liverpool Lime Street railway station . It was proposed in 2002 to replace the stadium with a new one in the adjacent Stanley Park , but after the acquisition of Liverpool F.C. by Fenway Sports Group in 2010 it was made clear this would not happen . 
 Construction for an extension to the Main Stand began on Monday , 8 December 2014 . This will increase the stadium size to around 54 @,@ 000 , and there are future plans to expand the Anfield Road Stand which would bring the stadium capacity to around 59 @,@ 000 . 
 = = History = = 
 Opened in 1884 , Anfield was originally owned by John Orrell , a minor land owner who was a friend of Everton F.C. member John Houlding . Everton , who previously played at Priory Road , were in need of a new venue owing to the noise produced by the crowd on match days . Orrell lent the pitch to the club in exchange for a small rent . The first match at the ground was between Everton and Earlestown on 28 September 1884 , which Everton won 5 – 0 . During Everton 's tenure at the stadium , stands were erected for some of the 8 @,@ 000 @-@ plus spectators regularly attending matches , although the ground was capable of holding around 20 @,@ 000 spectators and occasionally did . The ground was considered of international standard at the time , playing host to the British Home Championship match between England and Ireland in 1889 . Anfield 's first league match was played on 8 September 1888 , between Everton and Accrington F.C. Everton quickly improved as a team , and became Anfield 's first league champions in the 1890 – 91 season . 
 In 1892 , negotiations to purchase the land at Anfield from Orrell escalated into a dispute between Houlding and the Everton F.C. committee over how the club was run . Events culminated in Everton 's move to Goodison Park . Houlding was left with an empty stadium , and decided to form a new club to occupy it . The new team was called Liverpool F.C. and Athletic Grounds Ltd , and the club 's first match at Anfield was a friendly played in front of 200 people on 1 September 1892 , against Rotherham Town . Liverpool won 7 – 1 . 
 Liverpool 's first Football League match at Anfield was played on 9 September 1893 , against Lincoln City . Liverpool won 4 – 0 in front of 5 @,@ 000 spectators . A new stand capable of holding 3 @,@ 000 spectators was constructed in 1895 on the site of the present Main Stand . Designed by architect Archibald Leitch , the stand had a distinctive red and white gable , and was similar to the main stand at Newcastle United 's ground St James ' Park . Another stand was constructed at the Anfield Road end in 1903 , built from timber and corrugated iron . After Liverpool had won their second League championship in 1906 , a new stand was built along the Walton Breck Road . Local journalist Ernest Edwards , who was the sports editor of newspapers the Liverpool Daily Post and Echo , christened it the Spion Kop ; it was named after a famous hill in South Africa where a local regiment had suffered heavy losses during the Boer War in 1900 . More than 300 men had died , many of them from Liverpool , as the British army attempted to capture the strategic hilltop . Around the same period a stand was also built along Kemlyn Road . 
 The ground remained much the same until 1928 , when the Kop was redesigned and extended to hold 30 @,@ 000 spectators , all standing . A roof was erected as well . Many stadia in England had stands named after the Spion Kop . Anfield 's was the largest Kop in the country at the time — it was able to hold more supporters than some entire football grounds . In the same year the topmast of the SS Great Eastern , one of the first iron ships , was rescued from the ship breaking yard at nearby Rock Ferry , and was hauled up Everton Valley by a team of horses , to be erected alongside the new Kop . It still stands there , serving as a flag pole . 
 Floodlights were installed at a cost of £ 12 @,@ 000 in 1957 . On 30 October they were switched on for the first time for a match against Everton to commemorate the 75 @-@ year anniversary of the Liverpool County Football Association . In 1963 the old Kemlyn Road stand was replaced by a cantilevered stand , built at a cost of £ 350 @,@ 000 , and able to hold 6 @,@ 700 spectators . Two years later alterations were made at the Anfield Road end , turning it into a large covered standing area . The biggest redevelopment came in 1973 , when the old Main Stand was demolished and a new one constructed . At the same time , the pylon floodlights were pulled down and new lights installed along the top of the Kemlyn Road and Main Stands . The new stand was officially opened by the Duke of Kent on 10 March 1973 . In the 1980s the paddock in front of the Main Stand was turned into seating , and in 1982 seats were introduced at the Anfield Road end . The Shankly Gates were erected in 1982 , a tribute to former manager Bill Shankly ; his widow Nessie unlocked them for the first time on 26 August 1982 . Across the Shankly Gates are the words You 'll Never Walk Alone , the title of the hit song by Gerry and the Pacemakers adopted by Liverpool fans as the club 's anthem during Shankly 's time as manager . 
 Coloured seats and a police room were added to the Kemlyn Road stand in 1987 . After the Hillsborough disaster in 1989 where overcrowding led to the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans , the Taylor Report recommended that all grounds in the country should be converted into all @-@ seater grounds by May 1994 . A second tier was added to the Kemlyn Road stand in 1992 , turning it into a double @-@ decker layout . It included executive boxes and function suites as well as 11 @,@ 000 seating spaces . Plans to expand the stand had been made earlier , with the club buying up houses on Kemlyn Road during the 1970s and 1980s , but had to be put on hold until 1990 because two sisters , Joan and Nora Mason , refused to sell their house . When the club reached an agreement with the sisters in 1990 , the expansion plans were put into action . The stand — renamed the Centenary Stand — was officially opened on 1 September 1992 by UEFA president Lennart Johansson . In 1993 , Liverpool fans gestured their support for James Bulger during a two @-@ minute silence at the Kop , held before a game against Ipswich . The Kop was rebuilt in 1994 after the recommendations of the Taylor Report and became all seated ; it is still a single tier , and the capacity was significantly reduced to 12 @,@ 390 . 
 On 4 December 1997 , a bronze statue of Bill Shankly was unveiled at the visitors ' centre in front of the Kop . Standing at over 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) tall , the statue depicts Shankly with a fan 's scarf around his neck , in a familiar pose he adopted when receiving applause from fans . Inscribed on the statue are the words " Bill Shankly – He Made The People Happy " . The Hillsborough memorial is situated alongside the Shankly Gates , and is always decorated with flowers and tributes to the 96 people who died in 1989 as a result of the disaster . At the centre of the memorial is an eternal flame , signifying that those who died will never be forgotten . Since 2014 , the memorial was temporarily removed during the expansion of the Main Stand of the stadium . 
 The most recent structural change to Anfield came in 1998 when the new two @-@ tier Anfield Road end was opened . The stand has encountered a number of problems since its redevelopment ; at the beginning of the 1999 – 2000 season , a series of support poles and stanchions had to be brought in to give extra stability to the top tier of the stand . During Ronnie Moran 's testimonial match against Celtic , many fans complained of movement of the top tier . At the same time that the stanchions were inserted , the executive seating area was expanded by two rows in the main stand , lowering the seating capacity in the paddock . 
 = = Structures and facilities = = 
 Anfield comprises 45 @,@ 276 seats split between four stands : the Anfield Road end , the Centenary Stand , the Kop , and the Main Stand . The Anfield Road end and Centenary Stand are two @-@ tiered , while the Kop and Main Stand are single @-@ tiered . Entry to the stadium is gained by radio @-@ frequency identification ( RFID ) smart cards rather than the traditional manned turnstile . This system , used in all 80 turnstiles around Anfield , was introduced in 2005 . 
 Plans to replace Anfield with a new 60 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity stadium in adjacent Stanley Park were initiated in 1971 . The plans were revisited under the ownership of Tom Hicks and George Gillett . Following the acquisition of Liverpool F.C. by Fenway Sports Group in 2010 , the owners have abandoned the proposed new stadium in Stanley Park , preferring instead to redevelop and expand Anfield , thus echoing their decision to renovate Fenway Park . The Kop is a large single @-@ tiered stand . Originally a large terraced banking providing accommodation for more than 30 @,@ 000 spectators , the current incarnation was constructed in 1994 – 95 and is single @-@ tiered with no executive boxes . The Kop houses the club 's museum , the <unk> centre and the official club shop . The Kop is the most @-@ renowned stand at Anfield among home and away supporters , with the people who occupy the stand referred to as <unk> . Such was the reputation that the stand had it was claimed that the crowd in the Kop could suck the ball into the goal . Traditionally , Liverpool 's most vocal supporters congregate in this stand . 
 The oldest stand at Anfield is the Main Stand , taking 76 years to complete . The stand was completed in 1982 , however the 1906 structure is the lower section . Single @-@ tiered the stand houses the dressing rooms and directors ' box . The press and directors VIP box are located in the middle of the stand . The large roof is supported by two thin central uprights , with a large suspended television camera gantry . The players ' tunnel and the technical area where the managers and substitutes sit during the match are in the middle of the stand at pitch level . Above the stairs leading down to the pitch hangs a sign stating " THIS IS <unk> " . Its purpose is to both intimidate the opposition and to bring the Liverpool players who touch it good luck . Accordingly , Liverpool players and coaching staff reach up and place one or both hands on it as they pass underneath . 
 The Centenary Stand is a two @-@ tiered stand . Originally a single @-@ tiered stand called the Kemlyn Road Stand , the second tier was added in 1992 to coincide with the club 's centenary . It is located opposite of the Main Stand and houses directors ' boxes , which are between the two tiers . The stand also houses the ground 's police station . 
 The Anfield Road stand , on the left side of the Main Stand , houses the away fans during matches . The Anfield Road End was rebuilt in 1965 , and multi @-@ coloured seats were added in 1982 . Originally a single @-@ tier stand , a further revamp , which was completed in 1998 , gave the stand a second @-@ tier providing additional seating . 
 There are 59 spaces available in the stadium to accommodate wheelchair users who have season tickets ; a further 33 spaces are available for general sale and 8 are allocated to away supporters . These spaces are located in the Main Stand , Anfield Road Stand and The Kop . There are 38 spaces available for the visually impaired , which are situated in the paddock area of the Main Stand , with space for one personal assistant each . A headset with full commentary is provided . 
 The stadium features tributes to two of the club 's most successful managers . The Paisley Gateway is a tribute to Bob Paisley , who guided Liverpool to three European Cups and six League Championships in the 1970s and 1980s . The gates were erected at the Kop ; their design includes representations of the three European Cups Paisley won during his tenure , the crest of his birthplace in Hetton @-@ le @-@ Hole , and the crest of Liverpool F.C. The Shankly Gates , in tribute of Bill Shankly , Paisley 's predecessor between 1959 and 1974 , are at the Anfield Road end . Their design includes a Scottish flag , a Scottish thistle , the Liverpool badge , and the words " You 'll Never Walk Alone " . 
 Anfield stadium is a UEFA category 4 stadium . 
 = = Future = = 
 Plans to replace Anfield were originally initiated by Liverpool F.C. in May 2002 . The proposed capacity was 55 @,@ 000 , but it was later revised to 61 @,@ 000 , with 1 @,@ 000 seats given for segregation between home and away fans . Several attempts were made between 2003 and 2007 by the Liverpool City Council to instigate a groundshare of the proposed stadium with local rivals Everton , but this move was rejected , as neither club favoured it . On 30 July 2004 Liverpool was granted planning permission to build a new stadium 300 yards ( 270 m ) away from Anfield at Stanley Park . On 8 September 2006 Liverpool City Council agreed to grant Liverpool F.C. a 999 @-@ year lease of the land on the proposed site . 
 Following the takeover of Liverpool F.C. on 6 February 2007 by George Gillett and Tom Hicks , the proposed stadium was redesigned . In November 2007 the redesigned layout was approved by the council , and construction was due to start in early 2008 . The new stadium , provisionally called Stanley Park Stadium , was to be built by HKS , Inc .. It was scheduled to open in August 2011 with a capacity of 60 @,@ 000 . If the new stadium is built , Anfield would be demolished . The land would become home to the centrepiece for the Anfield Plaza development , which would include a hotel , restaurants , and offices . However , the construction of Stanley Park was delayed following the economic crisis of 2008 and the subsequent recession , which directly affected the then American owners . The situation was worsened because the club was bought with borrowed money , not the owners ' capital , and interest rates were higher than expected . Hicks and Gillett promised to begin work on the stadium within 60 days of acquisition of the club , but had trouble financing the estimated £ 500 million needed for the Stanley Park development . The deadline passed and the plan was eventually cancelled by the Fenway Sports Group , as their preference was to re @-@ develop the Anfield . 
 = = = Stadium expansion = = = 
 The acquisition of Liverpool F.C. by Fenway Sports Group in October 2010 put into question whether Liverpool would leave Anfield . In February 2011 the new club owner , John W. Henry , stated he had a preference for remaining at Anfield and expanding the capacity . After attending a number of games at Anfield , Henry stated that " the Kop is unrivalled " , adding " it would be hard to replicate that feeling anywhere else " . On 15 October 2012 , Liverpool City Council announced plans to regenerate the Anfield area after securing a £ 25m grant , with a housing association also set to invest . 
 On 23 August 2013 Anfield was listed as an Asset of Community Value by Liverpool City Council . On 11 September , current owner , John W. Henry announced that they had the funds to afford the expansion but they are waiting for the City Council to finalize the purchase of houses in the area before they commit to plans to expand the Main Stand and the Anfield Road end of the ground . In April 2014 Liverpool F.C. signed a legal agreement with Liverpool City Council and Your Housing Group to redevelop the surrounding Anfield area . This was seen as a significant step towards the renovation of the stadium . The redevelopment was worth around £ 260 million . On 23 April 2014 Liverpool F.C. revealed plans for an expansion of the Main Stand , increasing its capacity by 8 @,@ 250 and taking the capacity of the stadium to 54 @,@ 000 In a second phase the Anfield Road stand 's seating is to be increased by 4 @,@ 825 , which would give Anfield a total capacity of 58 @,@ 000 . 
 On 4 December 2014 , the club said they would begin work on 8 December to increase the stadium 's capacity from about 45 @,@ 500 to 59 @,@ 000 . The first phase would begin on the Main Stand , which would feature a new third tier , adding 8 @,@ 500 seats , which would bring total capacity to 54 @,@ 000 . The Anfield Road Stand would then be expanded to add a further 4 @,@ 800 seats . The work is expected to be completed in time for the 2016 – 17 season , and would significantly enhance the club 's ability to earn matchday revenue , while still protecting the special historic Anfield atmosphere . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 Anfield has hosted numerous international matches , and was one of the venues used during UEFA Euro 1996 ; the ground hosted three group games and a quarter @-@ final . The first international match hosted at Anfield was between England and Ireland , in 1889 . England won the match 6 – 1 . Anfield was also the home venue for several of England 's international football matches in the early 1900s and for the Welsh team in the later part of that century . Anfield has also played host to five FA Cup semi @-@ finals , the last of which was in 1929 . The most recent international to be hosted at Anfield was England 's 2 – 1 victory over Uruguay on 1 March 2006 . England has played two testimonial matches against Liverpool at Anfield . The first was in 1983 , when England faced Liverpool for Phil Thompson 's testimonial . Then , in 1988 , England visited again for Alan Hansen 's testimonial . 
 Liverpool F.C. ' s rivals Manchester United F.C. played their first home game of the 1971 – 72 season at Anfield as they were banned from playing their first two home league matches at Old Trafford after United hooligans threw knives into the away section at a match at the end of the previous season . United beat Arsenal F.C. 3 @-@ 1 . 
 Anfield has been the venue for many other events . During the mid @-@ twenties , Anfield was the finishing line for the city marathon . Liverpool held an annual race which started from St George 's plateau in the city centre and finished with a lap of Anfield . Boxing matches were regularly held at Anfield during the inter @-@ war years , including a number of British boxing championships ; on 12 June 1934 Nel Tarleton beat Freddie Miller for the World Featherweight title . Professional tennis was played at Anfield on boards on the pitch . US Open champion , Bill Tilden , and Wimbledon champion , Fred Perry , entertained the crowds in an exhibition match . In 1958 , an exhibition basketball match featuring the Harlem Globetrotters was held at the ground . 
 The stadium has hosted three rugby league matches . The first was the 1989 Charity Shield played between Widnes Vikings and Wigan Warriors . The 1991 World Club Challenge between the Wigan , the winners of the RFL Championship , and Penrith Panthers , winners of the Australian NSWRL Premiership , was held at the ground with an attendance of 20 @,@ 152 people . In 1997 , St Helens used the ground for their Super League II home game against Castleford Tigers ; the attendance was 12 @,@ 329 . The stadium will host the 2016 Rugby League Four Nations final . 
 Aside from sporting uses , Anfield has been a venue for musicians of different genres as well as evangelical preachers . One week in July 1984 , the American evangelist Billy Graham preached at Anfield , attracting crowds of over 30 @,@ 000 each night . Anfield was featured in Liverpool 's 2008 European Capital of Culture celebrations : 36 @,@ 000 people attended a concert on 1 June 2008 , featuring The Zutons , Kaiser Chiefs , and Paul McCartney . 
 = = Records = = 
 The highest attendance recorded at Anfield is 61 @,@ 905 , for Liverpool 's match against Wolverhampton Wanderers in the FA Cup fifth round , on 2 February 1952 . The lowest attendance recorded at Anfield was 1 @,@ 000 for a match against Loughborough on 7 December 1895 . The highest average attendance of 48 @,@ 127 was set in 1978 . 
 Liverpool did not lose a match at Anfield during the 1893 – 94 , 1970 – 71 , 1976 – 77 , 1978 – 79 , 1979 – 80 , 1987 – 88 , and 2008 – 09 seasons . They won all their home games during the 1893 – 94 season . Liverpool 's longest winning streak at home extended from January 1978 to January 1981 , a period encompassing 85 games , in which Liverpool scored 212 goals and conceded 35 . Liverpool 's worst losing streak at Anfield is three games . This has occurred three times in the club 's history to date ( 1899 – 1900 , 1906 – 07 and 1908 – 09 seasons ) . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The stadium is about 2 miles ( 3 km ) from Lime Street Station , which lies on a branch of the West Coast Main Line from London Euston . Kirkdale Station , about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the stadium , is the nearest station to Anfield . Fans travelling by train for matches may book direct to Anfield or Goodison Park , changing to the <unk> <unk> service at Sandhills Station on the Merseyrail Northern Line . The stadium has no parking facilities for supporters , and the streets around the ground allow parking only for residents with permits , although there are a small number of passes that can be allocated to over @-@ 65s . There are proposals under consideration for reinstating passenger traffic on the Bootle Branch , which would cut the distance from the nearest railway station to about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 1 km ) . 
 = Frigate action of 29 May 1794 = 
 The frigate action of 29 May 1794 — not to be confused with the much larger fleet action of 29 May 1794 that took place in the same waters at the same time — was a minor naval engagement of the French Revolutionary Wars between a Royal Navy frigate and a French Navy frigate . The action formed a minor part of the Atlantic campaign of May 1794 , a campaign which culminated in the battle of the Glorious First of June , and was unusual in that the French ship Castor had only been in French hands for a few days at the time of the engagement . Castor had previously been a British ship , seized on 19 May by a French battle squadron in the Bay of Biscay and converted to French service while still at sea . While the main fleets manoeuvered around one another , Castor was detached in pursuit of a Dutch merchant ship and on 29 May encountered the smaller independently cruising British frigate HMS Carysfort . 
 Captain Francis Laforey on Carysfort immediately attacked the larger ship and in an engagement lasting an hour and fifteen minutes successfully forced its captain to surrender , discovering a number of British prisoners of war below decks . Castor was subsequently taken back to Britain and an extended legal case ensued between the Admiralty and Captain Laforey over the amount of prize money that should be awarded for the victory . Ultimately Laforey was successful , in part due to testimony from the defeated French captain , proving his case and claiming the prize money . The lawsuit did not harm Laforey 's career and he later served at the Battle of Trafalgar and became a prominent admiral . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the spring of 1794 , the newly declared French Republic faced famine . In an effort to secure the required food supplies , large quantities were ordered from the French American colonies and from the United States , which gathered in a large convoy of merchant vessels off Hampton Roads in Virginia . On 2 April the convoy sailed for Europe under Contre @-@ Admiral Pierre Vanstabel , expecting to meet a squadron under Contre @-@ Admiral Joseph @-@ Marie Nielly on route while the main French Atlantic Fleet under Contre @-@ Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse held off the British Channel Fleet under Lord Howe . On 6 May , Nielly 's ships sailed from Rochefort and soon passed out of the Bay of Biscay and into the Central Atlantic , where they encountered a British convoy sailing from Newfoundland . The convoy was unprepared for the encounter , and escorted only by the frigate HMS Castor under Captain Thomas Troubridge . Nielly , whose squadron included five ships of the line and several smaller warships , ordered an attack on the convoy and after a brief chase ten merchant ships were captured and Castor was run down by the ship of the line Patriote , the British vessel offering no resistance in the face of such overwhelming odds . 
 Troubridge and most of his crew were removed from their ship and taken aboard Nielly 's flagship Sans Pareil , where they remained for the rest of the campaign . They were replaced by 200 French sailors taken from Nielly 's squadron , as Castor was hastily refitted at sea for service with the French Navy . Command was given to Captain L 'Huillier , who operated as a scout for Nielly 's squadron until 24 May , when he became detached while chasing the Dutch merchant ship Maria Gertruda , which had been separated from a Dutch convoy that had been attacked by Villaret 's fleet on 19 May . Separated from Nielly 's ships , L 'Huillier turned back towards Europe with the Dutch ship in tow . While the French fleets and squadrons searched the Eastern Atlantic for the convoy , the Royal Navy was equally active with a number of squadrons and independently sailing warships complementing the main fleet under Lord Howe . One such ship was the small 28 @-@ gun frigate HMS Carysfort under Captain Francis Laforey . Laforey was cruising the Eastern Atlantic for signs of the French convoy when on 29 May his lookouts sighted two sails ahead . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Laforey immediately advanced on the strange sails , which were soon revealed to be Castor and the Dutch merchant ship . With Carysfort bearing down on him L 'Huillier cast off the tow and prepared for battle , meeting the approaching British frigate with a broadside . The engagement was fought at close range and with little manoeuvering by either side , the ships exchanging broadsides for an hour and fifteen minutes before L 'Huillier surrendered . His ship was heavily battered in the exchange , with the main topgallantmast knocked down and the mainmast and hull severely damaged . Carysfort suffered just one man killed and four wounded from the understrength crew of 180 , while casualties were much heavier among the approximately 200 men aboard Castor , the French losing 16 men killed and nine wounded . The Dutch ship initially escaped , but was later captured and its value was eventually included in the prize money paid for Castor . 
 Laforey 's success was considered impressive by historian William James , as his ship carried only 28 nine @-@ pounder cannon in contrast with L 'Huillier 's 32 twelve @-@ pounder guns and four 24 @-@ pounder carronades . Castor was also a larger ship with a slightly larger crew , and although L 'Huillier and his men had only been aboard for ten days , the crew of Carysfort had only come together immediately before the cruise and had not had much longer to become acquainted with their vessel than the French crew . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Laforey placed a boarding party aboard Castor , who discovered an officer and 18 British sailors held as prisoners below decks , part of the original crew of the ship . These men were freed and joined the prize crew in bringing the ship back to Britain . The rest of the crew , including Captain Troubridge , remained on Nielly 's flagship throughout the subsequent campaign and witnessed the battle of the Glorious First of June , at which Sans Pareil was captured by Lord Howe 's fleet . The French fleet was defeated , losing seven ships , but the convoy had passed safely to the north during the battle and eventually reached France without interception by the cruising British squadrons . 
 When Castor returned to Britain , the frigate was classed by the Admiralty and the Navy Board as " salvage " rather than as a prize . The laws regarding salvage meant that the proportion of prize money due to be paid to Laforey and his crew was significantly reduced by the declaration . The grounds for this judgement were that after its capture by the French , Castor was not taken into a French harbour and properly condemned by a French prize court and commissioned into the French Navy , the normal legal requirement for what was termed a " complete prize " . On behalf of his men Laforey brought a legal challenge against the ruling to the High Court of Admiralty to determine the status of Castor . The judge , Sir James Marriott , heard evidence from a number of parties , including a deposition by Captain L 'Huillier that described Admiral Nielly 's standing orders to fit out any captured warships at sea for continued service in the campaign . After considering the evidence Marriott ruled that Castor was a legitimate prize " setting forth as a ship of war " , and that the normal prize rules should apply to Laforey 's case . The prize money for the purchase of the frigate was therefore authorised to be paid at Plymouth on 20 July 1795 . 
 The result of the case did not damage Laforey 's career : his junior officers were promoted after the action and he was given command of the larger frigate HMS Aimable . He went on to serve at the Battle of Trafalgar and become a full admiral before his death in 1835 . However , historian Tom Wareham has speculated that the legal case was probably the reason that Laforey was denied the knighthood that customarily accompanied a successful frigate action at this stage of the war . More than five decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants from Carysfort still living in 1847 . 
 = Cailleach = 
 In Gaelic mythology ( Irish , Scottish and Manx ) the Cailleach ( Irish pronunciation : [ <unk> ] , Scottish Gaelic pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is a divine hag , a creator deity and weather deity , and an ancestor deity . She is also commonly known as the Cailleach <unk> ( ch ) or Bheur ( ach ) . The word cailleach means " hag " in modern Scottish Gaelic , and has been applied to numerous mythological figures in Ireland , Scotland and the Isle of Man . 
 = = Name = = 
 Cailleach ( " old woman " or " hag " in modern Irish and Scottish Gaelic ) comes from the Old Gaelic <unk> ( " veiled one " ) , an adjectival form of caille ( " veil " ) , an early loan from Latin pallium ( displaying the expected / p / > / c / change of early loans ) . 
 The Cailleach is often referred to as the Cailleach <unk> ( ch ) , Cailleach Bheur ( ach ) , or variations thereof . It is suggested that this refers to the Beara Peninsula in southwestern Ireland , with which the Cailleach is strongly associated . However , Professor <unk> Ó <unk> believes that it comes from a word meaning " sharp , shrill , inimical " – <unk> ( ach ) or <unk> ( ach ) – and refers to the Cailleach 's association with winter and wilderness . 
 The 8th / 9th @-@ century Irish poem The Lament of the Old Woman says that the Cailleach 's name is <unk> or <unk> . In The Hunt of Slieve <unk> she is called <unk> , sister of <unk> . In the tale of the Glas <unk> she is called <unk> . Elsewhere , she is called Buí or Bua ( ch ) . In Manx Gaelic she is known as the <unk> . 
 The plural of cailleach is <unk> ( [ <unk> ] ) in Irish and <unk> ( [ <unk> ] ) in Scottish Gaelic . The word is found as a component in terms like the Gaelic cailleach @-@ <unk> ( " nun " ) and cailleach @-@ <unk> ( " owl " ) , as well as the Irish cailleach <unk> ( " wise woman , fortune @-@ teller " ) and cailleach <unk> ( " sorceress , charm @-@ worker " ) . Related words include the Gaelic <unk> and the Irish cailín ( " young woman , girl , <unk> " ) and the Lowland Scots carline / <unk> ( " old woman , witch " ) . A more obscure word that is sometimes interpreted as " hag " is the Irish <unk> , which has led some to speculate on a connection between the Cailleach and the <unk> of Sheela na Gigs . 
 = = Legends = = 
 In Scotland , where she is also known as Beira , Queen of Winter , she is credited with making numerous mountains and large hills , which are said to have been formed when she was striding across the land and accidentally dropped rocks from her creel or wicker basket . In other cases she is said to have built the mountains intentionally , to serve as her stepping stones . She carries a hammer for shaping the hills and valleys , and is said to be the mother of all the goddesses and gods . 
 The Cailleach displays several traits befitting the personification of winter : she herds deer , she fights spring , and her staff freezes the ground . 
 In partnership with the goddess Brìghde , the Cailleach is seen as a seasonal deity or spirit , ruling the winter months between Samhainn ( 1 November or first day of winter ) and Bealltainn ( 1 May or first day of summer ) , while Brìghde rules the summer months between Bealltainn and Samhainn . Some interpretations have the Cailleach and Brìghde as two faces of the same goddess , while others describe the Cailleach as turning to stone on Bealltainn and reverting to humanoid form on Samhainn in time to rule over the winter months . Depending on local climate , the transfer of power between the winter goddess and the summer goddess is celebrated any time between Là Fhèill Brìghde ( 1 February ) at the earliest , Latha na <unk> ( 25 March ) , or Bealltainn ( 1 May ) at the latest , and the local festivals marking the arrival of the first signs of spring may be named after either the Cailleach or Brìghde . 
 Là Fhèill Brìghde is also the day the Cailleach gathers her firewood for the rest of the winter . Legend has it that if she intends to make the winter last a good while longer , she will make sure the weather on 1 February is bright and sunny , so she can gather plenty of firewood to keep herself warm in the coming months . As a result , people are generally relieved if Là Fhèill Brìghde is a day of foul weather , as it means the Cailleach is asleep , will soon run out of firewood , and therefore winter is almost over . On the Isle of Man , where She is known as <unk> ny <unk> , the Cailleach is said to have been seen on St. Bride 's day in the form of a gigantic bird , carrying sticks in her beak . 
 In Scotland , the <unk> ( lit . ' old women ' ) are also known as The Storm Hags , and seen as personifications of the elemental powers of nature , especially in a destructive aspect . They are said to be particularly active in raising the windstorms of spring , during the period known as A ' <unk> . 
 On the west coast of Scotland , the Cailleach ushers in winter by washing her great plaid ( Gaelic : <unk> mòr ) in the Gulf of Corryvreckan ( Gaelic : Coire <unk> - ' cauldron of the plaid ' ) . This process is said to take three days , during which the roar of the coming tempest is heard as far away as twenty miles ( 32 km ) inland . When she is finished , her plaid is pure white and snow covers the land . 
 In Scotland and Ireland , the first farmer to finish the grain harvest made a corn dolly , representing the Cailleach ( also called " the Carlin or <unk> " ) , from the last sheaf of the crop . The figure would then be tossed into the field of a neighbor who had not yet finished bringing in their grain . The last farmer to finish had the responsibility to take in and care for the corn dolly for the next year , with the implication they 'd have to feed and house the hag all winter . Competition was fierce to avoid having to take in the Old Woman . 
 Some scholars believe the Old Irish poem , ' The Lament of the Old Woman of <unk> ' is about the Cailleach ; Kuno Meyer states , " she had fifty foster @-@ children in <unk> . She had seven periods of youth one after another , so that every man who had lived with her came to die of old age , and her grandsons and great @-@ grandsons were tribes and races . " 
 = = Locations associated with the Cailleach = = 
 = = = Ireland = = = 
 In Ireland she is also associated with craggy , prominent mountains and outcroppings , such as Hag 's Head ( Irish : Ceann Caillí , meaning " hag 's head " ) the southernmost tip of the Cliffs of Moher in County Clare . The megalithic tombs at <unk> in County Meath are situated atop Slieve na <unk> ( Irish : <unk> na Caillí , meaning " the hag 's mountain " ) and include a <unk> known as " the hag 's chair " . Cairn T on Slieve na <unk> is a classic passage tomb , in which the rays of the equinox sunrise shine down the passageway and illuminate an inner chamber filled with megalithic <unk> . <unk> ( <unk> na Caillí , " Hag Cliff " ) is a cliff in County Galway . 
 = = = Scotland = = = 
 The Cailleach is prominent in the landscape of Argyll and Bute , Scotland . In later tales she is known as the Cailleach nan Cruachan ( " the witch of Ben Cruachan " ) . Ben Cruachan is the tallest mountain in the region . Tea @-@ towels and postcards of her are sold in the visitor shop for the Hollow Mountain , which also features a mural depicting her accidental creation of Loch Awe . 
 Legend has it that the Cailleach was tired from a long day herding deer . Atop Ben Cruachan she fell asleep on her watch and a well she was tending overflowed , running down from the highlands and flooding the valleys below , forming first a river and then the loch . The overflowing well is a common motif in local Gaelic creation tales - as seen in the goddess <unk> 's similar creation of the River Boyne in Ireland . Other connections to the region include her above @-@ mentioned strong ties with the fierce whirlpool in the Gulf of Corryvreckan . 
 Beinn na <unk> on the Isle of Skye is one of her haunts , as are other mountains prominent in the landscape , and from which fierce storms of sleet and rain descend , wreaking havoc and destruction upon the lands below . 
 There is a Glen Cailleach which joins to Glen Lyon in Perthshire . The glen has a stream named Alt nan Cailleach . This area is famous for a pagan ritual which according to legend is associated to the Cailleach . There is a small <unk> in the Glen , known as either Tigh nan Cailleach or Tigh nam <unk> , which houses a series of apparently carved stones . According to local legend they represent the Cailleach , her husband the <unk> , and their children . 
 The local legend suggests that the Cailleach and her family were given shelter in the glen by the locals and while they stayed there the glen was always fertile and prosperous . When they left they gave the stones to the locals with the promise that as long as the stones were put out to look over the glen at Bealltainn and put back into the shelter and made secure for the winter at Samhainn then the glen would continue to be fertile . 
 This ritual is still carried out to this day . 
 = Advance Wars : Days of Ruin = 
 Advance Wars : Days of Ruin ( titled Advance Wars : Dark Conflict in Europe and Australia ) is a turn @-@ based strategy video game for the Nintendo DS handheld game console . It is the fourth installment in the Advance Wars series ( preceded by Advance Wars : Dual Strike ) and was released in North America on January 21 , 2008 ; in Europe on January 25 , 2008 ; and in Australia on February 21 , 2008 . A Japanese release was announced under the title of Famicom Wars DS : <unk> Hikari ( <unk> <unk> ) , but was canceled after several delays . However , on October 30 , 2013 , it became available in Japan through Club Nintendo as a downloadable platinum status reward for the Nintendo 3DS system . 
 Advance Wars : Days of Ruin was intended to have a darker atmosphere and more serious tone in contrast to the previous installments in the series , and features a new storyline independent of the previous games . Set amidst a post @-@ apocalyptic world , the story focuses on the Rubinelle 12th Battalion , one of the surviving remnants of the military of the country of Rubinelle , which had been locked in a century @-@ long war with its rival , Lazuria , prior to a devastating global meteor shower . In the aftermath , the Battalion devotes itself to saving any other survivors of the disaster , despite the shattered nations renewing their war against each other and an <unk> disease ravaging both sides . Meanwhile , a mysterious faction with unknown motives takes advantage of the destruction and pushes both sides deeper into conflict from behind the scenes . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The objective in Days of Ruin is for the player to use their military force to defeat the enemy 's force . Except for certain single player missions with special objectives , there are two ways to defeat an opponent : destroy all of the enemy 's units or capture their headquarters . The battle system is turn @-@ based . Two to four forces , each headed by a commanding officer ( CO ) , take turns building and commanding units on grid @-@ based maps . Every turn , units , which consist of ground , sea and air units , can move across the different types of terrain and attack enemy units or perform other actions , such as submerging a submarine or resupplying friendly units . Many factors can affect the battle , such as Fog of War , a phenomenon that prevents players from seeing enemy units other than those in the visual range of their units ; various weather conditions ; and CO powers . 
 = = = COs and CO powers = = = 
 The entire cast from the previous games has been replaced with new characters . CO powers have been toned down , and no longer affect all units or the whole battle or the whole map . Tag powers from Dual Strike which allowed players to move twice in one turn have been removed . Players gain CO powers much later in the campaign than before , and they have a much less significant role in overall gameplay . 
 At the HQ or any unit @-@ producing property , COs can join with a specific unit , and automatically promote that unit to Vet level , but at the cost of half of that unit 's value . The CO 's unit confers an advantage on friendly units within a certain range , the " CO zone . " These effects are generally minor advantages such as attack or defense boosts . CO effects are constant and , unlike previous games , only benefit units within the CO zone . 
 As damage is dealt by units within the CO zone , the CO 's power meter fills slightly , at a rate of one bar per five hit points worth of damage inflicted . As the CO power meter is filled , the CO zone grows larger . When the meter is full , the CO can activate his power which has an effect on the whole battlefield , such as repairing allied units , damaging enemy units , or temporarily altering weather conditions . In addition , the offensive and defensive boosts that normally apply only in the CO zone , also applies to all allied units on the whole battlefield for the turn that the CO power is active . If the CO unit is destroyed , the CO meter empties and the CO returns to the HQ , able to be redeployed with another unit . 
 = = = New units , properties , and terrain = = = 
 Units can now level up in battle , increasing their capabilities . Units increase their level once for each enemy unit that they destroy . The level of each unit is identified as I , II , or Vet , with Vet being the highest level . While units with higher levels are more powerful than new units , the power increase is slight . Unit experience is not persistent , and the player begins each mission with new units . 
 Unit prices have been readjusted and some units renamed , as well as new ones introduced . New land units include the Bike , a highly mobile infantry unit that can capture properties ; the Flare , an armored vehicle unit that can reveal areas affected by the Fog of War ; the Anti @-@ Tank , an indirect @-@ fire unit strong against tanks with the ability to counter @-@ attack during direct attacks ; and the War Tank ( formerly the Mega Tank ) , the strongest ground unit in the game . New air units include the Duster , a weaker , lower @-@ cost interceptor that can strike ground units ; and the Seaplane , which is produced by Carriers and can attack any unit , but has limited ammo and fuel reserves . Additionally , there is a single new sea unit , the Gunboat , which is armed with a missile salvo that must be resupplied after each use , and can transport one infantry / mech unit . Also , the Battleship was given the ability to move and fire in the same turn , making it the only indirect @-@ combat unit able to do so . 
 New properties have also been introduced , including temporary properties which are constructed by the Rig unit ( formerly known as the APC ) . Temporary properties cannot build new units like other properties can , but can only be used as stationary resupply bases providing some defensive cover for units , and can be captured . Each Rig unit can construct one of two temporary properties , the Temporary Port and Temporary Airport . Additionally , the new Radar property has been added ; when captured it clears a five @-@ tile radius of Fog of War . 
 New terrain is available in the game : Wasteland , which impedes the movement of ground vehicles ; Ruins , which provide a minor defense bonus for ground units and hiding places in Fog of War ; Fire , which is impassable and illuminates the surrounding area during Fog of War ; Rough Sea , which impedes the movement of naval units ; Mist , which provides a defense bonus and hiding places for naval units ; and Meteors and Plasma . Plasma forms an impassable wall that no unit can cross , and is generated by Meteors . Once a Meteor is destroyed , any Plasma in contact with it disappears , allowing units to pass . Plasma that is not in contact with a meteor cannot be destroyed . 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 The campaign plays out through 26 missions , with story scenes that tie the plot together occurring between and during the battles . In addition , 38 training missions are unlocked as the missions are completed . The training missions are more challenging , entirely optional , and can be played separately from the campaign . One new feature in Days of Ruin is that campaign missions can now be played individually as the player completes them . Like the training missions , campaign missions can be selected from the main menu at any time . 
 Upon completing a mission , the player is awarded a rank , starting with the lowest at C and going to B , A and S , which is the highest . The ranks are based on three categories : Power , Technique , and Speed , each determined by meeting certain conditions in a battle . All three categories are rated on a scale from 0 @-@ 150 , and added together to form a numerical ranking from 0 @-@ 450 in addition to their letter ranking ; for example , any score between 300 @-@ 450 earns an S ranking . Unlike previous games , the numerical score is not converted into points that can be redeemed to purchase new maps and COs ; instead , COs are unlocked after the completion of certain missions and all maps ( with the exception of training missions ) are available at the beginning of gameplay . 
 In a departure from the previous games , which included five factions in the campaign , Days of Ruin features only four : the Rubinelle 12th Battalion ( Red ) , Lazurian Army ( Blue ) , New Rubinelle Army ( Yellow ) , and Intelligent Defense Systems ( Black ) , although The Beast ( also Black and also allied with IDS ) could be considered a separate faction . These factions have different names in the American , European , and Japanese versions of the game . 
 = = Multiplayer = = 
 In a first for the series , Days of Ruin includes online multiplayer over Nintendo 's Wi @-@ Fi Connection service , as well as a feature for players to share their own custom map designs and download maps made by others ( custom maps and sharing custom maps is a feature present in all Advance Wars games ) . Over 150 premade maps are included in the game for use in local multiplayer , and designed for two , three , and four @-@ player matches . Multiplayer games can be played with only one DS game card : each player can pass the game to the next player when it is their turn . Of course , you can still do it with 2 or 3 or 4 DS systems . It is also possible to set all sides to CPU , which is useful for studying the AI . 
 Commanding Officers 
 The above table also includes PAL names for the characters in question if they have them ( on the right @-@ hand side of the forward slash ) . 
 = = = Custom maps = = = 
 When players create and upload their own custom maps to the Wi @-@ Fi Connection , these maps can be tested and given approval ratings by other players from around the world . Players can download randomly selected maps from the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection , or can choose maps based on their approval ratings . In order to upload a map , the player must win it once , and rate it based on its difficulty . The maximum size for <unk> maps is <unk> tiles , and the player can only upload one at a time ; if the player uploads another map , then the original one is replaced . Maps can have any dimensions between <unk> and <unk> tiles , and the game is able to store up to 50 custom maps . 
 = = = Online multiplayer = = = 
 When using Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection for online multiplayer , the player can choose between a match with a random opponent from around the world , or a match with someone that the player has exchanged friend codes with . Worldwide matches are limited to two players , with the weather conditions being randomly generated and a map randomly chosen from a set list . Worldwide match players can choose if they want an opponent close to their skill level or to play against an opponent regardless of skill level . When playing with a friend , more options are opened up to allow greater customization of the match , such as the type of weather and the duration of the match . Voice chat is only supported when playing with a friend , and is unavailable during worldwide online play . However , Caulder can not be used in <unk> multiplayer due to his extreme advantages . 
 = = = Local multiplayer = = = 
 Players also have the option of using local multiplayer , which requires that each player have his or her own DS game card and increases the limit of those who can participate to between 2 @-@ 4 players . 28 classic maps from previous Advance Wars games , 70 two @-@ player maps , 32 three @-@ player maps , and 30 four @-@ player maps are all playable with local multiplayer . Custom maps can also be used in multiplayer . The conditions of these maps can also be customized by the players . Also , like in previous games , there is an option to use one DS and game card to play with up to four players . This is accomplished by passing the DS to the next player after a player has completed his / her turn . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot of Days of Ruin is considerably darker than , and unrelated to , the plots of previous games . Almost 90 % of humanity has been killed off following devastating meteor strikes which have destroyed much of civilization and caused a massive dust cloud to blot out the sun , preventing <unk> and thereby preventing the growing of crops . Scattered survivors pick through the wreckage , and the remnants of several military superpowers patrol the ravaged landscape , some factions protecting the innocent while the others prey upon them . 
 Following the disaster , which obliterated much of the warring nations of Rubinelle and Lazuria , a young cadet from the Rubinelle military academy named Will escapes the ruins of the academy 's mess hall and is confronted by The Beast , a former sergeant gone rogue who leads a small band of raiders . Will is rescued by Brenner and Lin of Rubinelle 's 12th Battalion ( nicknamed " Brenner 's Wolves " ) , and takes on the group 's cause of saving as many survivors of the meteor strikes as possible . During a search , Will discovers a mysterious amnesiac who does not remember her own name , but somehow knows detailed military information . Will later names her Isabella , and she becomes a vital part of the battalion as they put an end to the Beast 's reign of terror . 
 One year after the meteor strikes , the 12th Battalion comes into contact with the New Rubinelle Army , and learns of the war raging between the Lazurian Army and the NRA . Brenner reluctantly sides with Greyfield , leader of the NRA , and advances on the Lazurian force , eventually defeating them at Fort Lazuria . Distraught by the ruthless execution of the Lazurian commander , Forsythe , Brenner and the 12th Battalion break the Lazurian prisoners out of an NRA internment camp before they can be executed . While the group escapes , Brenner stays behind and hides in an abandoned city to buy them some time . An infuriated Greyfield orders the use of a new weapon which completely destroys the city , killing Brenner and the NRA troops searching for him . Lin later leads a force against Greyfield , preventing the launch of a wave of deadly Caulder missiles and defeating the NRA once and for all . In the process , Lin personally shoots and kills Greyfield , avenging Brenner 's death . 
 The 12th Battalion is unexpectedly attacked soon after by Intelligent Defense Systems , a private military contractor that had secretly supported first the <unk> , then the NRA by supplying them with weapons of mass destruction . Dr. Caulder , leader of the IDS , had taken advantage of the world 's devastation to carry out horrific biological and psychological experiments that he would have been unable to undertake otherwise , such as creating and spreading a terrible new disease called the Creeper , which causes flowers to bloom from infected individuals , for the sole purpose of studying the survivor 's reactions . Despite numerous demoralizing attacks by IDS and its massive bomber , the Great Owl , the battalion survives and infiltrates and brings down The Great Owl , eventually pursuing Caulder to his main laboratory and fortress , The Nest . In the end , Caulder is killed in the destruction of his lab , and the war is finally brought to an end . One year later , the village of New Hope , founded by the 12th Battalion after the conflict , begins to flourish in the new @-@ found peace . The sun is seen rising above the nearby hills for the first time since the meteor strikes , giving hope of a brighter future . 
 = = Development = = 
 Days of Ruin was announced as Advance Wars DS 2 during the 2007 E3 Media and Business Summit . No other details for this installment were given other than the tentative name , but two months later in October a playable demo version was showcased at the <unk> Games Show in Paris , France , where the new darker style was first revealed . On October 12 , 2007 , the game 's title was officially released as Advance Wars : Days of Ruin for the North American version , with a planned shipping date of January 21 , 2008 ; the alternate name of Advance Wars : Dark Conflict for European and Australian versions was released in early December . 
 Advance Wars : Days of Ruin features a style unlike previous entries in the series . When asked why it was changed , the developers stated that they wanted to surprise people . One of the people who localized Days of Ruin into English , Tim O 'Leary , commented that the design change also came from reading comments from people that state to the effect : " We like the game , we love the game , but it 's the same thing . " In designing the new style , setting , and plot , the developers discovered that Japanese people have a different view on war than American people do , citing the previous titles ' lighthearted take on war . As a result , they designed the game to be " grittier " and " more somber " . Another influence on the new setting was that Advance Wars was more successful in North America than it was in Japan . The developers discussed the kinds of people that would exist in this world - people who seek out others to help them ; people who attempt to further their own agendas by taking control of pieces of land ; and those who attempt to hoard supplies and kill anyone who gets in their way . They added that they also wanted to make an Advance Wars title that even veterans of the series would find fresh . The setting was also a reason for the design change , being a " not @-@ so @-@ distant future science fiction " setting , which the developers felt didn 't fit well with the style of previous titles . When asked whether they feared that gamers would be turned off by the changes , the developers responded by saying that they have to " fight against " this fear . The developers felt that without innovation , the series would turn players off , so they introduced new gameplay mechanics as well as the new setting . 
 In discussing the more lighthearted elements of the plot , such as Dr. Morris , a character who tells corny jokes , the developers commented that these elements accentuated the dark elements of the game rather than detracted from them , as well as showing the stability of the survivors ' mental conditions . The decision to include more dialogue than previous entries in the series was to ensure that this new world and the new characters were understandable by the player , though the developers acknowledge that it could also distract from the strategic gameplay . The developers felt that the dialogue made the story more enjoyable for the players , as opposed to being a vehicle to move the gameplay forward . When asked if Days of Ruin was an attempt to bridge this series with fellow Intelligent Systems series Fire Emblem , developers commented that while the increase in volume may make it seem like this , it was not their intention . They explained that while Fire Emblem placed importance on individual units , Advance Wars was about improving as a Commanding Officer . 
 The developers intended to require the players to employ more tactical approaches to maps , in their introduction of such units as the Flare Gun , a vehicle that could reveal parts of the map hidden by fog of war , and the Commanding Officers , who have had their " CO Powers " reduced in importance from the previous titles . However , the developers added that one does not have to be a " master strategist " to play the game , commenting that the Flare Gun could be used by a casual gamer to quickly move across a map covered in fog of war , while a more advanced player may use it for more strategic means . This unit was added as a means to speed up stages with fog of war . Other new units include the Bike , which was a means of achieving a faster tempo to the game . When asked why the Duster , a modification of a crop duster , was added in favor of the stealth jet from Advance Wars : Dual Strike , the developers commented that the Duster was an inexpensive aerial unit that was not only easy @-@ to @-@ use , but could attack ground units as well . The unit was also added to be a throwback to an older era , as well as demonstrating how people in this world use anything they can as a means of survival . Other additions include the Rig and the Anti @-@ Tank ; the Rig is a modified version of an APC from the previous titles modified to be able to build temporary buildings , while the Anti @-@ Tank is both a direct and long @-@ range weapon specifically designed to do damage to tanks . Two modifications include the Battleship , which can now move and attack in one round , and the Aircraft Carrier , which can produce low @-@ fuel aircraft called Seaplanes . Another new unit is the Gunship , which can attack and carry units as well . In discussing the online play of the game , the developers felt that it was necessary to limit online battles to only two people per battle , explaining that they felt it would be too boring for a player to have to sit and stare at a screen while three other people made their moves . 
 When asked why the mechanism of unlocking maps and characters - accomplished in previous titles by purchasing them with points or coins won through battle - was removed , the developers apologized , commenting that after long deliberation , they felt that such a mechanic was detrimental to the enjoyment of gamers who are too busy to take the time to unlock all of these things . As a result , they designed this game in a way that allowed players to play any non @-@ story based map they wanted , introducing other mechanics to encourage players to keep playing . The developers commented that Days of Ruin had more strategy than previous entries in the series due to the changes and removals made to the game compared to the other titles . Another interviewer further asked of the developers of the removals of other features from previous entries in the series , including dual screen play , leveling up , Survival mode , Combat mode , and Hard mode . The dual @-@ screen play was removed , with the developers commenting that while it could have been implemented , it did not need to be , and the full use of the dual screens for viewing intel on units and terrain allowed the gameplay to proceed more seamlessly . The ability to level up players ' Commanding Officers was introduced in Days of Ruin 's predecessor , Advance Wars : Dual Strike , the developers commenting that the gameplay centered around how well players used their Commanding Officer . This mechanic was replaced by the ability to level up individual units , commenting that this mechanic required players to work strategically with how they deploy their units . The Survival and Combat modes were removed due to not fitting with the redesign of the world , preferring to have a more focused game . Finally , Hard mode was removed due to the developers feeling that the Normal mode was designed in such a way that a widespread audience could enjoy it . They also commented that earning a high ranking in this mode by doing a good job was effectively the same as Hard mode . 
 = = = Regional differences = = = 
 The European / Australian release , Dark Conflict , is identical to the North American release , Days of Ruin , in terms of the storyline , gameplay , and features . Several minor details distinguish each version , such as differences in the names of the factions , characters , chapter names and units , as well as significant dialogue changes . This is due to Nintendo of America and Nintendo of Europe receiving Japanese copies of the game to translate independently , resulting in unique versions for each region . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Advance Wars : Days of Ruin has received generally positive reviews , having aggregate scores of 85 and 86 on GameRankings and Metacritic , respectively . Nintendo Power gave a positive rating , calling the game " <unk> familiar " with battles that are " more approachable than before . " Online multiplayer was noted as taking " wireless connectivity and Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection further than any game that has preceded it . " One of the main flaws of Days of Ruin was identified as a lack of gameplay innovation . Game Informer 's Adam Biessener called it " an excellent game " , but criticized its change from " charming , cartoony roots " to a " dreary post @-@ apocalyptic setting " . 
 1UP.com praised the new turn Days of Ruin has taken for the series , but noted that the storyline , while darker than before , was still close in tone to the humor of the previous games . The new CO deployment feature was called the biggest change to the gameplay . The game was criticized for the removal of several staple features of the series , but complimented the new online play feature as being " the most balanced Advance Wars experience . " IGN gave the game a high rating for taking risks with its artistic design , but also criticized the loss of old single @-@ player modes in favor of new multiplayer content . IGN named Advance Wars : Days of Ruin the Best Online Multiplayer Game of 2008 for the Nintendo DS . The game was also a nominee for other awards from IGN , including Best Strategy Game and Best Artistic Design . GameSpot 's Ryan Davis praised the game for its online support , the map editor , and sharper visuals , but criticized it for its difficult campaign mode and felt that the story wasn 't strong enough to support the darker tone of the game . 
 In North America , Days of Ruin sold over 81 @,@ 000 copies in January after its release , and close to 50 @,@ 300 copies in February , bringing total sales in the region to over 130 @,@ 000 as of March 2008 . 
 = Tawny owl = 
 The tawny owl or brown owl ( Strix aluco ) is a stocky , medium @-@ sized owl commonly found in woodlands across much of Eurasia . Its underparts are pale with dark streaks , and the upperparts are either brown or grey . Several of the eleven recognised subspecies have both variants . The nest is typically in a tree hole where it can protect its eggs and young against potential predators . This owl is non @-@ migratory and highly territorial . Many young birds starve if they cannot find a vacant territory once parental care ceases . 
 This nocturnal bird of prey hunts mainly rodents , usually by dropping from a perch to seize its prey , which it swallows whole ; in more urban areas its diet includes a higher proportion of birds . Vision and hearing adaptations and silent flight aid its night hunting . The tawny owl is capable of catching smaller owls , but is itself vulnerable to the eagle owl or northern goshawk . 
 Although many people believe this owl has exceptional night vision , its retina is no more sensitive than a human 's . Rather , it is its asymmetrically placed ears that are key to its hunting because they give the tawny owl excellent directional hearing . Its nocturnal habits and eerie , easily imitated call , have led to a mythical association of the tawny owl with bad luck and death . 
 = = Description = = 
 The tawny owl is a robust bird , 37 – 46 cm ( 15 – 18 in ) in length , with an 81 – 105 cm ( 32 – 41 in ) wingspan . Weight can range from 385 to 800 g ( 0 @.@ 849 to 1 @.@ 764 lb ) . Its large rounded head lacks ear tufts , and the facial disc surrounding the dark brown eyes is usually rather plain . The nominate race has two morphs which differ in their plumage colour , one form having rufous brown upperparts and the other greyish brown , although intermediates also occur . The underparts of both morphs are whitish and streaked with brown . This species is sexually dimorphic ; the female is much larger than the male , 5 % longer and more than 25 % heavier . 
 The tawny owl flies with long glides on rounded wings , less undulating and with fewer wingbeats than other Eurasian owls , and typically at a greater height . The flight of the tawny owl is rather heavy and slow , particularly at takeoff . As with most owls , its flight is silent because of its feathers ' soft , furry upper surfaces and a fringe on the leading edge of the outer primaries . Its size , squat shape and broad wings distinguish it from other owls found within its range ; great grey , eagle owl and Ural owls are similar in shape , but much larger . 
 An owl 's eyes are placed at the front of the head and have a field overlap of 50 – 70 % , giving it better binocular vision than diurnal birds of prey ( overlap 30 – 50 % ) . The tawny owl 's retina has about 56 @,@ 000 light @-@ sensitive rod cells per square millimetre ( 36 million per square inch ) ; although earlier claims that it could see in the infrared part of the spectrum have been dismissed , it is still often said to have eyesight 10 to 100 times better than humans in low @-@ light conditions . However , the experimental basis for this claim is probably inaccurate by at least a factor of 10 . The owl 's actual visual acuity is only slightly greater than that of humans , and any increased sensitivity is due to optical factors rather than to greater retinal sensitivity ; both humans and owl have reached the limit of resolution for the retinas of terrestrial vertebrates . 
 Adaptations to night vision include the large size of the eye , its tubular shape , large numbers of closely packed retinal rods , and an absence of cone cells , since rod cells have superior light sensitivity . There are few coloured oil drops , which would reduce the light intensity . Unlike diurnal birds of prey , owls normally have only one fovea , and that is poorly developed except in daytime hunters like the short @-@ eared owl . 
 Hearing is important for a nocturnal bird of prey , and as with other owls , the tawny owl 's two ear openings differ in structure and are asymmetrically placed to improve directional hearing . A passage through the skull links the eardrums , and small differences in the time of arrival of a sound at each ear enables its source to be pinpointed . The left ear opening is higher on the head than the larger right ear and tilts downward , improving sensitivity to sounds from below . Both ear openings are hidden under the facial disk feathers , which are structurally specialized to be transparent to sound , and are supported by a movable fold of skin ( the pre @-@ aural flap ) . 
 The internal structure of the ear , which has large numbers of auditory neurons , gives an improved ability to detect low @-@ frequency sounds at a distance , which could include rustling made by prey moving in vegetation . The tawny owl 's hearing is ten times better than a human 's , and it can hunt using this sense alone in the dark of a woodland on an overcast night , but the patter of raindrops makes it difficult to detect faint sounds , and prolonged wet weather can lead to starvation if the owl cannot hunt effectively . 
 The commonly heard contact call is a shrill , <unk> @-@ wick but the male has a quavering advertising song hoo ... ho , ho , hoo @-@ hoo @-@ hoo @-@ hoo . William Shakespeare used this owl 's song in Love 's Labour 's Lost ( Act 5 , Scene 2 ) as " Then nightly sings the staring owl , Tu @-@ whit ; Tu @-@ who , a merry note , While greasy Joan doth keel the pot " , but this stereotypical call is actually a duet , with the female making the <unk> @-@ wick sound , and the male responding <unk> . The call is easily imitated by blowing into cupped hands through slightly parted thumbs , and a study in Cambridgeshire found that this mimicry produced a response from the owl within 30 minutes in 94 % of trials . A male 's response to a broadcast song appears to be indicative of his health and vigour ; owls with higher blood parasite loads use fewer high frequencies and a more limited range of frequencies in their responses to an apparent intruder . 
 = = = Geographical variation = = = 
 Although both colour morphs occur in much of the European range , brown birds predominate in the more humid climate of western Europe , with the grey phase becoming more common further east ; in the northernmost regions , all the owls are a cold @-@ grey colour . Siberian and Central Asian subspecies have grey and white plumage , the North African race is dark grey @-@ brown , and South and East Asian birds have barred , not striped , underparts , and fine lines around the facial disc . The Siberian and Scandinavian subspecies are 12 % larger and 40 % heavier , and have 13 % longer wings than western European birds , in accordance with Bergmann 's rule which predicts that northern forms will typically be bigger than their southern counterparts . 
 The plumage colour is genetically controlled , and studies in Finland and Italy indicate that grey @-@ morph tawny owls have more reproductive success , better immune resistance , and fewer parasites than brown birds . Although this might suggest that eventually the brown morph could disappear , the owls show no colour preference when choosing a mate , so the adverse selection pressure is reduced . There are also environmental factors involved . The Italian study showed that brown @-@ morph birds were found in denser woodland , and in Finland , Gloger 's rule would suggest that paler birds would in any case predominate in the colder climate . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described by Linnaeus in his Systema naturae in 1758 under its current scientific name . The binomial derives from Greek strix " owl " and Italian <unk> , " tawny owl " ( from Latin <unk> " screech @-@ owl " ) . 
 The tawny owl is a member of the wood @-@ owl genus Strix , part of the typical owl family Strigidae , which contains all species of owl other than the barn owls . Within its genus , the tawny owl 's closest relatives are Hume 's owl , Strix <unk> , ( formerly considered to be conspecific ) , the Himalayan owl , Strix <unk> , ( sometimes considered conspecific ) , its larger northern neighbour , the Ural owl , S. <unk> , and the North American barred owl , S. varia . The Early – Middle Pleistocene Strix intermedia is sometimes considered a paleosubspecies of the tawny owl , which would make it that species ' immediate ancestor . 
 The tawny owl subspecies are often poorly differentiated , and may be at a flexible stage of subspecies formation with features related to the ambient temperature , the colour tone of the local habitat , and the size of available prey . Consequently , various authors have historically described between 10 and 15 subspecies . The currently recognised subspecies are listed below . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The tawny owl has a distribution stretching discontinuously across temperate Eurasia from Great Britain and the Iberian Peninsula eastwards to western Siberia , and India . The subspecies S. a. <unk> extends the range into northwest Africa . This essentially non @-@ migratory owl is absent from Ireland ( probably because of competition from the long @-@ eared owl ) , and only a rare vagrant to the Balearic and Canary Islands . 
 This species is found in deciduous and mixed forests , and sometimes mature conifer plantations , preferring locations with access to water . Cemeteries , gardens and parks have allowed it to spread into urban areas , including central London . The tawny owl is mainly a lowland bird in the colder parts of its range , but breeds to 550 metres ( 1 @,@ 800 ft ) in Scotland , 1 @,@ 600 m ( 5 @,@ 200 ft ) in the Alps , 2 @,@ 350 m ( 7 @,@ 710 ft ) in Turkey , and up to 2 @,@ 800 m ( 9 @,@ 200 ft ) in Burma . 
 The tawny owl has a geographical range of at least 10 million km2 ( 3 @.@ 8 million mi2 ) and a large population including an estimated 970 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 individuals in Europe alone . Population trends have not been quantified , but there is evidence of an overall increase . This owl is not believed to meet the IUCN Red List criterion of declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations and is therefore evaluated as being of least concern . This species has expanded its range in Belgium , the Netherlands , Norway and Ukraine , and populations are stable or increasing in most European countries . Declines have occurred in Finland , Estonia , Italy and Albania . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Tawny owls pair off from the age of one year , and stay together in a usually monogamous relationship for life . An established pair 's territory is defended year @-@ round and maintained with little , if any , boundary change from year to year . The pair sit in cover on a branch close to a tree trunk during the day , and usually roost separately from July to October . Roosting owls may be discovered and " mobbed " by small birds during the day , but they normally ignore the disturbance . 
 The tawny owl typically nests in a hole in a tree , but will also use old European magpie nests , squirrel <unk> or holes in buildings , and readily takes to nest boxes . It nests from February onwards in the south of its range , but rarely before mid @-@ March in Scandinavia . The glossy white eggs are 48 mm × 39 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in × 1 @.@ 5 in ) in size and weigh 39 @.@ 0 g ( 1 @.@ 38 oz ) of which 7 % is shell . The typical clutch of two or three eggs is incubated by the female alone for 30 days to hatching , and the altricial , downy chicks fledge in a further 35 – 39 days . The young usually leave the nest up to ten days before fledging , and hide on nearby branches . 
 This species is fearless in defence of its nest and young , and , like other Strix owls , strikes for the intruder 's head with its sharp talons . Because its flight is silent , it may not be detected until it is too late to avoid the danger . Dogs , cats and humans may be assaulted , sometimes without provocation . Perhaps the best @-@ known victim of the tawny owl 's fierce attack was the renowned bird photographer Eric Hosking , who lost his left eye when struck by a bird he was attempting to photograph near its nest in 1937 . He later called his autobiography An Eye for a Bird . 
 The parents care for young birds for two or three months after they fledge , but from August to November the juveniles disperse to find a territory of their own to occupy . If they fail to find a vacant territory , they usually starve . The juvenile survival rate is unknown , but the annual survival rate for adults is 76 @.@ 8 % . The typical lifespan is five years , but an age of over 18 years has been recorded for a wild tawny owl , and of over 27 years for a captive bird . 
 Predators of the tawny owl include large birds such as Ural owls , eagle owls , northern goshawks , golden eagles , and common buzzards . Pine martens may raid nests , especially where artificial nest boxes make the owls easy to find , and several instances have been recorded of Eurasian jackdaws building nests on top of a brooding female tawny owl leading to the death of the adult and chicks . A Danish study showed that predation by mammals , especially red foxes , was an important cause of mortality in newly fledged young , with 36 % dying between fledging and independence . The mortality risk increased with fledging date from 14 % in April to more than 58 % in June , and increasing predation of late broods may be an important selective agent for early breeding in this species . 
 This species is increasingly affected by avian malaria , the incidence of which has tripled in the last 70 years , in parallel with increasing global temperatures . An increase of one degree Celsius produces a two- to three @-@ fold increase in the rate of malaria . In 2010 , the incidence in British tawny owls was 60 % , compared to 2 – 3 % in 1996 . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The tawny owl hunts almost entirely at night , watching from a perch before dropping or gliding silently down to its victim , but very occasionally it will hunt in daylight when it has young to feed . This species takes a wide range of prey , mainly woodland rodents , but also other mammals up to the size of a young rabbit , and birds , earthworms and beetles . In urban areas , birds make up a larger proportion of the diet , and species as unlikely as mallard and kittiwake have been killed and eaten . 
 Prey is typically swallowed whole , with indigestible parts regurgitated as pellets . These are medium @-@ sized and grey , consisting mainly of rodent fur and often with bones protruding , and are found in groups under trees used for roosting or nesting . 
 Less powerful woodland owls such as the little owl and the long @-@ eared owl cannot usually co @-@ exist with the stronger tawny owls , which may take them as food items , and are found in different habitats ; in Ireland the absence of the tawny owl allowed the long @-@ eared owl to become the dominant owl . Similarly , where the tawny owl has moved into built @-@ up areas , it tends to displace barn owls from their traditional nesting sites in buildings . 
 = = In culture = = 
 The tawny owl , like its relatives , has often been seen as an omen of bad luck ; William Shakespeare used it as such in Julius Caesar ( Act 1 Scene 3 ) : " And yesterday the bird of night did sit / Even at noon @-@ day upon the market @-@ place / <unk> and shrieking . " John Ruskin is quoted as saying " Whatever wise people may say of them , I at least have found the owl 's cry always prophetic of mischief to me " . 
 Wordsworth described the technique for calling an owl in his poem There was a Boy . 
 = Manta ( SeaWorld Orlando ) = 
 Manta is a steel flying roller coaster at SeaWorld Orlando . The attraction allows guests to encounter numerous species of ray before boarding a manta ray @-@ shaped train that takes them on a 3 @,@ 359 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 024 m ) roller coaster ride above the park , reaching top speeds of 56 miles per hour ( 90 km / h ) . Designed by Swiss firm Bolliger & Mabillard , Manta restrains riders in the prone position and features four inversions . The well @-@ received attraction officially opened to the public on May 22 , 2009 . Their slogan is " Dive deep , fly high … " . 
 = = History = = 
 SeaWorld Orlando revealed the concept that was to become Manta to a gathering of travel industry representatives and community leaders on April 2 , 2008 , although it had been in the planning stages for years . The exact specifications were not immediately revealed , but the park said it would be their largest single investment in an attraction , and that it would open sometime in 2009 . The park also announced that the attraction would include a roller coaster , but that it would be more than just a roller coaster . Joseph <unk> — vice president of sales and marketing — described the ride as " the next generation SeaWorld attraction " that would immerse guests in elements of marine life . 
 Artists ' concepts of the new attraction were leaked onto the Internet in April 2008 ; however , SeaWorld officials would not confirm whether the images were accurate representations of the final design , but said that the roller coaster would have a gliding sensation . Searches of trademark applications uncovered an entry for the use of the term " Manta " as an amusement ride , and construction on a large site within the park had already begun . On May 29 , 2008 , park officials confirmed that the attraction would be named Manta , and announced additional details about the attraction . 
 Construction of the roller coaster track and attraction buildings began in September 2008 . Superior Rigging & Erection built the supports and track . The ride 's layout was completed in December 2008 , and construction on other parts of the roller coaster continued into early 2009 . SeaWorld began previewing the attraction in early May 2009 , before it was officially opened on May 22 . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Theme and surrounding experience = = = 
 Manta is an attraction which encompasses a themed queue and a roller coaster . The queue is designed to resemble a seaside village decorated with mosaics and artwork inspired by rays . Within the attraction 's 4 @-@ acre ( 16 @,@ 000 m2 ) site are ten aquaria containing 184 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 700 @,@ 000 l ; 153 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of water . Approximately 3 @,@ 000 animals representing over 60 species are visible — including over 300 rays , such as <unk> rays and spotted eagle rays . Other creatures on display include sea horses , leafy <unk> and tropical fish . 
 Portions of the aquarium exhibit can be viewed by guests who do not wish to ride the roller coaster . Non @-@ riding guests can use a second entrance to the attraction area , which is separated from those waiting for the roller coaster . Guests in the ride 's queue have access to special exhibit components , such as a Plexiglas " pop @-@ up " window into the aquarium . Manta 's rails , supports , and track are filled with sand to reduce noise . 
 = = = Trains and loading procedure = = = 
 Manta is a flying roller coaster , which simulates the sensation of flight . It is designed to resemble the way rays — mantas in particular — appear to fly through seawater . Guests are initially seated upright on the trains in one of eight rows that hold four passengers each , accommodating up to 32 riders . Manta operates with three trains . Before departure , mechanisms in the station raise the cars up to the track , such that the riders ' spines are parallel to the track . Guests are secured in their seats using a locking lap bar , a vest @-@ like harness , and flaps at the riders ' ankles to hold their feet in place . 
 The cars are highly stylized . The lead car is shaped like a manta ray with a wingspan of 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . In the original plans , the wing of the car was intended to make contact with water at a certain point of the ride , but Bolliger & Mabillard said the idea would not work and a fountain was used instead . The roller coaster 's wings appear to skim the water 's surface . Water jets in the attraction 's main lagoon create a splash effect as the train passes . SeaWorld can adjust several features of the splash effect , including its duration and the train 's speed when it enters the area . The roller coaster 's color scheme includes deep purple , ultramarine blue and cobalt . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track of Manta is 3 @,@ 359 feet ( 1 @,@ 024 m ) long and lift hill is 140 feet ( 43 m ) high . There are four inversions ; a pretzel loop , two inline twists and one corkscrew . The track is dark blue and the supports are light blue . Sand is placed inside some sections of track to reduce the noise produced by the trains . Friction brakes are used to control the speed of the train . The track was fabricated at the Ohio @-@ based Clermont Steel Fabricators . In 2015 , a clone of Manta opened at Nagashima Spa Land under the name of Acrobat . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 Manta features a dual station configuration , which allows two trains to be loaded at the same time , thus increasing the ride 's capacity . After departing from the station , the train will make either a slight left or right turn — depending on which station it leaves — into the 140 @-@ foot ( 43 m ) chain lift hill . From the top of the lift hill , the train makes a 113 @-@ foot ( 34 m ) downward right turn into a 98 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) -tall pretzel loop , after which it turns left , leading into the first of two inline twists . The train then makes a right turn followed by a slight upward left turn into a corkscrew , before turning right into the mid @-@ course brake run . The train then drops to a point just above a body of water , at the same time making a 270 @-@ degree right turn , where water jets spray up near the train to produce the effect of the train actually hitting the water . After exiting the turn , the train goes by a waterfall , goes through the second inline twist , makes a left turn into the final brake run , then makes a left turn into one of the two stations where the next riders board . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Manta has been lauded by the mainstream media and industry press since its debut in May 2009 . Busch Entertainment Corporation , SeaWorld Orlando 's parent company , credited Manta with improving park attendance . In July 2009 , <unk> named Manta " best new attraction " . In September 2009 , Manta placed third in Amusement Today magazine 's poll for the Best New Ride of 2009 . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , Manta peaked at position 23 in its debut year . The ride 's ranking in subsequent polls is shown in the table below . 
 = Gevingåsen Tunnel = 
 Gevingåsen Tunnel is a 4 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometer ( 2 @.@ 7 mi ) single track railway tunnel between Hommelvik and Hell , Norway , on the Nordland Line . Blasting started in 2009 , and the tunnel opened on 15 August 2011 , having cost 635 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . Built by the Norwegian National Rail Administration , the tunnel has shortened travel time south of Stjørdal by five minutes and increased the capacity of the Trondheim – Stjørdal to four trains per hour in each direction . 
 The tunnel was the first stage in a project to reduce travel time between Steinkjer and Trondheim to one hour . The tunnel section will not be suitable for high @-@ speed trains , as it was built with curves with too small a diameter , notwithstanding political debate about both these tight curves and the possibility of double track . The whole project involved 5 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) of new tracks and permanent way . The blasted rock is used to build a new apron at Trondheim Airport , Værnes . 
 = = Background = = 
 The tunnel was built between Hommelvik and Hell on the Nordland Line , through the hill Gevingåsen . The tunnel is 4 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 7 mi ) long , although the whole project consists of 5 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) of track . The tunnel carries a single track , reducing travel time by five minutes . It has also created the same distance between all passing loops between Trondheim and Stjørdal , allowing the capacity to increase from 5 @.@ 4 to 8 trains per hour ( both directions combined ) . The old right @-@ of @-@ way , located on a ledge over the sea and prone to landslides , is to be closed . In addition , 92 houses are projected to enjoy reduced noise pollution after the closing . <unk> was the first part of the plan to reduce rail travel time from Trondheim to Steinkjer to one hour . Politicians have suggested that after the tunnel is completed , they want to electrify the tracks from Trondheim to Steinkjer . The E6 motorway runs parallel through Gevingåsen in the Hell Tunnel . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Construction of the tunnel was done by drilling and blasting . During planning , use of a tunnel boring machine was considered , but the conventional drilling and blasting method was chosen because it was both cheaper and faster . At Hommelvik , the new section of track starts at the river of <unk> , where it will run in a curve towards the tunnel entrance at Solbakken . Just within the entrance , there will be built a pool and pump to collect surface water . A crosscut is located at Muruvik , close to the quarry . At this point it is 275 meters ( 902 ft ) to the tunnel and blasting will be performed in both directions from the tunnel 's interception with the crosscut . Muruvik will also serve as the operational hub ; transport of the masses to the airport will run along the old E6 . The third point of entry for blasting is the entrance at Hell . The works include replacing the level crossing at Hell Station with an overpass . 
 The builder is the Norwegian National Rail Administration , and construction of the tunnel is financed through state funding , with the project costing NOK 635 million . The construction will be undertaken at the same time as Avinor is expanding the nearby Trondheim Airport , Værnes , and the spoil from the tunnel will be used to build a new apron . Planning of the tunnel was completed at the end of 2008 . The tender for construction was completed in March 2009 , and won by Mika . The construction will extract 400 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 14 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of blasted rock , that is transported out of the tunnel . The last blast was detonated on 12 August 2010 , completing the tunneling proper on time and on budget without injuries . The first revenue train ran through the tunnel on 15 August 2011 . But because schedules only change twice a year , the time saving cannot be incorporated until 2012 . Further plans include building a second track at Trondheim Airport Station . Due to the capacity increase created by the tunnel , this will allow dedicated airport trains to operate from Trondheim . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The Trøndelag Council , an unofficial coordination council consisting of representatives from Nord @-@ Trøndelag County Municipality , Sør @-@ Trøndelag County Municipality and Trondheim Municipality , originally stated that they wanted a double @-@ track tunnel . In 2006 , the Norwegian National Rail Administration stated that it was not certain that a double @-@ track in a single tunnel would meet European Union regulations , and that they might have to delay construction while looking into the matter . Costs for a double track would be about 50 % higher than for a single track . Constructing a second barrel later for the a new track would cost as much as the first barrel . Trøndelag Council member Alf Daniel Moen ( Labour ) stated that the council abandoned the demand for a double @-@ track tunnel so the airport expansion and tunnel construction could be coordinated and because there was not sufficient funding at the time to build both tracks . 
 The tunnel has raised criticism for not being in line with the goals to build a high @-@ speed railway in Trøndelag . This plan requires double track from Trondheim to Stjørdal , but such a solution through the tunnel has been disregarded . Norsk Bane , which is working on plans for a high @-@ speed rail from Oslo to Steinkjer , has criticized the tunnel route for having curves that are too tight . With a radius of 320 metres ( 1 @,@ 050 ft ) , this will only allow 110 kilometres per hour ( 68 mph ) at Hommelvik Station and 60 kilometres per hour ( 37 mph ) at Hell Station . So although the tunnel itself is straight enough to allow speeds of 210 kilometres per hour ( 130 mph ) , limitations at both ends of the tunnel will not allow trains to reach a higher maximum speed of 160 kilometres per hour ( 99 mph ) and an average speed of more than 130 kilometres per hour ( 81 mph ) . Because of this , Gevingåsen Tunnel would not be able to allow high speeds , defined by parliament as minimum 250 kilometres per hour ( 160 mph ) , and could not be part of a future high @-@ speed line north of Trondheim . Norsk Bane stated that part of the cause is that although the National Rail Administration has plans to build a high @-@ speed line from Trondheim to Steinkjer , no complete plans , nor any plans for the trackage on either side of the tunnel , have been made . 
 In January 2009 , just before construction commenced , the Nord @-@ Trøndelag County Cabinet , fronted by Chair Alf Daniel Moen and Councilor of Transport Tor Erik Jensen ( Conservative ) , stated that they did not want the tunnel to run along its planned route , but instead a less curved line that would allow it to be used as a high @-@ speed line in the future . This was rejected by the Ministry of Transport and Communications , who stated that they were building a " modern railway for the future " . 
 It could be added that most trains are regional trains which stop in both Hell and Hommelvik . For them high @-@ speed curves are meaningless . 
 = Japanese aircraft carrier Akagi = 
 Akagi ( Japanese : <unk> ) was an aircraft carrier built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) , named after Mount Akagi in present @-@ day Gunma Prefecture . Though she was laid down as an Amagi @-@ class battlecruiser , Akagi was converted to an aircraft carrier while still under construction to comply with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . The ship was rebuilt from 1935 to 1938 with her original three flight decks consolidated into a single enlarged flight deck and an island superstructure . The second Japanese aircraft carrier to enter service , and the first large or " fleet " carrier , Akagi figured prominently in the development of the IJN 's new carrier striking force doctrine that grouped carriers together , concentrating their air power . This doctrine enabled Japan to attain its strategic goals during the early stages of the Pacific War from December 1941 until mid @-@ 1942 . 
 Akagi 's aircraft served in the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War in the late 1930s . Upon the formation of the First Air Fleet or Kido Butai ( Striking Force ) in early 1941 , she became its flagship , and remained so for the duration of her service . With other fleet carriers , she took part in the Attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 and the invasion of Rabaul in the Southwest Pacific in January 1942 . The following month , her aircraft bombed Darwin , Australia , and assisted in the conquest of the Dutch East Indies . In March and April 1942 , Akagi 's aircraft helped sink a British heavy cruiser and an Australian destroyer in the Indian Ocean Raid . 
 After a brief refit , Akagi and three other fleet carriers of the Kido Butai participated in the Battle of Midway in June 1942 . After bombarding American forces on the atoll , Akagi and the other carriers were attacked by aircraft from Midway and the carriers Enterprise , Hornet , and Yorktown . Dive bombers from Enterprise severely damaged Akagi . When it became obvious she could not be saved , she was scuttled by Japanese destroyers to prevent her from falling into enemy hands . The loss of Akagi and three other IJN carriers at Midway was a crucial strategic defeat for Japan and contributed significantly to the Allies ' ultimate victory in the Pacific . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Construction and launch = = = 
 Akagi was laid down as an Amagi @-@ class battlecruiser at Kure , Japan , on 6 December 1920 . The ship was named after Mount Akagi , following the Japanese ship @-@ naming conventions for battlecruisers . Construction was halted , however , when Japan signed the Washington Naval Treaty on 6 February 1922 . The treaty placed restrictions on the construction of battleships and battlecruisers although it authorized conversion of two battleship or battlecruiser hulls under construction into aircraft carriers of up to 33 @,@ 000 long tons ( 34 @,@ 000 t ) displacement . The IJN had decided , following the launch of its first aircraft carrier , Hōshō , to construct two larger , faster carriers for operations with major fleet units . The incomplete hulls of Amagi and Akagi were thus selected for completion as the two large carriers under the 1924 fleet construction program . ¥ 24 @.@ 7 million was originally budgeted to complete Akagi as a battlecruiser and an estimated ¥ 8 million had been expended when construction stopped in February 1922 . Shortly thereafter , the Diet approved an additional ¥ 90 million to complete Akagi and Amagi as carriers . 
 Construction of Akagi as an aircraft carrier began on 19 November 1923 . Amagi 's hull was damaged beyond economically feasible repair in the Great Kantō earthquake of 1 September 1923 and was broken up and scrapped . Akagi , the only remaining member of her class , was launched as a carrier on 22 April 1925 and commissioned at Kure Naval Arsenal on 25 March 1927 , although trials continued through November 1927 . She was the second carrier to enter service with the IJN , after Hōshō and before Kaga ( which replaced Amagi ) . 
 Since Akagi was initially conceived as a battlecruiser , the prevailing ship naming conventions dictated that she ( like her sister ships ) be named after a mountain . Akagi came from Mount Akagi , a dormant volcano in the Kantō region ( the name literally means " red castle " ) . After she was redesignated as an aircraft carrier , her mountain name remained , in contrast to ships like Sōryū that were originally built as aircraft carriers , which were named after flying creatures . Her name was previously given to the Maya @-@ class gunboat Akagi . 
 Akagi was completed at a length of 261 @.@ 21 meters ( 857 ft 0 in ) overall . She had a beam of 31 meters ( 101 ft 8 in ) and , at deep load , a draft of 8 @.@ 08 meters ( 26 ft 6 in ) . She displaced 26 @,@ 900 long tons ( 27 @,@ 300 t ) at standard load , and 34 @,@ 364 long tons ( 34 @,@ 920 t ) at full load , nearly 7 @,@ 000 long tons ( 7 @,@ 100 t ) less than her designed displacement as a battlecruiser . Her complement totaled 1 @,@ 600 crewmembers . 
 = = = Flight deck arrangements = = = 
 Akagi and Kaga were completed with three superimposed flight decks , the only carriers ever to be designed so . The British carriers converted from " large light cruisers " , HMS Glorious , HMS Courageous , and HMS Furious , each had two flight decks , but there is no evidence that the Japanese copied the British model . It is more likely that it was a case of convergent evolution to improve launch and recovery cycle flexibility by allowing simultaneous launch and recovery of aircraft . Akagi 's main flight deck was 190 @.@ 2 meters ( 624 ft 0 in ) long , her middle flight deck ( beginning right in front of the bridge ) was only 15 meters ( 49 ft 3 in ) long and her lower flight deck was 55 @.@ 02 meters ( 180 ft 6 in ) long . The utility of her middle flight deck was questionable as it was so short that only some lightly loaded aircraft could use it , even in an era when the aircraft were much lighter and smaller than during World War II . The upper flight deck sloped slightly from amidships toward the bow and toward the stern to assist landings and takeoffs for the underpowered aircraft of that time . 
 As completed , the ship had two main hangar decks and a third auxiliary hangar , giving a total capacity of 60 aircraft . The third and lowest hangar deck was only used for storing disassembled aircraft . The two main hangars opened onto the middle and lower flight decks to allow aircraft to take off directly from the hangars while landing operations were in progress on the main flight deck above . The upper and middle hangar areas totaled about 80 @,@ 375 square feet ( 7 @,@ 467 @.@ 1 m2 ) , the lower hangar about 8 @,@ 515 square feet ( 791 @.@ 1 m2 ) . No catapults were fitted . Her forward aircraft lift was offset to starboard and 11 @.@ 8 by 13 meters ( 38 ft 9 in × 42 ft 8 in ) in size . Her aft lift was on the centerline and 12 @.@ 8 by 8 @.@ 4 meters ( 42 ft 0 in × 27 ft 7 in ) . The aft elevator serviced the upper flight deck and all three hangar decks . Her arresting gear was an unsatisfactory British longitudinal system used on the carrier Furious that relied on friction between the arrester hook and the cables . The Japanese were well aware of this system 's flaws , as it was already in use on their first carrier , Hōshō , but had no alternatives available when Akagi was completed . It was replaced during the ship 's refit in 1931 with a Japanese @-@ designed transverse cable system with six wires and that was replaced in turn before Akagi began her modernization in 1935 by the Kure Model 4 type ( Kure shiki 4 gata ) . There was no island superstructure when the carrier was completed ; the carrier was commanded from a space below the forward end of the upper flight deck . The ship carried approximately 150 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 570 @,@ 000 l ) of aviation fuel for her embarked aircraft . 
 As originally completed , Akagi carried an air group of 28 Mitsubishi B1M3 torpedo bombers , 16 Nakajima <unk> fighters and 16 Mitsubishi <unk> reconnaissance aircraft . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Akagi was armed with ten 50 @-@ caliber 20 cm 3rd Year Type No. 1 guns , six in casemates aft and the rest in two twin gun turrets , one on each side of the middle flight deck . They fired 110 @-@ kilogram ( 240 lb ) projectiles at a rate of 3 – 6 rounds per minute with a muzzle velocity of 870 m / s ( 2 @,@ 900 ft / s ) ; at 25 ° , this provided a maximum range between 22 @,@ 600 and 24 @,@ 000 meters ( 24 @,@ 700 and 26 @,@ 200 yd ) . The turrets were nominally capable of 70 ° elevation to provide additional anti @-@ aircraft fire , but in practice the maximum elevation was only 55 ° . The slow rate of fire and the fixed 5 ° loading angle minimized any real anti @-@ aircraft capability . This heavy gun armament was provided in case she was surprised by enemy cruisers and forced to give battle , but her large and vulnerable flight deck , hangars , and superstructure made her more of a target in any surface action than a fighting warship . Carrier doctrine was still evolving at this time and the impracticality of carriers engaging in gun duels had not yet been realized . 
 The ship carried dedicated anti @-@ aircraft armament of six twin 45 @-@ caliber 12 cm 10th Year Type gun mounts fitted on sponsons below the level of the funnels , where they could not fire across the flight deck , three mounts per side . These guns fired 20 @.@ 3 @-@ kilogram ( 45 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 825 – 830 m / s ( 2 @,@ 710 – 2 @,@ 720 ft / s ) ; at 45 ° , this provided a maximum range of 16 @,@ 000 meters ( 17 @,@ 000 yd ) , and they had a maximum ceiling of 10 @,@ 000 meters ( 11 @,@ 000 yd ) at 75 ° elevation . Their effective rate of fire was 6 – 8 rounds per minute . 
 Akagi 's waterline armored belt was reduced from 254 to 152 mm ( 10 to 6 in ) and placed lower on the ship than originally designed . The upper part of her torpedo bulge was given 102 mm ( 4 in ) of armor . Her deck armor was also reduced from 96 to 79 mm ( 3 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 1 in ) . The modifications improved the ship 's stability by helping compensate for the increased topside weight of the double hangar deck . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 In Akagi 's predecessor , Hōshō , the hot exhaust gases vented by swivelling funnels posed a danger to the ship , and wind @-@ tunnel testing had not suggested any solutions . Akagi and Kaga were given different solutions to evaluate in real @-@ world conditions . Akagi was given two funnels on the starboard side . The larger , forward funnel was angled 30 ° below horizontal with its mouth facing the sea , and the smaller one exhausted vertically a little past the edge of the flight deck . The forward funnel was fitted with a water @-@ cooling system to reduce the turbulence caused by hot exhaust gases and a cover that could be raised to allow the exhaust gases to escape if the ship developed a severe list and the mouth of the funnel touched the sea . Kaga adopted a version of this configuration when she was modernized during the mid @-@ 1930s . 
 Akagi was completed with four Gihon geared steam turbine sets , each driving one propeller shaft , that produced a total of 131 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 98 @,@ 000 kW ) . Steam for these turbines was provided by nineteen Type B Kampon boilers with a working pressure of 20 kg / cm2 ( 1 @,@ 961 kPa ; 284 psi ) . Some boilers were oil @-@ fired , and the others used a mix of fuel oil and coal . As a battlecruiser , she was expected to achieve 28 @.@ 5 knots ( 52 @.@ 8 km / h ; 32 @.@ 8 mph ) , but the reduction in displacement from 41 @,@ 200 to 34 @,@ 000 long tons ( 41 @,@ 900 to 34 @,@ 500 t ) increased her maximum speed to 32 @.@ 5 knots ( 60 @.@ 2 km / h ; 37 @.@ 4 mph ) , which was reached during her sea trials on 17 June 1927 . She carried 3 @,@ 900 long tons ( 4 @,@ 000 t ) of fuel oil and 2 @,@ 100 long tons ( 2 @,@ 100 t ) of coal that gave her a range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . 
 = = Early service = = 
 Akagi joined the Combined Fleet in August 1927 and was assigned to the First Carrier Division upon its formation on 1 April 1928 , serving as the division 's flagship under Rear Admiral <unk> Takahashi . The carrier 's early career was uneventful , consisting of various training exercises . From 10 December 1928 to 1 November 1929 , the ship was captained by Isoroku Yamamoto , future commander of the Combined Fleet . 
 Akagi was reduced to second @-@ class reserve status on 1 December 1931 in preparation for a short refit in which her arresting gear was replaced and her radio and ventilation systems were overhauled and improved . After completion of the refit , Akagi became a first @-@ class reserve ship in December 1932 . On 25 April 1933 , she resumed active service and joined the Second Carrier Division and participated in that year 's Special Fleet Maneuvers . 
 At this time , the IJN 's carrier doctrine was still in its early stages . Akagi and the IJN 's other carriers were initially given roles as tactical force multipliers supporting the fleet 's battleships in the IJN 's " decisive battle " doctrine . In this role , Akagi 's aircraft were to attack enemy battleships with bombs and torpedoes . Aerial strikes against enemy carriers were later ( beginning around 1932 – 1933 ) deemed of equal importance , with the goal of establishing air superiority during the initial stages of battle . The essential component in this strategy was that the Japanese carrier aircraft must be able to strike first with a massed , preemptive aerial attack . In fleet training exercises , the carriers began to operate together in front of or with the main battle line . The new strategy emphasized maximum speed from both the carriers and the aircraft they carried as well as larger aircraft with greater range . Thus , longer flight decks on the carriers were required in order to handle the newer , heavier aircraft which were entering service . As a result , on 15 November 1935 Akagi was placed in third @-@ class reserve to begin an extensive modernization at Sasebo Naval Arsenal . 
 = = Reconstruction = = 
 Akagi 's modernization involved far less work than that of Kaga , but took three times as long due to financial difficulties related to the Great Depression . The ship 's three flight decks were judged too small to handle the larger and heavier aircraft then coming into service . As a result , the middle and lower flight decks were eliminated in favor of two enclosed hangar decks that extended almost the full length of the ship . The upper and middle hangar areas ' total space increased to about 93 @,@ 000 square feet ( 8 @,@ 600 m2 ) ; the lower hangar remained the same size . The upper flight deck was extended to the bow , increasing its length to 249 @.@ 17 meters ( 817 ft 6 in ) and raising aircraft capacity to 86 ( 61 operational and 25 in storage ) . A third elevator midships , 11 @.@ 8 by 13 meters ( 38 ft 9 in × 42 ft 8 in ) in size , was added . Her arrester gear was replaced by a Japanese @-@ designed , hydraulic , Type 1 system with 9 wires . The modernization added an island superstructure on the port side of the ship , which was an unusual arrangement ; the only other carrier to share this feature was a contemporary , the Hiryū . The port side was chosen as an experiment to see if that side was better for flight operations by moving the island away from the ship 's exhaust outlets . The new flight deck inclined slightly fore and aft from a point about three @-@ eighths of the way aft . 
 Akagi 's speed was already satisfactory and the only changes to her machinery were the replacement of the mixed coal / oil @-@ fired boilers with modern oil @-@ fired units and the improvement of the ventilation arrangements . Although the engine horsepower increased from 131 @,@ 200 to 133 @,@ 000 , her speed declined slightly from 32 @.@ 5 to 31 @.@ 2 knots ( 60 @.@ 2 to 57 @.@ 8 km / h ; 37 @.@ 4 to 35 @.@ 9 mph ) on trials because of the increase in her displacement to 41 @,@ 300 long tons ( 42 @,@ 000 t ) . Her bunkerage was increased to 7 @,@ 500 long tons ( 7 @,@ 600 t ) of fuel oil which increased her endurance to 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 18 @,@ 520 km ; 11 @,@ 510 mi ) at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . The rear vertical funnel was changed to match the forward funnel and incorporated into the same casing . 
 The two twin turrets on the middle flight deck were removed and fourteen twin 25 mm ( 1 in ) Type 96 gun mounts were added on sponsons . They fired .25 @-@ kilogram ( 0 @.@ 55 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 900 m / s ( 3 @,@ 000 ft / s ) ; at 50 ° , this provided a maximum range of 7 @,@ 500 m ( 8 @,@ 200 yd ) , and an effective ceiling of 5 @,@ 500 m ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) . The maximum effective rate of fire was only between 110 – 120 rounds per minute due to the frequent need to change the 15 @-@ round magazines . Six Type 95 directors were fitted to control the new 25 mm guns and two new Type 94 anti @-@ aircraft directors replaced the outdated Type <unk> . After the modernization , Akagi carried one Type 89 director for the 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) guns ; it is uncertain how many were carried before then . The ship 's crew increased to 2 @,@ 000 after the reconstruction . 
 The ship 's anti @-@ aircraft guns were grouped amidships and placed relatively low on the hull . Thus , the guns could not be brought to bear directly forward or aft . Also , the island blocked the forward arcs of the port battery . As a result , the ship was vulnerable to attack by dive bombers . The ship 's 12 cm 10th Year Type guns were scheduled to be replaced by more modern 12 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) Type 89 mounts in 1942 . The anti @-@ aircraft sponsons were to be raised one deck to allow them some measure of cross @-@ deck fire as was done during Kaga 's modernization . However , the ship was lost in combat before the upgrade could take place . 
 Several major weaknesses in Akagi 's design were not rectified . Akagi 's aviation fuel tanks were incorporated directly into the structure of the carrier , meaning that shocks to the ship , such as those caused by bomb or shell hits , would be transmitted directly to the tanks , resulting in cracks or leaks . Also , the fully enclosed structure of the new hangar decks made firefighting difficult , at least in part because fuel vapors could accumulate in the hangars . Adding to the danger was the requirement of the Japanese carrier doctrine that aircraft be serviced , fueled , and armed whenever possible on the hangar decks rather than on the flight deck . Furthermore , the carrier 's hangar and flight decks carried little armor protection , and there was no redundancy in the ship 's fire @-@ extinguishing systems . These weaknesses would later be crucial factors in the loss of the ship . 
 = = Lead @-@ up to World War II = = 
 Akagi 's modernization was completed on 31 August 1938 . She was reclassified as a first reserve ship on 15 November , but did not rejoin the First Carrier Division until the following month . In her new configuration , the carrier embarked 12 Mitsubishi A5M Type 96 " Claude " fighters with 4 disassembled spares , 19 Aichi D1A " Susie " dive bombers with 5 spares , and 35 Yokosuka B4Y " Jean " horizontal / torpedo bombers with 16 spares . She sailed for southern Chinese waters on 30 January 1939 and supported ground operations there , including attacks on Guilin and Liuzhou , until 19 February , when she returned to Japan . Akagi supported operations in central China between 27 March and 2 April 1940 . She was reclassified as a special purpose ship ( <unk> <unk> ) on 15 November 1940 , while she was being overhauled . 
 The Japanese experiences off China had helped further develop the IJN 's carrier doctrine . One lesson learned in China was the importance of concentration and mass in projecting naval air power ashore . Therefore , in April 1941 , the IJN formed the First Air Fleet , or Kido Butai , to combine all of its fleet carriers under a single command . On 10 April , Akagi and Kaga were assigned to the First Carrier Division as part of the new carrier fleet , which also included the Second ( with carriers Hiryū and Sōryū ) , and Fifth ( with Shōkaku and Zuikaku ) carrier divisions . The IJN centered its doctrine on air strikes that combined the air groups of entire carrier divisions , rather than individual carriers . When multiple carrier divisions were operating together , the divisions ' air groups were combined . This doctrine of combined , massed , carrier @-@ based air attack groups was the most advanced of its kind in the world . The IJN , however , remained concerned that concentrating all of its carriers together would render them vulnerable to being wiped out all at once by a massive enemy air or surface strike . Thus , the IJN developed a compromise solution in which the fleet carriers would operate closely together within their carrier divisions but the divisions themselves would operate in loose rectangular formations , with approximately 7 @,@ 000 meters ( 7 @,@ 700 yd ) separating each carrier . 
 The Japanese doctrine held that entire carrier air groups should not be launched in a single massed attack . Instead , each carrier would launch a " deckload strike " of all its aircraft that could be spotted at one time on each flight deck . Subsequent attack waves consisted of the next deckload of aircraft . Thus , First Air Fleet air attacks would often consist of at least two massed waves of aircraft . The First Air Fleet was not considered to be the IJN 's primary strategic striking force . The IJN still considered the First Air Fleet an integral component in the Combined Fleet 's Kantai <unk> or " decisive battle " task force centered on battleships . Akagi was designated as the flagship for the First Air Fleet , a role the ship retained until her sinking 14 months later . 
 Although the concentration of so many fleet carriers into a single unit was a new and revolutionary offensive strategic concept , the First Air Fleet suffered from several defensive deficiencies that gave it , in Mark Peattie 's words , a " ' glass jaw ' : it could throw a punch but couldn 't take one . " Japanese carrier anti @-@ aircraft guns and associated fire @-@ control systems had several design and configuration deficiencies that limited their effectiveness . Also , the IJN 's fleet combat air patrol ( CAP ) consisted of too few fighter aircraft and was hampered by an inadequate early warning system , including lack of radar . In addition , poor radio communications with the fighter aircraft inhibited effective command and control of the CAP . Furthermore , the carriers ' escorting warships were not trained or deployed to provide close anti @-@ aircraft support . These deficiencies , combined with the shipboard weaknesses previously detailed , would eventually doom Akagi and other First Air Fleet carriers . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Pearl Harbor and subsequent operations = = = 
 In preparation for the attack , the ship was anchored at Ariake Bay , Kyushu beginning in September 1941 while its aircraft were based at Kagoshima to train with the other 1st Air Fleet air units for the Pearl Harbor operation . Once preparations and training were completed , Akagi assembled with the rest of the First Air Fleet at Hitokappu Bay in the Kuril Islands on 22 November 1941 . The ships departed on 26 November 1941 for Hawaii . 
 Commanded by Captain Kiichi Hasegawa , Akagi was Vice Admiral Chūichi Nagumo 's flagship for the striking force for the attack on Pearl Harbor that attempted to cripple the United States Pacific Fleet . Akagi and the other five carriers , from a position 230 nautical miles ( 430 km ; 260 mi ) north of Oahu , launched two waves of aircraft on the morning of 7 December 1941 . In the first wave , 27 Nakajima B5N " Kate " torpedo bombers from Akagi torpedoed the battleships Oklahoma , West Virginia , and California while 9 of the ship 's Mitsubishi A6M Zeros attacked the air base at Hickam Field . In the second wave , 18 Aichi D3A " Val " dive bombers from the carrier targeted the battleships Maryland and Pennsylvania , the light cruiser Raleigh , the destroyer Shaw , and the fleet oiler Neosho while nine " Zeros " attacked various American airfields . One of the carrier 's Zeros was shot down by American anti @-@ aircraft guns during the first wave attack , killing its pilot . In addition to the aircraft which participated in the raid , three of the carrier 's fighters were assigned to the CAP . One of the carrier 's Zero fighters attacked a Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress heavy bomber that had just arrived from the mainland , setting it on fire as it landed at Hickam , killing one of its crew . 
 In January 1942 , together with the rest of the First and Fifth Carrier Divisions , Akagi supported the invasion of Rabaul in the Bismarck Archipelago , as the Japanese moved to secure their southern defensive perimeter against attacks from Australia . She provided 20 B5Ns and 9 Zeros for the initial airstrike on Rabaul on 20 January 1942 . The First Carrier Division attacked Allied positions at nearby Kavieng the following day , of which Akagi contributed 9 A6M Zeros and 18 D3As . On the 22nd , Akagi 's D3As and Zeros again attacked Rabaul before returning to Truk on 27 January . The Second Carrier Division , with Sōryū and Hiryū , had been detached to support the invasion of Wake Island on 23 December 1941 and did not reunite with the rest of the carrier mobile striking force until February 1942 . 
 Akagi , along with Kaga and the carrier Zuikaku , sortied in search of American naval forces raiding the Marshall Islands on 1 February 1942 , before being recalled . On 7 February Akagi and the carriers of the First and Second Carrier Divisions were ordered south to the Timor Sea where , on 19 February , from a point 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ; 120 mi ) southeast of the easternmost tip of Timor , they launched air strikes against Darwin , Australia , in an attempt to destroy its port and airfield facilities to prevent any interference with the invasion of Java . Akagi contributed 18 B5Ns , 18 D3As , and 9 Zeros to the attack , which caught the defenders by surprise . Eight ships were sunk , including the American destroyer Peary , and fourteen more were damaged . None of the carrier 's aircraft were lost in the attack and the attack was effective in preventing Darwin from contributing to the Allied defense of Java . On 1 March , the American oiler Pecos was sunk by D3As from Sōryū and Akagi . Later that same day the American destroyer Edsall was attacked and sunk by D3As from Akagi and Sōryū , in combination with gunfire from two battleships and two heavy cruisers of the escort force . Akagi and her consorts covered the invasion of Java , although her main contribution appears to have been providing 18 B5Ns and 9 Zeros for the 5 March air strike on Tjilatjap . This group was very successful , sinking eight ships in the harbor there and none of Akagi 's aircraft were lost . Most of the Allied forces in the Dutch East Indies surrendered to the Japanese later in March . The Kido Butai then sailed for Staring Bay on Celebes Island to refuel and recuperate . 
 = = = Indian Ocean raid = = = 
 On 26 March , Akagi set sail for the Indian Ocean raid with the rest of the Kido Butai . The Japanese intent was to defeat the British Eastern Fleet and destroy British airpower in the region in order to secure the flank of their operations in Burma . On 5 April 1942 , Akagi launched 17 B5Ns and 9 Zeros in an air strike against Colombo , Ceylon , which damaged the port facilities . None of the aircraft were lost and the Zero pilots claimed to have shot down a dozen of the defending British fighters . Later that day , 17 D3As from Akagi helped to sink the British heavy cruisers Cornwall and Dorsetshire . On 9 April , she attacked Trincomalee with 18 B5Ns , escorted by 6 Zeros which claimed to have shot down 5 Hawker Hurricane fighters ( only two of which can be confirmed from Allied records ) without loss to themselves . Meanwhile , a floatplane from the battleship Haruna spotted the small aircraft carrier Hermes , escorted by the Australian destroyer Vampire , and every available D3A was launched to attack the ships . Akagi contributed 17 dive bombers and they helped to sink both ships ; they also spotted the oil tanker RFA Athelstone , escorted by the corvette Hollyhock , as well and sank both without loss . During the day 's actions , the carrier narrowly escaped damage when nine British Bristol Blenheim bombers from Ceylon penetrated the CAP and dropped their bombs from 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) , just missing the carrier and the heavy cruiser Tone . Four of the Blenheims were subsequently shot down by CAP fighters and one was shot down by aircraft from the carriers ' returning air strike . After the raid , the carrier mobile striking force returned to Japan to refit and replenish . 
 On 19 April 1942 , while near Taiwan during the transit to Japan , Akagi , Sōryū , and Hiryū were sent in pursuit of the American carriers Hornet and Enterprise , which had launched the Doolittle Raid . They found only empty ocean , however , for the American carriers had immediately departed the area to return to Hawaii . Akagi and the other carriers shortly abandoned the chase and dropped anchor at Hashirajima anchorage on 22 April . On 25 April , Captain Taijiro Aoki relieved Hasegawa as skipper of the carrier . Having been engaged in constant operations for four and a half months , the ship , along with the other three carriers of the First and Second Carrier Divisions , was hurriedly refitted and replenished in preparation for the Combined Fleet 's next major operation , scheduled to begin one month hence . The Fifth Carrier Division , with Shōkaku and Zuikaku , had been detached in mid @-@ April to support Operation Mo , resulting in the Battle of the Coral Sea . While at Hashirajima , Akagi 's air group was based ashore in Kagoshima and conducted flight and weapons training with the other First Air Fleet carrier units . 
 = = = Midway = = = 
 Concerned by the US carrier strikes in the Marshall Islands , Lae @-@ Salamaua , and the Doolittle raids , Yamamoto determined to force the US Navy into a showdown to eliminate the American carrier threat . He decided to invade and occupy Midway Island , which he was sure would draw out the American carrier forces to battle . The Japanese codenamed the Midway invasion Operation MI . 
 On 25 May 1942 , Akagi set out with the Combined Fleet 's carrier striking force in the company of carriers Kaga , Hiryū , and Sōryū , which constituted the First and Second Carrier Divisions , for the attack on Midway Island . Once again , Nagumo flew his flag on Akagi . Because of damage and losses suffered during the Battle of the Coral Sea , the Fifth Carrier Division with carriers Shōkaku and Zuikaku was absent from the operation . Akagi 's aircraft complement consisted of 24 Zeros , 18 D3As , and 18 B5Ns . 
 With the fleet positioned 250 nautical miles ( 460 km ; 290 mi ) northwest of Midway Island at dawn ( 04 : 45 local time ) on 4 June 1942 , Akagi 's portion of the 108 @-@ plane combined air raid was a strike on the airfield on Eastern Island with 18 dive bombers escorted by nine Zeros . The carrier 's B5Ns were armed with torpedoes and kept ready in case enemy ships were discovered during the Midway operation . The only loss during the raid from Akagi 's air group was one Zero shot down by AA fire and three damaged ; four dive bombers were damaged , of which one could not be repaired . Unbeknownst to the Japanese , the US Navy had discovered the Japanese MI plan by breaking the Japanese cipher and had prepared an ambush using its three available carriers , positioned northeast of Midway . 
 One of Akagi 's torpedo bombers was launched to augment the search for any American ships that might be in the area . The carrier contributed three Zeros to the total of 11 assigned to the initial combat air patrol over the four carriers . By 07 : 00 , the carrier had 11 fighters with the CAP which helped to defend the Kido Butai from the first US attackers from Midway Island at 07 : 10 . 
 At this time , Nagumo 's carriers were attacked by six US Navy Grumman TBF Avengers from Torpedo Squadron 8 ( VT @-@ 8 ) and four United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) B @-@ 26 Marauders , all carrying torpedoes . The Avengers went after Hiryū while the Marauders attacked Akagi . The 30 CAP Zeroes in the air at this time , including the 11 from Akagi , immediately attacked the American aircraft , shooting down five of the Avengers and two of the B @-@ 26s . One of Akagi 's Zeroes , however , was shot down by defensive fire from the B @-@ 26s . Several of the Marauders dropped their torpedoes , but all missed . One , piloted by Lieutenant James <unk> , strafed Akagi after dropping its torpedo , killing two men . Another , either attempting a suicide ramming , unflyable due to battle damage , or because of an incapacitated pilot , narrowly missed crashing into Akagi 's bridge , where Nagumo was standing , before it cartwheeled into the sea . 
 At 07 : 15 , Admiral Nagumo ordered the B5Ns on Kaga and Akagi rearmed with bombs for another attack on Midway itself . This process was limited by the number of ordnance carts ( used to handle the bombs and torpedoes ) and ordnance elevators , preventing torpedoes from being struck below until after all the bombs were moved up from their magazine , assembled , and mounted on the aircraft . This process normally took about an hour and a half ; more time would be required to bring the aircraft up to the flight deck , warm up and launch the strike group . Around 07 : 40 , Nagumo reversed his order when he received a message from one of his scout aircraft that American warships had been spotted . Three of Akagi 's CAP Zeroes landed aboard the carrier at 07 : 36 . At 07 : 40 , her lone scout returned , having sighted nothing . 
 = = = = Sinking = = = = 
 At 07 : 55 , the next American strike from Midway arrived in the form of 16 Marine SBD @-@ 2 Dauntless dive bombers of VMSB @-@ 241 under Major Lofton R. Henderson . Akagi 's three remaining CAP fighters were among the nine still aloft that attacked Henderson 's planes , shooting down six of them as they executed a fruitless glide bombing attack on Hiryū . At roughly the same time , the Japanese carriers were attacked by 12 USAAF B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses , bombing from 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) . The high altitude of the B @-@ 17s gave the Japanese captains enough time to anticipate where the bombs would land and successfully maneuver their ships out of the impact area . Four B @-@ 17s attacked Akagi , but missed with all their bombs . 
 Akagi reinforced the CAP with launches of three Zeros at 08 : 08 and four at 08 : 32 . These fresh Zeros helped defeat the next American air strike from Midway , 11 Vought SB2U Vindicator from VMSB @-@ 241 , which attacked the battleship Haruna starting around 08 : 30 . Three of the Vindicators were shot down , and Haruna escaped damage . Although all the American air strikes had thus far caused negligible damage , they kept the Japanese carrier forces off @-@ balance as Nagumo endeavored to prepare a response to news , received at 08 : 20 , of the sighting of American carrier forces to his northeast . 
 Akagi began recovering her Midway strike force at 08 : 37 and finished shortly after 09 : 00 . The landed aircraft were quickly struck below , while the carriers ' crews began preparations to spot aircraft for the strike against the American carrier forces . The preparations , however , were interrupted at 09 : 18 when the first American carrier aircraft to attack were sighted . These consisted of 15 Douglas TBD Devastator torpedo bombers of VT @-@ 8 , led by John C. Waldron from the carrier Hornet . The six airborne Akagi CAP Zeroes joined the other 15 CAP fighters currently aloft in destroying Waldron 's planes . All 15 of the American planes were shot down as they attempted a torpedo attack on Soryū , leaving one surviving aviator treading water . 
 Shortly afterwards 14 Devastators from VT @-@ 6 from the carrier Enterprise , led by Eugene E. Lindsey , attacked . Lindsey 's aircraft tried to sandwich Kaga , but the CAP , reinforced by an additional eight Zeros launched by Akagi at 09 : 33 and 09 : 40 , shot down all but four of the Devastators , and Kaga dodged the torpedoes . Defensive fire from the Devastators shot down one of Akagi 's Zeros . 
 Minutes after the torpedo plane attacks , American carrier @-@ based dive bombers arrived over the Japanese carriers almost undetected and began their dives . It was at this time , around 10 : 20 , that in the words of Jonathan Parshall and Anthony Tully , the " Japanese air defenses would finally and catastrophically fail . " Twenty @-@ eight dive bombers from Enterprise , led by C. Wade McClusky , began an attack on Kaga , hitting her with at least four bombs . At the last minute , one of McClusky 's elements of three bombers from VB @-@ 6 , led by squadron commander Richard Best who deduced Kaga to be fatally damaged , broke off and dove simultaneously on Akagi . At approximately 10 : 26 , the three bombers hit her with one 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 450 kg ) bomb and just missed with two others . The first near @-@ miss landed 5 – 10 m ( 16 – 33 ft ) to port , near her island . The third bomb just missed the flight deck and plunged into the water next to the stern . The second bomb , likely dropped by Best , landed at the aft edge of the middle elevator and detonated in the upper hangar . This hit set off explosions among the fully armed and fueled B5N torpedo bombers that were being prepared for an air strike against the American carriers , starting large fires . 
 At 10 : 29 , Captain Aoki ordered the ship 's magazines flooded . The forward magazines were promptly flooded , but the aft magazines were not due to valve damage , likely caused by the near miss aft . The ship 's main water pump also appears to have been damaged , greatly hindering fire fighting efforts . On the upper hangar deck , at 10 : 32 damage control teams attempted to control the spreading fires by employing the one @-@ shot CO2 fire @-@ suppression system . Whether the system functioned or not is unclear , but the burning aviation fuel proved impossible to control , and serious fires began to advance deeper into the interior of the ship . At 10 : 40 , additional damage caused by the near @-@ miss aft made itself known when the ship 's rudder jammed 30 degrees to starboard during an evasive maneuver . 
 Shortly thereafter , the fires broke through the flight deck and heat and smoke made the ship 's bridge unusable . At 10 : 46 , Admiral Nagumo transferred his flag to the light cruiser Nagara . Akagi stopped dead in the water at 13 : 50 and her crew , except for Captain Taijiro Aoki and damage @-@ control personnel , was evacuated . She continued to burn as her crew fought a losing battle against the spreading fires . The damage @-@ control teams and Captain Aoki were evacuated from the still floating ship later that night . 
 At 04 : 50 on 5 June , Yamamoto ordered Akagi scuttled , saying to his staff , " I was once the captain of Akagi , and it is with heartfelt regret that I must now order that she be sunk . " Destroyers Arashi , Hagikaze , Maikaze , and <unk> each fired one torpedo into the carrier and she sank , bow first , at 05 : 20 at 30 ° 30 ′ N 178 ° 40 ′ W. Two hundred and sixty @-@ seven men of the ship 's crew were lost , the fewest of any of the Japanese fleet carriers lost in the battle . The loss of Akagi and the three other IJN carriers at Midway , comprising two thirds of Japan 's total number of fleet carriers and the experienced core of the First Air Fleet , was a crucial strategic defeat for Japan and contributed significantly to Japan 's ultimate defeat in the war . In an effort to conceal the defeat , Akagi was not immediately removed from the Navy 's registry of ships , instead being listed as " unmanned " before finally being struck from the registry on 25 September 1942 . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Isaac in Florida = 
 The Effects of Hurricane Isaac in Florida were severe local flooding in South Florida and tornadoes in the central and northern portions of the state in August 2012 . Hurricane Isaac formed from a tropical wave while located east of the Lesser Antilles on August 21 , 2012 . The storm moved westward , crossed through the Leeward Islands , and entered the Caribbean Sea on August 22 . Isaac initially struggled to intensify and defied predictions of it strengthening into a hurricane ] . The storm made its first landfall in Haiti as a <unk> tropical storm prior to making a second one in Cuba later that day . It remained somewhat disorganized while moving through the Straits of Florida and passed near the Florida Keys on August 27 . The storm threatened to strike the Tampa Bay Area during the 2012 Republican National Convention and move ashore in the Florida Panhandle as a major hurricane . However , it continued northwestward and avoided landfall in the state . The storm finally became a hurricane late on August 28 . Isaac made two landfalls in Louisiana on August 29 , the first near the mouth of the Mississippi River and the other near Port Fourchon . The storm steadily weakened and eventually dissipated over Missouri on September 1 . 
 Despite passing closest to the Florida Keys , impact was minimal , limited to tropical storm @-@ force winds and light rainfall . The outerbands of Isaac produced heavy precipitation further north , especially in Palm Beach , St. Lucie and Indian River counties . In the former , the resultant flooding left numerous residents in Royal Palm Beach and Loxahatchee isolated . There was extensive street flooding , and water entered a few houses . Damage in Palm Beach County alone was nearly $ 71 @.@ 6 million ( 2012 USD ) . Inland flooding was also reported in several other counties , though losses were generally minor . A tornado in Indian River County damaged 118 mobile homes and 15 single family homes . Further north in Central Florida and the Panhandle , the storm spawned four other tornadoes . Tides along the Gulf Coast of Florida caused erosion and coastal flooding in Bay , Collier , Franklin , Gulf , and Wakulla counties . Though winds caused little damage , around 113 @,@ 000 customers were left without electricity in South Florida . The storm resulted in two indirect fatalities , both caused by vehicles driving on slick roads in Palm Beach and Okeechobee counties . Throughout the state , damage reached approximately $ 91 @.@ 45 million . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hurricane Isaac originated from a tropical wave that moved off the western coast of Africa on August 17 . Moving generally westward , the low @-@ pressure area initially did not have a well @-@ defined center until three days later . Convection associated with the system organized and intensified , and the tropical wave quickly strengthened into a tropical depression . In favorable conditions , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Isaac by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) on August 21 . Quickly accelerating westward due to a subtropical ridge located to the northwest , Isaac later moved past the Lesser Antilles between Guadeloupe and Dominica by August 23 , where it caused numerous mudslides and power outages . Maintaining tropical storm intensity , Isaac later made its first landfall on the southern coast of Haiti early on August 25 as a result of southeast flow . There , the storm directly killed 24 people , worsening conditions still remaining after the 2010 Haiti earthquake . 
 Isaac began to curve northwestward due to its location between a large deep @-@ layer low pressure area in the northwestern Caribbean Sea and a mid @-@ tropospheric ridge over the western Atlantic . After briefly moving into the Gulf of Gonâve , the tropical storm made a second landfall near <unk> , Guantánamo , in Cuba at 1500 UTC later on August 25 , where damages were comparatively less severe than in Haiti . The storm paralleled the northern coast of the island prior to making a close pass of Key West , Florida , where it caused minor flood damage across the Florida Keys and South Florida upon entry into the Gulf of Mexico . The threat of tropical cyclone impacts in Tampa forced the postponing of the 2012 Republican National Convention . In the gulf , the tropical storm curved to the northwest and attained hurricane strength on August 27 near the southern Louisiana coast . Another ridge of high pressure caused Isaac to move towards the west and slow down as it made two landfalls on the state . Once it moved inland , the hurricane weakened before dissipating over Missouri on September 1 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 At 2100 UTC on August 24 , a tropical storm watch was issued for all of Florida south of the Jupiter Inlet on the east coast and south of Bonita Springs on the west coast ; it also included Lake Okeechobee and the Florida Keys . Early on the next day , the tropical storm watch was upgraded to a warning , while the Florida Keys and the mainland from Ocean Reef to Bonita Springs were placed under a hurricane watch . Further north , a tropical storm watch was issued from the Jupiter Inlet to the Sebastian Inlet . Later on August 25 , the hurricane watch was switched to a warning , while a separate hurricane watch was issued from Golden Beach southward . At 1500 UTC on August 25 , the tropical storm warning was extended northward to Sebastian Inlet . In addition , a tropical storm watch was issued further north from Sebastian Inlet to Flagler Beach on the east coast and Bonita Springs to Tarpon Springs on the west coast . About six hours later , the tropical storm watch along the west coast of Florida was extended northward to the mouth of the Suwannee River on August 25 . The tropical storm watch , which now stretched from Bonita Springs to Tarpon Springs , was extended to Indian Pass on August 26 . Simultaneously , a hurricane watch was issued from the mouth of the Mississippi River in Louisiana to Indian Pass , Florida . 
 After Isaac crossed the Florida Keys on August 26 , the hurricane warning was downgraded to a tropical storm warning , and the tropical storm watch from Sebastian Inlet to Flagler Beach was discontinued . Simultaneously , the hurricane watch on the Gulf Coast of the United States was upgraded to a hurricane warning along the portion from Morgan City , Louisiana , to Destin , Florida . Additionally , the tropical storm warning was discontinued from the mouth of the Suwannee River to Tarpon Springs . Early on August 27 , the tropical storm warning on the east coast of Florida was discontinued for areas lying north of the Jupiter Inlet . Six hours later , the tropical storm warning on the east coast of Florida was lifted from the Jupiter Inlet southward to Ocean Reef , including Lake Okeechobee . At 1500 UTC , all of the remaining watches and warnings for South Florida were cancelled . On August 28 , the tropical storm warning in the Florida Panhandle was discontinued for areas east of Destin . By 1500 UTC on August 29 , all tropical storm and hurricane watches and warnings were no longer in effect for the state of Florida . 
 During the week of August 27 , the 2012 Republican National Convention was held in Tampa , Florida . Isaac threatened to force the cancellation or postponement of the convention ; there was also potential to move the event 's location . According to the Republican National Convention spokesman James Davis , officials had been coordinating with the United States Secret Service , should the 50 @,@ 000 politicians , delegates , and reporters require evacuation . The Republican National Convention was pushed to August 28 , with the storms threatening the coast of Tampa . Chairman of the Republican National Convention <unk> <unk> announced on August 25 that the convention would only convene for a short amount of time on August 27 and " immediately recess until Tuesday afternoon , August 28 " . At the same time , Governor of Florida Rick Scott announced he would not be attending the convention , together with Governor of Alabama Robert J. Bentley . On August 25 , Governor Scott declared a state of emergency for the state of Florida ahead of Tropical Storm Isaac . Amtrak suspended the Silver Meteor and Silver Star train service from Orlando to Miami on Sunday , August 26 . In Miami @-@ Dade County , evacuations were ordered for residents living in mobile homes . Additionally , the bridges across the Port of Miami were closed during the height of Isaac . Orange juice prices increased due to the threat of the storm in Florida , which produces more than 75 percent of orange crops in the United States . 
 The Florida Division of Emergency Management was put into partial activation , and Florida Power & Light brought in at least 4 @,@ 300 workers to help with expected power outages . Key West International Airport suspended all flights in preparation of Isaac , while all cruises and many theme parks were delayed . The United States Coast Guard activated hurricane condition " whiskey " , restricting the transportation of watercraft until the storm passed . In South Florida , specifically in Monroe County , many schools were used as shelters . In Miami @-@ Dade County , all public schools and universities – including Florida International University and the University of Miami – cancelled classes . While the airport in the county remained open , it cancelled hundreds of flights and delayed many others . As the storm passed , regular services became available once again . Across the remainder of the state , especially in coastal counties , most schools and government buildings were closed . In Escambia County , a mandatory evacuation was ordered for zones A , B , and C. Many shelters were opened for those who had nowhere to go , and all county schools were shut down . At Naval Air Station Pensacola , many planes were either evacuated from the base or placed into secure hangars . Farther east in Santa Rosa County , a mandatory evacuation was also ordered for zones A , B , and C , including all mobile home parks , campgrounds , low @-@ lying areas , and RV parks . In Walton County , special needs and general shelters were opened to the public , and all schools and government offices were to be shut down throughout the duration of the storm . The Clyde B. Wells Bridge was also shut down in anticipation of tropical storm @-@ force winds . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The storm impacted nearly all of Florida , despite not making landfall in the state . Due to the weak intensity and path offshore , damage was caused primarily by flooding , rather than winds . Persistent rainbands brought heavy precipitation to much of east @-@ central and southeast Florida . In central Palm Beach County , the highest observed total precipitation was 15 @.@ 86 inches ( 403 mm ) , though radars estimated that as much as 18 to 20 inches ( 460 to 510 mm ) fell in some areas . The resultant flooding left entire neighborhoods isolated and caused damage to homes , businesses , and roads in Palm Beach County . Other areas , such as Broward , Indian River , Martin , Miami @-@ Dade , and St. Lucie counties , were also impacted by flooding , albeit less severely . 
 Tides along the Gulf Coast of Florida caused erosion and coastal flooding in Bay , Collier , Franklin , Gulf , and Wakulla counties . Though winds caused little damage , around 113 @,@ 000 customers were left without electricity in South Florida alone . Further north in Central Florida and the Panhandle , Isaac spawned five tornadoes , one each in Hillsborough , Holmes , Indian River , Jackson , and Osceola counties . All of them ranked as only F0 on the Fujita scale . The worst twister occurred in Indian River County , damaging 133 buildings , most of which were mobile homes . Throughout the state , two indirect fatalities were reported and losses reached approximately $ 91 @.@ 54 million . 
 = = = Southern Florida = = = 
 Despite the Florida Keys being the closest to the path of the storm , effects there were minimal . In Molasses Reef , sustained winds reached 44 mph ( 71 km / h ) , while winds peaked at 41 mph ( 66 km / h ) in Sombrero Key . Rainfall in the Florida Keys was light , peaking at 1 @.@ 61 inches ( 41 mm ) at the National Weather Service Office in Key West . Winds were stronger in Miami @-@ Dade County , reaching 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) at the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory ( <unk> ) headquarters in Virginia Key . Many trees and power lines were downed throughout the county , with an estimated 33 @,@ 000 residences experiencing power outages . Tides reaching up to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) caused major beach erosion and minor coastal flooding in Naples . Between Everglades City and Chokoloskee , up to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of tidal inundation occurred , leaving roads flooded , stranding some people . In Goodland , water entered a few homes but was mainly confined to streets , yards , and marinas . Less than 2 @,@ 000 people were left without electricity in Collier County . Damage within that county was estimated to have reached $ 6 million . Throughout southeastern Florida , 113 @,@ 000 people were left without electricity . 
 Heavy rainfall fell in portions of Broward County , peaking at 11 @.@ 21 inches ( 285 mm ) at the intersection of State Road 997 and Interstate 75 near Weston . Other significant precipitation totals include 10 @.@ 86 inches ( 276 mm ) in Miramar , and 10 @.@ 41 in ( 264 mm ) in Coral Springs , with 7 to 10 in ( 180 to 250 mm ) reported at numerous other locations in the county . Moderate to severe flooding occurred over parts of northern Broward County . In <unk> , canals overflowed their banks and streets were flooded for a few days . Additionally , a few homes sustained minor water damage . Water also entered a few homes and businesses in Tamarac . Standing water also forced the closure of a few on @-@ ramps to the Sawgrass Expressway . Losses in Broward County reached $ 1 million . 
 = = = = Palm Beach County = = = = 
 The outerbands produced relatively strong winds in Palm Beach County . Wind gusts were estimated to have reached 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) in Tequesta , where the shutters were ripped from a life guard stand and also moved the structure about 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) from its original location . Additionally , winds in the area blew significant amounts of sand away , exposing rocks and creating 8 – 10 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 0 m ) drops . Slightly further south , waves of 8 – 10 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 0 m ) pounded the beaches of Jupiter , though only minimal beach erosion was reported . Nonetheless , hundreds of sea turtle nests were swept away , though 100 hatchlings were brought to the Loggerhead <unk> Center in Juno Beach . In Palm Beach County , the outerbands dropped significant amounts of rainfall , with radar estimates as high as 20 inches ( 510 mm ) in some areas . The highest observed precipitation total , measured in that vicinity , was 15 @.@ 86 inches ( 403 mm ) at Lion Country Safari in Loxahatchee , while 13 @.@ 754 inches ( 349 @.@ 4 mm ) fell in Boynton Beach , 13 @.@ 1 inches ( 330 mm ) fell in Greenacres and 12 @.@ 55 inches ( 319 mm ) fell in Wellington . Nearly all of the eastern half of Palm Beach County experienced at least 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of precipitation . 
 Due to heavy rainfall , widespread flooding was reported , especially in the central and western portions of the county . Whole neighborhoods in The Acreage , Loxahatchee , Royal Palm Beach , and Wellington were left stranded for up to several days . In some areas , flooding was considered the worst since Hurricane Irene in 1999 . At the post office in Loxahatchee , the parking lot was flooded , forcing the building to close for several days . A major washout was reported in West Palm Beach at the intersection of State Roads 80 and 882 . Also in West Palm Beach , a road collapsed and fire rescue crews quickly closed the road . On State Road 704 , a portion of it became inaccessible to low @-@ clearance vehicles . A man died in West Palm Beach after driving through the storm and crashing into a concrete wall along Interstate 95 . Several major and minor roads were also inundated by water in Wellington . Additionally , there was flooding at the intersections of Meadow Avenue and <unk> Shores Boulevard , and Indian Mound Road and South Shore Boulevard . Heavy rainfall left several leaking roofs at an apartment complex in Pahokee . 
 In the southern portion of Palm Beach County , flooding and wind damage was also reported . Residents reported an unconfirmed tornado in Lake Worth . It knocked over some trees and damage a shed and some roofs , as well as cause a few power outages . The entrance to the gated community of Lawrence Grove in Boynton Beach was flooded by about 1 foot ( 300 mm ) of water and passable only by large pickup trucks . In Delray Beach , lightning struck a tree , causing part of it to fall through an awning , break a window , and slice into a house . Streets were littered with small branches and palm fronds in Boca Raton , while low @-@ lying roads and swales were flooded with several inches of water . One small tree was uprooted across the street from City Hall . Initially , schools throughout the county were to remain open . However , in response to flooding , all Palm Beach County schools were closed on August 27 and August 28 . Thereafter , all but eight county public schools – located in Loxahatchee and The Acreage – were opened . Damage estimates for Palm Beach County reached $ 71 @.@ 59 million , $ 40 million of which was incurred to the Indian Trail Improvement District . 
 = = = Central Florida = = = 
 Precipitation amounts ranging from 4 to 8 inches ( 100 to 200 mm ) were common throughout Okeechobee County . The most significant impacts occurred in the city of Okeechobee and adjacent areas , such as Taylor Creek . Overflowing creeks and canals caused major flood damage to 14 homes , while another 146 had minor water intrusion . Several roads were temporarily closed due to standing water . One indirect fatality occurred along State Road 78 in Okeechobee , after a 62 ‑ year ‑ old man lost control of his vehicle and crashed . Winds were relatively light , with gusts between 30 and 40 mph ( 48 and 64 km / h ) along the northern shores of Lake Okeechobee . In nearby Martin County , rainfall averaged between 5 and 10 inches ( 130 and 250 mm ) . As a result , several roads in the county were temporarily impassable , while water entered one business complex in Palm City . Further north in St. Lucie County , rainfall amounts were similar . Standing water was reported on roads in Fort Pierce , Lakewood Park , Port St. Lucie , and White City . 
 The storm also produced heavy rainfall in Indian River County , with 16 @.@ 5 in ( 420 mm ) reported in Vero Beach . This was the highest observed precipitation total in the state of Florida during Isaac . Elsewhere in Indian River County , rainfall amounts were generally between 7 and 10 inches ( 180 and 250 mm ) . Throughout Indian River County , 27 homes and 2 single – family homes were flooded , while 20 roads were temporarily closed due to standing water . An EF0 tornado touched down in Vero Beach for about two minutes , damaging 118 mobile homes and 15 single family houses . According to Indian River County Emergency Management Coordinator Dale Justice , that tornado caused $ 850 @,@ 000 in losses . At the Vero Beach Municipal Airport , sustained winds reached 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) . In Highlands County , up to 6 inches ( 150 mm ) of rain forced the closure of a small portion of U.S. Route 98 between <unk> Road and County Road 621 in <unk> . The inundation was caused by Arbuckle Creek overflowing and washing a few inches of water on the road . 
 A damage survey conducted by the National Weather Service indicates that a tornado was spawned near St. Cloud in Osceola County . It destroyed an abandoned mobile home , leaving only a floor attachment to the frame . The tornado moved across a citrus grove , causing damage to trees and shrubs . Thereafter , it removed shingles and broke a window at one residence , while some fences nearby were toppled . Additionally , rainfall amounts ranging from 3 to 6 inches ( 76 to 152 mm ) left several roads impassable . The Myakka River overflowed in Sarasota County , flooding the Ramblers Mobile Home Park . Water rose up to the doorsteps of several units , while parking lots and grassy areas were inundated by water . Due to its weaker and further westward track than initially anticipated , impact in Hillsborough County and the city of Tampa was minimal during the Republican National Convention . On the first day of the convention , August 27 , Isaac dropped 2 @.@ 03 inches ( 52 mm ) of precipitation and brought sustained winds of 21 mph ( 34 km / h ) to Tampa International Airport , with gusts up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . A waterspout moved onshore near Tampa , damaging 6 houses in addition to the fences and trees on those properties . 
 = = = North Florida and Florida Panhandle = = = 
 Although it passed further west and was weaker than anticipated , the outerbands and fringe of the storm produced light rainfall and two tornadoes in the Florida Panhandle . The first tornado in the region was spawned near Greenwood in Jackson County , but caused no damage . The other tornado touched down near Graceville in Holmes County and ripped off the front porch of a mobile home and downed numerous trees . Rainfall was reported for a 3 day period in Flagler County from August 26 to August 28 . In Palm Coast , communities measured between 2 and 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 51 and 89 mm ) of precipitation . Some minor flooding occurred in parking lots . Gusty winds of 40 to 50 mph ( 64 to 80 km / h ) felled isolated trees in the western part of the county . A few trees were also blown down in Alachua County , one of which fell onto Main Street in Gainesville . Losses in Escambia and Santa Rosa Counties amounted to $ 10 @.@ 4 million and $ 1 @.@ 2 million respectively . 
 Some coastal flooding occurred across portions of Bay , Franklin , Gulf , and Wakulla counties due to storm surge . Erosion was most significant in Franklin County , where storm surge was measured at 3 @.@ 45 feet ( 1 @.@ 05 m ) in Apalachicola , while tides were 6 to 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal . Water Street in Apalachicola was inundated with over 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) of water in some places . At St. George Island State Park , waves pushed pass the dune line and flooded parking areas . Losses were estimated at about $ 500 @,@ 000 . In Bay County , storm surge reached 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) at Panama City , while tides were 8 to 10 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) above normal . The depth of inundation along 7th Avenue in Panama City ranged from a few inches to about one foot , while other roads in Lynn Haven and West Bay were also flooded . Tides along the coast of Gulf County flooded a road in Indian Pass and the access road to St. Joseph Peninsula State Park , causing closure of the park . In Wakulla County , minor coastal flooding was reported around St. Marks , with 2 to 4 inches ( 51 to 102 mm ) of water in a few businesses . The area experienced tidal flooding only about two months earlier during Tropical Storm Debby . One vacant home experienced minor water intrusion around the time of highest tide in Shell Point . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the storm , Governor of Florida Rick Scott attended a briefing at the South Florida Water Management District before boarding a helicopter to tour flooded areas of Palm Beach County . Scott said , " We 've got to take care of everybody 's needs but we 've got to get our state back to work , " and also encouraged tourists to return to the state , especially in Key West , where hotel owners were considering cancelling reservations for Labor Day . A Florida state fund known as Neighbors to the Rescue – with the purpose of distributing money to help recovery efforts for victims of Isaac – was activated by the governor . The area already qualified for small business loans due to a state of emergency and after the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) reviewed damage assessments , President of the United States Barack Obama considered a disaster declaration . Initially , FEMA denied a disaster declaration . In response , Governor Scott mailed a letter of appeal to FEMA Administrator Craig <unk> . The appeal was accepted , and on October 18 , 2012 , President Obama issued a disaster declaration for Bay , Collier , Escambia , Franklin , Gulf , Martin , Monroe , Okaloosa , Palm Beach , St. Lucie , and Santa Rosa counties . 
 = AC / DC = 
 AC / DC are an Australian rock band , formed in 1973 by brothers Malcolm and Angus Young . A hard rock / blues rock band , they have also been considered a heavy metal band , although they have always dubbed their music simply " rock and roll " . 
 AC / DC underwent several line @-@ up changes before releasing their first album , High Voltage , in 1975 ; Malcolm and Angus were the only original members left in the band . Membership subsequently stabilised until bassist Mark Evans was replaced by Cliff Williams in 1977 for the album Powerage . Within months of recording the album Highway to Hell , lead singer and co @-@ songwriter Bon Scott died on 19 February 1980 after a night of heavy alcohol consumption . The group considered disbanding , but buoyed by support from Scott 's parents , decided to continue and set about finding a new vocalist . Ex @-@ Geordie singer Brian Johnson was auditioned and selected to replace Scott . Later that year , the band released the new album , Back in Black , which was made as a tribute to Bon Scott . The album launched them to new heights of success and became their all @-@ time best @-@ seller . 
 The band 's next album , For Those About to Rock We Salute You , was their first album to reach number one in the United States . Drummer Phil Rudd was fired in 1983 and replaced by ex @-@ A II Z drummer Simon Wright , who left to join Dio in 1989 . The band experienced a resurgence in the early 1990s with the release of The Razors Edge . Phil Rudd returned in 1994 after Chris Slade , who was with the band from 1989 to 1994 , was asked to leave in favour of him , and contributed to the band 's 1995 album Ballbreaker . Stiff Upper Lip , released in 2000 , was well received by critics . The band 's studio album , Black Ice , released in 2008 , was the second @-@ highest @-@ selling album of that year , and their biggest chart hit since For Those About to Rock , eventually reaching No.1 on all charts worldwide . The band 's line @-@ up remained the same until 2014 with Malcolm Young 's retirement and Rudd 's legal troubles . In 2016 , Johnson was advised to stop touring on account of worsening hearing loss and Guns N ' Roses frontman Axl Rose stepped in as the band 's vocalist for the remainder of that year 's dates . 
 AC / DC have sold more than 200 million records worldwide , including 71 @.@ 5 million albums in the United States alone , making them the tenth @-@ best @-@ selling band in the United States and one of the world 's best @-@ selling bands of all time . Back in Black has sold an estimated 50 million units worldwide , making it the fifth @-@ highest @-@ selling album by any artist – and the third @-@ highest @-@ selling album by any band . The album has sold 22 million units in the US alone , where it is the sixth @-@ highest @-@ selling album of all time . AC / DC ranked fourth on VH1 's list of the " 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock " and were named the seventh " Greatest Heavy Metal Band of All Time " by MTV . In 2004 , AC / DC ranked No. 72 on the Rolling Stone list of the " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " . Producer Rick Rubin , who wrote an essay on the band for the Rolling Stone list , referred to AC / DC as " the greatest rock and roll band of all time . " In 2010 , AC / DC were ranked number 23 in the VH1 list of the " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background and name = = = 
 Brothers Malcolm , Angus , and George Young were born in Glasgow , Scotland , and moved to Sydney with most of their family in 1963 . George was the first to learn to play the guitar . He became a member of the Easybeats , one of Australia 's most successful bands of the 1960s . In 1966 , they became the first local rock act to have an international hit , with the song " Friday on My Mind " . Malcolm followed in George 's footsteps by playing with a Newcastle , New South Wales , band called the Velvet Underground ( not to be confused with the New York @-@ based Velvet Underground ) . Their oldest brother Alex Young chose to remain in Britain to pursue musical interests . In 1967 , Alexander formed and played bass in the London @-@ based band Grapefruit — initially called " The Grapefruit " — with three former members of Tony Rivers and the Castaways , John Perry , Geoff Swettenham , and Pete Swettenham . 
 Malcolm and Angus Young developed the idea for the band 's name after their sister , Margaret Young , saw the initials " AC / DC " on a sewing machine . " AC / DC " is an abbreviation meaning " alternating current / direct current " electricity . The brothers felt that this name symbolised the band 's raw energy , power @-@ driven performances of their music . " AC / DC " is pronounced one letter at a time , though the band are colloquially known as " Acca Dacca " in Australia . The AC / DC band name is stylised with a high voltage sign separating the " AC " and " DC " and has been used on all studio albums , with the exception of the international version of Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap . 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 In November 1973 , Malcolm and Angus Young formed AC / DC and recruited bassist Larry Van <unk> , vocalist Dave Evans , and Colin Burgess , ex @-@ Masters Apprentices drummer . Pushing hard for the band 's success were Australia 's legendary roadie Ray Arnold and his partner Alan Kissack . Gene Pierson booked the band to play at Bondi <unk> on New Year 's Eve , 1973 . 
 By this time , Angus Young had adopted his characteristic school @-@ uniform stage outfit . The idea was his sister Margaret 's . Angus had tried other costumes : Spider @-@ Man , Zorro , a gorilla , and a parody of Superman , named Super @-@ Ang . In its early days , most members of the band dressed in some form of glam or satin outfit but this approach was abandoned seeing as Melbourne band Skyhooks had already adopted this approach to their stage presentation . 
 The Young brothers decided that Evans was not a suitable frontman for the group because they felt he was more of a glam rocker like Gary Glitter . On stage , Evans was occasionally replaced by the band 's first manager , Dennis Laughlin , who was the original lead singer with Sherbet prior to Daryl Braithwaite . Evans did not get along with Laughlin , which also contributed to the band 's ill feeling toward Evans . 
 = = = The Bon Scott era ( 1974 – 80 ) = = = 
 = = = = The journey begins ( 1974 – 77 ) = = = = 
 In September 1974 , Ronald Belford " Bon " Scott , an experienced vocalist and friend of George Young , replaced Dave Evans after friend Vince <unk> recommended him to George Young . Like the Young brothers , Scott had been born in Scotland before emigrating to Australia in his childhood . The band had recorded only one single with Evans , " Can I Sit Next To You , Girl " / " Rockin ' in the Parlour " ; eventually , the song was re @-@ written and re @-@ recorded with Bon Scott as " Can I Sit Next to You Girl " [ Track 7 on the Australian album TNT ( 1975 ) , and Track 6 on the international release of High Voltage ( 1976 ) ] . 
 By October 1974 , the Australia @-@ only album High Voltage had been recorded . It took only ten days and was based on instrumental songs written by the Young brothers , with lyrics added by Scott . Within a few months , the band 's line @-@ up had stabilised , featuring Scott , the Young brothers , bassist Mark Evans and drummer Phil Rudd . Later that year they released the single " It 's a Long Way to the Top " , which became their perennial rock anthem . It was included on their second album , TNT ( 1975 ) , which was also released only in Australia and New Zealand . T.N.T. featured the song " High Voltage " , which was the first song written and recorded for the album . Because " High Voltage " was released as a single before T.N.T. was released , some people thought it was the title track to AC / DC 's debut album . 
 Between 1974 and 1977 , aided by regular appearances on Molly Meldrum 's Countdown , the ABC 's nationally broadcast pop @-@ music television show , AC / DC became one of the most popular and successful acts in Australia . Their performance on 3 April 1977 was their last live TV appearance for more than 20 years . 
 = = = = International success ( 1976 – 80 ) = = = = 
 In 1976 , the band signed an international deal with Atlantic Records and toured extensively throughout Europe , including their first UK tour sponsored by Sounds magazine , called the ' Lock Up Your Daughters Summer Tour ' . They gained invaluable experience of the stadium circuit , supporting leading rock acts such as Black Sabbath , Aerosmith , Kiss , Styx , UFO , and Blue Öyster Cult , and co @-@ headlined with Cheap Trick . 
 The first AC / DC album to gain worldwide distribution was a 1976 compilation of tracks taken from the High Voltage and T.N.T. LPs . Also titled High Voltage , and released on the Atlantic Records label , the album , which has to date sold three million copies worldwide , gained the band a following among the then @-@ substantial British punk audience . The track selection was heavily weighted toward the more recent T.N.T. , and included only two songs from their first LP . The band 's next album , Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap , was released in the same year in both Australian and international versions , like its predecessor . Track listings varied worldwide , and the international version of the album also featured the T.N.T. track " Rocker " , which had previously never been released internationally . The original Australian version included " Jailbreak " ( now more readily available on the 1984 compilation EP ' 74 Jailbreak or as a live version on the 1992 Live album ) . Dirty Deeds was not released in the US until 1981 , by which time the band were at the peak of their popularity . 
 Following the 1977 recording Let There Be Rock , bassist Mark Evans was fired ; purportedly to find someone who could sing backup vocals . Evans described disagreement with Angus and Malcolm as a contributing factor . He was replaced by Cliff Williams . Neither of the Young brothers has elaborated on the departure of Evans , though Richard Griffiths , the CEO of Epic Records and a booking agent for AC / DC in the mid @-@ 1970s , later commented , " You knew Mark wasn 't going to last , he was just too much of a nice guy . " Mark Evans ' autobiography , <unk> <unk> : My Life Inside / Outside of AC / DC , released in 2011 , predominantly dealt with his time in AC / DC , including being fired . 
 AC / DC were a somewhat formative influence on new wave of British heavy metal bands who emerged in the late 1970s , such as Saxon and Iron Maiden , in part as a reaction to the decline of traditional early 1970s hard rock bands . In 2007 , critics noted that AC / DC , along with Thin Lizzy , UFO , Scorpions and Judas Priest , were among " the second generation of rising stars ready to step into the breach as the old guard waned . " 
 AC / DC 's first American exposure was through the Michigan radio station AM 600 <unk> in 1977 . The station 's manager , Peter C. Cavanaugh , booked the band to play at Flint 's Capitol Theater . The supporting act was MC5 , who had just briefly reunited and agreed to play at the event . The band opened with their popular song " Live Wire " and closed with " It 's a Long Way to the Top ( If You Wanna Rock ' n ' Roll ) " . 
 AC / DC came to be identified with the punk rock movement by the British press . Their reputation , however , managed to survive the punk upheavals of the late 1970s , and they maintained a cult following in the UK throughout this time . Angus Young gained notoriety for mooning the audience during live performances . 
 The 1978 release of Powerage marked the debut of bassist Cliff Williams , and with its harder riffs , followed the blueprint set by Let There Be Rock . Only one single was released from Powerage , " Rock ' n ' Roll Damnation / Sin City " . An appearance at the Apollo Theatre , Glasgow during the Powerage tour was recorded and released as If You Want Blood You 've Got It , featuring such songs as " Whole Lotta Rosie " , " Problem Child " , and " Let There Be Rock " , as well as lesser @-@ known album tracks like " Riff Raff " . Powerage was the last album produced by Harry Vanda and George Young that had lead vocals by Bon Scott , and is claimed to be AC / DC 's most under @-@ rated album . 
 The major breakthrough in the band 's career came in their collaboration with producer " Mutt " Lange on the album Highway to Hell , released in 1979 . Eddie Van Halen notes this to be his favourite AC / DC record , along with Powerage . It became the first AC / DC LP to break into the US top 100 , eventually reaching No. 17 , and it propelled AC / DC into the top ranks of hard rock acts . Highway to Hell had lyrics that shifted away from flippant and comical toward more central rock themes , putting increased emphasis on backing vocals but still featured AC / DC 's signature sound : loud , simple , pounding riffs and grooving backbeats . The final track , " Night Prowler " , has two breaths in quick succession at the start of the song , intended to create a tone of fear and loathing . 
 = = = = Scott 's death ( 1980 ) = = = = 
 As 1980 began , the band began work on a new album that would eventually become Back in Black , but Bon Scott would not live to see it finished . On 19 February 1980 , Scott passed out in the car on the way back to friend Alistair Kinnear 's house after a night of heavy drinking at the Music Machine club in London . Upon arrival at his home , Kinnear was unable to move Scott from the car into his home for the night , so he left him in the car overnight to sleep off the effects of the alcohol . Unable to wake Scott late the next morning , Kinnear rushed him to King 's College Hospital in Camberwell , where Scott was pronounced dead on arrival . Pulmonary aspiration of vomit was the cause of Scott 's death , and the official cause was listed as " acute alcohol poisoning " . Scott 's family buried him in Fremantle , Western Australia , the area they emigrated to when he was a boy . 
 Inconsistencies in the official accounts of Scott 's death have been cited in conspiracy theories , which suggest that Scott died of a heroin overdose , or was killed by exhaust fumes redirected into the car , or that Kinnear did not exist . Additionally , Scott was asthmatic , and the temperature was below freezing on the morning of his death . 
 = = = The Brian Johnson era ( 1980 – 2016 ) = = = 
 = = = = Rebirth ( 1980 – 83 ) = = = = 
 Following Scott 's death the band briefly considered quitting , but encouraged by the insistence from Scott 's parents that he would have wanted them to go on , they eventually decided to continue and went about finding a new frontman . Various candidates were considered for his replacement , including : Buzz Shearman , ex @-@ <unk> member , who was not able to join because of voice problems , ex @-@ Back Street Crawler vocalist Terry Slesser and then Slade vocalist , Noddy Holder . The remaining AC / DC members finally decided on ex @-@ Geordie singer Brian Johnson . 
 Angus Young later recalled , " I remember the first time I had ever heard Brian 's ( Johnson ) name was from Bon . Bon had mentioned that he had been in England once touring with a band and he had mentioned that Brian had been in a band called Geordie and Bon had said ' Brian Johnson , he was a great rock and roll singer in the style of Little Richard . ' And that was Bon 's big idol , Little Richard . I think when he saw Brian at that time , to Bon it was ' Well he 's a guy that knows what rock and roll is all about . ' He mentioned that to us in Australia . I suppose when we decided to continue , Brian was the first name that Malcolm and myself came up with , so we said we should see if we can find him . " 
 For the audition , Johnson sang " Whole Lotta Rosie " from Let There Be Rock and Ike & Tina Turner 's " Nutbush City Limits " . He was hired a few days after the audition . With Johnson the band completed the songwriting that they had begun with Scott for the album Back in Black . Recording took place at Compass Point Studios in The Bahamas a few months after Scott 's death . Back in Black , produced by Mutt Lange and recorded by Tony Platt , became their biggest @-@ selling album and a hard @-@ rock landmark ; hits include " Hells Bells " , " You Shook Me All Night Long " , " Rock and Roll Ain 't Noise Pollution " and the title track . The album reached No.1 in the UK and No.4 in the US , where it spent 131 weeks on the Billboard 200 album chart . 
 The follow @-@ up album , 1981 's For Those About to Rock We Salute You , also sold well and was positively received by critics . The album featured two of the band 's most popular singles : " Let 's Get It Up " and the title track , " For Those About to Rock " , which reached No.13 and <unk> in the UK , respectively . The band split with Lange for their self @-@ produced 1983 album , Flick of the Switch , in an effort to recover the rawness and simplicity of their early albums . 
 = = = = Departure of Rudd and commercial decline ( 1983 – 87 ) = = = = 
 After having problems with drugs and alcohol , drummer Phil Rudd 's friendship with Malcolm Young deteriorated and eventually escalated to a physical confrontation after which Rudd was fired . Session drummer B.J. Wilson was drafted in to help complete the recordings , but his drum parts were eventually not used , as Rudd had already completed his drum parts . Rudd was replaced by Simon Wright in the summer of 1983 after the band held over 700 auditions in the US and UK . Simon Kirke of Free and Bad Company fame , and Paul Thompson of Roxy Music were two of the drummers auditioned . 
 Later in the year , AC / DC released the self @-@ produced album Flick of the Switch , which was less successful than their previous albums , and was considered underdeveloped and unmemorable . One critic stated that the band " had made the same album nine times " . AC / DC were voted the eighth @-@ biggest disappointment of the year in the 1984 Kerrang ! readers ' poll . However , Flick of the Switch eventually reached No.4 on the UK charts , and AC / DC had minor success with the singles " Nervous Shakedown " and " Flick of the Switch " . Fly on the Wall , produced by the Young brothers in 1985 , was also regarded as uninspired and directionless . A music concept video of the same name featured the band at a bar , playing five of the album 's ten songs . 
 In 1986 , the group returned to the charts with the made @-@ for @-@ radio " Who Made Who " . The album Who Made Who was the soundtrack to Stephen King 's film Maximum Overdrive ; it brought together older hits , such as " You Shook Me All Night Long " and " Ride On " , with newer songs such as title track " Who Made Who " , and two new instrumentals , " D.T. " and " Chase the Ace " . 
 In February 1988 , AC / DC were inducted into the Australian Recording Industry Association 's Hall of Fame . 
 = = = = Back to commercial success ( 1987 – 90 ) = = = = 
 AC / DC 's 1988 album , Blow Up Your Video , was recorded at Studio Miraval in Le Val ( Occitania ) , France , and reunited the band with their original producers , Harry Vanda and George Young . The group recorded nineteen songs , choosing ten for the final release ; though the album was later criticised for containing excessive " filler " , it was a commercial success . Blow Up Your Video sold more copies than the previous two studio releases combined , reaching No.2 on the UK charts — AC / DC 's highest position since " Back in Black " in 1980 . The album featured the UK top @-@ twenty single " Heatseeker " and popular songs such as " That 's the Way I Wanna Rock ' n ' Roll " . The Blow Up Your Video World Tour began in February 1988 , in Perth , Australia . That April , following live appearances across Europe , Malcolm Young announced that he was taking time off from touring , principally to begin recovery from his alcoholism . Another member of the Young family , Stevie Young , temporarily took Malcolm 's place . 
 Following the tour , Wright left the group to work on the upcoming Dio album Lock Up the Wolves , and was replaced by session veteran Chris Slade . Johnson was unavailable for several months while finalising his divorce , so the Young brothers wrote all the songs for the next album , a practice they continued for all subsequent releases through Rock or Bust in 2014 . 
 = = = = Popularity regained ( 1990 – 1994 ) = = = = 
 The next album , The Razors Edge , was recorded in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada , and was mixed and engineered by Mike Fraser and produced by Bruce Fairbairn , who had previously worked with Aerosmith and Bon Jovi . Released in 1990 , it was a major comeback for the band , and included the hits " Thunderstruck " and " Are You Ready " , which reached No.5 and No.16 respectively on Billboards Mainstream Rock Tracks Chart , and <unk> , which peaked at <unk> on the Billboard Hot 100 . The album went multi @-@ platinum and reached the US top ten . Several shows on the Razors Edge tour were recorded for the 1992 live album , titled Live . Live was produced by Fairbairn , and is considered one of the best live albums of the 1990s . AC / DC headlined the Monsters of Rock show during this tour , which was released on DVD as Live at Donington . During The Razors Edge tour three fans were killed at a concert at the Salt Palace in Salt Lake City , Utah in January 1991 . When the concert began fans rushed the stage crushing the three and injuring others . It took 20 minutes before venue security and the group understood the severity of the situation and stopped the concert . AC / DC settled with the victims ' families out of court . As a result of this incident , the Salt Palace eliminated festival seating from future events . A year later , AC / DC recorded " Big Gun " for the soundtrack of the Arnold Schwarzenegger movie Last Action Hero , and was released as a single , reaching No.1 on the US Mainstream Rock chart , the band 's first No.1 single on that chart . 
 = = = = Popularity confirmed ( 1994 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 In 1994 , Angus and Malcolm invited Rudd to several jam sessions . He was eventually rehired to replace Slade , whose amicable departure arose in part because of the band 's strong desire to again work with Rudd . Recorded at the Ocean Way Studios in Los Angeles by the reunited 1980 – 83 line @-@ up and produced by Rick Rubin , Ballbreaker was released in 1995 . The first single from the album was " Hard as a Rock " . Two more singles were released from the album : " Hail Caesar " and " Cover You in Oil " . 
 In 1997 , a box set named Bonfire was released . It contained four albums ; a remastered version of Back in Black ; Volts ( a disc with alternate takes , outtakes , and stray live cuts ) and two live albums , Live from the Atlantic Studios and Let There Be Rock : The Movie . Live from the Atlantic Studios was recorded on 7 December 1977 at the Atlantic Studios in New York . Let There Be Rock : The Movie was a double album recorded in 1979 at the Pavillon de Paris and was the soundtrack of a motion picture , AC / DC : Let There Be Rock . The US version of the box set included a colour booklet , a two @-@ sided poster , a sticker , a temporary tattoo , a keychain bottle opener , and a guitar pick . 
 In 2000 , the band released Stiff Upper Lip , produced by brother George Young at the Warehouse Studio , again in Vancouver . The album was better received by critics than Ballbreaker but was considered lacking in new ideas . The Australian release included a bonus disc with three promotional videos and several live performances recorded in Madrid , Spain in 1996 . Stiff Upper Lip reached No.1 in five countries , including Argentina and Germany ; No.2 in three countries , Spain , France and Switzerland ; No.3 in Australia ; No.5 in Canada and Portugal ; and No.7 in Norway , the US and Hungary . The first single , " Stiff Upper Lip " , remained at No.1 on the US Mainstream Rock charts for four weeks . The other singles released also did very well ; " Satellite Blues " and " Safe in New York City " reached No.7 and No.31 on Billboard 's Mainstream Rock Tracks , respectively . 
 In 2002 , AC / DC signed a long @-@ term , multi @-@ album deal with Sony Music , who went on to release a series of remastered albums as part of their AC / DC remasters series . Each release contained an expanded booklet featuring rare photographs , memorabilia , and notes . In 2003 , the entire back @-@ catalogue ( except Ballbreaker and Stiff Upper Lip ) was remastered and re @-@ released . Ballbreaker was eventually re @-@ released in October 2005 ; Stiff Upper Lip was later re @-@ released in April 2007 . Also in 2003 , the band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . 
 On 30 July 2003 , the band performed with the Rolling Stones and Rush at Molson Canadian Rocks for Toronto . The concert , held before an audience of half a million , was intended to help the city overcome the negative publicity stemming from the effects of a 2003 SARS epidemic . The concert holds the record for the largest paid music event in North American history . The band came second in a list of Australia 's highest @-@ earning entertainers for 2005 , and sixth for 2006 , despite having neither toured since 2003 nor released an album since 2000 . Verizon Wireless has gained the rights to release AC / DC 's full albums and the entire Live at Donington concert to download in 2008 . 
 On 16 October 2007 , Columbia Records released a double and triple DVD titled Plug Me In . The set consists of five and seven hours of rare footage , and even a recording of AC / DC at a high school performing " School Days " , " TNT " , " She 's Got Balls " , and " It 's a Long Way to the Top " . As with Family Jewels , disc one contains rare shows of the band with Bon Scott , and disc two is about the Brian Johnson era . The collector 's edition contains an extra DVD with 21 more rare performances of both Scott and Johnson and more interviews . 
 AC / DC made their video game debut on Rock Band 2 , with " Let There Be Rock " included as a playable track . The setlist from their Live at Donington live album was released as playable songs for the Rock Band series by means of a Wal @-@ Mart @-@ exclusive retail disc titled AC / DC Live : Rock Band Track Pack . 
 No Bull : The Directors Cut , a newly edited , comprehensive Blu @-@ ray and DVD of the band 's July 1996 Plaza De Toros de las <unk> concert in Madrid , Spain , was released on 9 September 2008 . 
 = = = = Black Ice ( 2008 – 11 ) = = = = 
 On 18 August 2008 , Columbia Records announced 18 October Australian release , and 20 October worldwide release , of the studio album Black Ice . The 15 @-@ track album was the band 's first studio release in eight years , was produced by Brendan O 'Brien and was mixed and engineered by Mike Fraser . Like Stiff Upper Lip , it was recorded at The Warehouse Studio in Vancouver , British Columbia . Black Ice was sold in the US exclusively at Walmart and Sam 's Club and the band 's official website . 
 " Rock ' n ' Roll Train " , the album 's first single , was released to radio on 28 August . On 15 August , AC / DC recorded a video for a song from the new album in London with a special selection of fans getting the chance to be in the video . Black Ice debuted at No.1 on album charts in 29 countries and also was Columbia Records ' biggest debut album ( since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking sales data for Billboard in March 1991 ) . Black Ice has been certified Multi Platinum in eight countries , including the US , Australia , Canada , Switzerland , Sweden , Norway , Germany and the Czech Republic . Additionally Black Ice has achieved Platinum status in twelve countries ( Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Finland , France , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , UK , Argentina , Singapore and New Zealand ) and Gold status in four countries ( The Netherlands , Spain , Poland and Brazil ) . The 18 @-@ month Black Ice World Tour supporting the new album was announced on 11 September and began on 28 October in Wilkes @-@ Barre , Pennsylvania . 
 On 15 September 2008 , AC / DC Radio debuted on Sirius Channel 19 and XM channel 53 . The channel plays AC / DC music along with interviews with the band members . 
 With the North American release of Black Ice on 20 October 2008 , Columbia Records and Walmart created " Rock Again AC / DC Stores " to promote the album . In October 2008 , MTV , Walmart , and Columbia created " AC / DC Rock Band Stores " in New York City , at Times Square , and in Los Angeles . " Black Ice " trucks were also dispatched on the streets of these two cities after the release , playing AC / DC music aloud and making various stops each day to sell merchandise . 
 In late September 2009 , the band rescheduled six shows when Brian Johnson underwent an operation for ulcers . On 29 September , the band announced a collection of studio and live rarities , <unk> , which was released on 10 November 2009 as a 3 @-@ CD / 2 @-@ DVD / 1 @-@ LP box @-@ set . 
 On 4 November AC / DC were announced as the Business Review Weekly top Australian earner ( entertainment ) for 2009 with earnings of $ 105 million . This displaced The Wiggles from the number one spot for the first time in four years . 
 On 19 April 2010 , AC / DC released Iron Man 2 , the soundtrack for the eponymous film . One month later , the band headlined Download Festival at Donington Park , and closed the Black Ice World Tour in Bilbao , Spain on 28 June 2010 , after 20 months in which AC / DC went to 108 cities in over 28 countries , with an estimated audience of over five million people . Three concerts in December 2009 at the River Plate Stadium in Argentina were released as the DVD Live at River Plate on 10 May 2011 . An exclusive single from the DVD , featuring the songs " Shoot to Thrill " and " War Machine " , was issued on Record Store Day . In 2011 , the band also issued on DVD and Blu @-@ ray the concert movie AC / DC : Let There Be Rock , which had its theatrical release in 1980 . 
 = = = Multiple lineup changes ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 Angus stated in an interview in early May 2011 that the band was beginning to plan another world tour , saying , " Now we 're thinking , ' How can we ever better the ' Black Ice ' world tour ? ' But we will . " At the band 's Live at River Plate DVD premiere on 6 May 2011 at the Hammersmith Apollo in London , England , Angus said that there were plans for the group to release a new studio album " within the next couple of years " , which the tour would support . 
 In May 2012 , Malcolm Young confirmed that the band are working on a potential follow @-@ up to 2008 's Black Ice . But he warned that fans were in for a longer wait than expected , after lead singer Brian Johnson suggested there would be new material next year . Malcolm stated , " You know what Brian 's like . He just says things and then walks away . It 'll be a little while – a year or two anyway . I 've been doing some jamming on some song ideas but I do that all the time , as do the rest of the band . We are still working . But we had a long rest between Stiff Upper Lip and Black Ice , so I think we need a couple of years to recuperate and work on it a bit more . " 
 On 19 November 2012 , AC / DC released Live at River Plate , their first live album in 20 years . 
 = = = = Malcolm Young 's retirement = = = = 
 On 16 April 2014 , in response to earlier reports that the band may be retiring due to Malcolm Young being seriously ill and unable to perform , Brian Johnson commented that AC / DC are not retiring , stating " We are definitely getting together in May in Vancouver . We 're going to pick up guitars , have a plonk and see if anybody has got any tunes or ideas . If anything happens we 'll record it . " AC / DC subsequently announced in an official statement on their Facebook page that Malcolm Young would be taking a break from the band due to his ill health . It ended : " The band will continue to make music . " In June , Johnson announced that AC / DC are " very likely " to be on the road again before the end of 2014 . In July 2014 , AC / DC confirmed that they have finished recording their next album and that Malcolm 's nephew , Stevie Young replaced Malcolm in the studio . 
 Drummer Phil Rudd released his first solo album , Head Job , on 29 August 2014 . He confirmed that there would be another AC / DC tour , and stated that the band had no intention of retiring , adding , " We 'll all have to be dead before it stops . " 
 = = = = " Rock or Bust " = = = = 
 On 23 September 2014 , Alberts management confirmed that founding member Malcolm Young had officially departed from the band and revealed that their new record entitled Rock or Bust featuring eleven new tracks would be released on 28 November 2014 as the first AC / DC album in the band 's history without Malcolm Young on the recordings . The band also announced plans for a world tour to promote the new album with Malcolm and Angus ' nephew Stevie Young as Malcolm 's replacement . 
 = = = = Phil Rudd 's replacement = = = = 
 On 6 November 2014 Rudd was charged with attempting to procure a murder , threatening to kill , possession of methamphetamine and possession of cannabis , following a police raid on his home . The charge of attempting to procure a murder was withdrawn the following day , but the other charges remained . AC / DC released a statement clarifying that the tour promoting Rock or Bust would continue , but did not say whether or not Rudd would participate , or if he was still a member of the band . 
 In an interview on 13 November , Angus Young stated that the band had experienced problems with Rudd earlier in the year when recording Rock or Bust , and that his situation had taken the band by surprise . Rudd had also missed video and photo shoots , and with reference to Rudd 's future in the band , Young added , " So , at this stage , it 's a pretty tough call for us . " He also said the band would continue : " He 's got to sort himself out I think ... At this point it 's kind of a question mark . But if we 're touring , there will be a drummer in place , put it that way . " 
 At the charity signing before the Grammy awards , the band was photographed together with former drummer Chris Slade . It was later confirmed that he had rejoined the band for the Grammys and upcoming tour . In April 2015 , Rudd pleaded guilty to drug charges and threatening to kill a former assistant . Shortly thereafter , the band 's web site removed Rudd as the band 's drummer and replaced him with Slade . On 9 July 2015 Rudd was sentenced to eight month 's home detention despite seeking to be discharged without conviction . 
 = = = = Brian Johnson 's hearing loss and departure = = = = 
 On 7 March 2016 , the band announced that the final ten dates of the Rock or Bust World Tour would be rescheduled as Johnson 's doctors had ordered him to stop touring immediately , as his hearing loss had accelerated and he risked complete deafness if he persisted on the road . The ten cancelled dates would be performed " likely with a guest vocalist " later in the year , leaving Johnson 's future in touring with the group uncertain . Johnson himself later stated on The Howard Stern Show that his hearing loss didn 't come from having performed for 36 years with AC / DC , but rather his love of auto racing and having forgotten to put on ear plugs in during one race left him with a busted ear drum in his left ear . 
 However , on 15 March 2016 , American comedian Jim Breuer ( a friend of Johnson ) revealed on his podcast that Johnson had received a second opinion on his hearing and it was not as bad as initially thought . Nonetheless , Breuer mentioned that Johnson told him that he was essentially fired from AC / DC and that he hadn 't heard from the band since the announcement of the tour being postponed , adding that Angus Young wants to continue the band for at least another ten years and do at least one more studio album and world tour . Breuer later clarified his comments on Facebook that did not end speculation on Johnson 's future with the band . 
 On 19 April 2016 , Johnson made an official statement regarding his health problems and inability to tour . In the statement , he acknowledged his ongoing hearing difficulties but stated his intentions to continue recording and potentially resume touring if his health improves sufficiently . He also specifically thanked Angus Young and Cliff Williams for their support during his AC / DC tenure . 
 = = = = Guest vocalist Axl Rose = = = = 
 On 16 April 2016 , AC / DC released a statement announcing the addition of Guns N ' Roses frontman Axl Rose as the band 's lead vocalist for the remainder of their 2016 tour dates , and apparently confirming Johnson 's departure . The statement reads : " AC / DC band members would like to thank Brian Johnson for his contributions and dedication to the band throughout the years . We wish him all the best with his hearing issues and future ventures . As much as we want this tour to end as it started , we understand , respect and support Brian 's decision to stop touring and save his hearing . We are dedicated to fulfilling the remainder of our touring commitments to everyone that has supported us over the years , and are fortunate that Axl Rose has kindly offered his support to help us fulfill this commitment . AC / DC will resume their Rock or Bust World Tour with Axl Rose joining on vocals . " 
 = = = = Planned Departure of Cliff Williams = = = = 
 On 8 July 2016 , Cliff Williams announced he would leave the group at the end of its 2016 touring commitments ; he cited the departures of Malcolm Young , Phil Rudd and Brian Johnson as a contributing factor in his decision . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 AC / DC were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on 10 March 2003 . During the ceremony the band performed " Highway to Hell " and " You Shook Me All Night Long " , with guest vocals provided by host Steven Tyler of Aerosmith . He described the band 's power chords as " the thunder from down under that gives you the second most powerful surge that can flow through your body . " During the acceptance speech , Brian Johnson quoted their 1977 song " Let There Be Rock " . 
 On 22 March 2000 , the municipality of Leganés ( near Madrid ) named a street in honour of the band as " Calle de AC / DC " ( " AC / DC Street " ) . Malcolm and Angus attended the inauguration with many fans . Later that day , the plaque with the name of the group was stolen , perhaps by an enthusiast or collector . The plaque was replaced two hours later , and stolen once again a mere three days after the fact . The plaque had since been stolen numerous times , forcing the municipality of Leganés to begin selling replicas of the official street plaque . 
 In May 2003 , the Young brothers accepted a Ted Albert Award for Outstanding Service to Australian Music at the 2003 Music Winners Awards , during which Malcolm paid special tribute to Bon Scott , who was also a recipient of the award . 
 On 1 October 2004 , a central Melbourne thoroughfare , Corporation Lane , was renamed ACDC Lane in honour of the band . However , the City of Melbourne forbade the use of the slash character in street names , so the four letters were combined . The lane is near Swanston Street where , on the back of a truck , the band recorded their video for the 1975 hit " It 's a Long Way to the Top " . 
 They sold over 1 @.@ 3 million CDs in the US during 2007 despite not having released a new album since 2000 at that point . Additionally , the group 's commercial success continues to flourish despite their choice to refrain from selling albums in digital online formats for many years . However , in November 2012 , the entire catalogue ( excluding the TNT album and the Australian versions of the High Voltage , Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap and Let There Be Rock albums ) became available on the iTunes Store . 
 In 2009 the Recording Industry Association of America upgraded the group 's US sales figures from 69 million to 71 million , making AC / DC the fifth @-@ best @-@ selling band in US history and the tenth @-@ best @-@ selling artist , selling more albums than Madonna and Mariah Carey . The RIAA also certified Back in Black as double Diamond ( 20 million ) in US sales , and by 2007 the album had sold 22 million copies , which made it the fifth @-@ best @-@ selling album of all @-@ time in the US . It is currently the second @-@ best @-@ selling album worldwide . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Current members 
 Angus Young – lead guitar ( 1973 – present ) 
 Cliff Williams – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 1977 – present ) 
 Stevie Young – rhythm guitar , backing vocals ( 1988 [ touring member ] , 2014 – present ) 
 Chris Slade – drums ( 1989 – 1994 , 2015 – present ) 
 Current touring member 
 Axl Rose – lead vocals ( 2016 ) 
 Former members 
 Malcolm Young – rhythm guitar , backing vocals ( 1973 – 2014 ) 
 Dave Evans – lead vocals ( 1973 – 1974 ) 
 Bon Scott – lead vocals ( 1974 – 1980 ) 
 Mark Evans – bass guitar ( 1975 – 1977 ) 
 Phil Rudd – drums ( 1975 – 1983 , 1994 – 2015 ) 
 Brian Johnson – lead and backing vocals ( 1980 – 2016 [ Indefinite Hiatus ] ) 
 Simon Wright – drums ( 1983 – 1989 ) 
 Note : Before their debut album , High Voltage ( 1975 ) , AC / DC had several line up changes . For a more comprehensive list of members that were part of the band before 1975 , see List of AC / DC band members . 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Tours = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Persona ( series ) = 
 Persona ( Japanese : ペルソナ , Hepburn : Perusona ) , also known as Shin Megami Tensei : Persona , is a series of role @-@ playing video games developed and primarily published by Atlus . The series is a spin @-@ off from Atlus ' Megami Tensei franchise , and was originally based on the high school setting of Shin Megami Tensei If .... The first entry in the series , Revelations : Persona , was released in 1996 . There have since been eight further console titles ( four main entries and four spin @-@ off titles ) , with another ( Persona 5 ) in development . The series takes its title from the beings used by characters in battle , manifested from a character 's personality . 
 Persona began as a spin @-@ off based on the positively @-@ received setting of If .... Its trademark features include a high school setting , a group of students as the protagonists , a silent protagonist similar to the mainline Megami Tensei franchise , and combat using Personas . Since the release of Persona 3 in 2006 , the main series has used a social simulation function called Social Links , which is directly linked to how Personas evolve . Central character designs are by series co @-@ creator Kazuma Kaneko ( Persona and the Persona 2 games ) and Shigenori Soejima ( Persona 3 onwards ) . Its overall theme is exploration of the human psyche and how the characters find their true selves . The series ' recurring concepts and design elements draw on Jungian psychology and archetypes , along with multiple world mythologies and popular literature . 
 Revelations : Persona was the first role @-@ playing Megami Tensei title to be released in the West . Beginning with Persona 2 : Eternal Punishment , the English localizations began to remain faithful to the Japanese versions , at the insistence of Atlus . The series is highly popular internationally , becoming the best @-@ known Megami Tensei spin @-@ off and establishing Atlus and the Megami Tensei franchise in North America . Following the release of Persona 3 and 4 , the series also established a strong following in Europe . Since the release of the first Persona game , the series has sold six million units worldwide , forming a substantial part of the Megami Tensei franchise 's total sales . There have been numerous adaptations , including anime television and theatrical series , novelizations , manga , and stage plays . 
 = = Titles = = 
 = = = Main series = = = 
 Revelations : Persona is the first entry in the series , was released in 1996 in Japan and North America for the PlayStation . A port to Microsoft Windows was released in Japan in 1999 . The game was later ported to the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) : it was published in 2009 in Japan and North America as physical and digital releases , and 2010 in Europe as a digital release . Set in the town of Mikage @-@ cho , it follows a group of high school students from St. Hermelin High , who are forced to confront an outbreak of demons in their hometown . 
 Persona 2 : Innocent Sin is the second entry in the series , released in Japan in 1999 for the PlayStation . After the success of Persona 's PSP port , a port of Innocent Sin was greenlit . For this version , adjustments were made so that it played more like its sequel , along with added features and a new scenario . The port was released in 2011 in all regions . Set in the coastal city of Sumaru , the story follows Tatsuya Suou , a student of Seven Sisters High , as he confronts phenomena generated by reality @-@ altering rumors . 
 Persona 2 : Eternal Punishment is the third entry in the main series , released in 2000 in Japan and North America for the PlayStation . Like Innocent Sin , it was remade for PSP , and included a new scenario by the game 's original writer . The remake released in Japan in 2012 , but did not reach the West . The original version was re @-@ released worldwide on PlayStation Network ( PSN ) in 2013 in response to this . Set shortly after the ending of Innocent Sin , the story follows Maya Amano , a supporting character from the previous game , as she confronts a similar rumor @-@ created threat along with Tatsuya . 
 Shin Megami Tensei : Persona 3 is the fourth entry in the main series . Developed for PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) , it released in 2006 in Japan , 2007 in North America , and 2008 in Europe . Persona 3 FES , a director 's cut featuring new content and an epilogue , was released in 2007 in Japan and 2008 in North America and Europe . The main portion of FES was later ported to the PSP as Persona 3 Portable : it featured a few enhancements such as a female playable character and the ability to control all characters in battle , and some content was adjusted or removed so it could fit on a portable platform . The story takes place in the town of Iwatodai , following a group of students known as " SEES " who fight monsters that appear during a time known as the Dark Hour . 
 Shin Megami Tensei : Persona 4 is the fifth entry in the main series , released on the PS2 in 2008 in Japan and North America , and 2009 in Europe . The success of Persona 3 Portable inspired the creation of a portable version of Persona 4 . As using the PSP would result in cutting too much content , it was instead developed for PlayStation Vita , which allowed for new features and content . This version was titled Persona 4 Golden . Persona 4 takes place in the rural town of Inaba , where a group of students investigate a series of killings related to a realm known as the Midnight Channel . 
 Persona 5 is the sixth entry in the main series , currently in production for PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 . It is set for release in 2016 in Japan and internationally in 2017 . Persona 5 will be set in Tokyo and will follow a group of students as they adopt the guises of thieves to tackle the city 's corruption and attain freedom from imposed societal pressures . 
 = = = Spin @-@ offs = = = 
 Persona 3 received a Japan @-@ exclusive spin @-@ off online game titled Persona 3 : The Night Before ; it follows a similar cycle of daytime activities and night time combat as the original game , with one player being chosen as the party leader each night . After its closure in 2008 , a new free @-@ to @-@ play browser game titled Persona Ain Soph was released that year ; the gameplay focused on players fusing Personas and confronting a threat known as the <unk> . Staying exclusive to Japan , it closed down in June 2010 . A fighting game sequel to Persona 4 , Persona 4 Arena , was released in arcades in Japan in 2012 . Console versions were released in 2012 in Japan and North America , and 2013 in Europe . A sequel , Persona 4 Arena Ultimax , was similarly released in Japanese arcades in 2013 , then released in 2014 in all regions for consoles . A standalone spin @-@ off for the Nintendo 3DS , Persona Q : Shadow of the Labyrinth , was released worldwide in 2014 ; it features the full casts of Persona 3 and 4 , and is classed by Atlus as an official entry in the Persona canon . A rhythm game set after the events of Persona 4 Arena Ultimax , Persona 4 : Dancing All Night , was released worldwide in 2015 . 
 Several Persona mobile games have been made in partnership with other Japanese mobile companies such as Bbmf . Their first partnership was in 2006 with the development and release of Megami Ibunroku Persona : Chapter of the Foreign Tower of Emptiness , a 3D dungeon crawler set within the environments of the first Persona game . The companies later collaborated on two mobile titles based on the Persona 2 games : Persona 2 : Innocent Sin - Lost Memories in 2007 , and Persona 2 : Eternal Punishment - Infinity Mask in 2009 . Both titles carried over the basic gameplay functions of the original games tailored for mobile phones . Many mobile spin @-@ offs are related to Persona 3 : there is an RPG side @-@ story titled Persona 3 Em , an action game prequel set ten years prior to Persona 3 titled Aegis : The First Mission , and an alternate version of Persona 3 featuring different characters titled Persona 3 Social . Multiple Persona 3 @-@ themed puzzle games have also been developed . An online mobile RPG set around the high school featured in Persona 3 , titled Persona Mobile Online , was released in 2009 . Persona 4 likewise received a mobile spin @-@ off , this time a card game titled Persona 4 The Card Battle . 
 = = Common elements = = 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 The gameplay of the Persona series revolves around combat against various enemy types : Demons , Shadows and Personas . Main combat takes place during dungeon crawling segments within various locations . The way battles initiate varies between random encounters ( Persona , Persona 2 ) or running into models representing enemy groups ( Persona 3 onwards ) . Battles are governed by a turn @-@ based system , where the player party and enemies each attack the opposing side . Actions in battle include standard physical attacks using short @-@ range melee or long @-@ range projectile weapons , magical attacks , using items , guarding , and under certain conditions escaping from battles . During battle , either side can strike an enemy 's weakness , which deals more damage than other attacks . For Persona 3 and 4 , a key element in battle is " One More Turn " : should a party member or enemy land a critical hit , they gain an extra turn . If all enemies are knocked down by critical hits , the party can perform an " All Out Attack " , with all party members attacking at once and dealing high damage . Each party member is manually controlled by the player in all but one Persona title : in Persona 3 , all the party apart from the main character are controlled by an AI @-@ based command system . The general gameplay has remained consistent across all Persona games . 
 Each Persona game also includes elements unique to them . In Persona , battles take place on a grid @-@ based battlefield , with characters ' and enemies ' movements dictated by their placement on the battlefield . This system was abandoned for the Persona 2 games : the party has free movement across the battlefield , and is assigned a set of moves which can be changed in the menu during and in between battles . In Persona and Persona 3 , there is a lunar phase tied to gameplay , time progression , and the plot . In Persona 4 , this was changed to a weather @-@ based system , where changes in the weather keyed to the story affected enemy behavior . Persona 5 introduces elements such as platforming and stealth gameplay to dungeon exploration . 
 = = = = Personas = = = = 
 A defining aspect of the series is the Personas , manifestations of a person 's psyche . Many Personas used up to Persona 3 are inspired by Graeco @-@ Roman mythology . In Persona 4 they are based on Japanese deities ; Persona 5 will use characters inspired by popular fictional and historical outlaws . The summoning ritual for Personas in battle varies throughout the series : in early games , the party gains the ability to summon through a short ritual after playing a parlor game ; in Persona 3 , they fire a gun @-@ like device called an Evoker at their head ; in Persona 4 , they summon their Personas using Tarot cards ; in Persona 5 , they will be summoned through the characters ' masks . 
 Personas are used for types of physical attack and magical attacks , along with actions such as healing and curing or inflicting status ailments . For all Persona games , all playable characters start out with an initial Persona , which evolves through story @-@ based events and use during battle . In multiple Persona titles , two or more Personas can be summoned at once to perform a powerful Fusion Spell . In Persona 3 and 4 , only the main character can wield and change between multiple Personas ; the other characters use a single Persona . During the course of the game , the player acquires more Personas through a system of Skill Cards , represented by Major Arcana Tarot cards . Each skill card represents a different Persona family , which in turn hold their own abilities inherent to that family . Multiple Personas can be fused together to create a new Persona with improved and inherited abilities : these range from fusing two Personas in the Persona 2 duology , to fusing up to twelve in Persona 4 . 
 A system introduced in Persona 3 is Social Links , a form of character interaction tied to the growth of Personas . During their time outside battle , the main character can interact with and grow a particular Social Link , which acts as an independent character growth system tied to a Persona family or Arcanum . As the main character 's relationship with the character representing a Social Link grows , its rank is raised and more powerful Personas related to the Social Link 's assigned Arcanum can be summoned and fused . Attributes related to the main character 's social life can also be used to improve their Persona abilities , such as their academic abilities and social aptitude . An updated version of Social Links will be featured in Persona 5 . In Persona and the Persona 2 duology , there is a Negotiation mechanic carried over from the Megami Tensei series , in which player characters can talk with enemies and provoke certain actions depending on their dialogue choices . Some responses yield Skill Cards for use in creating new Personas . Negotiation was removed from later Persona titles , although Atlus staff considered the Social Link system and aspects of Persona Fusion to be a " disguised " version of it . 
 = = = Setting and themes = = = 
 The Persona series takes place in modern @-@ day Japan , and almost always focuses on a group of high school students . The exception to this is Eternal Punishment , which instead focused on a group of adults . The setting has been described as urban fantasy , with extraordinary events happening in otherwise normal locations . The typical setting used is a city , with a noted exception being the rural town setting of Persona 4 . Although they are typically stand @-@ alone titles that only share thematic elements , the Persona games share a continuity , with elements from previous titles turning up in later ones . Persona and the Persona 2 games shared narrative elements which were concluded with Eternal Punishment , so Persona 3 started out with a fresh setting and characters . The first in the series is Persona , set in the year 1996 . This is followed by the events of Innocent Sin and Eternal Punishment in 1999 . At the end of Innocent Sin , the main characters rewrote events to avert the destruction of Earth , creating the Eternal Punishment reality , with the original reality becoming an isolated Other Side . Persona 3 and subsequent titles stem from Eternal Punishment . Persona 3 is set in 2009 to 2010 , and Persona 4 is set two years later in 2011 to 2012 . The Persona 4 Arena games and Dancing All Night take place in the months following Persona 4 . Persona Q takes place in a separate enclosed world which the characters of Persona 3 and 4 are drawn into from their respective time periods . The main character of each Persona game is a silent protagonist representing the player , with a manner described by the series ' director as " silent and cool " . When the writer for new story content in Eternal Punishment 's PSP version wished for the main character to have spoken dialogue , this was vetoed as it went against the series tradition . 
 A central concept for the series is the Collective Unconscious , a place generated by the hearts of humanity and from which Personas are born . According to the official Persona Club P3 book , the Collective Unconscious was generated by the primitive life on Earth as a means of containing the spiritual essence of Nyx , a space @-@ born being whose presence would cause the death of all life on Earth . Her body was damaged by the impact and became the moon , while her psyche was left on the surface and locked away at the heart of the Collective Unconscious . The fragments of Nyx 's psyche , known as " Shadows " , are both a threat and a crucial part of humanity 's existence . To further help defend against hostile Shadows , people generated the deities that exist within the Collective Unconscious , many of which manifest as Personas . Nyx appears in Persona 3 as the antagonist . Two recurring characters generated by the Collective Unconscious are Philemon and Nyarlathotep , the respective representatives of the positive and negative traits of humanity . In Innocent Sin , the two reveal that they are engaged in a proxy contest as to whether humanity can embrace its contradictory feelings and find a higher purpose before destroying itself . Philemon makes appearances in later Persona titles as a blue butterfly . A recurring location is the Velvet Room , a place between reality and unconsciousness that changes form depending on the psyche of its current guest . Its inhabitants , especially an enigmatic old man called Igor , aid the main characters by helping them hone their Persona abilities . 
 The central theme of the Persona series is exploration of the human psyche and the main characters discovering their true selves . The stories generally focus on the main cast 's interpersonal relationships and psychologies . There is also an underlying focus on " the human soul " . Many of the concepts and characters within the series ( Personas , Shadows , Philemon ) use Jungian psychology and archetypes . A recurring motif are the " masks " people wear during everyday life , which ties back to their Personas . This motif will be more overtly expressed in Persona 5 through the main casts ' use of masks in their thief guises . Each game also includes specific themes and motifs . Persona 2 focuses on the effect of rumors on the fabric of reality ( referred to by the developers as " the power of Kotodama " ) ; Persona 3 employs themes involving depression and the darkness within people ; Persona 4 focuses on how gossip and the media influences people 's views of others ; and Persona 5 will show how the main characters pursue personal freedom in a restrictive modern society . A recurring element in the earlier entries is " The Butterfly Dream " , a famous story by the Chinese philosopher Zhuang Zhou . It ties in with the series ' themes , and also with Philemon 's frequent appearances as a butterfly . Philemon 's original appearance was based on Zhuang Zhou . The character Nyarlathotep is based on the character of the same name from H. P. Lovecraft 's Cthulhu Mythos , and the Mythos as a whole is frequently referenced in Persona 2 . The Velvet Room was based on the Black Lodge from Twin Peaks . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Persona series was first conceived after the release of Shin Megami Tensei If ... for the Super Famicom . As the high school setting of If ... had been positively received , Atlus decided to create a dedicated subseries focusing on the inner struggles of young adults . The focus on high school life was also decided upon due to the experiences of the series ' creators , Kouji Okada and Kazuma Kaneko : according to them , as nearly everyone experiences being a student at some point in their lives , it was something everyone could relate to , representing a time of both learning and personal freedom . In their view , this approach helped players accept the series ' themes and the variety of ideas included in each title . Kaneko in particular tried to recreate his experiences and the impact it had on him during his time with the series . The main concept behind the first game was a Megami Tensei title that was more approachable for new and casual players than the main series . The abundance of casual games on the PlayStation reinforced this decision . The game 's title , Megami Ibunroku , represented the title 's status as a direct spin @-@ off from the series . It was later dropped to further define Persona as a standalone series . After the success of Persona , Innocent Sin began development , retaining many of the original staff . During the writing of Innocent Sin , it was decided that the world of Persona 2 needed a different perspective than that of the current protagonist . This decision laid the groundwork for Eternal Punishment . 
 The conceptual Persona 3 was submitted to Atlus in 2003 by Katsura Hashino , who had worked as a designer for multiple Megami Tensei titles and had been the director for Shin Megami Tensei : Nocturne . Gaining Atlus ' approval of the concept , development started in the same year , after the completion of Nocturne and the Digital Devil Saga duology . Ideas were being passed around about Persona 4 , but the title did not begin official development until after the release of Persona 3 . Preparations for Persona 5 's development began in 2010 . The team decided to shift towards more challenging story themes , saying that the shift would be more drastic than that experienced with Persona 3 . Persona 4 Arena and its sequel were the first non @-@ RPG collaborative project in the series : its success inspired the creation of both Persona Q and Dancing All Night . Beginning with Persona 3 , a dedicated team originally referred to as " 2nd Creative Production Department " has handled development for the series . The team was later dubbed " P @-@ Studio " . Aside from Atlus , other developers have helped develop entries in the Persona series . During the pre @-@ production stage of Persona 4 Arena , Hashino approached Arc System Works after being impressed by their work on the BlazBlue series . For Dancing All Night , development was initially handled by Dingo , who were well known for the Hatsune Miku : Project DIVA series . Citing quality concerns , Atlus took over development . 
 = = = Art design = = = 
 The two character artists for the Persona series are Kazuma Kaneko , a central artist in the main Megami Tensei series who designed characters for the first three Persona games , and Shigenori Soejima , who worked in a secondary capacity alongside Kaneko and took Kaneko 's place as the character designer from Persona 3 onwards . While designing the characters for Persona , Kaneko was inspired by multiple notable celebrities and fictional characters of the time , along with members of Atlus staff . In Persona and Innocent Sin , the main characters all wore the same school uniforms , so Kaneko differentiated them using accessories . For Eternal Punishment , the main cast were adults , so Kaneko needed to rethink his design procedure . Eventually , he adopted the concept of ordinary adults , and gave them designs that would stand out in @-@ game . 
 Soejima 's first major work for the series was working on side characters for Persona 2 alongside Kaneko . Kaneko put Soejima in charge of the series ' art direction after Persona 2 as Kaneko did not want to imprint his drawing style on the Persona series , and also wanted Soejima to gain experience . Soejima felt a degree of pressure when he was given his new role , as the series had accumulated a substantial following during Kaneko 's tenure . In a later interview , Soejima said that although he respected and admired Kaneko , he never consciously imitated the latter 's work , and eventually settled into the role of pleasing the fans of the Persona series , approaching character designs with the idea of creating something new rather than referring back to Kaneko 's work . For his character designs , Soejima uses real people he has met or seen , looking at what their appearance says about their personality . If his designs come too close to the people he has seen , he does a rough sketch while keeping the personality of the person in mind . For his work on Persona Q , his first time working with a deformed Chibi style due to its links with the Etrian Odyssey series , Soejima took into account what fans felt about the characters . A crucial part of his design technique was looking at what made a character stand out , then adjusting those features so they remained recognizable even with the redesign . 
 Starting with Persona 3 , each Persona game has been defined by a different aesthetic and key color . It is one of the first artistic decisions made by the team : Persona 3 has a dark atmosphere and serious characters , so the primary color was chosen as blue to reflect these and the urban setting . In contrast , Persona 4 has a lighter tone and characters but also sports a murder @-@ mystery plot , so the color yellow was chosen to represent both the lighter tones and to evoke a " warning " signal . According to Soejima , blue was the " color of adolescence " , and yellow was the " color of happiness " . For Persona 5 , the color chosen was red , to convey a harsh feeling in contrast to the previous Persona titles and tie in with the game 's story themes . Its art style was described as a natural evolution from where Persona 4 left off . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music of the Persona series has been handled by multiple composers . The one most associated with the series is Shoji Meguro , who began working on Persona shortly before he officially joined Atlus . His very first composition for the game was " Aria of the Soul " , the theme for the velvet room and a recurring tune within the series . During his initial work on the series , Meguro felt restricted by the limited storage space of the PlayStation 's disc system , and so when he began composing for Persona 3 , which allowed for sound streaming due to increased hardware capacity , he was able to fully express his musical style . His main worry for his music in Persona 3 and 4 was the singers ' pronunciation of the English lyrics . He was unable to work on the Persona 2 titles as he was tied up with other projects , including Maken X. The music for Innocent Sin and Eternal Punishment was handled by Toshiko Tasaki , Kenichi Tsuchiya , and Masaki Kurokawa . Tsuchiya had originally done minor work on Persona , and found composing for the titles a strenuous experience . Meguro returned to work on the series in Persona 5 . For this game , Meguro used its themes for inspiration , and used elements of acid jazz to achieve the right mood . Meguro also wrote the theme song for Persona Q ; the rest of the soundtrack was handled by Atsushi Kitajoh and Toshiki Konishi . 
 = = Release = = 
 The series consists of ten games ( main titles and spin @-@ offs ) , not counting re @-@ releases and mobile titles . Persona was the first role @-@ playing entry in the Megami Tensei franchise to be released in the West , as previous entries had been considered ineligible due to possibly controversial content . As examples of this content were in a milder form for Persona , the restrictions did not apply . According to Atlus , Persona and its sequel were to test player reactions to the Megami Tensei series in the West . The greater majority of Persona titles were either first released on or exclusive to PlayStation platforms . This trend was broken with the release of Persona Q for the 3DS in 2014 . All the Persona titles have been published by Atlus in Japan and North America . An exception in Japan was the Windows port of Persona , which was published by ASCII Corporation . After 2016 , due to Atlus USA 's merger with Sega of America , Sega took over North American publishing duties , although the Atlus brand remained intact . 
 Due to the company not having a European branch , Atlus has generally given publishing duties to other third @-@ party publishers with branches in Europe . This frequently results in a gap between North American and European release dates ranging from a few months to a year or more . For Persona 3 , Atlus gave publishing duties to Koei . For Persona 4 , European publishing was handled by Square Enix . Persona 4 Arena was originally published in Europe by Zen United after a long delay , but the digital rights were eventually returned to Atlus , resulting in the title being removed from PSN . Atlus ended up re @-@ publishing the digital PlayStation version in Europe . They had previously digitally published the PSP port of Persona in Europe and Australia . Arena Ultimax was published in Europe by Sega , who had recently purchased Atlus ' parent company . It was speculated that this could lead to a new trend that would shorten the release gap between North America and Europe . A regular publishing partner was Ghostlight , whose relations with Atlus went back to the European release of Nocturne . A more recent partner was NIS America , which published Persona 4 Golden , Persona Q , and Dancing All Night . Atlus ' partnership with NIS America ended in 2016 , with NIS America citing difficulties with the company since its acquisition by Sega as reasons for the split . As part of their statement , NIS America said that Atlus had become " very picky " about European partners , selecting those which could offer the highest minimal sales guarantee on their products . Sega of America and Atlus USA eventually entered into a partnership with European publishing company Deep Silver to publish multiple titles in the region , including Persona 5 . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 The localizations for the Persona series are generally handled by translator Yu Namba of Atlus USA , who also handles localization for multiple other Megami Tensei games . Another prominent staff member was Nich Maragos , who worked with Namba on multiple Persona games until moving to Nintendo of America prior to 2015 . The localization of Persona was handled by a small team , which put a lot of pressure on them as they needed to adjust the game for Western audiences : the changes implemented included altering names , changing the appearance of characters , and removing numerous cultural references . An entire alternate main quest was also removed . After Persona , it was decided that future Persona games should be as faithful as possible to their original releases . Namba 's first localization project for the series was Eternal Punishment . For the release of Innocent Sin , there was a debate over whether to release it , as it contained potentially controversial content including allusions to Nazism . In the end , due to staff and resource shortages , Innocent Sin was passed over for localization in favor of its sequel Eternal Punishment . Later , when the company developed the PSP ports , the team released the ports of Persona and Innocent Sin overseas so fans attracted by Persona 3 and 4 would be able to easily catch up with the rest of the series . The localization for Persona was completely redone , reverting and restoring all the previously altered or cut content . The port of Eternal Punishment was not localized due to " unusual circumstances " , so the company released the original version on PSN instead . 
 For the localizations of Persona 3 and 4 , the team incorporated as much of the original content as possible , such as using Japanese honorifics and keeping the game 's currency as yen rather than changing it . As a general rule , they incorporate cultural elements from the original versions unless they would not be understood by the player , such as with certain jokes . Nevertheless , some changes had to be made . In one instance , the character Mitsuru Kirijo was originally an English speaker , but her second language for the localized version was changed to French due to her cultured appearance . School tests also needed to be changed due to similar language @-@ based issues . The Social Links were originally called " Community " , but this was changed as the word " Community " had a very specific meaning in English . The new name was inspired by the way the character Igor made reference to the concept using words such as " society " and " bonds " . Some in @-@ game Easter egg references were also changed : in Persona 3 references to Shin Megami Tensei by a character in an in @-@ game MMORPG were changed to reference earlier Persona games , while mentions of a fictional detective in Persona 4 were altered to reference the Kuzunoha family from Eternal Punishment and the Devil Summoner series . Character names have also needed adjustment , such as the stage name of Persona 4 character Rise Kujikawa , and the way characters referred to each other was adjusted to appeal more to a western audience . Persona 5 is planned to be localized in this fashion . 
 The titles of games have also been altered . The banner title for Persona was changed from Megami Ibunroku to Revelations , principally because the team thought the latter title sounded " cool " . The Revelations title was removed for Innocent Sin and Eternal Punishment . After the successful release of Nocturne , the " Shin Megami Tensei " moniker was added to the series title to help with Western marketing . This has not been the case for some titles : Persona 4 Arena 's original title , Persona 4 : The Ultimate in Mayonaka Arena , was shortened as it sounded awkward , and the " Shin Megami Tensei " moniker was dropped as it would have made the title too long . The same change was made for Persona 4 Golden , with the team also dropping the " The " present in the Japanese title as it would have looked and sounded odd in Western territories . Persona 5 was also released in the West without the moniker . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Since the release of Persona in 1996 , the series has sold 6 @.@ 2 million units worldwide by the end of the 2014 / 2015 fiscal year , forming a large part of the total sales of the Megami Tensei franchise . The first Persona was referred to at the time as a sleeper hit , and the success of it and Eternal Punishment helped establish both Atlus and Megami Tensei in North America . In Europe , the series did not become established prior to the release of Persona 3 and 4 , both of which were highly successful in the region . According to Atlus CEO Naoto <unk> , the main turning point for the franchise was the release of Persona 3 , which was a commercial success and brought the series to the attention of the mainstream gaming community . Persona 4 received an even better reception . The Persona series ' success has allowed Atlus to build a strong player base in the West , contributing to the success of other titles such as Catherine . 
 The Persona series has been referred to as the most popular spin @-@ off from the Megami Tensei franchise , gaining notoriety and success in its own right . According to io9 's James <unk> , the series has become notable due to its balance of normal life and fantastic elements , commenting that " that 's much less common [ in the West ] , and the way the series portrays urban fantasy through that lens is what makes it so different , especially from what you would normally expect from Japanese RPGs " . Nintendo Power , in an article concerning the Megami Tensei series , cited the Persona series ' " modern @-@ day horror stories " and " teams of Japanese high @-@ school kids " as the perfect example of the franchise . Persona was mentioned in 1999 by GameSpot 's Andrew Vestal as a game that deserved attention despite not aging well , saying " Examining Persona reveals three of the traits that make the series so popular - and unique - amongst RPG fans : demonology , negotiation , and psychology " . The game has been named as a cult classic . Persona 3 was named by RPGamer as the greatest RPG of the past decade in 2009 , and RPGFan listed Persona 3 and 4 in second and fourth place respectively in their similar 2011 list . Persona 3 was listed by Gamasutra as one of the 20 essential RPGs for players of the genre . Persona 4 was also listed by Famitsu as one of the greatest games of all time in a 2010 list . 
 As well as gaining critical acclaim , the series has been the subject of controversy over its content . This controversy began with the localized banner title of the original Persona , which raised concerns due to its religious implications . Kurt <unk> , writing for 1UP.com in 2006 about the controversial content of the Megami Tensei franchise as a whole , mentioned Innocent Sin 's references to homosexuality , schoolyard violence , and Nazism , considering them possible reasons why the title was not originally released in the West . In 1UP.com 's 2007 game awards , which ran in the March 2008 issue of Electronic Gaming Monthly , Persona 3 was given the " Most controversial game that created no controversy " award : the writers said " Rockstar 's Hot Coffee sex scandal and Bully 's boy @-@ on @-@ boy kissing 's got nothing on this PS2 role @-@ player 's suicide @-@ initiated battles or subplot involving student @-@ teacher dating " . Persona 4 has in turn been examined by multiple sites over its portrayal of character sexuality and gender identity . 
 = = Related media = = 
 The first anime adaptation of the Persona series , a television series titled Persona : Trinity Soul , aired in 2008 . It was animated by A @-@ 1 Pictures , directed by Jun Matsumoto , written by a team that included Yasuyuki Muto , Shogo Yasukawa , and Shinsuke Onishi , and composed for by Taku Iwasaki . Its characters were designed by Soejima and Yuriko Ishii , while Persona designs were done by Nobuhiko <unk> . It was distributed internationally by NIS America . Trinity Soul takes place in an alternate setting ten years after Persona 3 , making it a non @-@ canon entry in the franchise . An anime adaptation of the original Persona 4 , Persona 4 : The Animation , was aired in 2011 . The 25 @-@ episode series was produced by AIC ASTA and directed by Seiji Kishi . In 2014 , a series based on Persona 4 Golden , titled Persona 4 : The Golden Animation , was produced by A @-@ 1 Pictures . This series , which retains the cast of the original adaptation , dramatizes the new material included in Persona 4 Golden , focusing on the protagonist 's encounters with new character Marie . A standalone prequel anime created by A @-@ 1 Pictures , Persona 5 The Animation : The Day Breakers , is set for release in September 2016 prior to the game 's release . 
 The original Persona 4 anime series was made into a condensed film adaptation titled Persona 4 : The Animation - The Factor of Hope ; it was released in Japanese cinemas in 2012 . Persona 3 has also been adapted into a series of anime films produced by AIC ASTA and featuring staff from Persona 4 : The Animation , released in cinemas in Japan and licensed for release overseas by Aniplex . The four films are titled # 1 Spring of Birth , # 2 Midsummer Knight 's Dream , # 3 Falling Down , and # 4 Winter of Rebirth . They were released from 2013 through to 2016 . For both Persona 4 : The Animation and the Persona 3 film series , one of the main concerns was the portrayal of the lead characters , which were originally dictated by player actions . 
 Persona was adapted into an eight @-@ issue manga series titled Megami Ibunroku Persona , originally serialized in 1996 and later reissued in 2009 . A second spin @-@ off manga , Persona : Tsumi to Batsu , was released to tie in with the release of the Persona 2 games . Set within the same setting of the Persona 2 games , it follows a separate story . In its 2011 reissue , new material was added that connected the manga to the events of Innocent Sin . Persona 3 and Persona 4 have both received manga adaptations , serialized in Dengeki Maoh . Another manga based on Persona Q was also serialized : two separate manga storylines , based on the two storylines featured in the game , were written and dubbed Side : P3 and Side : P4 . Multiple novels based on Persona 3 and 4 have also been released . 
 Three stage plays based on Persona 3 have been produced under the banner Persona 3 the Weird Masquerade . They received limited runs and featured separate performances for the male and female versions of the game 's protagonists . The three plays are titled Ao no Kakusei , <unk> no Meikyū , and Sōen <unk> . Persona 4 was also adapted into two stage plays , both produced by Marvelous AQL and receiving limited runs in 2012 : <unk> and <unk> the Evolution . A stage play based on Persona 4 Arena was likewise given a limited run in December 2014 , and one based on Persona 4 Arena Ultimax is planned to run in July 2016 . 
 Atlus has created or hosted media dedicated to the Persona series . A dedicated magazine originally ran for ten issues between 2011 and 2012 , and has been irregularly revived since then . An official talk show released on the official Persona website and Niconico , Persona Stalkers Club , began in February 2014 . Hosted by freelance writer Mafia <unk> and actress Tomomi <unk> , it was designed to deepen the connection between Atlus and the Persona fanbase . Concerts featuring music from the Persona series have also been performed , and some have received commercial releases on home media in Japan . Action figures and merchandise such as clothing related to Persona 3 and 4 have also been produced . 
 = Rejoined = 
 " Rejoined " is the 78th episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , the sixth of the fourth season . It originally aired on October 30 , 1995 , in broadcast syndication . The episode received a record volume of feedback from viewers for the series , both positive and negative , as it marked one of the first televised lesbian kisses . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures on Deep Space Nine , a space station located near a stable wormhole between the Alpha and Gamma quadrants of the Milky Way Galaxy . The plot of " Rejoined " expands on the Trill species , of which Jadzia Dax is a member . They are formed of a host and a symbiont , with the symbiont passed from host to host as the previous one dies . In the episode , Dax is reunited with <unk> Kahn , the ex @-@ wife of one of its former hosts . The two struggle with their feelings for one another because of the taboo in their species against reuniting with loved ones of former hosts . 
 The episode was the first that writers Ronald D. Moore and René Echevarria wrote together , and it was directed by main cast member Avery Brooks . In the first draft , Dax 's former partner was written as male , but after this was changed , the story was cleared through studio executives . The Trill taboo was intended to be an allegory for homosexuality and homophobia . " Rejoined " received a Nielsen rating of seven percent on the first broadcast in syndication . Reviews have been mostly positive towards the episode because of its message , but there was criticism that the plot was not exciting enough and there was a negative reaction from some viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Captain Benjamin Sisko ( Avery Brooks ) notifies Lieutenant Commander Jadzia Dax ( Terry Farrell ) that a group of Trill scientists will be arriving soon at Deep Space Nine to perform experiments related to wormhole physics . The Trill are a species formed of both a humanoid host and a symbiont , which are implanted into them . The symbionts live far longer than the hosts , and are moved into a new host when the old one dies . Jadzia is the eighth host of the Dax symbiont . Sisko tells Dax that the head scientist is <unk> Kahn ( Susanna Thompson ) , and offers to grant Dax a leave of absence while the Trill scientists are aboard , but she turns it down . Upon Dax and Kahn 's first meeting , Major Kira Nerys ( Nana Visitor ) notices that they are very familiar with each other ; Dax tells her that Kahn used to be her wife . Dr. Julian Bashir ( Alexander Siddig ) later informs Kira about the non @-@ association rules that Trill follow regarding the family and friends of former hosts , and says that hosts of the Dax and Kahn symbionts have previously been married to each other . 
 A party is held for the team , and Dax and Kahn warm to one another 's company once more . Afterward , they begin to socialize as they work together on Kahn 's wormhole experiment aboard USS Defiant . They agree to have dinner , but to also bring Bashir along as a chaperone . At the dinner , Bashir feels out of place and is effectively ignored by the two Trills . Returning to the tests , Kahn creates the first artificial wormhole in history and Dax hugs her in celebration . Kahn 's brother <unk> ( Tim Ryan ) , who is on the science team , speaks to her separately and highlights his concerns regarding her contact with Dax . Despite this , Kahn goes to Dax 's quarters and a discussion between the two leads to a kiss ; Kahn leaves before it goes any further . 
 Dax confides in Sisko that she knows she is in love with her former wife . He tells her that Trill customs mean that if they resumed their relationship , then they would be exiled from their homeworld and their symbionts would never be joined with a new host , but that she will have his support either way . Kahn and Dax continue to work on the experiment , but it goes wrong and Defiant is severely damaged . Kahn is injured in the explosion , but Dax rigs a force field across a plasma fire that allows her to reach Kahn , coming to the realization that the relationship is worth exile . After returning to the station , Kahn recuperates from her injuries . She decides against resuming her relationship with Dax , and — with the experiments complete — departs with the science team , leaving Dax heartbroken . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and directing = = = 
 " Rejoined " marked the first time that longtime Star Trek writers Ronald D. Moore and René Echevarria wrote a script together . They had been hired by executive producer Michael Piller following separate unsolicited manuscripts submitted during the third season of Star Trek : The Next Generation , and had remained on the staff of the franchise since . In Echevarria 's first draft of the story , there was no lesbian element as Dax 's former lover was male . The Trill taboo against reuniting relationships from past hosts was suggested by Piller early on in the creation of Deep Space Nine , in order for the society to prevent an " aristocracy of the joined " , where joined hosts never met anyone that they did not already know . 
 It was Moore 's suggestion to make Dax 's former partner a woman in order to tackle the taboo against homosexuality by way of the on @-@ screen taboo against re @-@ association . At that stage , they intended to make no reference in the script to any characters having a concern about Dax 's relationship with a woman so as to focus the story . Clearance was sought for the plot , first from showrunner Ira Steven Behr , then executive producer Rick Berman , and finally from the studio executives . Moore later explained that they agreed to the idea , saying that Star Trek stood for making statements like those in " Rejoined " . 
 Terry Farrell was happy with the story line , saying that it made sense for Dax to have this issue because the symbiont had been in both male and female hosts , adding that " Gender wasn 't the issue . For the worm / symbiont , it was a matter of the being it was embodied in . " She was pleased to be able to " stand up " for the LGBT community . A similar story had been approached during the first appearance of the Trill in The Next Generation episode " The Host " . In this story , however , when the symbiont is transferred from a male to a female host , the Trill is rejected by the character who was the Trill 's female partner , Beverly Crusher . The subplot featuring Kahn 's artificial wormhole was described as a " macguffin " by Moore , and simply a way to get the character into " Rejoined " . This was not the first subplot to be considered for the episode , with the main plot from " Bar Association " originally thought of as being suitable to appear in either " Rejoined " or " Crossfire " . Instead , the plot , which involved Rom forming a trade union , was expanded into the main plot of its own episode . 
 The episode was directed by main cast member Avery Brooks , who played Benjamin Sisko in the series , who later said that " Rejoined " was his favourite of the episodes he directed . He said that the episode was about love , and the choices that result from that , and that it was an extraordinary story about losing someone you love and having that person restored to you some time afterward . Following the death of Jadzia in the sixth season finale , " Tears of the Prophets " , Farrell suggested that the symbiont could be moved to a male character resulting in a similar situation as " Rejoined " between the new Dax host and Worf , as the two were in a relationship at that point . Instead , the symbiont was placed in a new female host called Ezri , as the producers did not want Kira Nerys to be the only female main character . The prejudice against re @-@ association first highlighted in " Rejoined " was mentioned in the seventh season episodes such as " Afterimage " . 
 = = = Visual effects and guest stars = = = 
 Visual effect supervisors Gary Hutzel and Glenn Neufeld were busy completing post @-@ production work on the opening episode of the fourth season , " The Way of the Warrior " . In their place , visual effects coordinator David Takemura led on the visual effects work on both " Rejoined " and " The Visitor " . For this episode , his two main tasks were the creation of the artificial wormhole and the sequence where Dax uses a forcefield as a walkway to reach a trapped Kahn . Takemura was relieved that the wormhole was intended to be artificial in nature , as it meant that he did not have to attempt to re @-@ create the detail already seen in the Bajoran wormhole on the series . Once he came up with the basic design , visual effects company VisionArt completed it . 
 For the forcefield scene , Farrell was shot " skating " down a board painted blue against a blue screen . A mixture of liquid nitrogen and hot water was used to create a fog around the ground . VisionArt combined these shots with the force field and footage of the engineering set on board the Defiant , while a staff animator added a " plasma glow " around her feet as she made contact with the field . 
 Before appearing in " Rejoined " , Susanna Thompson had previously appeared in two The Next Generation episodes ; " The Next Phase " and " Frame of Mind " . She later appeared in Star Trek : Voyager as the Borg Queen , previously portrayed by Alice Krige in the film Star Trek : First Contact . Farrell praised Thompson 's part in " Rejoined " , calling her a " wonderful actress and a joy to work with . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Writers on Deep Space Nine had previously hinted at a potential same @-@ sex relationship in the first season episode " Dax " , when Jadzia Dax says goodbye to <unk> <unk> , a former lover of Dax 's previous male host , Curzon . The first take of the scene resulted in a situation in which it was unclear whether Dax and <unk> were about to kiss . It was decided at the time that it was not appropriate , although the writers had hoped that there would be a time when the viewers would accept such a relationship . This theme was eventually realised in " Rejoined " . Allen Kwan has argued that Deep Space Nine is the only series of Star Trek that resists the heteronormativity typical of the franchise , citing both " Rejoined " and the Mirror Universe episodes as examples , even if the presented bisexuality is <unk> . 
 During that 1995 / 96 television season there had been an increase in the number of homosexual characters appearing in major television series , and so the same @-@ sex kiss in " Rejoined " was reviewed in this context . An article published by the Associated Press suggested that the kiss in Deep Space Nine was not truly a same @-@ sex kiss due to " extenuating circumstances " ; namely , one of the characters was an " alien who used to be a man " . A similar opinion was offered by Jan Johnson @-@ Smith , author of American Science Fiction TV , who said that the situation was " ambiguous " as , despite presenting a same @-@ sex kiss , the episode was clear that Jadzia was " actually kissing the symbiont who has the memories of the former host , her male lover , not the current female host " . 
 For film studies scholar Jean Bruce , the ambiguity of the kiss is foreshadowed in an early scene revolving around a magic trick . On the one hand , the magic trick produces a " pleasurable surprise " , while , on the other , this mirrors the deception necessary , due to Trill norms , in the <unk> of the characters . At the same time , the juxtaposition of very different shots serves to " convey physical distance and the desire to bridge it " , which mirrors the fact that the Trills ' love for one another transcends gender , identity and death . Though the kiss is " informed by the fact that Dax was a man in her past life " , once it occurs , it can " never be taken back " , and remains the queer image of two women kissing . 
 Nonetheless , " Rejoined " was still considered controversial because of its subject matter , which depicts two women who engage in a same @-@ sex romantic relationship , and included one of the first televised lesbian kisses . During the course of the episode , no characters register concern about Dax being involved with a woman , only that she was an ex @-@ spouse . David Greven , literary critic and author of Gender and Sexuality in Star Trek , said that " Rejoined " was one of the better @-@ received episodes of Star Trek that dealt with homosexuality as a theme , but that the franchise overall had typically avoided LGBT issues . Bryan Fuller , who also wrote for Deep Space Nine , said that the franchise had usually avoided those story lines because of the paranoia of the studio regarding homosexuality . Dale Palmer , in an essay on gender and sexual politics , suggested that the choice was made to have a female same @-@ sex kiss on screen because a male one would have alienated the main viewer demographic for the series . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 " Rejoined " was first broadcast on October 30 , 1995 , in broadcast syndication . It received Nielsen ratings of 7 percent , placing it in eighth place in its timeslot . This was lower than the share received by " Indiscretion " , broadcast in the week prior with a 7 @.@ 2 percent share and " Little Green Men " in the week afterward with 7 @.@ 7 percent . 
 = = = Fan , cast and crew response = = = 
 When the episode was originally broadcast , there was a strong negative reaction from some viewers . As Deep Space Nine was shown in syndication , one channel in the Southern United States took the step of editing out the kiss from the initial broadcast . Echevarria 's mother told him that they should have issued a parental guidance warning before broadcasting it . More responses were received at the production office from viewers than for any other episode of the series , resulting in several staff members having to take turns on the phones in order to cover the load . The staff found that although the majority of the phone calls were negative about " Rejoined " , the letters were mostly positive . Terry Farrell said in a 2015 interview that " Rejoined " was her favourite episode of all time and that she still had people thanking her for the episode , because " it gave them strength , and that it made them feel like they weren 't alone , it inspired them to be themselves — all the things I was hoping it would do . " 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Zack Handlen reviewed the episode for The A.V. Club in 2013 , praising the natural manner in which the romance was progressed , saying that this was " refreshing " to see . He felt that the relationship did not appear to be manipulative for the sake of male viewers , but added that the ending was expected and that the episode never communicated to the audience the need to care about the duo . Handlen wrote that the overall story itself was " shallow " , as the episode suffered from an " enervating lack of fun " which was only saved from " complete tedium " through " strong acting and an admirable lack of stigma " . Jordon Hoffman , reviewing the episode on his website , commented that Farrell 's acting " really steps up to the plate " for this episode , and gave " Rejoined " a rating of five out of five . 
 Keith DeCandido , in 2014 review on Tor.com , compared " Rejoined " structurally to The Next Generation episode " Lessons " , which also had a " love @-@ interest @-@ in @-@ danger climax " . He praised the episode , saying that at the time of broadcast it was considered " radical " and said that both Farrell and Thompson managed to get across the romantic message . He called it a " Trek message " episode , but said that it was one of the better ones as it " shines a light on an inadequacy in our own culture via an alien culture , but in this case it <unk> the waters a bit because the taboo actually makes sense on the face of it . " He gave " Rejoined " a rating of eight out of ten . 
 = = = alien kisses = = = 
 Dara Gellman , an independent Canadian video artist , used the kiss sequence in " Rejoined " as the basis of her 3 @-@ minute 1999 project alien kisses . In this piece , the kiss scene is manipulated — the video is slowed , the image enlarged and digitized — and trance music is added . New media scholar Carolyn Guertin argues that this serves to make the footage " even more alien " , presenting queerness as " unearthly " . Jean Bruce argues that , despite the inherent ambiguity of the scene in the episode , " the image is still one of two women kissing , which opens up the possibilities of queer desire on its own terms " . Similarly , Guertin argues that Gellman translates the ( not truly queer ) scene into an " expression of gay love that is alien and apart , but no less erotic for being so " . In using the scene in isolation , alien kisses , Bruce argues , " strips away the gender equivocation by imposing a new queer vision " . She suggests that alien kisses works as an " antidote " to the " ultimately tame treatment " Star Trek has offered of queer themes , and as a " suggestion " that Star Trek acknowledge the desires of queer viewers and fans " beyond the occasional titillating episode " . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The first home media release of " Rejoined " was on a VHS cassette alongside " Indiscretion " on March 25 , 1996 , in the United Kingdom . The first release within the United States was on a single @-@ episode VHS release on August 1 , 2000 . It was released on DVD as part of the season four box set on August 5 , 2003 . 
 = New History Warfare Vol . 3 : To See More Light = 
 New History Warfare Vol . 3 : To See More Light is the fourth studio album by Canada @-@ based saxophonist Colin Stetson , released by Constellation Records in 2013 . It is the final part of a trilogy of albums that also encompasses New History Warfare Vol . 1 ( 2007 ) and New History Warfare Vol . 2 : Judges ( 2011 ) . 
 Stetson , whose contributions to the album were recorded live without overdubs or loops , is the sole musical performer on the album , with Bon Iver 's Justin Vernon later providing vocals on four tracks . Production on the album was undertaken by Stetson in collaboration with Ben Frost . New History Warfare Vol . 3 : To See More Light was met with critical acclaim upon its release in April 2013 and was shortlisted for the 2013 Polaris Music Prize three months later . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Stetson 's original concept for the New History Warfare trilogy was largely skeletal , and developed as the albums were recorded . New History Warfare Vol . 1 was released in 2008 and had a narrative concept of a story of people who had been living at sea for generations . New History Warfare Vol . 2 : Judges , released in 2011 , told the story of one of these people finally arriving on land . New History Warfare Vol . 3 : To See More Light expanded on this , with Stetson stating that " it ’ s a war story . It ’ s finding your way to this shining beacon on the mountaintop , " and that it " deals with death and love . " 
 Stetson 's playing technique includes <unk> and overblowing , and he uses circular breathing to produce continuous tones without interruption , allowing him to perform an extended stream of notes . The physical and technical demands of this style of playing require Stetson to adhere to a fitness routine that includes running , yoga , breathing exercises and meditation . During the course of his career , his playing proficiency had been developing and each album in the New History Warfare trilogy marked a musical progression from the last . By the time he recorded New History Warfare Vol . 3 : To See More Light , Stetson 's playing capability had improved to such a level that he claimed " there ’ s almost nothing in there that I could have played when I recorded Vol . 2 . " 
 Stetson 's parts on Vol . 3 were performed and recorded live without overdubs or loops in various studios in Montreal , where he had wanted to use the large rooms to provide more reverb . Using an arrangement of microphones placed in strategic places including on the side of the saxophone , on his own throat , hanging from the ceiling and at different points around the studio , Stetson captured not only the sounds of the instrument but also the percussive sound of the keys and the sounds of his own breathing and vocalizing through the horn . Producer Ben Frost , whom Stetson had previously worked with on New History Warfare Vol . 2 : Judges , mixed between fifteen and twenty recordings of the same performance into a cohesive piece of music at Greenhouse Studios in Iceland . The vocals of Justin Vernon were recorded at April Base studios in Fall Creek , Wisconsin , and were overdubbed later in the recording process . 
 = = Musical content = = 
 New History Warfare Vol . 3 : To See More Light contains eleven tracks with a total running time of fifty @-@ two minutes . Ten tracks were written by Stetson , with three of these featuring additional writing from Justin Vernon . The track " What are They Doing in Heaven Today ? " is a cover version of a gospel song written by Charles Albert Tindley in 1901 and recorded by Washington Phillips in 1928 . 
 Stetson has stated that the songs are " based in traditional American song , " and the music was described by AllMusic reviewer Fred Thomas as containing " elements of jazz , modern composition , and ... aspects of repetition and textural drone found in certain branches of electronic music and noise . " Fact called the album " a rich , multi @-@ layered sonic world " and noted that the presence of Vernon 's vocals meant that " Stetson ’ s approach feels considerably poppier this time around . " Pitchfork Media opined that Stetson has " plowed a unique path through the music landscape in the last five years , " stating that " his music is heady but always rooted in the body . " Jeremy D. Larson concurred with this idea , claiming that Stetson 's music is " alien but human , technically astounding but filled with passion – the saxophone acts as a medium of expression tied to his whole body " , but admitted that " to most ears , Stetson ’ s music is hard to classify . " Reviewer Daniel Paton also found classification of the music difficult , saying that it " doesn ’ t really meet even the most open @-@ minded definitions of jazz , neither is it really an example of free improvised music . " 
 In his review for Drowned in Sound , Alexander Tudor observed the album 's " abrasiveness , brute force , and determination to push the instrument to its limits , " describing a " relentless pummelling of metal in motion ; often aggressive or chaotic , but using scales to evoke a sense of discipline " while noting that Stetson was " equally at home with classical minimalism . " Exclaim ! reviewer Vincent Pollard noted how Vol . 3 " organically and coherently blends Stetson 's avant @-@ garde playing and dark , complex themes with accessible and compelling compositions , " while MusicOMH commented that Stetson was " finding guttural , fuzzy , violent sounds from his saxophone ... but also finding a disarming warmth where necessary . " In his review for No Ripcord , Stephen Wragg stated that " there ’ s such a polyphonic richness to these recordings that it sounds , at times , like five people are present " and noted that the techniques employed in the recording of the album " creates this heady , vertiginous rush – adrenaline @-@ inducing in its deftness ; and that ’ s an effect that strikes me as incredibly difficult to recreate in music . " Spin 's Richard Gehr suggested that the music was " densely <unk> , often claustrophobic , and reeks of fear and flight " but that it " offers at least a slight sense of salvation , " and concluded that the final album in the trilogy was " music of the moment , a work of granular epiphanies that accrete , finally , into a magnificent whole . " 
 = = Release = = 
 At the announcement of the album in January 2013 , the track " High Above a Grey Green Sea " was made available for streaming on the Constellation Records Soundcloud website . In March , four more tracks from the album ( " And in Truth " , " Hunted " , " Who the Waves Are Roaring For " and " Part of Me Apart From You " ) were able to be streamed following their premiere on the Belgian radio station Radio Scorpio . A short film made to accompany the tracks " In Mirrors " and " And in Truth " was released on 5 April 2013 , directed by Kurtis Hough , Dan <unk> and Tabb <unk> . 
 New History Warfare Vol . 3 : To See More Light was released on 29 April 2013 in Europe and the following day in North America . The album was released on compact disc , 180g vinyl and digital download . Following the release of the album , a promotional video was made for the track " Who the Waves Are Roaring For " , created by videographers Isaac Gale and David Jensen . 
 In July 2013 , New History Warfare Vol . 3 : To See More Light was shortlisted for the Polaris Music Prize , which was Stetson 's second nomination for the award after Vol . 2 : Judges in 2011 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , New History Warfare Vol . 3 : To See More Light received critical acclaim . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews and ratings from mainstream critics , the album has received a metascore of 81 , based on 18 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim . " 
 AllMusic rated New History Warfare Vol . 3 : To See More Light four stars out of five with reviewer Fred Thomas commenting that " Stetson explores scorched landscapes and heavenly scenes alike with his stylized playing . " In his review for Consequence of Sound , Jeremy D. Larson lauded Stetson 's album as " his strongest and most cohesive collection in his career " and suggested that " you ’ ve never heard anything like it " , giving a mark of four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . Vol . 3 received an eight out of ten review from Drowned in Sound , where Alexander Tudor found the album to be " essential listening and another triumph . " Exclaim ! magazine 's Vincent Pollard awarded the album a perfect ten out of ten score , praising its " accessible and compelling compositions " and dubbing it a " masterpiece . " Angus Finlayson of FACT magazine was more critical , rating the album three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five and commenting that Vernon 's vocals " run the risk of taming Stetson ’ s playing . " 
 A favorable review from musicOMH 's Daniel Paton described Vol . 3 's " unpredictable and challenging but frequently awe @-@ inspiring terrain " and gave the album four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . No Ripcord reviewer Stephen Wragg was less impressed , rating it a seven out of ten , but offered that the album was " stacked with jaw @-@ dropping moments , underpinned by seismic emotional shifts . " Mark Richardson , writing for Pitchfork Media , awarded Vol . 3 8 @.@ 1 out of 10 @.@ 0 and noted Stetson ’ s " impressive achievement " before concluding that " the result is a sound that could come only from one person on earth . " Spin magazine 's Richard Gehr described the music as " peerless at conveying isolation , loneliness , and alienation " and scored the album eight out of ten . Rob Young of The Wire praised the album 's " extraordinary aural illusionism " , noting that Stetson 's playing technique finds " timbres in the saxophone 's tubing that are rarely brought out . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Colin Stetson except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Performers 
 Colin Stetson – alto saxophone , tenor saxophone , bass saxophone , vocals , production 
 Justin Vernon – vocals 
 Recording personnel 
 Mell Dettmer – mastering 
 Ben Frost – mixing , production 
 Jon <unk> – mixing 
 Vid Cousins – recording 
 Marcus Paquin – recording 
 BJ Burton – recording 
 Brian Joseph – recording 
 Mark Lawson – engineering , recording 
 Additional personnel 
 Tracy Maurice – artwork , design 
 Matt <unk> – artwork , design 
 = Helen Lee ( director ) = 
 Helen Lee ( Korean : <unk> <unk> ; born circa 1965 ) is a Korean @-@ Canadian film director . Born in Seoul , South Korea , she emigrated to Canada at the age of four and grew up in Scarborough , Ontario . Interested in film at a young age , she took film studies at the University of Toronto and , later , New York University . While in university she was influenced by gender and minority theories , as reflected in her first film , the short Sally 's Beauty Spot ( 1990 ) . While continuing her studies she produced two more films before taking a five @-@ year hiatus to live in Korea beginning in 1995 . After her return , she released another short film and her feature film debut , The Art of Woo ( 2001 ) . She continues to produce short films , although at a reduced rate . Lee 's films often deal with gender and racial issues , reflecting the state of East Asians in modern society ; a common theme in her work is sexuality , with several films featuring interracial relationships . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Helen Lee was born in Seoul , South Korea , around 1965 , but came to Canada when she was four , a year after her parents . She was raised in Scarborough , Ontario , having moved there in the mid @-@ 1970s . As a child , she became interested in black @-@ and @-@ white films from the Golden Age of Hollywood . She later wrote that the 1960 film The World of Suzie Wong spoke to her racial identity as an Asian Canadian , an experience she found to have influenced her filmmaking ; excerpts from the film were included in her first short . 
 Lee began her tertiary studies at the University of Western Ontario , taking business , before transferring to the University of Toronto ; there she majored in English literature and film studies . By 1989 she was attending New York University ( NYU ) , studying under Homi K. Bhabha , Faye Ginsburg , and Mick Taussig , with a scholarship . During this period she was influenced by Trinh T. Minh @-@ ha 's paradigms on women and ethnicity , as expressed in the 1989 book Woman , Native , Other : Writing <unk> and Feminism ; these were later expressed in Lee 's first film . She later described Minh @-@ ha as at one point being her " ultimate role model " . 
 = = Early film career = = 
 Lee made Sally 's Beauty Spot , a 12 @-@ minute long short film focusing on a mole on her sister 's right breast , for a film editing class at NYU in 1990 . For the film she used a second @-@ hand Bolex camera and edited it with a Steenbeck editing suite . She later recalled that she recorded the film while in her pyjamas . The production cost a total of $ 4 @,@ 000 . Fellow Canadian filmmaker David Weaver described it as sexualizing Sally 's body , something that Lee had not intended . The film was first screened at the Festival of Festivals in Toronto . After graduation , Lee spent time as a curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art before returning to Canada . 
 In 1992 Lee made the forty @-@ minute long film My Niagara , which featured scenes shot in Japan that were reminiscent of home movies ; the effect was obtained by filming in Super 8 Kodachrome , then transferring it to 16 mm film . Filmed in Etobicoke , Ontario , at the childhood home of co @-@ writer Kerri Sakamoto , the film detailed a young Asian @-@ Canadian woman living alone with her father after the death of her mother . Scenes were also shot at the R. C. Harris Water Treatment Plant in Toronto . <unk> Duran in <unk> writes that the film , which had a budget of $ 80 @,@ 000 , had a theme of cultural displacement , and Lee states that My Niagara was well received . That year she also released the three @-@ minute To Sir With Love . 
 After My Niagara , Lee took a position as a director observer on the set of Atom Egoyan 's Exotica , while led her to enrol with the Canadian Film Centre ( CFC ) . Meanwhile , she worked as a film and music critic for Now and extensively wrote about films for other publications . She took further studies at the Banff Centre for the Arts in Banff , Alberta , before returning to the CFC as a director residency . She continued to be involved with the American company Women Make Movies , a distributor of feminist media , which she had become involved with while at NYU . 
 In 1995 Lee released the 26 @-@ minute long Prey , starring Adam Beach and Sandra Oh ; she described the film as a " cross @-@ cultural comedy " . The film , which followed a young Korean woman who falls in love with a drifter , was a collaboration with Cameron Bailey and dealt with themes of racial differences , immigration , and social class . The Canadian film critic and experimental filmmaker Mike Hoolboom compared the themes to those of the 1989 Hollywood film Do the Right Thing , writing that had short films been respected it would have been a watershed mark . That year she also released the three @-@ minute M. <unk> Philip . She then took a five @-@ year hiatus , which she spent in Korea . 
 = = Post Korea = = 
 In 2000 Lee released the 22 @-@ minute short Subrosa , following a woman 's search for her mother in Seoul . Intended as a prequel for an undeveloped film entitled Priceless , the film was shot in several formats with a fifteen @-@ person crew , hurriedly recording scenes in public locations . It extensively used character @-@ centred shots , leading to what Lee described as an organic understanding of the character . It also featured on @-@ screen sexual intercourse , framed in a medium shot , which Lee intended as a sign and not simply a sex scene . Although Priceless , meant as a sequel to Subrosa , went through more than thirty drafts , it was ultimately cancelled despite interest from Alliance Atlantis and Citytv . 
 Anita Lee , co @-@ producer of Priceless , then suggested that Helen Lee make The Art of Woo , a romantic comedy sponsored by the Canadian Film Centre ; it was Lee 's feature film debut . Starring Adam Beach and Sook Yin Lee , the film followed a Korean @-@ Canadian art dealer who finds herself interested in a native artist but considers him unworthy as he is poor . Released in 2001 , the film was " slashed " by critics . For example , Jonathan Crow , writing for the <unk> Corporation , found the film " less fun and less accomplished than a third grade theater production " . However , its soundtrack – by Ron Sexsmith and Kurt <unk> – won a Genie Award for Best Achievement in Music – Original Song . That year she also released the three @-@ minute Star . 
 After The Art of Woo , Lee announced that intended to adapt Kerri Sakamoto 's novel The Electrical Field and a " romantic thriller " . However , neither film has yet been released . In 2002 she showed the video installation <unk> at the <unk> Biennale in Germany . She married around 2008 , and that same year released the short Hers at Last , about the interactions of two women in Korea . The short was premiered at the Seoul International Women 's Film Festival as part of an omnibus entitled Ten Ten , in celebration of the festival 's tenth anniversary . The omnibus also featured works by fellow directors Byun Young @-@ <unk> and Lee Su @-@ yeon . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Race , gender issues , and racial identity often feature in Lee 's works . The main characters , up through The Art of Woo , are Asian women that are " caught up in some cross cultural encounter " . She writes that she attempts to address these issues through her films in non @-@ didactic ways , such that the " racial melancholia ... are like seepages in the more obvious dramatic or comedic content " . She contrasts her films with the 1993 drama The Joy Luck Club , which she considers a film with obvious , easily consumable , ethnic content . She considers the stereotype of Asian women as <unk> , either demure " lotus blossoms " or vociferous " dragon ladies " , to be a degenerative one which is " sometimes extremely offensive " , but one that has " a cultural memory that demands [ the viewer 's ] attention . " 
 Lee 's works often include elements of sexuality in their characterizations . She writes that the main characters of My Niagara and Subrosa reach a greater understanding of themselves and their relationships after sexual encounters . She considers sex as " never the culmination or end point " , but a signifier for intimacy . As such , she feels that the more intimate aspects of sex are best conveyed wordlessly , through how it is presented , although she concedes that " talky sex " can be appropriate for romantic comedies . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 All of the below are short films unless noted . 
 Sally 's Beauty Spot ( 1990 ) 
 My Niagara ( 1992 ) 
 Prey ( 1995 ) 
 Subrosa ( 2000 ) 
 The Art of Woo ( 2001 ; feature film debut ) 
 Hers at Last ( 2008 ) 
 = McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4 Phantom II in Australian service = 
 The Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) operated 24 McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4E Phantom II fighter @-@ bomber aircraft in the ground attack role between 1970 and 1973 . The Phantoms were leased from the United States Air Force ( USAF ) as an interim measure owing to delays in the delivery of the RAAF 's 24 General Dynamics F @-@ 111C bombers . The F @-@ 4Es were considered successful in this role , but the government did not agree to a proposal from the RAAF to retain the aircraft after the F @-@ 111s entered service in 1973 . 
 The F @-@ 4C variant of the Phantom II was among the aircraft evaluated by the RAAF in 1963 as part of the project to replace its English Electric Canberra bombers . The F @-@ 111 was selected , but when that project was delayed in the late 1960s due to long @-@ running technical faults with the aircraft , the RAAF determined that the F @-@ 4E Phantom II would be the best alternative . As a result of continued problems with the F @-@ 111s , the Australian and United States Governments negotiated an agreement in 1970 whereby the RAAF leased 24 F @-@ 4Es and their support equipment from the USAF . 
 The RAAF 's F @-@ 4Es entered service in September 1970 , and proved to be highly effective . Used in the air @-@ to @-@ ground role , they prepared aircrew to operate the sophisticated F @-@ 111s , and the intensive training program undertaken using the aircraft improved the RAAF 's professional standards . One of the Phantoms was destroyed in a flying accident in June 1971 , and another was repaired by the RAAF after it sustained heavy damage during a crash landing . The 23 surviving aircraft were returned to the USAF in two batches during October 1972 and June 1973 . 
 = = Acquisition = = 
 The McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4C Phantom II was one of the aircraft types evaluated by the RAAF as a potential replacement for its aging English Electric Canberra bombers in the early 1960s . In mid @-@ 1963 a team of senior RAAF officers headed by the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal Valston Hancock , travelled to the United States to evaluate the General Dynamics F @-@ 111 ( then known as the " TFX " ) , North American A @-@ 5 Vigilante and F @-@ 4C Phantom II strike aircraft . While in the United States , the team also inspected the Boeing KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker , which was considered necessary to support these aircraft . In addition , the RAAF officers travelled to the United Kingdom and France to evaluate the BAC TSR @-@ 2 and Dassault Mirage IV , respectively . In its final report , the team rejected the F @-@ 4C on the grounds that the aircraft lacked the range , performance at low altitude and reconnaissance capability that the RAAF required . The F @-@ 111 was considered to be the most suitable aircraft of those considered , but the team proposed that the RAAF acquire 36 Vigilantes as they also met the force 's requirements and could be delivered within a shorter time frame . The Australian Government rejected this advice , and decided to purchase 24 F @-@ 111s . At the time the order was placed in late 1963 these aircraft were scheduled to be delivered in 1967 ; the delivery date was pushed back to 1968 after Australia decided to order the unique F @-@ 111C variant . In late 1963 the United States Government offered to lend Australia 24 Boeing B @-@ 47 Stratojet bombers until the F @-@ 111s were delivered . The RAAF 's Air Board opposed acquiring these aircraft on the grounds that they were obsolete and would be expensive to operate . Instead , it recommended to Cabinet that a package of F @-@ 4C strike aircraft , the RF @-@ 4C reconnaissance variant of this design , and KC @-@ 135 tankers be leased from the United States if an interim force was considered necessary . Cabinet considered the two options during 1964 , and rejected both of them . Between 1965 and 1970 six Australian pilots serving on exchange postings to the United States Air Force ( USAF ) flew Phantoms in combat during the Vietnam War . 
 The F @-@ 111 program experienced significant problems during the late 1960s . As a result of delays to the development of the RF @-@ 111 reconnaissance variant of the F @-@ 111 , of which Australia had ordered four , the RAAF considered purchasing eight RF @-@ 4C or RF @-@ 4E reconnaissance aircraft and two tankers in early 1968 . The Air Force and government eventually concluded that it was too early to make a decision on this matter , and no action was taken . The RAAF accepted all 24 F @-@ 111Cs at a ceremony held at Fort Worth , Texas , on 4 September 1968 . At this time the F @-@ 111 program was in crisis owing to technical problems with the design of the aircraft 's wing assembly , and all F @-@ 111s were grounded after an American F @-@ 111 crashed on 23 September . Subsequent testing revealed further problems with F @-@ 111 components not meeting their intended lifespan , and the Australian aircraft were placed in storage at Fort Worth until these flaws could be rectified . The RAAF subsequently evaluated the F @-@ 4E Phantom II , Blackburn Buccaneer , LTV A @-@ 7 Corsair II and Grumman A @-@ 6 Intruder as possible replacements for the F @-@ 111 . Only the F @-@ 4E was considered to come close to meeting the RAAF 's requirements , though its relatively short range and lack of terrain @-@ following radar and electronic countermeasures were considered problematic . 
 By 1970 the F @-@ 111Cs were still not airworthy , and the Australian Government was under pressure to cancel the order or acquire an interim design . In April of that year Minister for Defence Malcolm Fraser signed an agreement with his American counterpart , Melvin R. Laird , which specified the conditions under which the Australian Government would accept the F @-@ 111s . As part of the negotiations leading to this agreement , Laird offered to lease Australia 24 F @-@ 4E Phantoms at a reduced price . The Cabinet agreed to Fraser 's recommendation that this offer be taken up , a move supported by the Air Board . The RAAF remained committed to the F @-@ 111C , however , and the Air Board issued a statement during May arguing that these aircraft would " meet the RAAF operational requirement more effectively than the F @-@ 4E by a decisive margin " . 
 An RAAF team headed by the Deputy Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal Charles Read , was sent to the United States in May 1970 to negotiate the lease arrangements . After considering the proposed deal , Read recommended that it go ahead ; according to RAAF historian Alan Stephens this decision " delighted RAAF senior officers and aircrews " . The Cabinet subsequently approved the lease of 24 Phantoms for two years at a total cost of $ US 41 @.@ 554 million ( including training , spare parts and technical advice ) and the formal agreement to do so was signed on 29 June 1970 . The USAF designated this project Peace Reef . The terms of the lease agreement allowed the Australian Government to purchase the Phantoms outright if the F @-@ 111C program was cancelled , but also allowed the USAF to demand the immediate return of the aircraft and their support equipment in the event of a national emergency . Laird provided Fraser with a written commitment that this option would not be exercised , and it was never publicised . Laird also promised that USAF tankers would be made available to support the Australian Phantoms during crises , subject to American national requirements and the terms of relevant agreements between the two countries . 
 = = Operational service = = 
 The RAAF 's Phantoms were delivered soon after the lease agreement was completed . Australian pilots and navigators from the two units that were to operate the aircraft , No. 1 and No. 6 Squadrons , began to arrive in the United States for conversion training in July 1970 . Most of this training was provided by the <unk> Tactical Training Squadron , 1st Tactical Fighter Wing , at MacDill Air Force Base in Florida , and involved 32 hours of flying . USAF personnel were also posted to RAAF Base Amberley in Queensland , where the F @-@ 4Es were to be based , to train Australian ground crew . The Australian Phantoms were diverted from USAF orders and were brand new . The RAAF accepted all 24 aircraft in September 1970 , and they were subsequently ferried to Amberley in four groups of six aircraft ; the first three groups arrived on 14 , 19 and 26 September , and the final group arrived on 3 October . The Phantom was allocated the RAAF serial number prefix " A69 " , but this was never applied to the aircraft , and they retained their USAF serials . 
 The Phantom represented a significant improvement to the RAAF 's ground attack capabilities . The F @-@ 4Es were more technologically advanced than the Canberra , as they could fly at supersonic speeds , were equipped with air @-@ to @-@ air radar and missiles , and had an inertial navigation system , ground @-@ attack computer and a cannon . The Phantoms were capable of operating in several roles ; the RAAF primarily used them as strike aircraft . This role was selected to prepare aircrew to operate F @-@ 111s , and most training exercises were focused on tasks that the F @-@ 111s would also be able to perform . 
 Aircrew training using the F @-@ 4Es began three days after the aircraft first arrived at Amberley . The aircraft were initially operated as a pool controlled by No. 82 Wing ( the parent headquarters for No. 1 and No. 6 Squadrons ) and were allocated between the two squadrons only after all the Phantoms , aircrew and ground crew had arrived in Australia . The training program gradually increased in complexity , with night flying beginning in October , practice @-@ bombing sorties commencing in late November and air @-@ to @-@ air sorties being flown from January 1971 . Ground attack missions were practiced from February 1971 , and in June that year the Phantoms began dropping live bombs during exercises . The introduction of several of the aircraft into service was delayed by an initial shortage of spare parts , but all were operational by the end of 1970 . 
 During their service with the RAAF , the Phantoms were operated alongside the RAAF 's Dassault Mirage III fighters and the Royal Australian Navy 's Douglas A @-@ 4 Skyhawk ground attack aircraft . In addition to routine training flights , the Phantoms participated in major air defence exercises and also flew practice sorties against warships . The F @-@ 4Es also took part in airshows , including four that formed part of the flying displays conducted in different parts of Australia to mark the RAAF 's 50th anniversary during March and April 1971 . 
 Maintenance of the Phantoms was undertaken by No. 482 Squadron and No. 3 Aircraft Depot , both of which were located at Amberley . In addition to routine servicing , these units modified the Phantoms ' AN / APQ @-@ 120 radars during early 1971 . In response to problems detected during maintenance , RAAF technical personnel checked all the aircraft for defects to their emergency flap system in September 1971 and used X @-@ ray testing to detect any cracks in their stabilators during early 1972 . 
 The RAAF 's Phantoms suffered several accidents . The first occurred on 19 October 1970 when the systems needed to power the brake skid and nosewheel steering on board Phantom A69 @-@ 7234 failed during flight . It was decided to use Amberley 's arresting equipment to slow the aircraft as it landed , but this system failed after A69 @-@ 7234 's tail hook engaged the wires , causing the Phantom to slide off the runway . The pilot only suffered minor injuries and the navigator was unhurt , but A69 @-@ 7234 was badly damaged . The aircraft was subsequently rebuilt by No. 3 Aircraft Depot and returned to service on 30 September 1971 ; at the time this was the most complex Phantom repair task to have been undertaken by military personnel in any of the countries operating the aircraft . The next serious accident occurred on the night of 16 June 1971 when A69 @-@ <unk> crashed into the sea during an exercise near Evans Head , New South Wales , resulting in the death of the aircraft 's pilot and navigator . The cost of this aircraft was written off against that of an Australian Lockheed P @-@ 3B Orion that had crashed in the United States during 1968 before being delivered to the RAAF . Other accidents involving the Phantom included A67 @-@ <unk> being over @-@ stressed in flight during February 1971 ( which led to its engines being sent back to the United States for repairs ) and A69 @-@ <unk> 's nosewheel collapsing during takeoff in January 1972 . 
 The RAAF was highly satisfied with the performance of the F @-@ 4Es , and they played an important role in preparing No. 82 Wing to operate the F @-@ 111 . Many personnel in the Air Force believed that it would have been very difficult for the wing to have transitioned directly from the Canberra to the much more complicated F @-@ 111 . In particular , the Phantoms gave RAAF personnel experience operating aircraft fitted with sophisticated avionics and capable of using a wide range of weapons , and the intensive training program undertaken by No. 82 Wing during this period significantly improved its professionalism . In his book Going Solo : The Royal Australian Air Force 1946 – 1971 , Alan Stephens also argued that the speed with which the Air Force 's aircrew and technical personnel adapted to operating Phantoms " illustrated the RAAF 's exceptional technical competence " . 
 = = Return to the USAF = = 
 Repairs to the RAAF 's F @-@ 111Cs were undertaken from late 1971 , and all 24 were accepted on 15 March 1973 . The RAAF considered retaining the Phantoms after the F @-@ 111s entered service , and the US Government offered to sell the 23 remaining aircraft to Australia for $ 54 million . Studies found that the upfront cost of keeping the F @-@ 4Es would be $ 77 million , and that one of the Mirage III squadrons would need to be disbanded to man the Phantom @-@ equipped units . Nevertheless , the Air Board recommended that the aircraft be retained , but a proposal to do so was rejected by the Cabinet in 1972 on advice from the Treasury . If the Phantoms had remained in service they would have been used to provide close air support for the Army . 
 The Phantoms began to be returned to the USAF in 1972 . No. 6 Squadron ceased operating the aircraft on 4 October 1972 . Six F @-@ 4Es departed for the United States on 25 October that year , followed by a further five in early November . The first six F @-@ 111s arrived at Amberley on 1 June 1973 , and six Phantoms left for the United States five days later . The final RAAF Phantom flight was made on 20 June , and four of the aircraft departed the next day . The last two Phantoms left Amberley on 21 June . All but two of the former RAAF Phantoms were subsequently converted to specialist Wild Weasel aircraft . 
 A former USAF F @-@ 4E is on display at the RAAF Museum in Melbourne . This aircraft , which did not serve with the RAAF , was presented to the RAAF by the National Museum of the United States Air Force in 1990 , and is painted as one of the Phantoms operated by No. 82 Wing . 
 = Sandakan = 
 Sandakan ( Malaysian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] , Jawi : <unk> , Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Shān <unk> <unk> ) formerly known at various times as Elopura , is the second @-@ largest town in Sabah after Kota Kinabalu City , on the north @-@ eastern coast of Borneo in Malaysia . It is located on the east coast of the island in the administrative centre of Sandakan Division and was the former capital of British North Borneo . The town has an estimated population of 157 @,@ 330 while the surrounding municipal area has a total population of 396 @,@ 290 . 
 Before the founding of Sandakan , Sulu Archipelago was the source of dispute between Spain and the Sultanate of Sulu for economic dominance in the region . By 1864 , Spain had blockaded the Sultanate possessions in the Sulu Archipelago . The Sultanate of Sulu awarded a German consular service ex @-@ member a piece of land in the Sandakan Bay to seek protection from Germany . In 1878 , the Sultanate sold north @-@ eastern Borneo to an Austro @-@ Hungarian consul who later left the territory to a British colonial merchant . The German presence over the area raised concern among the British . As a result , a protocol was signed between the British , German and the Spanish to recognise Spanish sovereignty over the Sulu Archipelago , in return for the Spanish not intervening in British affairs in northern Borneo . 
 Sandakan began to prosper when the British North Borneo Company ( BNBC ) started to build a new settlement in 1879 , developing it into an active commercial and trading centre as well as making it the main administrative centre for North Borneo . The British also encouraged the migration of the Chinese from British Hong Kong to develop the economy of Sandakan . However , the prosperity halted when the Japanese occupied the area . As the war continued and Allied bombing started in 1944 , the town was totally destroyed . Unable to fund the costs of the reconstruction , the administrative powers of North Borneo were handed over to the Crown Colony government . Subsequently , the administrative capital of North Borneo was moved to Jesselton . As part of the 1948 – 1955 Colonial Office Reconstruction and Development Plan , the crown colony government began to develop the fishing industry in Sandakan . Today , Sandakan contains illegal immigrants from the southern Philippines . 
 Sandakan is one of the main ports for oil , tobacco , coffee , sago , and timber exports . Other economic activities include fishing , ship building , eco @-@ tourism , and manufacturing . Among the tourist attractions in Sandakan are Sandakan Heritage Museum , Sandakan Cultural Festival , Sandakan War Memorial , Sepilok Orang Utan Sanctuary , Turtle Islands National Park , and Gomantong Caves . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 A first European settlement was built by a Scottish arms smuggler from Glasgow named William Clark Cowie who named the settlement " Sandakan " , ( which in the Suluk language means " The place that was pawned " ) . It was soon renamed Kampong German ( Kampung <unk> ) , due to the presence of several German bases there . When another new settlement was built shortly after the previous Cowie settlement had been destroyed by a fire , it was called as Elopura , meaning " beautiful town " . The name was given by the British North Borneo Company but the locals persisted to use the old name and later it was changed back to Sandakan . Besides Elopura , it was also nicknamed Little Hong Kong due to a strong presence of ethnic Chinese migration from Hong Kong ( mainly Cantonese and Hakka ) . It was Pryer who gave the settlement the name Elopura meaning " beautiful town " . Several years later the settlement was again renamed Sandakan . The name Elopura , however , is still used for some local government functions of the Sabah State Legislative Assembly , including elections . The town is usually referred as " Sandakan " nowadays instead of " Elopura " or " Little Hong Kong " . However , efforts have been made to develop Sandakan so that the town is fitting to have the name of " Little Hong Kong " again . 
 = = History = = 
 Like most of Borneo , this area was once under the control of the Bruneian Empire in the 15th century before been ceded to the Sultanate of Sulu between the 1600s and 1700s as a gift for helping the Bruneian forces during the Brunei Civil War . In 1855 , when Spanish power began to expand in the Philippine archipelago , they began to restrict the trade of foreign nations with Sulu by establishing a port in Zamboanga and issuing a ruling which declared that ships wanting to engage in trade with the Sulu Archipelago must first visit the Spanish port . In 1860 , the Sultanate of Sulu became important to the British as their archipelago could allow the British to dominate trade routes from Singapore to Mainland China . But in 1864 , William Frederick Schuck , a German ex @-@ member for the German consular service arrived in Sulu and met Sultan Jamal ul @-@ Azam , who encouraged him to remain in Jolo . Schuck associated himself with the Singapore @-@ German trading firm of Schomburg and began working in the interest of the Sultan and Datu <unk> , who was an overlord in the island of Tawi @-@ Tawi . While he continued his voyage to Celebes , he decided to open his first headquarters at Jolo . Large quantities of arms , opium , textiles and tobacco from Singapore were shipped to Tawi @-@ Tawi in exchange for slaves from the Sultanate . 
 In November 1871 , Spanish gunboats bombarded Samal villages in Tawi @-@ Tawi islands and blockaded Jolo . As war in the waters of Sulu began to escalate , the Sultanate came to rely on Singapore 's market for assistance . When the Sultanate increased their close trade relations with the British trading ports of Labuan and Singapore , this forced the Spanish to take another major step to conquer the Sulu Archipelago . The arrival of German warship Nymph at the Sulu Sea in 1872 to investigate the Sulu @-@ Spanish conflict made the Sultanate believe Schuck was connected with the German government , thus the Sultanate granted Schuck an area of land in the Sandakan Bay to establish a trading port to monopolise the rattan trade in the northeast coast where Schuck could operate freely without the Spanish blockade . The intervention of Germans on the Sulu issue caught the British ' attention and made them suspicious , especially when the Sultanate had asked for protection from them . Schuck then established warehouses and residences in the Sandakan Bay , along with the arrival of two steamers under the German flag and it served as a base for the running of gunpowder and firearms . When another German warship Hertha visited Sandakan Bay , its commander described the activity in Kampung <unk> : 
 ... during our stay , two small steamers under German flag , ostensibly coming from Labuan , ran in ; also third , of about the same size , with a flag of all yellow , the property and flag , as I was told of the Datu Alum . Judging from the stores in the settlement , cotton goods , arms and especially firearms , appears to be the articles of trade with the natives of Sulu . 
 In 1878 , the Sultanate of Sulu sold their land in north @-@ eastern Borneo to an Austro @-@ Hungarian consul named Baron von Overbeck . After efforts by Overbeck to sell northern Borneo to the German Empire , Austria @-@ Hungary and the Kingdom of Italy for use as a penal colony were unsuccessful , he withdrew in 1880 . This left Alfred Dent to manage and establish the British North Borneo Company ( BNBC ) , as Sandakan became the capital of North Borneo in 1884 . 
 As the capital of North Borneo , Sandakan become an active commercial and trading centre . The main trading partners were Hong Kong and Singapore . Many Hong Kong traders eventually settled in Sandakan and in time the town was called the ' Little Hong Kong of North Borneo ' . The Cowie settlement was accidentally burnt down on 15 June 1879 and was never thereafter rebuilt . The first British Resident , William B. Pryer then moved the administration to a new settlement on 21 June 1879 to a residence in what is today known as <unk> Sim Sim near Sandakan Bay . 
 During Pryer 's tenure of being the first resident of Sandakan , one of his first tasks was to establish law and order . But since the local natives , although cowed by the guns of the British Navy , considered the British as transgressors in their land , they were hostile towards the authority of the British North Borneo Company . Hence , Pryer had to import his police from India and Singapore . His first contingent of police was made up of Indian Sikhs with a large body stature . The Indian police were probably from the Sepoy Company in India and were generally called ' <unk> ' by the locals . 
 Meanwhile , the Spanish continued to strengthen their blockade of trade activities in the Sulu Archipelago , resulting in the blockade 's opposition by Germans when many of their trading ships were seized by Spain . Both Berlin and London stated the archipelago should remain open to world trade route . Soon , the British began to co @-@ operate with German when rumours about the seizure of their trading ship by the Spanish began arriving to Great Britain which lead the British to oppose the Spanish action . British and Germans then refused to recognise the Spanish sovereignty over Sulu . But with strong opposition from Germans over the illegal seizures of their ships and the British fear of the German presence ( which was stronger than the Spanish during the time ) , a protocol known as Madrid Protocol was then signed in Madrid to secure Spanish sovereignty over the archipelago , making the Spanish free to wage any war with the Sultanate of Sulu without the fear of other foreign western powers intervening and as a return the Spanish would not intervene in the affairs of British in northern Borneo . 
 The prosperity of Sandakan as the capital of North Borneo was however ended when the Japanese occupied the town on 19 January 1942 . During their occupation , the Japanese restored the town 's previous name , Elopura and established a prisoner of war camp to hold their captive enemies . Allied planes started to raid Sandakan in September 1944 . As the Japanese feared further retaliation from the Allied forces , they began to move all prisoners and forced them to march to Ranau . Thousands of British and Australian soldiers lost their lives during this forced march in addition to Javanese labourers from the Dutch East Indies . Only six Australian soldiers survived from this camp , all after escaping . Sandakan was completely destroyed both by bombing from Allied forces and by the Japanese occupation . 
 At the end of the war , the British North Borneo Company returned to administer the town but were unable to finance the costs of reconstruction . They gave control of North Borneo to the British Crown on 18 July 1946 . The new colonial government chose to move the capital of North Borneo to Jesselton instead of rebuilding it as the cost of reconstruction was higher due to the damage . Although Sandakan was no longer the administrative capital , it still remained as the " economic capital " with its port activities related to the export of timber and other agricultural products in the east coast . To improve the facilities , the Crown Colony administration designed a plan , later known as the " Colonial Office Reconstruction and Development Plan for North Borneo : 1948 – 1955 ” . This plan established the Sandakan Fisheries Department on April 1948 . As a first step towards the development of Sandakan 's fishing industry , the Crown Colony devised the " Young Working Plan " through the " Colonial Development and Welfare Scheme " . Through this plan , the British administration were given the responsibility to import basic materials from Hong Kong for fishermen and distribute the materials at a price lower than the one offered by the capitalists . As a result , Hong Kong <unk> ( bosses ) were involved with the fishing industry in Sandakan . 
 = = Government and International relations = = 
 The town has twin town arrangements with Burwood , Australia and Zamboanga , Philippines . 
 There are three members of parliament ( MPs ) representing the three parliamentary constituencies in the district : <unk> ( <unk> ) , Batu Sapi ( <unk> ) , and Sandakan ( <unk> ) . 
 The town is administered by the Sandakan Municipal Council ( Majlis Perbandaran Sandakan ) . The current President of Sandakan Municipal Council is Datuk Ir . James Wong , who took over from Mr. Yeo Boon Hai in 2009 . The area under the jurisdiction of the Sandakan District covers the town area ( 46 square miles ) , half @-@ town area ( 56 square miles ) , rural areas and islands ( 773 square miles ) with all the total area are 875 square miles . 
 = = = Security = = = 
 Today , Sandakan is one of the six districts that is involved in the eastern Sabah sea curfew that have been enforced since 19 July 2014 by the Malaysian government to repel attacks from militant groups in the Southern Philippines . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Sandakan is located on the eastern coast of Sabah facing the Sulu Sea , with the town is known as one of the port towns in Malaysia . The town is located approximately 1 @,@ 900 kilometres from the Malaysia 's capital Kuala Lumpur , 28 kilometres from the international border with the Philippines and 319 kilometres from the capital of Sabah . The district itself is surrounded by <unk> ( known as <unk> @-@ <unk> District before ) and Kinabatangan district . Not far from the town , there are the three Malaysian Turtle Islands , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> <unk> . The nearest islands to the town are Berhala , Duyong , <unk> Darat , <unk> Laut , and Bai island . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Sandakan has a tropical rainforest climate under the Köppen climate classification . The climate is relatively hot and wet with average shade temperature about 32 ° C , with around 32 ° C at noon falling to around 27 ° C at night . The town sees precipitation throughout the year , with a tendency for October to February to be the wettest months , while April is the driest month . Its mean rainfall varies from <unk> mm to <unk> mm . 
 = = Demography = = 
 = = = Ethnicity and religion = = = 
 According to the Malaysian Census in 2010 , the whole town municipality 's area has a total population of 396 @,@ 290 . Non @-@ Malaysian citizens form the majority of the town population with 144 @,@ 840 people followed by other Bumiputras ( 100 @,@ 245 ) , Chinese ( 63 @,@ 201 ) , Bajau / Suluk ( 38 @,@ 897 ) , Malay ( 22 @,@ 244 ) , Kadazan @-@ Dusun ( 16 @,@ 616 ) , Indian ( 974 ) , Murut ( 519 ) and others ( 8 @,@ 754 ) . 
