 Most of the non @-@ Malaysian citizens are from the southern Philippines . The Chinese , like other places in Sabah , are mostly Cantonese and Hakka who arrived during the British period and had their original settlements before in the town which is now known as the Chinese Farm River Village . The Bajau , Suluk and Malays are majority Muslims , Kadazan @-@ Dusuns and <unk> mainly practice Christianity with some of them having become Muslims while the Chinese are mainly Buddhists , Taoist and some Christians . There is also a small number of Hindus , Sikhs , Animists , and secularists . 
 The large group of non @-@ citizens have been identified as a majority Muslims and there is some Christian Filipinos women who converted to Islam to marry Muslim Filipinos here . Like in Kota Kinabalu , the first wave of these immigrants arrived in the late 15th century during the Spanish colonisation , while the others arriving in the early 1970s because of the troubles in southern Philippines . They consist of migrant workers with many of them being naturalised as Malaysian citizens , however there are still many who live without proper documentation as illegal immigrants in the town with their own illegal settlement . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 Like the national language , the people of Sandakan mainly speak Malay , with a distinct Sabahan creole . The Malay language in Sandakan are different from the Malay language in the west coast which resembles Brunei Malay . In Sandakan , this language has been influenced by many words from the Suluk language . As Sandakan had also been dominated by the Hakka and Cantonese Chinese , Hakka and Cantonese widely spoken and taught as official language in the school back then . While for the east coast Bajau , their language has similarities with the Sama language in the Philippines and also borrowed many words from the Suluk language which is different from the west coast Bajau who had been influenced by the <unk> languages of Brunei Malay . 
 = = Economy = = 
 During the British period , Sandakan grew quickly as one of the largest British settlements on the east coast of North Borneo including having been the former capital of the territory . It grew rapidly due to the export activities as a port town . The port is important for palm oil , tobacco , cocoa , coffee , manila hemp and sago exports . In the mid @-@ 1930s , the export of tropical timber from Sandakan recorded a level of 180 @,@ 000 cubic metres which made the town as the world 's largest exporter of hardwood . Many Sandakan wood logs are now found in Beijing 's Temple of Heaven . Sandakan also enjoyed modern developments such as telegraph service to London and paved streets before Hong Kong and Singapore . 
 The overseas Chinese have contributed to the development of the town since their immigration in the late 19th century . The immigrants to Sandakan were farmers and labourers while some of them worked as businessmen and entrepreneurs . In the modern days , Sandakan have been poised to become one of Sabah business hubs . The town itself is one of Sabah 's major port , other than in Kota Kinabalu , Sepanggar Bay , Tawau , Lahad Datu , Kudat , Semporna and Kunak . Sandakan district is known for its eco @-@ tourism centres , such as the orangutan rehabilitation station in Sepilok Rehabilitation Centre , the Turtle Islands Park , the Kinabatangan River and the Gomantong Caves which are famous for their edible bird 's nest . Due to Sandakan geographical proximity to Southern Philippines , there is also a barter trade connection and Sandakan is considered as a transit point for food entering the Southern Philippines . The state government has been assisting traders to improve their trading system and providing infrastructure facilities . 
 Sandakan main industrial zones are basically based on three areas such as the <unk> area known for its oil depots , edible oil refinery and glue factories . In Batu Sapi , a shipyard , fertiliser oxygen gas and wood @-@ based factories are situated . The main highway , Batu Sapi Road , had been upgraded by 2014 . A grand specialised industrial park , Majulah Industrial Centre have also started operating in 2015 . The proposed <unk> industrial area consists of 1 @,@ 950 hectares ( 4 @,@ 833 acres ) is originally an agricultural area and the area is now in the process to be re @-@ zoning into an industrial area . 2 @,@ 531 acres will be for wood @-@ based industries while another 2 @,@ 302 will be used for general industries . At present , 55 wood @-@ based factories have been approved , of which 35 has been into operation . While another total of 340 hectares area for general industries and 30 hectares for service industries are located in various parts of Sandakan . 
 But in recent years , many businessmen have shifted their operations away from the town centre to other suburbs due to a large presence of illegal immigrants from Mindanao islands in the Philippines which has caused trouble , mostly crime such as theft and vandalism on public facility and also solid waste pollution in marine and coastal areas . But later in January 2003 , an urban renewal project , was launched to revive the town centre as a commercial hub in Sandakan and since 2013 , the Government of Malaysia has launched a major crackdown on illegal immigrants . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 All the internal roads linking different parts of the town are generally state roads constructed and maintained by the state 's Public Works Department , while the local council ( Sandakan Municipal Council ) oversees the housing estates roads . Currently , most roads in Sandakan are undergoing major upgrades due to issues like the lack of road networks and overloading . There is only one federal arterial road which links Sandakan to the west coast of Sabah , the Federal Route 22 , while other roads including the internal roads are called state roads . Most major internal roads are dual @-@ carriageways . The only highway route from Tawau connects : Sandakan – Telupid – Ranau – Kundasang – Tamparuli – Tuaran – Kota Kinabalu , as well Lahad Datu – Kunak – Semporna – Tawau ( part of the Pan Borneo Highway ) 
 Regular bus services with minivans and taxis also can be found . There are three bus terminals operating in the town such as the Buses to Sepilok , Local Bus Terminal and the Long Distance Bus Terminal . The long @-@ distance bus terminal is located about 4 km north of the town while the local bus connects with the centre of the town . 
 Sandakan Airport ( SA ) ( ICAO Code : <unk> ) provides flights linking the town to other domestic destinations . To boost the twin town relationship with Zamboanga City and for the ASEAN spirit in the BIMP @-@ EAGA region , there is an international route from Sandakan to Zamboanga International Airport . Local destinations for the airport including Kota Kinabalu , Kuching , Kuala Lumpur and many others . It is also one of the destinations for MASWings , which serves flights to other smaller towns or rural areas in East Malaysia . As of 2014 , the airport is being upgraded and expanded to accommodate additional travellers . 
 There is a ferry terminal which connects the town with some parts in the Southern Philippines such as Zamboanga City , the Sulu Archipelago and Tawi @-@ Tawi . The state government have tried to proposed a new ferry terminal in the town to attract more tourist particularly from the Philippines and also from Indonesia . But the proposal was turned down due to the trouble in the southern Philippines which could spread to the state and there is a call from the former Chief Minister of Sabah and the Current President of Sabah Progressive Party Yong Teck Lee to suspend the ferry service to counter the high level of people migration from the Philippines which now has become the major problem to Sabah as they are overstaying in the state and becoming an illegal immigrants . 
 = = Public services = = 
 The current court complex is located along Lebuh Empat . It contains the High Court , Sessions Court , and the Magistrate Court . Another court for the Sharia law was also located in the town . 
 The district police headquarters is also located at Lebuh Empat , along with the town police station located not far from the court beside the Wisma Sandakan . Other police station can be found throughout the district such as in <unk> , Ulu Dusun and in <unk> . Police substations ( Pondok Polis ) are found in <unk> . Manila , Suan Lamba , <unk> and Kim Fong <unk> areas , and the Sandakan Prison is located in the town centre . 
 There are one public hospital , eight public health clinics , one child and mother health clinic , eight village clinics , three mobile clinics and two 1Malaysia clinics in Sandakan . The Duchess of Kent Hospital , which is located along North Street ( Jalan Utara ) , is the main and second largest public hospital in Sabah after the Queen Elizabeth Hospital with 400 beds . Build in 1951 , it is also become the first modern and one of the important hospital in Sabah . 
 In 2008 , a private hospital was proposed to be built at the North Street . The Fook <unk> Medical Centre would be the largest private hospital in Sabah with 276 beds surpassing the Sabah Medical Centre with 134 beds in Kota Kinabalu once it finished in 2011 . The Sandakan Regional Library is located in the town and is one of three regional libraries in Sabah , the other in Keningau and Tawau . All these libraries are operated by the Sabah State Library department . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are many government or state schools in and around the town . The first primary school in the town was St. Mary Town Primary School which was opened by Rev. Fr . A. <unk> who became the first headmaster along with Rev. Fr . <unk> , who is a Mill Hill 's priests . It is an all boys Catholic Mission School and have been opened since 24 July 1883 , making it as the oldest school in Borneo . For the secondary schools , there are Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Elopura , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Elopura II , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Batu Sapi , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Datu Pengiran <unk> , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Gum @-@ Gum , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan <unk> , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Taman Fajar , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Perempuan , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Paris , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Merpati , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan <unk> , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan <unk> , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Sandakan , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Sandakan II , Sekolah Menengah Tiong Hua , Sekolah Menengah Cecilia Convent , Sekolah Menengah St. Mary , Sekolah Menengah St. Michael , Sekolah Menengah Sung Siew , Sekolah Menengah <unk> Sandakan and Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Agama Sandakan . One independent private school is also present in the town called the Yu Yuan Secondary School . 
 For higher / tertiary education , there are Sandakan Polytechnic , ILP Sandakan , <unk> Sandakan and Kinabalu Commercial College . Universities such as the University of Malaysia Sabah , Open University Malaysia and Universiti Putra Malaysia have a campus here . 
 = = Culture and leisure = = 
 Several cultural venues are located in Sandakan . The Sandakan Heritage Museum , situated at the Lebuh Empat Road , is the main museum of Sandakan . The museum is located on the right @-@ hand side of the ground and on the first floor of the Wisma Warisan Building which is next to the municipal building . Besides that , a cultural festival known as Sandakan Festival is celebrated once a year in the town , after having been introduced in 2000 by the Sandakan Municipal Council . 
 Another museum in Sandakan is the Agnes Keith House which is located on top of the hill along Istana Street . The house is known as the former home to Harry Keith and his wife Agnes Newton Keith . Other historical attractions include the Malaysia Fountain , Chartered Company Memorial , Chong Tain <unk> Memorial , North Borneo Scout Movement Memorial , Sandakan Japanese Cemetery , Sandakan Liberation Monument , Sandakan Massacre Memorial , Sandakan Memorial Park , Sandakan War Memorial and the William Pryer Memorial . The oldest religious buildings are the Parish of St. Michael 's and All Angels , the Sam Sing Kung Temple and the Jamek Mosque , which was opened by a Muslim cloth merchant from India , known as <unk> , in 1890 . 
 A number of leisure spots and conservation areas are available around Sandakan . The Sepilok Orang Utan Sanctuary is a place where orphaned or injured orangutans are brought to be rehabilitated to return to forest life . Established in 1964 , it is one of only four orangutan sanctuaries in the world . Other conservation areas are the Malaysian Turtle Islands where many turtles lay their eggs on the islands . They cover an area of 1 @,@ 740 hectares which includes the surrounding reefs and seas . The islands are also ideal for swimming , snorkelling and scuba diving . 
 Another attraction is the Gomantong Caves , which is home to hundreds of thousands of swifts who build their nests high on cave walls and roofs . Other than swifts , the caves are also inhabited by millions of bats . Furthermore , the Sandakan Orchid House has a collection of rare orchids . Along the <unk> Road from Sandakan , there is a crocodile farm which houses about 1 @,@ 000 crocodiles of various sizes . 
 The main shopping area in Sandakan is the Harbour Mall . Launched in 2003 , it is located in Sandakan 's new central business district and built on a bay of reclaimed land . It is part of the Sandakan Harbour Square and considered as the first modern shopping mall in the town . In 2014 , a new mall project with 341 units of store has been launched and will become the second main shopping destination for Sandakan once it gets finished . 
 Rugby is very popular in Sandakan . Eddie Butler , a former Welsh Rugby Union captain described it as the " Limerick of the tropics " . In 2008 , the Borneo Eagles @-@ Sabahans ( a team which included a few professional Fijians ) at the newly built Sandakan Rugby Club hosted a 10 @-@ a @-@ side tournament for the eighth and last time . In 2009 , the tournament was changed to seven @-@ a @-@ side . 
 Other than rugby , a sports complex containing a badminton court , swimming pool , weightlifting room , hockey stadium , football stadium , cricket field , boxing facility and field archery is available in the town . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Political 
 <unk> <unk> : Current Yang di @-@ Pertua Negeri of Sabah 
 Liew Vui Keong : Malaysian politician 
 Entertainment 
 Fung Bo Bo : Hong Kong actress 
 Sports 
 Alex Lim : Malaysian swimmer 
 David Johnny : Malaysian football player 
 Elvin Chia : Malaysian swimmer 
 <unk> Oto : Malaysian football player 
 <unk> Abdul Samad : Malaysian football player 
 = Connie Dion = 
 Joseph Conrad Étienne Dion ( August 11 , 1918 – November 7 , 2014 ) was a professional ice hockey player who played two seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Detroit Red Wings . One of thirteen children , Dion got his start as a goaltender with the Junior Verdun Maple Leafs in 1937 and had his first full season as a senior with the team the following year . After several seasons in the Quebec Senior and Professional Hockey Leagues , he was recruited by the Red Wings in 1943 as a potential replacement for Johnny Mowers , who had enlisted to fight in World War II . He spent two years with the team , earning a win @-@ loss @-@ tie record of 23 – 11 – 4 and taking part in the most lopsided shutout ( 15 – 0 ) in NHL history as the goalie for the winning side . 
 After being traded down to the American Hockey League ( AHL ) in 1945 , Dion continued to play professional hockey for nearly a decade , primarily with the Buffalo Bisons , and earned the Harry Hap Holmes Memorial Award in 1950 by being the goaltender with the lowest goals against average in the league . He retired from active competition in 1954 and moved to Asbestos , Quebec , where he was active in the local ice hockey and golf scenes . The arena in Asbestos , Aréna Connie Dion , is named in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dion was born on August 11 , 1918 in Saint @-@ Rémi @-@ de @-@ <unk> , Quebec and had twelve siblings : six brothers and six sisters . He got his start as an ice hockey goaltender with the Junior Verdun Maple Leafs of the Quebec Junior Hockey League in 1937 and was selected as one of the goaltenders for the 1938 Memorial Cup All @-@ Star team . He also played one game with the senior Maple Leafs that season . He served briefly in the Canadian Army in Cornwall , Ontario and also worked as an asbestos miner for Johns Manville prior to quitting that job to play professional hockey . 
 = = Hockey career = = 
 Dion had his first full season in ice hockey as a senior as a member of the Lachine Rapides of the Quebec Provincial Hockey League in 1938 – 39 , and joined the league 's Sherbrooke Red Raiders the following year . With the Red Raiders he took part in two playoff games for the 1940 Allan Cup , but lost them both after allowing 16 goals . Reporting to the Army for World War II service , he suited up for the Cornwall Flyers of the Quebec Senior Hockey League ( QSHL ) for three seasons ( the team was renamed Cornwall Army in 1942 ) . He was traded to the Washington Lions of the American Hockey League in 1941 , but did not report . 
 In 1943 Dion , after being discharged from the army , was among those selected to help replace Vezina Trophy @-@ winning goalie Johnny Mowers of the National Hockey League 's Detroit Red Wings , who had enlisted in the army to fight in World War II . He played a total of 38 NHL games with the Red Wings between 1943 and 1945 , exiting the league with a record of 23 – 11 – 4 and having allowed 119 goals . He recorded a 15 – 0 shutout against the New York Rangers on January 23 , 1944 , two days before being signed as a free agent with Detroit . This remains , as of 2015 , the most lopsided shutout in NHL history . He also took part in all five of Detroit 's games in the 1944 Stanley Cup playoffs , where the Red Wings were eliminated four games to one in the opening round by the eventual runner @-@ up , the Chicago Black Hawks . Dion spent much of the 1944 – 45 season , meanwhile , with the Red Wings ' AHL affiliate Indianapolis Capitals . In August 1945 , after the Red Wings decided to replace Mowers permanently with Harry Lumley , Dion was traded to the St. Louis Flyers of the AHL , and then to the league 's Buffalo Bisons just over two months later . He remained with the Bisons through 1951 and won the Harry Hap Holmes Memorial Award in 1950 , given annually to goaltenders with the lowest goals @-@ against average in the AHL . He was also selected to the league 's Second All @-@ Star Team three times . 
 During his time with the Bisons , Dion appeared intermittently for other teams including the Houston Huskies ( 1947 – 48 ) and Louisville Blades ( 1949 – 50 ) of the United States Hockey League , and the New York Rovers ( 1948 – 49 ) of the QSHL ( during the Eastern Hockey League 's season @-@ long hiatus ) . He took the 1951 – 52 season off before returning with the Sherbrooke Saints of the Quebec Major Hockey League in 1952 . He finished his career with the Glace Bay Miners of the Maritime Major Hockey League in 1953 – 54 . During his playing career he stood 5 feet , 4 inches ( 163 centimeters ) and weighed 140 pounds ( 64 kilograms ) , making him the second @-@ shortest player in NHL history , behind Roy Worters . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Dion moved to Asbestos , Quebec after the conclusion of his hockey career and became involved in the local minor hockey movement , often in the capacity of a referee . He helped establish an arena in the city , the Centre <unk> d <unk> , in 1954 , which was later renamed Aréna Connie Dion . Since 1991 , the Asbestos Minor Hockey Association has held an annual tournament at the arena in his honor . He also became involved in golf , designing several courses and helping lay foundations for the sport in Asbestos . He had a local tournament named after him in this sport as well , the inaugural edition of which was held in 1973 . He was married to Muriel Flanigan , who died in 2011 , and had four sons , Paul , Skip , Bob , and Mickey , and one daughter , Carol @-@ Ann . He died on November 7 , 2014 at the age of 96 at the Centre de <unk> et Service <unk> in Asbestos , following a two @-@ week period of hospitalization . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = The Boat Race 1912 = 
 The 69th Boat Race took place on 30 March 1912 with a re @-@ row on 1 April . Held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race . Umpired by former Cambridge rower Frederick I. Pitman , this year 's race ended with Cambridge sinking and Oxford waterlogged . Pitman declared the result as " No Race " and in the subsequent re @-@ row on the following Monday , the race was won by Oxford by six lengths . The Dark Blues ' fourth consecutive victory took the overall record in the event to 38 – 30 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race by three @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter lengths . Oxford , however , held the overall lead with 37 victories to Cambridge 's 30 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were G. C. Bourne who had rowed for the university in the 1882 and 1883 races , Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) , and W. F. C. Holland who had rowed for Oxford four times between 1887 and 1890 . Cambridge were coached by John Houghton Gibbon who rowed for the Light Blues in the 1899 and 1900 races . For the ninth year the umpire was old Etonian Frederick I. Pitman who rowed for Cambridge in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 Author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater noted that the Dark Blue crew was " by no means so quick in the water , but they possessed greater ease of movement " . Despite being struck by influenza , the training was never really hampered . Conversely , Cambridge suffered " misfortune after misfortune " . They persisted with D. C. Collins at stroke " in spite of his inexperience " but he was replaced by Sidney Swann . F. E. Hellyer was selected to row at number seven yet was forced to depart , suffering from influenza ; his replacement in L. S. Lloyd was considered " far too light " . C. F. Burnand was also forced to leave the crew through illness . Despite this , upon arrival at Putney , the Light Blues " made astonishing improvement " , and it was " only on account of their weight " that Oxford went into the race as favourites . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 5 @.@ 875 lb ( 78 @.@ 7 kg ) , 7 @.@ 625 pounds ( 3 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge saw five competitors return to the boat , including R. W. M. Arbuthnot at stroke , rowing in his fourth consecutive race . Oxford 's crew also contained five participants with Boat Race experience , including Robert Bourne who was making his fourth appearance in the event . Seven of the Oxford crew were educated at Eton College . Three participants in the race were registered as non @-@ British : Oxford 's Charles Littlejohn was Australian while Cambridge 's cox C. A. Skinner hailed from South Africa and their number two D. C. Collins came from New Zealand . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . In very rough conditions , Pitman started the race at 11 : 43 a.m. , with both coxes initially steering their crews away from each other . The Light Blues started better before Oxford passed them to lead after the first minute , their cox Henry Bensley @-@ Wells opposite the Cambridge stroke Swann . By the end of Fulham wall , the Dark Blues were clear of Cambridge but both crews had taken on board a large volume of water . Bensley @-@ Wells steered his boat close to the shore for shelter , moving out only to pass below the centre arch of Hammersmith Bridge before heading back towards the shore once again . Following discussion with his stroke Robert Bourne , Bensley @-@ Wells steered into the shore whereupon the crew disembarked to empty their vessel of the river water . After getting back onto the river , the Oxford boat was approached by the umpire 's launch and informed by Pitman that Cambridge had sunk off Harrods Furniture Depository and that he was declaring " No Race " . Despite this , Oxford finished the course and paddled to Mortlake . Prior to this year 's event , there had been one sinking in the history of the race : Cambridge sank in the 1859 race . Author Gordon Ross described the aborted race as " a fiasco of some magnitude " , while Drinkwater described it as " the greatest fiasco in the history of the race . " With the agreement of the Port of London Authority , it was agreed to hold a re @-@ row the following Monday . 
 According to Bensley @-@ Wells " the weather on the Monday was again bad ... the wind was even stronger but ... had changed direction slightly . " Oxford again won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . Pitman got the race under way at 12 : 40 p.m. The Dark Blues made a better start and took advantage of the shelter once again provided by the Middlesex side of the river . Although out @-@ rating the Dark Blues by up to six strokes per second , Cambridge could not overhaul the deficit and when Oxford passed the Crab Tree pub , Bensley @-@ Wells made for " the shortest way home " and steered over towards the Surrey station in water that " looked to be fairly good . " Oxford passed the finishing post with a lead of six lengths in a time of 22 minutes 5 seconds . It was the largest winning margin since the 1903 race and the slowest winning time since the 1901 race . The victory took the overall record in the event to 38 – 30 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Capon Chapel = 
 Capon Chapel ( pronunciation : / <unk> / KAY @-@ <unk> ) , also historically known as Capon Baptist Chapel and Capon Chapel Church , is a mid @-@ 19th century United Methodist church located near to the town of Capon Bridge , West Virginia in the United States . Capon Chapel is one of the oldest existing log churches in Hampshire County , along with Mount Bethel Church and Old Pine Church . 
 A Baptist congregation was gathering at the site of the present @-@ day church by at least 1756 . Primitive Baptist minister John Monroe ( 1750 – 1824 ) is credited for establishing a place of worship at this site ; he is interred in the church 's cemetery . The land on which Capon Chapel was built originally belonged to William C. Nixon ( 1789 – 1869 ) , a member of the Virginia House of Delegates ; later , it was transferred to the Pugh family . The first documented mention of a church at the Capon Chapel site was in March 1852 , when Joseph Pugh allocated the land to three trustees for the construction of a church and cemetery . 
 During the early years of Capon Chapel , no Protestant denomination was the exclusive owner or occupant , and the church was probably utilized as a " union church " for worship by any Christian denomination . Capon Chapel was used as a place of worship by Baptists until the late 19th or early 20th century . In the 1890s , Capon Chapel was added as a place of worship on the Capon Bridge Methodist circuit of the Southern Methodist Episcopal Church . As of 2015 , Capon Chapel remains a Methodist church , now a part of the United Methodist Church , holding Methodist services twice a month . 
 Capon Chapel 's cemetery is surrounded by a wrought iron fence made by Stewart Iron Works , and contains the remains of John Monroe , William C. Nixon , West Virginia House of Delegates member Captain David Pugh ( 1806 – 1899 ) , American Civil War veterans from the Union and the Confederacy , and free and enslaved African Americans . Capon Chapel , along with its cemetery , was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 12 , 2012 , in recognition of its representation of the rural religious architecture of the Potomac Highlands region , and for its service as an important rural church in Hampshire County . 
 = = Geography and setting = = 
 Capon Chapel and its associated cemetery are located to the east Christian Church Road ( West Virginia Secondary Route 13 ) , approximately 2 @.@ 01 miles ( 3 @.@ 23 km ) south of Capon Bridge and 1 @.@ 14 miles ( 1 @.@ 83 km ) northeast of the unincorporated community of Bubbling Spring in southeastern Hampshire County . Capon Chapel is 894 feet ( 272 m ) east of the Cacapon River , from which the church derives its name . The church and cemetery are situated atop a grassy hill on a 0 @.@ 96 acres ( 0 @.@ 39 ha ) plot of land , at an elevation of 869 feet ( 265 m ) , in a rural agricultural area within the Cacapon River Valley . Dillons Mountain , a forested and narrow anticlinal mountain ridge , rises to the west of the Cacapon River Valley , while the forested , rolling foothills of the anticlinal Timber Ridge rise to the valley 's east . 
 The church and cemetery are accessible through a gravel driveway to the north ; to the west , a cluster of tall oak trees blocks access to the road . Capon Chapel is landscaped with boxwoods on its north and south sides , a single holly on its east side , and <unk> along its west side . The Capon Chapel property consists of the church structure ( c . 1852 ) , and its associated cemetery , which is enclosed partly by the historic wrought iron fence and partly by a chain link fence . A flagpole stands at the center of the cemetery 's eastern perimeter . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The land on which Capon Chapel is located was originally part of the Northern Neck Proprietary , a land grant that Charles II of England awarded to seven of his supporters in 1649 and renewed by an official patent in 1688 . One of these seven supporters , Thomas Colepeper , 2nd Baron Colepeper , acquired the entire area in 1681 ; his grandson , Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , inherited it in 1719 . Under Lord Fairfax 's ownership , the Cacapon River Valley was predominantly inhabited by English @-@ speaking settlers as early as the late 1730s . The majority of these settlers had come from Pennsylvania and New Jersey , many of whom were either Quakers or former Quakers who were attracted to the Baptist and Methodist denominations . 
 = = = Baptist affiliation = = = 
 The Baptists established the oldest extant churches in Hampshire County . After the end of the American Revolutionary War , Baptist preachers continued their attempt to gain a foothold in what is now the Eastern Panhandle region . During the Baptists ' early growth in Hampshire County , the best known Baptist ministers were John Monroe ( 1750 – 1824 ) and Benjamin Stone ( 1743 – 1842 ) . Monroe preached at the North River , Crooked Run , and Patterson 's Creek churches during the early 19th century . According to historians Hu Maxwell and Howard Llewellyn Swisher in History of Hampshire County , West Virginia ( 1897 ) , Monroe was a minister for Primitive Baptists , who were adherent to a strict interpretation of the Calvinist theology of the <unk> Association . Monroe probably established a Baptist church on the site of the present @-@ day Capon Chapel , where he is buried in the church 's cemetery . However , other sources claim that a Baptist congregation began gathering at the Capon Chapel site as early as 1756 . 
 Increased settlement and the arrival of other religious denominations in the Cacapon River Valley were further facilitated following the completion of the Northwestern Turnpike in the 1830s , which connected Parkersburg with Winchester . A small community began to develop near the turnpike 's Cacapon River crossing , 2 @.@ 01 miles ( 3 @.@ 23 km ) north of Capon Chapel 's present @-@ day location . The community later became the town of Capon Bridge . 
 The land on which Capon Chapel was built belonged to William C. Nixon ( 1789 – 1869 ) , a member of the Virginia House of Delegates . Nixon 's mother @-@ in @-@ law , Elizabeth Caudy ( 1773 – 1816 ) , was the first person to be buried in the church 's cemetery . While various sources estimate that Capon Chapel was built around the 1750s , there is no physical or documentary evidence to support this claim . The first documented mention of a church at the Capon Chapel site was in March 1852 , when Joseph Pugh allocated 88 and one @-@ half poles , or approximately 0 @.@ 55 acres ( 2 @,@ 200 m2 ) , to three trustees : David Pugh , another David Pugh , and Robert Pugh . The Pugh family , which was of Welsh descent , were early settlers in the Cacapon River Valley , and were one of the families that came from Wales through Pennsylvania in the late 17th century . The grant 's deed told the trustees to conceive " a Graveyard and for a house for the Public Worship of Almighty God for the use of all orthodox Christians " , and specified that the land was only to be used for religious worship and " for no other purpose " . The deed further stipulated that inheritors of the land had to be Pugh 's descendants . 
 During the church 's early years , no Protestant denomination was the exclusive owner or occupant of Capon Chapel , which indicates that the church was probably utilized as a " union church " for worship by any Christian denomination . Since no single denomination oversaw the church during this early period , few records of its early activities and construction exist . Later records suggest that Capon Chapel was used as a place of worship by Baptists until the late 19th or early 20th century . While it remains unclear why or how the church became associated with the Baptists , its use by the denomination is possibly associated with the Second Great Awakening , a Protestant revival movement during the early @-@ to @-@ mid 19th century that gained momentum throughout the United States . According to the December 1904 issue of The Baptist Home Mission Monthly , the Baptist Little Cacapon Church contributed one dollar to the general fund of Capon Chapel , demonstrating that the Baptist community still continued to operate from or associate with the church in 1904 . 
 = = = Methodist affiliation = = = 
 In addition to the Baptist faith , Methodists started coming to the Cacapon River Valley during the latter half of the 18th century . Methodist Episcopal Church circuit rider Francis Asbury traveled through the Capon Bridge area in 1781 . In 1890 , the Southern Methodist Episcopal Church established its presence in the Capon Bridge area under the leadership of G. O. Homan . According to Maxwell and Swisher , the Capon Bridge Methodist circuit consisted of the following places in 1897 : Capon Bridge , North River Mills , Green Mound , Augusta , Sedan , Park 's Hollow , Sandy Ridge , and Capon Chapel . Capon Chapel was not commonly used as a Baptist place of worship by the early 20th century , and developed into a permanent stop along the Capon Bridge Methodist circuit , which later grew to include Central Church at Loom and Bethel Church at Neals Run . In 1976 , the circuit 's pastor was Thomas Malcolm . 
 Capon Chapel remains a Methodist church , now a part of the United Methodist Church . As of 2015 , Capon Chapel 's congregation numbers five . The church 's Methodist circuit pastor is M. Christopher Duckworth ; and it offers services four Sundays a month . A small group of committed congregants maintain the historic church and cemetery grounds . Brenda Hiett is the church 's caretaker , as of 2015 . Throughout its existence , Capon Chapel has been known by various names , including " Capon Baptist Chapel " and " Capon Chapel Church " . 
 = = = Preservation = = = 
 According to the church 's caretaker , Brenda Hiett , the church 's roof and siding were installed around 1900 . A wrought iron fence , made by Stewart Iron Works in Cincinnati , Ohio , was installed around the church 's cemetery . Electrical conduits were added to the interior of the church when it was electrified around 1930 , and further electrical updates were made in 2011 . The church 's perimeter foundation of concrete blocks replaced the original stone piers in the early 1970s , and its wide , heart pine plank floors were sanded and re @-@ lacquered . Around 1990 , the Stewart Iron Works fence and gate were restored by White ’ s Ornamental Ironworks . 
 In 2008 , following surveys of historic properties throughout the county , the Hampshire County Historic Landmarks Commission and the Hampshire County Commission embarked upon an initiative to place structures and districts on the National Register of Historic Places . The county received funding for the surveys from the State Historic Preservation Office of the West Virginia Division of Culture and History . Capon Chapel was one of the first of eight historic properties to be considered for placement on the register . The other seven properties were Fort Kuykendall , Hickory Grove , Hook Tavern , North River Mills Historic District , Old Pine Church , Springfield Brick House , and Valley View . According to the Hampshire County Commission 's compliance officer , Charles Baker , places of worship were not typically selected for inclusion in the register ; however , Capon Chapel and Old Pine Church were exceptions , because both " started out as meeting houses " . Capon Chapel is among the earliest existing log churches in Hampshire County , along with Mount Bethel Church and Old Pine Church . Capon Chapel was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 12 , 2012 , in recognition of its representation of the rural religious architecture of the Potomac Highlands region , and for its service as an important rural church in Hampshire County . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Capon Chapel is a single @-@ story , rectangular , front gable log building , covered with white @-@ painted wooden clapboard siding , and topped with a green standing seam metal roof , along with metal snow guards . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The church 's main façade is located on its east side , facing toward Timber Ridge , and away from the Cacapon River and Christian Church Road . The east side consists of a front gable façade of white @-@ painted clapboard siding . The church has one entryway , which is a centrally @-@ located , four @-@ paneled wooden door , topped by wooden dentil molding and a rectangular , four @-@ light transom window . The transom is the only window on the church 's east side . Unpainted wooden railings are on each side of the entryway . The clapboard siding on the church 's east side is horizontal , and varies between 5 and 7 inches ( 13 and 18 cm ) in width . The overhanging eave of the church 's roof is accentuated by a single wooden drop pendant at the top of the gable . The modern electricity meter is located to the right of the main entrance . The non @-@ loadbearing concrete block perimeter wall on this side is concealed by a stone veneer . 
 The west elevation is covered with white @-@ painted clapboarding and is undecorated , with the exception of an off @-@ center concrete block chimney and a single drop pendant similar to the one located at the top of the gable . The concrete block perimeter foundation is visible on the south side of the church , as is the metal embankment doors that allow access to the church 's basement . 
 The church 's north and south sides consist of two symmetrically placed six @-@ over @-@ six double @-@ hung sash wooden windows , along with operable green @-@ painted louvered wooden window shutters . The clapboard sidings vary between 3 and 6 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 and 15 @.@ 2 cm ) in width . At the base of the church 's north side , concrete blocks are visible under the foundation . On the church 's south side , a small strip of the roof 's eave confirms the original location of the chimney . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The interior of the church consists of a large , open floor plan , with wooden pews lined perpendicular to the north and south sides , thus creating a central aisle . The altar is a small wooden pulpit , which serves as a lectern that is accessible by a small wooden step ; the altar is accented by a large wooden backdrop of casing with dentil molding . Each of the church 's interior walls is covered with pine wainscot panelling and wallpaper , and topped with wooden crown molding . Wooden swag moldings accentuate the four symmetrically @-@ placed six @-@ over @-@ six double @-@ hung sash wooden windows , the doorway 's wooden casing , and the transom window . The wooden pews are simple , with cushions added for comfortable seating . The original ceiling is obscured by a dropped ceiling , which also conceals the electrical conduits for the church 's brass chandeliers . Prior to the church 's electrification , kerosene lanterns were used for light , and the lanterns remain in the church for decorative purposes . The church 's floor consists of the original heart pine planks . Concrete blocks and cut stone border the building 's perimeter to prevent animals from entering the church 's crawl space . Within the crawl space , log carrier beams support the building , on which the bark remains extant . 
 = = Cemetery = = 
 The cemetery is less than an acre in size and is located to the immediate east of the church , surrounded by a wrought iron fence manufactured by Stewart Iron Works . As of 2012 , the cemetery contains approximately 270 interments , including John Monroe ( 1750 – 1824 ) , Virginia House of Delegates member William C. Nixon ( 1789 – 1869 ) , West Virginia House of Delegates member Captain David Pugh ( 1806 – 1899 ) , American Civil War veterans from the Union and the Confederacy , and free and enslaved African Americans . Gertrude Ward ( 1896 – 1988 ) , a local historian and orchardist , is also interred in the cemetery . Captain David Pugh was an elected representative Hampshire County , who voted to secede from the Union in 1861 . 
 Older gravestones in the cemetery are generally cut from limestone , and the gravestones placed after 1900 are predominantly made of polished granite . Most of the gravestones have weathered significantly . The gravestones are generally rounded or rectangular in shape , and are placed on small stone foundations . The gravestones of prominent local leaders are more ornate in character , including that of Captain David Pugh and his family , who are buried under a large obelisk that lists the names of his three wives and their respective children . Nixon 's gravestone is deteriorating due to advanced weathering ; it is made of limestone and contains a carving of an open book . Following the purchase of a rectangular land tract around 1990 , the cemetery was expanded on the east side . This section of the cemetery is excluded from the church 's historically @-@ recognized boundaries , as it was not associated with the church during the period of its greatest significance . 
 The cemetery perimeter is lined on three sides by a cast wrought iron fence , accessible by a gate 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) in width at its western entryway . The wrought iron fence is 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in height , and has approximately 1 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) diameter tubular fence posts , which are supported by three horizontal metal rails . The fence posts are capped with white @-@ painted stylized arrows , with a ball at the tip . A shield with the emblem reading , " The Stewart Iron Works , Cincinnati , Ohio " , is emblazoned on the fence 's gate . The cemetery 's eastern extension is surrounded by chain @-@ link fencing . 
 = Turkey = 
 Turkey ( / <unk> / ; Turkish : Türkiye [ <unk> ] ) , officially the Republic of Turkey ( Turkish : Türkiye <unk> ; pronounced [ <unk> d ͡ <unk> ] ) , is a parliamentary republic in Eurasia , mainly on the Anatolian peninsula in Western Asia , with a smaller portion on the Balkan peninsula in Southeast Europe . Turkey is a democratic , secular , unitary , constitutional republic with a diverse cultural heritage . 
 Turkey is bordered by eight countries : Syria and Iraq to the south ; Iran , Armenia , and the Azerbaijani exclave of Nakhchivan to the east ; Georgia to the northeast ; Bulgaria to the northwest ; and Greece to the west . The Black Sea is to the north , the Mediterranean Sea to the south , and the Aegean Sea to the west . The Bosphorus , the Sea of Marmara , and the Dardanelles , which together form the Turkish Straits , divide Thrace and Anatolia ; they also separate Europe and Asia . Turkey 's location between Europe and Asia makes it strategically important . 
 Turkey has been inhabited since the paleolithic age by various ancient Anatolian civilizations : Aeolian , Dorian and Ionian Greeks , Thracians , Armenians , and Assyrians . After Alexander the Great 's conquest , the area was Hellenized , a process which continued under the Roman Empire and its transition into the Byzantine Empire . The Seljuk Turks began migrating into the area in the 11th century , starting the process of Turkification , which was accelerated by the Seljuk victory over the Byzantines at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 . The Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm ruled Anatolia until the Mongol invasion in 1243 , when it disintegrated into small Turkish beyliks . 
 In the mid 14th century the Ottomans started uniting Anatolia and created an empire encompassing much of Southeastern Europe , Western Asia and North Africa , becoming a major power in Eurasia and Africa during the early modern period . The empire reached the peak of its power in the 16th century , especially during the reign ( 1520 – 1566 ) of Suleiman the Magnificent . After the second Ottoman siege of Vienna in 1683 and the end of the Great Turkish War in 1699 , the Ottoman Empire entered a long period of decline . The Tanzimat reforms of the 19th century , which aimed to modernize the Ottoman state , proved to be inadequate in most fields , and failed to stop the dissolution of the empire . 
 Effectively controlled by the Three Pashas after the 1913 coup d 'état , the Ottoman Empire entered World War I ( 1914 – 1918 ) on the side of the Central Powers and was ultimately defeated . During the war , the Ottoman government committed ethnic cleansing or genocide against its Armenian , Assyrian and Pontic Greek citizens . Following the war , the conglomeration of territories and peoples that formerly comprised the Ottoman Empire was divided into several new states . 
 The Turkish War of Independence ( 1919 – 1922 ) , initiated by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and his colleagues in Anatolia , resulted in the establishment of the modern Republic of Turkey in 1923 , with Atatürk as its first president . 
 Turkey 's official language is Turkish , a Turkic language , spoken by 85 % of the population . 72 @.@ 5 % of the population are ethnic Turks ; and 27 @.@ 5 % are legally recognized ( Armenians , Greeks , Jews ) and unrecognized ( Kurds , Circassians , Arabs , Albanians , Bosniaks , Georgians , etc . ) ethnic minorities . Kurds are the largest minority group . The vast majority of the population is Sunni Muslim , with Alevis making up the largest religious minority . 
 Turkey is a charter member of the UN , early member of NATO , and a founding member of the OECD , OSCE , OIC and G @-@ 20 . After becoming one of the first members of the Council of Europe in 1949 , Turkey became an associate member of the EEC in 1963 , applied for full EEC membership in 1987 , joined the EU Customs Union in 1995 and started accession negotiations with the European Union in 2005 . Turkey 's growing economy and diplomatic initiatives have led to its recognition as a regional power . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name of Turkey ( Turkish : Türkiye ) is based on the ethnonym Türk . The first recorded use of the term " Türk " or " <unk> " as an autonym is contained in the Old Turkic inscriptions of the Göktürks ( Celestial Turks ) of Central Asia ( c . 8th century ) . The English name Turkey first appeared in the late 14th century and is derived from Medieval Latin <unk> . 
 The Greek cognate of this name , <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) was used by the Byzantine emperor and scholar Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus in his book De Administrando Imperio , though in his use , " Turks " always referred to Magyars . Similarly , the medieval Khazar Empire , a Turkic state on the northern shores of the Black and Caspian seas , was referred to as <unk> ( Land of the Turks ) in Byzantine sources . The Ottoman Empire was sometimes referred to as Turkey or the Turkish Empire among its contemporaries . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory of Anatolia and Eastern Thrace = = = 
 The Anatolian peninsula , comprising most of modern Turkey , is one of the oldest permanently settled regions in the world . Various ancient Anatolian populations have lived in Anatolia , from at least the Neolithic period until the Hellenistic period . Many of these peoples spoke the Anatolian languages , a branch of the larger Indo @-@ European language family . In fact , given the antiquity of the Indo @-@ European Hittite and Luwian languages , some scholars have proposed Anatolia as the hypothetical center from which the Indo @-@ European languages radiated . The European part of Turkey , called Eastern Thrace , has also been inhabited since at least forty thousand years ago , and is known to have been in the Neolithic era by about 6000 BC . 
 <unk> Tepe is the site of the oldest known man @-@ made religious structure , a temple dating to 10 @,@ 000 BC , while Çatalhöyük is a very large Neolithic and Chalcolithic settlement in southern Anatolia , which existed from approximately 7500 BC to 5700 BC . It is the largest and best @-@ preserved Neolithic site found to date and in July 2012 was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site . The settlement of Troy started in the Neolithic Age and continued into the Iron Age . 
 The earliest recorded inhabitants of Anatolia were the Hattians and Hurrians , non @-@ Indo @-@ European peoples who inhabited central and eastern Anatolia , respectively , as early as ca . 2300 BC . Indo @-@ European Hittites came to Anatolia and gradually absorbed the Hattians and Hurrians ca . 2000 – 1700 BC . The first major empire in the area was founded by the Hittites , from the 18th through the 13th century BC . The Assyrians conquered and settled parts of southeastern Turkey as early as 1950 BC until the year 612 BC . Urartu re @-@ emerged in Assyrian inscriptions in the 9th century BC as a powerful northern rival of Assyria . 
 Following the collapse of the Hittite empire c . 1180 BC , the Phrygians , an Indo @-@ European people , achieved ascendancy in Anatolia until their kingdom was destroyed by the Cimmerians in the 7th century BC . Starting from 714 BC , Urartu shared the same fate and dissolved in 590 BC , when it was conquered by the Medes . The most powerful of Phrygia 's successor states were Lydia , Caria and Lycia . 
 = = = Antiquity and Byzantine Period = = = 
 Starting around 1200 BC , the coast of Anatolia was heavily settled by Aeolian and Ionian Greeks . Numerous important cities were founded by these colonists , such as Miletus , Ephesus , Smyrna ( now İzmir ) and Byzantium ( now Istanbul ) , the latter founded by Greek colonists from Megara in 657 BC . The first state that was called Armenia by neighbouring peoples was the state of the Armenian <unk> dynasty , which included parts of eastern Turkey beginning in the 6th century BC . In Northwest Turkey , the most significant tribal group in Thrace was the <unk> , founded by Teres I. 
 All of modern @-@ day Turkey was conquered by the Persian Achaemenid Empire during the 6th century BC . The Greco @-@ Persian Wars started when the Greek city states on the coast of Anatolia rebelled against Persian rule in 499 BC . The territory of Turkey later fell to Alexander the Great in 334 BC , which led to increasing cultural homogeneity and Hellenization in the area . 
 Following Alexander 's death in 323 BC , Anatolia was subsequently divided into a number of small Hellenistic kingdoms , all of which became part of the Roman Republic by the mid @-@ 1st century BC . The process of Hellenization that began with Alexander 's conquest accelerated under Roman rule , and by the early centuries AD the local Anatolian languages and cultures had become extinct , being largely replaced by ancient Greek language and culture . From the 1st century BC up to the 3rd century AD , large parts of modern @-@ day Turkey were contested between the Romans and neighboring Parthians through the frequent Roman @-@ Parthian Wars . 
 In 324 , Constantine I chose Byzantium to be the new capital of the Roman Empire , renaming it New Rome . Following the death of Theodosius I in 395 and the permanent division of the Roman Empire between his two sons , the city , which would popularly come to be known as Constantinople , became the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire . This , which would later be branded by historians as the Byzantine Empire , ruled most of the territory of present @-@ day Turkey until the Late Middle Ages ; although the eastern regions remained in firm Sasanian hands up to the first half of the 7th century AD . The frequent Byzantine @-@ Sassanid Wars , as part of the centuries long @-@ lasting Roman @-@ Persian Wars , fought between the neighboring rivaling Byzantines and Sasanians , took place in various parts of present @-@ day Turkey and decided much of the latters history from the 4th century AD up to the first half of the 7th century AD . 
 = = = Seljuks and the Ottoman Empire = = = 
 The House of Seljuk was a branch of the <unk> Oğuz Turks who resided on the periphery of the Muslim world , in the Yabghu Khaganate of the Oğuz confederacy , to the north of the Caspian and Aral Seas , in the 9th century . In the 10th century , the Seljuks started migrating from their ancestral homeland into Persia , which became the administrative core of the Great Seljuk Empire . 
 In the latter half of the 11th century , the Seljuk Turks began penetrating into medieval Armenia and the eastern regions of Anatolia . In 1071 , the Seljuks defeated the Byzantines at the Battle of Manzikert , starting the Turkification process in the area ; the Turkish language and Islam were introduced to Armenia and Anatolia , gradually spreading throughout the region . The slow transition from a predominantly Christian and Greek @-@ speaking Anatolia to a predominantly Muslim and Turkish @-@ speaking one was underway . Alongside the Turkification of the territory , the culturally <unk> Seljuks set the basis for a Turko @-@ Persian principal culture in Anatolia , which their eventual successors , the Ottomans would take over . 
 In 1243 , the Seljuk armies were defeated by the Mongols , causing the Seljuk Empire 's power to slowly disintegrate . In its wake , one of the Turkish principalities governed by Osman I would , over the next 200 years , evolve into the Ottoman Empire . In 1453 , the Ottomans completed their conquest of the Byzantine Empire by capturing its capital , Constantinople . 
 In 1514 , Sultan Selim I ( 1512 – 1520 ) successfully expanded the empire 's southern and eastern borders by defeating Shah Ismail I of the Safavid dynasty in the Battle of <unk> . In 1517 , Selim I expanded Ottoman rule into Algeria and Egypt , and created a naval presence in the Red Sea . Subsequently , a competition started between the Ottoman and Portuguese empires to become the dominant sea power in the Indian Ocean , with a number of naval battles in the Red Sea , the Arabian Sea and the Persian Gulf . The Portuguese presence in the Indian Ocean was perceived as a threat for the Ottoman monopoly over the ancient trading routes between East Asia and Western Europe ( later collectively named the Silk Road ) . This important monopoly was increasingly compromised following the discovery of a sea route around Africa by Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias in 1488 , which had a considerable impact on the Ottoman economy . 
 The Ottoman Empire 's power and prestige peaked in the 16th and 17th centuries , particularly during the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent . The empire was often at odds with the Holy Roman Empire in its steady advance towards Central Europe through the Balkans and the southern part of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth . At sea , the Ottoman Navy contended with several Holy Leagues , such as those in 1538 , 1571 , 1684 and 1717 ( composed primarily of Habsburg Spain , the Republic of Genoa , the Republic of Venice , the Knights of St. John , the Papal States , the Grand Duchy of Tuscany and the Duchy of Savoy ) , for the control of the Mediterranean Sea . In the east , the Ottomans were often at war with Safavid Persia over conflicts stemming from territorial disputes or religious differences between the 16th and 18th centuries . The Ottoman wars with Persia continued as the Zand , <unk> , and Qajar dynasties succeeded the Safavids in Iran , until the first half of the 19th century . From the 16th to the early 20th centuries , the Ottoman Empire also fought many wars with the Russian Tsardom and Empire . These were initially about the Ottoman territorial expansion and consolidation in southeastern and eastern Europe ; but starting from the latter half of the 18th century , they became more about the survival of the Ottoman state , which began to lose its strategic territories on the northern Black Sea coast to the advancing Russians . Between the 18th and the early 20th centuries , the Ottoman , Persian and Russian empires were neighbouring rivals of each other . 
 From the beginning of the 19th century onwards , the Ottoman Empire began to decline . As it gradually shrank in size , military power and wealth , many Balkan Muslims migrated to the Empire 's heartland in Anatolia , along with the Circassians fleeing the Russian conquest . The decline of the Ottoman Empire led to a rise in nationalist sentiment among the various subject peoples , leading to increased ethnic tensions which occasionally burst into violence , such as the Hamidian massacres of Armenians . 
 The Ottoman Empire entered World War I on the side of the Central Powers and was ultimately defeated . During the war , the empire 's Armenians were deported to Syria as part of the Armenian Genocide . As a result , an estimated 800 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 Armenians were killed . The Turkish government has refused to acknowledge the events as genocide and claims that Armenians were only relocated from the eastern war zone . Large @-@ scale massacres were also committed against the empire 's other minority groups such as the Assyrians and Greeks . Following the Armistice of Mudros on 30 October 1918 , the victorious Allied Powers sought to partition the Ottoman state through the 1920 Treaty of Sèvres . 
 = = = Republic of Turkey = = = 
 The occupation of Constantinople and Smyrna by the Allies in the aftermath of World War I prompted the establishment of the Turkish National Movement . Under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal Pasha , a military commander who had distinguished himself during the Battle of Gallipoli , the Turkish War of Independence was waged with the aim of revoking the terms of the Treaty of Sèvres . 
 By 18 September 1922 the occupying armies were expelled , and the Ankara @-@ based Turkish regime , which had declared itself the legitimate government of the country on 23 April 1920 , started to formalize the legal transition from the old Ottoman into the new Republican political system . On 1 November 1922 , the Turkish Parliament in Ankara formally abolished the Sultanate , thus ending 623 years of monarchical Ottoman rule . The Treaty of Lausanne of 24 July 1923 led to the international recognition of the sovereignty of the newly formed " Republic of Turkey " as the successor state of the Ottoman Empire , and the republic was officially proclaimed on 29 October 1923 in Ankara , the country 's new capital . The Lausanne treaty stipulated a population exchange between Greece and Turkey , whereby 1 @.@ 1 million Greeks left Turkey for Greece in exchange for 380 @,@ 000 Muslims transferred from Greece to Turkey . 
 Mustafa Kemal became the republic 's first President and subsequently introduced many radical reforms with the aim of transforming the old religion @-@ based and multi @-@ communal Ottoman state system ( constitutional monarchy ) into an essentially Turkish nation state ( parliamentary republic ) with a secular constitution . With the Surname Law of 1934 , the Turkish Parliament bestowed upon Mustafa Kemal the honorific surname " Atatürk " ( Father of the Turks ) . 
 Turkey remained neutral during most of World War II , but entered the closing stages of the war on the side of the Allies on 23 February 1945 . On 26 June 1945 , Turkey became a charter member of the United Nations . Difficulties faced by Greece after the war in quelling a communist rebellion , along with demands by the Soviet Union for military bases in the Turkish Straits , prompted the United States to declare the Truman Doctrine in 1947 . The doctrine enunciated American intentions to guarantee the security of Turkey and Greece , and resulted in large @-@ scale U.S. military and economic support . Both countries were included in the Marshall Plan and <unk> for rebuilding European economies in 1948 , and subsequently became founding members of the OECD in 1961 . 
 After participating with the United Nations forces in the Korean War , Turkey joined NATO in 1952 , becoming a bulwark against Soviet expansion into the Mediterranean . Following a decade of Cypriot intercommunal violence and the coup in Cyprus on 15 July 1974 staged by the EOKA B paramilitary organization , which overthrew President Makarios and installed the pro @-@ Enosis ( union with Greece ) Nikos Sampson as dictator , Turkey invaded Cyprus on 20 July 1974 . Nine years later the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus , which is recognized only by Turkey , was established . 
 The single @-@ party period ended in 1945 . It was followed by a tumultuous transition to multiparty democracy over the next few decades , which was interrupted by military coups d 'état in 1960 , 1971 , and 1980 , as well as a military memorandum in 1997 . In 1984 , the PKK , a Kurdish separatist group , began an insurgency campaign against the Turkish government . The Kurdish @-@ Turkish conflict to date has claimed over 40 @,@ 000 lives . Over 3 @,@ 000 Kurdish villages were burned by Turkish security forces and hundreds of thousands of Kurds displaced , and Kurdish political parties were banned . Peace talks were launched in 2012 , but hostilities restarted in 2015 following the <unk> bombing . Since the liberalization of the Turkish economy during the 1980s , the country has enjoyed stronger economic growth and greater political stability . In 2013 , widespread protests erupted in many Turkish provinces , sparked by a plan to demolish <unk> Park but growing into general anti @-@ government dissent . 
 On 15 @-@ 16 July 2016 , an unsuccessful coup attempt tried to oust the government . 
 = = Administrative divisions = = 
 Turkey has a unitary structure in terms of administration and this aspect is one of the most important factors shaping the Turkish public administration . When three powers ( executive , legislative and judiciary ) are taken into account as the main functions of the state , local administrations have little power . Turkey is a unitary not a federal system , and the provinces are subordinated to the centre . Local administrations were established to provide services in place and the government is represented by the governors and city governors . Besides the governors and the city governors , other senior public officials are also appointed by the central government rather than appointed by mayors or elected by constituents . 
 Turkey is subdivided into 81 provinces for administrative purposes . Each province is divided into districts , for a total of 923 districts . 
 Turkey is also subdivided into 7 regions and 21 subregions for geographic , demographic and economic purposes ; this does not refer to an administrative division . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Turkey is a parliamentary representative democracy . Since its foundation as a republic in 1923 , Turkey has developed a strong tradition of secularism . Turkey 's constitution governs the legal framework of the country . It sets out the main principles of government and establishes Turkey as a unitary centralized state . The President of the Republic is the head of state and has a largely ceremonial role . The president is elected for a five @-@ year term by direct elections and Tayyip Erdoğan is the first president elected by direct voting . 
 Executive power is exercised by the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers which make up the government , while the legislative power is vested in the unicameral parliament , the Grand National Assembly of Turkey . The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature , and the Constitutional Court is charged with ruling on the conformity of laws and decrees with the constitution . The Council of State is the tribunal of last resort for administrative cases , and the High Court of Appeals for all others . 
 The prime minister is elected by the parliament through a vote of confidence in the government and is most often the head of the party having the most seats in parliament . The prime minister is <unk> <unk> , who replaced Ahmet Davutoğlu on 24 May 2016 . 
 Universal suffrage for both sexes has been applied throughout Turkey since 1933 , and every Turkish citizen who has turned 18 years of age has the right to vote . There are 550 members of parliament who are elected for a four @-@ year term by a party @-@ list proportional representation system from 85 electoral districts . The Constitutional Court can strip the public financing of political parties that it deems anti @-@ secular or separatist , or ban their existence altogether . The electoral threshold is 10 percent of the votes . 
 Supporters of Atatürk 's reforms are called <unk> , as distinguished from Islamists , representing two extremes on a continuum of beliefs about the proper role of religion in public life . The Kemalist position generally combines a kind of democracy with a <unk> constitution and westernised secular lifestyle , while supporting state intervention in the economy , education , and other public services . Since the 1980s , a rise in income inequality and class distinction has given rise to Islamic populism , a movement that in theory supports obligation to authority , communal solidarity and social justice , though what that entails in practice is often contested . 
 = = = Human rights = = = 
 Human rights in Turkey have been the subject of some controversy and international condemnation . Between 1998 and 2008 the European Court of Human Rights made more than 1 @,@ 600 judgements against Turkey for human rights violations , particularly regarding the right to life , and freedom from torture . Other issues , such as Kurdish rights , women 's rights , LGBT rights , and press freedom , have also attracted controversy . Turkey 's human rights record continues to be a significant obstacle to future membership of the EU . According to the Committee to Protect Journalists , the AKP government has waged one of the world 's biggest crackdowns on press freedoms . A large number of journalists have been arrested using charges of " terrorism " and " anti @-@ state activities " such as the Ergenekon and <unk> cases , while thousands have been investigated on charges such as " denigrating <unk> " or " insulting Islam " in an effort to sow self @-@ censorship . In 2012 , the CPJ identified 76 jailed journalists in Turkey , including 61 directly held for their published work , ranking 1st in the world , more than in Iran , Eritrea or China while <unk> identified 9 musicians imprisoned for their work , ranking 3rd after Russia and China . A former U.S. State Department spokesman , Philip J. Crowley , said that the United States had " broad concerns about trends involving intimidation of journalists in Turkey . " Turkey has a ' Not Free ' rating by Freedom House . 
 In its resolution " The functioning of democratic institutions in Turkey " on 22 June 2016 , the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe warned that " recent developments in Turkey pertaining to freedom of the media and of expression , erosion of the rule of law and the human rights violations in relation to anti @-@ terrorism security operations in south @-@ east Turkey have ( ... ) raised serious questions about the functioning of its democratic institutions . " 
 = = = Law = = = 
 Turkey has a legal system which has been wholly integrated with the system of continental Europe . For instance , the Turkish Civil Law has been modified by incorporating elements mainly of the Swiss Civil Code , the Code of Obligations and the German Commercial Code . The Administrative Law bears similarities with its French counterpart , and the Penal Code with its Italian counterpart . 
 Turkey has adopted the principle of the separation of powers . In line with this principle , judicial power is exercised by independent courts on behalf of the Turkish nation . The independence and organization of the courts , the security of the tenure of judges and public prosecutors , the profession of judges and prosecutors , the supervision of judges and public prosecutors , the military courts and their organization , and the powers and duties of the high courts are regulated by the Turkish Constitution . 
 According to Article 142 of the Turkish Constitution , the organization , duties and jurisdiction of the courts , their functions and the trial procedures are regulated by law . In line with the aforementioned article of the Turkish Constitution and related laws , the court system in Turkey can be classified under three main categories ; which are the Judicial Courts , Administrative Courts and Military Courts . Each category includes first instance courts and high courts . In addition , the Court of Jurisdictional Disputes rules on cases that cannot be classified readily as falling within the purview of one court system . 
 Law enforcement in Turkey is carried out by several departments ( such as the General Directorate of Security and Gendarmerie General Command ) and agencies , all acting under the command of the Prime Minister of Turkey or mostly the Minister of Internal Affairs . According to figures released by the Justice Ministry , there are 100 @,@ 000 people in Turkish prisons as of November 2008 , a doubling since 2000 . 
 In the years of government by the AKP and Tayyip Erdoğan , particularly since 2013 , the independence and integrity of the Turkish judiciary has increasingly been considered in doubt by institutions , parliamentarians and journalists both within and outside of Turkey ; due to political interference in the promotion of judges and prosecutors , and in their pursuit of public duty . The Turkey 2015 report of the European Commission stated that " the independence of the judiciary and respect of the principle of separation of powers have been undermined and judges and prosecutors have been under strong political pressure . " 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 Turkey is a founding member of the United Nations ( 1945 ) , the OECD ( 1961 ) , the OIC ( 1969 ) , the OSCE ( 1973 ) , the ECO ( 1985 ) , the <unk> ( 1992 ) , the D @-@ 8 ( 1997 ) and the G @-@ 20 major economies ( 1999 ) . Turkey was a member of the United Nations Security Council in 1951 – 1952 , 1954 – 1955 , 1961 and 2009 – 2010 . In September 2013 , Turkey became a member of the Asia Cooperation Dialogue ( ACD ) . 
 In line with its traditional Western orientation , relations with Europe have always been a central part of Turkish foreign policy . Turkey became one of the first members of the Council of Europe in 1949 , applied for associate membership of the EEC ( predecessor of the European Union ) in 1959 and became an associate member in 1963 . After decades of political negotiations , Turkey applied for full membership of the EEC in 1987 , became an associate member of the Western European Union in 1992 , joined the EU Customs Union in 1995 and has been in formal accession negotiations with the EU since 2005 . Today , EU membership is considered as a state policy and a strategic target by Turkey . Turkey 's support for Northern Cyprus in the Cyprus dispute complicates Turkey 's relations with the EU and remains a major stumbling block to the country 's EU accession bid . 
 The other defining aspect of Turkey 's foreign policy was the country 's long @-@ standing strategic alliance with the United States . The common threat posed by the Soviet Union during the Cold War led to Turkey 's membership of NATO in 1952 , ensuring close bilateral relations with Washington . Subsequently Turkey benefited from the United States ' political , economic and diplomatic support , including in key issues such as the country 's bid to join the European Union . In the post – Cold War environment , Turkey 's geostrategic importance shifted towards its proximity to the Middle East , the Caucasus and the Balkans . 
 The independence of the Turkic states of the Soviet Union in 1991 , with which Turkey shares a common cultural and linguistic heritage , allowed Turkey to extend its economic and political relations deep into Central Asia , thus enabling the completion of a multi @-@ billion @-@ dollar oil and natural gas pipeline from Baku in Azerbaijan to the port of Ceyhan in Turkey . The Baku – Tbilisi – Ceyhan pipeline forms part of Turkey 's foreign policy strategy to become an energy conduit to the West . However Turkey 's border with Armenia , a state in the Caucasus , was closed by Turkey in support of Azerbaijan during the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh War and remains closed . 
 Under the AKP government , Turkey 's influence has grown in the formerly Ottoman territories of the Middle East and the Balkans , based on the " strategic depth " doctrine ( a terminology that was coined by Ahmet Davutoğlu for defining Turkey 's increased engagement in regional foreign policy issues ) , also called Neo @-@ <unk> . Following the Arab Spring in December 2010 , the choices made by the AKP government for supporting certain political opposition groups in the affected countries have led to tensions with some Arab states , such as Turkey 's neighbour Syria since the start of the Syrian civil war , and Egypt after the ousting of President Mohamed Morsi . As of 2016 , Turkey doesn 't have an ambassador in Syria and Egypt . Diplomatic relations with Israel were also severed after the Gaza flotilla raid in 2010 , but were normalized following a deal in June 2016 . These political rifts have left Turkey with few allies in the East Mediterranean , where rich natural gas fields have recently been discovered ; in sharp contrast with the original goals that were set by the former Foreign Minister ( later Prime Minister ) Ahmet Davutoğlu in his " zero problems with neighbours " foreign policy doctrine . In 2015 , Turkey , Saudi Arabia and Qatar formed a " strategic alliance " against Syrian President Bashar al @-@ Assad . 
 Turkey has maintained forces in international missions under the United Nations and NATO since 1950 , including peacekeeping missions in Somalia and former Yugoslavia , and support to coalition forces in the First Gulf War . Turkey maintains 36 @,@ 000 troops in Northern Cyprus , though their presence is controversial , and assists Iraqi Kurdistan with security . Turkey has had troops deployed in Afghanistan as part of the United States stabilization force and the UN @-@ authorized , NATO @-@ commanded International Security Assistance Force ( ISAF ) since 2001 . Since 2003 , Turkey contributes military personnel to Eurocorps and takes part in the EU Battlegroups . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 The Turkish Armed Forces consists of the Land Forces , the Naval Forces and the Air Force . The Gendarmerie and the Coast Guard operate as parts of the Ministry of Internal Affairs in peacetime , although they are subordinated to the Army and Navy Commands respectively in wartime , during which they have both internal law enforcement and military functions . 
 The Chief of the General Staff is appointed by the President and is responsible to the Prime Minister . The Council of Ministers is responsible to the Parliament for matters of national security and the adequate preparation of the armed forces to defend the country . However , the authority to declare war and to deploy the Turkish Armed Forces to foreign countries or to allow foreign armed forces to be stationed in Turkey rests solely with the Parliament . 
 Turkey has the second largest standing military force in NATO , after the U.S. Armed Forces , with an estimated strength of 495 @,@ 000 deployable forces , according to a 2011 NATO estimate . Turkey is one of five NATO member states which are part of the nuclear sharing policy of the alliance , together with Belgium , Germany , Italy , and the Netherlands . A total of 90 B61 nuclear bombs are hosted at the Incirlik Air Base , 40 of which are allocated for use by the Turkish Air Force in case of a nuclear conflict , but their use requires the approval of NATO . 
 Every fit male Turkish citizen otherwise not barred is required to serve in the military for a period ranging from three weeks to a year , dependent on education and job location . Turkey does not recognise conscientious objection and does not offer a civilian alternative to military service . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Turkey is a transcontinental Eurasian country . Asian Turkey , which includes 97 percent of the country , is separated from European Turkey by the Bosphorus , the Sea of Marmara , and the Dardanelles . European Turkey comprises 3 percent of the country . The territory of Turkey is more than 1 @,@ 600 kilometres ( 990 miles ) long and 800 kilometres ( 500 miles ) wide , with a roughly rectangular shape . It lies between latitudes 35 ° and 43 ° N , and longitudes 25 ° and 45 ° E. Turkey 's land area , including lakes , occupies 783 @,@ 562 square kilometres ( 302 @,@ 535 square miles ) , of which 755 @,@ 688 square kilometres ( 291 @,@ 773 square miles ) are in Southwest Asia and 23 @,@ 764 square kilometres ( 9 @,@ 175 square miles ) in Europe . Turkey is the world 's 37th @-@ largest country in terms of area . The country is encircled by seas on three sides : the Aegean Sea to the west , the Black Sea to the north and the Mediterranean to the south . Turkey also contains the Sea of Marmara in the northwest . 
 The European section of Turkey , East Thrace ( the easternmost region of the Balkan peninsula ) , forms the borders of Turkey with Greece and Bulgaria . The Asian part of the country is comprised mostly by the peninsula of Anatolia , which consists of a high central plateau with narrow coastal plains , between the <unk> and Pontic mountain ranges to the north and the Taurus Mountains to the south . Eastern Turkey , located within the western plateau of the Armenian Highlands , has a more mountainous landscape and is home to the sources of rivers such as the Euphrates , Tigris and Aras , and contains Mount Ararat , Turkey 's highest point at 5 @,@ 137 metres ( 16 @,@ 854 feet ) , and Lake Van , the largest lake in the country . Southeastern Turkey is located within the northern plains of Upper Mesopotamia . 
 Turkey is divided into seven geographical regions : Marmara , Aegean , Black Sea , Central Anatolia , Eastern Anatolia , Southeastern Anatolia and the Mediterranean . The uneven north Anatolian terrain running along the Black Sea resembles a long , narrow belt . This region comprises approximately one @-@ sixth of Turkey 's total land area . As a general trend , the inland Anatolian plateau becomes increasingly rugged as it progresses eastward . 
 Turkey 's varied landscapes are the product of complex earth movements that have shaped the region over thousands of years and still manifest themselves in fairly frequent earthquakes and occasional volcanic eruptions . The Bosphorus and the Dardanelles owe their existence to the fault lines running through Turkey that led to the creation of the Black Sea . The North Anatolian Fault Line runs across the north of the country from west to east , along which major earthquakes took place in history . The latest of those big earthquakes was the 1999 İzmit earthquake . 
 = = = Biodiversity = = = 
 Turkey 's extraordinary ecosystem and habitat diversity has produced considerable species diversity . Anatolia is the homeland of many plants that have been cultivated for food since the advent of agriculture , and the wild ancestors of many plants that now provide staples for humankind still grow in Turkey . The diversity of Turkey 's fauna is even greater than that of its flora . The number of animal species in the whole of Europe is around 60 @,@ 000 , while in Turkey there are over 80 @,@ 000 ( over 100 @,@ 000 counting the subspecies ) . 
 The Northern Anatolian conifer and deciduous forests is an ecoregion which covers most of the Pontic Mountains in northern Turkey , while the Caucasus mixed forests extend across the eastern end of the range . The region is home to Eurasian wildlife such as the Eurasian sparrowhawk , golden eagle , eastern imperial eagle , lesser spotted eagle , Caucasian black grouse , red @-@ fronted <unk> , and wallcreeper . The narrow coastal strip between the Pontic Mountains and the Black Sea is home to the Euxine @-@ <unk> deciduous forests , which contain some of the world 's few temperate rainforests . The Turkish pine is mostly found in Turkey and other east Mediterranean countries . Several wild species of tulip are native to Anatolia , and the flower was first introduced to Western Europe with species taken from the Ottoman Empire in the 16th century . 
 There are 40 national parks , 189 nature parks , 31 nature preserve areas , 80 wildlife protection areas and 109 nature monuments in Turkey such as Gallipoli Peninsula Historical National Park , Mount <unk> National Park , Ancient <unk> National Park , <unk> Nature Park and <unk> Nature Park . 
 Ankara , the capital of Turkey , is renowned for the Angora cat , Angora rabbit and Angora goat . Another national cat breed of Turkey is the Van cat . The national dog breeds are the Anatolian Shepherd , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 The last confirmed death of an Anatolian leopard , closely related to the Persian ( Caucasian ) leopard and native to the western regions of Anatolia , took place in the <unk> village of the <unk> district in Ankara Province on 17 January 1974 . The Persian ( Caucasian ) leopard is still found in very small numbers in the northeastern and southeastern regions of Turkey . The Caspian tiger is an extinct tiger subspecies ( closely related to the Siberian tiger ) which lived in the easternmost regions of Turkey until the latter half of the 20th century , with the last confirmed death in <unk> , February 1970 . The Eurasian lynx and the European wildcat are other felid species which are currently found in the forests of Turkey . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The coastal areas of Turkey bordering the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas have a temperate Mediterranean climate , with hot , dry summers and mild to cool , wet winters . The coastal areas bordering the Black Sea have a temperate oceanic climate with warm , wet summers and cool to cold , wet winters . The Turkish Black Sea coast receives the greatest amount of precipitation and is the only region of Turkey that receives high precipitation throughout the year . The eastern part of that coast averages 2 @,@ 200 millimetres ( 87 in ) annually which is the highest precipitation in the country . 
 The coastal areas bordering the Sea of Marmara , which connects the Aegean Sea and the Black Sea , have a transitional climate between a temperate Mediterranean climate and a temperate oceanic climate with warm to hot , moderately dry summers and cool to cold , wet winters . Snow falls on the coastal areas of the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea almost every winter , but usually melts in no more than a few days . However snow is rare in the coastal areas of the Aegean Sea and very rare in the coastal areas of the Mediterranean Sea . 
 Mountains close to the coast prevent Mediterranean influences from extending inland , giving the central Anatolian plateau of the interior of Turkey a continental climate with sharply contrasting seasons . 
 Winters on the eastern part of the plateau are especially severe . Temperatures of − 30 to − 40 ° C ( − 22 to − 40 ° F ) can occur in eastern Anatolia . Snow may remain at least 120 days of the year . In the west , winter temperatures average below 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) . Summers are hot and dry , with temperatures often above 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) in the day . Annual precipitation averages about 400 millimetres ( 15 in ) , with actual amounts determined by elevation . The driest regions are the Konya plain and the Malatya plain , where annual rainfall is often less than 300 millimetres ( 12 in ) . May is generally the wettest month , whereas July and August are the driest . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Turkey has the world 's 17th largest GDP by PPP and 18th largest nominal GDP . The country is among the founding members of the OECD and the G @-@ 20 major economies . 
 The EU – Turkey Customs Union in 1995 led to an extensive liberalization of tariff rates , and forms one of the most important pillars of Turkey 's foreign trade policy . Turkey 's exports were $ 143 @.@ 5 billion in 2011 and reached $ 163 billion in 2012 ( main export partners in 2012 : Germany 8 @.@ 6 % , Iraq 7 @.@ 1 % , Iran 6 @.@ 5 % , UK 5 @.@ 7 % , UAE 5 @.@ 4 % ) . However , larger imports which amounted to $ 229 billion in 2012 threatened the balance of trade ( main import partners in 2012 : Russia 11 @.@ 3 % , Germany 9 % , China 9 % , US 6 % , Italy 5 @.@ 6 % ) . 
 Turkey has a sizeable automotive industry , which produced over a million motor vehicles in 2012 , ranking as the 17th largest producer in the world . Turkish shipbuilding exports were worth US $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in 2011 . The major export markets are Malta , Marshall Islands , Panama and the United Kingdom . Turkish shipyards have 15 floating docks of different sizes and one dry dock . Tuzla , <unk> , and İzmit have developed into dynamic shipbuilding centres . In 2011 , there were 70 active shipyards in Turkey , with another 56 being built . Turkish shipyards are highly regarded both for the production of chemical and oil tankers up to 10 @,@ 000 <unk> and also for their mega yachts . 
 Turkish brands like <unk> and <unk> are among the largest producers of consumer electronics and home appliances in Europe , and invest a substantial amount of funds for research and development in new technologies related to these fields . 
 Other key sectors of the Turkish economy are banking , construction , home appliances , electronics , textiles , oil refining , petrochemical products , food , mining , iron and steel , and machine industry . In 2010 , the agricultural sector accounted for 9 percent of GDP , while the industrial sector accounted for 26 percent and the services sector for 65 percent . However , agriculture still accounted for a quarter of employment . In 2004 , it was estimated that 46 percent of total disposable income was received by the top 20 percent of income earners , while the lowest 20 percent received only 6 percent . The rate of female employment in Turkey was 30 percent in 2012 , the lowest among all OECD countries . 
 Foreign direct investment ( FDI ) was $ 8 @.@ 3 billion in 2012 , a figure expected to rise to $ 15 billion in 2013 . In 2012 , Fitch Group upgraded Turkey 's credit rating to investment grade after an 18 @-@ year gap ; this was followed by a ratings upgrade by Moody 's in May 2013 , as the service lifted Turkey 's government bond ratings to the lowest investment grade <unk> . 
 = = = History = = = 
 In the early decades of the Turkish Republic , the government ( or banks established and owned by the government , such as Türkiye <unk> Bankası ( 1924 ) , <unk> ve <unk> Bankası ( 1925 ) , <unk> ve <unk> Bankası ( 1926 ) , Central Bank of Turkey ( 1930 ) , <unk> ( 1933 ) , <unk> Bankası ( 1933 ) , <unk> ( 1935 ) , <unk> ( 1937 ) , <unk> Bankası ( 1938 ) , etc . ) had to subsidize most of the industrial projects , due to the lack of a strong private sector . However , in the period between the 1920s and 1950s , a new generation of Turkish entrepreneurs such as Nuri <unk> , <unk> Koç , <unk> Ömer Sabancı and <unk> Eczacıbaşı began to establish privately owned factories , some of which evolved into the largest industrial conglomerates that dominate the Turkish economy today , such as Koç Holding , Sabancı Holding and Eczacıbaşı Holding . 
 During the first six decades of the republic , between 1923 and 1983 , Turkey generally adhered to a quasi @-@ statist approach with strict government planning of the budget and government @-@ imposed limitations over foreign trade , flow of foreign currency , foreign direct investment and private sector participation in certain fields ( such as broadcasting , telecommunications , energy , mining , etc . ) . However , in 1983 , Prime Minister Turgut Özal initiated a series of reforms designed to shift the economy from a statist , insulated system to a more private @-@ sector , market @-@ based model . 
 The reforms , combined with unprecedented amounts of funding from foreign loans , spurred rapid economic growth ; but this growth was punctuated by sharp recessions and financial crises in 1994 , 1999 ( following the earthquake of that year ) , and 2001 ; resulting in an average of 4 percent GDP growth per annum between 1981 and 2003 . Lack of additional fiscal reforms , combined with large and growing public sector deficits and widespread corruption , resulted in high inflation , a weak banking sector and increased macroeconomic volatility . Since the economic crisis of 2001 and the reforms initiated by the finance minister of the time , Kemal <unk> , inflation has dropped to single @-@ digit figures for the first time in decades ( 8 % in 2005 ) , investor confidence and foreign investment have soared , and unemployment has fallen ( 10 % in 2005 ) . 
 Turkey has gradually opened up its markets through economic reforms by reducing government controls on foreign trade and investment and the privatization of publicly owned industries , and the liberalization of many sectors to private and foreign participation has continued amid political debate . The public debt @-@ to @-@ GDP ratio peaked at 75 @.@ 9 percent during the recession of 2001 , falling to an estimated 26 @.@ 9 percent by 2013 . 
 The real GDP growth rate from 2002 to 2007 averaged 6 @.@ 8 percent annually , which made Turkey one of the fastest growing economies in the world during that period . However , growth slowed to 1 percent in 2008 , and in 2009 the Turkish economy was affected by the global financial crisis , with a recession of 5 percent . The economy was estimated to have returned to 8 percent growth in 2010 . According to Eurostat data , Turkish GDP per capita adjusted by purchasing power standard stood at 52 percent of the EU average in 2011 . 
 In the early years of the 21st century , the chronically high inflation was brought under control ; this led to the launch of a new currency , the Turkish new lira ( Yeni Türk <unk> ) in 2005 , to cement the acquisition of the economic reforms and erase the vestiges of an unstable economy . In 2009 , after only four years in circulation , the Turkish new lira was renamed back to the Turkish lira with the introduction of new banknotes and coins ( and the withdrawal of the Turkish new lira banknotes and coins that were introduced in 2005 ) , but the ISO 4217 code of the Turkish new lira ( <unk> ) remains in use for the current Turkish lira in the foreign exchange market . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Tourism in Turkey has experienced rapid growth in the last twenty years , and constitutes an important part of the economy . In 2013 , 37 @.@ 8 million foreign visitors arrived in Turkey , which ranked as the 6th most popular tourism destination in the world ; they contributed $ 27 @.@ 9 billion to Turkey 's revenues . In 2012 , 15 percent of the tourists were from Germany , 11 percent from Russia , 8 percent from the United Kingdom , 5 percent from Bulgaria , 4 percent each from Georgia , the Netherlands and Iran , 3 percent from France , 2 percent each from the United States and Syria , and 40 percent from other countries . 
 Turkey has 13 UNESCO World Heritage Sites , such as the " Historic Areas of Istanbul " , the " Rock Sites of Cappadocia " , the " Neolithic Site of Çatalhöyük " , " <unk> : the Hittite Capital " , the " Archaeological Site of Troy " , " Pergamon and its Multi @-@ Layered Cultural Landscape " , " Hierapolis – Pamukkale " , and " Mount <unk> " ; and 51 World Heritage Sites in tentative list , such as the archaeological sites or historic urban centers of <unk> Tepe , <unk> , Ephesus , Aphrodisias , Perga , Lycia , <unk> , <unk> , Zeugma , Ani , Harran , Mardin , Konya and Alanya . 
 Turkey hosts two of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World : the Mausoleum in Halicarnassus and the Temple of Artemis in Ephesus . 
 = = = Infrastructure = = = 
 In 2013 there were 98 airports in Turkey , including 22 international airports . As of 2015 , Istanbul Atatürk Airport is the 11th busiest airport in the world , serving 31 @,@ 833 @,@ 324 passengers between January and July 2014 , according to Airports Council International . The new ( third ) international airport of Istanbul is planned to be the largest airport in the world , with a capacity to serve 150 million passengers per annum . Turkish Airlines , flag carrier of Turkey since 1933 , was selected by Skytrax as Europe 's best airline for five consecutive years in 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 and 2015 . With 435 destinations ( 51 domestic and 384 international ) in 126 countries worldwide , Turkish Airlines is the largest carrier in the world by number of countries served as of 2016 . 
 As of 2014 , the country has a roadway network of 65 @,@ 623 kilometres ( 40 @,@ 776 miles ) . The total length of the rail network was 10 @,@ 991 km in 2008 , including 2 @,@ 133 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 325 miles ) of electrified and 457 kilometres ( 284 miles ) of high @-@ speed track . The Turkish State Railways started building high @-@ speed rail lines in 2003 . The Ankara @-@ Konya line became operational in 2011 while the Ankara @-@ Istanbul line entered service in 2014 . 
 In 2008 , 7 @,@ 555 kilometres ( 4 @,@ 694 mi ) of natural gas pipelines and 3 @,@ 636 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 259 mi ) of petroleum pipelines spanned the country 's territory . The Baku @-@ Tbilisi @-@ Ceyhan pipeline , the second longest oil pipeline in the world , was inaugurated on 10 May 2005 . The Blue Stream , a major trans @-@ Black Sea gas pipeline , delivers natural gas from Russia to Turkey . New undersea pipeline , with an annual capacity around 63 billion cubic metres ( <unk> ) , will allow Turkey to resell Russian gas to Europe . 
 In 2013 , the energy consumption was 240 billion kilowatt hours . As Turkey imported 72 percent of its energy in 2013 , the government decided to invest in nuclear power to reduce imports . Three nuclear power stations are to be built by 2023 . Turkey has the fifth highest direct utilization and capacity of geothermal power in the world . Turkey is a partner country of the EU <unk> energy programme . 
 Turkey 's first nuclear power plants are planned to be built in Mersin 's <unk> district on the Mediterranean coast ; in Sinop 's <unk> district on the Black Sea coast ; and in <unk> 's <unk> district on the Black Sea coast . Turkey has the fifth highest direct utilization and capacity of geothermal power in the world . Turkey is a partner country of the EU <unk> energy programme , which has four key topics : enhancing energy security , convergence of member state energy markets on the basis of EU internal energy market principles , supporting sustainable energy development , and attracting investment for energy projects of common and regional interest . 
 Turkey 's internet , which has 35 million active users , holds a ' Partly Free ' ranking in Freedom House 's index . 
 Water supply and sanitation in Turkey is characterized by achievements and challenges . Over the past decades access to drinking water has become almost universal and access to adequate sanitation has also increased substantially . Autonomous utilities have been created in the 16 metropolitan cities of Turkey and cost recovery has been increased , thus providing the basis for the sustainability of service provision . Intermittent supply , which was common in many cities , has become less frequent . In 2004 , 61 % of the wastewater collected through sewers was being treated . 
 Remaining challenges include the need to further increase wastewater treatment , to reduce the high level of non @-@ revenue water hovering around 50 % and to expand access to adequate sanitation in rural areas . The investment required to comply with EU standards in the sector , especially in wastewater treatment , is estimated to be in the order of Euro 2 billion per year , more than double the current level of investment . 
 = = = Science and technology = = = 
 <unk> is the leading agency for developing science , technology and innovation policies in Turkey . <unk> is an autonomous scholarly society acting to promote scientific activities in Turkey . <unk> is the official nuclear energy institution of Turkey . Its objectives include academic research in nuclear energy , and the development and implementation of peaceful nuclear tools . 
 Turkish government companies for research and development in military technologies include Turkish Aerospace Industries , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , among others . Turkish Satellite Assembly , Integration and Test Center ( <unk> ) is a spacecraft production and testing facility owned by the Ministry of National Defence and operated by the Turkish Aerospace Industries ( TAI ) . The Turkish Space Launch System ( UFS ) is a project to develop the satellite launch capability of Turkey . It consists of the construction of a spaceport , the development of satellite launch vehicles as well as the establishment of remote earth stations . 
 In 2015 , Aziz Sancar , a Turkish professor at the University of North Carolina , won the Nobel Chemistry Prize along with Tomas <unk> and Paul Modrich , for their work on how cells repair damaged DNA . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the Address @-@ Based Population Recording System of Turkey , the country 's population was 74 @.@ 7 million people in 2011 , nearly three @-@ quarters of whom lived in towns and cities . According to the 2011 estimate , the population is increasing by 1 @.@ 35 percent each year . Turkey has an average population density of 97 people per km ² . People within the 15 – 64 age group constitute 67 @.@ 4 percent of the total population ; the 0 – 14 age group corresponds to 25 @.@ 3 percent ; while senior citizens aged 65 years or older make up 7 @.@ 3 percent . In 1927 , when the first official census was recorded in the Republic of Turkey , the population was 13 @.@ 6 million . The largest city in Turkey , Istanbul , is also the largest city in Europe in population , and the third @-@ largest city in Europe in terms of size . 
 Article 66 of the Turkish Constitution defines a " Turk " as " anyone who is bound to the Turkish state through the bond of citizenship " ; therefore , the legal use of the term " Turkish " as a citizen of Turkey is different from the ethnic definition . However , the majority of the Turkish population are of Turkish ethnicity . They are estimated at 70 – 75 percent . Reliable data on the ethnic mix of the population is not available , because Turkish census figures do not include statistics on ethnicity . The three " Non @-@ Muslim " minority groups claimed to be officially recognized in the Treaty of Lausanne are Armenians , Greeks and Jews . Officially unrecognized ( mostly Muslim ) ethnic groups include Albanians , Arabs , Assyrians , Azeris , Bosniaks , Circassians , Georgians , <unk> , Persians , <unk> ( Bulgarians ) , Yazidis and Roma . The Kurds , a distinct ethnic group , are the largest non @-@ Turkic ethnicity , around 18 – 25 percent of the population . Kurds are concentrated in the east and southeast of the country , in what is also known as Turkish Kurdistan . Kurds make up a majority in the provinces of <unk> , <unk> , Muş , <unk> , Iğdır , <unk> , Diyarbakır , Batman , Şırnak , Bitlis , Van , Mardin , <unk> and Hakkari , a near majority in <unk> province ( 47 % ) , and a large minority in Kars province ( 20 % ) . In addition , due to internal migration , Kurdish communities exist in all major cities in central and western Turkey , particularly in Istanbul , where there are an estimated 3 million Kurds , making Istanbul the city with the largest Kurdish population in the world . Minorities besides the Kurds are thought to make up an estimated 7 – 12 percent of the population . Minorities other than the three officially recognized ones do not have any minority rights . The term " minority " itself remains a sensitive issue in Turkey , while the Turkish government is frequently criticized for its treatment of minorities . Although minorities are not recognised , state @-@ run Turkish Radio and Television Corporation ( TRT ) broadcasts television and radio programs in minority languages . Also , some minority language classes can be chosen in elementary schools . 
 An estimated 2 @.@ 5 percent of the population are international migrants . Turkey hosts the largest number of refugees in the world , including 2 @.@ 2 million Syrian refugees , as of September 2015 . 
 The country 's official language is Turkish , which is spoken by 85 @.@ 54 percent of the population as mother tongue . 11 @.@ 97 percent of the population speaks the <unk> dialect of Kurdish as mother tongue . Arabic and Zaza are the mother tongues of 2 @.@ 39 percent of the population , and several other languages are the mother tongues of smaller parts of the population . Endangered languages in Turkey include <unk> , Abkhaz , <unk> , Cappadocian Greek , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> , Ladino ( <unk> ) , Laz , <unk> , Pontic Greek , Romani , Suret , <unk> , <unk> , and Western Armenian . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Turkey is a secular state with no official state religion ; the Turkish Constitution provides for freedom of religion and conscience . The role of religion has been a controversial debate over the years since the formation of Islamist parties . For many decades , the wearing of the hijab was banned in schools and government buildings because it was viewed as a symbol of political Islam . However , the ban was lifted from universities in 2011 , from government buildings in 2013 , and from schools in 2014 . 
 = = = = Islam = = = = 
 Islam is the dominant religion of Turkey with 99 @.@ 8 percent of the population being registered as Muslim ( although some sources give a slightly lower estimate of 96 @.@ 4 percent ) with the most popular sect being the <unk> school of Sunni Islam . The highest Islamic religious authority is the Presidency of Religious Affairs ( Turkish : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ; it interprets the Hanafi school of law , and is responsible for regulating the operation of the country 's 80 @,@ 000 registered mosques and employing local and provincial imams . Academics suggest the Alevi population may be from 15 to 20 million while the Alevi @-@ <unk> Federation claims that there are around 25 million and according to <unk> magazine , the number of Shiite <unk> ( excluding Alevis ) is 3 million ( 4 @.@ 2 percent ) . There are also some Sufi Muslims . Roughly 2 percent are non @-@ denominational Muslims . 
 The percentage of non @-@ Muslims in Turkey fell from 19 percent in 1914 to 2 @.@ 5 percent in 1927 , due to events which had a significant impact on the country 's demographic structure , such as the Armenian Genocide , the population exchange between Greece and Turkey , and the emigration of non @-@ Muslims ( such as <unk> , Greeks , Armenians , Jews , etc . ) to foreign countries ( mostly in Europe and the Americas ) that actually began in the late 19th century and gained pace in the first quarter of the 20th century , especially during World War I and after the Turkish War of Independence . The Wealth Tax on non @-@ Muslims in 1942 , the emigration of a portion of Turkish Jews to Israel after 1948 , and the ongoing Cyprus dispute which damaged the relations between Turks and Greeks ( culminating in the Istanbul pogrom of 6 – 7 September 1955 ) were other important events that contributed to the decline of Turkey 's non @-@ Muslim population . 
 = = = = Christianity = = = = 
 Today there are more than 120 @,@ 000 people of different Christian denominations , representing less than 0 @.@ 2 percent of Turkey 's population , including an estimated 80 @,@ 000 Oriental Orthodox , 35 @,@ 000 Roman Catholics , 18 @,@ 000 Antiochian Greeks , 5 @,@ 000 Greek Orthodox and smaller numbers of Protestants . Currently there are 236 churches open for worship in Turkey . The Eastern Orthodox Church has been headquartered in Istanbul since the 4th century . 
 = = = = Judaism = = = = 
 There are about 26 @,@ 000 people who are Jewish , the vast majority of whom are Sephardi . There have been Jewish communities in Asia Minor since at least the 5th century BC and many Spanish and Portuguese Jews expelled from Spain were welcomed into the Ottoman Empire in the late 15th century , twenty centuries later . Despite emigration during the 20th century , modern @-@ day Turkey continues to have a small Jewish population . 
 = = = = Agnosticism and atheism = = = = 
 According to a 2010 Eurobarometer poll 94 % of Turks believed in God while only 1 % did not . This indicates that 5 % of the population are agnostic with another 1 % being explicitly atheist . However , according to another poll by <unk> the percentage of atheism is 2 @.@ 9 % . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 The Ministry of National Education is responsible for pre @-@ tertiary education . This is compulsory and lasts twelve years : four years each of primary school , middle school and high school . Less than half of 25- to 34 @-@ year @-@ old Turks have completed at least high school , compared with an OECD average of over 80 percent . Basic education in Turkey is considered to lag behind other OECD countries , with significant differences between high and low performers . Turkey is ranked 32nd out of 34 in the OECD 's <unk> study . Access to high @-@ quality school heavily depends on the performance in the secondary school entrance exams , to the point that some students begin taking private tutoring classes when they are 10 years old . The overall adult literacy rate in 2011 was 94 @.@ 1 percent ; 97 @.@ 9 percent for males and 90 @.@ 3 percent for females . 
 By 2011 , there were 166 universities in Turkey . Entry to higher education depends on the Student Selection Examination ( ÖSS ) . In 2008 , the quota of admitted students was 600 @,@ 000 , compared to 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 who took the ÖSS exam in 2007 . Except for the Open Education Faculty ( Turkish : <unk> <unk> ) at Anadolu University , entrance is regulated by the national ÖSS examination , after which high school graduates are assigned to universities according to their performance . According to the 2012 – 2013 Times Higher Education World University Rankings , the top university in Turkey is Middle East Technical University ( in the 201 – 225 rank range ) , followed by <unk> University and Koç University ( both in the 226 – 250 range ) , Istanbul Technical University and Boğaziçi University ( in the 276 – 300 bracket ) . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 Health care in Turkey used to be dominated by a centralized state system run by the Ministry of Health . In 2003 , the government introduced a sweeping health reform programme aimed at increasing the ratio of private to state health provision and making healthcare available to a larger share of the population . Turkish Statistical Institute announced that 76 @.@ 3 billion TL was spent for healthcare in 2012 ; 79 @.@ 6 percent of which was covered by the Social Security Institution and 15 @.@ 4 percent of which was paid directly by the patients . In 2012 , there were 29 @,@ 960 medical institutions in Turkey , and on average one doctor per 583 people and 2 @.@ 65 beds per 1000 people . 
 Life expectancy ( as of 2010 ) was 71 @.@ 1 years for men and 75 @.@ 3 for women , with an overall average of 73 @.@ 2 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Turkey has a very diverse culture that is a blend of various elements of the Oğuz Turkic , Anatolian , Ottoman ( which was itself a continuation of both Greco @-@ Roman and Islamic cultures ) and Western culture and traditions , which started with the Westernisation of the Ottoman Empire and still continues today . This mix originally began as a result of the encounter of Turks and their culture with those of the peoples who were in their path during their migration from Central Asia to the West . Turkish culture is a product of efforts to be a " modern " Western state , while maintaining traditional religious and historical values . 
 = = = Arts = = = 
 Turkish painting , in the Western sense , developed actively starting from the mid 19th century . The very first painting lessons were scheduled at what is now the Istanbul Technical University ( then the Imperial Military Engineering School ) in 1793 , mostly for technical purposes . In the late 19th century , human figure in the western sense was being established in Turkish painting , especially with Osman Hamdi Bey . Impressionism , among the contemporary trends , appeared later on with Halil Paşa . The young Turkish artists sent to Europe in 1926 came back inspired by contemporary trends such as Fauvism , Cubism and even Expressionism , still very influential in Europe . The later " Group D " of artists led by Abidin Dino , Cemal <unk> , Fikret <unk> , <unk> Zeid , Bedri <unk> <unk> , Adnan <unk> and <unk> <unk> introduced some trends that had lasted in the West for more than three decades . Other important movements in Turkish painting were the " <unk> Grubu " ( The Newcomers Group ) of the late 1930s ; the " On <unk> Grubu " ( Group of Ten ) of the 1940s ; the " Yeni Dal Grubu " ( New Branch Group ) of the 1950s ; and the " <unk> Kalem Grubu " ( Black Pen Group ) of the 1960s . 
 Turkish music and literature are examples of a mix of cultural influences . Interaction between the Ottoman Empire and the Islamic world along with Europe contributed to a blend of Turkic , Islamic and European traditions in modern @-@ day Turkish music and literary arts . Turkish literature was heavily influenced by Persian and Arabic literature during most of the Ottoman era . The Tanzimat reforms introduced previously unknown Western genres , primarily the novel and the short story . Many of the writers in the Tanzimat period wrote in several genres simultaneously : for instance , the poet <unk> Kemal also wrote the important 1876 novel <unk> ( Awakening ) , while the journalist <unk> is noted for writing , in 1860 , the first modern Turkish play , the one @-@ act comedy " <unk> <unk> " ( The Poet 's Marriage ) . Most of the roots of modern Turkish literature were formed between the years 1896 and 1923 . Broadly , there were three primary literary movements during this period : the <unk> @-@ ı <unk> ( New Literature ) movement ; the <unk> @-@ i <unk> ( Dawn of the Future ) movement ; and the <unk> <unk> ( National Literature ) movement . The first radical step of innovation in 20th century Turkish poetry was taken by <unk> Hikmet , who introduced the free verse style . Another revolution in Turkish poetry came about in 1941 with the <unk> Movement . The mix of cultural influences in Turkey is dramatized , for example , in the form of the " new symbols of the clash and interlacing of cultures " enacted in the novels of Orhan Pamuk , recipient of the 2006 Nobel Prize in Literature . 
 Turkey has a diverse folkloric dance culture . Hora is performed in East Thrace ; <unk> in the Aegean Region , Southern Marmara and East @-@ Central Anatolia Region ; Teke in the Western Mediterranean Region ; <unk> <unk> and <unk> in West @-@ Central Anatolia , Western Black Sea Region , Southern Marmara Region and Eastern Mediterranean Region ; Horon in the Central and Eastern Black Sea Region ; <unk> in Eastern Anatolia and the Central Anatolia Region ; and Bar and <unk> in the Northeastern Anatolia Region . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The architecture of the Seljuk Turks combined the elements and characteristics of the Turkic architecture of Central Asia with those of Persian , Arab , Armenian and Byzantine architecture . The transition from Seljuk architecture to Ottoman architecture is most visible in Bursa , which was the capital of the Ottoman State between 1335 and 1413 . Following the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople ( Istanbul ) in 1453 , Ottoman architecture was significantly influenced by Byzantine architecture . Topkapı Palace in Istanbul is one of the most famous examples of classical Ottoman architecture and was the primary residence of the Ottoman Sultans for approximately 400 years . Mimar Sinan ( <unk> – 1588 ) was the most important architect of the classical period in Ottoman architecture . He was the chief architect of at least 374 buildings which were constructed in various provinces of the Ottoman Empire in the 16th century . 
 Since the 18th century , Turkish architecture has been increasingly influenced by European styles , and this can be particularly seen in the Tanzimat era buildings of Istanbul like the Dolmabahçe , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Yıldız palaces , which were all designed by members of the <unk> family of Ottoman court architects . The Ottoman era waterfront houses ( <unk> ) on the Bosphorus also reflect the fusion between classical Ottoman and European architectural styles during the aforementioned period . The First National Architectural Movement ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) in the early 20th century sought to create a new architecture , which was based on motifs from Seljuk and Ottoman architecture . The movement was also labelled Turkish Neoclassical or the National Architectural Renaissance . The leading architects of this movement were <unk> Tek ( 1873 – 1942 ) , Mimar <unk> Bey ( 1870 – 1927 ) , Arif Hikmet <unk> ( 1888 – 1982 ) and Giulio <unk> ( 1873 – 1953 ) . Notable buildings from this era are the Grand Post Office in Istanbul ( 1905 – 1909 ) , <unk> Apartments ( 1919 – 1922 ) , Istanbul 4th <unk> Han ( 1911 – 1926 ) , State Art and Sculpture Museum ( 1927 – 1930 ) , Ethnography Museum of Ankara ( 1925 – 1928 ) , the first <unk> Bank headquarters in Ankara ( 1925 – 1929 ) , the first Türkiye <unk> Bankası headquarters in Ankara ( 1926 – 1929 ) , Bebek Mosque , and Kamer Hatun Mosque . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 The most popular sport in Turkey is association football ( soccer ) . Galatasaray won the UEFA Cup and UEFA Super Cup in 2000 . The Turkish national football team finished 3rd and won the bronze medal at the 2002 FIFA World Cup and at the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup ; while also reaching the semi @-@ finals ( finishing 3rd by goals difference ) at the UEFA Euro 2008 . 
 Other mainstream sports such as basketball and volleyball are also popular . The Turkish men 's national basketball team finished 2nd and won the silver medal at the 2010 FIBA World Championship and at EuroBasket 2001 , which were both hosted by Turkey . They also won two gold medals ( 1987 and 2013 ) , one silver medal ( 1971 ) and three bronze medals ( 1967 , 1983 and 2009 ) at the Mediterranean Games . Turkish basketball club Anadolu Efes S.K. won the 1995 – 96 FIBA <unk> Cup , finished 2nd at the 1992 – 93 FIBA Saporta Cup , and made it to the Final Four of Euroleague and <unk> in 2000 and 2001 , finishing 3rd on both occasions . Another Turkish basketball club , Beşiktaş , won the 2011 – 12 FIBA <unk> . Galatasaray won the 2015 – 16 Eurocup , while in the same season , Fenerbahçe finished second in the 2015 – 16 Euroleague . The Final of the 2013 – 14 EuroLeague Women basketball championship was played between two Turkish teams , Galatasaray and Fenerbahçe , and won by Galatasaray . 
 The Turkish women 's national volleyball team won the silver medal at the 2003 European Championship , the bronze medal at the 2011 European Championship , and the bronze medal at the 2012 FIVB World Grand Prix . They also won a gold medal ( 2005 ) , six silver medals ( 1987 , 1991 , 1997 , 2001 , 2009 , 2013 ) and a bronze medal ( 1993 ) at the Mediterranean Games . Women 's volleyball clubs in Turkey , namely Fenerbahçe , Eczacıbaşı and <unk> , have won numerous European championship titles and medals . Fenerbahçe won the 2010 FIVB Women 's Club World Championship and the 2012 <unk> Women 's Champions League . Representing Europe as the winner of the 2012 – 13 <unk> Women 's Champions League , <unk> also became the world champion by winning the 2013 FIVB Women 's Club World Championship . 
 The traditional Turkish national sport has been <unk> <unk> ( oiled wrestling ) since Ottoman times . Edirne has hosted the annual <unk> oiled wrestling tournament since 1361 . International wrestling styles governed by FILA such as Freestyle wrestling and Greco @-@ Roman wrestling are also popular , with many European , World and Olympic championship titles won by Turkish wrestlers both individually and as a national team . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Turkish cuisine is regarded as one of the most prominent in the world , its popularity is largely owed to the cultural influences of the Ottoman Empire and partly because of its major tourism industry . It is largely the heritage of Ottoman cuisine , which can be described as a fusion and refinement of Central Asian , Caucasian , Middle Eastern , Mediterranean and Balkan cuisines . 
 The country 's position between the East and the Mediterranean Sea helped the Turks gain complete control of major trade routes , and an ideal environment allowed plants and animals to flourish . Turkish cuisine was well established by the mid @-@ <unk> , the beginning of the Ottoman Empire 's six hundred @-@ year reign . Yogurt salads , fish in olive oil , and stuffed and wrapped vegetables became Turkish staples . The empire , eventually spanning from Austria to northern Africa , used its land and water routes to import exotic ingredients from all over the world . By the end of the 16th century , the Ottoman court housed over 1 @,@ 400 live @-@ in cooks and passed laws regulating the freshness of food . Since the fall of the empire in World War I ( 1914 – 1918 ) and the establishment of the Turkish Republic in 1923 , foreign food such as French hollandaise sauce and western fast food have made their way into the modern Turkish diet . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Hundreds of television channels , thousands of local and national radio stations , several dozen newspapers , a productive and profitable national cinema and a rapid growth of broadband internet use all make up a very vibrant media industry in Turkey . In 2003 a total of 257 television stations and 1 @,@ 100 radio stations were licensed to operate , and others operated without licenses . Of those licensed , 16 television and 36 radio stations reached national audiences . The majority of the audiences are shared among public broadcaster TRT and the network @-@ style channels such as Kanal D , Show TV , ATV and Star TV . The broadcast media have a very high penetration as satellite dishes and cable systems are widely available . The Radio and Television Supreme Council ( <unk> ) is the government body overseeing the broadcast media . By circulation , the most popular daily newspapers are Zaman , Posta , Hürriyet , <unk> , Sabah and Habertürk . Turkish television dramas are increasingly becoming popular beyond Turkey 's borders and are among the country 's most vital exports , both in terms of profit and public relations . Freedom House lists Turkey 's media as " partly free " . 
 = U.S. Route 25 in Michigan = 
 US Highway 25 ( US 25 ) was a part of the United States Numbered Highway System in the state of Michigan that ran from the Ohio state line near Toledo and ended at the tip of The Thumb in Port Austin . The general routing of this state trunkline highway took it northeasterly from the state line through Monroe and Detroit to Port Huron . Along this southern half , it followed undivided highways and ran concurrently along two freeways , Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) and I @-@ 94 . Near the foot of the Blue Water Bridge in Port Huron , US 25 turned north and northwesterly along the Lake Huron shoreline to Port Austin . 
 Created with the initial US Highway System on November 11 , 1926 , US 25 replaced several previous state highway designations . Some of the preceding highways followed roadways created in the 19th and the early 20th centuries . It initially was only routed as far north as Port Huron ; the northern extension to Port Austin happened in 1933 . By the end of the 1950s , the entire route was paved . Starting in the early 1960s , segments of I @-@ 75 and I @-@ 94 were built , and US 25 was shifted to follow them south of Detroit to Port Huron . A business loop was created when the main highway bypassed downtown Port Huron , and then in 1973 , the entire designation was removed from the state . The final routing of the highway is still maintained by the state under eight different designations , some unsigned . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = State line to Downriver = = = 
 In its final configuration before it was decommissioned in the state , US 25 entered Michigan south of Erie and followed Dixie Highway north @-@ northeasterly away from the state line . The highway ran parallel to US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) about 2 ⁄ 3 mile ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) to the east of that roadway . At LaSalle , the roadway turned more to the northeast toward Monroe . US 25 then turned back to the north @-@ northeast and followed Monroe Street next to Lake Monroe and through downtown Monroe over the River Raisin . North of town , Dixie Highway turned due north and terminated at an intersection with US 24 ; US 25 merged onto Telegraph Road , and the two highways ran concurrently northeasterly through rural Monroe County . At the crossing of the Huron River , US 24 / US 25 entered Flat Rock and Wayne County . 
 The highway followed Telegraph Road through downtown Flat Rock and continued into the suburban area of Downriver . At the intersection with Dix – Toledo Road near Woodhaven , US 25 separated from US 24 and continued northeasterly for about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to an interchange with I @-@ 75 where it merged onto the freeway . I @-@ 75 / US 25 continued on the Fisher Freeway through the Downriver suburbs of Taylor , Southgate , Allen Park , Lincoln Park , and Melvindale before entering the city of Detroit . The freeway curved to run east @-@ northeasterly and passed through an industrial area of the city , crossing the River Rouge . At Clark Avenue , US 25 left the freeway to turn a block south and run along Fort Street parallel to I @-@ 75 . The highway continued along Fort Street running under the approaches to the Ambassador Bridge and into downtown . 
 = = = Downtown Detroit to Port Huron = = = 
 In Downtown Detroit , Fort Street ended at Campus Martius Park at M @-@ 1 ( Woodward Avenue ) . US 25 looped around the park and followed the street named Cadillac Square over to Randolph Street , turning north to connect to Gratiot Avenue , a major thoroughfare on the east side of Detroit . The highway followed Gratiot through the east side of Detroit running north @-@ northeasterly . US 25 intersected the eastern end of the there @-@ unnumbered Fisher Freeway . Gratiot Avenue carried the highway through residential neighborhoods and connected it to the Detroit City Airport . East of the airport , the highway intersected the southern end of M @-@ 97 as well . At M @-@ 102 ( 8 Mile Road ) , US 25 exited Detroit and entered East Detroit , a suburb in Macomb County . The highway continued , roughly parallel to I @-@ 94 through Roseville and Mount Clemens . At Hall Road near Selfridge Air National Guard Base , M @-@ 59 merged with US 25 to follow Gratiot Avenue . At 23 Mile Road west of New Baltimore , US 25 / M @-@ 59 turned eastward onto 23 Mile to an interchange with I @-@ 94 . At that interchange , US 25 turned northeasterly onto the I @-@ 94 freeway while M @-@ 59 terminated ; 23 Mile continued eastward as M @-@ 29 into New Baltimore . 
 I @-@ 94 / US 25 ran northeasterly through rural areas of Macomb County , intersecting the southern end of M @-@ 19 near New Haven . The freeway crossed into rural southern St. Clair County south of Richmond and continued northeastward to Marysville , where it turned northward , crossing Gratiot Avenue . A business loop , Business US 25 ( Bus . US 25 ) ran northeasterly from the freeway along Gratiot Avenue to run parallel to the St. Clair River . From Marysville , the freeway skirted the western side of the Port Huron area , intersecting the M @-@ 21 freeway immediately east of the city before turning eastward to curve around the north side of town . After the freeway crossed the Black River , US 25 turned northward to separate from I @-@ 94 . 
 = = = Along Lake Huron = = = 
 North of downtown Port Huron , US 25 followed Pine Grove Avenue to the eastern terminus of M @-@ 136 and then followed 24th Avenue out of town . South of Lakeport , the highway changed names to Lakeshore Road and ran along the Lake Huron shoreline in The Thumb region of the state . US 25 stayed close to the shoreline and passed Lakeport State Park in the town of the same name . North of the park , the highway crossed into southern Sanilac County and followed the shoreline to the community of Lexington where it intersected the eastern end of M @-@ 90 . Further north , the highway intersected the eastern end of M @-@ 46 in Port Sanilac . 
 North of the community of Richmondville , US 25 passed Sanilac State Park , and then north of Forestville , it crossed into Huron County . On the other side of the county line , the highway passed through the community of White Rock and continued along the lake to Harbor Beach . There , US 25 intersected the eastern end of M @-@ 142 and began to curve around to the northwest to follow the northern tip of The Thumb . About 8 miles ( 13 km ) north of Harbor Beach , the highway passed through Port Hope and turned even more to the northwest on Lakeshore Road . US 25 turned due west at Huron City and passed south of Grindstone City on Grindstone Road . The highway was further inland on this east – west segment as it ran south of Pointe Aux <unk> to Port Austin . At an intersection with M @-@ 53 ( Van Dyke Road ) , US 25 merged with M @-@ 53 to run five blocks north along Lake Street to the waterfront in Port Austin . At the intersection with Spring Street just south of the marina , US 25 / M @-@ 53 jointly terminated while M @-@ 25 continued westward along Spring Street . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before the state highways = = = 
 The chief transportation routes in 1701 were the Indian trails that crossed the future state of Michigan ; the one connecting what are now Detroit and Port Huron was one of these 13 trails at the time . Detroit created 120 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) rights @-@ of @-@ way for the principal streets of the city , the modern Gratiot Avenue included , in 1805 . This street plan was devised by Augustus Woodward and others following a devastating fire in Detroit . Gratiot Avenue , then also called Detroit – Port Huron Road , was authorized by the US Congress on March 2 , 1827 , as a supply road from Detroit to Port Huron for Fort Gratiot . Construction started in Detroit in 1829 , and the roadway was completed in the same year to Mount Clemens . The rest was finished in 1833 . The road was named for the fort near Port Huron , which was in turn named for Colonel Charles Gratiot , the supervising engineer in charge of construction of the structure in the aftermath of the War of 1812 . 
 Telegraph lines were first installed from the Detroit area south to the Monroe area in the mid @-@ 19th century with additional lines north to Pontiac completed around 1868 . As these communication lines were installed , roadways were added as needed to provide access for maintenance . The parallel road from Dearborn south was named for these lines , becoming Telegraph Road . In 1915 , the Dixie Highway , an auto trail that ran south from Detroit to Miami , Florida , was extended to Detroit , and later in 1919 northward to the Straits of Mackinac . 
 = = = Initial state highways to US Highway = = = 
 When the state highway system was first signed in 1919 , five separate highways were designated along US 25 's general route from the state line north through Detroit and Port Huron to Port Austin . From the state line north to Monroe , the roadway was given the first M @-@ 56 designation . From there northward , there was no state highway that corresponded to the future US 25 , but the first M @-@ 10 followed the future US 24 into the Detroit area . Near Dearborn , M @-@ 10 ran further inland than the future US 25 and included a concurrency with M @-@ 17 into Detroit . From Detroit northward , Gratiot Avenue was assigned the M @-@ 19 number into the Port Huron area . Through downtown Port Huron , the future US 25 was numbered as the first M @-@ 27 and along the lakeshore north to Harbor Beach , the highway was M @-@ 31 . From Harbor Beach into Port Austin , M @-@ 27 took over the route . 
 When the US Highway System was created on November 11 , 1926 , US 25 was included in Michigan 's section of the system . The US Highway designation was assigned to run along Dixie Highway replacing that segment of M @-@ 56 . From Monroe northward , US 25 overlapped US 24 on Telegraph Road to the Dearborn area and then followed M @-@ 17 ( Ecorse Road ) to Fort Street and into Downtown Detroit . From there , the highway replaced M @-@ 19 to Marysville and overlapped M @-@ 29 into Port Huron to an intersection with M @-@ 21 ; the remainder of the highway to Port Austin was numbered M @-@ 29 only . The highway was rerouted off Telegraph Road along Dix – Toledo Highway into downtown Detroit in 1929 . By the end of 1932 , US 25 was rerouted from downtown Monroe along Dixie Highway north to US 24 instead of turning westward in the city . The next year , US 25 was extended northward from Port Huron to Port Austin , replacing that section of M @-@ 29 in the process . The remainder of M @-@ 29 westward to Bay City was renumbered M @-@ 25 . 
 In 1936 , US 25 was changed to traffic along a one @-@ way pairing of streets on the southwest side of Port Huron . Northbound traffic remained on Military Avenue while southbound traffic was diverted to Electric Avenue . Two US 25A routings were created in the late 1930s and early 1940s . The first , near Erie , was numbered in 1937 , and renumbered US 24A by 1945 . The second in Port Huron provided access to the Blue Water Bridge from the mainline of the highway starting in 1940 . That last segment of US 25 to be paved was completed near Port Hope at the end of the 1950s . 
 = = = Freeway era = = = 
 With the completion of a segment of I @-@ 94 between Roseville and Marysville in 1963 , US 25 was rerouted to follow I @-@ 94 from the Mount Clemens area north to Marysville . The next year , an additional freeway from the northern end of I @-@ 94 at Marysville to Port Huron was completed . I @-@ 94 / US 25 was extended north and east , replacing part of M @-@ 146 to the Blue Water Bridge . The former route of US 25 through downtown was redesignated Bus . US 25 while US 25A became a part of the mainline highway to connect to I @-@ 94 . In 1967 , another segment , this time south of Detroit , was rerouted to follow another freeway , I @-@ 75 . 
 Six years later , the US 25 designation was decommissioned in Michigan , although all sections of it are still state highways . The southern section from the state line northward through Monroe was renumbered M @-@ 125 and the US 25 designation was removed from US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) . In the Detroit area , the connection between US 24 and I @-@ 75 in Woodhaven was redesignated as an unsigned connector highway ( now Connector 24 ) . The US 25 designation was removed from I @-@ 75 northward into Detroit , while the routing along Clark Street became an unsigned connector highway ( now Connector 850 ) . The routing along Fort Street and Gratiot Avenue was numbered as M @-@ 3 . The US 25 designation was removed from I @-@ 94 , and the routing through Port Huron and northward to Port Austin became part of an extended M @-@ 25 . One segment of highway near Port Huron became an unsigned highway now designed Connector 25 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 All exits are unnumbered . 
 = = Related trunklines = = 
 There were three additional trunkline highways related to US 25 in Michigan , two alternate routes and a business loop . 
 = = = Erie alternate route = = = 
 US Highway 25A ( US 25 ) was an alternate route that started at the Michigan – Ohio state line south of Erie and ran northward along Summit Street to an intersection with US 25 near Erie . The highway was designated in 1937 , and it was replaced by US 24A in 1945 . The southern half of the highway was later designated as part of I @-@ 75 in 1959 , and the northern half is now an unsigned highway designated Connector 75 by MDOT . 
 = = = Port Huron alternate route = = = 
 US Highway 25A ( US 25A ) was an alternate route near Port Huron that provided a connection to the Blue Water Bridge to Canada . The highway split from its parent north of Port Huron and followed 24th Avenue south to connect to M @-@ 51 ( Pine Grove Avenue ) while US 25 followed Lakeshore Road and Gratiot Avenue into Port Huron . The parent highway crossed under the approaches to the Blue Water Bridge , and the alternate route , along with M @-@ 51 , provided a signed path between US 25 and the bridge . The designation was created in early 1940 and was deleted when US 25 was rerouted in 1963 through Port Huron and over the alternate route . 
 = = = Port Huron business loop = = = 
 Business US 25 ( Bus . US 25 ) was an 8 @.@ 4 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 13 @.@ 5 km ) business loop serving the cities of Marysville and Port Huron . It started southwest of Marysville near St. Clair County International Airport at I @-@ 94 / US 25 and ran northeasterly along Gratiot Avenue into Marysville . It then passed through the city 's downtown area and turned northward along Gratiot Boulevard near the St. Clair River . North of Ravenswood Road , Bus . US 25 split into the one @-@ way pairing of Military Street ( northbound ) and Electric Avenue ( southbound ) until the two directions merged on the south side of Port Huron . The business loop continued northward along through downtown Port Huron and across the Black River near its mouth . North of the river. the business loop followed Huron Avenue through the northern side of downtown Port Huron and turned northwesterly onto Pine Grove Avenue . The business loop passed under the approaches to the Blue Water Bridge before terminating at an intersection with US 25 . 
 In 1963 , the route of US 25 through the Port Huron area was realigned . In the process , that highway replaced its alternate route , and the former alignment through downtown was redesignated as a business loop . This arrangement lasted until 1973 when US 25 itself was decommissioned in Michigan . The former routing of Bus . US 25 through downtown Port Huron became part of an extended M @-@ 25 . In 1986 , the former business loop was redesignated Business Loop I @-@ 94 . 
 = Unhalfbricking = 
 Unhalfbricking is the third album by the British folk rock band Fairport Convention and their second album released in 1969 . It is seen as a transitional album in their history and marked a further musical move away from American influences towards more traditional English folk songs that had begun on their previous album , What We Did on Our Holidays and arguably reached its peak on the follow @-@ up , Liege & Lief , released later the same year . 
 Although featuring several at the time unreleased Bob Dylan songs , the album also marked Sandy Denny 's maturation as a singer and songwriter , including " Who Knows Where the Time Goes ? " , a song covered by many other performers and now regarded as a classic . The only traditional song on the album , " A Sailor 's Life " , is seen as pivotal in the development of English folk rock music . 
 Changes in the line @-@ up of the band , due not only to its musical direction but also to external events , mark this album as a turning point in the band 's history . 1969 was a prolific year for Fairport Convention ; from What We Did on Our Holidays to Liege & Lief within twelve months represented a major development . 
 The album also gave the band their first UK chart success , reaching number 12 in the UK album chart ( the second highest position in the band 's entire career ) , while the single release , " Si tu dois partir " , achieved number 21 in the UK singles chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 11 May 1969 , two months before the album was released , drummer Martin Lamble and guitarist Richard Thompson 's girlfriend , Jeannie Franklyn , were killed in a car crash as the band were returning from a concert in Birmingham . Simon Nicol later said : 
 That was a big watershed , I think . In the aftermath , we thought a lot about what to do , whether to call it a day . It had been fun while it lasted but it took a definite effort of will to continue . It had given us a lot but now it had taken away a lot : was it worth it if it was going to cost people their lives ? Martin was only 18 or 19 years old . He would have gone on to have been so much more than just another drummer , another musician : there was something very special about him . 
 Ashley Hutchings also said in relation to the album cover photograph : 
 My memory of it is bound up with the terrible car crash . On the back cover we 're all eating around a table . The shirt and the leather waistcoat I 'm wearing are what I had on when the crash happened . I can clearly remember them being bloodstained . You don 't forget things like that . 
 Unhalfbricking appeared , therefore , at a difficult time for the group , but was enthusiastically received . After a period of intense reflection about their future they decided to pursue the folk rock idea further and violinist Dave Swarbrick was invited to join full @-@ time for the follow @-@ up , Liege & Lief . 
 = = Production = = 
 Fairport Convention had been invited to Bob Dylan 's London music publishers to hear then @-@ unreleased tracks from The Basement Tapes sessions . The band 's bassist , Ashley Hutchings , said " We loved it all . We would have covered all the songs if we could . " In the event , versions of " Percy 's Song " , " Million Dollar Bash " and " If You Gotta Go , Go Now " ( retitled " Si Tu <unk> <unk> " ) were used on the album . The French lyrics for the latter were created during the interval of a performance at the Middle Earth Club . " Percy 's Song " and " Million Dollar Bash " had never been released before . According to guitarist Simon Nicol " I think the boredom factor was one of the reasons we came up with this wacky idea . Three or four punters joined us in the dressing room ; they were either French visitors or students of French working in London , and happened to be there that night . " 
 The band 's male vocalist Iain Matthews left during the recordings for Unhalfbricking to make his own album Matthews ' Southern Comfort , after recording just one track , " Percy 's Song " . Sandy Denny sang lead vocals on all the other songs , including her own compositions , " Autopsy " , and " Who Knows Where the Time Goes ? " . The latter was covered by many artists and is now viewed to be a classic . The lengthy " A Sailor 's Life " , a traditional English folk song collected by A. L. Lloyd , was already part of Denny 's club repertoire . In particular , the version on Unhalfbricking has been described as " the turning point of Fairport 's history from earlier contemporary Americana to English songs " and by Allmusic 's Richie Unterberger as a " clear signpost to the future " . 
 Guitarist Richard Thompson contributed two compositions to the album . The opening track , " Genesis Hall " , is a slow 3 / 4 waltz , on which he played dulcimer , while Sandy Denny provided the vocals ; it was the B @-@ Side of the single release . Genesis Hall was the nickname of the former Bell Hotel in Drury Lane , which had become a squat in early 1969 and later became noted for a mass eviction by the police . In the view of Mojo magazine reviewer Mike Baines " Thompson 's writing reached maturity on ' Genesis Hall ' " . " Cajun Woman " , which opens the second side of the album , features Dave Swarbrick 's fiddle @-@ playing in his first work with Fairport . 
 = = Title and cover = = 
 The title arose from the band playing the word game Ghost while travelling to and from gigs . Its object was to " avoid completing a real word " , and " Unhalfbricking " was Sandy Denny 's creation . 
 Eric Hayes took the photo on the sleeve design for the UK release , which featured neither album title nor band name . The photo captured Denny 's parents , Neil and Edna Denny , standing outside the family home in Arthur Road , Wimbledon , south London , with the band distantly visible through the garden fence . St Mary 's Church , Wimbledon , can be seen in the background . Joe Boyd later said " Unhalfbricking , then , that cover shot was taken in the early spring , right before the crash , I think ; and that record came out in June " . 
 Unhalfbricking 's cover in the US , released by A & M Records , was even less informative . It consisted of a picture of circus elephants with a small inset image of the band , allegedly because " the group apparently so upset their American label that they replaced it with an image of trampolining elephants " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Allmusic 's Richie Unterberger described Unhalfbricking as " a transitional album for the young Fairport Convention , in which the group shed its closest ties to its American folk @-@ rock influences and started to edge toward a more traditional British folk @-@ slanted sound " . 
 Rolling Stone 's John Mendelsohn , reviewing Unhalfbricking alongside Liege and Lief , was supportive , describing it as " Fairport Convention at its best " and singling out " Percy 's Song " in particular as " the album 's gem " . He was less complimentary about " A Sailor 's Life " , regarding it as overlong . 
 The album also gave the band their first UK chart success , spending a total of eight weeks in the UK album chart and reaching number 12 . The single " Si tu dois partir " spent nine weeks on the UK singles chart and reached number 21 . Fairport Convention appeared on Top of the Pops on 14 August 1969 , miming to the song and augmented by a roadie , Steve Sparks on percussion . 
 In 2004 Q magazine placed Unhalfbricking at number 41 in its list of the 50 Greatest British Albums Ever , and in the same year The Observer , describing it as " a thoroughly English masterpiece " , listed it at number 27 in its Top 100 British Albums . The following year , 2005 , it was included in Robert Dimery 's " 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die " . The Sandy Denny track , " Who Knows Where the Time Goes ? " , was voted " Favourite Folk Track of All Time " by listeners in the Radio 2 Folk Awards 2007 . In 2010 Unhalfbricking was voted the second best Fairport Convention album after Liege & Lief by Mojo magazine readers . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Side one 
 " Genesis Hall " ( Richard Thompson ) – 3 : 41 
 " Si tu dois partir " ( Bob Dylan ) – 2 : 25 
 " Autopsy " ( Sandy Denny ) – 4 : 27 
 " A Sailor 's Life " ( traditional , arranged by Denny , Thompson , Simon Nicol , Ashley Hutchings , Martin Lamble ) – 11 : 20 
 Side two 
 " Cajun Woman " ( Thompson ) – 2 : 45 
 " Who Knows Where the Time Goes ? " ( Denny ) – 5 : 13 
 " Percy 's Song " ( Dylan ) – 6 : 55 
 " Million Dollar Bash " ( Dylan ) – 2 : 56 
 Bonus tracks on CD reissue 
 " Dear Landlord " ( Dylan ) 
 " Ballad of Easy Rider " ( Roger McGuinn , Dylan ) 
 NOTE : Bob Dylan is not officially credited as a songwriter on " Ballad of Easy Rider " . 
 = = Release history = = 
 Unhalfbricking has been released on several occasions and in several formats : 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Sandy Denny – vocals , harpsichord 
 Richard Thompson – electric and acoustic guitars , electric dulcimer , piano accordion , organ , backing vocals 
 Ashley Hutchings – bass , backing vocals 
 Simon Nicol – electric and acoustic guitars , electric dulcimer , backing vocals 
 Martin Lamble – drums , stacked chair backs on " Si tu dois partir " 
 Additional personnel 
 Iain Matthews – backing vocals on " Percy 's Song " 
 Dave Swarbrick – fiddle on " Si tu dois partir " , " A Sailor 's Life " , and " Cajun Woman " and Mandolin on " Million Dollar Bash " 
 Trevor Lucas – triangle on " Si tu dois partir " 
 Marc Ellington – vocals on " Million Dollar Bash " 
 Dave <unk> – drums on " Ballad of Easy Rider " 
 Production 
 Recorded at Sound Techniques and Olympic Studios , London 
 Engineer : John Wood 
 Sleeve design : <unk> Attempts Ltd . 
 Source : 
 = Brian : Portrait of a Dog = 
 " Brian : Portrait of a Dog " is the seventh episode and the season finale of the first season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 16 , 1999 . The episode features anthropomorphic dog Brian after he swallows his pride , and joins a dog show , after much convincing , in order to win money for a new air conditioner . But after an argument over a trick gone bad , with his owner , Peter Griffin , Brian realizes he is a second @-@ class citizen and runs away from home , landing him in the pound on death row . Desperate to save their dog , the Griffin family attempts to release Brian , and prevent him from being euthanized . 
 The episode was written by Gary Janetti and directed by Michael Dante DiMartino . It received praise from television critic Ahsan Haque for its storyline and use of cultural references . The episode featured guest performances by Butch Hartman , Rachael MacFarlane , Dick Van Patten , Mary Scheer , Joey Slotnick and Wally Wingert , along with several recurring voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Quahog is in the grip of an unusual heat wave and , not having air conditioning , the Griffins are suffering . Peter learns of an upcoming dog show offering a top prize of $ 500 , which he sees as the perfect way to be able to buy an air conditioner . He persuades a reluctant Brian to participate . Brian performs his tricks at the dog show . Peter puts a bone biscuit on Brian 's nose ; finding this demeaning and becoming angry , Brian refuses to " perpetuate the stereotype of the ' good dog ' " , as well as Peter saying he is embarrassed that Brian would not comply . Brian subsequently exits in a huff . 
 On the way home , Peter and Brian argue until Brian gets out of the car . A police officer gives Brian a ticket , for which Peter has to pay $ 10 , for violating the local leash law , which only widens the rift between Peter and Brian . Another argument ensues and Peter mentions that he found Brian on the road as a stray dog . Angry that Peter brought that up and becoming more angry when Peter then demands that Brian stop being a bad dog , Brian leaves the house , whereupon he is treated cruelly by the community , and is ( ultimately ) forced to sleep at the bus shelter . Peter buys a new cat which turns out to be mischievous and abusive ; the family gets rid of it and searches for Brian . By the time Peter decides to apologize to Brian , Brian has been kicked out of a restaurant and a public store and chased by the police when he was found drinking from a water fountain . Brian becomes homeless , having actually attacked a man on the street for treating him as a drunken hobo and for not believing that he was not a good dog but a crazy animal . He is subsequently taken away by the police . 
 A social worker announces to Brian and the rest of his family that Brian is sentenced to be put down by a lethal injection , which shocks everyone . While Peter works on Brian 's appeal , Brian decides to study the Law as much as he can , and goes to court to defend himself , and finally gets the chance to plead his case before the Quahog City Council . During his parole hearing , he references the court case Plessy v. Ferguson , but unfortunately for him , the council believes that it 's stupid to listen to a dog . Just when Brian is about to be dismissed , Peter steps in and delivers a last @-@ ditch emotional appeal on his behalf . The city council members remain unmoved until Peter bribes them with $ 20 each , and Brian is immediately freed . The charges against him are finally dropped and the town shows him new respect , allowing him to finally drink out of a water fountain , showing his status to be the same as that of the other citizens of the community . The family returns home and Stewie , in an unusual ( at the time ) display of respect towards Brian , bows ever so slightly towards him . Brian and Peter are then left alone . Brian licks Peter 's face in an endearing dog gesture , and threatens to kill him if he ever tells anyone about it . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Brian : Portrait of a Dog " was written by Gary Janetti , his first time writing for the series , and directed by former King of the Hill director Michael Dante DiMartino , who was a newcomer to the show at the time , having directed " I Never Met the Dead Man " . DiMartino would later go on to co @-@ create and produce Avatar : The Last Airbender with Bryan Konietzko at Nickelodeon Animation Studios . Roy Allen Smith and Peter Shin ( who have been supervising other episodes of the show ) , acted as supervising directors . Mike Henry , Neil Goldman , Andrew Gormley and Garrett Donovan worked in the episode as story editors and staff writers . Series creator Seth MacFarlane , David Zuckerman , <unk> Aries , David Pritchard and Mike Wolf worked as executive producer , while Craig Hoffman , Danny Smith and Gary Janetti worked as supervising producers . In addition to the regular cast , the episode featured the voices of actress and comedian Mary Scheer , actors Dick Van Patten , Joey Slotnick , and actress and sister of show creator Seth MacFarlane , Rachael MacFarlane . Recurring guest voice actors included actress Lori Alan , writer and animator Butch Hartman , and voice actor Wally Wingert . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode makes references to the U.S. African @-@ American Civil Rights Movement . While arguing his case before the city council , Brian tries to reference the landmark U.S. Supreme Court case Plessy v. Ferguson , before being cut off . Another reference comes after Brian is freed , he drinks from a drinking fountain in a defiant manner , a reference to the 1974 television movie , The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman . Other media references include the Griffins watching the TV show Eight is Enough and Peter writing a letter to Angus MacGyver , from the show MacGyver , asking him to rescue Brian from jail . When Brian puts eye drops into his eyes before the dog show , he says " Showtime " with jazz hands . This ritual and phrase are a reference to Joe Gideon in All That Jazz 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ahsan Haque of IGN rated the episode a 9 @.@ 6 / 10 , praising the random jokes and calling it " yet another finely crafted early episode that tells a great cohesive story , has some great random jokes , and throws in a bucket of social satire for good measure . This was also the final episode of the extremely short but groundbreaking first season , and definitely ranks amongst the best in the series . " 
 " Portrait of a Dog " , along with the twenty @-@ seven other episodes from Family Guy 's first and second season , were released on a 4 @-@ disc DVD set in the U.S. on April 15 , 2003 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Seth MacFarlane and various crew and cast members for several episodes . It also features French and Spanish versions of the episodes , an alteration of an episode , and deleted scenes of some episodes . 
 = Zero Hour ( Stargate SG @-@ 1 ) = 
 " Zero Hour " is the fourth episode from Season 8 of the military science fiction television series Stargate SG @-@ 1 . It was written by producer Robert C. Cooper and directed by Peter Woeste . Clips of the episode were shown on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien before Season 8 began , with Late Night graphic designer Pierre Bernard making a cameo appearance in the episode . The first airing of " Zero Hour " on July 30 , 2004 on the American Sci Fi Channel was viewed by 3 million Americans . The episode received mixed reviews . 
 " Zero Hour " takes place shortly after the promotion of main character Jack O 'Neill from Colonel to Brigadier General . With O 'Neill being the new leader of Stargate Command ( SGC ) , Lt. Col. Samantha Carter has assumed O 'Neill 's old position as leader of the SG @-@ 1 unit . The idea to have the episode focus on General O 'Neill solving various problems at his new job came from the writers ' wondering what the general of the SGC does while his teams are on missions . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode takes place over the course of five days , counting down to an at first unrevealed event named " Zero Hour " . Five days to Zero Hour , General O 'Neill is introduced to his new administrative aide , Mark Gilmor , who makes a suspicious phone call . Meanwhile , O 'Neill 's new position as a general is twofold . He needs to decide decorations for an upcoming official visit , and prepare SG @-@ 1 for its next offworld trip . A quickly growing alien plant and the arrival of two <unk> <unk> , possible trade partners from another world , lead O 'Neill to write a letter to General Hammond , his predecessor . 
 At four days to Zero Hour , the alien plant has grown to cover many areas of the base . After SG @-@ 1 go missing on their off @-@ world mission , a Goa 'uld named Ba 'al contacts Stargate Command and suggests an exchange of the captured SG @-@ 1 against Camulus , another Goa 'uld who requested asylum on Earth several episodes before . With the help of Camulus , a potent power source is found and brought back to Stargate Command , only to find it tainted by Camulus ( powering it up could result in the destruction of the Solar system ) . With the SGC suffering from a temporary electricity failure caused by the alien plants , Ba 'al 's renewed contacting only results in O 'Neill 's mocking . Exhausted by sleep deprivation two days to Zero Hour , O 'Neill finishes his letter to General Hammond to inform him of his resignation . 
 Although Camulus leaves Earth , Ba 'al does not send back SG @-@ 1 . When all SG teams announce their trust and support for the general , SG @-@ 1 dial the Stargate from offworld , revealing that they were never captured by Ba 'al but instead were trapped in a secret base . After their safe return , O 'Neill attests new SG @-@ 1 leader Samantha Carter 's positive leadership skills . It is revealed that the ZPM Camulus was given to supposedly kill Ba 'al ( which Ba 'al would use to destroy Earth ) was actually the dead one from Antarctica . Zero Hour makes up the last minutes of the episode . The President is about to arrive , and Gilmor announces that his special assignment , initiated by the President 's order , will end the next day . Gilmor expresses his respect , and as they leave to greet the President , the camera zooms in on the resignation letter on O 'Neill 's desk , with the last words , " Never mind " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Despite being fourth in the airing order , " Zero Hour " was filmed as the seventh out of the twenty episodes of Season 8 . The limited availability of Richard Dean Anderson ( Jack O 'Neill ) , who only worked 3 @.@ 5 days out of five working days a week during the eighth season , extended the seven @-@ day filming period to four weeks . With " Zero Hour " being a bottle episode to save money , director Peter Woeste filmed the majority of the episode on the standing SGC sets at The Bridge Studios , Vancouver , Canada . The labs of Dr. Lee and Carter were filmed in the same room of the standing set , and a storage room for filming equipment was remodeled into the office of Gilmor . Second unit director Andy Mikita was responsible for the off @-@ world scenes of the SG teams , filmed in Tynehead Park , one of the few undeveloped Vancouver locations that still allows filming . O 'Neill in his sleeping quarters was the episode 's last filmed scene , shot in two takes to allow Anderson to catch his flight home to Los Angeles . 
 The inspiration for the episode came from the SG @-@ 1 writers wondering for years what George Hammond , the SGC leader from seasons one through seven , does while SG @-@ 1 is away on missions . Imagined scenarios ranged from the general dealing with minor decisions like bunting and lunch buffet , to averting major emergencies and threats . The episode 's working title was " A Day in the Life of General O 'Neill " , but writer Robert C. Cooper felt " Zero Hour " was more appropriate , referring to the President 's visit at the end of the episode . The subplot of the SGC being overrun with plant life originates in a Season 4 idea by writer and producer Brad Wright . To not interrupt the shooting process , the set was decorated with various plants and vines overnight . Some plants were plastic , but real plants were used for the torching scenes , sprayed to be flame retardant so as not to burn the whole set . Jim Menard as the director of photography was responsible for the green lighting when the emergency lighting goes off . He achieved depth by using differently @-@ colored lights in the control room and near the gate . 
 " Zero Hour " features several guest stars . Los Angeles actor David Kaufman was brought in to play the part of Mark Gilmor , a red herring to the story . Cliff Simon , flown in from L.A. for a day 's work , filmed most of his scenes as Ba 'al against green @-@ screen in the gateroom for a " hologram feel " . Bill Dow ( Dr. Lee ) was doing theater work in Vancouver during the filming of this episode , necessitating the producers to schedule around his availability . Gary Jones 's character , an SG @-@ 1 semi @-@ regular technician who sported the name " Norman Davis " on his uniform for years , received a new name in this episode : " Walter Harriman " . After O 'Neill had referred to him as " Walter " in the Season 4 episode " 2010 " , the producers could not get clearance for a renaming into " Walter Davis " . The new name is based on General Hammond referring to Jones 's character as " Airman " ( sounding like " Harriman " ) in the pilot episode , and SG @-@ 1 writer Joseph Mallozzi explained the resulting incongruity as a married @-@ name issue . One scene in " Zero Hour " features Pierre Bernard , a graphic designer for the NBC show Late Night with Conan O 'Brien , as technician O 'Brien . The SG @-@ 1 producers saw Bernard ranting on Late Night about Stargate SG @-@ 1 being better without Daniel Jackson ( actor Michael Shanks was not part of SG @-@ 1 during Season 6 ) , and gave him a cameo spot . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Producer Robert C. Cooper was satisfied with " Zero Hour " , claiming that Richard Dean Anderson " is fantastic in this episode . It 's new @-@ yet @-@ classic O 'Neill and fans of the character will be forever pleased with this . " When " Zero Hour " first aired on the Sci Fi Channel on July 30 , 2004 , it achieved a 2 @.@ 2 Household rating , equaling approximately 3 million viewers . Tied with " Icon " , this marked the sixth @-@ highest rating for any Season 8 episode of Stargate SG @-@ 1 . 
 DVD Talk called " Zero Hour " " a playful episode " with a " funny sub @-@ plot involving an alien plant " , but recognized the episode 's contribution to the overall story arc . TV Zone considered the plant threat " a nice change " but regretted that it was only a red herring for a later plot revelation . Bringing the plants to the SGC at all was regarded irritating , as the " obvious move [ to build a secure lab on an uninhabited planet ] doesn 't make for such good drama . " O 'Neill acting as the new leader made " the Goa 'uld threat [ ... ] a laugh " and " an amazing change from the events from the series ' early days " where O 'Neill took this race more seriously . The actual zero hour plot concerning the " harassed " O 'Neill was considered " a nice touch " . Conan O 'Brien , who had shown a clip of Pierre Bernard 's scene in his late night show before the first airing , congratulated Bernard for doing a good job , and Bernard would be invited back to the Stargate SG @-@ 1 set for a scene in the 200th episode of the show . 
 = Pendennis Castle = 
 Pendennis Castle is an artillery fort constructed by Henry VIII near Falmouth , Cornwall , between 1540 and 1542 . It formed part of the King 's Device programme to protect against invasion from France and the Holy Roman Empire , and defended the Carrick Roads waterway at the mouth of the River Fal . The original , circular keep and gun platform was expanded at the end of the century to cope with the increasing Spanish threat , with a ring of extensive stone ramparts and bastions built around the older castle . Pendennis saw service during the English Civil War , when it was held by the Royalists , and was only taken by Parliament after a long siege in 1646 . It survived the interregnum and Charles II renovated the fortress after his restoration to the throne in 1660 . 
 Ongoing concerns about a possible French invasion resulted in Pendennis 's defences being modernised and upgraded in the 1730s and again during the 1790s ; during the Napoleonic Wars , the castle held up to 48 guns . In the 1880s and 1890s an electrically operated minefield was laid across the River Fal , operated from Pendennis and St Mawes , and new , quick @-@ firing guns were installed to support these defences . The castle saw service during both the First and Second World Wars , but in 1956 , by now obsolete , it was decommissioned . It passed into the control of the Ministry of Works , who cleared away many of the more modern military buildings and opened the site to visitors . In the 21st century , the castle is managed by English Heritage as a tourist attraction , receiving 74 @,@ 230 visitors in 2011 – 12 . The heritage agency Historic England considers Pendennis to be " one of the finest examples of a post @-@ medieval defensive promontory fort in the country " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th – 17th centuries = = = 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 Pendennis Castle was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Basic defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry broke with Pope Paul III in order to annul the long @-@ standing marriage to his wife , Catherine of Aragon and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and he took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England appeared certain . In response , Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . 
 The stretch of water known as Carrick Roads at the mouth of the River Fal was an important anchorage serving shipping arriving from the Atlantic and the Mediterranean . A small gun tower , called the Little Dennis Blockhouse , was built in 1539 overlooking the entrance , and plans were made to protect the anchorage further with five additional castles . In the event , only two of these were constructed , Pendennis and St Mawes Castle , positioned on each side of Carrick Roads and able to provide overlapping fire across the water . John Killigrew , a prominent member of the local Cornish gentry , probably oversaw the construction of Pendennis ; it was built on his land and he was appointed as its first captain . Pendennis Castle cost £ 5 @,@ 614 to construct . 
 = = = = Initial operation = = = = 
 The <unk> controlled the castle for several decades , with John Killigrew 's son and grandson continuing in turn as the captain there until 1605 . The captains of Pendennis frequently argued with those of St Mawes and in 1630 a legal dispute broke out about the rights to search and detain incoming shipping : both castles argued that they had a traditional right to do so . The Admiralty eventually issued a compromise , proposing that the castles share the searching of the traffic . 
 Meanwhile , a lasting peace with France was made in 1558 and the initial invasion threat passed . The Spanish threat to the south @-@ west of England became more serious , however , and war broke out in 1569 . As a result , a defensive earthwork was constructed north @-@ west of the castle to protect it against an attack from the land , and an additional gun battery facing upriver was installed alongside the blockhouse . The levels of the garrison varied considerably during the period . Pendennis had a garrison of 100 men in 1578 , and could have mustered around 500 men in 1596 , while in 1599 it was reportedly guarded by 200 soldiers . 
 The Spanish threat continued ; raiding parties destroyed the <unk> ' family home at <unk> in 1593 , and four Spanish ships attacked the towns along the coast in 1595 . In 1597 a Spanish fleet with 20 @,@ 000 men set out to assault Pendennis and invade England , only being prevented from landing by bad weather . The failed attack caused considerable concern inside government and the Privy Council were informed that the castle was not sufficient to prevent a Spanish landing along the coast . A subsequent review carried out by Sir Nicholas Parker , Sir Walter Raleigh and Sir Ferdinando Gorges recommended that the castle 's defences should be significantly extended . The military engineer Paul Ive constructed an Italian @-@ styled ring of earthworks , embrasures , bastions and a stone @-@ revetted ditch around the original Henrician castle between 1597 and 1600 , using a team of 400 local workers , costing around £ 80 a week in wages . 
 In the early 1600s England was at peace and Pendennis was neglected ; reportedly the garrison 's pay was two years in arrears , forcing them to gather limpets from the shoreline for food . Nonetheless , a new Italian @-@ styled gatehouse was added to the castle , probably in 1611 . War with Spain broke out again 1624 and a new defensive line , with bastions and artillery , was built across the peninsula in 1627 . 
 = = = = English Civil War and Restoration = = = = 
 When civil war broke out in 1642 between King Charles I and Parliament , Pendennis and the south @-@ west of England were held by the Royalists . The growing town of Falmouth was a strategically important part of their supply route to the Continent , while Carrick Roads formed a base for Royalist piracy in the English Channel . As the war turned in favour of the Parliamentarians , preparations were made for Prince Charles to shelter there over the winter of 1645 – 46 , as part of which the surrounding fortifications were improved ; in the event , Charles stayed in the castle only briefly in early 1646 . 
 Shortly after Charles left Pendennis for the Isles of Scilly on 2 March , Thomas Fairfax entered Cornwall with a substantial army . Almost all the other Royalist positions in England had by now fallen and St Mawes Castle surrendered immediately as Fairfax approached . Pendennis Castle , however , continued to hold out , defended by around 1 @,@ 000 soldiers under the command of Sir John Arundell . They were determined to hold out against the besiegers and Arundell announced that he would die rather than surrender . Two Parliamentary colonels , Fortescue and Hammond , directed the bombardment of the castle from the land , while Captain Batten , with a flotilla of ten ships , blockaded it by sea , preventing fresh supplies from arriving . 
 The garrison 's defences were supported with artillery fire from a Royalist warship that was deliberately run aground north of the castle to produce an additional gun platform . By July , food had begun to run short and some of the garrison unsuccessfully attempted to break out by sea to acquire supplies . Arundell agreed to an honourable surrender on 15 August , and around 900 survivors left the fort two days later , some terminally ill from malnutrition . Pendennis was the penultimate Royalist fortification to hold out in the war . 
 Parliament maintained a garrison at the castle , but in 1647 it cut the levels of the armed forces across the country ; most soldiers who lost their posts were offered two months pay , but at Pendennis only one month 's pay was offered . The garrison , led by Colonel Richard Fortescue , mutinied , seized the visiting Parliamentary commissioners and refused to leave the castle until the additional pay was granted to them . Fearing a wider uprising , Parliament negotiated an end to the confrontation , paying off the garrison in full and offering Fortescue fresh employment elsewhere . A smaller , more reliable garrison was then installed . During the interregnum , the castle was used to imprison the radical pamphleteer William Prynne . 
 Just before the restoration of King Charles II to the throne in 1660 , the Royalist Sir Peter Killigrew became the new captain of the castle . Fears of an invasion continued , and an additional gun battery was constructed at Crab Quay , to the south @-@ east of the main fortification . At the end of the century , a new guard barracks and gate were constructed , probably emulating those being constructed in France . 
 = = = 18th – 19th centuries = = = 
 Pendennis Castle continued in use through the 18th and 19th centuries under the command of successive captains , still operating in partnership with St Mawes . In 1714 , Colonel Christian Lilly carried out an inspection of the fortification , finding it to be " in a very precarious condition " and noting that " the body of the fort having been for many years neglected is now is in a very ruinous condition " . The parapets had collapsed , the ramparts could easily be scaled and the ditches were filled with brambles . Little was done to remedy this , however , until the 1730s , when the castle was extensively modernised . The interior was redesigned , the ramparts were rebuilt and the castle 's guns were replaced , incorporating new 18 @-@ pounder cannons . 
 During the American Revolutionary War , France allied itself with the revolutionaries , causing war with Britain to break out in 1778 . The French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars followed , during which period Falmouth became an important military depot . In 1795 , the Crown purchased the castle 's land from the Killigrew family , and reinforced the fortress to deal with the fresh threat of invasion . The government installed more guns and built a new gun position called the Half @-@ Moon Battery just outside the 16th @-@ century walls ; the landward defences of Pendennis were reinforced , and a new barracks and other ancillary buildings were built inside the fortress . At its peak , the castle was equipped with up to 48 artillery pieces . A new volunteer unit of artillery was formed in Falmouth to support the forts around the harbour , many of them carrying out training using Pendennis 's guns before then deploying elsewhere across Cornwall . 
 After the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 , Pendennis was neglected ; many of its guns became unserviceable and some buildings fell into ruin . The old post of captain of Pendennis Castle was abolished in 1837 , with the fortification commanded by a conventional military appointment . In the 1850s , renewed fears of a French invasion led to investment in new artillery at the castle , and nineteen <unk> and 56 @-@ pounder ( 14 @.@ 5 and 24 @.@ 5 kg ) guns were installed . Falmouth continued to be an important harbour , particularly for the Royal Navy . When new concerns about France emerged , an electronically operated minefield was laid across Carrick Roads in 1885 , jointly controlled from Pendennis and St Mawes . New 6- and 12 @-@ pounder ( 2 @.@ 7 and 5 @.@ 4 kg ) quick @-@ firing guns , supported by machine @-@ guns for close defence , were assigned to the castle to deal with the emerging threat from enemy torpedo boats . 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 The 105th Regiment Royal Garrison Artillery took over the manning of Pendennis Castle in 1902 . A new barracks was built to house them , and a signal station was constructed on top of the old keep to coordinate operations with shipping , while the 16th @-@ century guardhouse alongside the keep was demolished . The castle was reinforced by territorial soldiers during the First World War and additional defences were constructed on the landward side . It continued to defend the harbour and was also used for training purposes . After the war , Pendennis continued to be used for training gunners , but its 16th @-@ century buildings were placed into the guardianship of the Ministry of Works in 1920 , and by 1939 the fortification 's artillery had all been removed . 
 The castle was rearmed at the beginning of the Second World War . Twin 6 @-@ pounder guns and longer range artillery were installed , zig @-@ zag trenches dug for protection , and new buildings added across the site . The 16th @-@ century fort was used as the headquarters of Falmouth Fire Command , which managed the artillery across the area . New radar @-@ controlled , 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Mark 24 guns followed in 1943 . Falmouth played an important role in supporting the D @-@ Day invasion of France in 1944 , and during the preparations for the invasion , the gun batteries at Pendennis were used to defend against German E @-@ boats . After the war , Pendennis was initially still used for training , but the castle was now obsolete and it was decommissioned in 1956 . 
 The whole of the Pendennis site was placed in the guardianship of the Ministry of Works and opened to visitors ; the Ministry focused its attention on the 16th @-@ century castle and many of the more modern buildings were destroyed . The barracks were used as a youth hostel between 1963 and 2000 . The heritage agency English Heritage took over control of the castle in 1984 , and placed a greater priority on the conservation of its more modern features . Extensive work was carried out across the castle in the 1990s to refurbish the fortifications and open new facilities for visitors , accompanied by archaeological surveys and excavations ; in the 2000s , the sergeant 's mess and the custodian 's house were converted into holiday cottages . 
 In the 21st century , the castle is managed by English Heritage as a tourist attraction , receiving 74 @,@ 230 visitors in 2011 – 12 . It is protected under UK law as a grade I listed building and as a scheduled monument . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Pendennis Castle is located at the end of a peninsula , overlooking Carrick Roads and the sea . It includes the original 16th @-@ century Device Fort , surrounded by a ring of outer defences , based on the Elizabethan ramparts and later adapted during the 18th , 19th and 20th centuries . Further gun batteries and a blockhouse are located closer to the shore . The heritage agency Historic England considers Pendennis to be " one of the finest examples of a post @-@ medieval defensive promontory fort in the country " , demonstrating a long history of different defensive approaches , and English Heritage describes the site as " one of the finest surviving examples of a coast fortress in England " . 
 = = = Ramparts = = = 
 The gatehouse to the castle is located on the western side of the ramparts and dates from around 1700 . It has a classical facade , with a mid @-@ 19th century stone bridge reaching across the external ditch . The ramparts are built from stone with protective ditches , and have angular bastions to provide overlapping fire , an innovative design in England when they were first constructed in 1600 . North of the gatehouse are the Smithwick and Carrick Mount bastions , the latter holding a quick @-@ firing gun battery from 1903 . Further around the ramparts , the East Bastion also has two emplacements for quick @-@ firing guns , dating from 1902 , and underground magazines , which were converted into a battery plotting room in the Second World War . Just to the south , the Nine @-@ Gun Battery was built in the 1730s and comprises a fixed line of nine gun embrasures . 
 In the south @-@ east corner of the ramparts is the One @-@ Gun Battery , which originally held a " disappearing gun " , designed to pivot back under a steel shield when fired . Built in 1895 , the approach proved unsuccessful and the gun was removed in 1913 , but the emplacement still remains and is a rare survival of this type of weapon . The Bell Bastion , the Ravelin , the Pig 's Pound Bastion and the Horse Pool Bastion protect the southern and western parts of the ramparts . A range of artillery and anti @-@ aircraft guns are on show around the defences , including 19th @-@ century carronades , and 20th @-@ century pieces such as a 155 mm ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) Long Tom field gun , a Quick Firing 3 @-@ inch 20 cwt ( 76 mm 102 kg ) anti @-@ aircraft gun and two Ordnance Quick @-@ Firing 25 @-@ pounder ( 11 kg ) howitzers . 
 = = = Inner castle = = = 
 At the heart of the castle is the 16th @-@ century Henrician fortification . Built of a combination of granite ashlar and rubble , it comprises a circular keep surrounded by a gun platform , entered through a bridge and a forebuilding . The keep has 3 @.@ 36 @-@ metre ( 11 @.@ 0 ft ) thick walls and on in the inside is octagonal . The basement was originally a kitchen , cellar and larder for the castle . The ground floor was initially designed to be a gun room , complete with gun embrasures , but was altered during the initial construction project to form living accommodation for the garrison instead . Another gun room occupies the first floor , with seven gun embrasures , and is dressed to appear as it would have done in the 16th century . The roof has seven gun embrasures and a lookout turret . 
 The polygonal gun platform around the keep has 16 sides , with a total of 14 gun embrasures . The two @-@ storey forebuilding dates from the second half of the 16th century , with three rooms on each level linked by a spiral @-@ staircase , and was originally used to house the captain of the castle . Its entrance was guarded with a portcullis , and the roof was designed to be defendable with handguns . The stone bridge that stretches across the ditch that protects the castle dates from 1902 ; it would originally have been protected at the front by a rectangular gatehouse , but this was demolished at the start of the 20th century . 
 The rest of the interior of the fortress was , at various times , occupied by a range of different military buildings , but they have mostly been demolished and grassed over to form a large parade ground . Among the surviving buildings are the Royal Garrison Artillery barracks , located to the north of the parade ground . Built between 1900 and 1902 , it could hold 140 soldiers in 12 man barrack @-@ rooms . Alongside the barracks are bungalows , originally for the use of senior non @-@ commissioned officers , a storehouse dating from the Napoleonic Wars , and two guard barracks from 1700 , which form a very early example of this form of military architecture in England . Other buildings that have survived include a 19th @-@ century field train shed , and an 18th @-@ century gunpowder magazine , since converted into a shelter for gunners . 
 = = = External defences = = = 
 Three defensive positions are positioned outside the main ramparts of the castle . To the south , reached by an underground passage , is the Half @-@ Moon Battery , constructed in 1793 and redesigned in 1895 and 1941 . This has two camouflaged gun houses and 6 @-@ inch guns dating from the Second World War , when it held a team of 99 soldiers . Further south , near the waterline , is the Little Dennis Blockhouse , a D @-@ shaped gun position dating from 1539 , altered in the 1540s and then adapted to form part of a larger fortification covering the whole of Pendennis Point in the late 16th century . Built from Killas rubble , the exterior of the blockhouse and its lookout turret still survive intact . Just along the shoreline to the north @-@ east is the Crab Quay Battery , a set of defences originating in the 16th century , intended to prevent an amphibious landing on the headland , and modernised extensively in 1902 . 
 = Château de Verteuil , Charente = 
 The Château de Verteuil is a historical building in Charente , France . It dates back to 1080 and has since been extensively rebuilt , although 12th century walls remain . The château has always been in the property of the La Rochefoucauld family . 
 During the Hundred Years ' War ( 1337 – 1453 ) the château was occupied several times by the English . It was demolished in 1442 , but was soon rebuilt using the original stones . In the religious wars of 16th and 17th centuries the château was a base for Huguenot forces , and in 1650 it was partly demolished by royal troops . Another château was erected but it received extensive damage in a fire in 1793 during the French Revolution . The château was renovated in the romantic style after the Bourbon Restoration of 1815 , and has been extensively modified since then . During World War II ( 1939 – 45 ) the château housed French troops and refugees from Alsace @-@ Lorraine in 1940 and for several months it was partially occupied by some German units . In 1944 some members of the maquis were hidden there . The château was listed as a monument historique on 31 March 1966 , and obtained full protection on 19 November 2010 . 
 The present château , designed on a triangular plan , has five conical towers and a watchtower capped by slate roofs . Archaeologists have uncovered traces of the older buildings on the site dating back to the 11th century . The architect Frantz Jourdain renovated the interior of the 14th century tower as a library for the <unk> family in 1893 . The Hunt of the Unicorn tapestries of the building , which hung in the master bedroom , were rediscovered in 1850 ; they were later sold to John D. Rockefeller , Jr. in 1923 . 
 = = Location = = 
 The castle is in a strategic position , dominating the village of Verteuil @-@ sur @-@ Charente and the Charente valley . In the past it controlled the road from Limoges to La Rochelle , on the route between the courts of France and Spain . The word " Verteuil " was often used in the Middle Ages to designate a fortified place . Jean Froissart ( c . 1337 – 1405 ) described it as " un <unk> fort <unk> en Poictou sur les marches du Limousin et de la Saintonge " ( a strong castle in Poitou on the borders of Limousin and Saintonge ) . The château , a few miles north of Angoulême and in fact in Angoumois , was later used as the country seat of the La Rochefoucauld family . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The Château de Verteuil is recorded in 1080 as the property of the Lord of La Rochefoucauld . Since then the castle has almost always belonged to a member of this family . The first recorded successful siege was in 1135 , by Count <unk> II of Angoulême ( c . 1089 – 1140 ) , when the castle belonged to Aymar II de la Rochefoucauld . Hostilities continued between their descendants , William VI of Angoulême ( died 1179 ) and Guy IV of la Rochefoucauld , but had ceased by 1170 when they both attended the dedication of the church of Saint @-@ Amant @-@ de @-@ <unk> . Louis VII of France ( 1120 – 80 ) and Eleanor of Aquitaine ( 1122 – 1204 ) may have stayed at Verteuil in 1137 . Eleanor 's mother was a Rochefoucauld , and due to the unsettled state of the country the young couple only stayed in safe and preferably well @-@ fortified places in their journey from Bordeaux to Paris . 
 King Philip VI of France ( 1293 – 1350 ) stayed at the castle in 1332 . Due to the Anglo @-@ French hostilities the castle was playing an increasingly important role . During the Hundred Years ' War the English were given the castle from 1360 to 1385 by the Treaty of Brétigny . The castle was yielded reluctantly to Edward III of England 's regent in France , John Chandos , on 25 October 1361 . He had brought the brother of the keeper to the castle and threatened to behead him unless there was an immediate capitulation . French troops commanded by the Duke of Bouillon and Geoffroy III of Rochefoucauld laid siege to the castle in 1380 , but it did not yield until five years later . The English later regained the castle , but in 1442 Charles VII of France ( 1403 – 61 ) finally captured it from the English . 
 The <unk> , who had played a major role in the fight against the English , now began to <unk> Angoulême . Charles VII returned , and this time destroyed the castle , largely by fire . However , the stones were recovered and the castle rebuilt . In 1446 the <unk> managed to obtain the king 's pardon and permission to build a defensive wall and two towers in Verteuil to restore the traditional refuge of the villagers . Under this pretext they made the castle among the best defended in France . The walls were not just restored but also reinforced using the latest techniques . 
 François I de La Rochefoucauld ( died 1541 ) was the godfather of Francis I of France ( 1494 – 1547 ) , who visited Verteuil in 1516 . Anne de Polignac , widow of Count François II de la Rochefoucauld , received the Emperor Charles V ( 1500 – 1558 ) in Verteuil on 6 December 1539 . Her mother 's sister was the wife of the historian Philippe de Commines . She made many improvements to the château , and built the famous library . In 1558 King Henry II of France ( 1519 – 59 ) stayed at Verteuil with his son Charles , Duke of Orleans ( 1550 – 74 ) , and his daughter Elizabeth ( 1545 – 68 ) , the future wife of Philip II of Spain ( 1527 – 98 ) . 
 = = = Religious wars and Bourbon monarchy = = = 
 François III de La Rochefoucauld ( 1521 – 72 ) became brother @-@ in @-@ law of the Protestant Louis , Prince of Condé ( 1530 – 1569 ) , and in 1560 organized a meeting at Verteuil between Condé and the Cardinal Georges d <unk> ( c . 1501 – 1585 ) legate of Pope Pius IV , in an attempt to prevent further conflict . Two years later François III had thrown in his lot with the Protestants . In 1567 the 6th national synod of the Reformed Church of France was held at the château , and the next year it was a rallying point for Huguenot troops that came to the aid of La Rochelle when it was besieged by Catholics . The château was visited by the future king Henry IV of France ( 1553 – 1610 ) , Catherine de ' Medici ( 1519 – 89 ) and her daughter , Margaret ( 1553 – 1615 ) , Louis XIII of France ( 1601 – 43 ) , Anne of Austria ( 1601 – 66 ) and the Queen Mother Marie de ' Medici ( 1575 – 1642 ) . 
 In 1650 François VI , Duc de La Rochefoucauld ( 1613 – 1680 ) gathered more than 2 @,@ 000 knights whom he led to Bordeaux to help the nobles in the second Fronde revolt . Soon after Charles de La Porte , Marshall of France and Duc de la <unk> ( 1602 – 64 ) attacked and took the castle with royal troops . He destroyed the Orangery and partially demolished the castle . The walls of the north wing were badly damaged , the towers dismantled , the drawbridge removed and the deep ditch that defended the northwest of the castle was partly filled . The castle remained habitable , and in 1651 was visited by the Prince de Conti , but he was forced to withdraw by soldiers of the Queen 's regiment . They installed a garrison of 150 men at Verteuil . 
 François VI was exiled by Louis XIV of France ( 1638 – 1715 ) after the revolt . In 1652 François VI returned to the Château de Verteuil , where he spent most of his time until 1659 writing his Mémoires . He was restored to favor in 1662 and in 1665 published his Maximes . François died in Paris in 1680 but was buried in the Franciscan chapel of Verteuil , which had been founded in 1470 by his ancestor , John , 16th lord of Rochefoucauld and 13th lord of Verteuil . All of John 's successors were buried in this chapel until the Reign of Terror began in 1793 . 
 There were some distinguished visitors during the reign of Louis XV of France ( 1710 – 1774 ) . Elisabeth Farnese ( 1692 – 1766 ) the second wife of Philip V of Spain ( 1683 – 1746 ) , spent time at Verteuil . The English agronomist Arthur Young in his account of a Journey to France in 1787 gave a detailed and flattering description of Verteuil , praising the agricultural improvements and the life of the population . 
 = = = French Revolution = = = 
 At the time of the outbreak of the French Revolution ( 1789 – 99 ) there were excellent relations between the La Rochefoucauld family and the people of Verteuil . According to Marquis de <unk> , nothing might have happened to the château if it had not been for Ruffec 's Committee of Public Safety and the Convention member Gilbert <unk> , who is credited with burning most of the archives at Verteuil and thirty portraits . A fire accident occurred in 1793 that destroyed the large gallery that connected the chapel to the north tower , and the west face of the large central tower was seriously damaged . The fire spread along the roofs and turrets of the northwest wing , and the upper part of the north tower was also burned . The chapel was sacked , and the flames destroyed its facade and part of its north wall . The crypt was not damaged . Most of the floors and fireplaces in the château and all the doors , windows and woodwork were irreparably destroyed . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 After the Revolution the senior branch of the Rochefoucauld family regained possession . The château was renovated in the first half of the 19th century . The work was undertaken by the La <unk> in the romantic style that accompanied the Bourbon Restoration after 1815 . They added decorations to the windows and made false arrow slots , added two towers to the south facade , added a flamboyant balustrade and dormer windows , and made changes to part of the chapel . 
 During the Second French Empire ( 1852 – 70 ) further changes were made , mainly to the interior . Hippolyte de La Rochefoucauld ( 1804 – 63 ) , who had been minister plenipotentiary in Germany and Florence , brought a fine collection of furniture and 18th century Venetian glass chandeliers when he retired . He restored the great stone staircase . Influenced by Eugène Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc he decided to transform the large East tower into a library . He blocked up the old openings and pierced large new windows in the old walls . He commissioned a copy of the statue by Didier Début on the facade of the Hôtel de Ville , Paris of the author of the Maximes . 
 During World War II ( 1939 – 45 ) the château housed French troops and refugees from Alsace @-@ Lorraine in 1940 . For several months it was partially occupied by some German units . In 1944 some members of the maquis were hidden there . Various extremely interesting archaeological finds have been made since the war . Research started by Count Gabriel de La Rochefoucauld , which had been interrupted by the war , uncovered a buried part of the castle dating to the 12th and 13th centuries , including the room that housed the drawbridge mechanism . A 12th century stairway was discovered that led down to a lower chapel from the 11th century , in excellent condition , whose existence was completely unknown before 1958 . Various other traces of the early buildings have been found . 
 The château was listed as a monument historique on 31 March 1966 , with the facades , roofs and substructure protected . The site was completely protected on 19 November 2010 as it was believed that the château , the interior courtyard and the land to the north may hold archaeological remains . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The present château with its five conical towers and watchtower capped by slate roofs began to be built in the 15th century , and was altered and extended several times since then . A park was built in the 19th century through which a wide driveway brought visitors to the main building . This is based on a central square tower with a pyramidal roof . The square keep is the main remaining part of the medieval structure . The present building is designed on a triangular plan . The large tower at the tip of the triangle is the medieval gatehouse , from which wings extend on either side . An isolated tower that now has the library on two floors divides the curtain wall on the east . 
 The buildings in the southeast were scarcely affected by the 19th century restoration apart from the chapel . Many of the walls of the 12th century tower have survived , partly rebuilt in the 15th century , and there are traces of a Romanesque chapel . The park was redesigned in the 19th century , enclosed in dry stone walls with several entrances . These have since been removed , as have the luxuriant gardens of the 18th century . Some traces remain in the form of boxwood , some alleys , the pools on the two terraces and the rockery . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 An inventory was made in 1728 after the death of Duke Francois VIII . The library contained 1 @,@ 069 works . The master bedroom included an elegant bed with sumptuous fittings of violet velvet embroidered in gold and silver , armchairs upholstered in the same velvet , a large Turkish rug in an alcove , a walnut table and other items . The architect Frantz Jourdain renovated the interior of the 14th century tower as a library for the <unk> family in 1893 . He designed it as a " <unk> <unk> " to display memorabilia of the famous author . Adrien <unk> contributed decorative murals to the room . Hippolyte 's son , Count Aimery de La Rochefoucauld continued to collect the souvenirs of his ancestors , turning the château into a sort of family museum . He redecorated the chapel and added stained glass windows . 
 = = The Hunt of the Unicorn Tapestries = = 
 Seven of The Hunt of the Unicorn tapestries were recorded in a 1680 inventory of the Paris possessions of Duke Francois VI . From various symbolic motifs the tapestries seem to have been made to celebrate a marriage , probably that of Anne of Brittany ( 1477 – 1514 ) and Louis XII of France ( 1462 – 1515 ) . The royal arms of Louis and Anne would have once decorated the sky in most of the tapestries . The 1728 inventory recorded five of The Hunt of the Unicorn tapestries hanging in the château 's master bedroom . The tapestries , which were well over two hundred years old , were almost half worn out . Two more of the tapestries were in " a large lower hall near the chapel , presently serving as a storage place for furniture . " They were described as " two pieces of tapestry of the Unicorn , torn in various places . " 
 During the French Revolution Ruffec 's Comité de Surveillance ruled that the old tapestries of the château could be preserved , since they bore no royal insignia . It seems that the insignia had been cut out so the tapestries would not be destroyed by the mob when the château was looted in 1793 . They were taken by peasants who used them to protect their potatoes from freezing and to cover their <unk> trees . Count Hippolyte rediscovered the Unicorn tapestries of the château in the 1850s , being used by a peasant to cover vegetables in his barn . After being restored they were hung in a salon of the château in 1856 . Xavier Barbier de <unk> saw the tapestries at Verteuil in the 1880s , and said that although " somewhat restored , [ they ] are of a freshness and of an incomparable grace " . In 1923 the tapestries were sold to John D. Rockefeller Jr. and shipped to New York . 
 = Jim Gilmore presidential campaign , 2008 = 
 The presidential campaign of Jim Gilmore was notable as much for its shortness as its inimitable episodes . The former Governor of Virginia and Chairman of the Republican National Committee was drafted successfully to run by his peers in January 2007 , and officially began the campaign in April after filing papers with the Federal Elections Commission . Gilmore was committed to conservative principles throughout his run , which ultimately ended in July 2007 due to a lack of sufficient funding . The campaign led to Gilmore 's decision to run in the 2008 Virginia Senatorial race , which he lost to Democrat Mark Warner . 
 = = Early stages = = 
 In August 2006 , an effort arose to convince Jim Gilmore to run for president of the United States in 2008 . The volunteers cited Gilmore 's past experiences as qualifications for the job including his service as a counter @-@ intelligence officer for the U.S. army , his post of attorney general of Virginia , his services as chairman of the Gilmore Commission and the National Council on Readiness and Preparedness , as well as his role as president of the non @-@ profit homeland security think @-@ tank USA Secure . 
 Gilmore decided to listen to the draft efforts , and weighed a possible presidential run when he became the sixth Republican to enact an exploratory committee on January 10 , 2007 . During his announcement , Gilmore cast himself as a " mainstream Reagan conservative that has always kept his promises " alluding to his record of tax cuts as Governor of Virginia . 
 On March 14 , Gilmore attended his first forum along with other , mostly Democratic presidential candidates . The meeting addressed the International Association of Fire Fighters labor union . Gilmore discussed how his policies as president would " be supportive of the troops " in Iraq and Afghanistan , and that he agreed with the policy for a troop surge in Iraq . Gilmore received no applause from the crowd after making the latter comment . 
 Later in March , Gilmore was interviewed by the Associated Press where he affirmed his pro @-@ life , pro @-@ gun , and anti @-@ tax positions on the issues . He stated that " The moment is there for a candidacy such as mine " while criticizing the frontrunners for the Republican nomination for their views . He stated that Arizona Senator John McCain " hasn 't made his reputation as a conservative " , he reminded his audience that former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani is " for gun control , ... gay marriage , ... [ and is ] pro @-@ choice " and described former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney as a " very liberal Northeast Republican " . At the end of March , it was revealed that Gilmore had raised $ 200 @,@ 000 for his exploratory committee . 
 Early in April , Gilmore coined the term " Rudy <unk> " to describe the three Republican frontrunners , whom he labeled as liberals during a forum in Des Moines , Iowa . On April 16 , ten days prior to his official announcement , polling results revealed that Gilmore hovered between 1 % and 2 % support among the Republican electorate . A Washington Post @-@ ABC News poll found that Gilmore was in twelfth place among Republicans with 1 % of participants , compared to 0 % in February and 1 % in January . Somewhat promising results showed that among Newt Gingrich supporters , Gilmore had 2 % support ; up from 0 % in February . 
 = = Campaign developments = = 
 On April 26 , 2007 , Gilmore announced his candidacy for president via webcast on his campaign website . He described this method of communication as the " wave of the future " through which he could " talk directly to the people as [ he ] develop [ ed ] the campaign . " Gilmore stated that as a dark horse candidate it would be beneficial for him to take advantage of the internet as a campaign tool to reach larger audiences without the cost associated with travel . 
 On May 3 , Gilmore participated in the first televised GOP debate featured on MSNBC at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley , California . The first question he received regarded the Iraq War , which he defended , stating that it represented the " entire Middle East issue " which he described as a " fundamental problem " that he connected to the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis . During an exchange with California Representative Duncan Hunter , Gilmore expressed the responsibility to capture Osama bin Laden and to fight terrorism with the help from allies and to use diplomacy to end the " sea of hostility " that he believed existed from " Morocco , all the way through the Middle East , [ and ] all the way to the Philippines . " Later in the debate , he announced his disagreement with a possible constitutional amendment to give naturalized citizens such as California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger , the ability to run for president . On abortion , Gilmore confirmed his support for a woman 's right to an abortion in the first eight to twelve weeks of pregnancy , but commented that he operated as a pro @-@ life governor . He affirmed his opposition to stem @-@ cell research . At the end of the debate , Gilmore asserted his attributes as a " consistent Conservative " while surprising many when he stated that he would not pardon Scooter Libby . He established his opposition to a National Identification Card , and highlighted the need to be " vigorous on the war on terror " , focus on homeland security , and become energy independent in the next presidency . 
 Gilmore participated in his second debate on May 15 in South Carolina broadcast by Fox News . His first question concerned the perceived growing threat of a nuclear armed Iran . Gilmore thanked the questioner on the basis that he believed the " Middle East issue " should be looked at beyond Iraq . He stated that as president he would join with American allies to put " serious mandatory sanctions " on the regime to let them know " that it is better for them to give up this sort of plan ( Nuclear proliferation ) . " After receiving a question about Social Security , Gilmore changed the subject to address his record of cutting taxes as Governor of Virginia . He would later attack fellow candidates : Rudy Giuliani for his pro @-@ choice positions , former Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee for his record on taxes , and Mitt Romney for his position on health care . When asked about potential terrorist attacks , Gilmore reminded the audience that he was governor when The Pentagon was attacked on 9 / 11 and that he has " the experience to deal with these issues . " At the end of the debate , Gilmore addressed the issue of race when asked why no minorities where present on the stage running for the presidency , he reacted to this question by declaring that the Republican Party has " people that are prepared to [ run ] in the immediate future " . He also cited his own credentials on race stating that as attorney general of Virginia he faced the issue when he had to deal with the burning of African @-@ American churches , which gave him a good standing with the African @-@ American community in his own judgment . 
 On May 18 , Gilmore appeared on the MSNBC program Tucker , hosted by Tucker Carlson . When alerted about the situation in Iraq , Gilmore made the assessment that when Iraq was invaded the president probably did not think American troops would be trying to control the streets in Baghdad at this point . He stated that it is in the interest of Americans to remain in Iraq and be involved in the " Middle East issue " because if not , America is " going to end up with a major war " . Later in the interview when Gilmore was asked if he believed Attorney General Alberto Gonzales was credible , he stated , " No , I don ’ t think he is particularly credible " . On May 27 , Gilmore appeared on ABC 's This Week and continued the strategy of attacking his opponents in the race for president . On the show , he criticized the credentials of former Senator and potential candidate Fred Thompson of Tennessee . He reminded the audience that Thompson is " a one @-@ term senator " and that " he 's well known because of his Law & Order appearance . But the question is , is there a solid , consistent record there of supporting conservative principles ? " 
 Gilmore participated in his final debate on June 5 in Goffstown , New Hampshire telecast by CNN . During this debate , Gilmore spoke less than all of his nine fellow candidates . After Kansas Senator Sam Brownback stated that he did not read the National Intelligence Estimate on weapons of mass destruction in Iraq prior to his vote to authorize the 2003 invasion of Iraq , Gilmore stated that those " who are responsible for sending this country to war ... ought to read at least that kind of material " . When asked if he had a problem with oil companies making a profit , Gilmore stated that he saw no problems with it and that he believed this was " an appropriate thing to do . " He later confirmed his opposition to the Kyoto Protocol because it " was going to basically just transfer money directly to Russia for nothing " and that it must include " every nation of the world in this entire project ... includ [ ing ] China and India " to meet his approval . But at the end of the debate when asked if he believed a conservative could include conservationist principles , he answered that he believed it could be a part of the platform because " energy independence ... is a national security issue " which serves the interests of Conservatives by preserving a " clean society that is also safe and secure for the nation . " 
 On June 17 , Gilmore was featured as the spotlight guest on CNN . He discussed economic policies of the Bush Administration that he disagreed with including " the prescription drug program " , but he applauded the president 's record on cutting taxes and stated that the handling of the economy was " not the source of the president 's unpopularity . " He assessed that " there are other areas " that have caused the low polling numbers including " the Iraq war " . He confirmed that he was " very uncomfortable with " the handling of the war , but strongly disagreed with some Democratic leaders who called for a timetable for withdrawal . He argued that these politicians were " not taking the best interest of this country ( The United States ) into effect . " 
 Later in June , Fox News did a report on the families of the candidates running for President . Jim Gilmore 's family was described as being busy with school and employment , limiting them from full @-@ time campaigning . Two of the candidate 's sons , Ashton and Jay were examined for the report . Ashton Gilmore worked full @-@ time for his father 's campaign headquarters , and Jay Gilmore worked in Washington and was only able to campaign as his schedule allowed . In election polling , unpromising results surfaced for the Gilmore campaign . In a CNN / Opinion Research Corporation poll , Gilmore failed to register half a percentage point among Republican voters . A grimmer portrait was painted for the campaign when end of the month finances revealed it was nearly broke with only $ 61 @,@ 765 cash on hand from the $ 391 @,@ 693 that had been raised overall . 
 Early in July , Gilmore was rushed to the emergency room after suffering from vision problems . He was immediately hospitalized and compelled to undergo surgery after he was diagnosed with a detached retina . Gilmore 's campaign was stalled as the candidate was ordered by doctors to restrict travel for an indefinite period . The doctors revealed that Gilmore 's vision problems could have deteriorated to the loss of eyesight . 
 On July 14 , Gilmore ended his campaign citing a late start , which " made it impractical to continue to pursue this path towards further public service " . The withdrawal was tied to a lack of funds and his diagnosis of a detached retina , which cut short at least a week of scheduled campaign appearances . In his final address of the campaign , Gilmore stated : 
 = = Campaign staff = = 
 Gilmore selected Kieran Mahoney to serve as the national consultant of the campaign . He was employed as the managing partner of Mercury Public Affairs , and worked on Bob Dole 's presidential campaign in 1996 , George Pataki 's three gubernatorial runs and Al D 'Amato 's 1992 Senatorial campaign . 
 Tom Bunnell served as Gilmore 's deputy campaign manager . He previously served as the campaign manager for Conrad Burns ' unsuccessful 2006 Senatorial re @-@ election campaign and worked as the political director for Oliver North 's 1994 Senatorial run . 
 Gilmore 's policy director was Dick <unk> who previously served as the consultant on Gilmore 's 1997 gubernatorial campaign . Director of Administrative Affairs was Egan Crover , who was formally a Legislative Aide to Maryland Senator Richard F. Colburn . Danny Adams served as Gilmore 's treasurer , and Boyd Marcus and Christian Josi both served as consultants for the campaign . Marcus worked on George Allen 's 1991 congressional campaign , and served as the Virginia state coordinator for President George H.W. Bush 's 1988 presidential campaign . Josi worked on Dan Quayle 's 1999 campaign for president and Gilmore 's 1997 gubernatorial run . Troy Bishop served as the Iowa campaign director for Gilmore 's campaign . 
 = = Endorsements = = 
 Former Treasury Secretary John W. Snow 
 Former Congressional candidate Paul Jost 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following his presidential campaign , Gilmore announced on November 19 , 2007 that he had begun a campaign to fill the United States Senate seat of retiring Republican Senator John Warner in his homestate of Virginia . In his four @-@ minute announcement video , Gilmore stated that the Senatorial race " is going to be a campaign about national security , about transportation , about education and about illegal immigration . " His Democratic challenger was former Virginia Governor Mark Warner who was previously mentioned as a potential candidate for president in 2008 . Gilmore would later lose the race to Warner in a landslide . 
 On February 9 , 2008 , Gilmore endorsed presumptive Republican Party nominee John McCain for the presidency . In a statement , Gilmore described McCain as " a proven conservative leader with a track record of cutting taxes , eliminating wasteful government spending , upholding our traditional values and promoting a strong national defense . " 
 = John F. Bolt = 
 John Franklin Bolt ( 19 May 1921 – 8 September 2004 ) was a United States Marine Corps aviator and a decorated flying ace who served during World War II and the Korean War . He remains the only U.S. Marine to achieve ace status in two wars and was also the only Marine jet fighter ace . He rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel during his military career . 
 Born to a poor family in Laurens , South Carolina , Bolt was a self @-@ described " workaholic " and was involved in numerous groups and social activities throughout his life . After dropping out of the University of Florida for financial reasons in 1941 , he joined the US Navy and trained as a Marine Corps pilot . Sent to the Pacific Theater of Operations , he flew an F4U Corsair during the campaigns in the Marshall Islands and New Guinea , claiming six victories against Japanese A6M Zeros . 
 Bolt continued his service through the Korean War , entering combat through an exchange program with the United States Air Force ( USAF ) in late 1952 . Over a period of several weeks in mid @-@ 1953 , he led flights of F @-@ 86 Sabres into combat with MiG @-@ 15s of the Chinese Air Force , scoring six victories during fights along the northern border of North Korea , commonly known as " MiG Alley , " giving him a total of 12 victories over his career . 
 Bolt stayed in the Marine Corps until 1962 , serving as an analyst and instructor in his later career , before retiring and earning a Juris Doctor degree from the University of Florida . He subsequently settled down in Florida and began a private real estate law practice ; he continued to be active in law until 1991 . He died from leukemia in 2004 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 John Bolt was born on 19 May 1921 in Laurens , South Carolina , to Thomas Crews Bolt and Brucie Bolt ( née Bagwell ) . John had a younger brother , Bruce . In 1924 the family moved to Sanford , Florida . In his youth , John Bolt gained the nickname " Jack " from his friends and family . His family was poor and he was for the most part responsible for providing his own clothes and social expenses from the time he was ten years old . He worked several part @-@ time jobs , at one point working 30 to 40 hours a week at a local creamery in addition to attending school . He also enrolled in the Boy Scouts , eventually attaining the rank of Star Scout . 
 In June 1939 , Bolt began attending Seminole High School . Described as modest and hardworking by his high school classmates , he was elected class president in his final two years in school . 
 Bolt attended the University of Florida , majoring in accounting and meeting most of the costs himself using money that he had saved while working through high school . He joined Phi Eta Sigma , an honor society and professional fraternity , and Alpha Tau Omega , a social fraternity . In 1941 , his brother Bruce also enrolled at Florida , straining the family 's expenses ; John dropped out after his second year so that his brother could complete his degree . Bolt enlisted in the Marine Corps Reserve in April 1941 to train as a pilot , but deferred his training when the Marine Corps offered him the chance to finish college and attend law school , paying him US $ 500 a year to do so . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Bolt left for basic training in June 1941 . Though he intended to join the US Marine Corps , he signed up for the US Navy Flight Training Program , which would allow him to fly for the Marines . On completion of his basic training in November 1941 , he was selected as a pilot , and moved to Naval Air Station Atlanta , Georgia in February 1942 . He was placed on active duty just before the attack on Pearl Harbor and the United States ' entry into World War II . Completing his initial pilot training and transferring to Naval Air Station Jacksonville , Florida for the next phase , he started flight training in the AT @-@ 6 Texan . He also qualified to fly in the <unk> Canary trainer aircraft . His final phase of flight lessons occurred in Naval Air Station Miami in Miami , Florida , where he flew the Grumman F3F , a biplane which was the Navy 's most advanced trainer at the time . Bolt completed this training on 18 July 1942 , and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the U.S. Marine Corps , receiving his aviator wings that day as well . 
 Around this time , Bolt began dating Dorothy E. Wiggins , whom he knew from Sanford . The two married after two years of dating , and they eventually had two children together , Robert and Barbara . Years later , during the Korean War , Bolt had the words " Darling Dottie " stencilled on the side of his North American F @-@ 86 Sabre jet as a tribute to this wife . 
 After commissioning , Bolt was assigned as a cadet training instructor , training aviation cadets at Naval Air Station Jacksonville and at Naval Auxiliary Air Station Green Cove Springs , Florida , until December 1942 , when the unit was deactivated . Until May 1943 he was trained on the F4F Wildcat , a carrier @-@ based aircraft , in preparation for movement to a front @-@ line combat unit . Over the next few months , Bolt was stationed at Naval Air Station Glenview in Glencoe , Illinois , where he trained for 60 hours aboard the paddlewheel aircraft carrier USS Wolverine . After qualifying to operate carrier @-@ based aircraft , he was assigned to Marine Corps Air Station Miramar in San Diego , California , until June 1943 , when he and his class departed for the Pacific Theater aboard the USS Rochambeau . 
 = = = Formation of VMF @-@ 214 = = = 
 On his way to the front lines , Bolt traveled to a number of islands as the Rochambeau stopped at New Caledonia and New Hebrides to avoid Japanese submarines . Upon arrival at Espiritu Santo , Bolt was placed in a pool of new officers who were intended to replace casualties in several squadrons . Casualties at this time proved to be less than expected , so the replacement pool was used to form a new squadron . The new unit was designated VMF @-@ 214 , and became known as the " Black Sheep " because its pilots had originally not been assigned to a squadron . Under the command of Major Pappy Boyington , the unit was equipped with F4U Corsairs . Moved after several months to the Russell Islands , they were ready for combat by 13 September . Bolt flew the aircraft every chance he got , and although new to the war in the Pacific , Bolt had over 700 hours flying in the F4U Corsair by September , more than many combat pilots accrued in two combat tours . 
 On 14 September , the squadron began flying missions to escort B @-@ 24 Liberator bombers . The Japanese had 200 aircraft at Kahili Airfield and <unk> Island , opposed by only 50 aircraft from the U.S. squadrons in the area . The first couple of missions that the squadron undertook were relatively quiet but , on 16 September , VMF @-@ 214 was attacked by a group of 35 Japanese A6M Zeros . The squadron repelled the strike , destroying 11 Japanese aircraft for the loss of only one of their own . Several costly engagements with the strong Japanese forces in the area followed . Bolt did not score any victories during this time , but was promoted to first lieutenant that month . 
 = = = Marshall Islands = = = 
 Bolt got his first victories of the deployment on 23 September when he was with a flight of 15 VMF @-@ 214 aircraft escorting B @-@ 24 Liberators back from a raid on Kahili . The bombers had been followed by 20 to 30 Zeros , and a dogfight quickly ensued . During the course of the engagement over Bougainville , Bolt scored two victories . His wingman , Ed Harper , also claimed a victory . For the next several weeks , the squadron operated out of Munda in the Solomon Islands . 
 A self @-@ described " workaholic " Bolt was considered by the other pilots to be the most energetic member of the squadron . He took to collecting and sending home keepsakes from daily life on the front lines ; he and two other pilots were known as the " Quartermaster Kids " because they collected so many souvenirs and shipped them home . He could often be found in the harbor near their airstrip dynamiting fish and was known to organize many of the squadron 's pig roasts and beer parties . Bolt also took it upon himself to test out many different ammunition configurations for the .50 caliber guns on the F4U during his free time . His research was conducted by firing rounds into 50 @-@ gallon drums partially filled with gasoline and at abandoned aircraft in the Espiritu Santo boneyard . He found that incendiary rounds were more effective , and convinced his squadron , and eventually most of the aircraft squadrons in the Pacific Theater , to begin firing six incendiary rounds for every one armor @-@ piercing or tracer round , rather than firing one for one . 
 Bolt became well known — but also drew the ire of his squadron 's commanding officer — during what began as an escort mission for B @-@ 24 Liberators . The bombers were lost in the clouds and the flight ran into poor weather , forcing them to turn back . During the flight home , the U.S. pilots noticed much Japanese surface traffic but did not engage because of the weather . On their way back to Munda one of the aircraft had a mechanical problem , and a group including Bolt had to land at <unk> Airfield on Vella Lavella . He tried to convince others to go with him to attack the ships they had seen , but they refused . He refueled and took off , against Boyington 's orders , and destroyed four enemy barges and strafed several ground concentrations in the vicinity of <unk> Harbor before returning to Munda . Disobeying a direct order drew Boyington 's wrath until the next day , when a telegram was received from Admiral William " Bull " Halsey : " That one man war ... conducted by Lieut Bolt against Jap stuff in <unk> , warm heart ( stop ) Halsey . " 
 On 17 October , during a mission over Kahili Airfield , Bolt 's squadron was ambushed by Japanese fighters . Bolt downed one of the Japanese aircraft in his last mission before a scheduled rest and recuperation ( R & R ) in Sydney , Australia . 
 = = = Vela Lavella = = = 
 When the squadron returned from its R & R , Bolt had been promoted to captain and the squadron had been relocated to Vella Lavella . The new base was within 150 miles ( 240 km ) of Rabaul , which was the center of Japanese activity on New Britain , and was the squadron 's next primary target . Defended by 98 @,@ 000 Japanese troops , the island was of great strategic importance as it had a harbor and several airfields and was within striking distance of the Marshall Islands , defended by 400 Japanese aircraft . 
 On 23 December , 16 Corsairs from VMF @-@ 214 formed part of a force of 120 U.S. fighters and bombers that undertook a mission over Rabaul . The strike against the city and harbor areas was countered by a large force of Japanese aircraft . While defending the bombers , Bolt shot down two more Japanese aircraft , making him the squadron 's sixth flying ace . Two days later , he took part in another mission during which his squadron mates claimed four victories , bringing VMF @-@ 214 's tally of confirmed aerial victories to 76 . 
 On 3 January 1944 , VMF @-@ 214 was among 75 U.S. aircraft raiding near Rabaul when they were surprised by 300 Japanese aircraft . Boyington was shot down and parachuted into the St. George 's Channel . The next day , Bolt led a flight of four Corsairs from VMF @-@ 214 in search of Boyington . Despite hazy weather and the need to take an indirect route to avoid Japanese radar , Bolt managed to lead the flight to the area where the battle had taken place the day before . Although they did not spot Boyington , they discovered and engaged a flotilla of Japanese barges , destroying six of them . Bolt also claimed his sixth victory against a Japanese aircraft attempting to defend the barges . 
 Bolt 's tour , along with the rest of VMF @-@ 214 , came to an end on 8 January 1944 , five days after Boyington was shot down and captured by the Japanese . VMF @-@ 214 was disbanded and its pilots assigned to other units . In his time with VMF @-@ 214 , Bolt developed a reputation among his peers as a leader and an accomplished pilot . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross twice , and scored a total of six confirmed victories and one probable victory and two aircraft damaged in his 92 missions with the squadron . 
 = = = Subsequent assignments = = = 
 Bolt was reassigned to VMF @-@ 211 , at an airfield on Nissan Island in the Green Islands , 75 miles ( 121 km ) north of Bougainville and 100 miles ( 160 km ) west of Rabaul . The aircraft there were primarily concerned with the destruction of convoys and ships . The missions , nicknamed " Truck Busters " , were very successful , but at the cost of damaged aircraft and wounded crewmen , including Bolt 's wingman . This tour lasted until May 1944 when Bolt returned to Marine Corps Air Station Santa Barbara with his squadron . 
 Reassigned , Bolt flew to Hawaii , then to Long Beach , California . He reunited with Dorothy Wiggins in San Francisco , and the two married on 23 May 1944 in Oakland , before going on a one @-@ month honeymoon . His next assignment was with the newly formed VMF @-@ 471 at Marine Corps Air Station El Toro . While posted to VMF @-@ 471 , he attended the Aviation Ground Officer 's School at Marine Corps Air Station Quantico , Virginia , from November 1944 through February 1945 . He saw no combat for the rest of the war , but did manage to break the Corsair endurance record by keeping an aircraft aloft for 14 hours and 9 seconds . After briefly returning to VMF @-@ 471 , Bolt was reassigned to VMF @-@ 215 in March 1945 , tasked with training pilots for new carrier @-@ based aircraft . He remained in this role until V @-@ J Day , the end of hostilities . 
 Following the war , Bolt served in various units around El Toro . He was at various times assigned to <unk> @-@ 46 , VMF @-@ 512 , VMF @-@ 323 , VMF @-@ 312 , VMF @-@ 452 , and Marine Aircraft Group 12 ( MAG @-@ 12 ) , before transferring to Quantico again in November 1949 to attend the Aircraft Maintenance Course . Diving in Florida 's Tampa Bay on leave , Bolt ( then a captain ) set a world <unk> record when he caught an Atlantic goliath grouper weighing hundreds of pounds . 
 = = Korean War = = 
 In May 1950 , Bolt was reassigned to VMF @-@ 224 at Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point , North Carolina , and he remained there until May 1951 . The squadron flew the F2H Banshee and within three months of joining the unit he had flown more hours on the aircraft than any other pilot in the squadron . This was followed by a quick four @-@ month tour on the staff at the 2nd Marine Aircraft Wing . During this time , the US Air Force was operating its first squadron of F @-@ 86 Sabre aircraft . The Sabres were the only U.S. aircraft which performed well against the MiG @-@ 15s operated by China and North Korea in the Korean War . Bolt used his connections to enter an exchange program with the USAF in September 1951 , becoming an exchange officer with the 318th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron at McChord Air Force Base in Washington flying the F @-@ 94 Starfire . Soon after , he began piloting the F @-@ <unk> Sabre which had been transferred to the squadron . He continued training with the squadron and was promoted to major in December 1951 . 
 = = = Fighter @-@ bomber missions = = = 
 In November 1952 , Bolt transferred to squadron VMF @-@ 115 , an element of the 1st Marine Aircraft Wing flying F9F Panther fighter @-@ bomber aircraft in South Korea . He flew 94 combat missions with the squadron , all of them in bombing runs and close air support and air strike missions against ground targets . He did not enjoy this duty , preferring instead to fly the Sabre in air @-@ to @-@ air combat . As his squadron headed to Japan for R & R , he traveled to Seoul to visit the 4th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Wing at Kimpo Airfield . 
 At the 4th Wing , Bolt met with its commander , Colonel Royal N. Baker , who refused his request to fly in combat units . He then went to the 51st Fighter @-@ Interceptor Wing at Suwon Air Base to observe its operations , where he met with George I. Ruddell , an acquaintance from El Toro , who was commanding the 39th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron . Ruddell agreed to let Bolt join his unit as part of another officer exchange . This apparently angered some of his commanders in VMF @-@ 115 , and Bolt only completed a requisite six weeks of duty with the wing prior to its next R & R. 
 = = = Exchange and combat = = = 
 Six weeks later , Bolt again turned down his R & R and joined the 39th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron , flying the F @-@ 86 Sabre . Ruddell assigned him to First Lieutenant Joseph C. McConnell , who would be the top ace in the war . Bolt and McConnell quickly established a close friendship in spite of Bolt 's superior rank , and he attributed his success in Korea to McConnell 's guidance . Ruddell sent a request to Lieutenant General Glenn O. Barcus , commander of the Fifth United States Air Force , that Bolt 's tour with the squadron be extended . The request was granted , and McConnell and Bolt began going on combat missions together as wingmen in MiG Alley , the area in northwestern Korea where air @-@ to @-@ air combat was most frequent . Bolt 's Sabre , tail number 52 @-@ <unk> , was named Darling Dottie . 
 By May , McConnell was rotated back to the United States and Bolt was given charge of the flight ; in 16 combat missions and 27 combat hours , his flight had never engaged any MiG fighters . This changed on 16 May , when the flight was attacked by a group of MiG fighters at 45 @,@ 000 feet ( 14 @,@ 000 m ) . He was quickly tailed by one of the aircraft , but managed to avoid its fire and tail another MiG himself . With several well placed shots , Bolt forced its pilot to bail out . Six days later on 22 May , MiG aircraft attacked again , and he managed to outmaneuver a fighter which had been attacking his wingman and shoot it down at 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) . On 24 June , he flew his 31st combat mission , during which he engaged a single MiG and shot it down after a quick battle in the vicinity of the Yalu River . A week later on 30 June , he was flying another mission in the same area when he spotted and quickly shot down another MiG . By the end of the month , he had credit for four victories and two aircraft " damaged " . 
 On 11 July , Bolt led another flight of four fighters in a reconnaissance mission above Sinuiju , his 37th combat mission of the deployment . Two of the aircraft departed after their fuel tanks were depleted , leaving him with one wingman to continue the patrol . Soon after , the two pilots spotted a formation of four MiGs taking off from <unk> airfield on the Chinese side of the Yalu River . Despite being low on fuel , Bolt ordered an attack . He made a head @-@ on dive toward the formation , which was attempting to gain altitude , and downed the leading airplane with four machine gun bursts . He then banked his aircraft and aimed for the second aircraft in the formation , continuing the attack and scoring hits on its fuselage . The pilot bailed out , and the remaining two MiGs fled . Within five minutes of the engagement , Bolt had shot down two of the MiGs after firing only 1 @,@ 200 rounds of ammunition , an exceptional feat . This brought his tally of confirmed victories during the war to six . For these actions he became the final Marine aviator to be awarded the Navy Cross during the war . Bolt is the only non @-@ USAF pilot to become an ace in the F @-@ 86 and the only naval aviator to become an ace in two wars . Shortly after this final mission , his tour of duty ended and he was rotated back to the United States for an extended rest and vacation , which he spent with his family . 
 = = Later Marine Corps career = = 
 Following his return from Korea , Bolt was assigned to the U.S. Navy Bureau of Aeronautics in Washington , D.C. as an aircraft design engineer . In this duty , he was detailed to The Pentagon and a board which reported on aircraft performance and tactics . A press conference was held in September 1953 to welcome him to the position , and during this he recounted stories from his service in Korea for the first time to local newspapers . Bolt 's experiences in World War II and the Korean War were used to help shape air combat doctrine . He worked in this assignment for around a year , until 1954 when he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and moved to the Naval Pilot Test Center at Naval Air Station Patuxent River , in St. Mary 's County , Maryland . During this time , he took evening classes at the University of Maryland , eventually earning a Bachelor of Science in Military History . 
 In 1957 , Bolt was ordered to Marine Corps Base Quantico to attend a one @-@ year course at the Senior School of Amphibious Warfare as part of a program which would later be incorporated into the accredited curriculum of the Marine Corps University . On 5 November , after this one @-@ year stint , he was assigned to command VMF @-@ 214 , his World War II squadron , at Marine Corps Air Station Kaneohe Bay on the Hawaiian Islands . The squadron , which was part of Marine Aircraft Group 13 , flew the FJ @-@ 4 Fury ; Bolt remained in command of it until 14 August 1959 . His final assignment as an instructor was at the Senior School of Amphibious Warfare at Quantico . He taught at this school for the final three years of his career , before retiring from the Marine Corps on 31 March 1962 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After retiring from the Marine Corps , Bolt , then 40 years old , began a new career in agriculture . He and his wife moved back to Sanford , Florida , where he worked for Chase & Co . He remained in that position for five years , until 1967 . That year , he decided to follow his original career aspirations to be a lawyer . He enrolled in the College of Law at the University of Florida , where his son Robert was also in attendance . The two formed an American handball team during their spare time , and won several tournaments . Bolt 's program had a three @-@ year curriculum , but he completed the degree in 27 months , graduating with a Juris Doctor degree in December 1969 . For two years after graduation , he stayed with the university to teach , and from 1969 to 1971 he was a law professor as well as the president of the Board of Trustees of Alpha Tau Omega , the fraternity he had joined while an undergraduate at the university . 
 After this stint as an instructor , Bolt and his wife moved to New Smyrna Beach , a place both of them had enjoyed in their childhoods . He began a private law practice and became a local property owner . During this time he was described as a " <unk> , kind , gentle person who would go out of his way to help a friend or a stranger . " He specialized in real estate law and was the attorney for the city 's utilities commission for 13 years . He retired from law in 1991 . 
 Bolt subsequently lived a quiet life and kept frequent contact with his children . Robert became a lawyer in Tampa , Florida , and Barbara wrote for Reader 's Digest . In May 1993 , Bolt attended the 50th reunion of the original " Black Sheep " or the 8th Fighter Squadron in New Orleans , Louisiana , and gave the toast at the beginning of the festivities . In 2003 , he was inducted into the American Combat Airman Hall of Fame at the American Airpower Heritage Museum in Midland , Texas . 
 Bolt died of acute leukemia in Tampa on 8 September 2004 after fleeing the approaching Hurricane Frances . At the time of his death , he was the last surviving of the seven Americans to become aces in both World War II and Korea . He was survived by his wife and children , as well as two grandchildren . 
 = = Aerial victory credits = = 
 Bolt scored a total of 12 confirmed aerial victories during his career , with an additional " probable " victory and two aircraft damaged . He was the only U.S. Marine Corps pilot to become an ace in the Korean War , and remains the only U.S. Marine Corps pilot to be an ace in two wars . Bolt was one of 1 @,@ 297 World War II aces from the United States with six confirmed victories during that war . He later became one of 40 Korean War aces from the United States with six more confirmed victories during that war . 
 Bolt is one of seven U.S. pilots who achieved ace status as both a piston @-@ engined pilot in World War II and as a jet pilot in Korea . The others are all USAF pilots : Francis S. Gabreski , James P. Hagerstrom , William T. Whisner , Vermont Garrison and Harrison <unk> , as well as George A. Davis , Jr . 
 = = Military awards = = 
 Bolt was decorated during World War II and the Korean War . His military decorations and awards include : 
 = = = Navy Cross citation = = = 
 The Navy Cross is presented to John F. Bolt . ( 0 @-@ <unk> ) Lt Colonel , U.S. Marine Corps for extraordinary heroism in connection with military operations against an armed enemy of the united Nations while attached to the First Marine Aircraft Wing and serving as a pilot of a plane in the <unk> <unk> Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron , Fifth Air Force , in action against enemy aggressor forces in the Republic of Korea on 11 July 1953 . Sighting four hostile jet interceptors immediately after the second section of his four @-@ plane flight was forced to retire from the area because of a low fuel supply during a reconnaissance mission deep in enemy territory . Major Bolt quickly maneuvered his aircraft and that of his wingman into attack position and deliberately engaged the numerically superior enemy in a head @-@ on firing run , destroying one of the hostile planes with his initial burst of fire . Although his fuel supply was dangerously low , he initiated repeated attacks on the remaining enemy aircraft and severely damaging the engine section of the lead interceptor , routinely pressed his attack against the crippled plane until the enemy pilot was forced to bail out . By his exceptional courage and superb airmanship in destroying the two aircraft , Major Bolt raised his total of enemy jet planes destroyed during the Korean War to six , thereby becoming the first jet ace in Marine Corps aviation . His inspiring leadership and great personal valor reflect the highest credit upon himself and was in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 For the President , / S / Robert Bernard Anderson , Secretary of the Navy . 
 = Whitey Wistert = 
 Francis Michael " Whitey " Wistert ( February 20 , 1912 – April 23 , 1985 ) was an American football and baseball player . He played college football and college baseball at the University of Michigan . Wistert was the first of the three Wistert brothers — he was succeeded by Albert ( Al ) and Alvin — who were named All @-@ American tackles at Michigan and later inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame . He was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame in 1967 . During his time at Michigan , Wistert played on three consecutive Big Ten Conference football championships teams , including two that won back @-@ to @-@ back national championships . He was also Big Ten Conference MVP in baseball in college and later played for Major League Baseball 's Cincinnati Reds . The Wistert brothers all wore jersey No. 11 at Michigan and are among the seven players who have had their numbers retired by the Michigan Wolverines football program . Their number will be put back into circulation starting on November 10 , 2012 before a Michigan home game against Northwestern as part of the Michigan Football Legend program . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Wistert was born in 1912 in Chicago . His parents , Kazimir J. Wistert and Josephine ( <unk> ) Wistert , immigrated to the United States from Lithuania in 1894 and were married at Chicago in 1907 . His father was a policeman in Chicago from at least 1910 to 1927 . At the time of the 1920 United States Census , Wistert 's family lived at 5647 Waveland Avenue in Chicago 's 27th Ward and consisted of parents , Kazimir and Josephine , and five children : Josephine ( age 11 ) , Isabelle ( age 10 ) , Francis ( age 7 ) , Evelyn ( age 6 ) , and Alvin ( age 3 @-@ 1 / 2 ) . 
 Wistert 's father was shot while on duty and pursuing a robbery suspect in July 1926 . By the spring of 1927 , Wistert 's father , who had served in the U.S. Army from 1898 to 1901 , was disabled due to " chest emphysema with draining sinus " and was admitted to the U.S. National Home for Disabled Volunteer Soldiers in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . He died in June 1927 when Whitey was 15 years old . 
 At the time of the 1930 United States Census , Wistert 's family continued to live at 5647 Waveland Avenue in Chicago . The household at that time consisted of Wistert 's mother , Josephine , and five children : Josephine ( age 22 , employed as a bookkeeper ) , Francis ( age 18 , employed as a tube maker for a radio company ) , Evelyn ( age 16 , employed as a " <unk> " at a variety store ) , Alvin ( age 13 ) , and Albert ( age 8 ) . 
 = = College athletics = = 
 After graduating from Chicago 's Schurz High School in 1929 , Wistert attended the University of Michigan where he was a star athlete in both football and baseball from 1931 to 1933 . 
 = = = The Wistert brothers of Michigan = = = 
 Wistert was the first of three brothers to play for Michigan . The other two are Al Wistert and Alvin Wistert . All three Wistert brothers wore number 11 for the Wolverines football team , and all three were All @-@ Americans . Interviewed by The Detroit News in 2004 , Alvin recalled : " And if I 'm not mistaken I think this is unprecedented in the annals of college football : that three brothers all would go to the same school , all played football . All played tackle , all wore the same number 11 , all made All @-@ American . Two of us played on four national championship teams . And all were inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame . " 
 The Wistert brothers grew up on the northwest side of Chicago and were the sons of a Lithuanian family . Their father was a Spanish – American War veteran who was later killed in the line of duty while working for the Chicago Police Department . According to brother Alvin Wistert , their father " was born <unk> <unk> and he Anglicized it when he came to America to Wistert . " 
 The story of the Wistert brothers at Michigan began when Whitey 's Carl Schurz High School classmate John Kowalik was invited to visit the University of Michigan . At the time , Whitey Wistert " was working in a factory building Majestic radios . " Kowalik took Whitey with him on his visit to Ann Arbor , and according to Alvin , " that 's how it started : the <unk> of Michigan . " 
 = = = Football = = = 
 As a football player , Wistert played for consecutive undefeated national championship teams in 1932 and 1933 and was a consensus All @-@ American in 1933 . The 1934 University of Michigan yearbook , the Michiganensian , included the following quote from Grantland Rice : " Wistert was unanimously selected as the best tackle in the Middle @-@ West this year . He was the key to Michigan 's defensive line play . He was a sure tackler and it was next to impossible to fool him on trick maneuvers . He was keen , quick , and accurate in diagnosing plays . " 
 Wistert and Chuck Bernard were the leaders of the 1933 offensive line when the team went 7 – 0 – 1 with a tie to the Minnesota Golden Gophers . 
 One of Wistert 's teammates on the 1932 and 1933 Michigan football teams was future U.S. President Gerald Ford . In an interview in the February 1974 issue of " Michigan Alumnus " , Wistert said of Ford : " He was a real good competitor – a real bulldog type . Even during a losing year , he was voted MVP by his teammates . They felt he was one guy who could stay and fight for a losing cause . " 
 In 1936 , he was a member Michigan football coaching staff under Coach Harry Kipke . 
 = = = Baseball = = = 
 Wistert also earned varsity letters in baseball three years and was selected as the Most Valuable Player in the Big Ten Conference in 1934 . The 1934 Michiganensian yearbook reports that the final game of the baseball season was a 4 – 0 shutout by Wistert against the University of Chicago Maroons . " Wistert , for the Wolves , allowed only five well @-@ scattered hits during the game . Although Whitey Wistert walked four men , he more than off @-@ set this by striking out nine of the Maroons to face him . " Wistert also pitched a four @-@ hitter against Ohio State . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Wistert was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1967 , one year before his brother Albert . In 1981 , he was named to the University of Michigan Hall of Honor in the fourth class of inductees alongside his brothers . Only five Michigan football players earned this honor before him . 
 = = Professional baseball = = 
 Wistert had a short cup of coffee in Major League Baseball , appearing in three games for the Cincinnati Reds between September 11 , 1934 and September 25 , 1934 . In two appearances as a pitcher , Wistert allowed only one run in eight innings , for a career ERA of 1 @.@ 13 . However , in three plate appearances , he went hitless and struck out twice . Although he only played briefly at the major league level , Wistert played five years of professional baseball . Fellow 1933 Michigan Wolverines football All @-@ American , Ted Petoskey also debuted for the Reds in September 1934 . 
 = = Late life = = 
 After retiring from sports , Wistert became a New York lawyer . He went on to become a vice @-@ president of an industrial relations firm in Toledo , Ohio . He served in the United States Navy as a lieutenant during World War II . 
 = Akmal Shaikh = 
 Akmal Shaikh ( 5 April 1956 – 29 December 2009 ) was a Pakistani @-@ British businessman who was convicted and executed in China for drug trafficking . The trial and execution attracted significant media attention in the UK . 
 Shaikh was born in Pakistan and moved to the United Kingdom as a child . After a couple of failed businesses , Shaikh moved to Poland with his second wife in 2005 with the dream of starting an airline , and later of becoming a pop star . He travelled from Poland to China and was arrested by Chinese customs officers at Ürümqi <unk> International Airport on 12 September 2007 with 4 kilograms ( 9 lb ) of heroin hidden in a compartment in his baggage . Shaikh 's defence team pleaded ignorance of the existence of the drugs , although his lawyers said that the evidence against Shaikh was " overwhelming " . Reprieve , an anti @-@ death penalty organisation , argued that Shaikh suffered from mental illness which was exploited by criminals who tricked him into transporting the heroin on the promise of a recording contract . 
 Shaikh , who had never been assessed by mental health experts , denied he was mentally ill . He had requested a psychiatric evaluation to prove he was sane , but the requests were refused by Chinese authorities on the grounds that PRC laws required defendants to first provide past medical records showing evidence of a mental disorder before such evaluations could be undertaken . Appeals for clemency were made by his family and by British government officials . After two appeals , the Supreme Court confirmed the death sentence he was given at his first trial in October 2008 , and Shaikh was executed by lethal injection in Ürümqi on 29 December 2009 . It was reported that Shaikh was the first European national to be executed in China since Antonio Riva in 1951 . Lau Fat @-@ wai , a Portuguese citizen , also faced drug trafficking charges back in 2006 , before Akmal Shaikh , but Mr. Lau 's death sentence was only carried out early in 2013 . 
 Britain made 27 official representations to the Chinese government ; the Chinese ambassador to London was summoned twice to meet British Foreign Office ministers , once after the execution . Senior British politicians strongly condemned the execution , and were disappointed that clemency was not granted , while human rights groups and some Western legal experts in Chinese law criticised the lack of due process ; United Nations Special Rapporteur Philip Alston said the refusal to assess Shaikh 's mental health was a violation of international law . The Chinese embassy in Britain said Shaikh had no " previous medical record " of mental illness and that his " rights and interests were properly respected and guaranteed " . It said the Chinese stance underlined the " strong resentment " felt by its public to drug traffickers , in part based on " the bitter memory of history " – a reference to the First and Second Opium Wars . A professor of criminal law at the East China University of Political Science and Law said the administration of the death penalty related to a country 's history , culture and other conditions : " It 's human nature to plead for a criminal who is from the same country or the same family , but judicial independence should be fully respected and everyone should be equal before the law . " 
 = = Biography = = 
 Shaikh , a Muslim , was a Pakistani migrant to the United Kingdom with his parents during his childhood . His first wife had converted from Hinduism to Islam when they married ; they had two sons and a daughter . In the 1980s , Shaikh was an estate agent in the United States . They moved back to London when the business stumbled . He then started a mini @-@ cab business in Kentish Town called ' <unk> ' which prospered for a time ; even so , he fell into bankruptcy for more than two years during the 1990s . 
 In 2003 , Shaikh sexually harassed and unfairly dismissed a 24 @-@ year @-@ old female employee ; he also failed to pay more than half her wages . In 2004 , an Employment Tribunal awarded her £ 10 @,@ 255 @.@ 97 damages and unpaid wages , which he subsequently never paid . Shaikh and his son , Abdul @-@ Jabbar , both failed to attend the tribunal hearings for the harassment case and sold the business to another minicab firm . Shaikh 's first marriage ended in divorce in 2004 . 
 He married his Polish secretary – who was then pregnant with his child – and moved to Poland permanently in 2005 , reportedly with ambitions to start an airline . He had been going to Lublin frequently since autumn 2004 . Following the 7 July 2005 London bombings , Shaikh sent a text message to two people in London saying : " Now everybody will understand who Muslims are and what jihad is , " and was consequently investigated as a terror suspect for five months by British intelligence and Poland 's Internal Security Agency . In December 2005 , the MI5 investigation was discontinued due to insufficient evidence . 
 His Polish wife is reported in the Daily Mail as saying that he began to act in a ' really silly and crazy way ' when he finally settled in Poland ; although they had a second child , a daughter , the marriage broke down and he became homeless . In 2006 , by which time his former wife had remarried and had another baby with her new husband , Shaikh 's ex @-@ wife reported him to Polish police for using threatening behaviour against her and her children ; she later withdrew her statement , and the case never went to court . In 2006 he was sentenced by a Polish court to one year in jail ( suspended for four years ) for driving under the influence of alcohol , and prohibited from driving for three years . He was wanted in 2007 by a Lublin court for not paying <unk> . 
 In 2007 , he joined in a month @-@ long demonstration for nurses outside the Warsaw office of the Prime Minister of Poland , and met British musician Gareth Saunders , according to whom Shaikh was destitute , living off handouts and ate at a soup kitchen . Chinese press reports that Saunders was told by Shaikh that he had started a business in Poland , before they met , but which he was forced to abandon due to a conspiracy against him . Shaikh wrote a song , " Come Little Rabbit " , [ a ] which Saunders said Shaikh pestered him and fellow Briton Paul Newberry into recording . Reprieve , an organisation working against the death penalty , campaigned for his release following his arrest in China . It cites Saunders and Newberry saying that Shaikh had no musical talent and appeared to entertain delusional ideas about stardom . Newberry reportedly said : " I can 't imagine anyone singing worse than he did on that recording and we told him so , but he was on such a high , convinced that he would have a huge hit ... We told him that he was crazy , that it was the worst thing we had ever heard , but he just laughed in our face and repeated that it would be huge . " A recording of this ' out of tune ' song , whose lyrics include a refrain ' Only one world , only one people , only one God ' , was released by Reprieve to raise awareness for their campaign to save him . 
 = = Drug trafficking , trials and execution = = 
 Reprieve said Shaikh met a man in Poland named " Carlos " sometime in 2007 who he believed had contacts in the music industry and could help make him famous ; Shaikh travelled to Kyrgyzstan , where a man named " Okole " promised Shaikh an opportunity to perform at a " huge nightclub " in China he purportedly owned . " Okole " and Shaikh travelled together to China , stopping in Tajikistan , where they stayed in a five @-@ star hotel . On 12 September 2007 , Shaikh flew from Dushanbe in Tajikistan , to Ürümqi in north @-@ west China . Shaikh claimed he was told he would have to travel alone to China as the flight was full ; " Okole " allegedly gave him a suitcase to carry , and promised he would take the next flight . Shaikh was arrested on his arrival at Ürümqi Airport the same day , when a baggage search revealed he was carrying 4 kilograms ( 9 lb ) of heroin of 84 @.@ 2 % purity ; Alerted by Shaikh 's nervous and circumspect behaviour , customs officers searched and found the drugs hidden in a compartment of his case , which was " practically empty " but for a few clothes ; he only had US $ 100 and 100 Chinese yuan on his person . Reprieve said that Shaikh claimed the suitcase was not his ; and he cooperated with the Chinese authorities in an attempt to catch " Okole " , who was supposed to arrive on the next plane , but who never turned up . According to the British media , the British Government was informed of the arrest almost a year later . 
 First trial – November 2007 
 Chen Dong , Director of the Ürümqi Legal Aid Center , was appointed to represent Shaikh , who was tried in November 2007 . Defence asserted to the court that Shaikh knew nothing of the drugs , and that he did not knowingly smuggle the narcotics . Shaikh was found guilty . On 29 October 2008 , after two failed appeals , he was sentenced to death by the Intermediate People 's Court of Ürümqi according to the section of the Chinese criminal code which provides the death penalty for smuggling heroin in quantities of more than 50 grams ( 2 oz ) . The Supreme People 's Court validated the sentence as being in accordance with Articles 48 and 347 of China 's Criminal Law . Prospect says the judgement was made public in October 2008 . 
 Second trial – May 2009 
 His case was heard in the second instance on 26 May 2009 . At his second trial , Reprieve said Shaikh defended himself with a " rambling and often incoherent " speech lasting 50 minutes and which was " greeted with incredulity and sometimes mirth by court officials . " According to the <unk> Living Weekly article , one of the two lawyers representing Shaikh during his second trial , Mr. Cao Hong , said that the key defence argument was Shaikh 's ignorance of the drug he was transporting . Cao said the official documents , baggage examination reports from the record of his arrest , as well as pictures and video footage taken during the baggage check was " overwhelmingly against Shaikh " ; he did not play in court some of the video footage recorded because it was too incriminating . Cao advised Shaikh to undergo a mental evaluation , which he initially refused , arguing that he was not mentally ill . Upon his lawyer 's insistence , he made a statement requesting an evaluation to prove that he was mentally sound , but which also said that neither he nor his family had any history of mental illnesses . 
 The Supreme People 's Court ruled that documents provided by the British Embassy in Beijing and Reprieve in support of the request for a psychiatric assessment did not prove that Shaikh had a mental disorder ; nor was there a history of mental disease in his family . His lawyer , Cao , confirmed that the documents he received from Reprieve contained " medical information about bipolar disorder , and a list of symptoms and case studies " not specific to Shaikh . According to Professor Jerome A. Cohen , professor emeritus at New York University School of Law , Shaikh 's November trial lasted half an hour ; he also said that the trial court initially agreed to allow a psychiatric evaluation of Shaikh , but subsequently refused it . Xinhua stated that the court 's decision to refuse a mental assessment was based on PRC laws requiring defendants to first provide past medical records showing evidence of a mental disorder before such evaluations could be undertaken . Xinhua also reported the Supreme People 's Court 's view that medical records provided by the British Embassy contained no documentary evidence to support claims of Shaikh 's condition . Although the Chinese authorities state he was provided with interpretation during his trials , The Guardian alleges there was none ; and the Foreign Secretary , David Miliband , too intimated that interpretation may have been inadequate . 
 A final appeal to the Supreme People 's Court for an independent assessment of his mental condition failed on 21 December 2009 , and his execution date was set for 29 December . Shaikh was not told of his impending execution throughout this time " for humanitarian reasons " . Shaikh was visited by two cousins and British consular officials in the hospital where he had been treated for a heart condition since August 2009 , and it was only then that he was informed that he would die in 24 hours . 
 Execution – December 2009 
 Shaikh was executed by lethal injection at 10 : 30 CST ( 02 : 30 GMT ) on 29 December 2009 at the <unk> Detention Centre in Ürümqi . Family members and British consular officials were refused access to Shaikh during the final hours by the Chinese authorities , and were not allowed to witness the execution . According to Reprieve , Shaikh was the first national of an EU member state to be executed in China in over 50 years . Officials say he was given a Muslim burial – his body intact – according to his family 's wishes , at the <unk> Muslim Cemetery ; his family was not allowed to attend . 
 = = Clemency campaign = = 
 Campaigners on his behalf were concerned at the apparent lack of due legal process . They did not dispute that he was carrying a large amount of heroin , but argued for the release of Shaikh based on their assertions that he was mentally ill at the time of the offence saying that the court did not take his condition into account during the trial . The case attracted support from Amnesty International ; and UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions , Philip Alston , who said there were " strong indications " that Shaikh may have been suffering from mental illness . He also said : " Both Chinese and international law clearly indicate that a person who committed a crime while suffering from significant mental illness should not be subjected to the death penalty , " and that " [ e ] <unk> a mentally ill man would be a major step backwards for China . " 
 His family , which had lost touch with him when he left for Poland , also pleaded for mercy : in a letter to the Chinese Ambassador , his elder brother Akbar wrote that his brother 's life had been destroyed by mental illness ; Akbar maintained that Shaikh was kind and harmless when healthy , and was much loved by his family . He was concerned at the effect his execution would have on their mother : " She is a frail woman , and our family have not been able to break the news to her that she may lose her youngest child next week . " Akmal 's children said their father had been " seriously ill for much of his life " , and pleaded for a reprieve . 
 Reprieve and his family all cite examples of Shaikh 's " erratic behaviour " and " questionable decisions " at least since 2001 . Reprieve interviewed people who had dealings with him to support their claims that he may have had bipolar disorder . Stephen Fry was one celebrity who joined the campaign for clemency . Reprieve also released hundreds of emails that Shaikh had sent in 2007 to embassy staff in Warsaw and to a group of 74 individuals and organisations including Tony Blair . Campaigners argued that Shaikh 's delusions of pop stardom were symptomatic of his condition , and may have made him especially susceptible to confidence tricks . Akmal 's former solicitor described his client as " charming and charismatic " , and said his client was sane as recently as 2003 . The lawyer said that " By the time he went over to Poland you could not even sit down and have a conversation with him . " Nevertheless , Shaikh had never been assessed by a psychiatrist in Britain or elsewhere . 
 Dr Peter <unk> , clinical and forensic psychologist engaged by Reprieve , was sent to China but was not allowed direct access to Shaikh . However , through 15 minutes ' access given to Foreign Office officials to interview Shaikh , Dr <unk> said he was able to deduce " with 99 per cent certainty " that Shaikh was suffering from a mental disorder , possibly bipolar or schizophrenia . In an op @-@ ed in the South China Morning Post , Professor Jerome A. Cohen suggested that China had failed to comply with its own and international legal standards that required a thorough mental evaluation of Shaikh before rendering a final judgment . 
 The China Daily said : " Intellectually challenged people do a lot of inexplicable things when they lose control ... But seldom have we heard of a mentally ill person hiding as much as 4 kg of heroin in his double @-@ layered suitcase . " It added that " the court had no reason not to consider the plaintiff 's alleged mental illness if he showed any signs of suffering from it while he was in jail . " It further asserted that the claims of his family were contradicted by Shaikh himself , who denied having a history of mental disorder . Wang <unk> , professor of criminal law in Fudan University , and professor Xue <unk> , professor of criminal law at the East China University of Political Science and Law , stated that " the Chinese court 's decision to execute Akmal Shaikh was completely appropriate ... [ and ] the denial of mental evaluation was legitimate and consistent with legal precedent " . Xue <unk> said the administration of the death penalty related to a country 's history , culture and other conditions : " It 's human nature to plead for a criminal who is from the same country or the same family , but judicial independence should be fully respected and everyone should be equal before the law " ; Wang said it was understandable that British media ran emotional stories and local people reacted with sorrow or anger as Britain did not retain the death penalty . " But one country should respect judicial independence of another country , without any interference in internal affairs . " 
 Britain made 27 official representations to the Chinese government about the case . Gordon Brown reportedly wrote several times to Hu Jintao and pleaded the case personally to Wen Jiabao during the Copenhagen summit . The Chinese ambassador in London was summoned twice by the government over the case . The Chinese Embassy in London cited their country 's obligations to the United Nations Conventions against Illicit Drug Trafficking as justification for punishing the " grave crime " of drug smuggling . The embassy statement asserted that Shaikh 's rights and interests under Chinese law were " properly respected and guaranteed " . 
 When his cousins , <unk> and Nasir Shaikh , arrived in Ürümqi to spend time with him at the hospital in Ürümqi the day before the execution , they also made a last @-@ minute petition to the local court for a stay of execution ; they and British embassy officials delivered a plea for mercy to president Hu Jintao . It was during this visit that Akmal was informed of his impending death . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Human rights organisations condemned China 's refusal to consider Shaikh 's alleged psychological illness as a denial of justice . However , some British commentators were largely sympathetic to , if not supportive of , the hard @-@ line Chinese stance against drug smuggling , and accepted there was little else the British Government could do ; some accused British leaders of hypocrisy in light of the country 's own drugs problem . Two British tabloids ( under the control of Rupert Murdoch and Trinity Mirror ) were supportive of the execution . 
 The Chinese authorities reacted angrily to the " foreign interference " , citing " the bitter memory " of China under foreign imperialism ; and stressing that all legal procedures to safeguard the defendant had been complied with . The Chinese public was cited as being overwhelmingly in support of the execution , further justified by endorsement of its action in the British press . 
 Reprieve , the group which mounted his campaign , said they had passed on new evidence and testimonials from six people who knew Akmal in Poland that they had received in the final 24 hours which the Chinese government had not acknowledged receiving at the time of the execution . Sally Rowan , their legal director , said that any talk of ' special treatment ' was " ridiculous " – as Chinese law has provisions to protect those with mental illness , but they chose not to invoke them . Rowan condemned the execution of an incompetent man as " barbaric " . Other mental health charities echoed the sentiments . 
 Shaikh 's family was saddened by the execution , but was split as to whether the UK establishment had done all it could to secure humanitarian treatment . Shaikh 's cousins <unk> and Nasir Shaikh praised the efforts of Gordon Brown , British ministers and Reprieve . Two other cousins , Amina and Ridwan Shaikh , attacked the government and the media in a scathing letter to The Guardian that questioned the effectiveness of the government 's approach . They criticised the " sporadic media attention " about their cousin 's plight for two years , and accused the government of acting out its powerlessness in the face of China 's economic might . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 Following the execution , there was a range of views in the British press , some agreed with the political leaders Gordon Brown , David Miliband and David Cameron , who expressed concerns that a mental health assessment was not done , and that clemency requests had not been granted ; others were critical of the UK government 's reaction ; and some were fairly neutral . Among the journalists who supported the UK government 's stance were Dominic Ziegler , author of The Economist 's Banyan column on Asian affairs , who felt that the issue raised questions about effective use of protections for defendants during judicial process ; and Daniel <unk> , who wrote in The Spectator that he felt that China was " a revanchist power " seeking the status and rights of the Western world , though not the responsibilities – Prospect magazine held a similar opinion that the Chinese authorities wished to " stand up to its old oppressors " and show the Chinese people that they were " being led in the right direction . " 
 An editorial in The Independent noted that some other Asian countries impose the death penalty for drug @-@ smuggling , and commented that the execution " was less the arrogance of a rising power than evidence that China is still feeling its way in the wider world " . George Walden wrote in The Times that he felt if the British government had been more discreet Shaikh might have been reprieved , and that " if we wish to influence China on capital punishment , a little historical humility may be in order " British commentators critical of the UK government 's response were Josephine McDermott of The Daily Telegraph who compared the government 's " sabre @-@ rattling " approach to the British attitude during the First Opium War in 1839 ; Michael White of The Guardian , who felt that China would not be interested in " lectures from Europeans on the morality of the drugs trade " , and Leo McKinstry of the Daily Mail , who said the international clamour to denounce China was " hypocritical and insensitive " . McKinstry declared support for the execution , and condemned Britain 's weak stance on drugs and its " institutionalised tolerance " of drug use . In a discussion on the Daily Mail website , participants were overwhelmingly in favour of the execution . Other popular tabloids were unanimous : Jon Gaunt of The Sun criticised British politicians and the media for grossly overplaying the case , and linked the government 's reaction with the Labour Party 's " soft " stance on immigration and crime . Tony Parsons of the Daily Mirror supported China 's strong stance against drug peddling , and said the British government 's reaction was " shrill beyond belief " . Anna Smith of The News of the World commented on the irony that a drug smuggler was executed by a drug injection , and felt that the public didn 't really care " about the human rights of a drug smuggler " . 
 = = = People 's Republic of China = = = 
 = = = = Official view = = = = 
 Foreign Ministry Spokeswoman Jiang Yu said , " Nobody has the right to speak ill of China 's judicial sovereignty . We express our strong dissatisfaction and opposition to the British Government 's unreasonable criticism of the case . We urge the British to correct their mistake in order to avoid harming China – UK relations . " The Chinese Embassy in London said " The legal structures of China and UK may be different , but it should not stand in the way of enhancing our bilateral relations on the basis of mutual respect . " Further , the Embassy cited " the bitter memory " of the Opium trade of the 19th century as a reason for the " strong resentment " felt by the Chinese public to drug traffickers and foreign ( especially British ) interference . A biannual summit session between China and the UK on human rights scheduled for early January was " postponed " by China in what The Daily Telegraph said was " widely thought to be a rebuke to the UK for its public criticism of China over the execution of Akmal Shaikh " . 
 = = = = Other views = = = = 
 The majority of Chinese people supported Shaikh 's execution . A survey by China Daily showed 77 @.@ 5 % in favour of the execution and 16 % opposing . The Global Times said that China 's death penalty has strong public support and that it acts as a deterrent to serious crime . It observed the fact that Shaikh is the first European to be executed in China in 50 years is highly emotive and sensational : " But viewed in context , the uniform application of sentencing standards for both the Chinese and foreigners underscores the progress of China 's legal system , which is steadily building the principle of rule of law . " Vocal supporters included overseas Chinese , legal specialists , government officials as well as journalists . A professor at the Shanghai Institute for European Studies accused Labour politicians of trying to capitalise on the issue of China 's human rights for political advantage in the upcoming election . An academic at Fudan University said the British criticism lacked legal and moral basis ; their reaction was " unreasonable " and showed " considerable cultural arrogance " ; another one at Tsinghua University considered the British politicians ' reaction an attempt to " create sentiments and manipulate the public " . Wang <unk> , a professor at China People 's Public Security University , said that Britain and China should respect each other 's differences in ideology and moral standards , rather than " using their own moral standards to judge , condemn and demonise China . " Citing polls and comments on websites of British press , the Chinese media also reported how politicians ' outcry was " unrepresentative " of the vast majority of Britons ' understanding of and support for China 's action . 
 In an editorial published by China Daily , Han <unk> , Professor of History and Political Science at Warren Wilson College , hailed the execution , saying that the decision " upheld the dignity of Chinese law . " He suggested that to act otherwise as a result of international pressure would be a return to the extraterritorial privileges that had been granted to many foreign nationals in China in the latter half of the 19th and first half of the 20th century pursuant to the " unequal treaties " . Han said that a nation bending its laws under outside pressure " invites endless troubles in the future " , leading to a lack of respect for the laws of that country , and dismissed the criticism of China 's human rights record by Western governments as " an excuse to intervene in China ’ s internal affairs " . 
 = = = International reaction = = = 
 Some public organisations and individual experts media were critical of the judicial process . The United Nations Special Rapporteur , Philip Alston , a human rights spokesman , felt that the brevity of the initial conviction might not have allowed due process , and that not assessing Shaikh 's mental health was " in violation not only of Chinese law but also international law . " The European Union condemned the execution and regretted that its calls for the sentence to be commuted had not been heeded . Amnesty International felt the execution highlighted the injustice of the death penalty , particularly in China , and called on all countries to press the Chinese government to improve the legal proceedings for defendants , especially those facing the death penalty . Jerome Cohen , an expert in Chinese law , commented in the US @-@ Asia Law Institute that the main legal issue was the refusal of a psychiatric examination , and that China may review its judicial process in this regard both in light of international criticism , and internal pressure as the country " shares the world ’ s abhorrence of punishing mentally irresponsible people " and after the execution of Yang Jia , who was also refused a psychiatric examination , the public sympathy prompted " some Chinese experts to seek necessary law reforms " . 
 Reaction from the international media was broadly critical of the authorities , with Der Spiegel summarising German commentators as being universally critical of Beijing . Newsweek felt that the Chinese authorities had consolidated their position domestically by giving the impression to Chinese citizens that the government will " protect them the best way it knows how from the mentally unstable , whether they are carrying machetes or suitcases full of drugs " , and Ireland 's Sunday Independent felt that the West was being hypocritical for overlooking other human rights concerns in China while enjoying the Beijing Olympics . 
 = Cyclone Leon – Eline = 
 Cyclone Leon – Eline was the longest @-@ lived Indian Ocean tropical cyclone on record , traveling over 11 @,@ 000 km ( 6 @,@ 800 mi ) during its 29 day duration . It formed on February 1 , 2000 , in the Australian basin as Tropical Cyclone Leon . After crossing 90 ° E , the Météo @-@ France office in Réunion ( MFR ) began tracking the system as Tropical Storm Eline on February 8 . Late on February 17 , Eline made landfall near Mahanoro , Madagascar , with 10 ‑ minute winds of 165 km / h ( 103 mph ) . The storm rapidly weakened over land , but restrengthened in the Mozambique Channel to reach peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . On February 22 , Eline made landfall about 80 km ( 50 mi ) south of Beira , Mozambique , near peak intensity , and quickly weakened over land . The well @-@ defined circulation moved across southern African , finally dissipating over eastern Namibia on February 29 . 
 While moving across much of the Indian Ocean , Eline brought high waves , gusty winds , and rainfall to several islands . Later , Eline struck Madagascar while the country was in the midst of a cholera epidemic that had killed over 1 @,@ 000 people . The storm directly killed at least 64 people , although Tropical Storm Gloria struck shortly thereafter , compounding upon the damage and making it difficult to discern the individual damage totals . Damage from Eline was estimated at $ 9 million ( USD ) , and collectively the two storms killed 205 people and left another 10 @,@ 000 homeless . In the region around Vatomandry , where Eline made landfall , 65 % of houses were damaged , 90 % of crops were lost , and 75 % of health facilities were wrecked . 
 Before Eline 's final landfall , Mozambique was experiencing the worst floods since 1951 , killing about 150 people . The additional rainfall and flooding from Eline created the country 's worst natural disaster in a century . The combined effects destroyed over 250 @,@ 000 ha ( 620 @,@ 000 acres ) of crop fields and killed 40 @,@ 000 cattle . Eline 's passage disrupted ongoing relief efforts . High levels along the Limpopo River isolated the town of Xai @-@ Xai , with water levels along the river reaching as high as 11 m ( 36 ft ) above normal in some areas , as well as 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) wide . A dam broke along the river , flooding the town of Chokwe in the middle of the night and trapping several unprepared residents ; this accounted for nearly half of the death toll . About 55 people drowned in Sofala Province after rescue helicopters arrived too late to save them . Around 20 @,@ 000 people in the capital city of Maputo lost their homes . In addition to the floods , strong winds blew away many roofs and some entire houses made of mud . The combined effects of the preceding floods and Eline left about 329 @,@ 000 people displaced or homeless , about 700 deaths , and damage estimated at $ 500 million ( USD ) . The cyclone and the floods disrupted much of the economic progress Mozambique had made in the 1990s since the end of its civil war . 
 Elsewhere in southern Africa , Eline brought strong winds and heavy rainfall when it crossed into eastern Zimbabwe , maintaining a well @-@ defined structure . Rivers overflowed their banks in the country , damaging crops and houses while leaving 15 @,@ 000 people homeless . The storm killed 12 people in the country . Flooding from the storm extended southward into Swaziland and South Africa . In the latter country , Eline dropped 503 mm ( 19 @.@ 8 in ) of rainfall in Levubu over three days , causing the Limpopo River to reach its highest level in 15 years . Officials opened dams along the river to prevent structural damage , which caused higher levels along the river to the east . At least 21 people died in the country , and about 80 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , forcing many people into churches and schools . Damage in Limpopo Province alone was estimated at $ 300 million ( USD ) . To the north , Eline dropped about 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) of rainfall in southern Malawi , while gusty winds caused a power outage in Blantyre . Farther west , rainfall rates of 50 – 100 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) were also reported in Botswana . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A low pressure area developed within the monsoon trough on February 1 about 250 km ( 160 mi ) south of the Indonesian island of Bali . Associated convection was initially sparse due to wind shear , although a developing anticyclone allowed the thunderstorms to persist . At 22 : 00 UTC on February 3 , the Perth Tropical Cyclone Warning Center ( PTCWC ) upgraded the low to a Category 1 on the Australian tropical cyclone scale , naming it Tropical Cyclone Leon . On February 4 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began issuing advisories on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 11S while southeast of Christmas Island . A ridge to the south steered the storm generally westward . Late on February 5 , the PTCWC estimated an initial peak of 140 km / h ( 87 mph ) , although increased shear caused weakening . Leon crossed 90 ° E on February 8 into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean , and was renamed Eline by the Mauritius Meteorological Service . Météo @-@ France ( MFR ) estimated 10 ‑ minute winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) at that time . 
 On February 11 , wind shear began decreasing as convection <unk> . Early on February 14 , the JTWC upgraded Eline to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane . That day , the storm passed about 85 km ( 53 mi ) south of St. Brandon and 180 km ( 110 mi ) northwest of Mauritius , although its small structure limited the strongest winds . Early on February 16 , Eline attained tropical cyclone status while passing about 160 km ( 99 mi ) northwest of Réunion . The eye became better defined , and while approaching eastern Madagascar on February 17 , Eline intensified to reach 10 ‑ minute winds of 165 km / h ( 103 mph ) . Around that time , the cyclone made landfall near Mahanoro . Eline rapidly weakened into a tropical depression over land . After crossing Madagascar for 26 hours , Eline emerged into the Mozambique Channel near Belo , quickly re @-@ intensifying into a moderate tropical storm on February 19 . The storm rapidly intensified as it approached eastern Mozambique , becoming an intense tropical cyclone early on February 22 with 10 ‑ minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . The JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 215 km / h ( 134 mph ) , the equivalent of a Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane scale . While at peak intensity , Eline made landfall about 80 km ( 50 mi ) south of Beira , Mozambique with gusts of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) , making it the strongest storm to hit the nation in several decades . Although the winds rapidly decreased after landfall , the storm maintained a well @-@ defined structure as it crossed into Zimbabwe late on February 22 and progressed across southern Africa . It eventually reached eastern Namibia , where the circulation dissipated on February 29 and merged with an approaching cold front . 
 Throughout its duration , Leon @-@ Eline lasted 29 days , a record longevity for a storm in the southern Indian Ocean . The track was over 11 @,@ 000 km ( 6 @,@ 800 mi ) , or about 25 % of the Earth 's circumference . However , Eline was in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean for 21 days , which is the third most on record since the start of satellite imagery . It was behind Cyclone Alibera in 1989 and Cyclone Georgette in 1968 , the latter of which lasted 24 days in the basin . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Early in its duration while it was still in the Australian basin , the cyclone produced high waves near Christmas Island , forcing a boat of about 500 refugees to be escorted to port . Later , Eline brought wind gusts of 76 km / h ( 47 mph ) to St. Brandon . On Mauritius , the cyclone produced wind gusts of 137 km / h ( 85 mph ) , along with heavy rainfall that peaked at 405 mm ( 15 @.@ 9 in ) at Sans Souci . This rainfall was about 70 % of the average February precipitation total . After Eline began restrengthening and turned more to the southwest , officials on Réunion declared a red alert , but this was dropped when the cyclone passed the island . Ultimately , the storm brushed the island with gusts of 101 km / h ( 63 mph ) along the coast , and 187 km / h ( 116 mph ) in the mountainous peak of <unk> . Rainfall was heaviest in the mountainous peaks , as well , reaching 1 @,@ 500 mm ( 59 in ) at Bébourg . Significant wave heights remained below 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . 
 = = = Madagascar = = = 
 Moving ashore in eastern Madagascar , Eline produced strong winds along its path , with gusts estimated at 250 km / h ( 160 mph ) by MFR at landfall . However , the storm blew away local weather stations , which made the true landfall intensity unknown . Winds remained strong farther inland ; Ivato International Airport near the capital Antananarivo reported winds of 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) , and winds in the capital were likely stronger . Eline also dropped heavy rainfall , with a 24 ‑ hour total of 131 mm ( 5 @.@ 2 in ) at Ivato airport . The rains also caused flooding along Madagascar 's west coast , which is usually spared from precipitation by mountains . Eline struck while Madagascar was in the midst of a cholera epidemic that had killed over 1 @,@ 000 people . 
 In Mahanoro , the biggest city near the cyclone 's landfall in Madagascar , Eline disrupted power and water supplies while also leaving the town isolated . About 80 % of buildings were damaged or destroyed there . In Marolambo , a village in eastern Madagascar , Eline killed six people . Heavy rainfall in the central portion of the nation caused landslides and flooding . Flooding also occurred in the west coast near Belo . The storm disrupted portions of at least three highways . The storm left about 10 @,@ 000 people homeless , with about 1 @,@ 500 people forced to stay in storm shelters . Damage to public buildings was estimated at $ 300 @,@ 000 ( 2000 USD ) , Nationwide , Eline killed at least 64 people and affected about a half @-@ million people affected . 
 Only 13 days after Eline struck the country , Cyclone Gloria also hit northeastern Madagascar , bringing additional damage and flooding . The two storms collectively killed at least 140 people , although there was initial uncertainty in the toll due to disrupted communications . Floods from the two storm inundated 70 % of homes and wrecked 70 % of the crops in the districts of Andapa , Sambava , Antalaha , and Vohemar . About 12 @,@ 000 people in 114 villages were isolated . Rice fields were flooded for over a week , and coffee and banana crops had severe losses . Collectively , 12 @,@ 230 people were left without access to clean water . 
 = = = Mozambique = = = 
 Before Eline struck Mozambique , storm warnings and later hurricane warnings were issued on February 21 . Flooding had affected the nation since January , with some areas receiving a year 's worth of rainfall in two weeks . Widespread areas were inundated , with about 220 @,@ 000 people displaced , and about 150 people killed . Eline moved ashore with very powerful winds , although there were no direct observations of the strongest winds . In Beira , the closest major city to the landfall point , winds reached storm force . However , the rainfall from Eline was the most impacting following the preexisting flooding , which were the worst since 1951 . The floods were beginning to recede by the time Eline arrived , and by the end of February 2000 , the situation was considered the country 's worst natural disaster in a century . Flooding continued for days after Eline moved through southern Africa due to waters flowing downstream from neighboring countries . By early March the floods were beginning to recede again , leaving behind a deep layer of mud , ponds of contaminated water , and piles of rotten corpses . 
 While Eline moved ashore , high winds knocked over coconut trees , destroying over 250 @,@ 000 ha ( 620 @,@ 000 acres ) of crop fields in conjunction with the floods . The floods killed 30 % of the cows in Gaza Province , and about 40 @,@ 000 cattle died nationwide , with many chickens and goats also killed . Many schools were closed after the storm , including 308 due to damage and others that housed storm victims . The storm knocked over telegraph power lines and caused widespread power and water outages from Inhambane to Beira , while also disrupting ongoing relief efforts . The cities of Chokwe , <unk> , and Xai Xai all had damage to their water systems . 
 After the storm knocked over 90 power poles , about two @-@ thirds of Beira was without power and water , and two people were killed due to downed power lines . Flooding damaged the World Food Program warehouse in the city . Also in Beira , the combination of strong winds and waves sank five ships in the harbor , including one at the entrance ; this halted port traffic for about two weeks . Floods submerged the primary highway connecting the north and south of the country , and damaged several other roads and rail lines , halting the region 's economy by preventing movement of goods . About 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) of the rail line between Maputo and Zimbabwe was under water . The swollen Limpopo River isolated the town of Xai @-@ Xai after all connecting roads and the airport were inundated , and the bridge connecting the rest of the region to the south was damaged . Water levels along the river reached as high as 11 m ( 36 ft ) above normal in some areas , as well as 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) wide , which broke the record for highest crest by 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . A dam broke along the river , flooding the town of Chokwe in the middle of the night and trapping several unprepared residents . Flooding there surpassed the previous water depth record by 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) , set in 1977 , thus inundating the town up to ceiling of one story buildings . In the city of Inhambane , the flooded Save River swept away several houses . Along the river , 50 @,@ 000 people were unaccounted for as of March 1 , many of whom were washed away . In nearby Nova <unk> , thousands of people became homeless due to storm flooding , killing at least ten people . About 55 people drowned in Sofala Province after rescue helicopters arrived too late to save them . Around 20 @,@ 000 people in the capital city of Maputo lost their homes . 
 In addition to the floods , strong winds blew away many roofs and some entire houses made of mud , leaving thousands of people homeless . The combined effects of the preceding floods and Eline left about 463 @,@ 000 people displaced or homeless , including 46 @,@ 000 children five years old or younger . Overall , the preceding floods and Eline caused about 700 deaths , half of whom in <unk> with damage estimated at $ 500 million ( 2000 USD ) . At least 17 people died directly due to Eline , although many bodies were washed away and unable to be counted . The cyclone and the floods disrupted much of the economic progress Mozambique had made in the 1990s since the end of its civil war . 
 = = = Elsewhere in mainland Africa = = = 
 The MFR issued a gale warning for Zimbabwe in anticipation of strong winds well inland . However , the Zimbabwe government did not issue any storm warnings until the storm moved over the country . Due to Eline maintaining a well @-@ defined structure , it brought strong winds and heavy rainfall when it crossed into eastern Zimbabwe . The heavy rains caused rivers to overflow their banks . Officials opened flood gates along several dams to maintain their integrity , which increased flooding downstream , including in Mozambique . However , eight dams were destroyed that were used for irrigation purposes . The storm destroyed over 3 @,@ 800 homes in the eastern portion of the country while killing 17 @,@ 000 heads of livestock . Flooding also washed away roads , bridges , and some power lines . Mutare , the country 's third largest city , lost power during Eline 's passage . Overall the storm killed 12 people in the country . 
 Flooding from the storm extended southward into Swaziland and South Africa . In the latter country , Eline dropped 503 mm ( 19 @.@ 8 in ) of rainfall in Levubu over three days , causing the Limpopo River to reach its highest level in 15 years . In Limpopo Province , a station recorded 284 mm ( 11 @.@ 2 in ) of rainfall in just 24 hours . Officials opened dams along the Limpopo River to prevent structural damage , which caused higher levels along the river to the east . However , 16 dams failed in the country , causing further damage to irrigation systems . The floodwaters isolated the town of Louis <unk> after N1 road was covered , and most border crossings were closed . The floods covered roads and caused several houses to collapse , hospitalizing 12 people in <unk> . Eline also damaged crops in the country , namely pulses , maize , and other vegetables . At least 21 people died in the country , and about 80 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , forcing many people into churches and schools . Damage in Limpopo Province alone was estimated at $ 300 million ( USD ) , with crop damage estimated at $ 11 million . Flooding began receding by the end of February . 
 To the north , Eline dropped about 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) of rainfall in southern Malawi . The storm 's gusty winds wrecked houses and knocked over trees , causing power outages in Blantyre . Farther west , rainfall rates of 50 – 100 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) were also reported in Botswana . In Namibia , Eline 's rainfall contributed to the third wettest summer in 50 years , as well as the wettest since 1976 . Several locations in the southern portion of the country reported daily rainfall rates of 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Immediately after Eline struck Madagascar , the government began distributing relief items , such as rice , tents , and sheets . On February 21 , survey flights helped indicate the extent of damage across the nation . Supplies were distributed by road from Antananarivo to the worst affected areas , with helicopters dropping off aid to isolated communities . After receiving request from the Malagasy government , UNICEF flew 15 tons of supplies from Copenhagen , such as medicine , 10 @.@ 5 tons of food , and equipment to help coordinate relief work . The agency also transported thousands of blankets and water purification tablets from Antananarivo . However , UNICEF faced difficulties in distributing the supplies . The government of France sent two helicopters with teams of doctors to Madagascar , and Médecins Sans Frontières sent about 35 tons of supplies , such as medicine , water purifying devices , and food . The World Food Programme flew about 400 tons of food to affected residents across the country , including 25 tons to Mahanoro . Due to the combined impacts of Eline and Gloria , the government of Madagascar requested for international assistance on March 7 , which was coordinated through the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs . In response , the government of the United Kingdom donated £ 1 @.@ 3 million ( $ 1 @.@ 9 million USD ) to Madagascar . The Organisation of African Unity donated $ 200 @,@ 000 to Madagascar on March 10 . In addition to Cyclone Gloria striking the country in March , Cyclone Hudah hit eastern Madagascar in early April , causing additional deaths and damage . 
 The government of Zimbabwe declared a state of emergency in three provinces . Nearby Botswana donated 15 million litres of fuel to the country to help with their recovery . Although Botswana was affected by the floods , their government was able to provide food and relief to the storm victims . In South Africa , families were forced to keep corpses in their houses due to the ongoing flooding . The country 's government authorized <unk> million ( ZAR , $ 1 @.@ 1 million USD ) to pay for emergency assistance . Limpopo Province was declared a disaster area . The South African government issued a warning on March 1 , stating they flood refugees from Mozambique would be deported if they entered illegally . The country of Australia donated $ 250 @,@ 000 to assist relief work in both Zimbabwe and South Africa . 
 = = = Mozambique = = = 
 By the time Eline struck Mozambique , there was already incoming assistance from the international community , responding to the earlier flooding . Mozambique 's president at the time , Joaquim Chissano , requested for additional aid after the storm struck , asking for $ 65 million for both reconstruction and emergency aid , and later increasing the request to $ 160 million . By the end of February 2000 , various countries had pledged $ 13 @.@ 5 million to Mozambique , well short of the required needs , but that rose to nearly $ 119 million by March 17 . By March 4 , 39 @.@ 6 tons of various relief goods reached the country , to be distributed from the towns of <unk> and <unk> . The supplies nearly overwhelmed the small airport at Maputo , as lack of distribution caused food to decay in the sun . 
 The Mozambique government worked to evacuate residents in newly flooded areas using boats , and set up 121 camps for evacuees . By early March , there were 35 @,@ 000 people at camps in <unk> , and another 10 @,@ 000 in <unk> . However , the country had a limited capacity for widespread rescues due to insufficient helicopters . In some locations , the floodwaters were so strong that boats were unable to operate search and rescue missions . Residents left homeless by the storm were forced to stay in churches and schools , although some residents in the country 's capital , Maputo , provided a spare bedroom . Citizens in the city also provided clothing to those who lost their homes in the flood . About 2 @,@ 000 residents from the flooded town of Chokwe walked 40 km ( 25 mi ) to receive shelter in <unk> . Following the storm , the residual floodwaters contributed to outbreaks of malaria and cholera , with malaria infections at four times the usual rate killing at least 11 people . Areas in southern Mozambique also lost access to clean water , furthering dehydration and illnesses . In addition , the United Nations Mine Action Service expressed concern that the floods shifted the locations of landmines leftover from the nation 's civil war . Later , the remnants of Cyclone Gloria halted relief work due to heavy rainfall . 
 Soon after the storm struck , CARE operated airlifts of food to flooded areas . The World Food Programme approved $ 2 million to help airlifting 53 @,@ 000 metric tons of food . A fleet of 29 helicopters had rescued 14 @,@ 204 people by March 7 as well as operating airlifting missions . This included 12 planes and helicopters from South Africa , six helicopters with crews along with 100 motorboats from the United Kingdom , ten helicopters from Germany , and two from Malawi . Many residents in flooded areas initially had to hold onto trees and roofs due to lack of helicopters , with 100 @,@ 000 people needing rescue as of March 1 . After the floodwaters receded , the need for rescue diminished , allowing families to return home , although helicopters were still required to airlift relief goods . Emergency road repairs allowed supplies to be delivered by road in some areas by March 5 . The United States sent a crew of 700 soldiers in what became Task Force Atlas Response , a $ 37 million operation to coordinate disaster relief , rebuild roads , deliver crop seed , and drop off aid . This was ordered by U.S. President Bill Clinton on March 2 after criticism that the international assistance was insufficient . The Save the Children organization helped reunited separated children from their families , while World Relief flew seeds and tools to help 26 @,@ 260 farmers regrow their damaged crops . The United Kingdom assisted by canceling the country 's $ 150 million debt earlier than scheduled , and urged other nations to follow suit ; Italy canceled its $ 500 million debt in March . On February 24 , the World Bank provided $ 2 @.@ 5 million to rebuild roads , and later provided an additional $ 15 million . The same agency delayed debt payments for one year . Portugal and Spain canceled $ 150 million and $ 20 million worth of debt , respectively . Through the Jubilee 2000 , most wealthy nations postponed debt payments for one year on March 16 . 
 = Rebirth ( sculpture ) = 
 Rebirth , nicknamed " Deer Baby " and " Twilight Zone Bambi " , was a proposed outdoor sculpture by American artist Seyed Alavi , considered for installation at the MAX Orange Line 's Southeast Park Avenue MAX Station in Oak Grove , an unincorporated area neighboring Milwaukie in Clackamas County , Oregon , in the United States . The design of the unfinished creative work , which featured a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) deer with a child 's face , was met with a mixed reception . Unable to meet TriMet 's standards and remain under budget , in November 2011 Alavi withdrew his design from the project . 
 = = Description = = 
 Seyed Alavi 's Rebirth was a proposed sculpture considered for installation at the MAX Orange Line 's Southeast Park Avenue MAX Station in Oak Grove , an unincorporated area neighboring Milwaukie . The design of the unfinished creative work called for a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) yellow @-@ painted deer with a child 's face and was intended to represent " the interaction between the nearby riparian forest and the people living in Oak Grove " . In its concept proposal , the art installation is described as : 
 A large , stylized deer with childlike face speaks to the community 's vision of renewal and the proximity of the station to the new Trolley Trail . Drawn from many traditions from NW Coast Native American carvings to colossal roadside sculpture , Rebirth is a monumental icon that creates a link between the natural environment and the commercial strip of McLoughlin Boulevard . 
 Two renderings of Alavi 's design were made available to the public ; the first computer @-@ generated image did not include context , which arguably provoked debate over its design , while the second was more " humanized " and illustrated how the installation could interact with people and the surrounding environment . TriMet confirmed at least two changes to the sculpture 's original design : a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) move to the southeast to avoid crossing into the Trolley Trail or Milwaukie 's boundaries , and removal of its mosaic tile facade to reduce costs . 
 In October 2011 , the artist presented a revised concept to TriMet 's Public Art Advisory Committee . The sculpture 's color and dimensions were unchanged , but it would be made of glass @-@ reinforced concrete . Its surface treatment remained undetermined , but Alavi wanted one that would be " natural or inherent " to the material to achieve a " reflective , glowing , and magical " appearance . The committee preferred the reflective appearance seen in the artist 's original design and requested material samples at his final presentation , which was scheduled to take place in December . 
 = = History and public reaction = = 
