 By February 8 , 1855 , less than a week after landing , the navvies were laying the first rails in the main street of Balaclava . A trial assembly of the stationary engines ( two had been acquired in case of the failure of one of them ) was made and on February 10 they were working . By the 13th , the railway had reached a point 300 yards ( 274 m ) from the town and on the 19th it was at Kadikoi . It began to function on the 23rd when horse @-@ drawn supplies were taken from Balaclava to Kadikoi . This was 15 days after starting to lay the first rails and about three weeks after the arrival of the fleet in the port . The railway yard in Balaclava was being extended and accommodation was being built for the workers and for storage of materials . By March 26 the line was complete to the top of the col and the first load was taken to the headquarters depot . By this time , the line had been double tracked from Balaclava to <unk> and various sidings had been constructed near the wharf . In less than seven weeks 7 miles ( 11 km ) of track had been laid . 
 During this time the pioneer photographer Roger Fenton had arrived and he recorded the railway and its progress . On April 2 , the railway was used to carry the sick and injured from the plateau down to Balaclava . It has been argued that this was the first hospital train ever to run . Also during this time , Colonel William McMurdo had been appointed to be in charge of a new department of the army , the Land Transport Corps . He arrived in the Crimea in early March , and one of his duties was to take over the operation of the railway from the contractors . It was finally handed over by Peto , Brassey and Betts in early July . 
 = = The war continues = = 
 The existence of the railway meant that sufficient supplies and armaments had been transported to the plateau for the allies to resume their attack . The Second Bombardment started on April 9 and continued for ten days . Initially , little progress seemed to have been made because again the Russians were able to repair the damage caused , and the Russians continued to deliver supplies to Sevastopol from the north . However , they had sustained heavy casualties . Following a period of stalemate , Allied forces cut off one of the main Russian supply lines at Kerch on May 24 . 
 The increased supply of ammunition meant that the Allies were able to mount the Third Bombardment on June 6 . This was much more intensive than the previous ones . It was followed by an assault on the 7th and 8th , which met with a limited degree of success . More supplies were brought by the railway and the Fourth Bombardment took place on June 17 . The subsequent attack was mismanaged and was a failure . 
 = = The end of the siege = = 
 The Russians suffered a significant defeat at the Battle of the Tchernaya on August 16 . The Fifth Bombardment took place for five days from the 17th with the intention of destroying as many Russian defence works as possible . The Sixth Bombardment was followed by a successful Allied attack on September 8 , bringing the siege to an end two days later . 
 During the summer , further surveys had been carried out with the intention of supplying not just the British forces , but also their French and Sardinian allies ( Sardinia had joined the war towards the end of 1854 ) by rail from Balaclava . At this time electric telegraphy by underwater cable was first used in warfare , connecting the Crimea to the Allies ' base at Varna in Bulgaria . 
 = = Locomotives and more lines = = 
 Locomotives were used , the first one running by November 8 , but this was too late to affect the outcome of the siege . The locomotives were not effective because they could not manage even the easy gradient from Balaclava to Kadikoi with more than a light load . Five second @-@ hand locomotives , purchased by the contractors from collieries and railway companies in England , are known to have arrived . Alliance and Victory were two small 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 saddle tanks built by E. B. Wilson & Co of Leeds in 1854 / 5 ; two from the London & North Western Railway , Nos 13 and 50 , were 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 0 Bury @-@ type passenger engines built by Benjamin Hick & Son of Bolton in 1838 and 1840 ; the fifth locomotive was Swan from the St Helens Canal & Railway Co , but its details remain obscure . 
 James Beatty left the Crimea in November to return to England , a sick man , and Donald Campbell took over . Earlier in September Her Majesty 's Floating Factory Chasseur arrived at Balaclava to provide an engineering service under the direction of Robert Frazer . A third stationary engine also arrived . Due to the haste in which the railway had been constructed , it was in danger of being severely damaged by the weather of the coming winter . William Doyne organised the building of new lines of a superior quality , again in a short time . By November 10 , 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 km ) of track had been laid between Balaclava and the British headquarters . The lines towards the Sardinian and French headquarters were also advancing . 
 = = Towards the end of the war = = 
 Towards and during the second winter , the supplies carried by the railway were different . The siege had ended , carriage of ammunition was less important , and the supplies related more to the accommodation and comfort of the troops . These included huts to replace tents , clothing , food , books and medical supplies . Colonel McMurdo also left the Crimea as a sick man on December 1 , passing the control of the railway to Colonel Edward Wetherall . Following the completion of the Sardinian branch , the railway had reached its limit . In all , it measured about 14 miles ( 23 km ) plus a few miles of sidings and loops . 
 Sevastopol lay in ruins after the end of the siege . Tsar Nicholas I died on 2 March 1855 , and peace negotiations were opened by the new Tsar , Alexander II . Hostilities ended between the Allies and the Russians on 29 February 1856 and the Treaty of Paris was signed on 30 March 1856 . The Russians sold the track to the Turks soon after the war ended . The rails had already been uprooted and taken away , and the railway ceased to exist 
 = = Argentina myth = = 
 A now @-@ discounted popular legend claims that two steam engines from the Crimean line went on to a new life on the newly started Buenos Ayres Western Railway in Argentina . According to the myth this is reason many railways in Argentina were built to " Indian Gauge " of 5 ' 6 " , which the builders of the Grand Crimean Central Railway had supposedly chosen as it enabled them to requisition for use in Crimea available engines and rolling stock which had already been built for lines in India . Research in the 1950s showed that this story is untenable . Contemporary information shows that the Crimean railway was standard gauge , despite subsequent rumours that it was 5 ' 3 " Irish gauge or 5 ' 6 " Indian gauge , while Argentina 's neighbours Chile and Paraguay had already adopted 5 ' 6 " gauge . The works number of the two Argentine steam engines , N ° 1 " La <unk> " ( on display at the Provincial Transport Museum in Luján , ) and N ° 2 " La Argentina " , show that they left manufacturer E. B. Wilson and Company of Leeds in 1856 , after the demolition of the Crimea railway had already begun . Their dimensions and characteristics would have been unsuitable for the steep gradients in Balaclava , and technical considerations would have prevented their conversion from standard to broad gauge . 
 On the other hand contemporary reports claim that engines from the <unk> went to Argentina ; see for instance Richard Francis Burton who mentions in his " Letters From the Battlefields of Paraguay " ( 1870 ) [ 1 ] that the train he travelled in was pulled by an " asthmatic little engine — which , after serving its time upon the Balaklava line , and being condemned as useless at Buenos Aires , had been shipped off to Paraguay " 
 = Beaune Altarpiece = 
 The Beaune Altarpiece ( c . 1445 – 50 ) , often called The Last Judgement , is a large polyptych altarpiece by the Flemish artist Rogier van der Weyden . It was painted in oil on oak panels , with parts later transferred to canvas . It consists of fifteen paintings on nine panels ; six are painted on both sides . It retains some of its original frames . 
 Six outer panels ( or shutters ) are hinged , when folded they show an exterior view of saints and the donors . The inner panels contain scenes from the Last Judgement and are arranged across two registers . The large central panel that spans both registers shows Christ seated on a rainbow in judgement , with his feet resting on a golden globe . Below him the Archangel Michael holds scales as he weighs souls . The panel on Christ 's far right shows the gates of Heaven , that to his far left the entrance to Hell . The panels of the lower register form a continuous landscape , with figures depicted moving from the central panel to their final destinations after receiving judgement . 
 The altarpiece was commissioned in 1443 for the Hospices de Beaune by Nicolas Rolin , Chancellor of the Duchy of Burgundy , and his wife <unk> de Salins , who is buried in front of the altarpiece 's original location in the hospice . It is one of van der Weyden 's most ambitious works , equal to his Prado Deposition and lost Justice of Trajan and Herkinbald . It remains in the hospice today , although not in its original position . It is in poor condition and was moved in the 20th century to shield it from sunlight and better protect it from the almost 300 @,@ 000 visitors it receives annually . It has suffered from extensive paint loss , the wearing and darkening of its colours , and an accumulation of dirt . In addition , a heavy layer of over @-@ paint was applied during restoration . The two painted sides of the outer panels have been separated so both can be shown simultaneously ; traditionally , the shutters would have been opened only on selected Sundays or church holidays . 
 = = Commission and hospice = = 
 Nicolas Rolin was appointed Chancellor of Burgundy by Philip the Good in 1422 , a position he held for the next 33 years . His tenure with the duke made him a wealthy man , and he donated a large portion of his fortune for the foundation of the Hôtel @-@ Dieu in Beaune . It is not known why he decided to build in Beaune rather than in his birthplace of Autun . He may have chosen Beaune because it lacked a hospital and an outbreak of the plague decimated the population between 1438 and 1440 . Furthermore , when in 1435 the Treaty of Arras failed to bring a cessation to the longstanding hostility and animosity between Burgundy and France , the town suffered brutal ravages and famine from <unk> ( marauding bands ) who roamed the countryside during the late 1430s and early 1440s . The hospice was built after Rolin gained permission from Pope Eugene IV in 1441 , and it was eventually consecrated on 31 December 1452 . In conjunction , Rolin established the religious order of " Les sœurs <unk> de Beaune " . Rolin dedicated the hospice to St Anthony Abbot , who was commonly associated with sickness and healing during the Middle Ages . 
 In the hospice 's founding charter , signed in August 1443 , Rolin wrote that " disregarding all human concerns and in the interest of my salvation , desiring by a favourable trade to exchange for celestial goods temporal ones , that I might from divine goodness render those goods which are perishable for ones which are eternal ... in gratitude for the goods which the Lord , source of all wealth , has heaped upon me , from now on and for always , I found a hospital . " In the late 1450s , only a few years before he died , he added a provision to the hospital charter stipulating that the Mass for the Dead be offered twice daily . Rolin 's wife , <unk> de Salins , played a major role in the foundation , as probably did his nephew Jan Rolin . De Salins lived and served at the hospice until her own death in 1470 . 
 Documents regarding the artwork 's commissioning survive and , unusually for a Netherlandish altarpiece , the artist , patron , place of installation and date of completion are all known . It was intended as the centrepiece for the chapel , and Rolin approached van der Weyden around 1443 , when the hospital was founded . The altarpiece was ready by 1451 , the year the chapel was consecrated . Painted in van der Weyden 's Brussels workshop – most likely with the aid of apprentices – the completed panels were then transported to the hospice . The altarpiece is first mentioned in a 1501 inventory , when it was positioned on the high altar . 
 The polyptych was commissioned to provide both comfort and warning to the dying . It was intended to remind them of their faith , and direct their last thoughts towards the divine . This is evident in its positioning in the chapel , within view of the patients ' beds . Rolin specified that 30 beds be placed within sight of the altarpiece for those too ill to walk , where it was visible to them through a pierced screen . There were usually only two patients per bed , luxurious at a time when six to fifteen in a large bed was more common . Medical care was expensive and primitive in the 15th century ; the spiritual care of patients was as important as the treatment of physical ailments . 
 Saints Sebastian and Anthony represent healing . Both were associated with bubonic plague , and intended to reassure the dying as intercessors with the divine . St Michael developed a cult following in 15th @-@ century France , most likely because he was thought to have appeared to Joan of Arc . He was seen as a guardian of the dead , a crucial role given the disasters wrought by plague in the region . There was a severe outbreak in 1441 – 42 , just before Rolin founded the hospital . Pilgrimage to Mont Saint @-@ Michel , Normandy reached a peak around this time . According to Barbara Lane , patients were unlikely to survive their stay , yet St Michael offered consolation as they could " gaze on his figure immediately above the altar of the chapel every time the altarpiece was opened . Like Saints Anthony and Sebastian on the exterior of the polyptych , the archangel offered ... hope that they would overcome their physical ills . " 
 = = Description = = 
 The altarpiece is composed of fifteen separate paintings on nine panels , six of which are painted on both sides . The closed view comprises two upper and four lower panels on the outside of the shutters . The upper panels are separately hinged and able to close independently of the others . When all the shutters are opened , the viewer is exposed to the expansive " Last Judgement " interior panels . These document the possible spiritual fates of the viewers : that they might reach Heaven or Hell , salvation or damnation ; stark alternatives appropriate for a hospice . The exterior panels serve as a funerary monument for the donors . Art historian Lynn Jacobs believes that the " dual function of the work accounts for the choice of the theme of the Last Judgement on its interior " . 
 The work clearly distinguishes between figures of the divine , earthly and hellish realms . Perhaps following Jan van Eyck 's c . 1432 Ghent Altarpiece , the polyptych wings form an inverted T @-@ shape . When the shutters are closed the panels resemble an upside @-@ down cross , a form common in 15th @-@ century carved retables : an elevated central panel allowed additional space for a narrative scene , to depict a heavenly vista , a single large figure , or a crucifixion with space for the cross to extend above the other panels , an innovation seen in van der Weyden 's Descent from the Cross . This shape echoes typical configuration of Gothic churches , where the naves often extended past the aisles into the apse or choir . The imagery of the outer panels is set in the earthly realm with the donors , and saints painted in grisaille to imitate sculpture . 
 = = = Inner panels = = = 
 According to Jacobs , the treatment of the panels as a whole with van der Weyden 's " elimination of thresholds is quite remarkable and indeed astonishing in the history of the triptych . " As with his Braque Triptych , the background landscape extends across each panel of the lower register . The celestial sphere , towards which the saved move , is dramatically presented with a " radiant gold background , spanning almost the entire width of the altarpiece " . 
 Motifs and arrangements of figures extend along the lower panels from one to the next , to the extent that the separations between panels are ignored with the intersections cutting figures in two . This is particularly evident on the lower register where each panel division intersects figures , so that parts of figures are painted on two adjoining panels ; whereas Christ and St Michael are enclosed within the single central panel , giving emphasis to the iconography . 
 The lower register presents Earth , with its exits to Heaven and Hell . The imposing figure of Christ above indicates the " reign of heaven is about to begin . " The distinction between the earthly and heavenly realms creates a sense of order . Christ , raised high above the altarpiece , " exudes calm and control " , and creates a sense of balance and movement throughout the other panels . 
 The manner with which van der Weyden presents the resurrection of the dead across the five lower panels is reminiscent of a Gothic tympanum , specifically that at Autun Cathedral . Rolin would have been familiar with the Autun Cathedral entrances , which may have motivated his decision to commission a Last Judgement for the hospice from van der Weyden . 
 Rolin was aware of the liturgy associated with the Mass for the Dead , and would have known Last Judgement scenes associated with the Mass from 15th @-@ century illuminated manuscripts , such as the full @-@ page Last Judgement in the Hours of Catherine of Cleves which shows Christ placed in a similar position , sitting above as the dead rise from the ground . 
 = = = = Upper register = = = = 
 Jesus sits in judgement in the upper centre panel . He holds a lily in his right hand and a sword in his left , and sits on a rainbow extending across two panels , while his feet rest on a sphere . His right hand is raised in the act of blessing , his left hand lowered . These positions indicate the act of judgement ; he is deciding if souls are to be sent to Heaven or Hell , his gestures echoing the direction and positioning of the scales held by the Archangel Michael beneath him . His palms are open , revealing the wounds sustained when they were nailed to the cross , while his cope gapes in places making visible the injury caused by the lance , which pours deep @-@ red blood . Christ 's face is identical to the representation in van der Weyden 's Braque Triptych , completed just a few years later in 1452 . Christ , placed so high in the pictorial space and spanning both registers , orchestrates the entirety of the inner panels . Whereas earlier Last Judgements might have seemed chaotic , here Christ brings a sense of order . 
 The two upper register wings on either side of Jesus show a pair of angels holding the instruments of the Passion . These include a lance , crown of thorns and a stick with a sponge soaked in vinegar . The angels are dressed in white liturgical vestments . 
 The Archangel Michael , the embodiment and conduit of divine justice , is positioned directly below Christ , the only figure to reach both Heaven and Earth . He wears a dispassionate expression as he holds a set of scales to weigh souls . Unusually for Christian art , the damned outweigh the blessed ; Michael 's scales have only one soul in each pan , yet the left pan tips below the right . Michael is given unusual prominence in a " Last Judgement " for the period , and his powerful presence emphasises the work 's function in a hospice and its preoccupation with the liturgy of death . His feet are positioned as if he is stepping forward , almost about to move out of the canvas and he looks directly at the viewer , giving the illusion of judging not only the souls in the painting but also the viewers . Michael , like Sebastian and Anthony , was a plague saint and would have been visible to inmates through the openings of the pierced screen as they lay in their beds . Michael is painted with iconographic elements associated with paintings of the Last Judgement , and is by far the most beautifully and colourfully painted figure ; he is dressed in a red cope with woven golden fabrics over a shining white alb , which dominates the lower panels , " hypnotically attracting the viewer 's glance " according to Lane . He is surrounded by four cherubs , playing trumpets to call the dead to their final destination . Michael 's role in the Last Judgement is emphasised through van der Weyden 's use of colour : Michael 's gleaming white alb contrasts with the cherub 's red vestments , set against a blue sky directly below heaven 's golden clouds . 
 Beneath Michael , souls scurry left and right . The saved walk in single file towards the gates of Heaven where they are greeted by a saint ; the damned arrive at the mouth of Hell and fall en masse headlong into damnation . The souls balanced in the scales are naked . The blessed look towards Christ , the banished look downwards . Both groups are tilted in the direction of Christ 's hands . Reinforcing this , inscriptions around the groupings read <unk> ( Virtues ) and <unk> ( sins ) . 
 = = = = Lower register = = = = 
 The Virgin Mary , John the Baptist , the twelve Apostles and an assortment of dignitaries are positioned at either side of Michael in a Deësis . The apostles are seated in a semicircle ; Peter , dressed in red , is on the far left , and Paul , dressed in green , is on the far right . The seven haloed dignitaries , dressed in contemporary clothing , are unidentified but include a king , a pope , a bishop , a monk , and three women . Rather than general representative types , they are portraits of specific unidentified individuals , according to Shirley Blum . 
 The dead rise from their graves around Michael 's feet ; some emerge to walk towards Heaven , others towards Hell . They are tiny compared to Christ and the saints . Lorne Campbell notes that these panels display a deeply pessimistic view of humanity , with the damned far outnumbering the saved , especially compared to Stefan Lochner 's Cologne panel , where the saved crowd the entrance to Heaven . The dead undergo a gradual transformation as they move from panel to panel . The souls rising at Michael 's feet show little expression , becoming more animated as they move to either side ; horror and desperation become especially visible on the faces of the damned as they move towards Hell . On the left , the saved all have , according to Jacobs , " the same beatific expressions " , but their postures gradually change from facing Christ and Michael to looking towards Heaven 's gate , notably with the couple below Mary – the man turns the woman 's gaze away from Michael , towards Heaven . This contrasts with another couple on the opposite panel who face Hell ; the woman is hunched over as the man raises his hand in vain to beseech God for mercy . 
 Heaven is represented by an entrance to the Heavenly City , which is in a contemporary Gothic style illuminated by long , thin rays of light . The saved approach clasping their hands in prayer , and are greeted at the entrance by an angel . Only a few souls pass through the heavenly gates at a time . The imagery of a church as an earthly representation of Heaven was popularised in the 13th century by theologians such as <unk> ; the gate to Heaven in this work resembles the entrance to the Beaune hospice . The way to Heaven is shown clearly as a gilded church – the saved ascend a set of steps , turn right , and disappear from sight . It is fully enclosed in a single panel , whereas Hell extends onto the adjoining panel , perhaps hinting that sin contaminates all around it . 
 Van der Weyden depicts Hell as a gloomy , crowded place of both close and distant fires , and steep rock faces . The damned tumble helplessly into it , screaming and crying . The sinners descend into Hell with heads mostly bowed , dragging each other along as they go . Traditionally , a Last Judgement painting would depict the damned tormented by malevolent spirits ; yet here the souls are left alone , the only evidence that they are tormented is in their expressions . The hellscape is painted so as to instil terror , but without devils . Erwin Panofsky was the first to pick up on this absence , and proposed that van der Weyden had opted to convey torment in an inward manner , rather than through elaborate descriptions of devils and fiends . He wrote , " The fate of each human being ... inevitably follows from his own past , and the absence of any outside instigator of evil makes us realize that the chief torture of the Damned is not so much physical pain as a perpetual and intolerably sharpened consciousness of their state " . According to Bernhard <unk> , van der Weyden accentuated the theme by " restricting the number of the dead and treating them almost as individuals . As the damned approach the abyss of hell they become more and more compressed . " 
 = = = Exterior panels = = = 
 The exterior consists of the two donor wings , a pair of saints , and two panels with Gabriel presenting himself to Mary . The donors are on the outer wings , kneeling in front of prayer books . Four imitation statues in grisaille make up the inner panels . The lower two depict Saint Sebastian and Saint Anthony . Sebastian was the saint of plagues and an intercessory against epidemics , Anthony the patron saint of skin diseases and ergotism , known in medieval times as St Anthony 's Fire . The two saints had strong associations with the Burgundian court as well : Philip the Good was born on St Anthony 's day , he had an illegitimate son named Anthony , and two of Rolin 's sons were named Anthony . St Sebastian was the patron saint of Philip the Good 's chivalric Order of the Golden Fleece , of which Rolin was a member . 
 The two small upper register panels show a rather traditional Annunciation scene , with the usual dove representing the Holy Spirit near Mary . The two sets of panels , unlike those on the interior , are compositionally very different . The figures occupy distinctly separate niches and the colour schemes of the grisaille saints and donors contrast sharply . 
 Like many mid @-@ 15th century polyptychs , the exterior panels borrow heavily from the Ghent Altarpiece , which was completed in 1432 . The combination of naturalistic donor portraits with grisaille imitation statues of saints is borrowed from that work , as is the treatment of the Annunciation . Van der Weyden used iconography in the Beaune exterior panels not found in his other works , which suggests Rolin may have commissioned the altarpiece to follow van Eyck 's example . Van der Weyden was not inclined merely to imitate though , and arranged the panels and figures in a concentrated and compact format . Jacobs writes that " the exterior presents the most consistent pictorial rendering of trompe l 'oeil sculpture to date " . Gabriel 's scroll and Mary 's lily appear to be made of stone ; the figures cast shadows against the back of their niches , creating a sense of depth which adds to the illusion . 
 The exterior panels are drab , according to Blum , who writes that on Rolin 's panel the most colourful figure is the red angel , which , with its gold helmet and keys , " emerges like an apparition " . Rolin and de Salins can be identified by the coats @-@ of @-@ arms held by the angels ; husband and wife kneel at cloth @-@ covered prie @-@ dieux ( portable altars ) displaying their emblems . Although De Salins was reputedly pious and charitable , and even perhaps the impetus for the building of the hospice , she is placed on the exterior right , traditionally thought of as an inferior position corresponding to Hell , linking her to Eve , original sin and the Fall of man . 
 Van Eyck had earlier portrayed Rolin in the c . 1435 Madonna of Chancellor Rolin , and the patron is recognizable from that work ; both portraits show similar lips , a large chin and somewhat pointed ears . In van Eyck 's portrait , Rolin is presented as perhaps pompous and arrogant ; here – ten years later – he appears more thoughtful and concerned with humility . Campbell notes wryly that van der Weyden may have been able to disguise the sitter 's ugliness and age , and that the unusual shape of his mouth may have been downplayed . He writes that while " van Eyck impassively recorded , van der Weyden imposed a stylised and highly personal vision of the subject " . Van Eyck 's depiction was most likely the more accurate ; van der Weyden embellished , mainly by lengthening the nose , enlarging the eyes and raising the eyebrows . 
 = = Inscriptions = = 
 The panels contain quotations in Latin from several biblical texts . They appear either as lettering seemingly sewn into the edges of the figures ' clothes ( mostly hidden in the folds ) , or directly on the surface of the central inner panel . The latter occur in four instances ; two pairs of text float on either side of Christ , two around Michael . Beneath the lily , in white paint are the words of Christ : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> A <unk> <unk> ( " Come ye blessed of my father , inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world " ) . The text beneath the sword reads : <unk> A ME <unk> IN <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> EST <unk> ET <unk> <unk> ( " Depart from me ye cursed , into everlasting fire , prepared for the devil and his angels " ) . 
 The inscriptions follow the 14th @-@ century convention of showing figures , imagery and motifs associated with the saved to Christ 's right , and those of the damned to his left . The words beneath the lily ( the <unk> ) read upwards towards Heaven , their curves leaning in towards Christ . The text to the left ( the <unk> ) flows in the opposite direction ; from the highest point downwards . The inscriptions to Christ 's right are decorated in light colours , to the extent that they are usually difficult to discern in reproductions . The lettering opposite faces downwards , and is applied with black paint . 
 = = Condition = = 
 A number of panels are in poor condition , owing variously to darkening of the colours , accumulated dirt , and poor decisions during early restorations . The altarpiece stayed in the chapel from the time of its installation until the Reign of Terror during the French Revolution , when it was hidden in the attic for decades . When it was brought out , the nude souls – thought to be offensive – were painted over with clothing and flames ; it was moved to a different room , hung 3 metres ( 10 ft ) from the ground , and portions were whitewashed . In 1836 , the Commission of Antiquities retrieved it and began plans to have it restored . Four decades later it underwent major restoration – between 1875 and 1878 – when many of these additions were removed , but not without significant damage to the original paintwork , such as the loss of pigment to the wall @-@ hangings in the donor panels , which were originally red and gold . In general , the central inside panels are better preserved than the interior and exterior wings . De Salins ' panel is damaged ; its colours have darkened with age ; originally the niche was a light blue ( today it is light green ) and the shield held by the angel was painted in blue . 
 The panels were laterally divided so that both sides could be displayed simultaneously , and a number of the panels were transferred to canvas . 
 = The Bubble ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " The Bubble " is the fifteenth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 45th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 19 , 2011 . In the episode , Leslie becomes nervous when her new boyfriend Ben has a business meeting with her tough mother , Marlene . Meanwhile , Chris tries to make some changes in the parks department , much to the chagrin of the staff . 
 Written by Greg Levine and Brian Rowe and directed by Matt Sohn , " The Bubble " originally aired back @-@ to @-@ back along with " Lil ' Sebastian " . The two are stand @-@ alone episodes not originally meant to run together , but because the third season premiered late , they had to be shown together so the series ' season would conclude by the end of the television season . The episode featured a guest appearance by Pamela Reed as Leslie 's mother Marlene , her first appearance since the second season episode " Galentine 's Day " . 
 " The Bubble " marked a major progression for the character Tom Haverford , who starts considering if he should leave his city hall position , which sets the stage for him to leave the position in " Li 'l Sebastian " . " The Bubble " received generally positive reviews and , according to Nielsen Media Research , was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 27 million household viewers . Combined with an estimated 3 @.@ 72 million household viewers with " Li 'l Sebastian " , the two episodes ' ratings were about even with the previous week 's episodes , " The Fight " and " Road Trip " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a cold open scene , the parks department welcomes Ann ( Rashida Jones ) to her new office in city hall and fill it with balloons , much to the chagrin of her cranky <unk> Stuart ( Jim Jansen ) . Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) and Ben ( Adam Scott ) are dating , but they are keeping their relationship a secret due to a no @-@ dating policy at work . They are enjoying what Leslie calls " the bubble " , or the beginning of a relationship when everything is simple and fun . It is suddenly threatened , however , when Ben has a meeting with Leslie 's mother Marlene ( Pamela Reed ) , a notoriously tough politician in the Pawnee school system , who wants Ben to approve the purchase of four new school buses despite a difficult budget season . Afraid of ruining the bubble , Leslie initially tells Ben she is not related to Marlene . Right before Ben 's meeting , however , Leslie admits Marlene is her mother , making him nervous and causing him to capitulate to all of her demands during the meeting . Marlene considers Ben weak , so Leslie becomes determined to prove that he is a tough boss to impress Marlene . 
 Meanwhile , Chris ( Rob Lowe ) has enacted numerous changes to the parks department ; he promotes Jerry ( Jim O 'Heir ) to public relations director , appoints April ( Aubrey Plaza ) as everyone 's assistant , places Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) on the nightmarish fourth floor with Andy ( Chris Pratt ) as his temporary assistant , and makes Ron ( Nick Offerman ) sit in the middle of a circular desk after the removal of his office , to force him to interact with people . Ron believes everything will eventually go back to normal as it has with past city managers that implemented drastic changes . However , Donna ( Retta ) is concerned the overly @-@ determined Chris will not do so and demands that Ron talk to him . On the fourth floor , Tom 's attempts to charm some of the elderly women into doing his work fails miserably , as they ignore him and all adore Andy . 
 Leslie trains Ben for his next meeting with her mother . He impresses Marlene so much with his tough negotiation skills that she becomes flirtatious with him . An uncomfortable Ben tells Leslie they should tell her about their relationship , but Leslie does not want to lose the bubble . Fed up , Ben storms into Marlene 's office and tells her that he is dating her daughter and asks her to keep it secret . Marlene laughs off the situation and tells Leslie that she approves of Ben . Meanwhile , Ron tells Chris the changes do not play to his staff 's strengths because Jerry only does well in the background , Tom only does well if people are all aware of his activities , and April only does well if people leave her the hell alone . Chris takes in Ron 's well @-@ reasoned arguments and they cut a deal where Chris will return everything to the way it was after Ron does one more week of interacting with the public . Nevertheless , Tom is frustrated with the experience and begins to contemplate leaving his city hall job to pursue his own entrepreneurial interests . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Bubble " was directed by Matt Sohn and written by Brian Rowe and Greg Levine , the latter of whom regularly works as a writers assistant on the series . The episode was originally broadcast on May 19 , 2011 , and ran back @-@ to @-@ back with the Parks and Recreation episode " Li 'l Sebastian " , which aired immediately afterward . The two are stand @-@ alone episodes that were not originally designed to be shown together . However , because the show premiered late as a mid @-@ season replacement in January , the two episodes aired together so the third season could conclude at the end of the television season . The concept of the fourth floor of Pawnee 's town hall as a dark and horrifying place was introduced in the second season episode " Tom 's Divorce " , and has been a running joke with the show ever since . 
 " The Bubble " featured a guest appearance by Pamela Reed as Leslie 's mother Marlene Griggs @-@ Knope , her first appearance on the show since the second season " Galentine 's Day " . Comedian Dana Gould , who previously worked as a producer on Parks and Recreation , made an uncredited cameo appearance as a man on the fourth floor who enters Tom 's fourth floor office looking for a man named Mort , then smashes a coffee pot and says , " Tell Mort I said , ' Your move . ' " " The Bubble " marked a progression of the Tom Haverford that had been building throughout the third season , in which the character begins to consider leaving his city hall position to pursue his own business ambitions . That storyline is advanced in " The Bubble " through Tom 's frustration with his assignment by Chris , and culminates in the season finale " Li 'l Sebastian " , in which he ultimately quits the parks department . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Leslie refers to the cable television network History while she describes why she enjoys the early part of romantic relationships : " White wine , cuddling , and crazy amounts of History Channel documentaries . " In one scene , Leslie refers to a mixtape for Ben that included five straight songs by singer and songwriter Sarah McLachlan . Leslie prepares Ben for her meeting with Marlene by describing some of her favorite conversation topics , including industrialist Andrew Carnegie and Calvin and Hobbes cartoonist Bill Watterson . Leslie claims her mother loves actor Daniel Craig and Mark Sloan , a character from the medical drama series Grey 's Anatomy nicknamed " <unk> " , and she makes a music box with a picture of the latter character in it for Ben to give her as a gift . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Due to the 9 p.m. broadcast of " Search Committee " , the one @-@ hour seventh season finale of comedy series The Office , Parks and Recreation was not shown in its regular 9 : 30 p.m. broadcast on May 19 . " The Bubble " aired at 10 p.m. , while " Li 'l Sebastian " immediately followed it at 10 : 30 p.m. In its original American broadcast , " The Bubble " was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 27 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with a 2 @.@ 4 rating / 6 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . A rating point represents one percent of the total number of television sets in American households , and a share means the percentage of television sets in use tuned to the program . Viewership for Parks and Recreation progressively dropped for the night , as " Li 'l Sebastian " was seen by an estimated 3 @.@ 72 million households . Combined , the ratings were about even with the average ratings for the previous week , in which two Parks and Recreation episodes were also shown back @-@ to @-@ back , although from a 9 : 30 p.m. to 10 : 30 p.m. time block : " The Fight " had been seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 55 million household viewers , while " Road Trip " was seen by 3 @.@ 54 million households . In its 10 p.m. timeslot , " The Bubble " was outperformed by the fourth season finale of the ABC medical drama series Private Practice , which was seen by 7 @.@ 45 million household viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Bubble " received generally positive reviews . The Atlantic writer Scott Meslow called the episode " a fine example of Parks and Recreation at its funniest " and along with " Li 'l Sebastian " served as an " ideal capper to a remarkably strong third season of the series " . Meslow added that Ron 's intervention on behalf of his co @-@ workers demonstrates he is a " much better manager than he lets on " . Henry Hanks of CNN called it a very funny episode and said scenes of Ron swiveling around his circular desk to avoid talking to members of the public were " masterfully executed " . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix said he enjoyed Marlene 's attempts to seduce Ben , and especially loved the subplot with Chris making changes to the parks department . He praised Nick Offerman 's " marvelously minimalist " performance , especially while trying to avoid people in his swivel desk . Matt Fowler of IGN said the episode was hilarious and demonstrated " how marvelously great this series is at creating a truly lovable ensemble " . He also praised the subplot with Pamela Reed and the " ridiculous filthiness " of the fourth floor . 
 Eric Sundermann of Hollywood.com called it a " great little episode " and strong setup for the season finale . Although Sundermann initially had reservations about Leslie and Ben getting together , he now said it felt real because Leslie was willing to risk a job she loved so much to be with him . Paste magazine writer Garrett Martin said although the idea of pairing two co @-@ workers felt like a conventional television move , he did not mind with Leslie and Ben because they are such a " charming and well @-@ matched pair " . Martin also said Pamela Reed " absolutely kills it " as Leslie 's mother . Rick Porter of Zap2it said Parks and Recreation was at the " top of its game " , and that " The Bubble " worked well paired along with the season finale " Li 'l Sebastian " . He praised the comedic and romantic chemistry between Amy Poehler and Adam Scott , and said the subplot with Chris imposing changes on the parks department was " great fun " . 
 Joel Keller of TV Squad said he enjoyed seeing Ron stand up for the parks department , which proved that despite his hatred of government , he knows his co @-@ workers well and is a good boss . Keller also praised Pamela Reed 's performance and said she works well with Amy Poehler . Nick McHatton of TV Fanatic said although he believed the no @-@ dating policy was little more than an unnecessary device meant to create friction between Leslie and Ben , he enjoyed the lengths with which they were going to keep their relationship secret . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club called " The Bubble " an excellent episode that went a long way in fleshing out the Leslie and Ben romance , but primarily set the scene for the superior " Li 'l Sebastian " . Time magazine writer James Poniewozik said " The Bubble " was not as funny as some of the better third season episodes like " Harvest Festival " or " Andy and April 's Fancy Party " , but was nonetheless enjoyable and " perfectly funny " . 
 = Capture of Saint Vincent = 
 The Capture of Saint Vincent was a French invasion took place on 16 – 18 June 1779 during the Anglo @-@ French War . A French force commanded by Charles Marie de <unk> du Rumain , landed on the West Indies isle of Saint Vincent , and quickly took over much of the British @-@ controlled part of the island , assisted by the local Black Caribs who held the northern part of the island . 
 British Governor Valentine Morris and military commander Lieutenant Colonel George Etherington disagreed on how to react , and ended up surrendering without significant resistance . Both leaders were subjected to inquiries over the surrender . The period of French control begun by the capture resulted in solidified Black Carib control over northern parts of the island . The area remained in Carib hands until the Second Carib War of 1795 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the entry of France into the American War of Independence as an American ally in early 1778 , French Admiral the Comte d 'Estaing arrived in the West Indies in early December 1778 in command of a fleet consisting of 12 ships of the line and a number of smaller vessels . At about the same time a British fleet under Admiral William Hotham also arrived , augmenting the fleet of Admiral Samuel Barrington . The British then captured French @-@ held St. Lucia , despite d 'Estaing 's attempt at relief . The British used St. Lucia to monitor the major French base at Martinique , where d 'Estaing was headquartered . 
 The British fleet was further reinforced in January 1779 by ten ships of the line under Admiral John Byron , who assumed command of the British Leeward Islands station . Throughout the first half of 1779 both fleets received further reinforcements , after which the French fleet was slightly superior to that of the British . Furthermore , Byron departed St. Lucia on June 6 in order to provide escort services to British merchant ships gathering at St. Kitts for a convoy to Europe , leaving d 'Estaing free to act . D 'Estaing and Governor the marquis de Bouillé seized the opportunity to begin a series of operations against nearby British possessions . Their first target was the isle of Saint Vincent , just south of St. Lucia . 
 The political situation on Saint Vincent was somewhat tense . The island was divided roughly in half between land controlled by white ( principally British ) planters and that controlled by the local Black Carib population . The line dividing these territories ran from the island 's north @-@ west to its south @-@ east , and had been agreed in a treaty signed in 1773 after the First Carib War . Neither side had been happy with the compromise agreement , and its terms were a continuing source of friction . The British had , uniquely among its Caribbean possessions , had to establish a chain of outposts to protect the planter population . 
 Saint Vincent 's colonial government and defences were in some disarray . Governor Valentine Morris had assumed office in 1776 when the isle was granted a separate government , and reported then that it had virtually no defences . In addition to the difficult relations with the Caribs , the British population was also sympathetic to the cause of colonial independence . The French capture of Dominica in 1778 had raised constitutional questions surrounding the imposition of martial law , and the colonial assembly had consequently refused to appropriate funds for improving the island defences . Governor Morris had spent his own funds instead on improvements , contributing to financial difficulties he would run into later . 
 The only British military presence on the island was a garrison of about 450 men from the Royal American Regiment under the command of Lieutenant Colonel George Etherington , most of whom were poorly trained recruits and about half of whom were unfit for duty . Etherington , rather than training and drilling his troops , or fully staffing the island 's outposts , was employing significant numbers of them to clear land on an estate on the north @-@ west side of the island . Etherington 's estate was on territory on the Carib side of the island , and its grant ( for Etherington 's service in the Seven Years ' War , but made under circumstances the Caribs viewed as illegal ) was a major source of annoyance to the Caribs . Governor de Bouillé had established regular contact with the Caribs , and was supplying them with arms . In late August 1778 French officials met with Carib leader Joseph <unk> , and in early September Governor Morris was confronted by Caribs bearing new French muskets on a tour of the border areas . 
 = = Capture = = 
 D 'Estaing organized a force of 300 to 500 troops , including French regulars drawn from the regiments Champagne , <unk> , and Martinique , and about 200 volunteer militia from Martinique . The invasion force was placed under the command of Lieutenant de vaisseau Charles Marie de <unk> du Rumain , who had recently distinguished himself by taking over British @-@ controlled Saint Martin in March 1779 . The force was embarked on a fleet consisting of the frigate Lively , the corvettes Lys and <unk> , and two privateers . Du Rumain sailed from Martinique on 9 June , and reached the waters off Saint Vincent on the 16th . One of the privateers was driven ashore on the windward side of the island , losing 82 men . 
 Two of the ships anchored in Young 's Bay , near <unk> , while the third anchored off Kingstown . The ships flew no national colours , leading to local speculation as to their intent . Local planters who thought they might be merchant vessels expected to pick up the sugar harvest prevented a sentry at one of the island 's coastal fortifications from firing a signal cannon , and one man sent out to one of the ships was taken prisoner . As the French began landing their troops , a small company under Captain <unk> de la Roque was landed on the eastern shore to mobilise the Caribs . These irregular forces , which grew to number about 800 , quickly overran British settlements near the borders between the British lands and those of the Caribs , while du Rumain led his main body of troops toward Kingstown . 
 The alarm was eventually raised , and Governor Morris thought it would be possible to make a stand against the French in the hills above Kingstown , in hopes that the Royal Navy would bring relief . Lieutenant Colonel Etherington was however opposed to this , especially when the size of the approaching Carib force became apparent , and a truce flag was sent to the French . Du Rumain demanded an unconditional surrender , which Morris rejected . During the negotiations , three ships were spotted flying British flags . Du Rumain returned to his ship , and quickly determined that the strangers were supply ships ; two he captured , but the third got away . After further negotiations terms were agreed that were similar to those granted by de Bouillé in the 1778 capture of Dominica . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After du Rumain 's success , d 'Estaing sailed with his entire fleet for Barbados at the end of June , but was unable to make significant progress against the prevailing winds . He gave up the attempt , sailing instead for Grenada , which he captured on 5 July . Admiral Byron had been alerted to the capture of Saint Vincent on 1 July , and was preparing a force to retake it when he learnt of the attack on Grenada . He immediately sailed there , arriving on the morning of 6 June . The fleets battled off Grenada , with d 'Estaing prevailing over Byron 's disorganized attack . Both Grenada and Saint Vincent remained in French hands until the end of the war , when they were returned to Britain under the terms of the 1783 Treaty of Paris . 
 Admiral George Brydges Rodney made an attempt to recover Saint Vincent in December 1780 . Arriving in the Caribbean after one of the worst hurricane seasons on record , Rodney acted on rumours that Saint Vincent 's defences had been devastated by an October hurricane that wrought havoc throughout the West Indies , and sailed to Saint Vincent with ten ships of the line and 250 soldiers under General John Vaughan . Although Saint Vincent had suffered significant damage ( most of the buildings in Kingstown were destroyed ) , the defences above Kingstown were in good condition and defended by 1 @,@ 000 French and Carib soldiers . Vaughan 's troops were landed , but they found the going difficult due to the conditions , and were re @-@ embarked after only one day . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Etherington was subjected to an enquiry at St. Lucia in 1781 over his conduct during the invasion , and exonerated . Governor Morris , a long @-@ time resident of the island , demanded an inquiry into his behaviour , alleging it had been misrepresented in the press and other writings ; he was also vindicated . He never returned to the island , dying in England in 1789 after spending seven years in King 's Bench Prison over debts incurred in part due to spending on Saint Vincent 's defences . 
 The Black Caribs actively harassed British settlers during the French occupation , at times requiring intervention of the French military to minimize bloodshed . After the return to British control , an uneasy peace existed between the British and Caribs until the 1790s , when the Caribs again rose up in the Second Carib War ( part of radical French efforts to export the French Revolution ) . The Caribs were then deported by the British to Roatán , an island off the coast of present @-@ day Honduras , where their descendants are now known as the <unk> people . Saint Vincent and the Grenadines gained its independence from Britain in 1979 . 
 = Thirty Minutes over Tokyo = 
 " Thirty Minutes Over Tokyo " is the twenty @-@ third episode and season finale of The Simpsons ' tenth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 16 , 1999 . In the episode , after being robbed by Snake Jailbird , the Simpsons visit a money @-@ saving seminar , where they learn ways to limit their expenses . Soon , the family can afford a cheap last @-@ minute flight to another country , the only disadvantage being that they do not know where their plane tickets will bring them , which leads them to spend their vacation in Japan . 
 The episode was written by Donick Cary and Dan Greaney , while Jim Reardon served as director . It was one of the last episodes written in its production line , and its title is a reference to the war film 30 Seconds Over Tokyo . Several guest @-@ stars appeared in the episode , including George Takei as the host for The Happy Smile Super Challenge Family Wish Show . The episode mocks several aspects of the Japanese culture , including the perceived cruelty of Japanese game shows . 
 The episode was seen by approximately 8 million viewers in its original broadcast . In 2005 , the episode was first released on home video , and in 2007 , it was released as part of the tenth season DVD box set . Following the tenth season 's home video release , " Thirty Minutes over Tokyo " received mixed reviews from critics . Because of a scene in which the Emperor of Japan is thrown into a trunk filled with sumo thongs , the episode has never aired in Japan , as the scene was considered disrespectful . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The family , on Lisa 's suggestion , visits a cyber café named The Java Server . However , when Homer looks at his bank account online , he is cyber @-@ robbed by Snake , which saddens Marge because they were saving the money for their family vacation . When Ned Flanders catches Homer burgling his house to recover the lost money , he says that he got more for less by attending the Chuck Garabedian Mega @-@ Savings Seminar . After considering Ned 's advice , Homer steals Ned 's tickets ( and his Jesus fish fridge magnet ) , and the Simpsons attend the seminar , in which Chuck explains many money @-@ saving strategies . Later , in order to save money , the family goes to a 33 ¢ store where Homer eats a can of plankton which had expired two years before and contains red tide poisoning , as warned by “ the Mexican Council of Food . ” Then , when they snag mega @-@ saver tickets from the Flanders family at the airport , they decide to go to Tokyo . 
 The Simpsons arrive in Japan and , although Lisa wants to explore Japanese culture , Homer prompts the family to eat at an American @-@ themed restaurant named Americatown . Afterwards , Homer and Bart encounters Woody Allen , who is in Japan filming a commercial for rice crackers . Later on , Homer and Bart attend a sumo match . While there , Homer asks a sumo wrestler who is throwing salt for some of his pretzel , only for the wrestler to steal it . He and Bart knock him out , and the Emperor of Japan Akihito , comes to congratulate Homer . However , Homer thinks he is another wrestler and throws him into a dumpster of worn mawashi . As a result , he and Bart are put in jail , where they learn Japanese and explore its culture until Marge pays the bail . Consequently , the only money the family has left is a one @-@ million yen bill , which Lisa loses in the wind after Homer makes an origami crane from it ( prompting him to say " D 'oh ! " in Japanese ) . 
 Now broke , the family goes to the US Embassy , where the Ambassador suggests that they get jobs . They eventually find work in a fish @-@ gutting factory in Osaka , but are dissatisfied , except for Bart , who believes he has found his purpose in life . Then , they notice a TV game show called The Happy Smile Super Challenge Family Wish Show . They decide to appear on the show , telling the game 's Japanese host Wink that what they wish for is plane tickets back to Springfield , but to get them they have to go through physical torture ( particularly Homer ) . Eventually , the tickets are theirs , but they have to pick them up from a rickety bridge over an active volcano . Lisa is able to get the tickets , but the bridge breaks and the whole family falls into the volcano , which is actually only <unk> with lots of wasabi added . Homer scolds the Japanese for their lack of ethics , making them feel ashamed of themselves . The program 's sadistic policy does not change however , as they then show an <unk> Canadian couple being showered with scorpions . As the Simpsons leave Japan , their plane is confronted by four giant monsters – Godzilla , Mothra , Gamera and Rodan – but Lisa goes to sleep and the monsters let the plane fly off on the journey back to Springfield . 
 A scene from Battling Seizure Robots is played throughout the end credits . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode , which was originally titled " Fat Man and Little Boy " ( which went on to be used for the name of a Season 16 episode ) , was directed by Jim Reardon and written by Donick Cary and Dan Greaney . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on May 16 , 1999 . " Thirty Minutes Over Tokyo " was one of the last episodes produced for the series ' tenth season . Staff writers Cary and Greaney wrote the draft in a couple of days , and it was then rewritten " extensively " with The Simpsons ' writing staff . Originally , there would be a long scene about how Homer had bought a " pre @-@ Columbian vase " on the Internet , however the scene was ultimately cut from the episode . The episode 's title is a reference to the 1944 war film 30 Seconds Over Tokyo . Originally , the staff wanted the title to be " Twenty @-@ two Minutes Over Tokyo " , since an episode of The Simpsons is approximately twenty @-@ two minutes long , but they eventually changed it to its current rendition because it “ sounds closer to ” the title of the film it references . According to Cary , the writers did a lot of research in order to accurately depict the Japanese language for the episode . For example , the three categories in The Happy Smile Super Challenge Family Wish Show are written in Japanese . 
 In the scene at the seminar , a character closely resembling the mascot of Hasbro 's Monopoly can be seen sitting next to Mr. Burns . Because the design is slightly different from the real @-@ life mascot , the Simpsons staff did not have to pay Hasbro for using their character in the episode . The design of Homer in a Jamaican attire was very popular among the staff , and Mike Scully , the showrunner for the episode , called the design " great " . A scene in the episode shows Homer buying a square watermelon , which turns out to be round and slips out of his hands . In the background , cars are driving on the left side of the street . Originally , the animators had drawn the cars driving on the right side . However , Tomi Yamaguchi , a Simpsons layout artist at the time , pointed out that cars in fact drive on the left side of the street in Japan . Because of this , the animators had to redraw the whole scene , and Yamaguchi received a technical advisor credit for the episode . The speech that Homer gives to the audience in The Happy Smile Super Challenge Family Wish Show was originally much longer , and would partially involve kitchenettes from Broyhill . The design of the male Canadian in the game show was based on Canadian Simpsons director Neil Affleck . 
 The cartoon version of The Simpsons ' theme song that plays at the end of the episode was conceived by composer Alf Clausen . Chuck Garabedian , the speaker at the seminar , was portrayed by series regular voice actor Hank Azaria , who plays Moe Szyslak among other characters . The Japanese waiter in Americatown was played by American actor Gedde Watanabe . Wink , the host for the The Happy Smile Super Challenge Family Wish Show , was portrayed by George Takei . Takei has appeared on The Simpsons several times before , and he is , according to Scully , one of the staff 's favorite guest @-@ stars . The episode also features the voices of Tress MacNeille , Denice Kumagai as Japanese mother , Karen Maruyama as Japanese stewardess , <unk> Young as the sumo wrestler , Karl Wiedergott as Mr. Monopoly and Woody Allen as himself . 
 = = Themes and cultural references = = 
 In his book Gilligan Unbound , American literary critic Paul Cantor described how " Thirty Minutes Over Tokyo " references and mocks several aspects of Japanese and American culture , as well as differences between the two . At a sumo wrestling match , Bart and Homer encounter the Japanese emperor , Akihito . After Homer throws him into a trunk of sumo thongs , Bart and Homer are put in jail , where they have to re @-@ enact a kabuki play about the forty @-@ seven Ronin , do origami , flower arranging and meditation . After Marge bails them out , Bart and Homer can speak fluent Japanese , and have fully absorbed , as Cantor writes , the " exclusionary " character of the Japanese culture , as Homer asks Bart ( in Japanese , with English subtitles ) : " Should we tell them [ Marge and Lisa ] the secret to inner peace ? " , to which Bart replies ( still in Japanese ) , " No , they are foreign devils . " The episode also references the Japanese 's adaption to American culture , and is , according to Cantor , " filled " with signs of how eagerly Japanese have taken to American culture . In one scene , the Simpsons eat at a restaurant called Americatown , filled with US memorabilia and having only American items on the menu . Another scene shows director Woody Allen filming a commercial for Japanese television . 
 In order to get back to the United States , the Simpsons have to enter a humiliating game show called The Happy Smile Super Challenge Family Wish Show . According to Cantor , this is where the family find a difference between Japanese and American culture , as Wink , the game @-@ show host , explains to them : " Our game shows are a little different from yours . Your shows reward knowledge . We punish ignorance . " The game show is partly based on the Japanese show Za <unk> , as well as the British show Family Fortunes . As with many other episodes in the series , " Thirty Minutes Over Tokyo " suggests that , in the end , the Simpsons are more attached to the local than to the global , and , as Cantor writes : " indeed the global is ultimately important in the series only insofar as it can be made local , that is , part of Springfield . For all its cosmopolitanism , the show keeps returning to the American theme of ' there 's no place like home ' " . 
 The computers seen in the internet cafe that the Simpsons visit in the beginning of the episode are based on the Apple iMac computers . In a scene inside Flanders ' kitchen , a note which reads " 1 COR 6 : 9 @-@ 11 " can be seen . This refers to the Bible , First Corinthian , chapter 6 , verses 9 to 11 : " Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God ? Do not be deceived : neither the sexually immoral , nor idolaters , nor adulterers , nor men who practice homosexuality , nor thieves , nor the greedy , nor drunkards , nor <unk> , nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God . And such were some of you . But you were washed , you were sanctified , you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God . " The cups in the 33 cent store read That 70 's Show , a reference which Danny Masterson , one of the lead actors in That 70 's Show , was entertained by , according to Scully . Battling Seizure Robots , the seizure @-@ inducing television show that the Simpsons watch in their hotel room , is based on an episode of Pokémon , called " Dennō Senshi Porygon " , which caused several hundred children to develop epileptic seizures . According to Scully , the staff received " several angry letters " from people for the scene . After the cartoon , an advertisement for Mr. Sparkle , a character that first appeared in the season 8 episode " In Marge We Trust " , can be seen on the television screen . Barney , while impersonating Homer , says " That boy ain 't right " , a line frequently used by Hank Hill , the main character of the animated television series King of the Hill . The giant monsters attacking at the end of the episode are Godzilla , Gamera , Rodan and Mothra , all of which are famous from Japanese monster movies . The scene was included as a reference to the 1998 action science fiction film Godzilla , in which three of the main The Simpsons cast members ( Azaria , Cartwright and Shearer ) had a live @-@ action role . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 16 , 1999 , " Thirty Minutes Over Tokyo " received an 8 @.@ 0 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 8 million viewers . On May 23 , 2005 , the episode was released along with the season 12 episode " Simpson Safari " , the season 13 episode " Blame It on Lisa " and the season 15 episode " The Regina Monologues " , as part of a DVD set called The Simpsons – Around The World In 80 D 'Oh 's . On August 7 , 2007 , the episode was again released as part of The Simpsons – The Complete Tenth Season DVD box set . Matt Groening , Mike Scully , Donick Cary , George Meyer , Ron Hauge , Matt Selman and Jim Reardon participated in the DVD 's audio commentary of the episode . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , gave the episode a positive review , and wrote that it was " A magnificent end to the season . " They wrote that the episode was " thoroughly racist " but " completely inoffensive because it 's simply very funny . " Jake MacNeill of Digital Entertainment News was also favourable , considering it to be one of the better episodes of the season . James Plath of DVD Town wrote that the episode has " some funny moments . " Aaron Roxby of Collider was more critical , denouncing the episode 's dated references . He wrote : " I am going to go ahead and give this one the benefit of the doubt and assume that making fun of Japanese junk culture and game shows felt fresher in 1999 than it does do now . " Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide called the episode " mediocre " . He wrote that , though the episode 's concept should " open up lots of interesting possibilities " , it " doesn ’ t explore them particularly well " . While he did not consider it to be a bad episode , he thought it " fail [ ed ] to live up to its potential " . 
 = = = Banning in Japan = = = 
 Although all other episodes of The Simpsons have been dubbed and broadcast on Japanese television , " Thirty Minutes Over Tokyo " has never aired in Japan . The reasoning behind this was that a scene in the episode , which shows Homer throwing Akihito , the current emperor of Japan , into a box filled with sumo thongs , was considered disrespectful . There was also a rumor that Sanrio objected to the portrayal of the Hello Kitty factory featured briefly in the episode . The episode has become study material for sociology courses at University of California Berkeley , where it is used to " examine issues of the production and reception of cultural objects , in this case , a satirical cartoon show " , and to figure out what it is " trying to tell audiences about aspects primarily of American society , and , to a lesser extent , about other societies " . Some questions asked in the courses include : 
 • What aspects of American society are being addressed in the episode ? 
 • What aspects of them are used to make the points ? 
 • How is the satire conveyed : through language ? drawing ? music ? 
 • Is the behavior of each character consistent with his / her character as developed over the years ? 
 • Can we identify elements of the historical / political context that the writers are satirizing ? 
 • What is the difference between satire and parody ? 
 = Road to Perdition = 
 Road to Perdition is a 2002 American crime thriller film directed by Sam Mendes . The screenplay was adapted by David Self , from the graphic novel of the same name by Max Allan Collins . The film stars Tom Hanks , Paul Newman , Jude Law , and Daniel Craig . The plot takes place in 1931 , during the Great Depression , following a mob enforcer and his son as they seek vengeance against a mobster who murdered the rest of their family . 
 Filming took place in the Chicago area . Mendes , having recently finished 1999 's acclaimed American Beauty , pursued a story that had minimal dialogue and conveyed emotion in the imagery . Cinematographer Conrad L. Hall took advantage of the environment to create symbolism for the film , for which he won several awards , including a posthumous Academy Award for Best Cinematography . The film explores several themes , including the consequence of violence and father @-@ son relationships . 
 The film was released on July 12 , 2002 , and eventually grossed over $ 180 million worldwide . The cinematography , setting , and the lead performances by Hanks and Newman were well received by critics . A home media release debuted on February 25 , 2003 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1931 , during the Great Depression , Michael Sullivan Sr. ( Hanks ) is an enforcer for Irish mob boss John Rooney ( Newman ) in Rock Island , Illinois . Rooney raised the orphan Sullivan and loves him more than his own biological son , the unstable Connor ( Craig ) . Connor snaps and kills disgruntled associate Finn McGovern when meeting him with Sullivan , resulting in Sullivan gunning down McGovern 's men . Sullivan 's twelve @-@ year @-@ old son Michael Sullivan , Jr ( Tyler Hoechlin ) had hidden in his father 's car and witnesses the event . Despite Sullivan swearing his son to secrecy and Rooney pressuring Connor to apologize for the reckless action , Connor murders Sullivan 's wife Annie and younger son Peter , mistaking him for Sullivan , Jr . He then sends Sullivan to an ambush at a speakeasy but Sullivan realizes and escapes to Chicago with his son to seek Al Capone , for work and to discover the location of Connor , who has gone into hiding . 
 Capone 's underboss Frank Nitti ( Tucci ) rejects Sullivan 's proposals , before informing Rooney of the meeting . Rooney reluctantly allows Nitti to dispatch assassin Harlen Maguire ( Law ) , who is also a crime scene photographer , to kill Sullivan . Maguire tracks him and his son to a roadside diner , but fails to kill Sullivan ; realizing Maguire 's intentions , Sullivan escapes through the bathroom and punctures Maguire 's car tire before fleeing . 
 In reaction to the ordered hit , Sullivan begins robbing banks that hold Capone ’ s laundered money , hoping to trade it for Connor while teaching Michael to drive their getaway car . Sullivan is impeded when the mob withdraws its money , so he visits Rooney 's accountant Alexander Rance ( Baker ) at his hotel . The encounter is a set @-@ up , with Rance stalling Sullivan until Maguire enters with a shotgun . In the ensuing crossfire , Rance is killed by the shot from Maguire 's shotgun , Maguire is injured by flying glass shards , and Sullivan escapes with the ledgers ; as Sullivan flees , Maguire shoots him in his left arm . 
 When his father collapses from his wound , Michael Jr. drives his father to a farm , where a childless elderly couple help him recover . Sullivan bonds with his son and discovers from the ledgers that Connor has been embezzling from his father for years , using the names of dead men . As the Sullivans depart , they give the couple much of the stolen money . Sullivan confronts Rooney with the information while they attend Mass . Rooney already knew about the embezzlement and that Connor was likely to die , if not by Sullivan 's hand then by Chicago once Rooney dies and they discover Connor had been stealing money ; however , he refuses to give up his son . He encourages Sullivan to leave with his son , while mourning his departure . 
 Later one night , cloaked by darkness and rain , Sullivan dispatches Rooney 's entire entourage with his Thompson submachine gun and walks directly up to Rooney . As Rooney mutters that he is glad his killer is Sullivan , an emotionally reluctant Sullivan pulls the trigger . Seeing no further reason to protect Connor , Nitti reveals his location to Sullivan , after making the latter promise to end the feud . Sullivan goes to the hotel where Connor is hiding and kills him . 
 Sullivan drives his son to stay at his Aunt Sara 's beach house in Perdition , a town on the shore of Lake Michigan . However , he is ambushed and shot by a disfigured Maguire . As Maguire prepares to photograph the dying Sullivan , Michael Jr. appears and points a gun at Maguire , but cannot muster the will to fire . Sullivan pulls out his gun and kills Maguire , before dying in his son 's arms . Mourning his father 's death , Michael Jr. returns to the elderly farm couple to live with them . While growing up , Michael Jr. reflects that his father 's only fear was that his son would become like him . Michael states he has never held a gun since the fatal encounter between Maguire and his father . When asked if Sullivan was a good or bad man , he says he replies " he was my father . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Tom Hanks as Michael Sullivan , Sr. , a top @-@ notch hitman who works for John Rooney . Hanks was sent a copy of the graphic novel Road to Perdition by Steven Spielberg while he was filming Cast Away ( 2000 ) . Initially too busy to make sense of the story , he later received David Self 's adapted screenplay , to which he became attached . Hanks , a father to four children , described Michael Sullivan 's role , " I just got this guy . If you 're a man , and you 've got offspring ... emotionally , it 's devastating . " 
 Tyler Hoechlin as Michael Sullivan , Jr . , Hoechlin was chosen from over 2 @,@ 000 candidates to portray Michael Sullivan 's son . The actor was 14 years old at the time of filming . For scenes in which Hoechlin 's character assisted his father as a getaway driver , Hoechlin was trained by a driving instructor . 
 Paul Newman as John Rooney , a crime boss who treats Sullivan as a surrogate son . Newman was unanimously the first choice for the role . The actor prepared by requesting Frank McCourt , the Irish @-@ American author of Angela 's Ashes , to record a tape of his voice . 
 Jude Law as Harlen Maguire , a crime scene photographer who moonlights as an assassin . Self , who created this character ( who did not exist in the graphic novel ) , explained , " He gets so jaded from exposure to this world , he steps over the line from being the storyteller to being the story maker . " To capture the " seedy countenance " of the character , Law was given a sallow skin tone that reflected the wear from working in a darkroom . Law 's teeth also received a lower <unk> and had a rotted look . He was also given a weak , thinning hairline . Maguire 's apartment also displays a collection of photographs of dead bodies , some of them actual police stills from the 1930s . 
 Daniel Craig as Connor Rooney , the unstable , violent son of John Rooney . He ’ s deeply jealous of his father 's affection for Sullivan . 
 Stanley Tucci as Frank Nitti , the underboss for the Al Capone Outfit . Tucci was selective about roles in gangster films ( playing a mob soldier in <unk> 's Honor and playing Lucky Luciano in Billy Bathgate ) , believing that Hollywood stereotyped all Italian @-@ Americans as gangsters . However , attracted by the prospect of working with Mendes and his crew , the actor accepted the role of Nitti , a real @-@ life Mob boss from Chicago . 
 Jennifer Jason Leigh as Annie Sullivan , the wife of Michael Sullivan , Sr. 
 Liam Aiken as Peter Sullivan , the doomed younger son of Michael Sullivan , Sr. 
 Dylan Baker as Alexander Rance , an accountant who holds the ledgers for the Rooney crime syndicate . 
 Ciarán Hinds as Finn McGovern , the man whose murder by Connor Rooney is witnessed by Sullivan 's son . 
 Anthony LaPaglia as Al Capone , the notorious crime boss . This character was filmed for a single scene , which was omitted from the final cut , and can be found in the DVD 's deleted scenes . Mendes believed that Capone was more menacing as an unseen presence . Actor Alfred Molina was approached to portray Capone , but Molina was forced to turn the role down due to scheduling conflicts with Frida ( 2002 ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 When Max Allan Collins wrote the graphic novel Road to Perdition , his book agent saw potential in the story as a film adaptation and showed it to a film agent . By 1999 , the novel had reached Dean Zanuck , who was the vice president of development at the company owned by his father , producer Richard D. Zanuck . The novel was sent to the elder Zanuck in Morocco , who was there producing Rules of Engagement ( 2000 ) . The <unk> agreed on the story 's prospect and sent it to director @-@ producer Steven Spielberg . Shortly afterward , Spielberg set up the project at his studio DreamWorks , though he did not pursue direction of the film due to his full slate . 
 Mendes sought a new project after completing American Beauty ( 1999 ) and explored prospects including A Beautiful Mind , K @-@ PAX , The Shipping News , and The Lookout . DreamWorks sent Mendes Road to Perdition as a prospect , and Mendes was attracted to the story , considering it " narratively very simple , but thematically very complex " . One theme that he saw in the story was of the parents ' world that is inaccessible to their children . Mendes considered the story 's theme to be about how children deal with violence , and whether exposure to violence would render children violent themselves . Mendes described the script as having " no moral absolutes " , a factor that appealed to the director . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Spielberg first contacted screenwriter David Self to adapt the story into a feature film . Self wrote an initial draft that remained close to the source material and retained most of its dialogue . The screenplay was then rewritten by uncredited writers , distancing the script from the graphic novel and leaving the core elements of the story . Some of the harsher aspects of the story were toned down as the script became more streamlined ; for example , in some early drafts of the screenplay , Sullivan became an alcoholic , but this element was ultimately absent from the final version . 
 The story itself is deeply informed by the Lone Wolf and Cub manga series . Novelist Max Allan Collins acknowledged the influence of Lone Wolf and Cub on his graphic novel Road to Perdition in an interview to the BBC , declaring that " Road To Perdition is ' an unabashed homage ' to Lone Wolf And Cub " . 
 Some of the characters ' names were slightly changed from their original versions from the graphic novel : the surname of the real @-@ life gangsters John Looney and his son Connor were changed to Rooney , and the surname of Tom Hanks ' character and his family was streamlined from the original O 'Sullivan to simply Sullivan . One significant addition to the script was the creation of Maguire to provide a persistent element of pursuit to the Sullivans ' departure from the old world . 
 Hanks and cinematographer Conrad Hall requested Mendes to limit violence in the film to meaningful acts , rather than gratuitous carnage . Hanks ' character , Michael Sullivan , is known as " The Angel of Death " in the graphic novel and invokes fear in those around him , but his infamy is downplayed in the film . Mendes , who described the graphic novel as " much more pulpy " , sought to reduce the graphic novel 's background to its essence , seeking the " nonverbal simplicity " of films like Once Upon a Time in America ( 1984 ) , Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid ( 1973 ) , and films by Akira Kurosawa that lack dialogue . Duplicate language in characters ' confrontations in Road to Perdition was trimmed to the absolute minimum . Mendes described Road to Perdition as a " poetic , elegiac story , in which the pictures tell the story " . An example of one such unspoken scene in the film was the piano duet between Rooney and Michael Sr. , intended to convey their relationship without words . In the final 20 minutes of Road to Perdition , the script was written to have only six lines of dialogue . 
 The author of the Perdition graphic novel , Max Allan Collins , originally wanted to write the adapted screenplay for the feature film , but was not given the opportunity . He chose to stay out of the scripting process out of respect for the different style of writing for a different medium , though he served as a consultant in the process . Collins praised the addition of Maguire and considered the minimalist use of dialogue to be appropriate . The author also applauded the film 's version of Rooney as " more overtly a father figure " to Sullivan . 
 Collins opposed the profanity in the script , as the vulgar language did not fit his vision of the 1930s . He also contested the path of Sullivan 's son in the film . In the graphic novel , the son kills once , and in the film , he does not kill anyone . Collins also disagreed with the narration technique of the film . In the novel , the son narrates the story as an adult , becoming a priest , while in the film , he narrates while still a young boy . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Before filming , Mendes sought to produce a period film that would avoid clichés in the gangster genre . He chose to film Road to Perdition on location in downtown at the University Club of Chicago , the Chicago neighborhood of Pullman as well as the Chicago suburb of Geneva , Illinois . The Armory , the state 's largest location mainstay which houses the Illinois State National Guard , was provided to the studio by the Illinois State Film Commission . Sets were built inside the Armory , including interiors of the Sullivan family 's home and the Rooney mansion . The availability of an inside location provided the crew complete control over the lighting environment , which was established with the rigging of scaffoldings . 
 Mendes collaborated with costume designer Albert <unk> , production designer Dennis Gassner , and cinematographer Conrad Hall to design the film 's style . <unk> designed costumes that were " very controlled , with soft outlines and very soft silhouettes " . Gassner built sets that could capture the cold look of the era . Mendes sought a muted palette for the film , having dark backgrounds and sets with dark , muted greens and grays . Mendes filmed Road to Perdition using the Super 35 format . 
 The director filmed exterior scenes in Illinois in the winter and the spring of 2001 , using real weather conditions such as snow , rain , and mud for the scenes . Mendes considered the usage of bleak weather conditions and the intended coldness of Gassner 's exterior locations to define the characters ' emotional states . Pullman became a key location to reflect this theme , having several settings , including the town 's historic Florence Hotel , easily redressed by the crew for the film . Filming concluded in June 2001 . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 To establish the lighting of scenes in Road to Perdition , Mendes drew from the paintings of Edward Hopper as a source of inspiration , particularly Hopper 's New York Movie ( 1939 ) . Mendes and cinematographer Conrad Hall sought to convey similar atmospheric lighting for the film 's scenes , applying a " less is more " mantra . Hall also shot wide open scenes that retained one point in the depth of field sharply focused . Hall considered the technique to provide an emotional dimension to the scenes . The cinematographer also used unconventional techniques and materials to create unique lighting effects . One of Hall 's methods was to use black silk in daylight exterior scenes to filter the light enough to create an in @-@ shade look . 
 Hall purposely distanced the camera from Hanks ' character , Michael Sullivan , Sr. , at the beginning of the film to establish the perspective of Sullivan 's son , who is unaware of his father 's true nature . Hanks ' character was filmed as partially obscured and seen through doorways , and his entrances and exits took place in shadows . A wide lens was used to maintain a distance from the character . 
 Shots in the film were drawn directly from panels in the graphic novel , illustrated by Richard Piers Rayner . An instance of the direct influence is the scene in which Michael , Jr. looks up at the Chicago skyline from the vehicle , with the skyline reflected in the vehicle 's glass . 
 A seamless 40 @-@ second driving scene , in which Michael Sullivan and his son travel into Chicago from the countryside , was aided by visual effects . The live @-@ action part of the scene was filmed at LaSalle Street , and due to the lack of scenery for part of the drive down LaSalle Street , the background of Balbo Drive was included with the use of visual effects . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Consequences of violence = = = 
 The film 's title , Road to Perdition , is both Michael Sullivan and his son 's destination town and a euphemism for Hell , a road that Sullivan desires to prevent his son from traveling . Sullivan , who chooses his violent path early on in life , considers himself irredeemable and seeks to save his son from a similar fate . Said Mendes , " [ Sullivan ] is in a battle for the soul of his son . Can a man who has led a bad life achieve redemption through his child ? " Hanks described Sullivan as a man who achieved a comfortable status through violent means , whose likely repercussions he ignored . Sullivan is a good father and husband , but also has a job that requires him to be a violent killer . The film explores this paradoxical dichotomy . When Sullivan is faced with the consequences , Hanks says , " At the moment we 're dropped into the story , it is literally the last day of that false perspective . " To keep Sullivan from justifying his violent actions in the film , Mendes omitted scenes in the final cut that had Sullivan explaining his background to his son . 
 In the film , most of the numerous acts of violence are committed off @-@ screen . The violent acts were also designed to be quick , reflecting the actual speed of violence in the real world . The focus was not on the direct victims of the perpetuated violence , but the impact of violence on the perpetrators or witnesses to the act . 
 = = = Fathers and sons = = = 
 The film also explores father @-@ son relationships , not only between Michael Sullivan and his son , but between Sullivan and his boss , John Rooney , and between Rooney and Connor . Sullivan simultaneously idolizes and fears Rooney , and Sullivan 's son feels the same about his own father . Rooney 's son , Connor , has none of Sullivan 's redeeming qualities , and Rooney is conflicted about whom to protect : his biological son or his surrogate son . Connor is jealous of his father 's relationship with Sullivan , which fuels his actions , ultimately causing a domino effect that drives the film . 
 Because Sullivan shields his background from his son , his attempt to preserve the father @-@ son relationship is actually harmful . Tragedy brings Sullivan and his son together . Sullivan escapes from the old world with his son , and the boy finds an opportunity to strengthen the relationship with his father . Tyler Hoechlin , who portrayed Michael , Jr . , explained , " His dad starts to realize that Michael is all he has now and how much he 's been missing . I think the journey is of a father and son getting to know each other , and also finding out who they themselves are . " 
 = = = Water = = = 
 Water served as a motif in the film . It was developed after researching the wake scene at the beginning of the film informed the director that corpses were kept on ice in the 1920s to keep bodies from decomposing . The notion was interwoven into the film , which linked the presence of water with death . Mendes reflected on the theme , " The linking of water with death ... speaks of the mutability of water and links it to the <unk> of fate . These are things that humans can 't control . " 
 = = Release = = 
 When filming concluded in June 2001 , the studio intended a United States release for the following Christmas . But by September 2001 , Mendes requested more time . It was rescheduled for release on July 12 , 2002 , an unconventional move that placed the drama among the action @-@ oriented summer films . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Road to Perdition opened in 1 @,@ 798 theaters over its opening weekend , competing against several other new releases including Reign of Fire , Halloween : Resurrection , and The Crocodile Hunter : Collision Course , and grossed $ 22 @,@ 079 @,@ 481 , placing second to Men in Black II , which was in its second week of release . It eventually grossed $ 104 @,@ 454 @,@ 762 in the United States and $ 76 @,@ 546 @,@ 716 in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 181 @,@ 001 @,@ 478 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The film received positive reviews and acclaim from critics , with the lead performances of Hanks and Newman being praised . Reviewer James Berardinelli , on his own ReelViews web site , praised Road to Perdition for its atmosphere and visuals , but he considered an emotional attachment to be lacking except for Sullivan 's son . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times praised Hall 's cinematography and the thematic use of water . He , too , felt an emotional detachment from the characters , saying , " I knew I admired it , but I didn 't know if I liked it ... It is cold and holds us outside . " 
 Eleanor Ringel Gillespie of The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution enjoyed the film 's cinematography and Depression @-@ era setting , as well as the performances of Hanks and Newman . Gillespie expressed the wish that the film lasted a little longer to explore its emotional core further . Eric Harrison of the Houston Chronicle considered Road to Perdition " the most brilliant work in this [ gangster ] genre " since the uncut Once Upon a Time in America ( 1984 ) . Harrison considered Self 's script " so finely honed that the story can change directions in a heartbeat . " 
 Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter praised Hanks , Newman , and Craig but called Law 's performance " almost cartoonish " . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone also complimented Hanks and Newman : " [ They ] act together with the confidence of titans , their talents in the service of character , never star ego . " Travers cited Hall 's " breathtaking " cinematography and composer Thomas Newman 's " evocative " score . 
 Paul Clinton of CNN said : " While these deeply human issues are touched upon , they 're never fully explored , and that undermines the sense of greatness to which this movie obviously aspires . Clinton considered Craig 's character " one @-@ dimensional to the extreme " . He found the cinematography too overpowering for the film 's storyline , which he considered " weak " . J. Hoberman of The Village Voice described the film as " grim yet soppy . " He added : " The action is stilted and the tabloid energy embalmed . " Stephen Hunter of The Washington Post thought that the script lost its path when Sullivan and his son fled their old life . 
 Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 81 % based on reviews from 210 critics , with an average score of 7 @.@ 5 / 10 . Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 from reviews by mainstream critics , gave a film rating of 72 / 100 based on 36 reviews . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Road to Perdition was nominated for six Academy Awards : Best Supporting Actor ( Paul Newman ) , Best Art Direction , Best Cinematography ( Conrad L. Hall ) , Best Original Score ( Thomas Newman ) , Best Sound ( Scott Millan , Bob <unk> and John Pritchett ) , and Best Sound Editing ( Scott Hecker ) . The sole award went , posthumously , to Hall for Cinematography . 
 The film was also nominated for BAFTA Awards for Best Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role ( Newman ) , Best Cinematography , and Best Production Design , winning awards for the latter two . Hall also won an award from the American Society of Cinematographers for Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in Theatrical Releases . In April 2006 , Empire recognized Road to Perdition as number six in its list of the top 20 comic book films . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Max Allan Collins , who authored the graphic novel , was hired to write the novelization for the film adaptation . Collins initially turned in a draft that contained 90 @,@ 000 words , but the licensing at DreamWorks required the author to use only the dialogue from the film and no additional dialogue . Collins reluctantly edited the novelization down to 50 @,@ 000 words and later said he regretted taking on the task . 
 Road to Perdition was released on DVD on February 25 , 2003 , in both full screen and anamorphic widescreen versions . The DVD 's features included an audio commentary , deleted scenes , an HBO " Making of " documentary , and a photo gallery . Work on the DVD began on the same day the film 's production began , and a collaborative effort among the director , the studio , and the DVD production crew shaped the DVD 's content . Due to a limit of space on the DVD , the film 's deleted scenes were chosen over a DTS soundtrack . Instead , the DVD included a Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 soundtrack . A special edition DVD containing both DTS and Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 soundtracks was also released , excluding the " Making of " documentary to fit both soundtracks . 
 Road to Perdition was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on August 3 , 2010 , featuring a widescreen transfer , a DTS @-@ HD Master Audio 5 @.@ 1 soundtrack , and all of the features from the DVD release . 
 = Andromeda ( constellation ) = 
 Andromeda is one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd @-@ century Greco @-@ Roman astronomer Ptolemy and remains one of the 88 modern constellations . Located north of the celestial equator , it is named for Andromeda , daughter of Cassiopeia , in the Greek myth , who was chained to a rock to be eaten by the sea monster Cetus . Andromeda is most prominent during autumn evenings in the Northern Hemisphere , along with several other constellations named for characters in the Perseus myth . Because of its northern declination , Andromeda is visible only north of 40 ° south latitude ; for observers farther south it lies below the horizon . It is one of the largest constellations , with an area of 722 square degrees . This is over 1 @,@ 400 times the size of the full moon , 55 % of the size of the largest constellation , Hydra , and over 10 times the size of the smallest constellation , Crux . 
 Its brightest star , Alpha Andromedae , is a binary star that has also been counted as a part of Pegasus , while Gamma Andromedae is a colorful binary and a popular target for amateur astronomers . Only marginally dimmer than Alpha , Beta Andromedae is a red giant , its color visible to the naked eye . The constellation 's most obvious deep @-@ sky object is the naked @-@ eye Andromeda Galaxy ( M31 , also called the Great Galaxy of Andromeda ) , the closest spiral galaxy to the Milky Way and one of the brightest Messier objects . Several fainter galaxies , including M31 's companions M110 and M32 , as well as the more distant NGC 891 , lie within Andromeda . The Blue Snowball Nebula , a planetary nebula , is visible in a telescope as a blue circular object . 
 In Chinese astronomy , the stars that make up Andromeda were members of four different constellations that had astrological and mythological significance ; a constellation related to Andromeda also exists in Hindu mythology . Andromeda is the location of the radiant for the Andromedids , a weak meteor shower that occurs in November . 
 = = History and mythology = = 
 The <unk> of Andromeda has its roots most firmly in the Greek tradition , though a female figure in Andromeda 's location had appeared earlier in Babylonian astronomy . The stars that make up Pisces and the middle portion of modern Andromeda formed a constellation representing a fertility goddess , sometimes named as <unk> or the Lady of the Heavens . 
 Andromeda is known as " the Chained Lady " or " the Chained Woman " in English . It was known as Mulier <unk> ( " chained woman " ) in Latin and al @-@ Mar 'at al <unk> in Arabic . It has also been called Persea ( " Perseus 's wife " ) or <unk> ( " Cepheus 's daughter " ) , all names that refer to Andromeda 's role in the Greco @-@ Roman myth of Perseus , in which Cassiopeia , the queen of Ethiopia , bragged that her daughter was more beautiful than the Nereids , sea nymphs blessed with incredible beauty . Offended at her remark , the nymphs petitioned Poseidon to punish Cassiopeia for her insolence , which he did by commanding the sea monster Cetus to attack Ethiopia . Andromeda 's panicked father , Cepheus , was told by the Oracle of Ammon that the only way to save his kingdom was to sacrifice his daughter to Cetus . She was chained to a rock by the sea but was saved by the hero Perseus , who used the head of Medusa to turn the monster into stone ; Algol ( β Persei ) , the " Demon Star " , marks the head of Medusa . Perseus and Andromeda then married ; the myth recounts that the couple had nine children together – seven sons and two daughters – and founded Mycenae and its <unk> dynasty . After Andromeda 's death Athena placed her in the sky as a constellation , to honor her . Several of the neighboring constellations ( Perseus , Cassiopeia , Cetus , and Cepheus ) also represent characters in the Perseus myth . It is connected with the constellation Pegasus . 
 Andromeda was one of the original 48 constellations formulated by Ptolemy in his 2nd @-@ century Almagest , in which it was defined as a specific pattern of stars . She is typically depicted with α Andromedae as her head , ο and λ Andromedae as her chains , and δ , π , μ , Β , and γ Andromedae representing her body and legs . However , there is no universal depiction of Andromeda and the stars used to represent her body , head , and chains . Arab astronomers were aware of Ptolemy 's constellations , but they included a second constellation representing a fish at Andromeda 's feet . Several stars from Andromeda and most of the stars in Lacerta were combined in 1787 by German astronomer Johann Bode to form Frederici <unk> ( also called Friedrichs Ehre ) . It was designed to honor King Frederick II of Prussia , but quickly fell into disuse . Since the time of Ptolemy , Andromeda has remained a constellation and is officially recognized by the International Astronomical Union , although like all modern constellations , it is now defined as a specific region of the sky that includes both Ptolemy 's pattern and the surrounding stars . In 1922 , the IAU defined its recommended three @-@ letter abbreviation , " And " . The official boundaries of Andromeda were defined in 1930 by Eugène Delporte as a polygon of 36 segments . Its right ascension is between 22h <unk> and <unk> <unk> and its declination is between 53 @.@ 19 ° and 21 @.@ 68 ° in the equatorial coordinate system . 
 = = = In non @-@ Western astronomy = = = 
 In traditional Chinese astronomy , nine stars from Andromeda ( including Beta Andromedae , Mu Andromedae , and Nu Andromedae ) , along with seven stars from Pisces , formed an elliptical constellation called " Legs " ( <unk> ) . This constellation either represented the foot of a walking person or a wild boar . Gamma Andromedae and its neighbors were called " Teen Ta <unk> Keun " ( <unk> , heaven 's great general ) , representing honor in astrology and a great general in mythology . Alpha Andromedae and Gamma Pegasi together made " Wall " ( <unk> ) , representing the eastern wall of the imperial palace and / or the emperor 's personal library . For the Chinese , the northern swath of Andromeda formed a stable for changing horses ( <unk> , <unk> , stable on sky ) and the far western part , along with most of Lacerta , became <unk> , a flying snake . 
 An Arab constellation called " al @-@ Hut " ( the fish ) was composed of several stars in Andromeda , M31 , and several stars in <unk> ν And , μ And , β And , η And , ζ And , ε And , δ And , π And , and 32 And were all included from Andromeda ; ν Psc , φ Psc , χ Psc , and ψ Psc were included from Pisces . 
 Hindu legends surrounding Andromeda are similar to the Greek myths . Ancient Sanskrit texts depict <unk> chained to a rock , as in the Greek myth . Scholars believe that the Hindu and Greek astrological myths were closely linked ; one piece of evidence cited is the similarity between the names " <unk> " and " Andromeda " . 
 Andromeda is also associated with the Mesopotamian creation story of Tiamat , the goddess of Chaos . She bore many demons for her husband , <unk> , but eventually decided to destroy them in a war that ended when Marduk killed her . He used her body to create the constellations as markers of time for humans . 
 In the Marshall Islands , Andromeda , Cassiopeia , Triangulum , and Aries are incorporated into a constellation representing a porpoise . Andromeda 's bright stars are mostly in the body of the porpoise ; Cassiopeia represents its tail and Aries its head . In the Tuamotu islands , Alpha Andromedae was called Takurua @-@ e @-@ te @-@ <unk> @-@ hanga @-@ <unk> , meaning " Star of the wearisome toil " , and Beta Andromedae was called <unk> @-@ o @-@ <unk> . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 α And ( Alpheratz , Sirrah ) is the brightest star in this constellation . It is an <unk> class binary star with an overall apparent visual magnitude of 2 @.@ 1 and a luminosity of 96 L ☉ . It is 97 light @-@ years from Earth . It represents Andromeda 's head in Western mythology , however , the star 's traditional Arabic names – Alpheratz and Sirrah , from the phrase <unk> al @-@ <unk> – sometimes translated as " navel of the steed " . The Arabic names are a reference to the fact that α And forms an asterism known as the " Great Square of Pegasus " with three stars in Pegasus : α , β , and γ Peg . As such , the star was formerly considered to belong to both Andromeda and Pegasus , and was co @-@ designated as " Delta Pegasi ( δ Peg ) " , although this name is no longer formally used . 
 β And ( <unk> ) is a red @-@ hued giant star of type M0 located in an asterism known as the " girdle " . It is 198 light @-@ years away , has a magnitude of 2 @.@ 06 , and a luminosity of 115 L ☉ . Its name comes from the Arabic phrase al @-@ <unk> meaning " the loins " or " the loincloth " , a phrase translated from Ptolemy 's writing . However , β And was mostly considered by the Arabs to be a part of al @-@ Hut , a constellation representing a larger fish than Pisces at Andromeda 's feet . 
 γ And ( Almach ) is an orange @-@ hued bright giant star of type K3 found at the southern tip of the constellation with an overall magnitude of 2 @.@ 14 . Almach is a multiple star with a yellow primary of magnitude 2 @.@ 3 and a blue @-@ green secondary of magnitude 5 @.@ 0 , separated by 9 @.@ 7 arcseconds . British astronomer William Herschel said of the star : " [ the ] striking difference in the colour of the two stars , suggests the idea of a sun and its planet , to which the contrast of their unequal size contributes not a little . " The secondary , described by Herschel as a " fine light sky @-@ blue , inclining to green " , is itself a double star , with a secondary of magnitude 6 @.@ 3 and a period of 61 years . The system is 358 light @-@ years away . Almach was named for the Arabic phrase <unk> al @-@ Ard , which means " the earth @-@ kid " , an obtuse reference to an animal that aids a lion in finding prey . 
 δ And is an orange @-@ hued giant star of type K3 orange giant of magnitude 3 @.@ 3 . It is 105 light @-@ years from Earth . 
 ι And , κ , λ , ο , and ψ And form an asterism known as " Frederick 's Glory " , a name derived from a former constellation ( Frederici <unk> ) . ι And is a blue @-@ white hued main @-@ sequence star of type B8 , 502 light @-@ years from Earth ; κ And is a white @-@ hued main @-@ sequence star of type B9 <unk> , 168 light @-@ years from Earth ; λ And is a yellow @-@ hued giant star of type G8 , 86 light @-@ years from Earth ; ο And is a blue @-@ white hued giant star of type B6 , 679 light @-@ years from Earth ; and ψ And is a blue @-@ white hued main @-@ sequence star of type B7 , 988 light @-@ years from Earth . 
 μ And is a white @-@ hued main @-@ sequence star of type A5 and magnitude 3 @.@ 9 . It is 130 light @-@ years away . 
 υ And is a magnitude 4 @.@ 1 binary system that consists of one F @-@ type dwarf and an M @-@ type dwarf . The primary star has a planetary system with four confirmed planets , 0 @.@ 96 times , 14 @.@ 57 times , 10 @.@ 19 times and 1 @.@ 06 the mass of Jupiter . The system is 44 light @-@ years from Earth . 
 ξ And ( <unk> ) is a binary star 217 light years away . The primary is an orange @-@ hued giant star of type K0 . 
 π And is a blue @-@ white hued binary star of magnitude 4 @.@ 3 that is 598 light @-@ years away . The primary is a main @-@ sequence star of type B5 . Its companion star is of magnitude 8 @.@ 9 . 
 51 And was assigned by Johann Bayer to Perseus , where he designated it " Upsilon Persei ( υ Per ) " , but it was moved to Andromeda by the International Astronomical Union . It is 177 light @-@ years from Earth and is an orange @-@ hued giant star of type K3 . 
 54 And was a former designation for φ Per . 
 56 And is an optical binary star . The primary is a yellow @-@ hued giant star of type K0 with an apparent magnitude of 5 @.@ 7 that is 316 light @-@ years away . The secondary is an orange @-@ hued giant star of type K0 and magnitude 5 @.@ 9 that is 990 light @-@ years from Earth . 
 R And is a Mira @-@ type variable star with a period of 409 days . Its maximum magnitude is 5 @.@ 8 and its minimum magnitude is 14 @.@ 8 , and it is at a distance of 1250 light @-@ years . There are 6 other Mira variables in Andromeda . 
 Z And is the M @-@ type prototype for its class of variable stars . It ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 12 @.@ 4 to a maximum of 8 @.@ 0 . It is 2720 light @-@ years away . 
 Ross 248 ( HH Andromedae ) is the ninth closest star to Earth at a distance of 10 @.@ 3 light @-@ years . It is a red @-@ hued main @-@ sequence BY Draconis variable star of type M6 . 
 14 And is a yellow @-@ hued giant star of type G8 that is 251 light @-@ years away . It has a mass of 2 @.@ 2 M ☉ and a radius of 11 R ☉ . It has one planet , 14 Andromedae b , discovered in 2008 . It orbits at a distance of 0 @.@ 83 astronomical units from its parent star every 186 days and has a mass of 4 @.@ 3 MJ . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 The constellation of Andromeda lies well away from the galactic plane , so it does not contain any of the open clusters or bright nebulae of the Milky Way . Because of its distance in the sky from the band of obscuring dust , gas , and abundant stars of our home galaxy , Andromeda 's borders contain many visible distant galaxies . The most famous deep @-@ sky object in Andromeda is the spiral galaxy cataloged as Messier 31 ( M31 ) or NGC 224 but known colloquially as the Andromeda Galaxy for the constellation . M31 is one of the most distant objects visible to the naked eye , 2 @.@ 2 million light @-@ years from Earth ( estimates range up to 2 @.@ 5 million light @-@ years ) ; it is seen under a dark , transparent sky as a hazy patch in the north of the constellation . M31 is the largest neighboring galaxy to the Milky Way and the largest member of the Local Group of galaxies . In absolute terms , M31 is approximately 200 @,@ 000 light @-@ years in diameter , twice the size of the Milky Way . It is an enormous – 192 @.@ 4 by 62 @.@ 2 arcminutes in apparent size – barred spiral galaxy similar in form to the Milky Way and at an approximate magnitude of 3 @.@ 5 , is one of the brightest deep @-@ sky objects in the northern sky . Despite being visible to the naked eye , the " little cloud " near Andromeda 's figure was not recorded until AD 964 , when the Arab astronomer al @-@ Sufi wrote his Book of Fixed Stars . M31 was first observed telescopically shortly after its invention , by Simon Marius in 1612 . 
 M31 is often referred to as a twin sister to the Milky Way , but it has only half the mass of the Milky Way despite being twice its diameter . The futures of the Andromeda and Milky Way galaxies may be interlinked : in about five billion years , the two could potentially begin an Andromeda – Milky Way collision that would spark extensive new star formation . 
 American astronomer Edwin Hubble included M31 ( then known as the Andromeda Nebula ) in his groundbreaking 1923 research on galaxies . Using the 100 @-@ inch Hooker Telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory in California , he observed Cepheid variable stars in M31 during a search for novae , allowing him to determine their distance by using the stars as standard candles . The distance he found was far greater than the size of the Milky Way , which led him to the conclusion that many similar objects were " island universes " on their own . Hubble originally estimated that the Andromeda Galaxy was 900 @,@ 000 light @-@ years away , but Ernst Öpik 's estimate in 1925 put the distance closer to 1 @.@ 5 million light @-@ years . 
 The Andromeda Galaxy 's two main companions , M32 and M110 ( also known as NGC 221 and NGC 205 , respectively ) are faint elliptical galaxies that lie near it . M32 , visible with a far smaller size of 8 @.@ 7 by 6 @.@ 4 arcminutes , compared to M110 , appears superimposed on the larger galaxy in a telescopic view as a hazy smudge , M110 also appears slightly larger and distinct from the larger galaxy ; M32 is 0 @.@ 5 ° south of the core , M32 is 1 ° northwest of the core . M32 was discovered in 1749 by French astronomer Guillaume Le Gentil and has since been found to lie closer to Earth than the Andromeda Galaxy itself . It is viewable in binoculars from a dark site owing to its high surface brightness of 10 @.@ 1 and overall magnitude of 9 @.@ 0 . M110 is classified as either a dwarf spheroidal galaxy or simply a generic elliptical galaxy . It is far fainter than M31 and M32 , but larger than M42 with a surface brightness of 13 @.@ 2 , magnitude of 8 @.@ 9 , and size of 21 @.@ 9 by 10 @.@ 9 arcminutes . 
 The Andromeda Galaxy has a total of 15 satellite galaxies , including M32 and M110 . Nine of these lie in a plane , which has caused astronomers to infer that they have a common origin . These satellite galaxies , like the satellites of the Milky Way , tend to be older , gas @-@ poor dwarf elliptical and dwarf spheroidal galaxies . 
 Along with the Andromeda Galaxy and its companions , the constellation also features NGC 891 ( Caldwell 23 ) , a smaller galaxy just east of Almach . It is a barred spiral galaxy seen edge @-@ on , with a dark dust lane visible down the middle . NGC 891 is incredibly faint and small despite its magnitude of 9 @.@ 9 , as its surface brightness of 14 @.@ 6 indicates ; it is 13 @.@ 5 by 2 @.@ 8 arcminutes in size . NGC 891 was discovered by the brother @-@ and @-@ sister team of William and Caroline Herschel in August 1783 . This galaxy is at an approximate distance of 30 million light years from Earth , calculated from its redshift of 0 @.@ 002 . 
 Andromeda 's most celebrated open cluster is NGC 752 ( Caldwell 28 ) at an overall magnitude of 5 @.@ 7 . It is a loosely scattered cluster in the Milky Way that measures 49 arcminutes across and features approximately twelve bright stars , although more than 60 stars of approximately 9th magnitude become visible at low magnifications in a telescope . It is considered to be one of the more inconspicuous open clusters . The other open cluster in Andromeda is NGC <unk> , which has a similar magnitude of 5 @.@ 6 and is also a part of the Milky Way . It contains approximately 20 stars in a diameter of 15 arcminutes , making it a tighter cluster than NGC 752 . 
 There is one prominent planetary nebula in Andromeda : NGC <unk> ( Caldwell 22 ) . Lying approximately three degrees southwest of Iota Andromedae at a distance of about 4 @,@ 000 light @-@ years from Earth , the " Blue Snowball Nebula " is a popular target for amateur astronomers . It earned its popular name because it appears as a faint , round , blue @-@ green object in a telescope , with an overall magnitude of 9 @.@ 2 . Upon further magnification , it is visible as a slightly elliptical annular disk that gets darker towards the center , with a magnitude 13 @.@ 2 central star . The nebula has an overall magnitude of 9 @.@ 2 and is 20 by 130 arcseconds in size . 
 = = = Meteor showers = = = 
 Each November , the Andromedids meteor shower appears to radiate from Andromeda . The shower peaks in mid @-@ to @-@ late November every year , but has a low peak rate of fewer than two meteors per hour . Astronomers have often associated the Andromedids with Biela 's Comet , which was destroyed in the 19th century , but that connection is disputed . <unk> meteors are known for being very slow and the shower itself is considered to be diffuse , as meteors can be seen coming from nearby constellations as well as from Andromeda itself . <unk> meteors sometimes appear as red fireballs . The Andromedids were associated with the most spectacular meteor showers of the 19th century ; the storms of 1872 and 1885 were estimated to have a peak rate of two meteors per second ( a zenithal hourly rate of 10 @,@ 000 ) , prompting one Chinese astronomer to compare the meteors to falling rain . The Andromedids had another outburst on December 3 – 5 , 2011 , the most active shower since 1885 , with a maximum zenithal hourly rate of 50 meteors per hour . The 2011 outburst was linked to ejecta from Comet Biela , which passed close to the Sun in 1649 . None of the meteoroids observed were associated with material from the comet 's 1846 disintegration . The observers of the 2011 outburst predicted outbursts in 2018 , 2023 , and 2036 . 
 = And Maggie Makes Three = 
 " And Maggie Makes Three " is the thirteenth television episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on January 22 , 1995 . In the episode , Lisa notices that there are no photos of Maggie in the family photo albums . This leads to a recount of Maggie 's birth : having settled all his debts , Homer quit his job at the nuclear power plant , and took his dream job at a bowling alley . However , when Maggie was born , his salary was not enough to support three children , so he had to return to his old job at the plant . He explains that all of Maggie 's pictures are at his work station to inspire him . 
 The episode was written by Jennifer Crittenden , and directed by Swinton O. Scott III . This was both Crittenden 's and Scott 's first episode on The Simpsons . It features cultural references to television shows such as The Mary Tyler Moore Show and Knight Rider . Since airing , the episode has received many positive reviews from fans and television critics , and has been called " a touching look at fatherhood " by Kevin Wong at PopMatters . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 3 , and was the fourth highest rated show on Fox the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While the family is browsing through the family photo album , Lisa notices that there are no baby pictures of Maggie at all . Homer explains by recounting the story of Maggie 's birth . In 1993 , Homer hated working at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , and had a dream of working at a bowling alley . After he received a paycheck that cleared him of all his debts , he happily quit his job at the power plant , and went to get a job at the local bowling alley owned by Barney Gumble 's uncle Al . 
 When Homer and Marge celebrated this development with sex , she became pregnant . In the meantime , Homer did an excellent job working at the bowling alley , and got treated well by the staff and customers as a result . Meanwhile , upon learning of her pregnancy , Marge feared that the news would end Homer 's new lifestyle and happiness , because it meant he could no longer support his family on his bowling alley salary . Marge kept her pregnancy a secret as long as she could , but Patty and Selma , eager to ruin Homer 's life , spread the news quickly around town . As a result , several people congratulated Homer , who was unaware of Marge 's pregnancy until a baby shower was given to Marge back at the Simpson residence . 
 Realizing the truth , Homer became very unhappy and completely unenthusiastic about it . On Marge 's advice , he attempted to get a raise on his salary to alleviate his problem , but Al stated that the alley can 't do enough to make that much money unless the business was expanded . Homer then attempted to expand the business by using a shotgun to attract more customers , but this failed . Due to the financial problems caused by the pregnancy , Homer was forced to quit his job at the bowling alley and go back to the power plant . However , Mr. Burns made Homer beg for his job back , and in an attempt to break what is left of Homer 's spirit as punishment for quitting his job earlier , he placed a large plaque in front of Homer 's desk reading : " Don 't forget : you 're here forever " . Homer was once again unhappy at his work , but as with all the Simpson children , when Maggie was born , Homer instantly fell in love with her . Back in the present , Bart and Lisa still do not understand what that has to do with Maggie 's photos . Homer merely mentions that they are in the place where he needs them the most . The scene then cuts to his workplace where all of the photos of Maggie are positioned on the plaque on the wall , which now reads : " Do it for her " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Jennifer Crittenden , and directed by Swinton O. Scott III . This was the first episode Scott directed for the show . Crittenden also made her debut as a writer for The Simpsons in this episode . Crittenden was taking a beginners ' writing program at 20th Century Fox when former The Simpsons showrunner David Mirkin hired her on the show . Crittenden 's only writing experience before that had been as an intern on the Late Show with David Letterman . 20th Century Fox introduced Crittenden to Mirkin , and Mirkin read a script of hers that he liked . When Mirkin first talked to Crittenden , he thought she was a really nice woman who was very mature . Crittenden was only 23 years old at the time , but Mirkin liked her and he hired her . 
 After Homer quits his job at the power plant , he violently tosses his old boss Mr. Burns out of the cart he is driving . Homer then drives across a wooden bridge and tosses a match onto it — within a second the whole bridge is engulfed in flames . Mirkin came up with the joke , and said that the thing with animation is that you can stage almost anything and time it perfectly , something you would not be able to do in live action . He then said that the staff is always excited when the directors come in because they can , for example , make a bridge catch on fire instantly , just in the time of a single shot . As a live @-@ action director , Mirkin said he enjoys the amount of control they have in animation . 
 In the episode , Mr. Burns places a " de @-@ motivational plaque " in Homer 's station that says " Don 't forget : you 're here forever " . Homer then places photos of Maggie around the plaque to alter it into saying " Do it for her " , referring to Maggie . The Simpsons writer George Meyer , who enjoys writing jokes that involve anagrams or any other forms of word play , came up with the idea for this particular joke . The joke is also an homage to Al Jaffee 's Fold @-@ in features in the Mad magazine . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The couch gag is a reference to the James Bond gun barrel sequence . Homer 's flashback to saving the Nuclear Power Plant from freelance terrorists is a reference to Die Hard . Dr. Hibbert 's flashback hairstyle is modeled after Arsenio Hall 's . The family watches Knight Boat , a parody of Knight Rider . Homer spinning around with a bowling ball in his hand before throwing it into the air and exclaiming " I 'm gonna make it after all ! " is reminiscent of the opening of The Mary Tyler Moore Show where Mary throws her hat into the air . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " And Maggie Makes Three " finished 47th in the ratings for the week of January 16 to January 22 , 1995 , with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 3 . The episode was the fourth highest rated show on the Fox network that week , beaten only by Melrose Place , Beverly Hills , 90210 and the Rock ' n ' Roll Skating Championship . 
 Since airing , the episode has received many positive reviews from fans and television critics . One @-@ time Simpsons writer and comedian Ricky Gervais named it his second favorite episode , and said : " Mr. Burns gives [ Homer ] this terrible plaque above his desk that says , ' Don 't forget : You 're here forever . ' It 's about how sometimes things don 't go the way you planned , which is pretty amazing in a cartoon . Homer then puts up all the pictures of Maggie he 's ever taken to strategically cover this horrible thing so it now reads , ' Do it for her . ' It gives me a lump in the throat thinking about it . " Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , said : " A surprisingly traditional episode . The flashback to 1993 seems a bit odd , but this is a good example of a story that doesn 't overly rely on set pieces and confounded expectations for its success . " In a review of the sixth season , Joshua Klein of the Chicago Tribune cited " And Maggie Makes Three " , " Treehouse of Horror V " , " Homer Badman " and " Lisa 's Rival " among his favorite episodes of the season . 
 TV Squad 's Adam Finley said the episode " manages to be both incredibly funny and incredibly touching , both signs of a great Simpsons episode . " He added that " the episode has some great gags in it , but the emotion is very real , too . Homer is not thrilled with the idea of having a baby , and the episode does a wonderful job of showing the dark side of having another mouth to feed . " Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in a review of the sixth season DVD : " Flashback episodes of The Simpsons usually work well , and [ this episode ] is no exception to that rule . Actually , at this point it ’ s one of my favorites , but that ’ s partially because of overexposure to some of the other episodes . In any case , this one has many hilarious moments – such as the scene that explains Homer 's hair loss . " Kevin Wong at PopMatters said the episode is " a touching look at fatherhood " . 
 = HMS Lord Clyde ( 1864 ) = 
 HMS Lord Clyde was the name ship of the wooden @-@ hulled Lord Clyde class of armoured frigates built for the Royal Navy during the 1860s . She and her sister ship , Lord Warden , were the heaviest wooden ships ever built and were also the fastest steaming wooden ships . Lord Clyde was initially assigned to the Channel Fleet in 1866 , but was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1868 . The ship suffered engine problems throughout her career and it needed to be replaced after only two years of service . She rejoined the Mediterranean Fleet in 1871 , but was badly damaged when she ran aground the next year . When Lord Clyde was under repair , her hull was found to be rotten and she was sold for scrap in 1875 
 = = Design and description = = 
 HMS Lord Clyde was 280 feet ( 85 @.@ 3 m ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 58 feet 11 inches ( 18 @.@ 0 m ) . The ship had a draught of 23 feet 9 inches ( 7 @.@ 2 m ) forward and 27 feet 2 inches ( 8 @.@ 3 m ) aft . She displaced 7 @,@ 842 long tons ( 7 @,@ 968 t ) and had a tonnage of 4 @,@ 067 tons burthen . 
 Lord Clyde had a very low centre of gravity which meant that she rolled very badly ; she was said to be the worst roller in the Victorian fleet . This characteristic was so dramatic that when the rolling propensities of ships were compared , it was usual to say " as bad a roller as the Prince Consort " , the Lord <unk> being beyond compare . Lord Clyde generally performed worse than did her sister ship , Lord Warden . In sea trials in 1867 with Bellerophon , Lord Clyde was rolling her gun ports under , while Bellerophon could have fought her main armament in safety . She was , however , very handy and sailed well in all weathers under sail or steam ; her first captain reported that she was " as handy as a frigate " . Her crew consisted of 605 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had a single two @-@ cylinder trunk steam engine , made by Ravenhill and Hodgson , that drove a single propeller using steam provided by nine rectangular boilers . The engine , the largest and most powerful yet built , produced 6 @,@ 064 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 522 kW ) which gave Lord Clyde a speed of 13 @.@ 4 knots ( 24 @.@ 8 km / h ; 15 @.@ 4 mph ) under steam . The severe vibration of the engine , coupled with the flexibility of the wooden hull , caused major problems during the ship 's career . After only two years , the engine was worn out and everything but the condensers and shafting had to be replaced . She carried a maximum of 600 long tons ( 610 t ) of coal . 
 Lord Clyde was ship @-@ rigged with three masts and had a sail area of 31 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 900 m2 ) . To reduce drag , the funnels were telescopic and could be lowered . Her best speed under sail alone was 10 @.@ 5 knots ( 19 @.@ 4 km / h ; 12 @.@ 1 mph ) , nearly the slowest of any British ironclad . The ship holds " the double record of being the largest ship of any type or of any nationality ever to enter Plymouth Sound or Spithead on sail alone " . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ship was initially armed with 24 seven @-@ inch rifled muzzle @-@ loading ( RML ) guns . Four pairs of guns were positioned as fore and aft chase guns on the upper and main decks . The remaining 16 guns were mounted on the broadside amidships . The seven @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) gun weighed 6 @.@ 5 long tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) and fired a 112 @-@ pound ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) shell that was able penetrate 7 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) of armour . 
 Lord Clyde 's original armament was replaced during her 1870 refit with a pair of RML nine @-@ inch guns and 14 RML eight @-@ inch guns ; she only retained a pair of her original seven @-@ inch guns . The latter guns remained in position as forward chase guns on the main deck ; one of the nine @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) guns became the chase gun on the upper deck and the other replaced the pair of seven @-@ inch aft chase guns on the main deck . Also on the upper deck were a pair of eight @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns on the broadside and the remaining 12 eight @-@ inch guns were mounted on the main deck on the broadside amidships . 
 The shell of the nine @-@ inch gun weighed 254 pounds ( 115 @.@ 2 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 12 long tons ( 12 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 420 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was rated with the ability to penetrate 11 @.@ 3 inches ( 287 mm ) of wrought @-@ iron armour . The eight @-@ inch gun weighed nine long tons ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) ; it fired a 175 @-@ pound ( 79 @.@ 4 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 410 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate 9 @.@ 6 inches ( 244 mm ) of armour . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The entire side of Lord Clyde 's hull , except for the side of the upper deck , was protected by wrought @-@ iron armour that tapered from 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) at the ends to 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 140 mm ) amidships . It extended 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) below the waterline . The forward chase guns on the upper deck were protected by 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch armour plates on the sides of the hull and a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch transverse bulkhead to their rear protected them from raking fire . The armour was backed by 30 inches ( 762 mm ) of oak and the 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) iron skin of the ship . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Lord Clyde , named after the recently deceased Field Marshal Colin Campbell , 1st Baron Clyde , was ordered on 3 July 1863 from Pembroke Naval Dockyard . She was laid down on 29 September 1863 and launched on 13 October 1864 . The ship was commissioned in June 1866 to run her sea trials and completed on 15 September , for the cost of £ 285 @,@ 750 or £ 294 @,@ 481 , exclusive of armament . 
 Commanded by Captain Roderick Dew , the ship was initially assigned to the Channel Fleet where she spent three months as temporary flagship before she was transferred to the Mediterranean in 1868 . Lord Clyde made one cruise with the Mediterranean Fleet during which she fractured her steel <unk> in a squall . Her engines continued to deteriorate and they were condemned as no longer safe to use by the fleet engineer when she arrived in Naples . The ship was sent to the Malta Dockyard under sail for repair , but they could only make temporary repairs that would enable her to reach home . 
 Upon arrival at Plymouth , Lord Clyde was paid off and a new engine was built for her at Devonport Dockyard . In addition , her four @-@ bladed propeller was replaced by a lighter , two @-@ bladed propeller with less drag and the ship was rearmed . She remained in reserve until 1871 when she recommissioned under the command of Captain John <unk> , an officer who had won the Victoria Cross during the Crimean War of 1854 – 55 . Lord Clyde rejoined the Mediterranean Fleet ; six months after her arrival , she ran aground herself whilst attempting to rescue a British steamship that had gone aground off the island of Pantellaria . Attempts to lighten the ship enough to float her off were futile and she remained stuck fast taking damage from wave action that strained her back and wrenched off her sternpost , rudder post and rudder . Lord Warden was able to pull her off and tow her to be repaired at Malta where the dockyard estimated repairs would take six months . <unk> and his navigator were convicted during their court @-@ martial and neither ever served at sea again . 
 The Admiralty ordered that Lord Clyde be only repaired enough to allow for a passage home ; that required six months of work and the ship was escorted back to Plymouth by the ironclad Defence . She was again paid off upon arrival and her engines and boilers were removed to allow for her hull to be thoroughly inspected . The dockworkers found that her entire hull was colonized by a fungus , partly because unseasoned wood had been used in the ship 's construction , and they spent the next three years attempting to kill the fungus and stop the continuing deterioration . All efforts failed and Lord Clyde was sold for scrap before she lost all value in 1875 for £ 3 @,@ 730 . 
 = David Lucas ( composer ) = 
 David Lucas ( born David Helfman April 21 , 1937 ) is an American rock and roll composer , singer , and music producer . He has written a number of well @-@ known commercial jingles , such as AT & T 's " Reach Out and Touch Someone . " In 1981 , he received a Clio Award for composing the music to Pepsi 's " Catch That Pepsi Spirit . " As a record producer , he worked with many new artists such as Blue Öyster Cult . On the 1976 Blue Öyster Cult song " Don 't Fear the Reaper " which he co @-@ produced , Lucas sang backup vocals and came up with the idea for using a cowbell , which became a catchphrase in 2000 when it was parodied by Christopher Walken in the " More cowbell " skit on Saturday Night Live . In June 2011 , Lucas was inducted into Buffalo 's Music Hall of Fame . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1940s – 1960s ) = = = 
 Lucas was born David Helfman on April 21 , 1937 in Buffalo , New York . By the age of four , he was singing with his parents in the Buffalo area , both at venues and on local radio . He briefly attended Bennett High School in Buffalo , where he sang in the choir , and then in 1951 transferred to Miami Beach Senior High School , graduating in 1955 . 
 At the age of nineteen , Lucas started promoting records , choosing artists such as the young Paul Anka , Frankie Avalon , Sam Cooke , and The Everly Brothers , and encouraging local DJs to play their music . He continued with record promotion until he was drafted into the United States Army , after which he moved to Miami Beach , where he was a social director and performer at the Attache Hotel . He made ends meet by selling vacuum cleaners during the day , and attending night school to learn about mutual funds . While in Miami , he met jazz drummer and bandleader Buddy Rich , and joined him for a world tour , after which Lucas moved to Los Angeles , where he worked as a songwriter and producer . In Las Vegas , he sang at the Sahara Hotel , where he was noticed by popular singer Doris Day , who was impressed , and signed Lucas to her record label , <unk> Records . Lucas then recorded " So Until I See You " , a song by composer Al Lerner which became the closing theme for Jack Paar 's The Tonight Show . 
 Lucas then moved to New York City where he took various odd jobs , including becoming a sound engineer for his cousin , jazz musician and writer Don Elliott . He worked with artists such as Laura Nyro , Ravi Shankar ( produced by Timothy Leary ) , Tim Rose , Cass Elliot , Janis Ian , Jimmy Smith , Bill Evans , Mel Tormé , and Terry Gibbs . In 1964 he joined a quintet formed by Dave Lambert , " Lambert and Co . " This quintet , though it never recorded any albums , was notable because it became the subject of a 15 @-@ minute documentary by D. A. Pennebaker ( later famous for working with Bob Dylan ) , called Audition at RCA . The scenes in the documentary were some of the last images recorded of Lambert , who , in 1966 , was killed in an auto accident . 
 = = = Jingle writer ( 1960s – 1990s ) = = = 
 In the late 1960s , Lucas began writing his own commercial jingle melodies , such as Macleans Toothpaste . He eventually passed off his engineer job to Jay Messina , and opened his own company , David Lucas Associates , to write jingles full @-@ time . In 1969 , Quincy Jones introduced Lucas to Cy Coleman , who signed him to Coleman 's Notable Music Publishing Company . 
 Along with writing jingles , Lucas continued with other projects as well . He was hired by Ahmet Ertegun as musical director for the first rock and roll musical , Tom Sankey 's The Golden Screw , which played at the Provincetown Playhouse and won the 1967 Obie Award for Sankey 's concept , writing , and performing . Lucas used a young tape <unk> from Gotham Studios named Walter Carlos who had an early Moog synthesizer to compose music for William Claxton 's film Basic Black , a work that is credited as the first " fashion video " and is in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art in New York . He produced the first recordings of the blues band Raven , enabling them to secure a contract with Columbia Records . He composed the songs " Tell Me a Story " and " Blood " for The Magic Garden of Stanley Sweetheart ( the first movie by actor Don Johnson ) and also composed the theme music for the 1970s children 's series , Jabberwocky , a show which remained in syndication for decades . 
 In 1973 , Lucas formed a new partnership with Tom McFaul , and they took an unusual step for jingle writers , founding their own studio . Situated in an old spice warehouse , they called it the Warehouse Recording Studio , and it hosted such artists as Paul McCartney and Charlie Brown . They employed a dozen people , and Lucas composed and produced thousands of jingles for many national brands , and McFaul created the " Meow " theme for Meow Mix . Notable jingles Lucas wrote included AT & T 's " Reach Out and Touch Someone " ; Pepsi 's " Catch That Pepsi Spirit " and " Pepsi 's got your taste for life " ; " You look like you just heard from Dean Witter " ; Maxwell House " Coffee Made Your Way " ; Coca Cola 's " You Can 't Beat The Feeling " ( co @-@ written with Jayne <unk> ) ; " Give Your Cold To <unk> " ; " G.E. We Bring Good Things To Life , " ; " Lipton puts Summer on Ice " ; and a jingle for Mercury Cougar . In 1979 , New York Magazine referred to Lucas and McFaul as " Jingle Giants " , two out of a handful of jingle writers , saying , " Two out of three major commercial jingles are written by the elite group . " 
 = = = Blue Öyster Cult ( 1970s ) = = = 
 In 1971 , Lucas produced a four @-@ song demo for the band Stalk @-@ Forrest , which led to them being signed by Columbia 's Clive Davis as Blue Öyster Cult . Lucas produced their first album at his Warehouse studio , and later as music producer for their 1976 album Agents of Fortune , including the song , " Don 't Fear the Reaper " . " Reaper " became a huge hit , and is listed at number 405 on Rolling Stone 's list of the top 500 songs of all time . In it , Lucas sang background vocals and came up with the idea and played the cowbell . This choice became legendary when it was parodied by Christopher Walken in a Saturday Night Live " More cowbell " comedy sketch on April 8 , 2000 . In 1977 Lucas produced Spectres which included the hit Godzilla . 
 = = = Current projects ( 1990s – present ) = = = 
 In 1998 , Lucas sold The Warehouse , which was subsequently sold to Wyclef Jean . Lucas moved back to Miami where he built a studio and is continuing to write songs and jingles . 
 In 2010 , Lucas wrote the song " Inside my Heart " , which was sung by actress Kyra Sedgwick for The Miracle Project of Hollywood to benefit autism . 
 Also an avid sailor , Lucas once had a yacht built by David Macfarlane , Alden <unk> , now the president of <unk> , Sisu was used in the company 's advertisements . In 1985 , Lucas refined a recipe of his grandfather 's and developed a brand of cocktail mix , " Bob 's No Problem , Bloody Mary maker " . The brand launched nationally in 2010 . 
 Lucas has four grown children . Lisa Lucas , a well @-@ known and award @-@ nominated child actress in the 1970s , played " Addie Mills " in several CBS holiday specials , and became a journalist as an adult . Jason Lucas is a composer and producer in Nashville , Cristopher Lucas is a composer and performer in Idaho , and David Lucas 's youngest daughter Lindsay Lucas is a singer and performer in Boston , who attended Berklee College of Music . He is also working on a musical with co @-@ writer Jayne <unk> , a writer / singer from Lucas / McFaul in the 1980s . 
 According to his website , Lucas spends a great deal of time in Portland Jamaica , sailing and working on environmental projects , such as trying to save <unk> Beach for the local <unk> <unk> He operated the legendary Frenchman 's Cove resort for several years in the ' 90 's . He also joined his friend , Frank Clark , in sustaining the beauty of the glorious " Reach Falls " and continues to support the revival of Portland Parrish . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Lucas has won Clio awards for his composing music for commercials for AT & T ( 1980 , Best Television / Cinema ) , Pepsi Cola 's " Catch that Pepsi Spirit " ( 1981 , U.S. Radio , Clio Winner ) , and Coca @-@ Cola 's " Masquerade on Skis " ( Television / Cinema , Special Citation , 1969 ) . In 2010 , Lucas was recognized at the 35th annual Friends of Old Time Radio Convention , with an award for his contributions to the Golden Age of Radio . In June 2011 , Lucas was inducted into the Buffalo , New York Music Hall of Fame . 
 = Frederick Stovin = 
 General Sir Frederick Stovin GCB KCMG ( 1783 – 16 August 1865 ) was a British Army officer who served throughout the Napoleonic Wars and the War of 1812 . After the end of the wars , he commanded colonial garrisons and served in administrative roles in Ireland , before retiring with the rank of colonel to take up a position at court as a Groom in Waiting under Queen Victoria . In retirement , he continued to rise through the ranks of general officers by seniority , dying a full general . 
 He originally joined the army as an ensign in the 52nd Foot in 1800 , and saw active service the same year in Spain . He later acquired a captaincy in the 28th Foot in 1803 ; he saw service in Germany and at the Battle of Copenhagen with the 28th , and then served on the staff under Sir John Moore until the Battle of Corunna . He was later an aide to General Alexander Mackenzie @-@ Fraser , then to General Thomas Picton , and a divisional adjutant through the later stages of the Peninsular War . In 1814 – 15 he served in the War of 1812 , as a staff officer with the expedition sent to New Orleans , and had he not been detained by prosecuting at a court @-@ martial , he would have served at the Battle of Waterloo . 
 After the war , he commanded the 92nd Gordon Highlanders at Jamaica — where he scandalised his regiment by ordering them to adopt trousers instead of the kilt — and the 90th Light Infantry in the Ionian Islands , before retiring from active duty in 1829 . He then held a number of administrative roles in Ireland , including the state secretary to the Lord @-@ Lieutenant and the commissioner of police in Ulster , and after the accession of Queen Victoria in 1837 became a palace courtier . His final military role was the ( ceremonial ) colonelcy of the 83rd ( County of Dublin ) Regiment , which he held from 1848 until his death . 
 = = Family and early career = = 
 Stovin was born at Whitgift , in the East Riding of Yorkshire , the son of James Stovin . He was the youngest son of a large family , by his father 's second marriage ; his eldest half @-@ brother , James , later became a clergyman , a fellow of Peterhouse , Cambridge and a magistrate in Yorkshire , whilst the younger half @-@ brother , Richard , would also join the army , rising to the rank of lieutenant @-@ general . 
 Stovin joined the army at the age of seventeen , when he was commissioned as an ensign in the 52nd Foot on 22 March 1800 . He served with the regiment in the expedition to Ferrol , and purchased promotion to lieutenant on 10 January 1801 , he purchased a captaincy in the 62nd Foot on 20 November 1802 , giving him command of a company . He was put on half @-@ pay after the Peace of Amiens , but on 19 July 1803 took a captaincy in the 28th Foot . 
 Stovin served with the 28th during garrison duties in Ireland , and in the brief German expedition of 1805 , before seeing service at the Battle of Copenhagen in 1807 . He served under Sir John Moore in Sweden and then in Spain , in the lead @-@ up to the Battle of Corunna . In 1809 he was the aide @-@ de @-@ camp to General Alexander Mackenzie @-@ Fraser in the Walcheren expedition , then served at Gibraltar and in southern Spain with the 28th , returning to England in September 1810 . 
 He briefly commanded the regimental depot , before returning to the peninsula in 1811 as General Thomas Picton 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp , and later assistant adjutant @-@ general ( AAG ) to Picton 's 3rd Division , he received a majority by brevet on 28 April 1812 , and a brevet lieutenant @-@ colonelcy on 26 August 1813 . He held the position of AAG until the end of the Peninsular War in 1814 , and received the Gold Cross with two clasps for his services . When an amphibious force was sent to North America in 1814 during the War of 1812 , Stovin was appointed its deputy adjutant @-@ general ; he was wounded at the Battle of New Orleans . He prosecuted the case of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Thomas Mullins when the force returned to the United Kingdom — Mullins , commanding the 44th Foot , had been charged with neglecting orders during the battle . As a result , although he had been assigned to Picton 's staff , he missed the opportunity to serve with him in the Waterloo Campaign . 
 Stovin was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath on 2 January 1815 when the order was reorganised , and received the accolade and insignia of the order from the Prince Regent at Carlton House on 8 June . He married Anne Sitwell , daughter of Sir Sitwell Sitwell , 1st Baronet , on 4 October that year ; the two would remain married for forty years , until Anne 's death in 1856 , but had no children . Unusually , Anne was a relative of his by marriage ; Stovin 's sister Sarah Caroline had married Sir Sitwell after his first wife 's death , making Stovin 's new wife his step @-@ niece . 
 = = Regimental command = = 
 He received regimental promotion to major in the 28th Foot on 9 May 1816 . The regiment moved to a garrison posting in the Ionian islands in 1819 , and his time in the islands saw him command a force which put down a local rising on Santa Maura . On 2 September 1819 he purchased the substantive rank of lieutenant @-@ colonel and command of the 92nd Gordon Highlanders . His tenure at the 92nd was short and contentious ; since it was garrisoned in Jamaica , he did not actually join the regiment until October 1820 , and then scandalised his officers and men by his approach to regimental traditions . He appeared on parade in a cocked hat rather than the conventional highland bonnet , and attempted to order the regiment to wear trousers rather than the kilt . The Duke of York quickly arranged for his transfer to a less sensitive role , and he was transferred to command the 90th Light Infantry , a Lowland — and safely <unk> — regiment , on 9 August 1821 . The 90th were in the Ionian Islands , where Stovin had been posted some years earlier , but his second tour was substantially quieter ; he saw no further active service before he retired from the 90th on half @-@ pay on 23 April 1829 . For his services there , he was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George . 
 = = Ireland = = 
 He was appointed as the military secretary to Sir John Byng , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Ireland , and in July 1831 became the State Secretary to the Marquess of Anglesey , the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland . He was promoted to colonel on 22 July 1830 . In 1834 he became the Inspector @-@ General of Police in Ulster , but was passed over for the position of Inspector @-@ General of the Irish constabulary in 1836 ; the possibility of his appointment to the latter post had caused some concern among Irish Tories , who felt he was too critical of the Orange Order . He was later rumoured to be a candidate for the governorship of Dominica , in the West Indies , though this post does not seem to have materialised . In 1838 he was ordered to Canada to act as adjutant @-@ general for the force garrisoned there after the Rebellions of 1837 . When Lord Hill was retiring from the post of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Forces in 1839 , Anglesey was suggested as a replacement to succeed him , although he eventually turned down the job ; had he taken it up , Stovin was widely expected to become his personal secretary , the same capacity he had served in Dublin . 
 = = Royal service = = 
 On the accession of Queen Victoria , he took up roles in the Royal Household , becoming a groom @-@ in @-@ waiting on 27 July 1837 , and taking part in the coronation procession the following year . He still retained his army commission , and progressed steadily in rank through his retirement , becoming a major @-@ general on 23 November 1841 , lieutenant @-@ general on 11 November 1851 , and full general on 14 August 1859 ; on 1 September 1848 , he took the colonelcy of the 83rd ( County of Dublin ) Regiment of Foot . In 1855 , he accompanied the young Prince Alfred to Geneva to supervise his studies there . In 1858 he was appointed a member of the Royal Commission set up to look into the functioning of the militia . He resigned his role as groom in waiting on 18 November 1859 , because of ill @-@ health ; he was appointed an extra groom in waiting on 28 March 1860 , and promoted Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath on 18 May 1860 . 
 Stovin died on 16 August 1865 , at St James 's Palace , London . 
 = Chartered Institute of Public Relations = 
 The Chartered Institute of Public Relations ( CIPR ) is a professional body in the United Kingdom for public relations practitioners . Originally founded as the Institute for Public Relations in 1948 , CIPR was awarded Chartered status by the Privy Council of the United Kingdom in 2005 and added " Chartered " to its name . As of late 2012 , CIPR had 10 @,@ 095 members . The association provides training and education , publishes a code of conduct and hosts awards and events . It is governed by an executive board and a President that is elected each year . 
 = = History = = 
 Discussions at the first Public Relations Officers conference in November 1946 led to the foundation of the Institute of Public Relations ( IPR ) in February 1948 . It established a Professional Practices committee in 1956 and incorporated in 1962 . The Institute of Public Relations first discussed attaining chartered status , a professional recognition in the United Kingdom , with the Privy Council in 1956 . The Privy Council said that in order to be awarded chartered status , the organisation would have " adopt and publish professional ethical standards relevant to the practice of public relations and to maintain procedures for the regulation of members ' professional conduct and discipline . " The Institute 's first code of conduct was published seven years later in 1963 . As of 2003 few members have been expelled for breaches in the code . 
 To support its bid for chartered status , IPR created a joint report with the Department of Trade and Industry in 2003 based on a survey of 812 professionals . The following year the Privy Council told IPR it needed to do more for the public good and professional development to qualify . By 2005 , the privy council decided that IPR and its members act in a way that contributes to the public good and granted it chartered status . IPR added " Chartered " to its name . An analysis in the Journal of Communication Management in 2005 said that chartered status was needed in a time where public trust in businesses , institutions and governments was decreasing , but noted CIPR 's limited power to enforce ethics among its members . 
 In 2009 CIPR provided an official response to a report by the Public Administration Select Committee 's ( <unk> ) that suggested the creation of a new government entity to oversee and regulate lobbyists . The report suggested the creation of a requirement for lobbyists to register themselves and record their activities . CIPR 's position was that regulation would complement CIPR 's code of ethics , but that it was more important to regulate members of the House of Lords that were being lobbied to . CIPR also said that lobbying regulation should focus on regulating individuals instead of companies . 
 CIPR changed its membership structure in 2011 . Affiliate @-@ level memberships were removed and the requirement for six years of experience to attain full membership status was reduced to two . That same year , CIPR responded to a report by the UK 's Intellectual Property Office . CIPR felt that copyright policy decisions were prioritizing commercial interests over the public good . They expressed concern that the Newspaper Licensing Agency ( NLA ) was both the most popular provider of newspaper clippings to public relations professionals in the UK and the organization that enforces the intellectual property rights of newspapers . 
 In December 2011 the Bureau of Investigative Journalism shot a covert video interview with Bell Pottinger executives , in which the executives referred to their " dark arts " for manipulating Wikipedia entries for their clients . The following month CIPR announced it would work with the Wikipedia community to create guidance for public relations professionals on how to participate ethically on Wikipedia . CIPR 's guidance was made available for editing by the Wikipedia community and published in June 2012 . According to PRWeek and <unk> Magazine the most important aspect of CIPR 's guidance is that PR professionals not directly edit Wikipedia articles about their clients or employers . Instead , CIPR recommends they offer content and suggestions to the Wikipedia community . 
 In July 2013 , CIPR joined The Public Relations Consultants Association and the Association of Professional Political Consultants in criticizing the UK government 's definition of a lobbyist . CIPR 's Director of Policy said the definition of lobbying was so narrow it would be " self @-@ defeating " because few lobbyists would be defined as one . CIPR and other public relations trade associations support a registrar for lobbyists , though UK government estimates the cost of a registrar to be 500 @,@ 000 pounds its first year and 200 @,@ 000 every year thereafter . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The Chartered Institute of Public Relations is governed by a 50 @-@ member Council that meets four times a year and an Executive Board that meets every six weeks . A President is elected each year that is usually supported by their predecessor . CIPR has six membership grades and 15 regional groups . CIPR had approximately 3 @,@ 900 members in 1999 , 7 @,@ 000 by 2002 , and 7 @,@ 800 by 2004 . By the end of 2012 , CIPR had 10 @,@ 095 members . Prior to 1999 , applications for membership were processed over six weeks , before being ratified to an immediate acceptance system . CIPR is a member of the European PR Federation and a founding member of the Global Alliance for Public Relations and Communications Management . CIPR membership is bestowed in two categories : Associate CIPR member for new entrants to the field and full membership for those with at least two years of experience . It also has a Government Affairs Group dedicated to lobbyists . 
 = = Services = = 
 CIPR started hosting training and certification programmes in 1980 . By 1998 it awarded 5 @,@ 000 certificates and 3 @,@ 000 diplomas . CIPR publishes a code of conduct that encourages members to " deal honestly and fairly " with clients , employers , business partners and the public . The code sets standards in personal conduct , integrity and confidentiality . Violations in its code are reported to the Professional Practices Committee , which may pass cases on to the Disciplinary Committee for sanctions . 
 The Institute hosts the Excellence Awards and the <unk> awards . The Excellence Awards are bestowed in 28 categories based on a scoring of a campaign in four categories : planning , creativity , measurement and evaluation . CIPR maintains a public database of members , information on legislation affecting public relations , case studies , and a career guide . 
 The organization also hosts networking , award and educational events . PR professionals don 't have to be a member to attend events or training . In 2003 , 2 @,@ 000 non @-@ members attended the organization 's training and 7 @,@ 000 non @-@ members attended events . CIPR has published Public Relations from 1952 to 1988 and IPR Newsletter intermittently from 1956 to 1983 , as well as other publications . It also publishes a series of books with case studies and tips from CIPR award @-@ winners called the " PR in practice series . " 
 = Drowned God = 
 Drowned God : Conspiracy of the Ages is a 1996 science fiction adventure game developed by Epic Multimedia Group and published by Inscape . The game propounds the conspiracy theory that all of human history is a lie and the human race 's development and evolution were aided by extra @-@ terrestrials . The player attempts to uncover the truth through the course of the game by traveling to a variety of different worlds , interacting with historical and fictional characters , and solving puzzles . 
 Drowned God is based on a forged manuscript written by Harry Horse in 1983 . After facing legal trouble and fines when he attempted to sell the text , Horse shelved it until playing Myst and 7th Guest in the mid @-@ 1990s , whereupon he decided a first person adventure game would be the best way to tell the manuscript 's story . 
 Producer Algy Williams hired a team of multimedia artists and programmers to help Horse develop Drowned God . Upon its release , the game sold well , but quickly faded in popularity due to bugs and a lack of patches . Drowned God 's concept and visuals were widely praised , while its gameplay , audio , and puzzles received more varied responses . A planned sequel never came to fruition . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Drowned God 's concept centers around the idea that human history has been manipulated to cover up certain facts . The true history , according to the game , is that aliens from the Orion area of space seeded humanity on Earth thousands of years ago and have since guided its development . An ancient , highly developed civilization was lost millennia ago in the Great Flood . The library of Alexandria housed much of what game writer Harry Horse called " forbidden knowledge " before it was destroyed . The Knights Templar , whose membership included luminaries such as Leonardo da Vinci and Isaac Newton , preserved the information for centuries . In the 20th century , the Philadelphia Experiment opened a gateway into another dimension , first freeing the aliens Horse refers to as " the Legion " . An independent government group spent the subsequent decades in contact with the aliens following the Roswell UFO incident . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game 's plot begins in a chamber containing the Bequest Globe , a device which the player has recently inherited . The Globe is a giant brass cylinder full of gears , fronted by a clock face made of sliding and rotating plates comprising twenty @-@ two Roman numerals , which represent the Major Arcana , with the Jewish Kabbalah in its center . A voice welcomes the player and tells them the Globe is a gift , then explains that the player must unlock the secret of the drowned god . 
 The player initially must enter their name into the device , which then displays a series of past lives the player has lived . The name is converted into its numerological equivalent . Above and below the central chamber are two other areas , called Kether and Malchut , respectively , each of which houses a display screen with a mask @-@ like face that provides the player with information about the next task . The motivations of the two organizations represented by the faces are murky , although it becomes clear they are acting in opposition to each other . Both masks refer to the player by their assigned number . 
 The player must enter four different worlds through the Bequest Globe , each of which is an amalgamation of historical and fantastical elements and named after one of the <unk> on the kabbalistic Tree of Life . The player seeks to recover four lost artifacts : the Rod of Osiris , the Holy Grail , the Philosopher 's Stone , and the Ark of the Covenant . According to Horse , " The relics you 're searching for are not what you think they are " . The first world , <unk> , includes aspects of Arthurian legend , including Morgan Le Fey and the Knights Templar , as well as Stonehenge . The second , Chesed , features Aztec ruins and a submarine interior . The third , Din , centers around an underground transit system , a steampunk carnival , and a mechanical maze . The final world , <unk> , takes place outside Area 51 . 
 Throughout the game , the player finds and uses Tarot cards to unlock new areas and gain more information about the true history of the world . Upon returning to the Bequest Globe between worlds , the player sees the Roman numerals in its display light up in relation to the cards that have been recovered . After recovering three of the lost artifacts , the player fails to recover the last one , the Ark of the Covenant , which takes the form of a nuclear warhead . The player is able to choose one of three endings , depending on whether they decide to enter a final doorway in the chambers of one of the two opposing factions represented by Kether and Malchut , or enter a new central chamber via the Bequest Globe . 
 Choosing either of the two doors results in an ending in which the player is trapped in a dystopian world : either Kether 's , a technological police state , or Malchut 's , a society of forced genetic manipulation . Both have ominous men in black overseeing the proceedings . If the player instead chooses to open the central chamber , a scene with a group of grey aliens approaching is briefly shown , wherein they say , " We are coming , for we are Legion . " All three options lead to the same ending credits , which feature a voice @-@ over describing the murder of Osiris . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Drowned God uses a point @-@ and @-@ click interface and first person perspective typical of games similar to Myst of the mid- to late @-@ 1990s . The player navigates and interacts with the game world by clicking the mouse on different parts of the screen . The mouse cursor changes shape depending on the action clicking will perform : an arrow for moving to another location , a face with an arrow to pick up or place Tarot cards , and an Eye of Providence for activating or interacting with objects in the environment . Frequent cutscenes provide background information and advance the storyline . 
 The game is filled with a variety of puzzles that must be solved to advance the story . These include memory games and mazes . Others involve competing against a computer @-@ controlled opponent , completing a sequence in a limited number of moves , operating mechanisms , or using an inventory item . Puzzles do not all have to be completed in a precise order ; there is some flexibility in terms of being able to move through game areas and work on different challenges . 
 One of the best received puzzles in the game involves arranging the pieces of a dialogue between the sculpted heads of Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein . The player listens to the randomly ordered statements made by each head , then decides how to chronologically arrange the statements to form a coherent conversation based on context . 
 = = Development = = 
 Harry Horse conceived the game 's ancient <unk> conspiracy . Horse had previously written several children 's books and received the Scottish Arts Council Writer of the Year award for his 1983 book , The <unk> : My Journey with the Loch Ness Monster . He began forging documents that same year as a way to earn money . The story which became the basis for Drowned God was originally a phony manuscript Horse wrote in 1983 , ostensibly describing events after the destruction of the lost city of Atlantis . The manuscript , dated 1846 , was said to have been written by the English poet Richard Horne , who shares Horse 's birth name . Horse 's initiation into the concept of an alternate history came in the early 1980s , when he first encountered professor Ian <unk> , who explained to him that information from the Kabbalah and ancient Jewish texts " hide and <unk> the secret " , namely , human evolution was aided by extraterrestrial intelligence . According to Horse , <unk> believed the Ark of the Covenant was a nuclear device , and that humans and pigs share compatible genes . 
 Initially , experts determined the manuscript was genuine , as the date Horse picked matched the time period Horne had been alive and active , and the manuscript 's topics matched the poet 's interests . Horse had written the manuscript without knowing any of these details . After his hoax was discovered , Horse held onto the text for the next decade , until he played Myst and 7th Guest and decided the point @-@ and @-@ click adventure genre was a good match for his conspiracy theory @-@ inspired ideas . He later said that while the story of Myst did not interest him , the game 's artwork and the sense of immersion inspired him to immediately begin working on Drowned God in 1994 . 
 The game was originally commissioned by a division of Time Warner and was later taken over by Inscape when that division closed . Horse worked with Inigo <unk> and Anthony <unk> for six months designing the game , then cooperated with the game 's artists and modelers until the project 's completion . The game 's producer , Algy Williams , hired puzzle expert Chris <unk> , whose output he called " fiendishly difficult " , to design the game 's puzzles together with John Morris . Williams also employed sculptor Greg Boulton , who had previously worked on the Peter Gabriel video " Sledgehammer " . Drowned God 's music was written and performed by an ambient music duo operating under the name <unk> . William S. Burroughs was originally scheduled to narrate the game , but died just before he could begin recording . <unk> and Williams later founded the company Babel Media , which specializes in video game localization . 
 = = Release = = 
 Drowned God was released on October 31 , 1996 for the Windows 95 operating system . In its first two weeks , it sold 34 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It was one of the top ten best @-@ selling video games in United States during the first month after its release , but bugs and poor support from the developers caused it to fall out of favor with gamers by December . By February 1998 , the game had sold over 60 @,@ 000 copies . Around the time of the game 's release , Horse stated that its story was incomplete , and that the rest of the story would be revealed in a sequel called <unk> , planned to center around Area 51 . However , he killed himself a decade after the game 's release , and no sequel was ever completed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Drowned God received mixed to positive reviews , with many critics complimenting the game 's ideas and imagery while giving a less favorable response to its audio , puzzles , and execution . GameSpot reviewer Vince Broady wrote that the game sounded very promising , and might " also raise awareness of the thread of deception that runs throughout recorded history . " Steve Ramsey of Quandary said Drowned God presented its massive assortment of conspiracy theories entertainingly . Ray Ivey of Just Adventure called Drowned God " the strangest , creepiest , most psychedelic adventure game I 've yet to come across . " Although Ivey did not understand much of the game , he found it enjoyable , because " it made sense to the game 's characters and creators . " 
 T. Liam McDonald of PC Gamer wrote that he was " fascinated by the strong sense of style and the intellectual approach to terrific subject matter " . Steven Levy and Patricia King of Newsweek found the game to be " richly detailed and original " . In 2012 , Andy Hughes of Topless Robot put the game at the top of his list of " 9 Surprising Literary References In Videogames " . Hughes wrote that the game was one that could be played from start to finish " without having any idea what the hell 's going on " , noting its references to a wide variety of subjects , including Egyptian mythology , The Man in the Iron Mask , and the Bermuda Triangle . 
 Boardy complimented the graphics , writing , " Drowned God is loaded with freaky animations and unexpected visual twists " . Ramsey praised the visuals and the audio , saying both contributed to the game 's " shadowy and secretive feelings " . His one significant criticism was that dialogue was difficult to hear , with no option to display text for it . Regarding the game 's audio aspect , Boardy said , " The soundtrack is less impressive , primarily because of overuse : The background effects drone on mercilessly , and many of the game 's narratives ( which are universally well @-@ written and finely acted ) must be listened to over and over again . " 
 The puzzles , according to Boardy , were of uneven quality . He called some " hopelessly difficult " and others extremely derivative . By contrast he considered the Albert Einstein and Isaac Newton dialogue puzzle " brilliant " , but said , " Ideas as original as Horse 's call for puzzles to match , not rehashes of things we 've seen far too many times already . " Ramsey thought the puzzles were challenging but not overly difficult , arguing " on almost every occasion I felt that I was making progress , and I never felt bogged down and hopelessly lost . " He considered the puzzles to be mostly well @-@ integrated , and found those that were not did not detract from his enjoyment . Ivey remarked , " For puzzle lovers , Drowned God is a treasure trove . ... This collection of tricky <unk> are challenging and frequently innovative . " 
 Boardy panned the navigation for being confusing , counter @-@ intuitive , and requiring the player to revisit locations multiple times . He concluded his review by saying , " The net effect is that the story — which made this game so intriguing in the first place — is almost totally lost , and that is a shame . " GameSpot considered the game one of the most disappointing of 1996 in their annual recap , writing " the great premise is buried like the mysteries of the ages themselves under a mediocre Myst clone " . Bob Strauss of Entertainment Weekly opined that the game tried to be too many things , and quipped , " the result is a game so obscure , you 'd be better off perusing something more comprehensible — like the collected works of Zoroaster . " Mark Reece and Brooke Adams of Deseret News also had mixed feelings about the game , calling it both " clever and deep " and " frustrating and difficult " . McDonald wrote that he was " frustrated by the lack of good game play . " Hughes called the pace of the game and its puzzles both " tedious " and " ponderous " , but said it " had ambition out the genetically modified ears . " 
 = Ross Youngs = 
 Royce Middlebrook " Ross " Youngs ( April 10 , 1897 – October 22 , 1927 ) was a professional baseball player . Nicknamed " Pep " , he played ten seasons in Major League Baseball for the New York Giants from 1917 through 1926 , playing right field almost exclusively . Youngs was a part of the Giants teams that won four consecutive National League pennants and the 1921 and 1922 World Series . 
 From Shiner , Texas , Youngs excelled at baseball and American football at the West Texas Military Institute . After beginning his professional career in minor league baseball , the Giants signed him in 1916 . Youngs had a lifetime .322 batting average with the Giants and batted over .300 nine times in his career , including eight consecutive seasons . His career was cut short by illness , however , as he died at the age of 30 of Bright 's disease . 
 Known for his defense and hitting , he was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1972 by the Veterans Committee . His election was not without controversy , however , as the Veterans Committee consisted of his former teammates , and charges of cronyism were leveled against the Veterans Committee . 
 = = Early life and minor leagues = = 
 Youngs was born in Shiner , Texas , the second of three children , all sons . His father was a railroad worker , but suffered disability and moved his family to San Antonio where he worked as a rancher . Youngs ' mother ran a small hotel in San Antonio and Youngs had a paper route . 
 Youngs was educated at West Texas Military Institute . He received offers for scholarships to play college football but passed on these , as he preferred baseball . He made his professional baseball debut for the Austin Senators of the Texas League in 1914 . Appearing in 17 games , he hit just <unk> for the class @-@ B Senators and , in 1915 , found himself down in the Class @-@ D leagues , playing for Brenham of the Middle Texas League and the Waxahachie Athletics of the Central Texas League ; both leagues disbanded during the season . In 1916 , playing in the infield for the Sherman Lions of the Class @-@ D Western Association , he hit .362 as a switch @-@ hitter , drawing the attention of the New York Giants , who purchased his contract in August for $ 2 @,@ 000 ( $ 43 @,@ 492 in current dollar terms ) . 
 = = New York Giants = = 
 Youngs reported to spring training in Marlin , Texas with the Giants in 1917 . They initially assigned him to the Rochester Hustlers , a team in the International League with which the Giants had a working relationship . Giants manager John McGraw told Mickey Doolan , the manager of the Hustlers , " I 'm giving you one of the greatest players I 've ever seen . Play him in the outfield . If anything happens to him , I 'm holding you responsible . " In 140 games with Rochester , Youngs hit .356 , earning himself a late @-@ season promotion to the big league club . McGraw gave Youngs the nickname " Pep " due to his hustle and soon began to groom Youngs to become his successor as Giants ' manager . 
 Youngs made his major league debut on September 25 and played in seven of the last nine games of the season for the eventual National League ( NL ) pennant @-@ winners : six in center field and one in right . In those seven games he went 9 @-@ for @-@ 26 ( .346 ) with two doubles and three triples . In 1918 regular Giants right fielder Dave Robertson left the team to manage a local military ballclub , and Youngs was given the full @-@ time job out of spring training . Batting exclusively left @-@ handed , Youngs responded by batting .302 in 121 games , finishing sixth in the league . It would be the first of seven straight seasons in which he hit .300 as a regular , and the second of eight overall counting his brief stint in 1917 . He also finished sixth in the NL with a .368 on @-@ base percentage ( OBP ) . The next season Robertson was traded to the Chicago Cubs for pitcher Phil Douglas , leaving Youngs to become a fixture in right field for the Giants . Youngs finished third in the NL in 1919 with a .311 batting average . His .351 batting average in 1920 was second in the NL to Rogers Hornsby . 
 Youngs batted .327 in 1921 , good for ninth in the NL . In Game 3 of the 1921 World Series Youngs became the first player to record two hits in the same inning of a World Series game . The Giants defeated the New York Yankees as Youngs batted .280 in the series . Youngs hit for the cycle on April 29 , 1922 . He finished the regular season ninth in the NL in OBP ( .398 ) and tied for ninth in stolen bases ( 17 ) , proceeding to hit .375 in the 1922 World Series as the Giants again defeated the Yankees . Youngs led the NL in runs scored in 1923 , with 121 , and his .348 batting average was the eighth best in the league . Youngs batted .356 in the 1923 World Series , which the Giants lost to the Yankees . 
 Youngs batted .356 during the 1924 season , finishing third in the NL . In the final series of this season , the Giants were playing the Philadelphia Phillies at the Polo Grounds and battling for the pennant with the Brooklyn Dodgers . Jimmy O 'Connell , an outfielder for the Giants , offered Phillies shortstop Heinie Sand $ 500 to intentionally lose the games ( $ 6 @,@ 904 in current dollar terms ) . Sand rejected the bribe and reported it to Phillies manager Art Fletcher . It eventually led to the lifetime suspension of O 'Connell and Giants coach Crazy Dolan by Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis . O 'Connell implicated teammates Youngs , George Kelly , and Frankie Frisch as co @-@ conspirators ; Landis , however , cleared the trio of any wrongdoing . 
 Youngs slumped to a .185 batting average during the 1924 World Series , which the Giants lost to the Washington Senators . Continuing to struggle in 1925 , Youngs batted .264 , his only season with a batting average below .300 , but improved to .306 in 95 games during the 1926 season . Toward the end of his career , Youngs taught Mel Ott , his eventual successor , how to play right field in the Polo Grounds . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 Youngs 's career was abruptly cut short in 1926 when he was diagnosed with the kidney disorder that , at the time , was called Bright 's disease . He had been exposed to streptococcal infection in 1924 . Too ill to play after August 10 , 1926 , Youngs returned home on McGraw 's insistence and received a blood transfusion in March 1927 . 
 Youngs died of Bright 's disease on October 22 , 1927 at the age of 30 . He went from weighing 170 pounds ( 77 kg ) during his playing career to 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) by the time of his death . In The New York Times obituary , Giants manager John McGraw called Youngs the greatest outfielder he 'd ever seen , as well as " the greatest fighter I ever saw on a baseball field " and " the easiest man I ever knew to handle . " The Giants honored Youngs with a bronze plaque on the right field wall of the Polo Grounds ; although the Giants intended to pay for it , fans expressed their desire to contribute and , even though contributions were limited to $ 1 per person , donations paid for the plaque entirely . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Over his abbreviated ten @-@ year career , Youngs posted 812 runs , 42 home runs , 592 runs batted in ( RBI ) , 153 stolen bases , a .322 career batting average , and <unk> career on @-@ base percentage . He batted .300 or higher in every season until 1925 , and higher than .350 twice . Youngs scored 100 or more runs three times and posted a career high 102 RBI in 1921 and 10 home runs in 1924 . During his tenure with the team , the Giants went to the World Series four consecutive years ( 1921 – 1924 ) and won twice ( 1921 , 1922 ) . Youngs was a favorite of McGraw , who kept only two pictures in his office : one of Christy Mathewson and one of Youngs . Rosy Ryan , a teammate with the Giants , and Burleigh Grimes , who played against Youngs as a member of the Brooklyn Dodgers , considered Youngs the best player they ever saw . 
 Youngs was included in the inaugural balloting for the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1936 , but received less than 5 % of the vote from the Baseball Writers ' Association of America ( BBWAA ) . Youngs remained on the ballot every year through 1956 , receiving his highest vote total in 1947 with 22 % . Ford C. Frick , Commissioner of Baseball , and former teammate Bill Terry both championed Youngs ' candidacy . 
 Former Giants teammates Terry and Frankie Frisch joined the Veterans Committee in 1967 and aided the elections of several of their former teammates , including Youngs in 1972 . In addition to Youngs , Terry and Frisch shepherded the selections of Giants teammates Jesse Haines in 1970 , Dave Bancroft and Chick Hafey in 1971 , George Kelly in 1973 , Jim Bottomley in 1974 , and Freddie Lindstrom in 1976 . Youngs died at the earliest age of any current Hall of Famer . Youngs is the only member of the National Baseball Hall of Fame from San Antonio and was inducted into the San Antonio Sports Hall of Fame in 1998 . Shiner , the town in which Youngs was born , hosted a baseball tournament in his honor at Clipper Field from 2001 through 2003 . 
 Youngs ' selection , along with some of the other selections made by Terry and Frisch , has been considered one of the weakest in some circles . According to the BBWAA , the Veterans Committee was not selective enough in choosing members , and charges of cronyism were later leveled against the committee . This led to the Veterans Committee having its powers reduced in subsequent years . Baseball statistician Bill James recognized this and wrote that Youngs does not belong in the Hall of Fame . In 1981 , however , Lawrence Ritter and Honig included Youngs in their book The 100 Greatest Baseball Players of All Time . They explained what they called " the Smoky Joe Wood Syndrome " , where a player of truly exceptional talent but a career curtailed by injury or illness should still — in spite of not owning career statistics that would quantitatively rank him with the all @-@ time greats — be included on their list of the 100 greatest players . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Youngs married Dorothy <unk> , a woman from Brooklyn who he met while vacationing in the Berkshires , in October 1924 . Their daughter Caroline was born in December 1925 . Dorothy feuded with Youngs ' mother , however , and the couple separated before the birth of Caroline , whom he never met . Youngs was considered friendly and generous , loaned money constantly , and was reportedly owed $ 16 @,@ 000 at the time of his death ( $ 217 @,@ 962 in current dollar terms ) . Youngs enjoyed playing golf and was considered the best golfer in the major leagues . 
 = Kowloon Walled City = 
 Kowloon Walled City was a densely populated , largely ungoverned settlement in Kowloon City , Hong Kong . Originally a Chinese military fort , the Walled City became an enclave after the New Territories were leased to Britain in 1898 . Its population increased dramatically following the Japanese occupation of Hong Kong during World War II . By 1987 , the Walled City contained 33 @,@ 000 residents within its 2 @.@ 6 @-@ hectare ( 6 @.@ 4 @-@ acre ) borders . From the 1950s to the 1970s , it was controlled by Triads and had high rates of prostitution , gambling , and drug use . 
 In January 1987 , the Hong Kong government announced plans to demolish the Walled City . After an arduous eviction process , demolition began in March 1993 and was completed in April 1994 . Kowloon Walled City Park opened in December 1995 and occupies the area of the former Walled City . Some historical artefacts from the Walled City , including its yamen building and remnants of its South Gate , have been preserved there . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Military outpost = = = 
 The history of the Walled City can be traced back to the Song Dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) , when an outpost was set up to manage the trade of salt . Little took place for hundreds of years afterward , although 30 guards were stationed there in 1668 . A small coastal fort was established around 1810 . In 1842 , during Qing Emperor <unk> 's reign , Hong Kong Island was ceded to Britain by the Treaty of Nanjing . As a result , the Qing authorities felt it necessary to improve the fort in order to rule the area and check further British influence . The improvements , including the formidable defensive wall , were completed in 1847 . The Walled City was captured by rebels during the Taiping Rebellion in 1854 before being retaken a few weeks later . The present Walled City 's " <unk> Association House " forms the remnants of what was previously Lai <unk> 's garrison . 
 The Convention for the Extension of Hong Kong Territory of 1898 handed additional parts of Hong Kong ( the New Territories ) to Britain for 99 years , but excluded the Walled City , which at the time had a population of roughly 700 . China was allowed to continue to keep officials there as long as they did not interfere with the defence of British Hong Kong . The following year , the Governor , Sir Henry Blake , suspected that the Viceroy of Canton was using troops to aid resistance to the new arrangements . On 16 May 1899 , British forces attacked the Walled City , only to find the Viceroy 's soldiers gone , leaving behind only the mandarin and 150 residents . 
 Though the British claimed ownership of the Walled City , they did little with it over the following few decades . The Protestant church established an old people 's home in the yamen , as well as a school and almshouse in other former offices . Aside from such institutions , however , the Walled City became a mere curiosity for British colonials and tourists to visit . In 1933 , the Hong Kong authorities announced plans to demolish most of the decaying Walled City 's buildings , compensating the 436 squatters that lived there with new homes . By 1940 only the yamen , the school , and one house remained . During its World War II occupation of Hong Kong , Japan demolished the City 's wall and used the stone to expand the nearby Kai Tak Airport . 
 = = = Urban settlement = = = 
 After Japan 's surrender , China announced its intent to reclaim its rights to the Walled City . Refugees poured in to take advantage of Chinese protection , and 2 @,@ 000 squatters occupied the Walled City by 1947 . After a failed attempt to drive them out in 1948 , the British adopted a ' hands @-@ off ' policy in most matters concerning the Walled City . 
 In January 1950 , a fire broke out that destroyed over 2 @,@ 500 huts , home to nearly 3 @,@ 500 families and 17 @,@ 000 total people . The disaster highlighted the need for proper fire prevention in the largely wooden @-@ built squatter areas , complicated by the lack of political ties with the colonial and Chinese governments . The ruins gave new arrivals to the Walled City the opportunity to build anew , causing speculation that the fire may have been intentionally set . 
 With no government enforcement from the Chinese or the British aside from a few raids by the Hong Kong Police , the Walled City became a haven for crime and drugs . It was only during a 1959 trial for a murder that occurred within the Walled City that the Hong Kong government was ruled to have jurisdiction there . By this time , however , the Walled City was virtually ruled by the organised crime syndicates known as Triads . 
 Beginning in the 1950s , Triad groups such as the 14K and Sun Yee On gained a stranglehold on the Walled City 's countless brothels , gambling parlors , and opium dens . The Walled City had become such a haven for criminals that police would venture into it only in large groups . It was not until 1973 – 74 , when a series of more than 3 @,@ 500 police raids resulted in over 2 @,@ 500 arrests and over 1 @,@ 800 kilograms ( 4 @,@ 000 lb ) of seized drugs , that the Triads ' power began to wane . With public support , particularly from younger residents , the continued raids gradually eroded drug use and violent crime . In 1983 , the police commander of Kowloon City District declared the Walled City 's crime rate to be under control . 
 The City also underwent massive construction during the 1960s , with developers building new modular structures above older ones . The city became extremely dense , with over 30 @,@ 000 people in 300 buildings occupying little more than 7 acres ( 2 @.@ 8 ha ) . As a result , the city reached its maximum size by the late 1970s and early 1980s ; a height restriction of 13 to 14 storeys had been imposed on the city due to the flight path of planes heading towards Kai Tak Airport . Eight municipal pipes provided water to the entire structure ( although more could have come from wells ) . A few of the streets were illuminated by fluorescent lights , as sunlight rarely reached the lower levels due to the outstanding disregard to air rights within the city . Although the rampant crime of earlier decades diminished in later years , the Walled City was still known for its high number of unlicensed doctors and dentists , who could operate there without threat of prosecution . 
 Although the Walled City was for many years a hotbed of criminal activity , most residents were not involved in any crime and lived peacefully within its walls . Numerous small factories and businesses thrived inside the Walled City , and some residents formed groups to organise and improve daily life there . An attempt by the government in 1963 to demolish some shacks in a corner of the City gave rise to an " <unk> committee " that served as the basis for a <unk> association . Charities , religious societies , and other welfare groups were gradually introduced to the City . While medical clinics and schools went unregulated , the Hong Kong government did provide some services , such as water supply and mail delivery . 
 = = = Eviction and demolition = = = 
 Over time , both the British and the Chinese governments found the City to be increasingly intolerable , despite a reduction in the reported crime rate . The quality of life in the City — sanitary conditions in particular — remained far behind the rest of Hong Kong . The Sino @-@ British Joint Declaration in 1984 laid the groundwork for the City 's demolition . The mutual decision by the two governments to tear down the Walled City was announced on 14 January 1987 . On 10 March 1987 , following the announcement that the Walled City would be converted to a park , the Secretary for District Administration formally requested the Urban Council agree to take over the site following demolition . Owing to the presence of numerous other green spaces in the area the Urban Services Department doubted the need for " yet another park " from a planning and operations point of view , but the council agreed nonetheless to accept the government 's proposal on the condition that the government bear the cost of park construction . 
 The government distributed some HK $ 2 @.@ 7 billion ( US $ 350 million ) in compensation to the estimated 33 @,@ 000 residents and businesses in a plan devised by a special committee of the Hong Kong Housing Authority . Some residents were not satisfied with the compensation , and were forcibly evicted between November 1991 and July 1992 . After four months of planning , demolition of the Walled City began on 23 March 1993 and concluded in April 1994 . Construction work on Kowloon Walled City Park started the following month . 
 = = Current status as park = = 
 The area where the Walled City once stood is now Kowloon Walled City Park , adjacent to Carpenter Road Park . The 31 @,@ 000 m2 ( 330 @,@ 000 sq ft ) park was completed in August 1995 and handed over to the Urban Council . It was opened officially by Governor Chris Patten a few months later on 22 December . Construction of the park cost a total of HK $ 76 million . 
 The park 's design is modelled on Jiangnan gardens of the early Qing Dynasty . It is divided into eight landscape features , with the fully restored yamen as its centrepiece . The park 's paths and pavilions are named after streets and buildings in the Walled City . Artefacts from the Walled City , such as five inscribed stones and three old wells , are also on display in the park . The park was designed by the Architectural Services Department , who won a " prestigious award " from the Central Society of Horticulture of Germany for the redevelopment . 
 Components of the park include : 
 The Eight Floral Walks , each named after a different plant or flower 
 The Chess Garden , featuring four 3 @-@ by @-@ 5 @-@ metre ( 9 @.@ 8 by 16 @.@ 4 ft ) Chinese chessboards 
 The Garden of Chinese zodiac , containing stone statues of the 12 Chinese zodiac animals 
 The Garden of Four Seasons ( named <unk> Square after the small open area in the Walled City ) , a 300 m2 ( 3 @,@ 200 sq ft ) garden with plants that symbolise the four seasons 
 The Six Arts Terrace , a 600 m2 ( 6 @,@ 500 sq ft ) wedding area containing a garden and the Bamboo Pavilion 
 The <unk> Pavilion , including a moon gate framed by two stone tablets and the towering <unk> Rock , which represents Hong Kong 's return to China 
 The Mountain View Pavilion , a two @-@ storey structure resembling a docked boat that provides a good view of the entire park 
 The Lung Tsun , Yuk Tong , and Lung Nam Pavilions 
 The yamen and the remains of the South Gate ( see below ) . 
 = = = Declared monuments = = = 
 The Antiquities and Monuments Office conducted archaeological examinations as the Walled City was being demolished , and several cultural remains were discovered . Among them were the Walled City 's yamen and remnants of its South Gate , which were officially designated declared monuments of Hong Kong on 4 October 1996 . 
 The South Gate had originally served as the Walled City 's main entrance . Along with its foundation , other remains included two stone plaques inscribed with " South Gate " and " Kowloon Walled City " from the South Gate and a flagstone path that had led up to it . The foundations of the City 's wall and East Gate were also discovered . The Hong Kong government preserved the South Gate remnants next to a square in front of the yamen . 
 The yamen building is made up of three halls . Originally the middle hall served the Assistant Magistrate of Kowloon 's administrative office , and the rear block was his residence . After the government officials left the area in 1899 , it was used for several other purposes , including an old people 's home , a refuge for widows and orphans , a school , and a clinic . It was restored in 1996 and is now found near the centre of the park . It contains a photo gallery of the Walled City , and two cannon dating back to 1802 sit at the sides of its entrance . 
 = = Layout and architecture = = 
 The Walled City was located in what became known as the Kowloon City area of Kowloon . In spite of its transformation from a fort into an urban enclave , the Walled City retained the same basic layout . The original fort was built on a slope and consisted of a 2 @.@ 6 @-@ hectare ( 0 @.@ 010 sq mi ) plot measuring about 210 by 120 metres ( 690 by 390 ft ) . The stone wall surrounding it had four entrances and measured 4 metres ( 13 ft ) tall and 4 @.@ 6 metres ( 15 ft ) thick before it was dismantled in 1943 . 
 Construction surged dramatically during the 1960s and 1970s , until the formerly low @-@ rise City consisted almost entirely of buildings with 10 storeys or more ( with the notable exception of the yamen in its centre ) . However , due to the Kai Tak Airport 's position 0 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 50 mi ) south of the City , buildings did not exceed 14 storeys . The two @-@ storey Sai Tau Tsuen settlement bordered the Walled City to the south and west until it was cleared in 1985 and replaced with Carpenter Road Park . 
 The City 's dozens of alleyways were often only 1 – 2 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) wide , and had poor lighting and drainage . An informal network of staircases and passageways also formed on upper levels , which was so extensive that one could travel north to south through the entire City without ever touching solid ground . Construction in the City went unregulated , and most of the roughly 350 buildings were built with poor foundations and few or no utilities . Because apartments were so small — a typical unit was 23 m2 ( 250 sq ft ) — space was maximised with wider upper floors , caged balconies , and rooftop additions . Roofs in the City were full of television antennae , clothes lines , water tanks , and rubbish , and could be crossed using a series of ladders . 
 = = Population = = 
 Kowloon Walled City 's early population fluctuated between zero and a few hundred , and began growing steadily shortly after World War II . However , there is no accurate population information available for much of the Walled City 's later existence . Official census numbers estimated the Walled City 's population at 10 @,@ 004 in 1971 and 14 @,@ 617 in 1981 , but these figures were commonly considered to be much too low . Informal estimates , on the other hand , often mistakenly included the neighbouring squatter village of Sai Tau Tsuen . Population figures of about 50 @,@ 000 were also reported . 
 A thorough government survey in 1987 gave a clearer picture : an estimated 33 @,@ 000 people resided within the Walled City . Based on this survey , the Walled City had a population density of approximately 1 @,@ 255 @,@ 000 inhabitants per square kilometre ( 3 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 / sq mi ) in 1987 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Contrary to what many outsiders believed , most residents of the Walled City behaved similarly to other Hong Kong natives . In response to difficult living conditions , the residents formed a tightly knit community , helping one another endure various hardships . Within families , wives often did housekeeping , while grandmothers cared for their grandchildren and other children from surrounding households . The City 's rooftops were an important gathering place , especially for residents who lived on upper floors . Parents used them to relax , and children would play or do homework there after school . 
 The yamen in the heart of the City was also a major social centre , a place for residents to talk , have tea or watch television , and to take classes such as calligraphy . The Old People 's Centre also held religious meetings for Christians and others . Other religious institutions included the <unk> Tak and Tin Hau temples , which were used for a combination of Buddhist , Taoist , and animist practices . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 A few people who spent time in Kowloon Walled City have written accounts of their experiences . Evangelist Jackie Pullinger wrote a 1989 memoir , Crack in the Wall , about her involvement in treating drug addicts within the Walled City . In his 2004 autobiography <unk> , Martin Booth describes his exploration of the Walled City as a child in the 1950s . 
 In addition to such accounts , many authors , game designers , and filmmakers have used the Walled City to convey a sense of oppressive urbanisation or unfettered criminality . In literature , Robert Ludlum 's novel The Bourne Supremacy uses the Walled City as one of its settings . The City appears as a virtual reality environment ( described by Steven Poole as an " oasis of political and creative freedom " ) in William Gibson 's Bridge trilogy , and as a contrast with Singapore in his Wired article " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " . In the manga Crying Freeman , the titular character 's wife travels to the Walled City to master her swordsmanship and control a cursed sword . The manga Blood + : Kowloon Nights uses the Walled City as the setting for a series of murders . The Walled City plays a heavy role in the roleplaying video game Shadowrun : Hong Kong , in which the Walled City has been rebuilt in the future . 
 The 1982 Shaw Brothers film Brothers from the Walled City is set in Kowloon Walled City . The 1984 gangster film Long Arm of the Law features the Walled City as a refuge for gang members before they are gunned down by police . In the 1988 film Bloodsport , starring Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme , the Walled City is the setting for a martial arts tournament . The 1992 non @-@ narrative film Baraka features several highly detailed shots of the Walled City shortly before its demolition . The 1993 film Crime Story starring Jackie Chan was partly filmed in the deserted Walled City , and includes real scenes of building explosions . A walled neighbourhood called the Narrows in the 2005 film Batman Begins was inspired by the Walled City . The 2006 Hong Kong horror film Re @-@ cycle features a decrepit , nightmarish version of the Walled City , complete with tortured souls from which the protagonist must flee . 
 Kowloon Walled City is depicted in several games , including Kowloon 's Gate , Shenmue II and Call of Duty : Black Ops . The game Stranglehold , a sequel to the film Hard Boiled , features a version of the Walled City filled with hundreds of Triad members . In the games Fear Effect and Fear Effect 2 , photographs of the Walled City were used as inspiration " for moods , camera angles and lighting . " Concept art for the MMORPG Guild Wars : Factions depicts massive , densely packed structures inspired by the Walled City . The pen @-@ and @-@ paper RPG Shadowrun includes a crime @-@ ridden , rebuilt version of the Walled City set in 2056 . 
 A partial recreation of the Kowloon Walled City exists in the Kawasaki Warehouse , an amusement arcade that opened in 2009 in the Japanese suburb of Kawasaki , Kanagawa . The designer 's desire to accurately replicate the atmosphere of the Walled City is reflected in the arcade 's narrow corridors , electrical wires , pipes , <unk> , sign boards , neon lights , frayed posters , and various other small touches that provide an air of authenticity . 
 = Horses in World War I = 
 The use of horses in World War I marked a transitional period in the evolution of armed conflict . Cavalry units were initially considered essential offensive elements of a military force , but over the course of the war , the vulnerability of horses to modern machine gun and artillery fire reduced their utility on the battlefield . This paralleled the development of tanks , which would ultimately replace cavalry in shock tactics . While the perceived value of the horse in war changed dramatically , horses still played a significant role throughout the war . 
 All of the major combatants in World War I ( 1914 – 1918 ) began the conflict with cavalry forces . Germany stopped using them on the Western Front soon after the war began . They continued to be deployed in a limited fashion on the Eastern Front well into the war . The Ottoman Empire used cavalry extensively during the war . On the Allied side , the United Kingdom used mounted infantry and cavalry charges throughout the war , but the United States used cavalry for only a short time . Although not particularly successful on the Western Front , Allied cavalry did have some success in the Middle Eastern theatre , possibly because they faced a weaker and less technologically advanced enemy . Russia used cavalry forces on the Eastern Front , but with limited success . 
 The military mainly used horses for logistical support during the war ; they were better than mechanized vehicles at traveling through deep mud and over rough terrain . Horses were used for reconnaissance and for carrying messengers , as well as pulling artillery , ambulances , and supply wagons . The presence of horses often increased morale among the soldiers at the front , but the animals contributed to disease and poor sanitation in camps , caused by their manure and carcasses . The value of horses , and the increasing difficulty of replacing them , was such that by 1917 some troops were told that the loss of a horse was of greater tactical concern than the loss of a human soldier . Ultimately , the Allied blockade prevented the Central Powers from importing horses to replace those lost , which contributed to Germany 's defeat . By the end of the war , even the well @-@ supplied U.S. Army was short of horses . 
 Conditions were severe for horses at the front ; they were killed by artillery fire , suffered from skin disorders , and were injured by poison gas . Hundreds of thousands of horses died , and many more were treated at veterinary hospitals and sent back to the front . Procuring equine food was a major issue , and Germany lost many horses to starvation through lack of fodder . Several memorials have been erected to commemorate the horses that died . Artists , including Alfred Munnings , extensively documented the work of horses in the war , and horses were featured in war poetry . Novels , plays and documentaries have also featured the horses of World War I. 
 = = Cavalry = = 
 Many British tacticians outside of the cavalry units realized before the war that advances in technology meant that the era of mounted warfare was coming to an end . However , many senior cavalry officers disagreed , and despite limited usefulness , maintained cavalry regiments at the ready throughout the war . Scarce wartime resources were used to train and maintain cavalry regiments that were rarely used . The continued use of the cavalry charge as a tactical maneuver resulted in the loss of many troops and horses in fruitless attacks against enemy machine guns . 
 Early in the war , cavalry skirmishes occurred on several fronts , and horse @-@ mounted troops were widely used for reconnaissance . Britain 's cavalry were trained to fight both on foot and mounted , but most other European cavalry still relied on the shock tactic of mounted charges . There were isolated instances of successful shock combat on the Western Front , where cavalry divisions also provided important mobile firepower . Beginning in 1917 , cavalry was deployed alongside tanks and aircraft , notably at the Battle of Cambrai , where cavalry was expected to exploit breakthroughs in the lines that the slower tanks could not . But , this plan never came to fruition due to missed opportunities and the use of machine guns by German forces . At Cambrai , troops from Great Britain , Canada , India and Germany participated in mounted actions . Cavalry was still deployed late in the war , with Allied cavalry troops harassing retreating German forces in 1918 during the Hundred Days Offensive , when horses and tanks continued to be used in the same battles . In comparison to their limited usefulness on the Western Front , " cavalry was literally indispensable " on the Eastern front and in the Middle East . 
 Great changes in the tactical use of cavalry were a marked feature of World War I , as improved weaponry rendered frontal charges ineffective . Although cavalry was used with good effect in Palestine , at the Third Battle of Gaza and Battle of Megiddo , generally the mode of warfare changed . Tanks were beginning to take over the role of shock combat . The use of trench warfare , barbed wire and machine guns rendered traditional cavalry almost obsolete . Following the war , the armies of the world powers initiated a process of mechanization in earnest , and most cavalry regiments were either converted to mechanized units or disbanded . Historian G.J. Meyer writes that " the Great War brought the end of cavalry " . From the Middle Ages into the 20th century , cavalry had dominated battlefields , but from as early as the American Civil War , their value in war was declining as artillery became more powerful , reducing the effectiveness of shock charges . The Western Front in World War I showed that cavalry was almost useless against modern weaponry , and it also reinforced that they were difficult to transport and supply . British cavalry officers , far more than their continental European counterparts , persisted in using and maintaining cavalry , believing that mounted troops would be useful for exploiting infantry breakthroughs , and under the right circumstances would be able to face machine guns . Neither of these beliefs proved correct . 
 = = = British Empire = = = 
 = = = = United Kingdom = = = = 
 Britain had increased its cavalry reserves after seeing the cavalry feats of mounted Boers during the Second Boer War ( 1899 – 1902 ) . Horse @-@ mounted units were used from the earliest days of World War I : on August 22 , 1914 , the first British shot of the war in France was fired by a cavalryman , Edward Thomas of the 4th Royal Irish Dragoon Guards , near Casteau , during a patrol in the buildup to the Battle of Mons . Within 19 days of Britain beginning mobilization for war , on August 24 , 1914 , the 9th Lancers , a cavalry regiment led by David Campbell , engaged German troops with a squadron of 4th Dragoon Guards against German infantry and guns . Campbell obeyed his orders to charge , although he believed the more prudent course of action would have been to fight dismounted . The charge resulted in a British loss of 250 men and 300 horses . On September 7 , Campbell 's troops charged again , this time towards the German 1st Guard Dragoons , another lancer cavalry regiment . In the same year , the British Household Cavalry completed their penultimate operation on horseback — the Allied retreat from Mons . Upon reaching the Aisne River and encountering the trench system , cavalry was found to be ineffective . Although cavalry divisions were still being formed in Britain , cavalry troops quickly became accustomed to fighting dismounted . Britain continued to use cavalry throughout the war , and in 1917 , the Household Cavalry conducted its last mounted charge during a diversionary attack on the Hindenburg Line at Arras . On the orders of Field Marshal Douglas Haig , the Life Guards and the Blues , accompanied by the men of the 10th Hussars , charged into heavy machine gun fire and barbed wire , and were slaughtered by the German defenders ; the Hussars lost two @-@ thirds of their number in the charge . The last British fatality from enemy action before the armistice went into effect was a cavalryman , George Edwin Ellison , from C Troop 5th Royal Irish Lancers . Ellison was shot by a sniper as the regiment moved into Mons on November 11 , 1918 . 
 Despite their lackluster record in Europe , horses proved indispensable to the British war effort in Palestine , particularly under Field Marshal Edmund Allenby , for whom cavalry made up a large percentage of his forces . Most of his mounted troops were not British regular cavalry , but the Desert Mounted Corps , consisting of a combination of Australian , New Zealand , Indian units and English Yeomanry regiments from the Territorial Force , largely equipped as mounted infantry rather than cavalry . By mid @-@ 1918 , Turkish intelligence estimated that Allenby commanded around 11 @,@ 000 cavalry . Allenby 's forces crushed the Turkish armies in a running series of battles that included the extensive use of cavalry by both sides . Some cavalry tacticians view this action as a vindication of cavalry 's usefulness , but others point out that the Turks were outnumbered two to one by late 1918 , and were not first @-@ class troops . Horses were also ridden by the British officers of the Egyptian Camel Transport Corps in Egypt and the Levant during the Sinai and Palestine Campaigns . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 Indian cavalry participated in actions on both the Western and Palestinian fronts throughout the war . Members of the 1st and 2nd Indian Cavalry Divisions were active on the Western Front , including in the German retreat to the Hindenburg Line and at the Battle of Cambrai . A charge by the 5th ( Mhow ) Cavalry Brigade of the 1st Division ended successfully at the Battle of Cambrai despite being against a position fortified by barbed wire and machine guns . This successful ending was an unusual occurrence during the war . Several Indian cavalry divisions joined Allenby 's troops in the spring of 1918 after being transferred from the Western Front . 
 = = = = Canada = = = = 
 When the war began , Lord Strathcona 's Horse , a Canadian cavalry regiment , was mobilized and sent to England for training . The regiment served as infantry in French trenches during 1915 , and were not returned to their mounted status until February 16 , 1916 . In the defense of the Somme front in March 1917 , mounted troops saw action , and Lieutenant Frederick Harvey was awarded the Victoria Cross for his actions . Canadian cavalry generally had the same difficulties as other nations in breaking trench warfare deadlocks and were of little use on the front lines . However , in the spring of 1918 , Canadian cavalry was essential in halting the last major German offensive of the war . On March 30 , 1918 , Canadian cavalry charged German positions in the Battle of <unk> Wood , defeating a superior German force supported by machine gun fire . The charge was made by Lord Strathcona 's Horse , led by Gordon <unk> , later posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross for his actions during the charge . Although the German forces surrendered , three @-@ quarters of the 100 cavalry participating in the attack were killed or wounded in the attack against 300 German soldiers . 
 = = = = Australia and New Zealand = = = = 
 The Australian and New Zealand Mounted Division ( known as the Anzac Mounted Division ) was formed in Egypt in 1916 , after the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZAC ) was disbanded . Comprising four brigades , the 1st , 2nd and 3rd Australian Light Horse and the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade . All had fought at Gallipoli dismounted . In August the division 's dynamic capabilities were effectively combined with the static 52nd ( Lowland ) Infantry Division at the Battle of Romani , where they repelled an attempted Ottoman attack on the Suez Canal . This victory stopped the advance of Kress von Kressenstein 's Expeditionary Force ( 3rd Infantry Division and Pasha I formation ) towards the Suez Canal and forced his withdrawal under pressure . An Ottoman garrison at Magdhaba was defeated in December 1916 by the division with the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade attached and the other major Ottoman fortification at Rafah was captured in January 1917 . They participated mounted in the First Battle of Gaza in March , and the Third Battle of Gaza ( including the Battle of Beersheba ) in October 1917 . They attacked dismounted in the Second Battle of Gaza in April 1917 . In 1918 , the Anzac and Australian Mounted Divisions , along with the Yeomanry Mounted Division in the Desert Mounted Corps , conducted two attacks across the Jordan River to Amman in March , then moved on to Es Salt in April . The Australian Mounted Division were armed with swords mid year , and as part of the Battle of Megiddo captured Amman ( capturing 10 @,@ 300 prisoners ) , Nazareth , Jenin and Samakh in nine days . After the Armistice they participated in the reoccupation of Gallipoli in December . 
 The Anzac and Australian Mounted Divisions carried rifles , bayonets and machine guns , generally using horses as swift transport and dismounting to fight . Troops of four men were organised , so that three were fighting while the fourth held the horses . Sometimes they fought as mounted troops : at the Battle of Beersheba during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign in 1917 , the Australian Mounted Division 's 4th Light Horse Brigade made what is sometimes called " the last successful cavalry charge in history " , when two regiments successfully overran Turkish trenches . They formed up over a wide area , to avoid offering a target for enemy artillery , and galloped 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) into machine gun fire , equipped only with rifles and bayonets . Some of the front ranks fell , but most of the brigade broke through , their horses jumping the trenches into the enemy camp . Some soldiers dismounted to fight in the trenches , while others raced on to Beersheba , to capture the town and its vital water supplies . The charge was " instrumental in securing Allenby 's victory [ in Palestine ] " . 
 The Australians primarily rode Waler horses . The English cavalry officer , Lieutenant Colonel RMP Preston DSO , summed up the animals ' performance in his book , The Desert Mounted Corps : 
 ... ( November 16th , 1917 ) The operations had now continued for 17 days practically without cessation , and a rest was absolutely necessary especially for the horses . Cavalry Division had covered nearly 170 miles ... and their horses had been watered on an average of once in every 36 hours ... The heat , too , had been intense and the short rations , 9 1 ⁄ 2 lb of grain per day without bulk food , had weakened them greatly . Indeed , the hardship endured by some horses was almost incredible . One of the batteries of the Australian Mounted Division had only been able to water its horses three times in the last nine days — the actual intervals being 68 , 72 and 76 hours respectively . Yet this battery on its arrival had lost only eight horses from exhaustion , not counting those killed in action or evacuated wounded ... The majority of horses in the Corps were <unk> and there is no doubt that these hardy Australian horses make the finest cavalry mounts in the world ... 
 = = = Continental Europe = = = 
 Before the war began , many continental European armies still considered the cavalry to hold a vital place in their order of battle . France and Russia expanded their mounted military units before 1914 . Of the Central Powers , Germany added thirteen regiments of mounted riflemen , Austria – Hungary expanded their forces , and the Bulgarian army also readied the cavalry in their army . When the Germans invaded in August 1914 , the Belgians had one division of cavalry . 
 French cavalry had similar problems with horses on the Western Front as the British , although the treatment of their horses created additional difficulties . Opinion generally was that the French were poor horsemen : " The French cavalryman of 1914 sat on his horse beautifully , but was no <unk> . It did not occur to him to get off his horse 's back whenever he could , so there were thousands of animals with sore backs ... " . One French general , Jean @-@ François <unk> , was accused of not letting horses have access to water in hot weather . By late August 1914 , a sixth of the horses in the French cavalry were unusable . The French continued to eschew mounted warfare when in a June 1918 charge by French lancers the horses were left behind and the men charged on foot . 
 Russia possessed thirty @-@ six cavalry divisions when it entered the war in 1914 , and the Russian government claimed that its horsemen would thrust deep into the heart of Germany . Although Russian mounted troops entered Germany , they were soon met by German forces . In the August 1914 Battle of Tannenberg , troops led by German Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg and Lieutenant @-@ General Erich Ludendorff surrounded the Russian Second Army and destroyed the mounted force of Don Cossacks that served as the special guard of Russian General Alexander Samsonov . Other Russian cavalry units successfully harassed retreating Austro @-@ Hungarian troops in September 1914 , with the running battle eventually resulting in the loss of 40 @,@ 000 of the 50 @,@ 000 men in the Austro @-@ Hungarian XIV Tyrolean Corps , which included the 6th Mounted Rifle Regiment . Transporting cavalry created a hardship for the already strained Russian infrastructure , as the great distances they needed to be moved meant that they had to be transported by train . Approximately the same number of trains ( about 40 ) were required to transport a cavalry division of 4 @,@ 000 as to transport an infantry division of 16 @,@ 000 . 
 The cavalries of the Central Powers , Germany and Austria – Hungary , faced the same problems with transport and the failure of tactics as the Russians . Germany initially made extensive use of cavalry , including a lance @-@ against @-@ lance battle with the British in late 1914 , and an engagement between the British 1st Cavalry Brigade and the German 4th Cavalry Division in the lead @-@ up to the First Battle of the Marne in September 1914 . That battle ended " decidedly to the disadvantages of the German cavalry " , partially due to the use of artillery by the accompanying British L Battery of horse artillery . The Germans stopped using cavalry on the Western Front not long after the beginning of the war , in response to the Allied Forces ' changing battle tactics , including more advanced weaponry . They continued to use cavalry to some extent on the Eastern Front , including probes into Russian territory in early 1915 . The Austrians were forced to stop using cavalry because of large @-@ scale equipment failures ; Austrian military saddles were so poorly designed as to rub the skin off the back of any horse not already hardened to the equipment from parade ground practice ; only a few weeks into the war half of all Austrian cavalry mounts were disabled , and the rest nearly so . 
 = = = Ottoman Empire = = = 
 In 1914 , the Ottoman Turks began the war with one cavalry regiment in the Turkish army corps and four reserve regiments ( originally formed in 1912 ) under the control of the Turkish Third Army . These reserve regiments were composed of Kurds , rural Turks and a few Armenians . The performance of the reserve divisions was poor , and in March 1915 the forces that survived were turned into two divisions totalling only two thousand men and seventy officers . Later that month , the best regiments were consolidated into one division and the rest disbanded . Nonetheless , cavalry was used by Ottoman forces throughout 1915 in engagements with the Russians , and one cavalry unit even exchanged small arms fire with a submarine crew in the Dardanelles in early 1915 . Turkish cavalry was used in engagements with the British , including the Third Battle of Gaza in late 1917 . In this battle , both sides used cavalry forces as strategic parts of their armies . Cavalry continued to be involved in engagements well into 1918 , including in conflicts near the Jordan River in April and May that year , which the Ottomans called the First and Second Battles of Jordan , part of the lead @-@ up to the Battle of Megiddo . By September 1918 , regular army cavalry forces were stationed throughout the Turkish front , and the only remaining operationally ready reserve forces in the Ottoman military were two cavalry divisions , one formed after the initial problems in 1915 . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 By 1916 , the United States Cavalry consisted of 15 @,@ 424 members organized into 15 regiments , including headquarters , supply , machine @-@ gun and rifle troops . Just before formally joining the war effort , the US had gained significant experience in 1916 and 1917 during the Pancho Villa Expedition in Mexico , which helped to prepare the US Cavalry for entry into World War I. In May 1917 , a month after the US declaration of war , the National Defense Act went into effect , creating the 18th through the 25th US Cavalry regiments , and later that month , twenty more cavalry regiments were created . However , British experiences during the first years of the war showed that trench warfare and weapons that included machine guns and artillery made cavalry warfare impractical . Thus , on October 1 , eight of the new cavalry regiments were converted to field artillery regiments by order of Congress , and by August 1918 , twenty National Army horse units were converted to thirty @-@ nine trench mortar and artillery batteries . Some horse units of the 2nd , 3rd , 6th and 15th Cavalry regiments accompanied the US forces in Europe . The soldiers worked mainly as grooms and farriers , attending to remounts for the artillery , medical corps and transport services . It was not until late August 1918 that US cavalry entered combat . A provisional squadron of 418 officers and enlisted men , representing the 2nd Cavalry Regiment , and mounted on convalescent horses , was created to serve as scouts and couriers during the St. Mihiel Offensive . On September 11 , 1918 , these troops rode at night through no man 's land and penetrated five miles behind German lines . Once there , the cavalry was routed and had to return to Allied territory . Despite serving through the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive , by mid @-@ October the squadron was removed from the front with only 150 of its men remaining . 
 = = Logistical support = = 
 Horses were used extensively for military trains . They were used to pull ambulances , carry supplies and ordnance . At the beginning of the war , the German army depended upon horses to pull its field kitchens , as well as the ammunition wagons for artillery brigades . The Royal Corps of Signals used horses to pull cable wagons , and the promptness of messengers and dispatch riders depended on their mounts . Horses often drew artillery and steady animals were crucial to artillery effectiveness . The deep mud common in some parts of the front , caused by damaged drainage systems flooding nearby areas , made horses and mules vital , as they were the only means of getting supplies to the front and guns moved from place to place . After the April 1917 Battle of Vimy Ridge , one Canadian soldier recalled , " the horses were up to their bellies in mud . We 'd put them on a picket line between the wagon wheels at night and they 'd be sunk in over their fetlocks the next day . We had to shoot quite a number . " 
 Thousands of horses were employed to pull field guns ; six to twelve horses were required to pull each gun . During the Battle of Cambrai , horses were used to recover guns captured by the British from no man 's land . In one instance , two teams of sixteen horses each had their hooves , tack and pulling chains wrapped to reduce noise . The teams and their handlers then successfully pulled out two guns and returned them to British lines , the horses jumping a trench in the process and waiting out an artillery barrage by German troops on the road they needed to take . 
 Dummy horses were sometimes used to deceive the enemy into misreading the location of troops . They were effectively used by Allenby during his campaigns in the east , especially late in the war . Evidence exists that the Germans used horses in their experimentations with chemical and biological warfare . German agents in the US are suspected of infecting cattle and horses bound for France with glanders , a disease which can fatally spread to humans ; similar tactics were used by the Germans against the Russians , causing breakdowns in their ability to move artillery on the Eastern Front . 
 The value of horses was known to all . In 1917 at the Battle of Passchendaele , men at the front understood that " at this stage to lose a horse was worse than losing a man because after all , men were replaceable while horses weren 't . " For Britain , horses were considered so valuable that if a soldier 's horse was killed or died he was required to cut off a hoof and bring it back to his commanding officer to prove that the two had not simply become separated . 
 = = Procurement = = 
 = = = Allied forces = = = 
 To meet its need for horses , Britain imported them from Australia , Canada , the USA , and Argentina , and requisitioned them from British civilians . Lord Kitchener ordered that no horses under 15 hands ( 60 inches , 152 cm ) should be confiscated , at the request of many British children , who were concerned for the welfare of their ponies . The British Army Remount Service , in an effort to improve the supply of horses for potential military use , provided the services of high quality stallions to British farmers for breeding their broodmares . The already rare Cleveland Bay was almost wiped out by the war ; smaller members of the breed were used to carry British troopers , while larger horses were used to pull artillery . New Zealand found that horses over 15 @.@ 2 hands ( 62 inches , 157 cm ) fared worse than those under that height . Well @-@ built Thoroughbreds of 15 hands and under worked well , as did compact horses of other breeds that stood 14 @.@ 2 to 14 @.@ 3 hands ( 58 to 59 inches , 147 to 150 cm ) . Larger crossbred horses were acceptable for regular work with plentiful rations , but proved less able to withstand short rations and long journeys . Riflemen with tall horses suffered more from fatigue , due to the number of times they were required to mount and dismount the animals . Animals used for draught work , including pulling artillery , were also found to be more efficient when they were of medium size with good endurance than when they were tall , heavy and long @-@ legged . 
 The continued resupply of horses was a major issue of the war . One estimate puts the number of horses that served in World War I at around six million , with a large percentage of them dying due to war @-@ related causes . In 1914 , the year the war began , the British Army owned only about 25 @,@ 000 horses . This shortfall required the US to help with remount efforts , even before it had formally entered the war . Between 1914 and 1918 , the US sent almost one million horses overseas , and another 182 @,@ 000 were taken overseas with American troops . This deployment seriously depleted the country 's equine population . Only 200 returned to the US , and 60 @,@ 000 were killed outright . By the middle of 1917 , Britain had procured 591 @,@ 000 horses and 213 @,@ 000 mules , as well as almost 60 @,@ 000 camels and oxen . Britain 's Remount Department spent £ 67 @.@ 5 million on purchasing , training and delivering horses and mules to the front . The British Remount Department became a major multinational business and a leading player in the international horse trade , through supplying horses to not only the British Army but also to Canada , Belgium , Australia , New Zealand , Portugal , and even a few to the US . Shipping horses between the US and Europe was both costly and dangerous ; American Expeditionary Force officials calculated that almost seven times as much room was needed per ton for animals than for average wartime cargo , and over 6 @,@ 500 horses and mules were drowned or killed by shell fire on Allied ships attacked by the Germans . In turn , New Zealand lost around 3 percent of the nearly 10 @,@ 000 horses shipped to the front during the war . 
 Due to the high casualty rates , even the well @-@ supplied American army was facing a deficit of horses by the final year of the war . After the American First Army , led by General John J. Pershing , pushed the Germans out of the Argonne Forest in late 1918 , they were faced with a shortage of around 100 @,@ 000 horses , effectively immobilizing the artillery . When Pershing asked Ferdinand Foch , Marshal of France , for 25 @,@ 000 horses , he was refused . It was impossible to obtain more from the US , as shipping space was limited , and Pershing 's senior supply officer stated that " the animal situation will soon become desperate . " The Americans , however , fought on with what they had until the end of the war , unable to obtain sufficient supplies of new animals . 
 = = = Central Powers = = = 
 Before World War I , Germany had increased its reserves of horses through state @-@ sponsored stud farms ( German : <unk> ) and annuities paid to individual horse breeders . These breeding programs were designed specifically to provide high @-@ quality horses and mules for the German military . These efforts , and the horse @-@ intensive nature of warfare in the early 20th century , caused Germany to increase the ratio of horses to men in the army , from one to four in 1870 to one to three in 1914 . The breeding programs allowed the Germans to provide all of their own horses at the beginning of the war . Horses were considered army reservists ; owners had to register them regularly , and the army kept detailed records on the locations of all horses . In the first weeks of the war , the German army mobilized 715 @,@ 000 horses and the Austrians 600 @,@ 000 . Overall , the ratio of horses to men in Central Powers nations was estimated at one to three . 
 The only way Germany could acquire large numbers of horses after the war began was by conquest . More than 375 @,@ 000 horses were taken from German @-@ occupied French territory for use by the German military . Captured Ukrainian territory provided another 140 @,@ 000 . The Ardennes was used to pull artillery for the French and Belgian armies . Their calm , tolerant disposition , combined with their active and flexible nature , made them an ideal artillery horse . The breed was considered so useful and valuable that when the Germans established the Commission for the Purchase of Horses in October 1914 to capture Belgian horses , the Ardennes was one of two breeds specified as important , the other being the Brabant . The Germans were not able to capture the horses belonging to the Belgian royal family , as they were successfully evacuated , although they captured enough horses to disrupt Belgian agriculture and breeding programs . Horses used for the transport of goods were also taken , resulting in a fuel crisis in Belgium the next winter as there were no horses to pull coal wagons . The Germans sold some of their captured horses at auction . Prevented by the Allies from importing remounts , the Germans ultimately ran out of horses , making it difficult for them to move supplies and artillery , a factor contributing to their defeat . 
 = = Casualties and upkeep = = 
 Battle losses of horses were approximately 25 percent of all war @-@ related equine deaths between 1914 and 1916 . Disease and exhaustion accounted for the remainder and the Germans specifically targeted horses with gunfire . The highest death rates were in East Africa , where in 1916 alone deaths of the original mounts and remounts accounted for 290 % of the initial stock numbers , mainly due to infection from the tsetse fly . On average , Britain lost about 15 percent ( of the initial military stock ) of its animals each year of the war ( killed , missing , died or abandoned ) , with losses at 17 percent in the French theatre . This compared to 80 percent in the Crimean War , 120 percent in the Boer War and 10 percent in peacetime . During some periods of the war , 1 @,@ 000 horses per day were arriving in Europe as remounts for British troops , to replace horses lost . Some horses , having collapsed from exhaustion , drowned in ankle @-@ deep mud , too tired to lift their heads high enough to breathe . Equine casualties were especially high during battles of attrition , such as the 1916 Battle of Verdun between French and German forces . In one day in March , 7 @,@ 000 horses were killed by long @-@ range shelling on both sides , including 97 killed by a single shot from a French naval gun . By 1917 , Britain had over a million horses and mules in service , but harsh conditions , especially during winter , resulted in heavy losses , particularly amongst the Clydesdale horses , the main breed used to haul the guns . Over the course of the war , Britain lost over 484 @,@ 000 horses , one horse for every two men . A small number of these , 210 , were killed by poison gas . 
 Feeding horses was a major issue , and horse fodder was the single largest commodity shipped to the front by some countries , including Britain . Horses ate around ten times as much food by weight as a human , and hay and oats further burdened already overloaded transport services . In 1917 , Allied operations were threatened when horse feed rations were reduced after German submarine activity restricted supplies of oats from North America , combined with poor Italian harvests . The British rationed hay and oats , although their horses were still issued more than those from France or Italy . The Germans faced an even worse fodder crisis , as they had underestimated the amount of food they needed to import and stockpile before the beginning of the war . Sawdust was mixed with food during times of shortage to ease animals ' sense of hunger , and many animals died of starvation . Some feed was taken from captured territories on the Eastern Front , and more from the British during the advances of the 1918 spring offensive . 
 Animals bolstered morale at the front , due to the soldiers ' affection for them . Some recruitment posters from World War I showcased the partnership between horse and man in attempts to gain more recruits . Despite the boost in morale , horses could also be a health hazard for the soldiers , mainly because of the difficulty of maintaining high levels of hygiene around horses , which was especially noted in camps in Egypt . Horse manure was commonplace in the battle and staging areas on several fronts , creating breeding grounds for disease @-@ carrying insects . <unk> was supposed to be buried , but fast @-@ moving battle conditions often made this impossible . Sanitation officers were responsible for the burial of horse carcasses , among other duties . 
 Many horses died as a result of the conditions at the front — of exhaustion , drowning , becoming mired in mud and falling in shell holes . Other horses were captured after their riders were killed . Horses also endured poor feeding and care , poison gas attacks that injured their respiratory systems and skin , and skin conditions such as mange . When gas warfare began in 1915 , nose plugs were improvised for the horses to allow them to breathe during attacks . Later , several types of gas masks were developed by both the Central and Allied nations , although horses often confused them with <unk> and destroyed them . Soldiers found that better @-@ bred horses were more likely to suffer from shell shock and act up when exposed to the sights and sounds of war than less @-@ well @-@ bred animals , who often learned to lie down and take cover at the sound of artillery fire . Veterinary hospitals were established to assist horses in recovering from shell shock and battle wounds , but thousands of equine corpses still lined the roads of the Western Front . In one year , 120 @,@ 000 horses were treated for wounds or disease by British veterinary hospitals alone . Ambulances and field veterinary hospitals were required to care for the horses , and horse trailers were first developed for use on the Western Front as equine ambulances . Disease was also a major issue for horses at the front , with equine influenza , ringworm , sand colic , sores from fly bites , and anthrax among the illnesses that affected them . British Army Army Veterinary Corps hospitals treated 725 @,@ 216 horses over the course of the war , successfully healing 529 @,@ 064 . Horses were moved from the front to veterinary hospitals by several methods of transportation , including on foot , by rail and by barge . During the last months of the war , barges were considered ideal transportation for horses suffering wounds from shells and bombs . 
 When the war ended , many horses were killed due to age or illness , while younger ones were sold to slaughterhouses or to locals , often upsetting the soldiers who had to give up their beloved mounts . There were 13 @,@ 000 Australian horses remaining at the end of World War I , but due to quarantine restrictions , they could not be shipped back to Australia . Two thousand were designated to be killed , and the remaining 11 @,@ 000 were sold , most going to India as remounts for the British Army . Of the 136 @,@ 000 horses shipped from Australia to fighting fronts in the war , only one , Sandy , was returned to Australia . New Zealand horses were also left behind ; those not required by the British or Egyptian armies were shot to prevent maltreatment by other purchasers . The horses left behind did not always have good lives – the Brooke Trust was established in 1930 when a young British woman arrived in Cairo , only to find hundreds of previously Allied @-@ owned horses living in poor conditions , having been sold to Egyptians after the cessation of the war . In 1934 , the Old War Horse Memorial Hospital was opened by the trust , and is estimated to have helped over 5 @,@ 000 horses that had served in World War I ; as of 2011 , the hospital continues to serve equines in the Cairo area . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The horse is the animal most associated with the war , and memorials have been erected to its service , including that at St. Jude on the Hill , Hampstead , which bears the inscription " Most obediently and often most painfully they died – faithful unto death . " The Animals in War Memorial in London commemorates animals , including horses , that served with the British and their allies in all wars . The inscription reads : " Animals In War . This monument is dedicated to all the animals that served and died alongside British and allied forces in wars and campaigns throughout time . They had no choice . " In Minneapolis , a monument by Lake of the Isles is dedicated to the horses of the Minnesota 151st Field Artillery killed in battle during World War I. 
 The men of the Australian Light Horse Brigade and New Zealand Mounted Rifles who died between 1916 and 1918 in Egypt , Palestine and Syria are commemorated by the Desert Mounted Corps Memorial , or Light Horse Memorial , on ANZAC Parade , in Canberra , Australia . The original version of this monument was in Port Said in Egypt , and was mostly destroyed during the 1956 Suez War . A piece from the original memorial , a shattered horse 's head , was brought back to Australia and used as part of a new statue in the A is for Animals exhibition honoring animals who have served with the Australian military . The exhibition also contains the preserved head of Sandy , the only horse to return to Australia after the war . 
 War artist Alfred Munnings was sent to France in early 1918 as an official war artist with the Canadian Cavalry Brigade . The Canadian Forestry Corps invited Munnings to tour their work camps in France after seeing some of his work at the headquarters of General Simms , the Canadian representative . He produced drawings , watercolors , and paintings of their work , including Draft Horses , Lumber Mill in the Forest of Dreux in 1918 . Forty @-@ five of his paintings were displayed at the Canadian War Records Exhibition at the Royal Academy , many of which featured horses in war . Numerous other artists created works that featured the horses of World War I , including Umberto Boccioni with Charge of the Lancers and Terence Cuneo with his celebrated postwar painting of the saving of the guns at Le Cateau during the Retreat from Mons . During World War I , artist Fortunino Matania created the iconic image Goodbye Old Man that would be used by both British and American organizations to raise awareness of the suffering of animals affected by war . The painting was accompanied by a poem , The Soldiers Kiss , that also emphasized the plight of the horse in war . 
 Writing poetry was a means of passing the time for soldiers of many nations , and the horses of World War I figured prominently in several poems . In 1982 , Michael Morpurgo wrote the novel War Horse , about a cavalry horse in the war . The book was later adapted into a successful play of the same name , and also into a screenplay , with the movie , released on December 25 , 2011 in the United States . In January 2010 , the History Channel aired a documentary entitled The Real War Horse , depicting the horses of World War I. 
 = Angels Cry ( song ) = 
 " Angels Cry " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her twelfth studio album , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel ( 2009 ) . It was written and produced by Carey , Tricky Stewart and James " Big Jim " Wright , with additional songwriting from Crystal Johnson . On the album 's track listing , " Angels Cry " is preceded by a one @-@ minute , four second prelude called " Angel ( The Prelude ) " , which consists of Carey performing purely in her whistle register . The prelude then leads into " Angels Cry " , a song about trying to fix a broken relationship because true love only happens once . Carey released " Angels Cry " as a remix single featuring Ne @-@ Yo in January 2010 for a proposed Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel remix album called Angels Advocate , which was ultimately shelved . 
 = = Overview = = 
 " Angels Cry " was written and produced by Mariah Carey , Tricky Stewart and James " Big Jim " Wright , with additional songwriting from Crystal Johnson , for Carey 's twelfth studio album Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel ( 2009 ) . The song was recorded by Brian Garten and Brian " B @-@ Luv " Thomas at The Boom Boom Room in Burbank and Honeywest Studios in New York City , and they were assisted in the process by Luis Navarro . It was mixed by Phil Tan at Soapbox Studios in Atlanta . Additional engineering was carried out by Carlos Oyanedel and Damien Lewis . The keys and Hammond B3 were performed by Stewart and Wright . Carey uses her higher vocal register to perform over an instrumental of a piano and finger snapping . " Angels Cry " is preceded by a one @-@ minute , four second prelude called " Angel ( The Prelude ) " . The prelude was written and produced by Carey , Stewart and Wright . Oyanedel , Lewis and Tan carried out the additional engineering and mixing as with " Angels Cry " , however Garten and Thomas recorded the prelude at the Studio at the Palms in Las Vegas in addition to Honeywest Studios . The prelude consists of Carey performing only whistle notes . 
 Lyrically , " Angels Cry " is about maintaining hope that a fading relationship can be salvaged because true love only happens once . Carey sings " I ’ m willing to live and die for our love / Baby we can get back that shine . " However , the lyrics " Super natural love conquers all " could also be interpreted as feeling God 's love . Adam Holz of Plugged In thought that the lyrics were " depressing , " while Lauren Murphy of Entertainment IE felt that the lyrics " When you and I say goodbye , I felt the angels cry " were too sentimental . Although Ann Powers of Los Angeles Times thought that the song had a " sad " tone , she praised its production . Bill Lamb of About.com placed " Angels Cry " in his list of the album 's best tracks . Michael Cragg of musicOMH was critical of the song , writing that it is a " limp ballad " which he thought was trying too hard at recreating some of Carey 's previous material , and concluded by writing that it " ultimately ends up making you want to hear the original version more than anything " . A reviewer for DJ Booth commented that the song sounded as thought it could have been released in 1994 . 
 = = Remix single featuring Ne @-@ Yo = = 
 = = = Background and release = = = 
 Carey revealed that she intended to re @-@ release Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel as a remix album in early 2010 , titled Angels Advocate , consisting of remixes of the standard songs with new featured artists , including Mary J. Blige , Snoop Dogg , Trey Songz , R. Kelly , T @-@ Pain , Gucci Mane and OJ da Juiceman . " Angels Cry " and " Up Out My Face " from Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel were released as remix singles with Ne @-@ Yo featuring on the former and Nicki Minaj on the latter . The remix version of " Angels Cry " featuring Ne @-@ Yo was released to rhythmic contemporary and urban contemporary radio in the United States on January 26 , 2010 . It was made available for digital download on February 23 , 2010 , in Canada and the United States . A release date of February 23 , 2010 , for the album was slated , and then pushed back to March 9 . It was then further pushed back to March 30 . However , it was confirmed in March 2010 that production of Angels Advocate had halted and the project was shelved indefinitely . Island Def Jam stated that the singer was instead working on a new project and " new surprises " . Metro revealed that Carey was possibly recording a Christmas album . 
 = = = Composition and reception = = = 
 Musically , the remix does not greatly differ from that of the original apart from a new second verse by Ne @-@ Yo . Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey praised the track . He wrote that it was one of the standouts on Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel and that " it 's about as close to ' classic ' Mariah as ' new ' Mariah gets " . He complimented Carey 's " classy " and " effortless " vocals , and added that Ne @-@ Yo gave the track an emotional " extra dimension " . Copsey likened the song to one of Carey 's previous singles , " We Belong Together " ( 2005 ) : " It 's a bit of a ' We Belong Together ' retread , but it 's a thoroughly pleasant ' We Belong Together ' retread " . Leonie Cooper of The Guardian gave a mixed review of the remix . Although she did not express her dislike for the track , she felt that it was too similar to Carey previous material , writing that it is middle @-@ of @-@ the road " inoffensive semi @-@ soul fodder we 've had to come to expect from her . " Cooper was , however , critical of the decision to include Ne @-@ Yo and that his addition makes the song even more bland . Robbie Daw of Idolator also felt that the track was a " typically Mariah @-@ esque ballad " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United States , the remix peaked at number twenty @-@ six on the Adult Contemporary chart , becoming her twenty @-@ eighth career entry and Ne @-@ Yo 's first . It is the second song from Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel to enter the chart following Carey 's single release cover of " I Want to Know What Love Is " which peaked at number ten ; it is also the first time Carey had charted two songs on the Adult Contemporary chart from the same album since her sixth studio Butterfly , where its title track and " My All " peaked at numbers eleven and eighteen in 1997 / 98 . The remix also peaked at number ninety on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . Elsewhere , the track peaked at number eighty @-@ nine in Japan and number ninety on the UK Singles Chart , but reached number twenty @-@ eight on the UK R & B Chart . It did however achieve some success in South Korea , peaking at number four on the international Digital Singles chart . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The accompanying music video for the remix of " Angels Cry " was directed by Carey 's husband , Nick Cannon . In December 2009 , Cannon spoke of the video 's concept , saying " This video is going to be simplistically genius ! No bells and whistles , just documenting history and brilliance . Two of the worlds greatest song writers in the studio crafting a masterpiece . I hope the world is ready to hear ' Angels Cry ' " . It premiered simultaneously with the video for " Up Out My Face " with Minaj on Vevo on January 28 , 2010 . The video shows Carey and Ne @-@ Yo collaborating on the song together in a recording studio . 
 The video starts with Carey walking in the rain to meet Ne @-@ Yo who is waiting for her in the studio . Clips of Carey singing in desperation in the rain are intercut with footage of her recording her vocals in the recording booth . For his scenes , Ne @-@ Yo sings as he stands next to as well as plays the piano as Carey reminisces by herself , while other scenes show him in the booth with Carey as they sing their parts together . At the video 's climax , both singers are belt the final note in the booth , which is followed by them walking out of the studio where it has stopped raining and the sun is shining . Robbie Daw wrote that the video gave him " chills " . He also commented on the use of product placement of Carey 's perfume M and her own brand of champagne . Melinda Newman of HitFix thought that the video appeared to have a bigger production budget than that of the video for " Up Out My Face " with Minaj , but noted that it was still " low @-@ key " for a Carey video . Newman further commented that while the singer appears to be wearing albeit little make @-@ up , she looked more natural and " beautiful " than ever . Leonie Cooper thought that the video made the " bland " song more appealing : " the video , with a moist Mariah <unk> in the rain , preposterous sequinned gold boots , a puppy in the studio , and shameless pimping of her latest perfume , kind of makes up for it . " 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 = 1995 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 1995 Giro d 'Italia was a Grand Tour cycling stage race that took place in May and June 1995 . It was the 78th edition of the event . The Giro began on 13 May with a stage that began in Perugia and ended Terni . The race came to a close on 4 June with a stage that ended in the Italian city of Milan . The race was won by the Swiss Tony Rominger of the Mapei – GB – <unk> team . Second and third were the Russian rider Evgeni Berzin and Latvian rider Piotr Ugrumov . 
 Mario Cipollini was the event 's first leg in a bunch sprint , allowing him to be the first rider to don the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) . The following stage was an individual time trial that was won by Rominger , who also gained enough time on Cipollini to take the race lead . Rominger built upon his lead by winning the remaining two time trial stages , along with the hilly stage 4 , and retained the lead for the duration of the race . By winning the Giro he became the third Swiss rider to win the event . 
 In addition to the general classification , Tony Rominger also won the points and intergiro classifications . <unk> rider Mariano Piccoli won the mountains classification . Gewiss – Ballan finished as the winners of the team classification . The team points classification , a system in which the teams ' riders are awarded points for placing within the top twenty in each stage and the points are then totaled for each team , was also won by Gewiss @-@ Ballan . 
 = = Teams = = 
 A total of 22 teams were invited to participate in the 1995 Giro d 'Italia . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , so the Giro began with a peloton of 198 cyclists . Out of the 198 riders that started this edition of the Giro d 'Italia , a total of 122 riders made it to the finish in Milan . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 The starting peloton included Evgeni Berzin , the 1994 winner . Berzin 's team , Gewiss – Ballan , also brought Latvian Piotr Ugrumov , a two @-@ time Grand Tour runner @-@ up . The two riders had developed a mutual distaste for each other . El País writers Paolo Viberti and Carlos Arribas believed that Swiss rider Tony Rominger and Latvian Piotr Ugrumov were the favorites to win the race , while Adrian Huber of Avui named Rominger as the sole favorite . Author Bill McGann believed that Rominger and Berzin were in great form coming into the race . Rominger entered the event after having recently won the Tour de Romandie . Aside from Rominger and Berzin , El Punt 's Luis Simon named 1988 winner Andrew Hampsten , Russian Pavel Tonkov , and Claudio Chiappucci amongst several other riders that could challenge for the overall title . 
 Italian Marco Pantani was seen by some to be a contender for to win the race . However , Pantani crashed during a training ride on 1 May and did not recover in time to participate . Two @-@ time winner Miguel Indurain chose not to enter the race in favor of preparing for the Tour de France . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The route for the 1995 Giro d 'Italia was unveiled by race director Carmine Castellano on 12 November 1994 in Milan . It contained three time trial events , all of which were individual . There were thirteen stages containing high mountains , of which five had summit finishes : stage 8 , to Massiccio del <unk> ; stage 11 , to Il <unk> ; stage 14 , to <unk> ; stage 15 , to <unk> ; and stage 20 , to <unk> @-@ Saint @-@ Jean . The organizers chose to include one rest day . When compared to the previous year 's race , the race was 6 km ( 4 mi ) longer , contained one more rest day , and the same amount of stages . The nineteenth stage was regarded as the queen stage as it featured the climbs of the Col Agnel , Col d 'Izoard , and Colle di <unk> . 
 The race route began in Perugia and traveled throughout the southern half of Italy for the first ten stages . After the stage 10 individual time trial , the riders were transferred to Tuscany by airplane , where the race remained in the northern half of the country and proceeded to cross into the higher and tougher mountains . There were a total of three stages that started outside Italy . Stage 15 ended in the Swiss city <unk> and served as the start for the race 's sixteenth stage . The mountainous twentieth stage began in the French city of Briançon . 
 The nineteenth stage was originally planned to stretch from Mondovì to Briançon over 202 km ( 126 mi ) . The stage finish was moved to part way up the ascent of the Col Agnel , due to avalanches . The stage finished in <unk> where the day 's intermediate sprint had been planned after 129 @.@ 9 km ( 81 mi ) of racing . The avalanche trapped several fans that had gotten their earlier , along with their cars . Ten spectators were injured and two were taken to the hospital . 
 Chiappucci believed that the descents of the mountains included in the race were very difficult . An El País writer found the route to be more mountainous than in years past . In addition , the writer mentioned that the increase in mountains within the route coupled with the reduced amount of time trial kilometers , including the lack of a prologue , favored Marco Pantani . Three @-@ time winner Gino Bartali believed that the route for the Giro was harder than the same year 's Tour de France course . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 Mario Cipollini won the race 's opening stage by several bike lengths to don the race 's first maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) . Cipollini lost the lead to Tony Rominger following the stage 2 individual time trial that was contested in rainy conditions . Rominger was able to gain almost a minute on each of the main general classification contenders including Piotr Ugrumov and Evgeni Berzin . The third stage was Cipollini 's second stage victory as he won the bunch sprint . The fourth stage was contested on a set circuit that was covered four times . The day 's breakaway managed to get a maximum of 14 ' 25 " before gradually being pulled in . Claudio Chiappucci attacked on the final lap but was pulled back in by the chasing peloton . Ugrumov , Berzin , and Berzin 's teammate Vladislav <unk> then attacked and managed to form a gap . Rominger chased after and caught the riders , then passed them and went on to win the stage . 
 The event 's fifth leg saw a breakaway succeed ; the group began with five riders and was reduced to three riders – Erik Breukink , Filippo Casagrande , and Rolf Sørensen – before the finish . Casagrande won the three @-@ man sprint to the line to take the day . The sixth stage resulted in a field sprint that was won by Nicola <unk> . The seventh stage featured an undulating stage profile , with a slight uphill finish . On the race 's final incline , Rominger attacked but his move was marked by several general classification contenders . Maurizio Fondriest managed to edge out Rominger in a dash for the line which saw him gain four seconds on Rominger due to time bonuses . The eighth stage featured the first summit finish of the race , to Massiccio del <unk> . The day 's breakaway was established early on in the day and managed to reach the final climb before the pursuing peloton . Stage winner Laudelino Cubino attacked with eight kilometers to go and rode solo until the finish ; the time he gained during the stage allowed him to move into third overall . 
 The ninth day of racing resulted in a bunch sprint that was won by Sørensen . The next stage of the race was a forty @-@ two kilometer individual time trial . Race leader Rominger won the leg by one minute and twenty @-@ four seconds and increased his overall lead to three minutes over Casagrande , who was in second place overall . Enrico Zaina and Nelson Rodríguez Serna were the first two riders to reach the stage 's final climb of Il Cioccio and the two stayed out in front until the finish which saw Zaina win the race to the line . With four kilometers left in the stage , Ugrumov and Berzin attempted to crack Rominger by attacking him repeatedly . After several attacks where the riders moves were marked , the riders agreed to ride to the finish together . The twelfth stage of the race saw the peloton arrive at the finish together ready for a bunch sprint . Cipollini originally won the stage but was relegated to last place on the stage after having been found to have leaned on Mario Manzoni during the dash to the line . Ján Svorada , who had come in second , was then made the stage winner . 
 The thirteenth stage saw the race begin to enter the smaller mountains within the Dolomites . The day 's breakaway formed on the climb of San Valentino . As the riders approached the finish , Pascal Richard edged <unk> Rincón for the stage victory . The following stage featured a summit finish to Val <unk> after a twenty kilometer climb . With eight kilometers to go , Berzin , Rominger , Ugrumov , and Rincón were in the leading group together . Rincón attacked and was allowed to ride solo to victory . Ugrumov attacked shortly after and Rominger was only able to follow initially ; however , Berzin was able to merge back with the two riders and the trio then rode to the finish together . Casagrande lost a large amount of time during the stage . Mariano Piccoli won the fifteenth leg after being a part of the day 's breakaway that managed to survive until the finish . On the descent of the second to last climb , Berzin attacked in an attempt to join the breakaway . Berzin was caught before the start of the stage 's final mountain pass . Ugrumov and Berzin repeatedly attacked Rominger on the final climb , but Rominger was able to neutralize each attack . 
 The sixteenth leg was a downhill stage from the Swiss Alps . A breakaway did form but was caught before the run into the finish as the peloton prepared for a sprint finish . The stage was initially won by Giovanni Lombardi , but he was deemed by race judges to have had an irregular sprint and the victory was awarded to the second placed rider Giuseppe <unk> . The next day consisted of a climbing time trial to <unk> . Rominger extended his advantage over all his competitors by winning the stage by a margin of one minute and thirty @-@ nine seconds over Berzin . The eighteenth stage was plagued by rainy conditions throughout the undulating course . The day 's breakaway consisted of sixteen riders , which Tony Rominger 's Mapei team chose not to chase down . Denis Zanette and Giuseppe <unk> formed an attack group from the breakaway and rode into the finish where Zanette managed to edge out <unk> for the win . The main contenders did not have any time gaps during the stage , leaving the general classification unchanged . 
 The nineteenth leg saw a breakaway of nine riders form off the front of the peloton . While racing , the finish line of the stage was moved to <unk> , a location that was part way up the climb of the Col Agnel because several avalanches occurred near the summit and prevented the riders from passing . Richard was the first rider to reach the new finish line and thus won his second stage . <unk> <unk> won the following stage after being a part of the day 's breakaway that dwindled as the stage wore on ; he out @-@ raced the only other remaining member Richard to win the stage . Behind , <unk> attacked and was only marked by both Berzin and Rincon , while Rominger trailed behind . Berzin and Ugrumov refused to work with one another and did not extend their advantage over Rominger . Rominger wound up losing minimal time . The race 's penultimate stage was marred by rain . On the second ascension of the <unk> , Berzin attacked and was able to distance himself ; however , he gave up the attack near the summit . He attacked again on the race 's final climb of <unk> di <unk> <unk> . Berzin rode solo to win the stage and managed to gain twenty @-@ five seconds on Ugrumov and Rominger . The final leg of the race was decided through a bunch sprint that was won by Giovanni Lombardi . Rominger became the third Swiss rider to win the Giro . 
 Three riders achieved multiple stage victories : Cipollini ( stages 1 and 3 ) , Rominger ( stages 2 , 4 , 10 , and 17 ) , and Richard ( stages 13 and 19 ) . Stage wins were achieved by eleven of the twenty @-@ one competing squads , eight of which won multiple stages . Mapei @-@ GB @-@ <unk> had four stage wins through Rominger . MG Maglificio @-@ <unk> won a total of three stage wins with Richard and Rolf <unk> ( stage 9 ) . Six teams won two stages . These were Mercatone Uno @-@ <unk> ( through Cipollini ) , Lampre @-@ Panaria ( Fondriest on stage 7 and <unk> on stage 12 ) , <unk> ( Casagrande on stage 5 and Piccoli on stage 15 ) , Aki @-@ <unk> ( <unk> on stage 16 and Zanette on stage 18 ) , Gewiss @-@ Ballan ( <unk> on stage 6 and Berzin on stage 21 ) , and Polti @-@ <unk> @-@ Santini ( <unk> on stage 20 and Lombardi on stage 22 ) . Kelme @-@ <unk> , Carrera Jeans @-@ Tassoni , and <unk> each won a single stage at the Giro , through Cubino ( stage 8 ) , Zaina ( stage 11 ) , and Rincón ( stage 14 ) , respectively . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 Four different jerseys were worn during the 1995 Giro d 'Italia . The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages – wore a pink jersey . This classification is the most important of the race , and its winner is considered as the winner of the Giro . 
 For the points classification , which awarded a purple ( or cyclamen ) jersey to its leader , cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15 ; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints . The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader . In this ranking , points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists . Each climb was ranked as either first , second or third category , with more points available for higher category climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded more points than the other first category climbs . The Cima Coppi for this Giro was the Col Agnel , but it was not climbed due to avalanches that prevented the riders from being able to pass on the roads . The intergiro classification was marked by a blue jersey . The calculation for the intergiro is similar to that of the general classification , in each stage there is a midway point that the riders pass through a point and where their time is stopped . As the race goes on , their times compiled and the person with the lowest time is the leader of the intergiro classification and wears the blue jersey . 
 Although no jersey was awarded , there was also a classification for the teams , in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added ; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time . There was another team classification that awarded points to each team based off their riding 's finishing position in every stage . The team with the highest total of points was the leader of the classification . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 = = = Team points classification = = = 
 = James Strang = 
 James Jesse Strang ( March 21 , 1813 – July 9 , 1856 ) was an American religious leader , politician and self @-@ proclaimed monarch . In 1844 he founded the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints ( Strangite ) , a faction of the Latter Day Saint movement that he claimed to be the sole legitimate continuation of the Church of Christ founded by Joseph Smith fourteen years before . A major contender for leadership of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints during the 1844 succession crisis , Strang vied with Brigham Young and Sidney Rigdon for control of the organization in Nauvoo , Illinois before his rejection there subsequently led him to start his own sect . While serving as Prophet , Seer and Revelator of his church , Strang reigned for six years as the crowned " king " of an ecclesiastical monarchy that he established on Beaver Island in the US state of Michigan . Building an organization that eventually rivaled Young 's in Utah , Strang gained nearly 12 @,@ 000 adherents prior to his murder in 1856 , which brought down his kingdom and all but extinguished his sect . 
 In contrast to Joseph Smith , who used the eminently republican title of " President of the Church , " Strang taught that the chief prophetic office embodied an overtly royal attribute , by which its occupant was to be not only the spiritual leader of his people , but their temporal king as well . He offered a sophisticated set of teachings that differed in many significant aspects from any other version of Mormonism , including that preached by Smith . To bolster his claims , Strang published translations of two purportedly long @-@ lost works : the Voree Record , deciphered from three metal plates reportedly unearthed in response to a vision ; and the Book of the Law of the Lord , supposedly transcribed from the Plates of Laban mentioned in the Book of Mormon . These are accepted as scripture by his followers , but not by any other Latter Day Saint church . Although his long @-@ term doctrinal influence on the Latter Day Saint movement was minimal , several early members of Strang 's organization helped to establish the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints , which became ( and remains ) the second @-@ largest Mormon sect . While most of Strang 's followers eventually disavowed him , a small but devout remnant continues to carry on his teachings and organization today . 
 In addition to his ecclesiastical calling , Strang served one full term and part of a second as a member of the Michigan House of Representatives , and assisted in the organization of Manitou County . He was also at various times an attorney , educator , temperance lecturer , newspaper editor , Baptist minister , correspondent for the New York Tribune , and amateur scientist . His survey of Beaver Island 's natural history was published by the Smithsonian Institution , remaining the definitive work on that subject for nearly a century , while his career in the Michigan legislature was praised even by his enemies . However , his polygamous lifestyle and sometimes abrasive personality made him many enemies inside his church and out of it , contributing to his ultimate demise . 
 While Strang 's organization is formally known as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints , the term " Strangite " is usually added to the title to avoid confusing them with other Latter Day Saint bodies carrying this or similar names . This follows a typical nineteenth @-@ century usage where followers of Brigham Young were sometimes referred to as " <unk> , " while those of Sidney Rigdon were called " <unk> , " followers of Joseph Smith III were called " <unk> " , and disciples of Strang became " Strangites " . 
 = = Childhood , education and conversion to Mormonism = = 
 James Jesse Strang was born March 21 , 1813 , in Scipio , Cayuga County , New York . He was the second of three children , and his parents had a good reputation in their community . James ' mother was very tender with him as a consequence of delicate health , yet she required him to render an account of all his actions and words while absent from her . In a brief autobiography he wrote in 1855 , Strang reported that he had attended grade school until age twelve , but that " the terms were usually short , the teachers inexperienced and ill qualified to teach , and my health such as to preclude attentive study or steady attendance . " He estimated that his time in a classroom during those years totaled six months . 
 But none of this meant that Strang was illiterate or simple . Although his teachers " not <unk> turned me off with little or no attention , as though I was too stupid to learn and too dull to feel neglect , " Strang recalled that he spent " long weary days ... upon the floor , thinking , thinking , thinking ... my mind wandered over fields that old men shrink from , seeking rest and finding none till darkness gathered thick around and I burst into tears . " He studied works by Thomas Paine and the Comte de Volney , whose book Les <unk> exerted a significant influence on the future prophet . 
 As a youth , Strang kept a rather profound personal diary , written partly in a secret code that was not deciphered until over one hundred years after it was authored ( by Strang 's own grandson Mark Strang , a banker in Long Beach , California ) . This journal contains Strang 's musings on a variety of topics , including his desire to " rival Caesar or Napoleon " and his regret that by age nineteen , he had not yet become a general or member of the state legislature , which he saw as being essential by that point in his life to his quest for fame . However , Strang 's diary equally reveals a heartfelt desire to be of service to his fellow man , together with agonized frustration at not knowing how he might do so as a penniless , unknown youth from upstate New York . 
 At age twelve , Strang was baptized a Baptist . He did not wish to follow his father 's calling as a farmer , so he took up the study of law . Strang was admitted to the bar in New York at age 23 and later at other places where he resided . He became county Postmaster and edited a local newspaper , the Randolph Herald . Later , in the midst of his myriad duties on Beaver Island , he would find time to found and publish the Daily Northern Islander , the first newspaper in northern Michigan . 
 Strang , who once described himself as a " cool philosopher " and a freethinker , became a Baptist minister but left in February 1844 to join the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints . He quickly found favor with Joseph Smith , though they had known each other only a short time , and was baptized personally by him on February 25 , 1844 . On March 3 of that year he was ordained an Elder by Joseph 's brother Hyrum and sent forthwith at Smith 's request to Wisconsin , to establish a Mormon stake at Voree . Shortly after Strang 's departure , Joseph Smith was murdered by an anti @-@ Mormon mob in Carthage , Illinois . 
 = = Succession claim and notable early allies = = 
 Following Smith 's demise , several men claimed the right to lead the Latter Day Saints . The most significant of these were Brigham Young , president of Smith 's Twelve Apostles ; Sidney Rigdon , the sole surviving member of Smith 's First Presidency ; and James Strang . A power struggle ensued , and Young eventually led the bulk of Smith 's followers to Utah while Rigdon led a smaller group to Pennsylvania . As a newcomer to the faith Strang did not possess the name recognition enjoyed by his rivals , so his prospects of assuming Smith 's prophetic mantle appeared shaky at first . But this did not dissuade him . Though the Quorum of Twelve quickly published a notice in the Times and Seasons of Strang 's excommunication , Strang insisted that he had never received a legitimate trial . He equally asserted that the Twelve had no right to sit in judgment on him , as he was the lawful President of the church . 
 To bolster his claim Strang produced a " Letter of Appointment " allegedly from Smith , carrying a Nauvoo postmark and dated June 18 , 1844 , just nine days before Smith 's murder . He furthermore testified that an angel ordained him as Joseph Smith 's successor at the time Smith died . Smith and Strang were some 225 miles ( 362 km ) apart at the time , and Strang offered witnesses to affirm that he had made his announcement before news of Smith 's demise was publicly available . Strang 's letter is held today by Yale University . Although the postmark is legitimate , some modern analysts have asserted that Joseph Smith 's signature on the third page is a forgery . One former Strangite claimed that Strang 's law partner conspired with Strang to fabricate his Letter of Appointment and the Voree Plates , though no proof of this was ever produced . 
 Strang 's letter convinced several eminent Mormons of his claims , including Book of Mormon witnesses John and David Whitmer , Martin Harris and Hiram Page . In addition Apostles John E. Page , William E. M <unk> , and William Smith , together with Nauvoo Stake President William Marks , and Bishop George Miller , accepted Strang at first . A newspaper affiliated with Strang , the Voree Herald , claimed that Joseph Smith 's mother , Lucy Mack Smith , and three of his sisters accepted Strang 's claims , although this is disputed . The newspaper alleges that Lucy Smith wrote to one Reuben <unk> : " I am satisfied that Joseph appointed J.J. Strang . It is verily so . " According to Joseph Smith 's brother William , all of his family ( except for Hyrum and Samuel Smith 's widows ) , initially endorsed Strang . 
 Also championing Strang was John C. Bennett , a physician and libertine who had enjoyed a less than stellar career as Joseph Smith 's Assistant President and mayor of Nauvoo . Invited by Strang to join him in Voree , Bennett was instrumental in establishing a so @-@ called " Halcyon Order of the Illuminati " there , with Strang as its " Imperial Primate . " Eventually Bennett 's profligate ways caught up with him , as in Nauvoo , and Strang expelled him in 1847 . His " order " fell by the wayside and has no role in <unk> today , though it did lead to conflict between Strang and some of his associates . 
 = = From monogamist to polygamist = = 
 About 12 @,@ 000 Latter Day Saints ultimately accepted Strang 's claims . However , not all of these followed him to Beaver Island in Lake Michigan , where church headquarters was moved in 1848 . Most of his initial adherents , including all of those listed above ( with the exception of George Miller , who remained loyal to Strang until death ) , would leave Strang 's church before his demise . John E. Page departed in July 1849 , accusing Strang of dictatorial tendencies and concurring with Bennett 's furtive " Illuminati " order . Martin Harris had broken with Strang by January 1847 , after a failed mission to England . Hiram Page and the <unk> also left around this time . 
 Many defections , however , were due to Strang 's seemingly abrupt " about @-@ face " on the turbulent subject of polygamy . <unk> opposed to the practice at first , Strang reversed course in 1849 to become one of its strongest advocates , marrying five wives ( including his original spouse , Mary ) and fathering fourteen children . Since many of his early disciples viewed him as a monogamous counterweight to Brigham Young 's polygamous version of Mormonism , Strang 's decision to embrace plural marriage proved costly to him and his organization . Strang defended his new tenet by claiming that , far from enslaving or demeaning women , polygamy would liberate and " elevate " them by allowing them to choose the best possible mate based upon any factors deemed important to them — even if that mate were already married to someone else . Rather than being forced to wed " corrupt and degraded sires " due to the scarcity of more suitable men , a woman could marry the man she saw as the most compatible to herself , the best candidate to father her children and give her the finest possible life , no matter how many other wives he might have . 
 Strang 's first wife was Mary Perce , whom he married on November 20 , 1836 , when she was eighteen and he was twenty @-@ three . They were separated in May 1851 , though they remained legally married until Strang 's death . His second wife , married on July 13 , 1849 , was nineteen @-@ year @-@ old Elvira Eliza Field ( who disguised herself at first as " Charlie J. Douglas , " Strang 's purported nephew , before revealing her true identity in 1850 ) . Strang 's third wife was thirty @-@ one @-@ year @-@ old Betsy McNutt , whom he married on January 19 , 1852 ; his fourth was nineteen @-@ year @-@ old Sarah Adelia Wright , married on July 15 , 1855 . Ironically , decades after Strang 's death , Sarah would divorce her second husband , one Dr. Wing , due to his interest in polygamy . Strang 's last wife was eighteen @-@ year @-@ old Phoebe Wright , cousin to Sarah , whom he wed on October 27 , 1855 , less than one year before his murder . 
 Sarah Wright described Strang as " a very mild @-@ spoken , kind man to his family , although his word was law . " She wrote that while each wife had her own bedroom , they shared meals and devotional time together with Strang and that life in their household was " as pleasant as possible . " On the other hand , Strang and Phoebe Wright 's daughter , Eugenia , wrote in 1936 that after only eight months of marriage , her mother had " begun to feel dissatisfied with polygamy , though she loved him [ Strang ] devotedly all her life . " 
 = = Theological contributions = = 
 = = = Publications = = = 
 Like Joseph Smith , James Strang reported numerous visions , unearthed and translated allegedly ancient metal plates using what he said was the Biblical <unk> and <unk> , and claimed to have restored long @-@ lost spiritual knowledge to humankind . Like Smith , he presented witnesses to authenticate the records he claimed to have received . Unlike Smith , however , Strang offered his plates to the public for examination . The non @-@ Mormon Christopher Sholes — inventor of the typewriter and editor of a local newspaper — perused Strang 's " Voree Plates " , a minuscule brass chronicle Strang said he had been led to by a vision in 1845 . Sholes offered no opinion on Strang 's find , but described the would @-@ be prophet as " honest and earnest " and opined that his followers ranked " among the most honest and intelligent men in the neighborhood . " Strang published his translation of these plates as the " Voree Record , " purporting to be the last testament of one " Rajah <unk> of <unk> , " who had lived in the area centuries earlier and wished to leave a brief statement for posterity . While many scoffed , Strangites assert that two modern scholars have affirmed that the text on the plates appears to represent a genuine , albeit unknown , language . This assertion has not been verified by independent sources , however . The Voree Plates disappeared around 1900 , and their current whereabouts are unknown . 
 Strang also claimed to have translated the " Plates of Laban " described in the Book of Mormon . This translation was published in 1851 as the Book of the Law of the Lord , said to be the original Law given to Moses and mentioned in II Chronicles 34 : 14 – 15 . Greatly expanded and republished in 1856 , this book served as the constitution for Strang 's spiritual kingdom on Beaver Island , and is still accepted as scripture by Strangites . One distinctive feature ( besides its overtly monarchial tone ) is its restoration of a " missing " commandment to the Decalogue : " Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself . " Strang insisted that versions of the Decalogue found in Bibles used by other churches — including other Latter Day Saint churches — contain only nine commandments , not ten . 
 Strang received several other revelations , which while never formally added to his church 's Doctrine and Covenants , are nevertheless accepted as scripture by his followers . These concerned , among other things , Baptism for the Dead , the building of a temple in Voree , the standing of Sidney Rigdon , and an invitation for Joseph Smith III , eldest son of Joseph Smith , to take a position as Counselor in Strang 's First Presidency . " Young Joseph " never accepted this calling and refused to have anything to do with Strang 's organization . Strang also authored The Diamond , an attack on the claims of Sidney Rigdon and Brigham Young , and The Prophetic Controversy , ostensibly for Mrs. Martha Coray , co @-@ author with Lucy Mack Smith of The History of Joseph Smith by His Mother . Coray , a partisan of Brigham Young 's , had challenged " the vain usurper " to provide convincing evidence of his claims , and Strang attempted to oblige in this open letter addressed to her . Coray 's reaction to Strang 's missive has not been preserved . 
 = = = Distinctive dogmas = = = 
 Some of Strang 's teachings differed substantially from those of other Latter Day Saint leaders , including Joseph Smith . For instance , Strang rejected the traditional Christian doctrines of the Trinity and the Virgin Birth of Jesus Christ , together with the Mormon doctrine of " plurality of gods . " A monotheist , he insisted that there was but one eternal God of all the universe , the Father , and that " progression to godhood " ( a doctrine allegedly taught by Joseph Smith toward the end of his life ) was impossible . God had always been God , said Strang , and He was but one Person and not three , as in the traditional Christian Trinity . Jesus Christ was presented as the natural @-@ born son of Mary and Joseph , who was chosen from before all time to be the Savior of mankind but who had to be born as an ordinary mortal of two human parents ( rather than being the offspring of the Father or the Holy Spirit ) to fulfill his Messianic role . Strang claimed that the earthly Christ was in essence " adopted " as God 's son at birth , and fully revealed as such during the Transfiguration . After proving himself to God by living a perfectly sinless life , he was enabled to provide an acceptable sacrifice for the sins of men , prior to his resurrection and ascension . 
 Furthermore , Strang denied that God could do all things , and insisted that some things were as impossible for Him as for us . Thus , he saw no essential conflict between science and religion , and while he never openly championed evolution , he did state that God was limited in His power by the matter He was working with and by the eons of time required to " organize " and shape it . Strang spoke glowingly of a future generation who would " make religion a science , " to be " studied by as exact rules as <unk> . " " The mouth of the Seer will be opened , " he prophesied , " and the whole earth enlightened . " 
 Musing at length on the nature of sin and evil , Strang wrote that of all things that God could give to man , He could never give him experience . Thus , if " free agency " were to be real , said Strang , humanity must be given the opportunity to fail and to learn from its own mistakes . The ultimate goal for each human being was to willingly conform oneself to the " revealed character " of God in every respect , preferring good to evil not out of a fear of punishment or any desire for reward , but rather solely " on account of the innate loveliness of undefiled goodness ; of pure unalloyed holiness . " 
 = = = Practices = = = 
 Strang believed strongly in the seventh @-@ day Sabbath , and enjoined it in lieu of Sunday ; the Strangite church continues this tradition . He advocated baptism for the dead , and practiced it to a limited extent in Voree and on Beaver Island . He also introduced animal sacrifice – not for sin , but as a part of Strangite celebration rituals . Animal sacrifices and baptisms for the dead are not currently practiced by the Strangite organization , though belief in each is still required . Strang attempted to construct a temple in Voree , but was prevented from completing it due to the poverty and lack of cooperation of his followers . No " endowment " rituals comparable to those in the Utah LDS and <unk> churches appear to have existed among his followers . Eternal marriage formed a part of Strang 's teaching , though he did not require it to be performed in a temple ( as in the LDS church ) . Thus , such marriages are still contracted in Strang 's church in the absence of any Strangite temple or " endowment " ceremony . Alcohol , tobacco , coffee and tea were prohibited , as in many Latter Day Saint denominations . Polygamy is no longer practiced by Strang 's followers , though belief in its correctness is still affirmed . 
 Strang allowed women to hold the Priesthood offices of Priest and Teacher , unique among all Latter Day Saint factions during his lifetime . He welcomed African Americans into his church , and ordained at least two to the eldership . Strang also mandated conservation of land and resources , requiring the building of parks and retention of large forests in his kingdom . He wrote an eloquent refutation of the " Solomon Spalding theory " of the Book of Mormon 's authorship , and defended the ministry and teachings of Joseph Smith – as he understood them . 
 = = Coronation and troubled reign on Beaver Island = = 
 Strang claimed that he was to occupy the office of king described in the Book of the Law of the Lord . He insisted that this authority was incumbent upon all holders of the prophetic office from the beginning of time , and his followers believe that Smith himself was crowned secretly as " king " of the Kingdom of God before his murder . Strang was accordingly crowned in 1850 by his counselor and Prime Minister , an actor named George J. Adams . About 300 people witnessed his coronation , for which he wore a bright red flannel robe topped by a white collar with black speckles . His tin crown was described in one account as " a shiny metal ring with a cluster of glass stars in the front . " Strang also sported a breastplate and carried a wooden scepter . He " reigned " for six years , and the date of his coronation , July 8 , is still mandated as one of the two most important dates in the Strangite church year ( the other being April 6 , the anniversary of the founding of Joseph Smith 's church ) . 
 Strang never claimed to be the king of Beaver Island itself , nor of any other geographical entity . Rather , he claimed to be king over his church , which he saw as the true " Kingdom of God " prophesied in Scripture and destined to spread over all the earth . Nor did Strang ever say that his " kingdom " supplanted United States sovereignty over Beaver Island . However , since his sect was the main religious body on the isle , claiming the allegiance of most of its inhabitants , Strang often asserted authority even over non @-@ Strangites on Beaver — which ultimately caused him and his followers a great deal of grief . Furthermore , he and many of his disciples were accused of forcibly appropriating property and revenue on the island , which made him few friends among the non @-@ Mormon " gentiles . " 
 On the other hand , Strang and his people lived in apprehension of what their non @-@ member neighbors might do next . Some Strangites were beaten up while going to the post office to collect their mail , and some of their homes were robbed and even seized by " gentiles " while Strangite men were away . On July 4 , 1850 , a drunken mob of fishermen vowed to kill the " Mormons " or drive them out , only to be awed into submission when Strang fired a cannon ( which he had secretly acquired ) at them . Competition for business and jobs added to tensions on the island , as did the increasing Strangite monopoly on local government , made sure after Beaver and adjacent islands were attached first to Emmet County in 1853 , then later organized into their own insular county of Manitou in 1855 . 
 As a result of his coronation , together with lurid tales spread by George Adams ( who had been excommunicated by Strang a few months after the ceremony ) , Strang was accused of treason , counterfeiting , trespass on government land , and theft , among other crimes . He was brought to trial in Detroit , Michigan , after President Millard Fillmore ordered US District Attorney George Bates to investigate the rumors about Strang and his colony . Strang 's successful trial defense brought him considerable favorable press , which he leveraged to run for , and win , a seat in the Michigan state legislature as a Democrat in 1853 . Facing a determined effort to deny him this seat due to the hostility of his enemies , he was permitted to address the legislature in his defense , after which the Michigan House of Representatives voted twice ( first unanimously , then a second time by a 49 – 11 margin ) to allow " King Strang " to join them . 
 In the 1853 legislative session , Strang introduced ten bills , five of which passed . The Detroit Advertiser , on February 10 , 1853 , wrote of Strang : " Mr. Strang ’ s course as a member of the present Legislature , has disarmed much of the prejudices which have previously surrounded him . Whatever may be said or thought of the peculiar sect of which he is the local head , I take pleasure in stating that throughout this session he has conducted himself with the degree of decorum and propriety which have been equaled by his industry , sagacity , good temper , apparent regard for the true interests of the people , and the obligations of his official oath . " He was reelected in 1855 , and did much to organize the upper portion of Michigan 's lower peninsula into counties and townships . Strang ardently fought the illegal practice of trading liquor to local Native American tribes . This made him many enemies among those non @-@ Strangite residents of Beaver and nearby Mackinac Island who profited mightily from this illicit trade . 
 = = Assassination = = 
 James Strang made foes among his own people , too . One of these , Thomas Bedford , had been flogged for adultery on Strang 's orders , and felt considerable resentment toward the " king . " Another , Dr. H.D. McCulloch , had been excommunicated for drunkenness and other alleged misdeeds , after previously enjoying Strang 's favor and several high offices in local government . These conspired against Strang with Alexander Wentworth and Dr. J. <unk> , who had allegedly endeavored ( unsuccessfully ) to blackmail the Strangites into paying his numerous bad debts . A decree that female Strangites must wear " bloomers " only added fuel to the fire . Pistols were procured , and the four conspirators began several days of target practice while finalizing the details of their murderous plan . 
 Although Strang apparently knew that Bedford and the others were gunning for him , he seems not to have taken them very seriously . " We laugh with bitter scorn at all these threats , " he wrote in the Northern Islander , just days before his murder . Strang 's refusal to employ a bodyguard or to carry a firearm or other weapon made him an easy target . 
 On Monday , June 16 , 1856 , Strang was waylaid around 7 : 00 PM on the dock at the harbor of St. James , chief city of Beaver Island , by Wentworth and Bedford , who shot him in the back . All of this was carried out in full view of several officers and men of the USS Michigan , a US Naval vessel docked in the harbor . Not one person on board the ship made any effort to warn or to aid the intended victim . 
 Strang was hit three times : one bullet grazed his head , another lodged in his cheek and a third in his spine , paralyzing him from the waist down . One of the assassins then savagely pistol @-@ whipped the fallen prophet before running aboard the nearby vessel with his companion , where both claimed sanctuary . Some accused Captain McBlair of the Michigan of complicity in , or at least foreknowledge of , the assassination plot , though no hard evidence of this was ever forthcoming . The so @-@ called " King of Beaver Island " was taken to Voree , where he lived for three weeks , dying on July 9 , 1856 at the age of 43 . After refusing to deliver Bedford and Wentworth to the local sheriff , McBlair transported them to Mackinac Island , where they were given a mock trial , fined $ 1 @.@ 25 , released , and then feted by the locals . None of the plotters was ever punished for his crimes . 
 = = Death of a kingdom = = 
 While Strang lingered on his deathbed in Voree , his Michigan enemies determined to extinguish his Beaver Island kingdom . On July 5 , 1856 , on what Michigan historian Byron M. <unk> later called " the most disgraceful day in Michigan history , " a drunken mob of " gentiles " from Mackinac and elsewhere descended upon the island and forcibly evicted every Strangite from it . Strang 's subjects on the island — numbering approximately 2 @,@ 600 persons — were herded onto hastily commandeered steamers , most after being robbed of their money and other personal possessions , and unceremoniously dumped onto docks along the shores of Lake Michigan . A few moved back to Voree , while the rest scattered across the country . 
 Strang refused to appoint a successor , telling his apostles to take care of their families as best they could , and await divine instruction . While his supporters endeavored to keep his church alive , Strang 's unique dogma requiring his successor to be ordained by angels handicapped his church in its search for a new prophet . Lorenzo Dow Hickey , the last of Strang 's apostles , emerged as an ad @-@ hoc leader until his death in 1897 , followed by Wingfield W. Watson , a High Priest in Strang 's organization ( until he died in 1922 ) . Neither of these men ever claimed Strang 's office or authority , however . Left without a prophet to guide them , most of Strang 's members ( including all of his wives ) departed his church in the years after his murder . Most later joined the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints , which was established in 1860 . A few , however , continue to carry on Strang 's mission as best they can , while awaiting a new successor to their fallen founder . 
 Strang 's disciples today are divided into two main factions ; one is led by a Presiding High Priest , who does not claim to have the authority or priesthood office possessed by Joseph Smith or James Strang . The other claims that the first faction is in error , and that by incorporating in 1961 , it lost its identity as a faithful continuation of Strang 's organization . This second group claims that it is the sole true remnant of James Strang 's church . Missionary work is no longer emphasized among the Strangites ( unlike the LDS and many other Latter Day Saint sects ) , as they tend to believe that after three murdered prophets ( Joseph Smith , Hyrum Smith and James Strang ) God closed His dispensation to the " gentiles " of the West . Consequently , Strang 's church has continued to dwindle until the present day . Current membership figures vary between 50 and 300 persons , depending upon the source consulted . 
 While proving a key player in the 1844 succession struggle , Strang 's long @-@ term influence on the Latter Day Saint movement was minimal . His doctrinal innovations had little impact outside of his church , and he was largely ignored until recent historians began to reexamine his life and career . Even the county ( Manitou ) he had fought to establish was abolished by the Michigan legislature in 1895 , removing the last tangible remnant of Strang 's temporal empire . For all his efforts , Strang 's most vital ( albeit unintended ) contribution to the Latter Day Saint religion turned out to be providing some of the impetus behind creation of the Reorganized Church , which became a major rival to the Utah @-@ based LDS Church and other Latter Day Saint groups — including his own . 
 = Scott Stevens = 
 Ronald Scott Stevens ( born April 1 , 1964 ) is a retired professional ice hockey defenceman , and current assistant coach of the Minnesota Wild . Stevens played 22 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Washington Capitals , St. Louis Blues , and the New Jersey Devils . Although offensively capable , Stevens was largely known for his defensive play and his heavy body checking on opponents . 
 Stevens started his career with the Capitals , where he helped the team make the playoffs for the first time . After spending a season with the Blues , he was acquired by the Devils through arbitration . <unk> the team 's defence @-@ first mentality , he captained the Devils to four Stanley Cup Finals appearances in nine years , winning three of them . In 2000 , he won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the Stanley Cup playoffs . Despite his team success with the Devils , he never won the Norris Trophy as the league 's best defenceman . His career came to an end after a slapshot hit his head and caused post @-@ concussion syndrome . He was later inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2007 , his first year of eligibility . Stevens retired with the most games played by an NHL defenceman ( 1635 games ) , later to be passed by Chris Chelios . Stevens was also the youngest player in league history to reach 1 @,@ 500 games played , playing in his 1,500th game at age 37 years , 346 days . He did not have a negative plus / minus in any of his 22 NHL seasons , and had the most penalty minutes of any player enshrined in the Hall of Fame until Chris Chelios was inducted in 2013 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stevens was born in Kitchener to Larry and Mary Stevens , the middle child of three brothers . Larry owned a paper products company , and was also a semi @-@ professional Canadian football player . All three Stevens brothers played hockey as children ; older brother Geoff would later go on to be a scout for the New Jersey Devils , while Mike , the youngest , enjoyed a brief NHL career with several teams . Growing up near Toronto , he was a fan of the Maple Leafs , and idolized Leafs defenceman Börje Salming . Stevens attended Eastwood Collegiate Institute , where he played middle linebacker . One of his teammates was Markus Koch , who would go on to win a Super Bowl with the Washington Redskins . Hockey was Stevens ' true passion , however . He and his brothers often played hockey in the house , ruining the furniture repeatedly . He eventually earned a spot on the Kitchener Junior B team , and passed on the opportunity to tour Czechoslovakia with the Kitchener midget team in order to play there . His play impressed scouts , and he was taken ninth overall by his hometown Kitchener Rangers in the 1981 Ontario Hockey League draft . 
 The 1981 – 82 Kitchener Rangers were a team that featured several future NHL players . The defensive corps included Dave Shaw and Al MacInnis , Wendell Young was the team 's starting goaltender , and the top scoring line on the team was Jeff Larmer , Brian Bellows , and Grant Martin . Stevens and Shaw were an integral part of the Rangers ' defence , playing in every game of the season en route to the team 's Memorial Cup victory . In addition , both played in the OHL All @-@ Star Game . Rangers coach Joe Crozier commented on him , saying " He 's come a long way this year ... He 's strong , tough , handles the puck well and has tremendous hockey sense . " Stevens led all rookie defencemen in scoring , and he was named the second best defensive defenceman and second best body @-@ checker in a poll of OHL coaches . 
 = = Washington Capitals = = 
 Stevens was taken fifth overall in the 1982 NHL Entry Draft by the Washington Capitals . Due to injuries to other players during training camp , Stevens made the team at 18 years old , and never played a game in the minor leagues . He made an immediate impact , scoring on his first shot in his first NHL game . He scored 25 points in his debut season , and made the All @-@ Rookie Team . In addition , he led all rookie defencemen in penalty minutes . He finished third in the voting for the Calder Memorial Trophy , which is awarded to the league 's Rookie of the Year . He was also named the Capitals ' Rookie of the Year . Stevens ' debut with the Capitals coincided with the team 's first playoff appearance , although they were eliminated in the first round by the New York Islanders . 
 The following year , he would nearly double his point total from the previous year , finishing with 13 goals and 32 assists for 45 points . Only teammate Larry Murphy had more points among defencemen . His 201 penalty minutes would lead the team ; he would ultimately lead the Capitals in the category five times during his tenure with the team , and eventually set the team record for most career penalty minutes by a defenceman . However , Stevens ' personal success did not translate to the Capitals , who were eliminated in the second round of the playoffs by the Islanders . During this period , Stevens learned from veterans Rod Langway and defensive linemate Brian Engblom on the finer points of playing defence . Head coach Bryan Murray also helped calm the fiery young Stevens , who would learn to fight less and play harder . Stevens spoke fondly of his time with the Capitals years later , saying : 
 We had a great bunch of guys and we worked hard . We were great defensively . We might have been at times a little challenged scoring and we might have been a bit challenged in the goal at times ... But there are no regrets . 
 The 1984 – 85 season would be a breakout year for Stevens . He set a team record for defencemen by scoring 16 power play goals , and tied a team record for goals by a defenceman with 21 . His performance was good enough to land him a spot in the All @-@ Star Game . Stevens would lead all Capitals defencemen in scoring for the first time , finishing the year with 21 goals and 44 assists , and earned the team 's Fan Favorite Award . His offensive abilities and size made Murray consider moving him to winger . The Capitals finished second in the Patrick Division , but were out of the playoffs early again , this time courtesy of the Islanders . Before the next season , the Capitals acquired Dwight Schofield in the waiver draft . Schofield was known for his abilities as an enforcer , and his goal was to keep other teams ' hitters away from Stevens and Langway , who were deemed too valuable to lose to penalties . The plan worked , as Stevens finished with 165 penalty minutes , the lowest in his career to that point . He added 15 goals and 38 assists that season as well . The Capitals continued their playoff woes , however ; after defeating the Islanders in the first round , they lost to the New York Rangers in the division finals . 
 The 1986 – 87 season saw Stevens return to his old ways , as he spent a career @-@ high 283 minutes in the penalty box . The total set a Capitals record ( since broken ) for penalty minutes in a season . Despite missing three games with a broken right index finger , an injury he suffered against the Islanders , Stevens would finish the year third on the team in scoring with 61 points ; his 51 assists were also good enough for second on the Capitals . The Caps were once again eliminated by the Islanders in the first round of the playoffs . 
 During the 1987 – 88 season , Stevens set Capitals records for most assists and most points by a defenceman in a game , with five assists against the Los Angeles Kings on December 6 , 1987 . Later that season , he would score at least one assist in eight consecutive games , setting another team record for defencemen . He finished the year second on the team in scoring with 12 goals and 60 assists for 72 points , tops among all Capitals blueliners . He ended up finishing second behind Boston Bruins defenceman Ray Bourque in the voting for the Norris Trophy . In addition , he was named as a NHL First Team All @-@ Star . Stevens would suffer a shoulder injury in the first round of the playoffs against the Flyers , a series the Capitals would win . He returned in time for the Capitals ' divisional finals against his future team , the New Jersey Devils . Despite tying a team record by posting four assists in Game 6 of the series , the Capitals fell four games to three . 
 The Capitals won the Patrick Division in the 1988 – 89 season , and Stevens ' 68 points ( including a team @-@ leading 61 assists ) led Caps defencemen . He had 225 penalty minutes ; this was the last time Stevens would have over 200 minutes in his career . He was named to his second All @-@ Star game , and added an assist as the Wales Conference lost to the Campbell Conference 9 @-@ 5 . The Caps could not translate their regular season success into the playoffs , however , as they lost in the first round to the Flyers . The 1989 – 90 season saw mixed success for Stevens . Personally he struggled , as he was beset with injuries , including a broken foot that caused him to miss nearly two months . In addition , he was suspended for three games for gouging Chicago Blackhawks player Dave Manson in the eye during a fight . Stevens said he never hit Manson 's eye , but that the eye hit Stevens ' helmet during the fight . Missing a third of the season led to Stevens ' lowest point total since his rookie year ; he finished with just 11 goals and 29 assists for 40 points , although it was still second among Capitals defencemen . Despite his lowered stats , the Capitals made their furthest inroads in the playoffs ever . After defeating the Devils in the first round and the Rangers in the second round , the Capitals were in the conference finals for the first time in team history . Unfortunately , they were swept by the Bruins . 
 Over eight seasons with the Capitals , Stevens finished with 98 goals and 429 points in 601 games . He also set team records ( all since broken ) for penalty minutes ( 1 @,@ 630 ) , games played by a defenceman ( 601 ) , points by a defenceman ( 429 ) , goals by a defenceman ( 98 ) , assists by a defenceman ( 331 ) , playoff games played ( 67 ) , playoff points ( 53 ) , playoff assists ( 44 ) and playoff goals by a defenceman ( 9 ) . 
 = = St. Louis Blues = = 
 After eight seasons in Washington , Stevens felt it was time to move on . The St. Louis Blues courted him and offered a four @-@ year deal worth $ 5 @.@ 145 million . Since he was a restricted free agent , Washington had the option to match the offer sheet ; they declined , however , and received two first round picks plus $ 100 @,@ 000 in cash , turning into five first @-@ round picks if the Capitals did not have a top @-@ 7 draft pick in the 1991 or 1992 entry drafts , as compensation ( two of these picks would become Sergei Gonchar and Brendan Witt ) . 
 Stevens ' signing had far @-@ reaching ramifications on player contracts in the NHL . At the time , the deal made him the highest @-@ paid defenceman in the league . In addition , the deal included a $ 1 @.@ 4 million signing bonus . Several defencemen considered superior players to Stevens , including Ray Bourque and Chris Chelios , were earning less money , and Capitals defenceman Kevin Hatcher held out until he received a contract similar to that of Stevens . General managers worried that these players would begin demanding bigger contracts . The players did end up asking for more money , and this escalation was one of the factors in the 1994 – 95 NHL lockout several seasons later . 
 After his arrival in St. Louis , Stevens was named captain of the Blues . He scored 5 goals and added 44 assists for 49 points , good enough for fifth on a team led by Brett Hull and Adam Oates . He made the Campbell Conference All @-@ Star Team as well . The Blues were eliminated in the second round of the playoffs by the Minnesota North Stars . 
 = = New Jersey Devils = = 
 Stevens ' time with the Blues would only last one season . In the offseason following the 1990 – 91 NHL season , the Blues signed Brendan Shanahan from the New Jersey Devils , who , like Stevens the year before , was a restricted free agent , entitling the Devils to compensation . As the Blues still owed first round picks to the Capitals ( now five instead of two , as the 1991 pick given up ended up being the 21st pick ) , other compensation had to be negotiated , and the Blues and Devils could not agree on what the compensation was ; the Blues offered goalie Curtis Joseph , forward Rod Brind 'Amour , and two draft picks , but the Devils only wanted Stevens . The case went to arbitration , and arbitrator Edward Houston awarded Stevens to the Devils as compensation on September 4 , 1991 . 
 = = = 1991 – 1995 = = = 
 Initially , Stevens refused to report to the Devils for training camp , and would not report until September 26 , 1991 , 22 days after the arbitration ruling . The Devils were already worried after captain Kirk Muller walked out of camp . Stevens and his wife had made plans to settle in St. Louis , and he wanted to end his career with the Blues . In addition , he was concerned about the apparent lack of unity in the organization , citing Muller 's walkout as proof . Several Devils players were upset over the feeling that Stevens was being forced upon the team ; some players , including Ken Daneyko , wanted more money , while other players wanted general manager Lou Lamoriello to trade Stevens . He would eventually report to the Devils three weeks later . 
 Stevens finished his first season in New Jersey fifth on the team in scoring , first among defencemen and good enough for a spot on the Second All @-@ Star Team . He earned a spot on the All @-@ Star roster for the second consecutive season , and would miss only one All @-@ Star game for the remainder of his career as a Devil . The Devils would be taken out of the playoffs by their rival , the Rangers , in seven games . In the offseason , Stevens replaced Bruce Driver as team captain , a title he held until his retirement . 
 Although he would miss part of the following season with a concussion , his 12 goals and 45 assists still led all Devils defencemen in scoring , The Devils were eliminated in the first round of the playoffs again , losing to the Pittsburgh Penguins in five games . Stevens stepped up his offensive game in 1993 – 94 . He posted 18 goals and 60 assists , good enough for the team lead and a career high in points . He won the NHL Plus @-@ Minus Award , finishing with a + 53 ; only Vladimir Konstantinov has led the league with a higher plus / minus rating since Stevens ' win . The Devils made it all the way to the Conference Finals against the Rangers , where they fell in double overtime of Game 7 . Stevens finished as a runner @-@ up to Ray Bourque for the Norris Trophy ; the four @-@ vote difference was the closest in Norris Trophy voting history . 
 After the 1993 – 94 season , Stevens was a potential free agent . Officials from the St. Louis Blues discussed a return to the team with him , and persuaded him to sign an offer sheet worth $ 17 million over four years on July 4 , 1994 . Five days later , the Devils matched the offer , and thus Stevens remained in New Jersey . However , the Devils later found out that Stevens had heard from St. Louis management before the free agency period began , which was illegal under NHL policy . After a five @-@ year investigation , the league fined the Blues $ 1 @.@ 5 million USD , and awarded the Devils two St. Louis first @-@ round draft picks . Devils general manager Lou Lamoriello felt the punishment was not enough ; he wanted five first @-@ round draft picks plus damages . Despite the investigation , there was no evidence that Stevens was aware of any wrongdoing . 
 After the 1994 – 95 season was delayed due to an owners ' lockout , the Devils were off to a slow start , winning only 9 of their first 24 games . Despite the reduced schedule , Stevens managed two goals and 20 assists , once again leading defencemen in scoring . The Devils finished fifth in the conference , and advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals , where they swept the heavily favored Detroit Red Wings to win the franchise 's first championship . Stevens ' reputation as a hard hitter was reinforced in Game 2 , where he leveled Vyacheslav Kozlov with a body check that temporarily knocked him out of the game . It was later determined that Kozlov suffered a concussion . Stevens then turned to Wings forward and former Washington teammate Dino Ciccarelli , who was upset about the check , and said " You 're next ! " 
 = = = 1996 – 1999 = = = 
 The Devils expected to defend their Stanley Cup title the following season . However , they became the first team in 26 years to miss the playoffs following a championship . Stevens voiced the team 's disappointment , saying " After winning the Cup , you expect to definitely be in the playoffs the next year ... Maybe it was just a wakeup call to get back on track . " 
 Stevens started the 1996 – 97 season with a one game suspension due to a high @-@ sticking penalty against Igor Larionov , which drew blood . The team , however , returned to a solid style of play , and finished the season atop the Atlantic Division , though they would be eliminated in the playoffs once again by the Hudson River rival New York Rangers . Stevens finished second on the team among defencemen in scoring behind Scott Niedermayer . 
 Stevens ' leadership continued into the next season . He signed a contract extension with the Devils , stating at the time that he wanted to finish his career with the team . Stevens was especially important to the Devils ' defensive corps , as longtime Devil Ken Daneyko was undergoing rehabilitation for alcoholism . However , he suffered a hip pointer injury against the Tampa Bay Lightning , and missed several games . Stevens once again had a good defensive season , although his lack of scoring kept him out of consideration for the Norris Trophy . The Devils finished as the top seed in the Eastern Conference , but were eliminated in the first round by the Ottawa Senators . 
 The Devils made several changes prior to the 1998 – 99 season , including the hiring of Robbie Ftorek as coach to replace Jacques Lemaire . The team continued its focus on defence , as the solid corps of Stevens , Daneyko , and Niedermayer finished with plus @-@ minuses of + 29 , + 27 , and + 26 , respectively . Unfortunately , the team was once again eliminated in the first round of the playoffs , this time by the Pittsburgh Penguins . 
 = = = 2000 – 2004 = = = 
 The 1999 – 2000 Devils focused more on offense , which was reinforced by their 251 goals scored , good enough for second in the league . With four players scoring over 50 points , including rookie Scott Gomez 's team leading 51 assists , Stevens ' 29 points were only good enough for tenth on the team , and third among defencemen behind Niedermayer and Brian Rafalski . Stevens also set an NHL record , becoming the first player to play in 600 games with two teams . After finishing the season in fourth place in the conference , the Devils swept the Florida Panthers and defeated the Toronto Maple Leafs in six games . 
 The Devils then met their bitter rivals , the Philadelphia Flyers , in the Eastern Conference Finals . After getting behind in the series three games to one , the Devils managed to win games five and six , setting the stage for game seven in Philadelphia . During the first period , Flyers star centre Eric Lindros was skating alone through the neutral zone with his head down . Stevens leveled him with a shoulder that appeared to hit his chin , forcing Lindros out of the game with a concussion . It was only Lindros ' second game since returning from a concussion suffered in March against the Boston Bruins . Stevens had previously taken Flyers centre Daymond Langkow out with a concussion after game 2 . 
 The Devils completed the comeback against the Flyers with a 2 – 1 victory and faced off against the defending Stanley Cup champion Dallas Stars in the Stanley Cup Finals . Stevens and Rafalski were tasked with the responsibility of shutting down Dallas ' scoring line of Mike Modano , Brett Hull , and Joe Nieuwendyk . Stevens scored the game @-@ winner in the first game of the series , en route to a Devils 7 @-@ 3 victory ; the goal was his third of the playoffs . The Devils went on to win the Finals in six games , after Game Five went to three <unk> and Game Six was decided in double overtime . Stevens earned an assist on Jason Arnott 's Cup @-@ winning goal , and won the Conn Smythe Trophy for his leadership role on the team . 
 During the 2000 – 01 NHL season , led by Patrik Eliáš ' franchise @-@ record of 96 points , and Alexander Mogilny 's team @-@ leading 43 goals , the team finished first in the conference . After defeating Carolina , Toronto , and Pittsburgh in the playoffs , the Devils once again made the Finals , this time against the Colorado Avalanche . Despite being up three games to two , however , the Devils could not finish off the Avalanche , and lost the series in seven games . Stevens finished third in the voting for the Norris Trophy . 
 The next season , Stevens finished with his lowest scoring total in his career , though he did become the youngest player ever to play in 1 @,@ 500 games . The Devils , however , fell in the first round of the playoffs to the Hurricanes , who went on to lose to Detroit in the Stanley Cup finals . 
 Stevens and the Devils once again had success in 2002 – 03 , finishing first in the division . In addition , he was named as captain of the Eastern Conference All @-@ Star team for the first time , and finished the season with the fewest penalty minutes over a full season in his career . The Devils played well in the playoffs , knocking off Boston , Tampa Bay , and Ottawa to face the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim in the Finals . Stevens and the Devils had a minor scare in Game 3 of the semifinals against Tampa Bay when a slapshot from Pavel <unk> hit the side of his head and forced him to leave the game . Although there was uncertainty whether he would return for Game 4 , Stevens in fact returned , and did not miss a game throughout the remainder of the playoffs . In Game 2 of the Finals , he set the record for most playoff games by a defenceman , breaking the record by his former coach , Larry Robinson . Stevens added to his list of playoff hits when he knocked down Ducks forward Paul Kariya in Game Six . However , Kariya came back shortly thereafter and led the Ducks to a victory , forcing a seventh game . The Devils kept the Ducks scoreless in Game Seven , 3 @-@ 0 , to win their third Stanley Cup in nine years . Stevens ' appearance in Game Seven tied Patrick Roy 's record for appearances in Game Sevens , with 13 . Despite the play of Stevens , Martin Brodeur , Jamie Langenbrunner , and Jeff Friesen , the Conn Smythe Trophy went to Ducks goaltender Jean @-@ Sébastien Giguère . Some speculated that there were too many worthy Devils candidates for the trophy , resulting in a split vote among sportswriters . 
 The 2003 – 04 NHL season would be the last for Stevens . Before ending the season , he surpassed former teammate Larry Murphy as the NHL 's all @-@ time leader in games played by a defenceman , when he appeared in his <unk> game in November . He missed several games in January with the flu , and while he was out , he was diagnosed with post @-@ concussion syndrome ( which would eventually coerce him into retirement ) . Despite missing the second half of the season , he was still voted in as a starter for the Eastern Conference All @-@ Star team . Scott Niedermayer filled in as captain in Stevens ' absence , but the loss of Stevens , as well as Daneyko , who had retired before the season , was too much of a loss for the Devils ' defence , and they fell to the Flyers in the first round of the playoffs . In the offseason , Stevens recovered and continued to work out , and expected to return to the Devils for the 2004 – 05 NHL season . However , the lockout canceled the entire season , and Stevens retired on September 6 , 2005 , after 1635 NHL games , fourth at the time ( and now seventh ) all @-@ time in games played , the leader in games played by a defenceman ( since passed by Chris Chelios ) , and 14th all @-@ time in career penalty minutes . 
 = = = 2012 – 2015 = = = 
 On July 17 , 2012 , the Devils announced Stevens would return to the team as an assistant coach . After two seasons of failing to make the playoffs , Stevens stepped down as assistant coach in September 2014 . His role as the assistant coach for defenseman was filled by another former Devil , Tommy <unk> . However , only three months later Stevens returned to the Devils along with former assistant coach Adam Oates , relieving Peter DeBoer of his coaching duties . In a unique move , both Stevens and Oates were named as co @-@ head coaches with Stevens focusing on defenseman and Oates on forwards . 
 = = Minnesota Wild = = 
 On June 7 , 2016 , the Minnesota Wild hired Stevens as an assistant to head coach Bruce Boudreau . 
 = = International play = = 
 In addition to his NHL career , Stevens represented Canada in several international ice hockey competitions . He attended summer camp with Team Canada prior to the 1983 World Junior Championships , but because of his commitment to the Capitals , he was unable to join the team . His first experience with the senior team was at the 1983 World Ice Hockey Championships , where he won a bronze medal . The following year he made the Canadian team for the 1984 Canada Cup , but he did not play . During the 1985 World Ice Hockey Championships , he scored a goal and added two assists as Canada finished with a silver medal . He played only two games during the 1987 tournament ; Canada finished in fourth place . Two years later he scored two goals as Canada once again won the silver medal . During the tournament , he suffered a serious cut when Borje Salming 's skate sliced his face ; he would receive 88 stitches for the wound . He finally won international gold with Canada during the 1991 Canada Cup . Five years later , he played in the 1996 World Cup of Hockey , the successor to the Canada Cup . Finishing with two assists , Stevens won the silver medal ; Canada finished in second place after giving up four goals in the final four minutes of the championship game against the American team . 
 National Hockey League players were first allowed to participate in the Olympic ice hockey tournament at the 1998 games . Stevens was selected to join Team Canada , but finished without a point for the only time in his international career . Canada would finish fourth after losing their semi @-@ final match @-@ up against the Czech Republic in a shootout . Stevens would be part of Canada 's orientation camp for the 2002 Games , but he would not make the final roster . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stevens left a lasting legacy on the NHL . Stevens was the longest reigning captain in Devils history . Later on in his career , he mentored the younger Devils defencemen like Colin White and Brian Rafalski , who was Stevens ' defensive linemate . Longtime teammate Scott Niedermayer said Stevens was " not the most vocal guy around " , but he would talk to players when it was necessary . Stevens was honored by the Devils by becoming the first player in team history to have his number retired by the team ; his # 4 was raised to the rafters on February 3 , 2006 . Additionally , the Kitchener Rangers have retired # 3 for Stevens . 
 Stevens was also remembered as a hard hitter , often leveling players who crossed an open part of the ice with their heads down . Among the victims of Stevens ' body checks were Slava Kozlov , Eric Lindros , Paul Kariya , Shane Willis and Ron Francis , the last of whom was inducted with Stevens into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2007 . Some players have accused Stevens of playing cheap . After his check on Willis , Carolina Hurricanes goaltender <unk> Irbe said Stevens was " trying to kill [ Willis ] or put him out of the playoffs . " Stevens responded : 
 On the other hand , Kozlov did not blame Stevens for his hit , and said he was a clean player . Despite his penchant for hits , Stevens finished his career with only four elbowing penalties in the regular season . He was often credited with changing the momentum of a game not with a goal , but with a hard check , earning him the nickname " Captain Crunch " . He was named the fifth most fearsome player in NHL history by the Sporting News in 2001 and was voted the toughest player in the NHL by the voters . NHL defencemen Dion Phaneuf and Francois <unk> are often compared to Stevens , and Phaneuf says he has idolized Stevens ' style of play . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Stevens met his wife Donna while he was playing junior hockey with Kitchener . The couple have three children ; Kaitlin , Ryan and Kara . He is a fan of the outdoors , and spent his summers away from hockey at Lake <unk> . He also enjoys duck hunting in his spare time , and is a fan of the Three Stooges . After the September 11 , 2001 attacks , he started a program called Scott 's Kids for the families of the victims . Stevens resides in the town of Far Hills , New Jersey . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International play = = = 
 = = = All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = 2013 Alabama Crimson Tide football team = 
 The 2013 Alabama Crimson Tide football team ( variously " Alabama " , " UA " , " Bama " or " The Tide " ) represented the University of Alabama in the 2013 NCAA Division I FBS football season . It was the Crimson Tide 's 119th overall season , 80th as a member of the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) and its 22nd within the SEC Western Division . The team was led by head coach Nick Saban , in his seventh year , and played its home games at Bryant – Denny Stadium in Tuscaloosa , Alabama . They finished the season with a record of eleven wins and two losses ( 11 – 2 overall , 7 – 1 in the SEC ) and with a loss in the 2014 Sugar Bowl to Oklahoma . 
 After they captured the 2012 national championship , the Crimson Tide signed a highly rated recruiting class in February 2013 and completed spring practice the following April . With thirteen returning starters from the previous season , Alabama entered the 2013 season as the two @-@ time defending national champions , ranked as the number one team in the nation and as a favorite to win the Western Division , the SEC and national championships . The Crimson Tide opened the season with eleven consecutive victories that included one over Virginia Tech at a neutral site , against Texas A & M in a game that saw many team records broken and an emotional victory over Louisiana State University ( LSU ) at Bryant – Denny Stadium . In their twelfth game , Alabama was upset by Auburn . The loss , in a game since dubbed " Kick Bama Kick , " kept the Crimson Tide out of the SEC Championship Game . Although they did not qualify to play for their third consecutive national championship with a final BCS ranking of third , Alabama did accept an invitation to play in the Sugar Bowl . Against Oklahoma , the Crimson Tide lost 45 – 31 . 
 At the conclusion of the season , Alabama 's defense was nationally ranked near the top in total defense , scoring defense , rushing defense and ranked passing defense . Offensively , the Alabama offense ranked 17th in scoring offense , 24th in rushing offense , 33rd in total offense and 49th in passing offense . Additionally , several players were recognized for their individual accomplishments on the field . C. J. Mosley won the Butkus Award as the top collegiate linebacker ; AJ McCarron won both the Maxwell Award as the overall player of the year and the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award as the top senior quarterback . Also , four players were named to various All @-@ America Teams with C. J. Mosley being a unanimous selection and Ha Ha Clinton @-@ Dix and Cyrus Kouandjio being consensus selections . 
