 Remixes 
 " Hot n Cold " ( Party Rock Remix ) ( ft LMFAO ) – 3 : 41 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Katy Perry - composer , vocals 
 Dr. Luke – bass , composer , drums , guitars , programming 
 Max Martin - composer , guitars 
 Benny Blanco - drums , programming 
 Steven Wolf - programming 
 Serban Ghenea - mixing 
 John Hanes - mix engineer 
 Emily Wright - engineer 
 Sam Holland - engineer 
 Nick Banns - engineer 
 Tatiana Gottwald - engineer 
 Tina Kennedy - engineer 
 Credits adapted from One of the Boys album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 2013 RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Covers = = 
 = = = Woe , Is Me version = = = 
 Atlanta @-@ based metalcore band , Woe , Is Me covered the track for the compilation album Punk Goes Pop 3 , which was released on November 2 , 2010 . The song was leaked on October 6 , 2010 , and was officially released as a single for digital download on October 21 , 2010 . MTV News described the band 's cover as " 50 percent faithful to the original and ..... 50 percent punishing , metal and gravel @-@ throated growls . It must be heard to be believed . " 
 = = = The Baseballs version = = = 
 " Hot n Cold " was covered by the German rockabilly cover band The Baseballs in 2009 from their debut album Strike ! . Their cover charted in the band 's home country of Germany , as well as in Finland and Switzerland . 
 = = = = Charts = = = = 
 = = = Other cover versions = = = 
 The song was covered by British ska and indie band Kid British on their 2009 EP iTunes Live : London Festival ' 09 . 
 The Chipettes covered the song for the movie Alvin and the Chipmunks : The Squeakquel and the movie 's soundtrack . In this version the line " You PMS , like a bitch , I would know " is changed to " You always stress like a chick , I would know " . 
 Selena Gomez & the Scene performed the song during their 2009 Selena Gomez & the Scene : Live in Concert tour . 
 = Maryland Route 70 = 
 Maryland Route 70 ( MD 70 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known for most of its length as Roscoe Rowe Boulevard , the highway runs 2 @.@ 31 miles ( 3 @.@ 72 km ) from MD 450 in Annapolis north to Bestgate Road in Parole . MD 70 is the primary highway connecting U.S. Route 50 ( US 50 ) and US 301 with downtown Annapolis . The highway also serves several sets of Maryland state government offices and Navy @-@ Marine Corps Memorial Stadium . MD 70 was constructed in the mid @-@ 1950s contemporaneously with the US 50 freeway . The highway was extended north to Bestgate Road in the early 1990s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 70 begins at an intersection with MD 450 ( College Avenue ) in downtown Annapolis . This intersection is next to Government House , the residence of the Governor of Maryland , and one block north of the Maryland State House . MD 70 heads northwest for two blocks as Bladen Street , a four @-@ lane divided boulevard that passes between state office buildings , including the offices of members of the Maryland General Assembly . At Calvert Street , the highway 's name changes to Roscoe Rowe Boulevard . A two @-@ lane ramp splits from southbound MD 70 just south of the southern end of the highway 's bridge over College Creek , the point at which maintenance responsibility changes from the city of Annapolis to the state . The highway passes between several sets of government offices , including the Maryland Court of Appeals and the Maryland State Archives , leading up to its intersection with MD 435 ( Taylor Avenue ) . MD 70 passes to the east of Navy @-@ Marine Corps Memorial Stadium before crossing Weems Creek and leaving the city of Annapolis . The highway meets US 50 and US 301 ( John Hanson Highway ) at a partial cloverleaf interchange . Beyond the interchange , MD 70 curves to the west and intersects Bestgate Road and Tidewater Colony Drive ; the latter street leads to the historic home Howard 's Inheritance . The highway continues along Bestgate Road and becomes a four @-@ lane road with a center turn lane before reaching its northern terminus at an arbitrary point west of Compton Drive and Willie Drive . Bestgate Road continues west as a county highway toward the Annapolis Mall in the center of Parole . 
 = = History = = 
 MD 70 from College Avenue to US 50 and US 301 is named for Roscoe C. Rowe , the mayor of Annapolis from 1949 until his 1952 death . Rowe was credited with organizing the city of Annapolis 's financial contribution to construct the boulevard and for persuading the Maryland State Roads Commission to finance the construction of the bridge across College Creek . Construction of MD 70 began from US 50 , then also under construction , to Weems Creek , including the bridge over the creek , in October 1952 . Construction on the highway resumed in May 1954 ; the section from Weems Creek to College Avenue was completed in November 1954 , five months after the US 50 freeway opened from MD 450 to MD 2 east of the Severn River . The boulevard 's interchange with US 50 was originally a trumpet interchange . MD 70 's southern end was originally a one @-@ way pair ; traffic leaving Annapolis followed Bladen Street from College Avenue toward College Creek and traffic entering Annapolis veered south onto Northwest Street to end at Church Circle . Bladen Street was expanded to a two @-@ way boulevard in 1983 . MD 70 was extended north to its present terminus and its junction with US 50 and US 301 was changed to a partial cloverleaf interchange in 1991 . The state highway 's bridges over Weems Creek and College Creek were replaced between 2004 and 2006 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Anne Arundel County . 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 MD 70 has two existing auxiliary routes and one former route . All three routes were established in 2002 along county highways relocated as part of the extension of MD 70 north to Bestgate Road . 
 MD 70A is the designation for the 0 @.@ 15 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 24 km ) stretch of North Lawrence Road north from MD 70 . 
 MD 70B was the designation for the 0 @.@ 09 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 14 km ) portion of Tidewater Colony Drive south from the intersection between Roscoe Rowe Boulevard and Bestgate Road . MD 70B was transferred to county maintenance in 2009 . 
 MD <unk> is the designation for the 0 @.@ 08 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 13 km ) segment of Bestgate Road east from the intersection of MD 70 and Tidewater Colony Drive . 
 = Pennsylvanian ( train ) = 
 The Pennsylvanian is a 444 @-@ mile ( 715 km ) daytime Amtrak train running between New York and Pittsburgh via Philadelphia . The trains travel across the Appalachian Mountains , through Pennsylvania 's capital Harrisburg , the Pennsylvania Dutch Country , suburban and central Philadelphia , and New Jersey en route to New York . Trains run once daily in each direction . The entire train ride takes about 9 hours total , with 1 @.@ 5 hours between New York and Philadelphia , 2 hours between Philadelphia and Harrisburg , and 5 @.@ 5 hours between Harrisburg and Pittsburgh . 
 The Pennsylvanian is a once a day replacement of the Keystone service between New York and Harrisburg , offering Business Class seating as an upgrade to the coach @-@ only seating on Keystone trains . Prior to Amtrak , the route was known as the Duquesne , named after Fort Duquesne in Pittsburgh , and operated by the Pennsylvania Railroad . The Pennsylvanian began on April 27 , 1980 , as a state @-@ supported daylight train between Philadelphia and Pittsburgh , with connecting service to New York . Amtrak would later extend the train to serve New York directly . Between November , 1998 and January , 2003 , Amtrak shifted the endpoints west to Chicago and Philadelphia , providing daylight service to Cleveland , Ohio . In 2003 the Pennsylvanian reverted to a Pittsburgh – New York schedule . On its inauguration the Pennsylvanian used Amfleet equipment and continues to be so equipped . 
 = = History = = 
 The Pennsylvanian is the replacement of the former Keystone service between New York and Pittsburgh . Prior to Amtrak , the route was known as the Duquesne , named after Fort Duquesne in Pittsburgh , and operated by the Pennsylvania Railroad . The Duquesne had a long history , finally becoming a daily New York — Pittsburgh train on October 25 , 1959 , numbered 16 eastbound and 25 westbound . With the start of Amtrak operations on May 1 , 1971 , the Duquesne was renamed the Keystone and renumbered 42 westbound and 43 eastbound with the first Amtrak timetable on November 14 , 1971 . The Keystone was discontinued on April 30 , 1972 . 
 The immediate impetus for the Pennsylvanian was the discontinuance of the National Limited , a New York – Kansas City train which had provided service over the corridor . The Pennsylvanian began on April 27 , 1980 , as a state @-@ supported daylight train between Philadelphia and Pittsburgh , with connecting service to New York via the Philadelphian ( a <unk> ) westbound and the Montrealer eastbound . At the time the Pennsylvanian was inaugurated , the Broadway Limited was departing Pittsburgh at an inconvenient early morning hour . The new train ran with Amfleet equipment , including a cafe car . Pennsylvania agreed to pay 20 % of the train 's costs for the first year , or $ 580 @,@ 000 , with the state and Amtrak eventually splitting the costs 50 / 50 by the third year . 
 Between 1981 and 1983 , Pennsylvanian equipment was turned every night to operate a second state @-@ supported train , the Fort Pitt , which ran from Pittsburgh to Altoona . Amtrak withdrew this train in early 1983 after the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation ( PennDOT ) declined to continue subsidizing the increased operation . At the time the Fort Pitt carried 30 passengers per day . 
 After significant ridership gains in 1984 , PennDOT proposed that a second train be added to the route . PennDOT and Amtrak would have split the costs evenly . Amtrak officials were favorable , but budget problems stalled the plan . 
 In the late 1980s passenger @-@ rail groups urged Amtrak to extend the Pennsylvanian to Cleveland , Ohio . Proposals included new stations in Sewickley and Beaver Falls . Pressure increased in 1989 when Amtrak announced the re @-@ routing of the Broadway Limited and Capitol Limited over that same route as part of a restructuring of routes in Indiana . As part of this change , the Capitol Limited began serving the Cleveland — Pittsburgh route , albeit in the middle of the night . Amtrak and PennDOT considered two routes for an extended Pennsylvanian : one via Alliance , Ohio ( following the route of the Capitol Limited ) and one via Youngstown , Ohio ( partially following the Broadway Limited ) with a new stop in New Castle , Pennsylvania . 
 On November 7 , 1998 , Amtrak extended the Pennsylvanian through to Chicago along the route of the Capitol Limited via Toledo , finally bringing a daylight connection to Cleveland . The Three Rivers continued to run over a different schedule via Akron and <unk> . As part of the change Amtrak truncated the eastern end to Philadelphia , enabling the train to complete the run within a single day . Amtrak returned the Pennsylvanian to the New York — Pittsburgh route on January 27 , 2003 , citing low ridership and Amtrak 's withdrawal from the express freight business . On November 1 , 2004 , Amtrak merged the Pennsylvanian and Three Rivers , keeping the latter name with a western terminus in Chicago . Amtrak had sought $ 2 @.@ 5 million in assistance from Pennsylvania to keep both trains running . On March 8 , 2005 , Amtrak truncated service to Pittsburgh — New York and restored the Pennsylvanian name to the route . 
 As of 2010 there is no through service west of Pittsburgh ; the Capitol Limited continues to provide service to Chicago , though as part of its federally mandated analysis of the worst @-@ performing long @-@ distance routes , Amtrak determined that reinstating a through @-@ car connection with the Pennsylvanian would result in the highest gain in monetary and customer service measurements of possible options . To implement this , Amtrak plans to operate a <unk> sleeper car , an Amfleet cafe car and two Amfleet coaches between Chicago and New York approximating the historic Broadway Limited , via the Capitol Limited and Pennsylvanian . This would begin when funding and equipment is available . 
 On January 28 , 2011 , it was announced that Pennsylvania had received a $ 750 @,@ 000 grant from the federal government to study expanding service westwards from Harrisburg to Pittsburgh along the route of the Pennsylvanian , including higher speeds and additional frequencies . 
 During fiscal year 2011 , the Pennsylvanian carried over 200 @,@ 000 passengers , a 2 % increase over FY2010 . The train had a total revenue of $ 8 @,@ 856 @,@ 539 during FY2011 , up 4 @.@ 8 % from FY2010 . In Fiscal Years 2012 and 2013 , ridership increased to 212 @,@ 006 and 218 @,@ 997 respectively . Likewise , revenue increased to $ 9 @.@ 28 and $ 10 @.@ 4 million respectively . In May 2013 the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania agreed to $ 3 @.@ 8 million in funding to subsidize the service . 
 In November 2013 , The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation announced that funding would be provided for the train to operate until October 1 , 2014 . The change in subsidiary resulted from <unk> laws passed in 2009 that requires states to subsidize Amtrak routes less than 750 miles in length 
 = = Equipment = = 
 On its inauguration the Pennsylvanian ran with then @-@ new Amfleet equipment : two coaches and a cafe . Today the Pennsylvanian continues to use an all @-@ Amfleet consist although the number of coaches has grown to six . The train consists of an Amfleet I business class car , an Amfleet I cafe car , an Amfleet I coach , and three Amfleet II long @-@ distance coach cars . Motive power is usually a Genesis diesel @-@ electric locomotive west of Philadelphia . East of Philadelphia , the motive power is a Siemens ACS @-@ 64 electric locomotive ; an engine swap is made at 30th Street Station in Philadelphia . Since the Keystone Corridor is now equipped with ACSES , or Amtrak 's version of Positive Train Control , only ACSES @-@ equipped locomotives are able to lead between Philadelphia and Harrisburg . This requires either an Siemens ACS @-@ 64 ahead of the Genesis locomotive or a Genesis equipped with ACSES . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Pennsylvanian follows the Pennsylvania Railroad 's Main Line over the following trackage : 
 Amtrak : New York @-@ Philadelphia @-@ Harrisburg 
 Northeast Corridor 
 Keystone Corridor 
 Norfolk Southern Railway : Harrisburg @-@ Pittsburgh 
 Pittsburgh Line 
 = Stephen I of Hungary = 
 Stephen I , also known as King Saint Stephen ( Hungarian : Szent István király ; Latin : Sanctus Stephanus ; Slovak : Štefan I. or Štefan Veľký ; c . 975 – 15 August 1038 AD ) , was the last Grand Prince of the Hungarians between 997 and 1000 or 1001 , and the first King of Hungary from 1000 or 1001 until his death in 1038 . The year of his birth is uncertain , but many details of his life suggest that he was born in or after 975 in Esztergom . At his birth , he was given the pagan name Vajk . The date of his baptism is unknown . He was the only son of Grand Prince Géza and his wife , Sarolt , who was descended from the prominent family of the <unk> . Although both of his parents were baptized , Stephen was the first member of his family to become a devout Christian . He married Gisela of Bavaria , a scion of the imperial Ottonian dynasty . 
 After succeeding his father in 997 , Stephen had to fight for the throne against his relative , Koppány , who was supported by large numbers of pagan warriors . He defeated Koppány mainly with the assistance of foreign knights , including Vecelin , Hont and Pázmány , but also with help from native lords . He was crowned on 25 December 1000 or 1 January 1001 with a crown sent by Pope Sylvester II . In a series of wars against semi @-@ independent tribes and chieftains — including the Black Hungarians and his uncle , Gyula the Younger — he unified the Carpathian Basin . He protected the independence of his kingdom by forcing the invading troops of Conrad II , Holy Roman Emperor , to withdraw from Hungary in 1030 . 
 Stephen established at least one archbishopric , six bishoprics and three Benedictine monasteries ; thus the Church in Hungary developed independently of the archbishops of the Holy Roman Empire . He encouraged the spread of Christianity with severe punishments for ignoring Christian customs . His system of local administration was based on counties organized around fortresses and administered by royal officials . Hungary , which enjoyed a lasting period of peace during his reign , became a preferred route for pilgrims and merchants traveling between Western Europe and the Holy Land or Constantinople . 
 He survived all of his children . He died on 15 August 1038 and was buried in his new basilica , built in Székesfehérvár and dedicated to the Holy Virgin . His death caused civil wars which lasted for decades . He was canonized by Pope Gregory VII , together with his son , Emeric , and Bishop Gerard of Csanád , in 1083 . Stephen is a popular saint in Hungary and the neighboring territories . In Hungary , his feast day ( celebrated on 20 August ) is also a public holiday commemorating the foundation of the state . 
 = = Early years ( c . 975 – 997 ) = = 
 Stephen 's birth date is uncertain because it was not recorded in contemporaneous documents . Hungarian and Polish chronicles written centuries later give three different years : 967 , 969 and 975 . The unanimous testimony of his three late 11th @-@ century or early 12th @-@ century hagiographies and other Hungarian sources , which state that Stephen was " still an adolescent " in 997 , substantiate the reliability of the later year ( 975 ) . Stephen 's Lesser Legend adds that he was born in Esztergom , which implies that he was born after 972 because his father , Géza , Grand Prince of the Hungarians , chose Esztergom as royal residence around that year . Géza promoted the spread of Christianity among his subjects by force , but never ceased worshipping pagan gods . Both his son 's Greater Legend and the nearly contemporaneous Thietmar of Merseburg described Géza as a cruel monarch , suggesting that he was a despot who mercilessly consolidated his authority over the rebellious Hungarian lords . 
 Hungarian chronicles agree that Stephen 's mother was Sarolt , daughter of Gyula , a Hungarian chieftain with jurisdiction either in Transylvania or in the wider region of the confluence of the rivers Tisza and Maros . Many historians — including Pál Engel and Gyula Kristó — propose that her father was identical with " Gylas " , who had been baptized in Constantinople around 952 and " remained faithful to Christianity " , according to Byzantine chronicler John Skylitzes . However , this identification is not unanimously accepted ; historian György Györffy states that it was not Sarolt 's father , but his younger brother , who was baptized in the Byzantine capital . In contrast with all Hungarian sources , the Polish @-@ Hungarian Chronicle and later Polish sources state that Stephen 's mother was Adelhaid , an otherwise unknown sister of Duke Mieszko I of Poland , but the reliability of this report is not accepted by modern historians . 
 Stephen was born as Vajk , a name derived from the Turkic word <unk> , meaning " hero " , " master " , " prince " or " rich " . Stephen 's Greater Legend narrates that he was baptized by the saintly Bishop Adalbert of Prague , who stayed in Géza 's court several times between 983 and 994 . However , Saint Adalbert 's nearly contemporaneous Legend , written by Bruno of Querfurt , does not mention this event . Accordingly , the date of Stephen 's baptism is unknown : Györffy argues that he was baptized soon after birth , while Kristó proposes that he only received baptism just before his father 's death in 997 . 
 Stephen 's official hagiography , written by Bishop Hartvic and sanctioned by Pope Innocent III , narrates that he " was fully instructed in the knowledge of the grammatical art " in his childhood . This implies that he studied Latin , though some scepticism is warranted as few kings of this era were able to write . His two other late 11th @-@ century hagiographies do not mention any grammatical studies , stating only that he " was brought up by receiving an education appropriate for a little prince " . Kristó says that the latter remark only refers to Stephen 's physical training , including his participation in hunts and military actions . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , one of his tutors was a Count <unk> from Italy , who later founded a monastery in Tata . 
 According to Stephen 's legends , Grand Prince Géza convoked an assembly of the Hungarian chieftains and warriors when Stephen " ascended to the first stage of adolescence " , at the age of 14 or 15 . Géza nominated Stephen as his successor and all those present took an oath of loyalty to the young prince . Györffy also writes , without identifying his source , that Géza appointed his son to rule the " Nyitra <unk> " around that time . Slovak historians , including Ján Steinhübel and Ján Lukačka , accept Györffy 's view and propose that Stephen administered Nyitra ( now Nitra , Slovakia ) from around 995 . 
 Géza arranged Stephen 's marriage , to Gisela , daughter of Henry the Wrangler , Duke of Bavaria , in or after 995 . This marriage established the first family link between a Hungarian ruler and a Western European ruling house , as Gisela was closely related to the Ottonian dynasty of Holy Roman Emperors . According to popular tradition preserved in the Scheyern Abbey in Bavaria , the ceremony took place at the Scheyern castle and was celebrated by Saint Adalbert . Gisela was accompanied to her new home by Bavarian knights , many of whom received land grants from her husband and settled in Hungary , helping to strengthen Stephen 's military position . Györffy writes that Stephen and his wife " presumably " settled in Nyitra after their marriage . 
 = = Reign ( 997 – 1038 ) = = 
 = = = Grand Prince ( 997 – 1000 ) = = = 
 Grand Prince Géza died in 997 . Stephen convoked an assembly at Esztergom where his supporters declared him grand prince . Initially , he only controlled the northwestern regions of the Carpathian Basin ; the rest of the territory was still dominated by tribal chieftains . Stephen 's ascension to the throne was in line with the principle of primogeniture , which prescribed that a father was succeeded by his son . On the other hand , it contradicted the traditional idea of seniority , according to which Géza should have been succeeded by the most senior member of the Árpád dynasty , which was Koppány at that time . Koppány , who held the title Duke of <unk> , had for many years administered the regions of Transdanubia south of Lake Balaton . 
 Koppány proposed to Géza 's widow , Sarolt , in accordance with the pagan custom of levirate marriage . He also announced his claim to the throne . Although it is not impossible that Koppány had already been baptized , in 972 , most of his supporters were pagans , opponents of the Christianity represented by Stephen and his predominantly German retinue . A charter of 1002 for the Pannonhalma Archabbey writes of a war between " the Germans and the Hungarians " when referring to the armed conflicts between Stephen and Koppány . Even so , Györffy says that <unk> ( " Alan " ) , Besenyő ( " Pecheneg " ) , <unk> and other place names , referring to ethnic groups or Hungarian tribes in Transdanubia around the supposed borders of Koppány 's duchy , suggest that significant auxiliary units and groups of Hungarian warriors — who had been settled there by Grand Prince Géza — fought in Stephen 's army . 
 Kristó states that the entire conflict between Stephen and Koppány was only a feud between two members of the Árpád dynasty , with no effect on other Hungarian tribal leaders . Koppány and his troops invaded the northern regions of Transdanubia , took many of Stephen 's forts and plundered his lands . Stephen , who according to the Illuminated Chronicle " was for the first time girded with his sword " , placed the brothers Hont and Pázmány at the head of his own guard and nominated Vecelin to lead the royal army . The latter was a German knight who had come to Hungary in the reign of Géza . Hont and Pázmány were , according to Simon of Kéza 's Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum and the Illuminated Chronicle , " knights of Swabian origin " who settled in Hungary either under Géza or in the first years of Stephen 's reign . On the other hand , Lukačka and other Slovak historians say that Hont and Pázmány were " Slovak " noblemen who had joined Stephen during his rule in Nyitra . 
 Koppány was besieging Veszprém when he was informed of the arrival of Stephen 's army . In the ensuing battle , Stephen won a decisive victory over his enemies . Koppány was killed on the battlefield . His body was quartered and its parts were displayed at the gates of the forts of Esztergom , Győr , Gyulafehérvár ( Alba Iulia , Romania ) and Veszprém in order to threaten all of those who were conspiring against the young monarch . 
 Stephen occupied Koppány 's duchy and granted large estates to his own partisans . He also prescribed that Koppány 's former subjects were to pay tithes to the Pannonhalma Archabbey , according to the deed of the foundation of this monastery which has been preserved in a manuscript containing interpolations . The same document declares that " there were no other bishoprics and monasteries in Hungary " at that time . On the other hand , the nearly contemporary Bishop Thietmar of Merseburg stated that Stephen " established bishoprics in his kingdom " before being crowned king . If the latter report is valid , the dioceses of Veszprém and Győr are the most probable candidates , according to historian Gábor Thoroczkay . 
 = = = Coronation ( 1000 – 1001 ) = = = 
 By ordering the display of one part of Koppány 's quartered corpse in Gyulafehérvár , the seat of his maternal uncle , Gyula the Younger , Stephen asserted his claim to reign all lands dominated by Hungarian lords . He also decided to strengthen his international status by adopting the title of king . However , the exact circumstances of his coronation and its political consequences are subject to scholarly debate . 
 Thietmar of Merseburg writes that Stephen received the crown " with the favour and urging " of Emperor Otto III ( r . 996 – 1002 ) , implying that Stephen accepted the Emperor 's suzerainty before his coronation . On the other hand , all of Stephen 's legends emphasize that he received his crown from Pope Sylvester II ( r . 999 – 1003 ) . Kristó and other historians point out that Pope Sylvester and Emperor Otto were close allies , which implies that both reports are valid : Stephen " received the crown and consecration " from the Pope , but not without the Emperor 's consent . Around 75 years after the coronation , Pope Gregory VII ( r . 1075 – 1085 ) , who claimed suzerainty over Hungary , declared that Stephen had " offered and devotedly surrendered " Hungary " to Saint Peter " ( that is to the Holy See ) . In a contrasting report , Stephen 's Greater Legend states that the King offered Hungary to the Virgin Mary . Modern historians — including Pál Engel , and Miklós Molnár — write that Stephen always asserted his sovereignty and never accepted papal or imperial suzerainty . For instance , none of his charters were dated according to the years of the reign of the contemporary emperors , which would have been the case if he had been their vassal . Furthermore , Stephen declared in the preamble to his First Book of Laws that he governed his realm " by the will of God " . 
 The exact date of Stephen 's coronation is unknown . According to later Hungarian tradition , he was crowned on the first day of the second millennium , which may refer either to 25 December 1000 or to 1 January 1001 . Details of Stephen 's coronation preserved in his Greater Legend suggest that the ceremony , which took place in Esztergom or Székesfehérvár followed the rite of the coronation of the German kings . Accordingly , Stephen was anointed with consecrated oil during the ceremony . Stephen 's portrait , preserved on his royal cloak from 1031 , shows that his crown , like the Holy Roman Emperor 's diadem , was a hoop crown decorated with gemstones . 
 Besides his crown , Stephen regarded a spear with a flag as an important symbol of his sovereignty . For instance , his first coins bear the inscription <unk> <unk> ( " the king 's spear " ) and depict an arm holding a spear with flag . According to the contemporaneous Adémar de Chabannes , a spear had been given to Stephen 's father by Emperor Otto III as a token of Géza 's right to " enjoy the most freedom in the possession of his country " . Stephen is styled in various ways — Ungarorum rex ( " king of the Hungarians " ) , <unk> rex ( " king of the Pannonians " ) or <unk> rex ( " king of Hungary " ) — in his charters . 
 = = = Consolidation ( 1001 – c . 1009 ) = = = 
 Although Stephen 's power did not rely on his coronation , the ceremony granted him the internationally accepted legitimacy of a Christian monarch who ruled his realm " by the Grace of God " . All his legends testify that he established an archbishopric with its see in Esztergom shortly after his coronation . This act ensured that the Church in Hungary became independent of the prelates of the Holy Roman Empire . The earliest reference to an archbishop of Esztergom , named Domokos , has been preserved in the deed of foundation of the Pannonhalma Archabbey from 1002 . According to historian Gábor Thoroczkay , Stephen also established the Diocese of Kalocsa in 1001 . Stephen invited foreign priests to Hungary to evangelize his kingdom . Associates of the late Adalbert of Prague , including <unk> and Astrik , arrived in Hungary in the first years of his reign . The presence of an unnamed " Archbishop of the Hungarians " at the synod of 1007 of Frankfurt and the consecration of an altar in Bamberg in 1012 by Archbishop Astrik show that Stephen 's prelates maintained a good relationship with the clergy of the Holy Roman Empire . 
 The transformation of Hungary into a Christian state was one of Stephen 's principal concerns throughout his reign . Although the Hungarians ' conversion had already begun in his father 's reign , it was only Stephen who systematically forced his subjects to give up their pagan rituals . His legislative activity was closely connected with Christianity . For example , his First Book of Laws from the first years of his reign includes several provisions prescribing the observance of feast days and the confession before death . His other laws protected property rights and the interests of widows and orphans , or regulated the status of serfs . 
 If someone has such a hardened heart — God forbid it to any Christian — that he does not want to confess his faults according to the counsel of a priest , he shall lie without any divine service and alms like an infidel . If his relatives and neighbors fail to summon the priest , and therefore he should die <unk> , prayers and alms should be offered , but his relatives shall wash away their negligence by fasting in accordance with the judgement of the priests . Those who die a sudden death shall be buried with all ecclesiastical honor ; for divine judgment is hidden from us and unknown . 
 Many Hungarian lords refused to accept Stephen 's suzerainty even after his coronation . The new King first turned against his own uncle , Gyula the Younger , whose realm " was most wide and rich " , according to the Illuminated Chronicle . Stephen invaded Transylvania and seized Gyula and his family around 1002 or in 1003 . The contemporary Annals of Hildesheim adds that Stephen converted his uncle 's " country to the Christian faith by force " after its conquest . Accordingly , historians date the establishment of the Diocese of Transylvania to this period . If the identification , proposed by Kristó , Györffy and other Hungarian historians , of Gyula with one Prokui — who was Stephen 's uncle according to Thietmar of Merseburg — is valid , Gyula later escaped from captivity and fled to Boleslav the Brave , Duke of Poland ( r . 992 – 1025 ) . 
 [ Duke Boleslav the Brave 's ] territory included a certain burg , located near the border with the Hungarians . Its guardian was lord Prokui , an uncle of the Hungarian king . Both in the past and more recently , Prokui had been driven from his lands by the king and his wife had been taken captive . When he was unable to free her , his nephew arranged for her unconditional release , even though he was Prokui 's enemy . I have never heard of anyone who showed such restraint towards a defeated foe . Because of this , God repeatedly granted him victory , not only in the burg mentioned above , but in others as well . 
 About a hundred years later , the chronicler Gallus Anonymus also made mention of armed conflicts between Stephen and Boleslav , stating that the latter " defeated the Hungarians in battle and made himself master of all their lands as far as the Danube " . Györffy says that the chronicler 's report refers to the occupation of the valley of the river Morava — a tributary of the Danube — by the Poles in the 1010s . On the other hand , the Polish @-@ Hungarian Chronicle states that the Polish duke occupied large territories north of the Danube and east of the Morava as far as Esztergom in the early 11th century . According to Steinhübel , the latter source proves that a significant part of the lands that now form Slovakia were under Polish rule between 1002 and 1030 . In contrast with the Slovak historian , Györffy writes that this late chronicle " in which one absurdity follows another " contradicts all facts known from 11th @-@ century sources . 
 The Illuminated Chronicle narrates that Stephen " led his army against Kean , Duke of the Bulgarians and Slavs whose lands are by their natural position most strongly fortified " following the occupation of Gyula 's country . According to a number of historians , including Zoltán <unk> and Gábor Thoroczkay , Kean was the head of a small state located in the southern parts of Transylvania and Stephen occupied his country around 1003 . Other historians , including Györffy , say that the chronicle 's report preserved the memory of Stephen 's campaign against Bulgaria in the late 1010s . 
 Likewise , the identification of the " Black Hungarians " — who were mentioned by Bruno of Querfurt and Adémar de Chabannes among the opponents of Stephen 's proselytizing policy — is uncertain . Györffy locates their lands to the east of the river Tisza ; while Thoroczkay says they live in the southern parts of Transdanubia . Bruno of Querfurt 's report of the Black Hungarians ' conversion by force suggests that Stephen conquered their lands at the latest in 1009 when " the first mission of Saint Peter " — a papal legate , Cardinal <unk> — arrived in Hungary . The latter attended the meeting in Győr where the royal charter determining the borders of the newly established Bishopric of Pécs was issued on August 23 , 1009 . 
 The Diocese of Eger was also set up around 1009 . According to Thoroczkay , " it is very probable " that the bishopric 's establishment was connected with the conversion of the Kabars — an ethnic group of Khazar origin — and their chieftain . The head of the Kabars — who was either Samuel Aba or his father — married Stephen 's unnamed younger sister on this occasion . The Aba clan was the most powerful among the native families who joined Stephen and supported him in his efforts to establish a Christian monarchy . The reports by Anonymus , Simon of Kéza and other Hungarian chroniclers of the Bár @-@ Kalán , Csák and other 13th @-@ century noble families descending from Hungarian chieftains suggest that other native families were also involved in the process . 
 Stephen set up a territory @-@ based administrative system , establishing counties . Each county , headed by a royal official known as a count or ispán , was an administrative unit organized around a royal fortress . Most fortresses were earthworks in this period , but the castles at Esztergom , Székesfehérvár and Veszprém were built of stone . Forts serving as county seats also became the nuclei of Church organization . The settlements developing around them , where markets were held on each Sunday , were important local economic centers . 
 = = = Wars with Poland and Bulgaria ( c . 1009 – 1018 ) = = = 
 Stephen 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Henry II , became King of Germany in 1002 and Holy Roman Emperor in 1013 . Their friendly relationship ensured that the western borders of Hungary experienced a period of peace in the first decades of the 11th century . Even when Henry II 's discontented brother , Bruno , sought refuge in Hungary in 1004 , Stephen preserved the peace with Germany and negotiated a settlement between his two brothers @-@ in @-@ law . Around 1009 , he gave his younger sister in marriage to Otto Orseolo , Doge of Venice ( r . 1008 – 1026 ) , a close ally of the Byzantine Emperor , Basil II ( r . 976 – 1025 ) , which suggests that Hungary 's relationship with the Byzantine Empire was also peaceful . On the other hand , the alliance between Hungary and the Holy Roman Empire brought her into a war with Poland lasting from around 1014 until 1018 . The Poles occupied the Hungarian posts along the river Morava . Györffy and Kristó write that a Pecheneg incursion into Transylvania , the memory of which has been preserved in Stephen 's legends , also took place in this period , because the Pechenegs were close allies of the Polish duke 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Grand Prince Sviatopolk I of Kiev ( r . 1015 – 1019 ) . 
 Poland and the Holy Roman Empire concluded the Peace of Bautzen in January 1018 . Later in the same year , 500 Hungarian horsemen accompanied Boleslav of Poland to Kiev , suggesting that Hungary had been included in the peace treaty . The historian Ferenc Makk says that the Peace of Bautzen obliged Boleslav to hand over all the territories he had occupied in the Morava valley to Stephen . According to Leodvin , the first known Bishop of Bihar ( r. c . 1050 – c . 1060 ) , Stephen allied with the Byzantines and led a military expedition to assist them against " barbarians " in the Balkan Peninsula . The Byzantine and Hungarian troops jointly took " Cesaries " which Györffy identifies as the present @-@ day town of Ohrid . Leodvin 's report suggests that Stephen joined the Byzantines in the war ending with their conquest of Bulgaria in 1018 . However , the exact date of his expedition is uncertain . Györffy argues that it was only in the last year of the war that Stephen led his troops against the Bulgarians . 
 = = = Domestic policies ( 1018 – 1024 ) = = = 
 Bishop Leodvin wrote that Stephen collected relics of a number of saints in " Cesaries " during his campaign in the Balkans , including Saint George and Saint Nicholas of Myra . He donated them to his new triple @-@ naved basilica dedicated to the Holy Virgin in Székesfehérvár , where he also set up a cathedral chapter and his new capital . His decision was influenced by the opening , in 1018 or 1019 , of a new pilgrimage route that bypassed his old capital , Esztergom . The new route connected Western Europe and the Holy Land through Hungary . Stephen often met the pilgrims , contributing to the spread of his fame throughout Europe . Abbot Odilo of Cluny , for example , wrote in a letter to Stephen that " those who have returned from the shrine of our Lord " testify to the king 's passion " towards the honour of our divine religion " . Stephen also established four hostels for pilgrims in Constantinople , Jerusalem , Ravenna and Rome . 
 [ Almost ] all those from Italy and Gaul who wished to go to the Sepulchre of the Lord at Jerusalem abandoned the usual route , which was by sea , making their way through the country of King Stephen . He made the road safe for everyone , welcomed as brothers all he saw and gave them enormous gifts . This action led many people , nobles and commoners , to go to Jerusalem . 
 In addition to pilgrims , merchants often used the safe route across Hungary when travelling between Constantinople and Western Europe . Stephen 's legends refer to 60 wealthy Pechenegs who travelled to Hungary , but were attacked by Hungarian border guards . The king sentenced his soldiers to death in order to demonstrate his determination to preserve internal peace . Regular minting of coinage began in Hungary in the 1020s . Stephen 's silver dinars bearing the inscriptions <unk> REX ( " King Stephen " ) and <unk> <unk> ( " royal city " ) were popular in contemporary Europe , as demonstrated by counterfeited copies unearthed in Sweden . 
 Stephen convinced some pilgrims and merchants to settle in Hungary . Gerard , a Benedictine monk who arrived in Hungary from the Republic of Venice between 1020 and 1026 , initially planned to continue his journey to the Holy Land , but decided to stay in the country after his meeting with the king . Stephen also established a number of Benedictine monasteries — including the abbeys at Pécsvárad , <unk> and <unk> — in this period . 
 The Long Life of Saint Gerard mentions Stephen 's conflict with Ajtony , a chieftain in the region of the river Maros . Many historians date their clash to the end of the 1020s , although Györffy and other scholars put it at least a decade earlier . The conflict arose when Ajtony , who " had taken his power from the Greeks " , according to Saint Gerard 's legend , levied tax on the salt transported to Stephen on the river . The king sent a large army led by Csanád against Ajtony , who was killed in battle . His lands were transformed into a Hungarian county and the king set up a new bishopric at Csanád ( Cenad , Romania ) , Ajtony 's former capital , which was renamed after the commander of the royal army . According to the Annales Posonienses , the Venetian Gerard was consecrated as the first bishop of the new diocese in 1030 . 
 = = = Conflicts with the Holy Roman Empire ( 1024 – 1031 ) = = = 
 Stephen 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Emperor Henry , died on 13 July 1024 . He was succeeded by a distant relative , Conrad II ( r . 1024 – 1039 ) , who adopted an offensive foreign policy . Conrad II expelled Doge Otto Orseolo — the husband of Stephen 's sister — from Venice in 1026 . He also persuaded the Bavarians to proclaim his own son , Henry , as their duke in 1027 , although Stephen 's son , Emeric had a strong claim to the Duchy of Bavaria through his mother . Emperor Conrad planned a marriage alliance with the Byzantine Empire and dispatched one of his advisors , Bishop Werner of Strasbourg , to Constantinople . In the autumn of 1027 , the bishop seemingly travelled as a pilgrim , but Stephen , who had been informed of his actual purpose , refused to let him enter into his country . Conrad II 's biographer <unk> of Burgundy narrated that the Bavarians incited skirmishes along the common borders of Hungary and the Holy Roman Empire in 1029 , causing a rapid deterioration in relations between the two countries . 
 Emperor Conrad personally led his armies to Hungary in June 1030 and plundered the lands west of the River Rába . However , according to the Annals of Niederalteich , the emperor , suffering from consequences of the scorched earth tactics used by the Hungarian army , returned to Germany " without an army and without achieving anything , because the army was threatened by starvation and was captured by the Hungarians at Vienna " . Peace was restored after Conrad had ceded the lands between the rivers Lajta and Fischa to Hungary in the summer of 1031 . 
 At this same time , dissensions arose between the Pannonian nation and the Bavarians , through the fault of the Bavarians . And , as a result , King [ Stephen ] of Hungary made many incursions and raids in the realm of the <unk> ( that is , of the Bavarians ) . Disturbed on this account Emperor Conrad came upon the Hungarians with a great army . But King [ Stephen ] , whose forces were entirely insufficient to meet the Emperor , relied solely on the guardianship of the Lord , which he sought with prayers and fasts proclaimed through his whole realm . Since the Emperor was not able to enter a kingdom so fortified with rivers and forests , he returned , after he had sufficiently avenged his injury with lootings and burnings on the borders of the kingdom ; and it was his wish at a more opportune time to complete the things he had begun . His son , King Henry , however , still a young boy entrusted to the care of <unk> , bishop of Freising , received a legation of King [ Stephen ] which asked for peace ; and solely with the counsel of the princes of the realm , and without his father 's knowledge , he granted the favor of reconciliation . 
 = = = Last years ( 1031 – 1038 ) = = = 
 Stephen 's biographer , Hartvic , narrates that the King , whose children died one by one in infancy , " restrained the grief over their death by the solace on account of the love of his surviving son " , Emeric . However , Emeric was wounded in a hunting accident and died in 1031 . After the death of his son , the elderly King could never " fully regain his former health " , according to the Illuminated Chronicle . Kristó writes that the picture , which has been preserved in Stephen 's legends , of the king keeping the vigils and washing the feet of paupers , is connected with Stephen 's last years , following the death of his son . 
 Emeric 's death jeopardized his father 's achievements in establishing a Christian state , because Stephen 's cousin , Vazul — who had the strongest claim to succeed him — was suspected of an inclination towards paganism . According to the Annals of Altaich Stephen disregarded his cousin 's claim and nominated his sister 's son , the Venetian Peter Orseolo , as his heir . The same source adds that Vazul was captured and blinded , and his three sons , Levente , Andrew and Béla , were expelled from Hungary . Stephen 's legends refer to an unsuccessful attempt upon the elderly king 's life by members of his court . According to Kristó , the legends refer to a plot in which Vazul participated and his mutilation was a punishment for this act . That Vazul 's ears were filled with molten lead was only recorded in later sources , including the Illuminated Chronicle . 
 In the view of some historians , provisions in Stephen 's Second Book of Laws on the " conspiracy against the king and the kingdom " imply that the book was promulgated after Vazul 's unsuccessful plot against Stephen . However , this view has not been universally accepted . Györffy states that the law book was issued , not after 1031 , but around 1009 . Likewise , the authenticity of the decree on tithes is debated : according to Györffy , it was issued during Stephen 's reign , but Berend , <unk> and <unk> argue that it " might be a later addition " . 
 Stephen died on 15 August 1038 . He was buried in the basilica of Székesfehérvár . His reign was followed by a long period of civil wars , pagan uprisings and foreign invasions . The instability ended in 1077 when Ladislaus , a grandson of Vazul , ascended the throne . 
 = = Family = = 
 Stephen married Gisela , a daughter of Duke Henry the Wrangler of Bavaria , who was a nephew of Otto I , Holy Roman Emperor . Gisela 's mother was Gisela of Burgundy , a member of the Welf dynasty . Born around 985 , Gisela was younger than her husband , whom she survived . She left Hungary in 1045 and died as Abbess of the <unk> Abbey in Passau in Bavaria around 1060 . 
 Although the Illuminated Chronicle states that Stephen " begot many sons " , only two of them , Otto and Emeric , are known by name . Otto , who was named after Otto III , seems to have been born before 1002 . He died as a child . 
 Emeric , who received the name of his maternal uncle , Emperor Henry II , was born around 1007 . His Legend from the early 12th century describes him as a saintly prince who preserved his chastity even during his marriage . According to Györffy , Emeric 's wife was a kinswoman of the Byzantine Emperor Basil II . His premature death led to the series of conflicts leading to Vazul 's blinding and civil wars . 
 Be obedient to me , my son . You are a child , descendant of rich parents , living among soft pillows , who has been caressed and brought up in all kinds of comforts ; you have had a part neither in the troubles of the campaigns nor in the various attacks of the pagans in which almost my whole life has been worn away . 
 The following family tree presents Stephen 's ancestors and his relatives who are mentioned in the article . 
 * A Khazar , Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarian lady . * * Györffy writes that she may have been a member of the Bulgarian Cometopuli dynasty . * * * Samuel Aba might have been the son of Stephen 's sister instead of her husband . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Founder of Hungary = = = 
 Stephen has always been considered one of the most important statesmen in the history of Hungary . His main achievement was the establishment of a Christian state that ensured that the Hungarians survived in the Carpathian Basin , in contrast to the Huns , Avars and other peoples who had previously controlled the same territory . As Bryan Cartledge emphasizes , Stephen also gave his kingdom " forty years of relative peace and sound but unspectacular rule " . 
 His successors , including those descended from Vazul , were eager to emphasize their devotion to Stephen 's achievements . Although Vazul 's son , Andrew I of Hungary , secured the throne due to a pagan uprising , he prohibited pagan rites and declared that his subjects should " live in all things according to the law which King St. Stephen had taught them " , according to the 14th @-@ century Illuminated Chronicle . In medieval Hungary , communities that claimed a privileged status or attempted to preserve their own " liberties " often declared that the origin of their special status was to be attributed to King Saint Stephen . An example is a 1347 letter from the people of <unk> telling the king about their grievances against the Pannonhalma Archabbey and stating that the taxes levied upon them by the abbot contradicted " the liberty granted to them in the time of King Saint Stephen " . 
 = = = Holy King = = = 
 Stephen 's cult emerged after the long period of anarchy characterizing the rule of his immediate successors . However , there is no evidence that Stephen became an object of veneration before his canonization . For instance , the first member of the royal family to be named after him , Stephen II , was born in the early 12th century . 
 Stephen 's canonization was initiated by Vazul 's grandson , King Ladislaus I of Hungary , who had consolidated his authority by capturing and imprisoning his cousin , Solomon . According to Bishop Hartvic , the canonization was " decreed by apostolic letter , by order of the Roman see " , suggesting that the ceremony was permitted by Pope Gregory VII . The ceremony started at Stephen 's tomb , where on 15 August 1083 masses of believers began three days of fasting and praying . Legend tells that Stephen 's coffin could not be opened until King Ladislaus held Solomon in captivity at Visegrád . The opening of Stephen 's tomb was followed by the occurrence of healing miracles , according to Stephen 's legends . Historian Kristó attributes the healings either to mass psychosis or deception . Stephen 's legends also say that his " balsam @-@ scented " remains were elevated from the coffin , which was filled with " rose @-@ colored water " , on 20 August . On the same day , Stephen 's son , Emeric , and the bishop of Csanád , Gerard , were also canonized . 
 Having completed the office of Vespers the third day , everyone expected the favors of divine mercy through the merit of the blessed man ; suddenly with Christ visiting his masses , the signs of miracles poured forth from heaven throughout the whole of the holy house . Their multitude , which that night were too many to count , brings to mind the answer from the Gospel which the Savior of the world confided to John , who asked through messengers whether he was the one who was to come : the blind see , the lame walk , the deaf hear , the lepers are cleansed , the crippled are set straight , the paralyzed are cured ... 
 Stephen 's first legend , the so @-@ called Greater Legend , was written between 1077 and 1083 . It provided an idealized portrait of the king , one who dedicated himself and his kingdom to the Virgin Mary . However , Stephen 's Lesser Legend — composed around 1100 , under King Coloman — emphasized Stephen 's severity . A third legend , also composed during King Coloman 's reign by Bishop Hartvic , was based on the two existing legends . Sanctioned in 1201 by Pope Innocent III , Hartvic 's work served as Stephen 's official legend . Gábor Klaniczay wrote that Stephen 's legends " opened a new chapter in the legends of holy rulers as a genre " , suggesting that a monarch can achieve sainthood through actively using his royal powers . Stephen was the first triumphant miles Christi ( " Christ 's soldier " ) among the canonized monarchs . He was also a " confessor king " , one who had not suffered martyrdom , whose cult was sanctioned , in contrast with earlier holy monarchs . 
 Stephen 's cult spread beyond the borders of Hungary . Initially , he was primarily venerated in Scheyern and Bamberg , in Bavaria , but his relics were also taken to Aachen , Cologne , Montecassino and Namur . Upon the liberation of Buda from the Ottoman Turks , Pope Innocent XI expanded King Saint Stephen 's cult to the entire Roman Catholic Church in 1686 , and declared 2 September his feast day . As the feast of Saint Joachim was moved , in 1969 , from 16 August , the day immediately following the day of Stephen 's death , Stephen 's feast was moved to that date . Stephen is venerated as the patron saint of Hungary , and regarded as the protector of kings , masons , stonecutters , stonemasons and bricklayers , and also of children suffering from severe illnesses . His canonization was recognized by Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople in 2000 . In the calendar of the Hungarian Catholic Church , Stephen 's feast is observed on 20 August , the day on which his relics were translated . In addition , a separate feast day ( 30 May ) is dedicated to his " Holy Dexter " . 
 = = = Holy Dexter = = = 
 Stephen 's intact dexter , or right hand ( Hungarian : Szent <unk> ) , became the subject of a cult . A cleric named Mercurius stole it , but it was discovered on 30 May 1184 in Bihar County . The theft of sacred relics , or <unk> sacra , had by that time become a popular topic of saints ' biographies . Bishop Hartvic described the discovery of Stephen 's right hand in accordance with this tradition , referring to adventures and visions . An abbey erected in Bihar County ( now <unk> , Romania ) was named after and dedicated to the veneration of the Holy Dexter . 
 Why is it , brothers , that his other limbs having become disjointed and , his flesh having been reduced to dust , wholly separated , only the right hand , its skin and sinews adhering to the bones , preserved the beauty of wholeness ? I surmise that the inscrutability of divine judgement sought to proclaim by the extraordinary nature of this fact nothing less than that the work of love and alms surpasses the measure of all other virtues . ... The right hand of the blessed man was deservedly exempt from putrefaction , because always <unk> from the flower of kindness it was never empty from giving gifts to nourish the poor . 
 The Holy Dexter was kept for centuries in the Szentjobb Abbey , except during the Mongol invasion of 1241 and 1242 , when it was transferred to Ragusa ( now Dubrovnik , Croatia ) . The relic was then taken to Székesfehérvár around 1420 . Following the Ottoman occupation of the central territories of the Kingdom of Hungary in the mid @-@ 16th century , it was guarded in many places , including Bosnia , Ragusa and Vienna . It was returned to Hungary in 1771 , when Queen Maria Theresa donated it to the cloister of the Sisters of Loreto in Buda . It was kept in Buda Castle 's St. Sigismund Chapel between around 1900 and 1944 , in a cave near Salzburg in 1944 and 1945 , and again by the Sisters of Loreto in Buda , between 1945 and 1950 . Finally , since 1950 , the Holy Dexter has been in St. Stephen 's Basilica in Budapest . An annual procession celebrating the relic was instituted in 1938 , and continued until 1950 , when the procession was forbidden by the Communist government . It was resumed in 1988 . 
 = = = Admonitions = = = 
 According to Stephen 's Greater Legend , the king " himself compiled a book for his son on moral education " . This work , now known as Admonitions or De <unk> morum , was preserved in manuscripts written in the Late Middle Ages . Although scholars debate whether it can actually be attributed to the king or a cleric , most of them agree that it was composed in the first decades of the 11th century . 
 The Admonitions argues that kingship is inseparably connected with the Catholic faith . Its author emphasized that a monarch is required to make donations to the Church and regularly consult his prelates , but is entitled to punish clergymen who do wrong . One of its basic ideas was that a sovereign has to cooperate with the " pillars of his rule " , meaning the prelates , aristocrats , ispáns and warriors . 
 My dearest son , if you desire to honor the royal crown , I advise , I counsel , I urge you above all things to maintain the Catholic and Apostolic faith with such diligence and care that you may be an example for all those placed under you by God , and that all the clergy may rightly call you a man of true Christian profession . Failing to do this , you may be sure that you will not be called a Christian or a son of the Church . Indeed , in the royal palace , after the faith itself , the Church holds second place , first constituted and spread through the whole world by His members , the apostles and holy fathers , And though she always produced fresh offspring , nevertheless in certain places she is regarded as ancient . However , dearest son , even now in our kingdom the Church is proclaimed as young and newly planted ; and for that reason she needs more prudent and trustworthy guardians lest a benefit which the divine mercy bestowed on us undeservedly should be destroyed and annihilated through your idleness , indolence or neglect . 
 = = = In arts = = = 
 King St Stephen has been a popular theme in Hungarian poetry since the end of the 13th century . The earliest poems were religious hymns which portrayed the holy king as the apostle of the Hungarians . Secular poetry , especially poems written for his feast day , followed a similar pattern , emphasizing Stephen 's role as the first king of Hungary . Poets described Stephen as the symbol of national identity and independence and of the ability of the Hungarian nation to survive historical cataclysms during the Communist regime between 1949 and 1989 . 
 A popular hymn , still sung in the churches , was first recorded in the late 18th century . It hails King St. Stephen as " radiant star of Hungarians " . Ludwig van Beethoven composed his King Stephen Overture for the inauguration of the Hungarian theatre in Pest in 1812 . According to musician James M. Keller , " [ t ] he descending unisons that open the King Stephen Overture would seem to prefigure the opening of the Ninth Symphony ; ... [ a ] nd then a later theme , introduced by flutes and clarinets , seems almost to be a variation ... of the famous Ode " To Joy " melody of the Ninth Symphony 's finale " . Hungarian composer Ferenc Erkel named his last complete opera from 1885 , István király ( " King Stephen " ) , after him . In 1938 , Zoltán Kodály wrote a choral piece titled <unk> Szent István <unk> ( " Hymn to King Stephen " ) . In 1983 , Levente Szörényi and János Bródy composed a rock opera — István , a király ( " Stephen , the King " ) — about the early years of his reign . Seventeen years later , in 2000 , Szörényi composed a sequel called <unk> , <unk> ! ( " You , Sir " ) . 
 = M @-@ 17 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 17 is a 6 @.@ 390 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 10 @.@ 284 km ) state trunkline highway in the U.S. state of Michigan , connecting the cities of Ypsilanti and Ann Arbor in Washtenaw County . It was once part of a highway that spanned the southern Lower Peninsula of Michigan before the creation of the U.S. Highway System in 1926 . The designation once extended into downtown Detroit , but the eastern terminus was progressively scaled back in the late 1960s to the current location in Ypsilanti . The changes made to the highways in Washtenaw County spawned Business M @-@ 17 ( Bus . M @-@ 17 ) , a business loop for 11 years between 1945 and 1956 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 17 begins at exit 37 along US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) on the Ann Arbor – Pittsfield Township border . West of this cloverleaf interchange , Washtenaw Avenue is Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) and Business US 23 ( Bus . US 23 ) . M @-@ 17 follows Washtenaw Avenue east of this interchange through Pittsfield Township and Ypsilanti Township . The street is five lanes wide through an urban area between Ann Arbor and Ypsilanti running east @-@ southeasterly . Although there are many residential areas near M @-@ 17 , particularly to the south , the road itself is dominated by commercial development , including numerous restaurants . M @-@ 17 crosses into the city of Ypsilanti at Hewitt Road . This intersection provides access north to <unk> Stadium , home field for the Eastern Michigan University ( EMU ) Eagles football team . 
 Continuing east @-@ southeasterly along Washtenaw Avenue , M @-@ 17 meets the southeast corner of the EMU campus at Oakwood Avenue . The highway follows the southern edge of campus to Cross Street , where the highway splits to follow a one @-@ way pairing of streets . Eastbound M @-@ 17 continues along Washtenaw Avenue while westbound traffic follows Cross Street . Eastbound traffic turns southward at Hamilton Street for two blocks before turning east along Michigan Avenue , meeting westbound Bus . US 12 . The two highway designations merge , running concurrently through downtown Ypsilanti . The section of Michigan Avenue between Hamilton and Huron streets is actually a wrong @-@ way concurrency because although it is a two @-@ way boulevard , the eastbound direction is M @-@ 17 and the westbound direction is Bus . US 12 . Both directions of traffic for both highways rejoin at Huron Street , as the westbound M @-@ 17 traffic uses Huron Street north to Cross Street and westbound Bus . US 12 turns south along Huron Street . Northeast of the Huron Street intersection is Riverside Park . Michigan Avenue forms the extreme southern park boundary just before it crosses the Huron River . At Ecorse Road , M @-@ 17 turns south in Ypsilanti Township through a residential area , separating from Bus . US 12 . Ecorse Road turns east four blocks north of I @-@ 94 / US 12 and runs parallel to the freeway . Past Harris Road , US 12 turns northeasterly on a separate expressway . Where it meets Ecorse Road , US 12 follows Ecorse Road , replacing M @-@ 17 . This junction marks the eastern terminus of M @-@ 17 west of Willow Run Airport . 
 Like other state highways in Michigan , M @-@ 17 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . As a part of these maintenance duties , the department tracks the traffic levels along its roadways using a metric called annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) . This is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . In 2009 , MDOT 's surveys found that the highest AADT along the trunkline was 26 @,@ 141 vehicles daily on the westernmost section near the US 23 interchange while the lowest counts were along the north – south section of Ecorse Road at 8 @,@ 926 vehicles . The section of M @-@ 17 from US 23 to the western junctions with Bus . US 12 has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roadways important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 17 is an original state trunkline dating back to the 1919 signing of the system . On July 1 , 1919 , the highway started at M @-@ 11 in Berrien County in the southwestern Lower Peninsula and ran east to Detroit . The debut of the U.S. Highway System replaced most of M @-@ 17 with two different highways . From Watervliet to Ann Arbor , US 12 replaced M @-@ 17 ; east of Ypsilanti to Detroit , US 112 replaced M @-@ 17 . The M @-@ 17 designation also replaced M @-@ 23 on Ecorse Road between Ypsilanti and Lincoln Park and then ran concurrently with US 25 into Detroit . The Ann Arbor segment was rerouted along Boulevard Drive ( now Stadium Boulevard ) between US 12 and US 23 . 
 A realignment in 1937 – 38 moved the M @-@ 17 designation in Allen Park . Changes made moved the highway to turn east on Southfield Road to US 25 and follow US 25 back to the former routing into Detroit . Another larger change came before 1945 with the completion of the Willow Run Expressway . M @-@ 17 was rerouted west of the Wayne – Washtenaw county line along the expressway that replaced Ecorse Road . M @-@ 17 was joined by Bypass US 112 ( BYP US 112 ) along the Willow Run Expressway to a southern freeway bypass of Ypsilanti . M @-@ 17 continued past the end of BYP US 112 at US 112 / Michigan Avenue along a two @-@ lane highway to US 23 . It then followed US 23 back to Washtenaw Avenue in Pittsfield Township to rejoin the original alignment of M @-@ 17 west to Ann Arbor . The former M @-@ 17 through downtown Ypsilanti was redesignated Business M @-@ 17 ( Bus . M @-@ 17 ) . 
 The Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) completed the freeway bypass of the Ann Arbor – Ypsilanti in 1956 , then moved the M @-@ 17 designation back to Washtenaw Avenue , Michigan Avenue and Ecorse Road , removing Bus . M @-@ 17 in the process . US 12 and US 112 replaced the BYP US 112 designation on the freeway . The former US 112 designation through downtown Ypsilanti was converted to a BUS US 112 designation , including sections concurrent with M @-@ 17 . Another change was made to the Ann @-@ Arbor section of the highway as it was truncated to end at US 23 . The 1962 completion of the US 23 freeway through the Ann Arbor area by MSHD moved the western terminus of M @-@ 17 west to meet the new freeway at the current terminus . The eastern terminus was progressively scaled back starting in 1968 . The US 25 concurrency was removed and the terminus was moved to M @-@ 39 / Southfield Road in Allen Park . A second truncation scaled the terminus back to US 12 , the current eastern endpoint . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Washtenaw County . 
 = = Business loop = = 
 Business M @-@ 17 ( Bus . M @-@ 17 ) was a business route designation used along a section of highway from 1945 until 1956 . It was routed along Washtenaw and Michigan avenues and Ecorse Road in the Ypsilanti area . At the time of its commissioning , M @-@ 17 was moved to a freeway bypass of downtown Ypsilanti . It was later decommissioned in 1956 when the freeway bypass was completed west around the south side of Ann Arbor . M @-@ 17 was moved back to its original routing through downtown Ypsilanti , supplanting Bus . M @-@ 17 when US 12 / US 112 supplanted M @-@ 17 on the freeway . 
 = Dan Dworsky = 
 Daniel Leonard Dworsky ( born October 4 , 1927 ) is an American architect . He is a longstanding member of the American Institute of Architects College of Fellows . Among other works , Dworsky designed Crisler Arena , the basketball arena at the University of Michigan named for Dworsky 's former football coach , Fritz Crisler . Other professional highlights include designing Drake Stadium at UCLA , the Federal Reserve Bank in Los Angeles , California and the Block M seating arrangement at Michigan Stadium . He is also known for a controversy with Frank Gehry over the Walt Disney Concert Hall . 
 Previously , Dworsky was an American football linebacker , fullback and center who played professional football for the Los Angeles Dons of the All @-@ America Football Conference in 1949 , and college football for the Michigan Wolverines from 1945 to 1948 . He was an All @-@ American on Michigan 's undefeated national championship teams in 1947 and 1948 . 
 = = College football at the University of Michigan = = 
 Born in Minneapolis , Minnesota in 1927 , Dworsky lived in the Twin Cities and Sioux Falls , South Dakota before attending the University of Michigan . Dworsky was a four @-@ year starter for Fritz Crisler ’ s Michigan Wolverines football teams from 1945 to 1948 . He played linebacker , fullback , and center for the Michigan Wolverines and was a key player on the undefeated 1947 and 1948 Michigan football teams that won consecutive national championships . The 1947 team , anchored by Len Ford , Alvin Wistert , Dworsky and Rick <unk> , has been described as the best team in the history of Michigan football . Dworsky won a total of six varsity letters at Michigan , four in football and two in wrestling where he competed in the heavyweight division . Dworsky is among the famous Jews in football , and has been extensively profiled in encyclopedic Jewish publications . Dworsky married the former Sylvia Ann Taylor on August 10 , 1957 . The couple has three children : Douglas , Laurie and Nancy . They reside in Los Angeles , California . 
 = = = 1947 season = = = 
 The 1947 Michigan Wolverines football team went 10 @-@ 0 and outscored their opponents 394 to 53 . Dworsky led a defensive unit that gave up an average of 5 @.@ 3 points per game and shut out Michigan State ( 55 – 0 ) , Pitt ( 60 – 0 ) , Indiana ( 35 – 0 ) , Ohio State ( 21 – 0 ) , and USC ( 49 – 0 ) . He also played fullback and center for the 1947 team and was named a third team All @-@ American by the American Football Coaches Association . 
 In a 1988 interview with the Los Angeles Times , Dworsky described the 1947 team ’ s defensive scheme as follows : " We were an intelligent team and we had some complex defenses , the nature of which you see today . I called the defensive signals and we would shift people , looping , or stunting . " 
 After going undefeated and winning the Big Ten championship , Michigan was invited to Pasadena to face the USC Trojans in the 1948 Rose Bowl — the Wolverines ' first bowl game since 1901 . Just before Christmas , the team boarded a train in Ann <unk> for a three @-@ day trip across the country . With little to do on the train , Alvin Wistert recalled that Dworsky entertained the team with music . " Dan Dworsky was a piano player . We 'd gather around and sing . There was a piano in the last car . " 
 After the long trip , the Wolverines beat the Trojans 49 – 0 . Dworsky recalled that the coaching staff did an excellent job of scouting the Trojans . " When we went to the Rose Bowl , we had USC down pat . We knew their system as well as they did . " The Trojans gained only 91 yards rushing and 42 yards passing , moving past midfield only twice . Dworsky played center during the Rose Bowl , blocking USC ’ s All @-@ American tackle ( and future Los Angeles city councilman ) , John Ferraro . 
 In Dworsky 's collegiate days , the final national rankings were determined before the bowl games . At the end of the regular season in 1947 , Michigan was ranked No. 2 behind Notre Dame , but after defeating USC 49 – 0 in the Rose Bowl , the Associated Press held a special poll , and Michigan replaced Notre Dame as the national champion by a vote of 226 to 119 . Dworsky later noted , " Notre Dame still claims that national championship and so do we . " 
 = = = 1948 season = = = 
 The 1948 Michigan Wolverines football team went 9 – 0 and outscored their opponents 252 to 44 . The defensive unit led by Dworsky held its opponents to just 4 @.@ 9 points per game , including shutouts against Oregon ( 14 – 0 ) , Purdue ( 40 – 0 ) , Northwestern ( 28 – 0 ) , Navy ( 35 – 0 ) , and Indiana ( 54 – 0 ) . The 1948 Wolverines finished the season ranked No. 1 by the AP , but Big Ten Conference rules prohibited a team from playing in the Rose Bowl two years in a row . Dworsky did , however , play in the 1948 Blue @-@ Gray All Star game . 
 = = = Relationship with Fritz Crisler = = = 
 Dworsky was a four @-@ year starter under Michigan ’ s legendary coach , Fritz Crisler . Dworsky later said that Crisler ’ s " real genius " was in blending all the elements . The 1947 championship team included several older veteran players who had returned from military service . Dworsky recalled : " About half of us were 18 @-@ year old kids , and half were veterans . We had guys who were serious guys and guys who were excitable . Fritz struck a balance , so we never had to be pushed , but we never lost our focus either . " 
 Dworsky recalled : " Crisler was not only an intellectual in strategy , but also in the way he ran practices . . . . He ran practices rigidly and we called him ' The Lord . ' He would allow it to rain , or not . He was a Douglas MacArthur @-@ type figure , handsome and rigid . . . . I sculpted him and gave him the bust in 1971 . " Dworsky also kept another bust of Crisler in his office . 
 = = Professional football with the Los Angeles Dons = = 
 In 1949 , Dworsky was the first round draft pick of the Los Angeles Dons of the All @-@ America Football Conference . The Dons were the first professional football team in Los Angeles . Dworsky played eleven games with the Dons in 1949 , his only season in professional football . Dworsky played linebacker and blocking back for the Dons and had one interception and one kick return for 14 yards . The AAFC disbanded after the 1949 season , and Dworsky turned down an offer from the Pittsburgh Steelers to return to the University of Michigan where he graduated in 1950 with a degree in architecture . Dworsky later noted : " It was a toss @-@ up whether I would become a pro football player or an architect . Being a linebacker is good conditioning for a young designer . You learn to block the bull coming at you from all sides . " 
 = = Career as an architect = = 
 = = = Overview of Dworsky 's practice = = = 
 After receiving his degree in architecture in 1950 , Dworsky moved to Los Angeles and served as an apprentice in the early 1950s with prominent local early modernists William Pereira , Raphael Soriano , and Charles Luckman . In 1953 , Dworsky began his own architecture firm in Los Angeles , known as Dworsky Associates . The firm grew into one of the most prominent architectural firms in California , creating major public buildings in California . Dworsky Associates won the 1984 Firm of the Year Award from the California Council of the American Institute of Architects . In September 2000 , Dworsky Associates merged with <unk> and ceased to operate as an independent firm . 
 = = = Architectural style = = = 
 Dworsky belongs to the generation of post @-@ World War II modernists which took its cues from the 1920s German Bauhaus and the French @-@ Swiss master Le Corbusier . In 1988 , Dworsky noted : " I am most intrigued by the essential mystery of architecture . For me , built space will always be a kind of theater , a stage on which life is played , and played out . That ’ s why I keep on being an architect . Asked what inspires his architecture , Dworsky said he draws from the " solid , resolved concepts " of modern designers such as Le Corbusier and Marcel Bruer , while being encouraged on occasion to experiment by such " new wave " designers as Frank Gehry and Eric Owen Moss . 
 = = = Crisler Arena and the Block " M " = = = 
 Dworsky ’ s first major commission was to design a basketball arena for his alma mater , the University of Michigan . The members of the 1947 Michigan Wolverines football team had reunions with Fritz Crisler every five years in Ann Arbor , and it was at one of those reunions that Crisler ( by then the school 's athletic director ) gave Dworsky one of his big breaks , asking him to design the arena . Built in 1967 , the arena was named Crisler Arena , as a tribute to the coach . Dworsky ’ s design of the arena was well received and was said to demonstrate " his ability to combine majesty of scale with human accessibility . " The roof of Crisler Arena is made of two plates , each weighing approximately 160 tons . The bridge @-@ like construction allows them to expand or contract given the change of seasons or the weight of the snow . Crisler Arena remains the home of Michigan ’ s basketball team and houses memorabilia and trophies from all Wolverine varsity athletic teams . 
 In 1965 , the wooden benches at Michigan Stadium were replaced with blue fiberglass benches . Dworsky designed a yellow “ Block M ” for the stands on the eastern side of the stadium , just above the tunnel . 
 = = = Drake Stadium at UCLA = = = 
 After his work on Crisler Arena , Dworsky was commissioned by UCLA to design a track and field stadium on the university ’ s central campus . Dworsky designed the stadium , known as Drake Stadium . Since its inaugural meet on February 22 , 1969 , the stadium has been the site of numerous championship meets , including the National AAU track & field championships in 1976 , 1977 , and 1978 . It is also used each year for special campus events , such as the annual UCLA Commencement Exercises in June . 
 = = = Major works = = = 
 The major works credited to Dworsky and his firm include the following : 
 The Jerry Lewis Neuromuscular Research Center at UCLA ( 1979 ) . 
 The Tom Bradley International Terminal at Los Angeles International Airport ( 1984 ) . 
 A 35 acres ( 0 @.@ 055 sq mi ; 0 @.@ 142 km2 ) planned community complex for the California School for the Blind in Fremont , California . The design won a merit award from the California AIA . 
 The Theater Arts Building at California State University Dominguez Hills . Dworsky cited the theater as one of his favorite projects . Photograph of Building 
 The Angelus Plaza residential complex in the Bunker Hill area of downtown Los Angeles ( 1982 ) Photograph of Building 
 The Ventura County Jail . 
 The Los Angeles Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank located at Grand Avenue and Olympic Boulevard in downtown Los Angeles ( 1987 ) . Dworsky Associates won several awards for its design of the 304 @,@ 000 square feet ( 28 @,@ 200 m2 ) , $ 50 million building . Photograph of Building 
 The Northrop Electronics Division Headquarters in Hawthorne , California . Dworsky Associates received a Gold Nugget Grand Award for Best Commercial Office Building and top honors in the Crescent Architecture Awards competition for the design . 
 The Kilroy Airport Center in Long Beach , California , a complex of office buildings fronting the 405 Freeway with direct runway access to the Long Beach Airport for private aircraft ( 1987 ) . Photograph of Building 
 The Westwood Terrace building on Sepulveda Boulevard in West Los Angeles , California occupied by New World <unk> of Building 
 The 20 @-@ story City Tower in Orange , California near the intersection of the Garden Grove ( 22 ) and Santa Ana ( 5 ) freeways in Orange County . Photograph of Building 
 The Home Savings building on Ventura Boulevard in Sherman Oaks , California . 
 The Metropolitan , a 14 @-@ story upscale rental complex in downtown Los Angeles ’ South Park area . 
 The Van Nuys Municipal Court building in Van Nuys , California . Dworsky Associates received the Kaufman & Broad Award for Outstanding New Public or Civic Project for the design . 
 The Federal Office Building in Long Beach , California . Dworsky Associates was awarded a 1992 Design Award from the General Services Administration for its design of the federal building . 
 The renovation of the Carnation Building at 5055 Wilshire Boulevard in Hollywood . The renovated building was occupied by The Hollywood Reporter , Billboard , and other entertainment industry companies . 
 The Beverly Hills Main Post Office in Beverly Hills , California . Dworsky Associates received a Beautification Award from the Los Angeles Business Council for the design . 
 The San Joaquin County Jail in French Camp , California . Shortly after the prison opened , six prisoners escaped after cutting through a one @-@ inch bar in the <unk> with a hacksaw . The prison break led to finger @-@ pointing among the construction firm , the architect , and the prison guards over who was responsible for the lapse in security . 
 The UC Riverside Alumni and Visitors Center ( 1996 ) . Photographs 
 The Thousand Oaks Civic Arts Plaza , a project on which Dworsky Associates teamed with New Mexico architect Antoine Predock . The New Mexico chapter of the AIA gave Predock and Dworsky Associates an award in 1996 for their work on the Civic Arts Plaza . 
 The Calexico Port of Entry building in Calexico , California . The innovative design won the highest award from the California AIA , and it won a Presidential Design Award from President Bill Clinton . Photos and Drawings of Award Winning Calexico Port of Entry 
 Beckman Hall at Chapman University in Orange , California ( 1999 ) . Photograph of Building 
 The Lloyd D. George Federal Courthouse in Las Vegas , Nevada ( 2000 ) . Photographs of Courthouse 
 The Hollywood @-@ Highland station on the Metro Red Line ( <unk> ) in the heart of Hollywood . Photograph of Station 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 Dworsky has received numerous national , regional and community awards for design excellence , including the following : 
 Dworsky ’ s numerous award @-@ winning projects in his first 14 years of practice led to his election to the American Institute of Architects College of Fellows at the early age of 41 . 
 Gold Medal Award from the Los Angeles Chapter of the American Institute of Architects 
 Lifetime Achievement Award for Distinguished Service from the American Institute of Architects , California Council , awarded in 2004 . In granting the award , the Council noted that Dworsky had " made a major , positive impact on California architecture " and his " strong , simple sculpted work has provided a compelling statement for California architecture the past half century . " 
 He was voted one of the twelve most distinguished architects in Los Angeles . 
 Dworsky Associates won the 1984 Firm of the Year Award from the American Institute of Architects , California Council , for “ excellence in design of distinguished architecture ” and reaching for a livelier style beyond the boundaries of conventional modernism . ” 
 He was honored by the Southern California Institute of Architecture in May 1986 for his professional accomplishments and his efforts on behalf of the school ’ s scholarship program . 
 Dworsky was awarded a $ 3 @.@ 5 million grant by the California Board of Corrections in 1982 to study the idea of the modular jail . 
 Dworsky served on the Architectural Evaluation Board for the County of Los Angeles . 
 Dworsky also served on the board of directors and the “ directors circle ” of the Southern California Institute of Architecture . 
 = = = Walt Disney Concert Hall controversy = = = 
 In February 1989 , the Walt Disney Concert Hall Committee selected Dworsky as executive architect to work with designated architect Frank Gehry in designing the future home of the Los Angeles Philharmonic . Dworsky was selected to translate Gehry 's conceptual designs into working drawings that would meet building code specifications . By 1994 , the cost of the project had skyrocketed to $ 160 million ( it eventually reached $ 274 million ) , and controversy halted the project . By 1996 , a major donor was sought to complete the project by 2001 ( four years behind schedule ) . Gehry and his design came under fire , and some considered him a spoiled , impractical artist . 
 Gehry publicly blamed Dworsky : “ The executive architect was incapable of doing drawings that had this complexity . We helped select that firm . I went to Daniel , supposedly a friend , and I said , ' This is going to fail and we now have the capability to do it , so let us ghost @-@ write it . ' ” Dworsky refused . Gehry was also quoted in the Los Angeles Times as saying : “ We had the wrong executive architect doing the drawings . I helped pick him , I ’ m partly responsible . It brought us to a stop . ” Gehry told Los Angeles magazine in 1996 that he “ no longer speaks to his former friend ( Dworsky ) . ” Gehry continued his public attacks on Dworsky : “ He ( Dworsky ) made a lot of money . He begged me for the job . I ’ d like to shoot him . ” 
 Dworsky was eventually told to stop working on the drawings before he completed them , but he defended himself against Gehry ’ s criticism . “ Knowledgeable people were supportive of us . They were saying it ’ s a very complex and unusual design , and they can understand the difficulties in trying to achieve this within a limited budget and a limited schedule . It was unfortunate that Frank came out with his criticism , but he was the center of the storm , having designed the building , and he was just trying to lessen the blame on himself . ” 
 Dworsky also told the Los Angeles Times : “ This is a one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind building . You just don ’ t simply open up the plans and understand them quickly . ” Dworsky 's allies refer to Gehry 's work as " confusing " . Disney Hall official Frederick M. Nicholas also defended Dworsky ’ s work against Gehry ’ s attacks , denying that there were any problems with the Dworsky drawings not attributable to fast @-@ tracking . Nicholas said : " They were not ' bad ' drawings . It was a question of the subs not understanding them . " 
 = Proxima Centauri = 
 Proxima Centauri ( from Latin , meaning " nearest [ star ] of Centaurus " ) is a red dwarf , a small low @-@ mass star , about 4 @.@ 25 light @-@ years from the Sun , inside the G @-@ cloud , in the constellation of Centaurus . It was discovered in 1915 by the Scottish astronomer Robert Innes , the Director of the Union Observatory in South Africa , and is the nearest known star to the Sun , although it is too faint to be seen with the naked eye , with an apparent magnitude of 11 @.@ 05 . Its distance to the second- and third @-@ nearest stars , which form the bright binary Alpha Centauri , is 0 @.@ 237 ± 0 @.@ 011 ly ( 15 @,@ 000 ± 700 AU ) . Proxima Centauri is very likely part of a triple star system with Alpha Centauri A and B , but its orbital period may be greater than 500 @,@ 000 years . 
 Because of Proxima Centauri 's proximity to Earth , its angular diameter can be measured directly . It is about one @-@ seventh the diameter of that of the Sun . It has a mass about an eighth of the Sun 's mass ( M ☉ ) , and its average density is about 40 times that of the Sun . Although it has a very low average luminosity , Proxima is a flare star that undergoes random dramatic increases in brightness because of magnetic activity . The star 's magnetic field is created by convection throughout the stellar body , and the resulting flare activity generates a total X @-@ ray emission similar to that produced by the Sun . The mixing of the fuel at Proxima Centauri 's core through convection and its relatively low energy @-@ production rate mean that it will be a main @-@ sequence star for another four trillion years , or nearly 300 times the current age of the universe . 
 Searches for companions orbiting Proxima Centauri have been unsuccessful , ruling out the presence of brown dwarfs and supermassive planets . Precision radial velocity surveys have also ruled out the presence of super @-@ Earths within the star 's habitable zone . The detection of smaller objects will require the use of new instruments , such as the James Webb Space Telescope , which is scheduled for deployment in 2018 . Because Proxima Centauri is a red dwarf and a flare star , whether a planet orbiting it could support life is disputed . Nevertheless , because of the star 's proximity to Earth , it has been proposed as a destination for interstellar travel . 
 = = Observation = = 
 In 1915 , the Scottish astronomer Robert Innes , Director of the Union Observatory in Johannesburg , South Africa , discovered a star that had the same proper motion as Alpha Centauri . He suggested that it be named Proxima Centauri ( actually Proxima Centaurus ) . In 1917 , at the Royal Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope , the Dutch astronomer Joan <unk> measured the star 's trigonometric parallax at 0 @.@ 755 ± 0 @.@ 028 ″ and determined that Proxima Centauri was approximately the same distance from the Sun as Alpha Centauri . It was also found to be the lowest @-@ luminosity star known at the time . An equally accurate parallax determination of Proxima Centauri was made by American astronomer Harold L. Alden in 1928 , who confirmed Innes 's view that it is closer , with a parallax of 0 @.@ 783 ± 0 @.@ 005 ″ . 
 In 1951 , American astronomer Harlow Shapley announced that Proxima Centauri is a flare star . Examination of past photographic records showed that the star displayed a measurable increase in magnitude on about 8 % of the images , making it the most active flare star then known . The proximity of the star allows for detailed observation of its flare activity . In 1980 , the Einstein Observatory produced a detailed X @-@ ray energy curve of a stellar flare on Proxima Centauri . Further observations of flare activity were made with the <unk> and ROSAT satellites , and the X @-@ ray emissions of smaller , solar @-@ like flares were observed by the Japanese ASCA satellite in 1995 . Proxima Centauri has since been the subject of study by most X @-@ ray observatories , including XMM @-@ Newton and Chandra . 
 Because of Proxima Centauri 's southern declination , it can only be viewed south of latitude 27 ° N. Red dwarfs such as Proxima Centauri are far too faint to be seen with the naked eye . Even from Alpha Centauri A or B , Proxima would only be seen as a fifth magnitude star . It has an apparent visual magnitude of 11 , so a telescope with an aperture of at least 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) is needed to observe it , even under ideal viewing conditions — under clear , dark skies with Proxima Centauri well above the horizon . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Proxima Centauri is a red dwarf , because it belongs to the main sequence on the Hertzsprung – Russell diagram and is of spectral class M6 . M6 means that it falls in the low @-@ mass end of M @-@ type stars . Its absolute visual magnitude , or its visual magnitude as viewed from a distance of 10 parsecs , is 15 @.@ 5 . Its total luminosity over all wavelengths is 0 @.@ 17 % that of the Sun , although when observed in the wavelengths of visible light the eye is most sensitive to , it is only 0 @.@ <unk> % as luminous as the Sun . More than 85 % of its radiated power is at infrared wavelengths . 
 In 2002 , optical interferometry with the Very Large Telescope ( VLTI ) found that the angular diameter of Proxima Centauri was 1 @.@ 02 ± 0 @.@ 08 <unk> . Because its distance is known , the actual diameter of Proxima Centauri can be calculated to be about 1 / 7 that of the Sun , or 1 @.@ 5 times that of Jupiter . The star 's estimated mass is 12 @.@ 3 % M ☉ , or 129 Jupiter masses ( MJ ) . The mean density of a main @-@ sequence star increases with decreasing mass , and Proxima Centauri is no exception : it has a mean density of 56 @.@ 8 × 103 kg / m3 ( 56 @.@ 8 g / cm3 ) , compared with the Sun 's mean density of 1 @.@ 411 × 103 kg / m3 ( 1 @.@ 411 g / cm3 ) . 
 Because of its low mass , the interior of the star is completely convective , causing energy to be transferred to the exterior by the physical movement of plasma rather than through radiative processes . This convection means that the helium ash left over from the thermonuclear fusion of hydrogen does not accumulate at the core , but is instead circulated throughout the star . Unlike the Sun , which will only burn through about 10 % of its total hydrogen supply before leaving the main sequence , Proxima Centauri will consume nearly all of its fuel before the fusion of hydrogen comes to an end . 
 Convection is associated with the generation and persistence of a magnetic field . The magnetic energy from this field is released at the surface through stellar flares that briefly increase the overall luminosity of the star . These flares can grow as large as the star and reach temperatures measured as high as 27 million K — hot enough to radiate X @-@ rays . Indeed , Proxima Centauri 's quiescent X @-@ ray luminosity , approximately ( 4 – 16 ) × 1026 erg / s ( ( 4 – 16 ) × 1019 W ) , is roughly equal to that of the much larger Sun . The peak X @-@ ray luminosity of the largest flares can reach 1028 erg / s ( 1021 W. ) 
 Proxima Centauri 's chromosphere is active , and its spectrum displays a strong emission line of singly ionized magnesium at a wavelength of 280 nm . About 88 % of the surface of Proxima Centauri may be active , a percentage that is much higher than that of the Sun even at the peak of the solar cycle . Even during quiescent periods with few or no flares , this activity increases the corona temperature of Proxima Centauri to 3 @.@ 5 million K , compared to the 2 million K of the Sun 's corona . However , Proxima Centauri 's overall activity level is considered low compared to other red dwarfs , which is consistent with the star 's estimated age of 4 @.@ 85 × 109 years , since the activity level of a red dwarf is expected to steadily wane over billions of years as its stellar rotation rate decreases . The activity level also appears to vary with a period of roughly 442 days , which is shorter than the solar cycle of 11 years . 
 Proxima Centauri has a relatively weak stellar wind , no more than 20 % of mass loss rate of the solar wind . Because the star is much smaller than the Sun , however , the mass loss per unit surface area from Proxima Centauri may be eight times that from the solar surface . 
 A red dwarf with the mass of Proxima Centauri will remain on the main sequence for about four trillion years . As the proportion of helium increases because of hydrogen fusion , the star will become smaller and hotter , gradually transforming from red to blue . Near the end of this period it will become significantly more luminous , reaching 2 @.@ 5 % of the Sun 's luminosity ( L ☉ ) and warming up any orbiting bodies for a period of several billion years . When the hydrogen fuel is exhausted , Proxima Centauri will then evolve into a white dwarf ( without passing through the red giant phase ) and steadily lose any remaining heat energy . 
 = = = Distance and motion = = = 
 Based on the parallax of 768 @.@ 7 ± 0 @.@ 3 milliarcseconds , measured using the Hipparcos astrometry satellite , and more precisely with the Fine Guidance Sensors on the Hubble Space Telescope , Proxima Centauri is about 4 @.@ 24 light @-@ years ( ly ) from the Sun . A more recent and even more accurate parallax value from <unk> astrometry is 0 @.@ <unk> " , giving a distance of 4 @.@ 25 ly , or 270 @,@ 000 times more distant than Earth is from the Sun . From Earth 's vantage point , Proxima is separated from Alpha Centauri by 2 @.@ 18 degrees , or four times the angular diameter of the full Moon . Proxima also has a relatively large proper motion — moving 3 @.@ 85 arcseconds per year across the sky . It has a radial velocity toward the Sun of 22 @.@ 4 km / s . 
 Among the known stars , Proxima Centauri has been the closest star to the Sun for about 32 @,@ 000 years and will be so for about another 25 @,@ 000 years , after which the closest star to the Sun will be Alpha Centauri . In 2001 , J. García @-@ Sánchez et al. predicted that Proxima will make its closest approach to the Sun , coming within 3 @.@ 11 ly , in approximately 26 @,@ 700 years . A 2010 study by V. V. <unk> predicted a closest approach distance of 2 @.@ 90 ly in about 27 @,@ 400 years , followed by a 2014 study by C. A. L. <unk> @-@ Jones predicting a perihelion approach of 3 @.@ 07 ly in roughly 26 @,@ 710 years . Proxima Centauri is orbiting through the Milky Way at a distance from the Galactic Center that varies from 8 @.@ 3 to 9 @.@ 5 kpc , with an orbital eccentricity of 0 @.@ 07 . 
 Ever since the discovery of Proxima it has been suspected to be a true companion of the Alpha Centauri binary star system . At a distance to Alpha Centauri of just 0 @.@ 21 ly ( 15 @,@ 000 ± 700 AU ) , Proxima Centauri may be in orbit around Alpha Centauri , with an orbital period of the order of 500 @,@ 000 years or more . For this reason , Proxima is sometimes referred to as Alpha Centauri C. Modern estimates , taking into account the small separation between and relative velocity of the stars , suggest that the chance of the observed alignment being a coincidence is roughly one in a million . Data from the Hipparcos satellite , combined with ground @-@ based observations , is consistent with the hypothesis that the three stars are truly a bound system . If so , Proxima would currently be near apastron , the farthest point in its orbit from the Alpha Centauri system . Such a triple system can form naturally through a low @-@ mass star being dynamically captured by a more massive binary of 1 @.@ 5 – 2 M ☉ within their embedded star cluster before the cluster disperses . More accurate measurement of the radial velocity is needed to confirm this hypothesis . 
 If Proxima was bound to the Alpha Centauri system during its formation , the stars would be likely to share the same elemental composition . The gravitational influence of Proxima may also have stirred up the Alpha Centauri protoplanetary disks . This would have increased the delivery of volatiles such as water to the dry inner regions . Any terrestrial planets in the system may have been enriched by this material . 
 Six single stars , two binary star systems , and a triple star share a common motion through space with Proxima Centauri and the Alpha Centauri system . The space velocities of these stars are all within 10 km / s of Alpha Centauri 's peculiar motion . Thus , they may form a moving group of stars , which would indicate a common point of origin , such as in a star cluster . If it is determined that Proxima Centauri is not gravitationally bound to Alpha Centauri , then such a moving group would help explain their relatively close proximity . 
 Though Proxima Centauri is the nearest bona fide star , it is still possible that one or more as @-@ yet undetected sub @-@ stellar brown dwarfs may lie closer . 
 = = = Possible companions = = = 
 If a massive planet is orbiting Proxima Centauri , it would cause some displacement of Proxima Centauri over the course of the planet 's orbit . If the orbital plane of the planet is not perpendicular to the line of sight from Earth , then this displacement would cause periodic changes in the radial velocity of Proxima Centauri . The fact that multiple measurements of the star 's radial velocity have detected no such shifts has lowered the maximum mass that a detectable companion to Proxima Centauri could possess . The activity level of the star adds noise to the radial velocity measurements , limiting future prospects for detection of a companion using this method . 
 In 1998 , an examination of Proxima Centauri using the Faint Object Spectrograph on board the Hubble Space Telescope appeared to show evidence of a companion orbiting at a distance of about 0 @.@ 5 AU . However , a subsequent search using the Wide Field Planetary Camera 2 failed to locate any companions . Astrometric measurements at the Cerro Tololo Inter @-@ American Observatory appear to rule out a Jovian companion with an orbital period of 2 − 12 years . 
 Proxima Centauri , along with Alpha Centauri A and B , was among the " Tier 1 " target stars for NASA 's now @-@ canceled Space Interferometry Mission ( SIM ) , which would theoretically have been able to detect planets as small as three Earth masses ( M ⊕ ) within two AU of a " Tier 1 " target star . 
 = = = Habitable zone = = = 
 The TV documentary Alien Worlds hypothesized that a life @-@ sustaining planet could exist in orbit around Proxima Centauri or other red dwarfs . Such a planet would lie within the habitable zone of Proxima Centauri , about 0 @.@ 023 – 0 @.@ 054 AU from the star , and would have an orbital period of 3 @.@ 6 – 14 days . A planet orbiting within this zone will experience tidal locking to the star , so that Proxima Centauri moves little in the planet 's sky , and most of the surface experiences either day or night perpetually . However , the presence of an atmosphere could serve to redistribute the energy from the star @-@ lit side to the far side of the planet . 
 Proxima Centauri 's flare outbursts could erode the atmosphere of any planet in its habitable zone , but the documentary 's scientists thought that this obstacle could be overcome ( see continued theories ) . <unk> Basri of the University of California , Berkeley , even mentioned that " no one [ has ] found any showstoppers to habitability . " For example , one concern was that the torrents of charged particles from the star 's flares could strip the atmosphere off any nearby planet . However , if the planet had a strong magnetic field , the field would deflect the particles from the atmosphere ; even the slow rotation of a tidally locked dwarf planet that spins once for every time it orbits its star would be enough to generate a magnetic field , as long as part of the planet 's interior remained molten . 
 Other scientists , especially proponents of the Rare Earth hypothesis , disagree that red dwarfs can sustain life . Any exoplanet in this star 's habitable zone would likely be tidally @-@ locked resulting in a relatively weak planetary magnetic moment , leading to strong atmospheric erosion by coronal mass ejections from Proxima Centauri . 
 = = Interstellar travel = = 
 Proxima Centauri has been suggested as a possible first destination for interstellar travel . Proxima currently moves toward Earth at a rate of 22 @.@ 4 km / s . <unk> , after 26 @,@ 700 years , when it will come as close as 3 @.@ 11 light @-@ years , it will begin to move farther away . If non @-@ nuclear propulsion were used , a flight of a spacecraft to a planet orbiting Proxima Centauri would probably require thousands of years . For example , Voyager 1 , which is now travelling 17 @.@ 043 km / s ( 38 @,@ 120 mph ) relative to the Sun , would reach Proxima in 73 @,@ 775 years , were the spacecraft traveling in the direction of that star . A slow @-@ moving probe would have only several tens of thousands of years to catch Proxima Centauri near its closest approach , and could end up watching it recede into the distance . Nuclear pulse propulsion might enable such interstellar travel with a trip timescale of a century , beginning within the next century , inspiring several studies such as Project Orion , Project Daedalus , and Project Longshot . 
 From Proxima Centauri , the Sun would appear as a bright 0 @.@ 4 @-@ magnitude star in the constellation Cassiopeia . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Chipotle Mexican Grill = 
 Chipotle Mexican Grill , Inc . ( / <unk> / ) is an American chain of fast food restaurants in the United States , United Kingdom , Canada , Germany , and France , specializing in tacos and burritos . Its name derives from chipotle , the Nahuatl name for a smoked and dried jalapeño chili pepper . 
 The company has released a mission statement called Food with Integrity , which highlights its efforts in using naturally @-@ grown ingredients , and serves more naturally raised meat than any other restaurant chain . Chipotle is one of the first chains of fast casual dining establishments . 
 Founded by Steve Ells in July 1993 , Chipotle had 16 restaurants ( all in Colorado ) when McDonald 's Corporation became a major investor in 1998 . By the time McDonald 's fully divested itself from Chipotle in 2006 , the chain had grown to over 500 locations . 
 With more than 2 @,@ 000 locations , Chipotle had a net income of US $ 475 @.@ 6 million and a staff of more than 45 @,@ 000 employees in 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 Founder Steve Ells attended the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park , New York . Afterward , he became a line cook for Jeremiah Tower at Stars in San Francisco . There , Ells observed the popularity of the <unk> and San Francisco burritos in the Mission District . In 1993 , Ells took what he learned in San Francisco and opened the first Chipotle Mexican Grill in Denver , Colorado in a former Dolly Madison Ice Cream store at 1644 East Evans Avenue , near the University of Denver campus , using an $ 85 @,@ 000 loan from his father . Ells and his father calculated that the store would need to sell 107 burritos per day to be profitable . After one month , the original restaurant was selling over 1 @,@ 000 burritos a day . The second store opened in 1995 using Chipotle 's cash flow , and the third was opened using an SBA loan . To fund more growth , Ells ' father invested $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Afterwards , Ells created a board of directors and business plan , raising an additional $ 1 @.@ 8 million for the company . Ells had originally planned to use funds from the first Chipotle to open a fine @-@ dining restaurant , but instead focused on Chipotle Mexican Grill when the restaurants saw success . 
 In 1998 , the first restaurant outside of Colorado opened in Kansas City , Missouri . The company opened its first location in Minnesota by opening near the campus of the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis in March 1999 . 
 In 1998 , McDonald 's made an initial minority investment in the company . By 2001 , the company had grown to be Chipotle 's largest investor . The investment from McDonald 's allowed the firm to quickly expand , from 16 restaurants in 1998 to over 500 by 2005 . On January 26 , 2006 , Chipotle made its initial public offering ( IPO ) after increasing the share price twice due to high pre @-@ IPO demand . In its first day as a public company , the stock rose exactly 100 % , resulting in the best U.S.-based IPO in six years , and the second @-@ best IPO for a restaurant after Boston Market . The money from the offering was then used to fund new store growth . 
 In October 2006 , McDonald 's fully divested from Chipotle . This was part of a larger initiative for McDonald 's to divest all of its non @-@ core business restaurants — Chipotle , <unk> Pizza , and Boston Market — so that it could focus on the main McDonald 's chain . McDonald 's invested approximately $ 360 million into Chipotle , and took out $ 1 @.@ 5 billion . McDonald 's had attempted to get Chipotle to add drive @-@ through windows and a breakfast menu , which Ells resisted . The company currently trades on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol CMG . 
 Competitors in the fast @-@ casual Mexican market include Qdoba Mexican Grill , Moe 's Southwest Grill , Rubio 's Coastal Grill , <unk> Mexican Grill , Freebirds World Burrito , and Baja Fresh . In a list of fastest @-@ growing restaurant chains in 2009 , Chipotle was ranked eighth , based on increases in U.S. sales over the past year , and in 2010 Chipotle was ranked third . Consumer Reports ranked Chipotle as the best Mexican fast @-@ food chain in 2011 . The company serves approximately 750 @,@ 000 customers per day . 
 In December 2010 , Chipotle hired chef Nate Appleman to develop new cuisine . Appleman has won Rising Star Chef from the James Beard Foundation , was named " Best New Chef " by Food & Wine magazine , and competed on The Next Iron Chef . 
 In 2010 , U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) audited Chipotle 's Minneapolis restaurants , and found that some employees had been hired using fraudulent documents . In December , Chipotle fired 450 employees from its Minneapolis restaurants as a result of the audit , resulting in protests by local groups . In February 2011 , ICE expanded the audit to include 60 restaurants in Virginia and Washington , D.C. which resulted in 40 workers being fired . In April 2011 , the criminal division of the Attorney General 's office in Washington , D.C. , joined the case , and ICE agents began interviewing employees at 20 to 25 restaurants in other locations , such as Los Angeles and Atlanta . In response to the government investigations , Chipotle hired former director of ICE Julie Myers Wood and high @-@ profile attorneys Robert Luskin and Gregory B. Craig . In addition , a Mexican citizen is suing Chipotle for " mental anguish and suffering " , claiming racial and national discrimination because a Minnesota restaurant allegedly refused to acknowledge his Mexican passport as a valid identification for an alcohol purchase . 
 In 2011 , Steve Ells was a judge for the TV show America 's Next Great Restaurant and investor of ANGR Holdings , the company that will be running the winning concept 's restaurants . Chipotle has agreed to purchase Ells ' investment in ANGR at his cost , provide support for ANGR operations , and invest a total of $ 2 @.@ 3 million in cash contributions . 
 On December 18 , 2013 , the company revealed that it had opened its first fast @-@ food pizza chain in Denver back in May 2013 . According to Associated Press , Chipotle partnered with a local full @-@ service restaurant called Pizzeria Locale to create a fast @-@ food version of the eatery , keeping its name . The company plans to open at least two more pizzerias in the Denver area . 
 In April 2014 , Chipotle announced an increase in menu prices for the first time in nearly three years , due to increasing costs for steak , avocados , and cheese . The price increase was expected to be rolled out from the end of second quarter of 2014 through the end of the third quarter . In late 2015 , Chipotle expanded its mobile strategy through delivery partnerships with tech startups like <unk> , a delivery service that targets college campuses . 
 = = = International expansion = = = 
 According to an article in The Motley Fool , Chipotle had 17 locations outside of the United States by October 2014 with the majority in Canada and the UK and was in the process of opening more locations . 
 In August 2008 , Chipotle opened its first location outside of the United States in Toronto . The second location in Toronto and Canada was not opened until 2010 . The first Canadian location outside of Toronto area was open in Vancouver in December 2012 . Except for the single location in Vancouver , all Canadian locations were within the Toronto area at the end of 2014 . 
 Chipotle has expanded to Europe , with the first European restaurant opened in May 2010 in London . A second location open in London in September 2011 . The following year , three addition location were quickly opened in the London area . After this growth spurt , the rate of further expansion in London slowed greatly with the sixth location appearing in 2013 and the seventh in June 2015 . Although Chipotle blames the slow growth in the United Kingdom on the British unfamiliarity with Mexican foods , several locally owned burrito chains had opened locations across the United Kingdom during the same interval . 
 A location first opened in Paris in France in May 2012 and Frankfurt in Germany in August 2013 . 
 Expansion in France was much slower than that in the United Kingdom or Canada , with a second location in Paris opening in 2013 and a third location in 2014 . At 7 @,@ 000 square feet , the restaurant at La Défense is , as of 2015 , the largest Chipotle location in the world , while a typical Chipotle restaurant is usually between 2 @,@ 200 and 2 @,@ 500 square feet . A fourth Parisian location was opened in Levallois @-@ Perret in 2015 . 
 By May 2016 , there were 25 locations outside of the United States with 9 locations in Toronto , 1 location in Vancouver , 6 locations in London , 3 in Paris , and 1 in Frankfurt . The rate of overseas expansion was slower than expected . Many of the press reviewers thought that the food was overpriced for their area . 
 = = = Operation and distribution = = = 
 All of Chipotle 's restaurants are company @-@ owned , rather than franchised . As of December 2012 , 1430 restaurants have since opened throughout the United States and Canada , with locations in 43 states , Ontario , British Columbia , and the District of Columbia . Founder Steve Ells serves as chairman and co @-@ chief executive officer , and has a 1 @.@ 25 % stake in the company . 
 = = = ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen = = = 
 In September 2011 , Chipotle opened an Asian fast @-@ casual concept restaurant named ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen in Washington , D.C. The company has said the new restaurant " would follow the Chipotle service format and its focus on ' food with integrity ' in ingredients . " Chipotle 's plan was to start with only one store , and see how the restaurant works out before expanding the concept . ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen features " cuisine inspired by Thai , Malaysian and Vietnamese cuisines " served in bowls or initially as bánh <unk> sandwiches . The sandwiches were quickly dropped a few months later after receiving mostly negative reviews on the quality of bread that was being used and ShopHouse 's inability to find a dependable supplier of decent bread . 
 In 2014 , The Motley Fool noted that Chipotle was expanding the ShopHouse concept rather slowly when compared with the expansion of Noodles & Company during the same time period . A writer for MarketWatch commented in 2015 that some of the procedures that Chipotle had developed for providing affordable quality burritos quickly " may not work with other cuisines " . As of 2015 , there have been , on average , three new <unk> opened each year , while 150 new <unk> were opened annually during the same time period , or nearly three opens per week . 
 As of April 2015 , there are four ShopHouse locations in D.C. , three in the D.C. suburbs of Maryland , and three in Los Angeles County , California . 
 The ShopHouse concept was primarily developed by Chipotle 's director of concept development Tim Wildin , who was born in Bangkok and spent all of his childhood summers there . Wildin had been working in the marketing department at Chipotle and realized that if he could follow Chipotle ’ s business model and combine it with his knowledge of traditional Southeast Asian cuisine , he could bring the taste of his homeland to the American masses . Culinary manager Nate Appleman was responsible for developing some recipes and the procedures to produce the final product . Wildin was responsible with the look of the facilities , the locations of the restaurants , and marketing . 
 = = Corporate management = = 
 Chipotle ’ s team includes a residing corporate office of managers and its board of directors . Members of both teams are appointed to serve on committees : audit , compensation , and nominating and corporate governance . The top management team consists of the co @-@ Chief Executive Officers , the Chief Financial Officer , the Chief Development Officer , and the Chief Marketing Officer . Seven individuals currently sit on the board of directors : Steve Ells , Montgomery Moran , Patrick Flynn , Albert <unk> , Neil <unk> , Darlene Friedman , and John Charlesworth . 
 = = = Salaries = = = 
 The labor @-@ market research firm <unk> reported that Steve Ells earned $ 29 million in 2014 , versus a median of $ 19 @,@ 000 for Chipotle 's workers , making the CEO @-@ to @-@ worker pay ratio 1522 : 1 . 
 = = = Field team = = = 
 The field team are the employees who work closely with but not directly within specific restaurants . The field support system includes apprentice team leaders ( step up from restaurateurs ) , team leaders or area managers , team directors and regional directors ( not atypical for them to oversee more than fifty locations ) . Because Chipotle does not franchise , all restaurants are corporately owned . Thus , whenever Chipotle is in the process of launching a new location , the field team hires a new general manager and trains them at a current location so that they will be ready for the new location when it opens for business . The corporate office takes care of finding and funding new locations as well . 
 = = Menu = = 
 Chipotle 's menu consists of four items : burritos , bowls , tacos , and salads . The price of each item is based on the choice of chicken , pork carnitas ( available only in some locations ) , <unk> , steak , tofu @-@ based " <unk> " , or vegetarian ( with guacamole , which would be at an extra charge otherwise ) . Additional optional toppings are offered free of charge , including : rice , beans , four types of salsa , sour cream , cheese , and lettuce . When asked in 2007 about expanding the menu , Steve Ells said , " [ I ] t 's important to keep the menu focused , because if you just do a few things , you can ensure that you do them better than anybody else . " Chipotle also offers a children 's menu . Most restaurants sell beer and margaritas in addition to soft drinks and fruit drinks . 
 The majority of food is prepared in each restaurant . Some exceptions are the beans and carnitas , which are prepared at a central kitchen in Chicago , Illinois . None of the restaurants have freezers , microwave ovens , or can openers . 
 The chain experimented with breakfast foods at two airports in the Washington ( D.C. ) metropolitan area but decided against expanding the menu in that direction . Starting in 2009 , selected restaurants had offer a <unk> soup , which has since been discontinued . 
 In June 2015 , Chipotle began test marketing a pork and chicken <unk> @-@ type sausage as a new protein option at selected locations in the Kansas City area . Some food writers have expressed their health related concerns over the protein 's relatively high sodium content since a 4 @-@ ounce serving contains 293 calories and 803 milligrams of sodium while the American Heart Association ’ s recommended daily amount is less than 1 @,@ 500 milligrams of sodium . In contrast , the protein options with next highest sodium contents are <unk> with 530 milligrams and <unk> with 555 milligrams . An earlier version on the Mexican sausage was tested in Denver and New York City in 2011 , but that test was terminated when that version of the sausage was perceived as looking too greasy . 
 Chipotle accepts fax orders , and in 2005 the company added the ability to order online from their website . For both online and fax orders , customers proceed to the front of the line to pay for pre @-@ ordered food . In 2009 , Chipotle released an app for the iPhone that allows users to find nearby Chipotle locations , place an order , and prepay with a credit card . In 2013 , Chipotle released an Android app that allows users to locate nearby Chipotle locations , place an order , prepay with a credit or gift card , and access favorites and recent orders . 
 = = = Nutrition = = = 
 In 2003 , a Center for Science in the Public Interest report stated that Chipotle 's burritos contain over 1 @,@ 000 calories , which is nearly equivalent to two meals ' worth of food . MSNBC <unk> placed the burritos on their list of the " 20 Worst Foods in America " because of their high caloric content and high sodium . When a burrito with carnitas , rice , vegetables , cheese , guacamole , and salsa was compared with a typical Big Mac , the burrito had more fat , cholesterol , carbohydrates , and sodium than the Big Mac , but it also had more protein and fiber . The restaurant has also received praise – <unk> included the restaurant in its list of the " <unk> Fast Food Restaurants " . 
 Chipotle 's vegetarian options include rice , black beans , <unk> vegetables ( onions and bell peppers ) , salsa , guacamole and cheese . All items other than the meats , cheese , sour cream , and honey vinaigrette dressing are vegan . As of late 2013 , Chipotle developed a new cooking strategy for the pinto beans , eliminating the bacon and making them vegetarian and vegan @-@ friendly . The cheese is processed with vegetable @-@ based rennet in order to be suitable for vegetarians . In April 2010 , Chipotle began testing a vegan " Garden Blend " option , which is a plant @-@ based meat alternative marinated in chipotle adobo , at six locations in the U.S. The flour tortillas used for the burritos and soft tacos are the only items that contain gluten . 
 = = = Food sourcing = = = 
 In 1999 , while looking for ways to improve the taste of the carnitas , Steve Ells was prompted by an article written by Edward Behr to visit Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations ( <unk> ) . Ells found the <unk> " horrific " , and began sourcing from open @-@ range pork suppliers . This caused an increase in both the price and the sales of the carnitas burritos . 
 In 2001 , Chipotle released a mission statement called Food With Integrity , which highlighted Chipotle 's efforts to increase their use of naturally raised meat , organic produce , and dairy without added hormones . Chipotle only uses the leg and thigh meat from its chickens ; the breast meat is sold to Panera Bread . 
 Founder Steve Ells has testified before the United States Congress in support of the Preservation of Antibiotics for Medical Treatment Act , which aims to reduce the amount of antibiotics given to farm animals . 
 Since 2006 , the Coalition of Immokalee Workers ( CIW ) , a Floridian farmworker organization , has protested Chipotle ’ s refusal to sign a Fair Food agreement , which would commit the restaurant chain to pay a penny @-@ per @-@ pound premium on its Florida tomatoes to boost tomato harvesters ’ wages , and to only buy Florida tomatoes from growers who comply with the Fair Food Code of Conduct . In 2009 , the creators of the documentary film Food , Inc . ( along with 31 other leaders in the sustainable food movement ) signed an open letter of support for the CIW ’ s campaign , stating that , “ If Chipotle is sincere in its wishes to reform its supply chain , the time has come to work with the Coalition of Immokalee Workers as a true partner in the protection of farmworkers rights . ” In September 2009 , Chipotle announced that it would sidestep partnership with the CIW and instead work directly with East Coast Growers and Packers to increase wages for its tomato pickers . CEO Steve Ells has framed the dispute as a fundamental issue of control , stating that , “ the CIW wants us to sign a contract that would let them control Chipotle 's decisions regarding food in the future . " In October 2012 , Chipotle Mexican Grill signed an agreement with the CIW and became the 11th company to join the organization 's Fair Food Program . 
 In January 2015 , Chipotle pulled carnitas from its menu in a third of its restaurants ; company officials cited animal welfare problems at one of the suppliers , found during a regular audit , as the reason . Subsequently , a false rumor spread online claiming it was done to appease Muslims who consider pork to be unclean , leading to some protests on social media . The company still uses antibiotic @-@ free and hormone @-@ free steak in its restaurants , despite being briefly forced to " serve beef that is not naturally raised " during the summer of 2013 , posting an in @-@ store notice each time that occurred . Roberto <unk> of The Washington Post opined that Chipotle 's stated mission to sell " food with integrity " may be " untenable " if meat producers continue to breach Chipotle 's ethical standards . 
 Also in 2015 , Chipotle stopped using genetically modified corn and soy beans in their foods , claiming to be the first nationwide restaurant to cook completely GMO free . This was done in response to increasing consumer demand for GMO free products . 
 = = Food safety = = 
 Since 2008 , a former Kansas State University food safety professor has accused Chipotle of confusing the public by using such terms as " naturally raised meats " , " organic ingredients " , and " locally sourced " and trying to equate those terms with food safety . In rebuttal , a Chipotle spokesperson told The Daily Beast that " all of our practices have always been very much within industry norms . It 's important to note that restaurant practices are regulated by health codes , and restaurants are routinely inspected by health officials . Everything we have done in our supply chain and in our restaurants has been within industry norms . " Yet , FiveThirtyEight pointed out that the 2015 norovirus outbreak appears to be unusual and others are criticizing their food sourcing or handling practices . MarketWatch wrote that the result of all of these outbreaks will be to force Chipotle to obtain their produce from larger corporate farms that can afford the more extensive microbial food @-@ safety testing programs and to process vegetables at centralized locations instead of at the individual stores , both of which are industry @-@ standard practices that the company had previously criticized . The New York Times implied that the company 's insistence on maintaining its long standing rhetoric about " food integrity " seemed to be quite opposite with the realities of recent current events and made it appear that the management was just ignoring their current problems . It also has been pointed out that Chipotle 's current record @-@ keeping system is actually hindering the health authorities ' investigation in locating the sources of the various infections . 
 A writer for the magazine Popular Science pointed out that Chipotle had publicly acknowledged that they " may be at a higher risk for food @-@ borne illness outbreaks than some competitors due to our use of fresh produce and meats rather than frozen , and our reliance on employees cooking with traditional methods rather than automation . " Henry I. Miller , a medical researcher and columnist and the founding director of the FDA 's Office of Biotechnology , asked : " One wonders whether Chipotle ’ s " traditional methods " include employees ' neglecting to wash their hands before preparing food , which is how norovirus is usually spread . And the fresh versus frozen dichotomy is nothing more than a snow @-@ job . Freezing E. coli @-@ contaminated food does not kill the pathogens ; it preserves them . " Describing food poisoning outbreaks as " something of a Chipotle trademark ; the recent ones are the fourth and fifth this year [ 2015 ] , one of which was not disclosed to the public " , Miller notes that " a particularly worrisome aspect of the company 's serial deficiencies is that there have been at least three unrelated pathogens in the outbreaks – Salmonella and E. coli bacteria and norovirus . In other words , there has been more than a single glitch ; suppliers and employees have found a variety of ways to contaminate what Chipotle cavalierly sells ( at premium prices ) to its customers . " 
 A writer for the North Carolina newspaper The News & Observer called Chipotle 's " food with integrity " a " lucrative farce " and a " marketing ploy " by pointing out that organic food is " often grown with manure ( an ' all @-@ natural ' fertilizer ) , which can certainly increase the risks of accidentally spreading fecal bacteria like E. coli . " 
 In December 2015 , Seattle health officials closed a Seattle @-@ area Chipotle for a day after it had repeatedly had small numbers of violations during recent consecutive inspections that previously would not have generated a closure order . On December 10 , 2015 , CEO Steve Ells released a press statement apologizing for 2015 outbreaks and promised changes to minimize the risks of future outbreaks . 
 On February 8 , 2016 , Chipotle closed all of its eateries nationwide for a few hours during the morning for an all @-@ staff meeting on food safety . 
 = = = March 2008 hepatitis outbreak = = = 
 In March and April 2008 , the Community Epidemiology Branch of the San Diego County Health and Human Services Agency traced a hepatitis A outbreak in San Diego County to a single Chipotle restaurant located in La Mesa , California in which over 20 customers , but no employees , had tested positive for the virus . 
 = = = April 2008 norovirus outbreak = = = 
 In 2008 , Chipotle was implicated in a norovirus outbreak in Kent , Ohio , where over 400 people became ill after eating at a Chipotle restaurant . Officials at the Ohio Department of Health said that the outbreak was caused by Norovirus Genotype G2 . Many of the victims were students at Kent State University and some of reported victims were secondary victims who contracted the virus from being in close contact with the persons who had gotten ill at Chipotle . The initial source of the outbreak was never found . 
 = = = February 2009 Campylobacter jejuni outbreak = = = 
 In 2009 , an investigation by the Minnesota Department of Health traced an outbreak of campylobacteriosis to a Chipotle Mexican Grill in Apple Valley , Minnesota . The investigation found that chicken was sometimes served undercooked by the restaurant and determined that lettuce which had been cross @-@ contaminated with raw or undercooked chicken was the vector for the outbreak . 
 = = = July 2015 E. coli outbreak = = = 
 In early November 2015 , The Oregonian reported that there was a little @-@ known E. coli outbreak that had occurred earlier in July in which five persons were infected with the O157 : H7 strain of E. coli . The outbreak was traced to a single Chipotle location in Seattle and that the incident was not publicized at that time . Seattle public health officials defended their actions at that time by saying that the outbreak was over by the time they made an association with Chipotle . Health officials were unable to trace the source of the July outbreak and said that the cause of the July outbreak is unrelated to the October / November outbreak . 
 = = = August 2015 norovirus outbreak = = = 
 Another norovirus outbreak was confirmed to have occurred in August 2015 at a Simi Valley , California location in which 80 customers and 18 employees reported becoming ill . Ventura County health inspectors found various health violations during two inspections following the outbreak report . Despite those violations , the county health officials did not close the restaurant and allowed it to continue to operate . In a January 2016 article , the New York Times reported that the number of victims involved in the Simi Valley norovirus outbreak was actually 207 , twice the number that was reported earlier . 
 In an unusual move , the U.S. Attorney 's Office for the Central District of California in conjunction with the Food and Drug Administration has gotten a federal grand jury to issue a subpoena in January 2016 as part of a criminal investigation seeking documents and information from Chipotle concerning the Simi Valley norovirus outbreak . As of January 2016 , it is too early to tell which organization is the actual target of the investigation . In most cases involving norovirus outbreaks that involved a single location , state and / or local authorities are the usual jurisdiction responsible in the investigation and prosecution of those type of cases . However , Ventura County officials had been criticized for their handling of parts of their investigation , and for allowing the restaurant to continue to operate after finding health violations during consecutive inspections . 
 Less than two weeks later , a federal class action lawsuit was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California claiming that Chipotle knowingly allowed an ill kitchen manager to work for two days before sending that person home and had actively deep @-@ cleaned the restaurant to remove all traces of contamination prior to notifying the Ventura County Environmental Health Division of the existing of the outbreak and thus hinder their investigation . The lawsuit also claimed that the number of known victims is much higher , 234 , and estimates that the number of meals that the infected employee may have come in contact with could be as high 3000 . 
 = = = August 2015 Salmonella outbreak = = = 
 At almost the same time as the Simi Valley norovirus outbreak , Minnesota health officials confirmed a Salmonella outbreak that affected 17 Minneapolis @-@ area Chipotle restaurants in mid @-@ August 2015 . The source of the outbreak was traced back to contaminated tomatoes that were grown in Mexico . The Minnesota Department of Health reported that samples from 45 victims were tested and found that their illness was caused by the Salmonella Newport bacterium as determined by DNA profiling . Later , the state officials reported that the total of persons who became infected was increased to 64 and the number Chipotle locations in which they had acquired the bacterium was increased to 22 , all located within the state of Minnesota . 
 = = = October 2015 E. coli outbreak = = = 
 In October 2015 , at least 22 persons were reported to have gotten sick after eating at several different Chipotle locations in the states of Washington and Oregon . At that time , an epidemiologist for the Washington Health Department said the culprit appeared to be a Shiga toxin @-@ producing Escherichia coli bacterium , but they were still waiting the outcome of several laboratory tests before they can give a definitive result . As a precaution , Chipotle had closed 43 stores in Washington and Oregon pending the results and recommendations of the involved health authorities . On November 5 , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) had reported that the number of persons reported ill had risen to 40 known cases and that the bacteria samples taken from 7 infected persons in Washington and 3 persons in Oregon states were confirmed to be infected by the same strain of E. coli , the Shiga toxin @-@ producing STEC O26 strain , as determined by DNA profiling . At least 12 persons required hospitalization , but no fatalities . As of November , 2015 , Health authorities were still trying to trace the exact source of the bacterial contamination , but suspected fresh produce . 
 On November 12 , the CDC increased the number of known cases to 50 , the number of persons requiring hospitalization to 14 , and the number of DNA fingerprint confirmations to 33 . Through a match via <unk> , the DNA fingerprint also matched a recent case in Minnesota , but the ill person did not eat at Chipotle . The source of the bacteria infection still had not yet been determined at the time of the report released by the CDC and the CDC is trying to use the more definitive , but more time consuming whole genome sequencing procedure to see if they are able to determine the relationships between all of the STEC O26 cases . In the meantime , Chipotle reopened the closed restaurants on November 11 after disposing all of the food within the closed facilities and deep cleaning those facilities . 
 On November 20 , the CDC reported that the number of STEC O26 cases , as determined by DNA fingerprinting , had increased to 45 with 16 persons requiring hospitalization and the total number states being affected had increased to six . Besides Oregon and Washington , new cases were reported in the states of Minnesota , California , New York , and Ohio . 43 out of 45 of the affected individuals had reported that they had eaten at a Chipotle in the week before they had become sick . 
 On December 4 , the CDC reported that the number of STEC O26 cases , as determined by DNA fingerprinting , had increased to 52 with 20 persons requiring hospitalization and the total number states being affected had increased to nine . New cases were reported in the states of California ( 1 ) , Illinois ( 1 ) , Maryland ( 1 ) , Ohio ( 2 ) , Pennsylvania ( 1 ) , and Washington ( 1 ) . 
 The price of shares for Chipotle stock dropped a further 12 % immediately after the CDC had issued their update on November 20 . Share prices had been dropping since the initial announcement of the E. coli outbreak in late October with investors unsure if the drop in share prices just a temporary aberration and that Chipotle management is handling the incident as well as they could . Chipotle has since hired a consultant to improve their food safety program and have their program reviewed by both the CDC and FDA . 
 On February 1 , 2016 , the CDC official closed their investigations on the larger E. coli that started in Pacific Northwest in October 2015 and also the smaller outbreak that started in Kansas and Oklahoma in November since no new cases were reported since December 1 . In their final report , the CDC stated that 55 persons in 11 states were infected with the same strain of STEC O26 during the major outbreak with 21 of those persons requiring hospitalization . The five persons infected in the later outbreak were made ill by a generically different strain of STEC O26 . The CDC also reported that federal and local health and food safety authorities were unable to detect traces of the microorganisms in any of the food samples taken from the suspected restaurants or from their supply chain . The CDC , FDA , and the USDA Food Safety and Inspection Service were unable to determine a point source that was in common in the meals that were consumed by all the victims since some of the restaurants were located far apart and had obtained some of their ingredients from different suppliers while other consumers of the suspected suppliers were not affected . 
 = = = November 2015 E. coli cases = = = 
 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported on December 21 that five more people became ill after eating at two Chipotle restaurants located in Kansas and Oklahoma in late November . Preliminary DNA fingerprinting results appear to indicated that the newer cases were caused by a different strain of Shiga toxin @-@ producing E. coli O26 . Scientists are waiting the results of the more definitive whole genome sequencing analyses to determine if the organisms responsible for this outbreak are genetically related to the E. coli that are responsible for causing the outbreak that had started in Oregon and Washington in late October and thus an extension of that outbreak . The agency has not yet determined which food is responsible for the outbreak . The Food and Drug Administration reported that they are trying to determine how the bacteria in these cases , along with the earlier Oregon , Washington , and other multi @-@ state cases , might have been propagated through the food supply chain . 
 = = = December 2015 norovirus outbreak = = = 
 In December 2015 , eighty students at Boston College were sickened after eating at a single Chipotle restaurant . Affected students had been tested for both E. coli and norovirus in order to determine the cause of the illnesses . Although it would take as long as two days before the results of more definitive tests became known , public health investigators reported that preliminary tests pointed to the presence of norovirus . The health inspectors for the City of Boston had since closed this particular location on December 7 for a number of health violations that included maintaining meats at a too low of a temperature on the serving line and for allowing a sick employee to work at the time of the inspection . 
 On December 10 , officials from the Boston Public Health Commission reported that tests had identified a single strain of norovirus that is responsible for this particular outbreak . Boston Globe reported on December 10 that 141 persons were reported to have gotten ill and that some of the newer victims had not visited Chipotle before contracting the virus and most likely became infected by being in close proximity to someone who had gotten ill at Chipotle , such as a roommate or dorm @-@ mate . Boston authorities traced the caused of the outbreak to a sick employee who was allowed to work on the day of the outbreak . Chipotle has since fired the employee and also the manager who knowingly allowed the ill worker to complete his shift instead of following health codes . 
 = = Advertising and publicity = = 
 In the past , Chipotle mainly relied on billboards , radio ads , and word of mouth to advertise . In 2012 , Chipotle aired its first nationally televised commercial during the 54th Annual Grammy Awards ceremony . In 2010 , the company initiated an ad campaign that mocks advice given to Chipotle by advertising agencies . Chipotle has run many promotions giving out free food to potential customers , especially when opening a new store . Stores also give out free burritos on certain holidays ; for instance , on Halloween , some locations have had promotions in which free burritos are given to people who come dressed as a burrito . Chipotle gave away free burritos to reporters during the 1997 trial of Timothy McVeigh , which took place in Chipotle 's hometown of Denver . In addition , stores offered free burritos to those displaced by Hurricane Katrina . Chipotle received attention when Ozzy Osbourne 's reality show The Osbournes featured the company 's burritos heavily . Chipotle was also mentioned throughout the " Dead Celebrities " episode of the television series South Park . For Halloween 2010 , Chipotle announced that customers dressed as a processed food product would receive a burrito for $ 2 . The event was part of a $ 1 million fundraiser for Jamie Oliver 's Food Revolution called " <unk> 2010 : The Horrors of Processed Food . " For " <unk> 2011 " , customers dressed in costumes " inspired by family farms " will receive a menu item for $ 2 , with proceeds from the promotion going to The Chipotle Cultivate Foundation and Farm Aid . The promotion is aimed to increase awareness of family farms . Also in support of family farms , Chipotle released music videos of Karen O of the Yeah Yeah Yeahs and Willie Nelson . On September 12 , 2013 , Chipotle released an animated short called The Scarecrow , with a companion mobile video game ; both feature a narrative heavily critical of industrial farming , but little in the way of direct marketing for the chain . The short features a cover of " Pure Imagination " from Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory , sung by Fiona Apple . It was named one of the worst advertisements of 2013 by The Wall Street Journal . 
 In 2011 , Chipotle created the " Farm Team " , which is a rewards program available only by invitation from restaurant managers . The Farm Team members have access to a special Chipotle website , where members can earn rewards , i.e. free food and T @-@ shirts . The site offers members to , " learn where Chipotle ’ s food comes from , take quizzes and polls , play games and watch videos about the company " . In April 2014 , the Farm Team program was shut down . 
 Founder Steve Ells was a judge for the NBC reality television series America 's Next Great Restaurant ; Chipotle offered a buy @-@ one @-@ get @-@ one @-@ free deal in conjunction with the show . The show featured an episode where contestants worked in a Chipotle restaurant for a day . 
 Chipotle sponsors Team Garmin @-@ Barracuda ( formerly Team Garmin @-@ Chipotle , Team Garmin @-@ Slipstream , Team Garmin @-@ Transitions and Team Garmin @-@ Cervélo ) of the International Cycling Union , and is an official team partner of the Boston Celtics , and the Boston Bruins . In June 2009 , Chipotle sponsored free screenings of Food , Inc . , a film that criticizes the corporate food industry . Founder Steve Ells stated that he hoped the film would make customers appreciate Chipotle 's Food With Integrity policy . From May until September 2009 , Chipotle ran a contest on <unk> , a microsite which had a competition for the best user @-@ created audio and video presentations about different combinations of ingredients . In July 2010 , Chipotle began a campaign to support healthier lunch alternatives for students , in which money will be donated to The Lunch Box program based on how many spam E @-@ mails consumers forward to a company E @-@ mail address . For Chipotle 's 18 year anniversary , the company began wrapping its burritos in gold foil as part of a larger promotion to draw attention to its Food With Integrity mantra . Also as part of the gold foil campaign , Chipotle is offering prizes for customer @-@ created pictures of items wrapped in gold foil . Chipotle hired comedian Amy Sedaris to create a comedic how @-@ to video on wrapping with gold foil , and spread the video using Twitter . In March 2013 , Chipotle pulled its sponsorship of a Boy Scouts of America event , citing that organization 's ban on LGBT members . 
 On February 17 , 2014 , Chipotle released the first webisode of a four @-@ part series titled Farmed and Dangerous on Hulu . The comedy is a satire of " Big Ag " and " Big Food " practices , featuring the fictional megacorporation <unk> feeding cows <unk> , which are made directly from petroleum , instead of corn and soybeans , which rely on ammonium nitrate fertilizers produced through the Haber – Bosch process , using natural gas as a source of energy . 
 In 2014 , Chipotle debuted their " Cultivate : Food , Ideas & Music Festival " in several cities across the nation . 2015 festivals were held in Phoenix , Kansas City , and Minneapolis . Cultivate headlines of @-@ the @-@ moment bands and draws huge crowds to the free festival . In between band performances , attendees can enjoy food , drinks , activities , free samples from partners ( such as Ben & Jerry 's ) , and informational and interactive programs displaying Chipotle 's responsible farming methods . 
 Also in 2014 , Chipotle introduced the " Cultivating Thought Author Series , " in which notable contemporary writers and other personalities are invited to produce short pieces of work , designed to be read in two minutes , to be printed on Chipotle packaging , such as to @-@ go bags and cups . The program was suggested and is curated by Jonathan Safran Foer . Foer has contributed work to the program ; other participating writers include Amy Tan , Paulo Coelho , Aziz Ansari , Walter Isaacson , Jeffrey Eugenides , <unk> Burroughs , Neil Gaiman , Julia Alvarez , Carlos Ruiz <unk> , and Barbara Kingsolver . Former participants include Toni Morrison , Malcolm Gladwell , Sarah Silverman , Michael Lewis , Bill Hader , Judd Apatow , George Saunders , Steven Pinker , and Sheri Fink . 
 On December 16 , 2015 , Chipotle ran full page ads in both The Boston Globe and Boston Herald apologizing for the recent norovirus outbreak linked to Chipotle 's Cleveland Circle location . The ad , containing a letter by Chipotle founder and co @-@ CEO Steve Ells , affirmed the company 's commitment to food safety . 
 On March 14 , 2016 , a National Labor Relations Board ( NLRB ) administrative law judge concluded that Chipotle ’ s social media policy , and more specifically its application towards an employee who posted tweets regarding wages and working conditions , violated the National Labor Relations Act ( NLRA ) . A former Chipotle employee in Havertown , Pennsylvania , wrote a series of tweets from his personal account about hourly workers being required to work on snow days . Chipotle instructed the employee to delete the tweets . The NLRB judge determined that Chipotle ’ s request to delete the tweets , violated the NLRA , even though the employee was not disciplined as a result of his tweets . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Architecturally , all Chipotle restaurants are built using most of the same materials ( plywood , corrugated metal , stainless steel , exposed ductwork ) , although each store is unique . The interiors have been described as having an " industrial , sheet metal look " . Chipotle has built restaurants using white ceramic tile instead of stainless steel . It costs the company approximately $ 850 @,@ 000 to open a new restaurant . When the first Chipotle opened , Steve Ells asked his friend , sculptor Bruce Gueswel , to design the chairs and a styled Mayan king whose face was loosely based on that of civil rights leader Martin Luther King , Jr . , a personal inspiration of Gueswel , for the restaurant . Both items were made from wood and metal . Gueswel has continued to design and build the art and chairs for all subsequent Chipotle restaurants . 
 Most Chipotle locations display a photograph of the original restaurant , which is near the University of Denver campus on Evans Avenue . Instead of a photograph of itself , the original location has a photograph of the Dolly Madison Ice Cream that previously occupied the location . In 2010 , Chipotle began opening " A Model " restaurants , which are smaller concept locations , citing the lower costs of development and occupancy . Chipotle uses environmentally friendly packaging , with bowls made from recycled newsprint , unbleached tray liners , and napkins and cups made from <unk> waste . 
 Chipotle 's architectural design team incorporates the principles of sustainable architecture in their projects . The " green " restaurant in Gurnee , Illinois features an on @-@ site six kilowatt wind turbine , which generates about 10 % of the restaurant 's electrical needs . The Gurnee restaurant has received Platinum level LEED certification from U.S. Green Building Council . A restaurant in Tulsa , Oklahoma , uses recycled drywall , low @-@ VOC paint , and energy @-@ efficient appliances . A Chipotle restaurant in Austin , Texas was the first to receive a four @-@ star rating from the city 's Green Building Program . Additionally , Chipotle has made arrangements to add solar panels to 75 of its restaurants . Chipotle has contracted to clean its stores in New York City and Long Island , with " plant @-@ based , environmentally preferable cleaning supplies and technologies . " The cleansers are readily biodegradable and non @-@ toxic to humans or aquatic life . 
 Chipotle was the defendant in a lawsuit for failure to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act ( ADA ) . Maurizio <unk> , a customer who used a wheelchair , claimed he was denied the " Chipotle Experience " , because he was unable to see the food preparation . The case against the company was upheld in the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit , and the Supreme Court of the United States declined to hear Chipotle 's appeal , leaving the Ninth Circuit 's ruling intact . Chipotle has " an official disability policy of bringing ingredients to the tables of diners with disabilities and doing tableside preparation . " Chipotle is retrofitting restaurants affected by the ruling , replacing the walls in front of the food preparation area with lower ones or transparent panels . They are incorporating the new design elements into new restaurants . The case was one of over twenty ADA @-@ related lawsuits filed by <unk> , who died in 2011 . 
 = Red Lips = 
 " Red Lips " is a song recorded by American recording artist Sky Ferreira for her second extended play ( EP ) Ghost ( 2012 ) . It was released on July 17 , 2012 by Capitol Records . The song was written and produced by Greg Kurstin , with additional songwriting provided by Shirley Manson . " Red Lips " is a pop rock song that describes the emotional deterioration of an individual that Ferreira disliked . It differs from the previous electropop styles displayed in her earlier works ; this was deliberately done to prevent Ferreira from being branded in a similar fashion as recording artist Britney Spears , which she felt that Capitol Records had intended to do . 
 Despite Ghost itself garnering mixed reviews , " Red Lips " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who complimented its overall production . However , the track failed to impact any national record charts . An accompanying music video for " Red Lips " was directed by Terry Richardson , and was premiered through Richardson 's YouTube channel on June 12 , 2012 . Critics directed their commentaries towards Ferreira 's increasingly risqué public persona , shifting from the more innocent image with which she launched her career . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 With her debut studio album having been frequently delayed throughout the early 2010s , Ferreira released her second extended play Ghost on October 2 , 2012 while simultaneously continuing production of her full @-@ length record . " Red Lips " appears as the fourth of five songs on the track listing ; a preview of the song was first released through YouTube earlier that February . " Red Lips " was later heard on the television series Gossip Girl , during the episode " Save the Last Chance " from its sixth and final season on November 26 . 
 " Red Lips " was written and produced by Greg Kurstin , with additional songwriting provided by Shirley Manson . Ferreira first collaborated with Kurstin on her demo track " Femme Fatale " , and first came into contact with Manson through her Myspace profile which she had been uploading her music on . They were concerned that her record label intended to brand her like recording artist Britney Spears ; these conversations prompted Manson to offer Ferreira the track " Red Lips " . She made lyrical adjustments to remove slang commonly used in British English , including the term " taking a piss " , to better suit the American Ferreira . The track incorporates pop rock musical styles , becoming a departure from the electropop elements explored in her earlier tracks ; it additionally incorporates elements of grunge music , which was popularized in the 1990s . " Red Lips " also includes prominent guitar instrumentation , which Michael Cragg from The Guardian felt signaled a musical transition for Ferreira ; he further compared the song to the works of the band Yeah Yeah Yeahs . Bradley Stern from MuuMuse noted that the blending of " intimidating stabs of guitars and a wicked drum pulse " showcased " the acidic side of Sky ’ s attitude " . 
 Ferreira stated that the lyrics for " Red Lips " were intended as a narrative of the emotional breakdown of " a very specific person or a type [ that ] always made me feel uncomfortable " . In October 2012 , DJ Com Truise released a synthpop remix of " Red Lips " , which a writer for Fact felt complimented the songs on his debut studio album Galactic Melt ( 2011 ) . The DSL Remix of the original track is included in the soundtrack album of the feature film Vampire Academy : Blood Sisters ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Red Lips " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who complimented its overall production . Writing for Consequence of Sound , Tony Hardy offered a favorable review and appreciated the grunge music elements seen throughout the track , despite opining that its parent extended play Ghost ( 2012 ) lacked a creative focus . Michael Cragg from The Guardian recognized the track as a " welcome return for Sky Ferreira " , and compared it to the works of the band Garbage , which songwriter Shirley Manson is a member of . Bradley Stern from MuuMuse shared a similar sentiment , elaborating that the track " plays like the unofficial sequel " to " Cherry Lips " by the band . Jon Caramanica from The New York Times drew comparisons to the tracks " Owner of a Lonely Heart " by Yes and " In Bloom " by Nirvana . Writing for Pitchfork Media , Katherine St. Asaph appreciated that Ferreira " fares better and sounds far more comfortable " on tracks including " Red Lips " , which she felt that Ferreira " [ sells ] with a distant , almost tossed @-@ off vocal . " However , in a more mixed review , a writer for Tiny Mix Tapes was disappointed that Ferreira came across as an " imitation " of Avril Lavigne and Fefe Dobson on the track . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video for " Red Lips " was directed by Terry Richardson . She went into its filming open @-@ minded in regards to its concept , and ultimately agreed with the creative direction that Richardson proposed . The final product was premiered through Richardson 's YouTube channel on June 12 , 2012 ; it later appeared on Ferreira 's Vevo channel on July 13 . The clip sees Ferreira , dressed in underwear , applying lipstick on her entire face , and is interspersed with footage of its co @-@ star , the spider " Toby the Tarantula " , crawling across her body . She stated that her wardrobe was intended to complement the simplistic nature of the music video , rather than an attempt to create sex appeal . 
 Critics directed their commentaries of the music video towards Ferreira 's increasingly risqué public persona , shifting from the more innocent image with which she launched her career . A writer from MuuMuse provided a favorable review , comparing it to the visuals for " Criminal " by Fiona Apple and summarizing that " Sky Ferreira is cooler than anything you and I could ever be . " Becky Bain from Idolator stated that the appearance of Toby the Tarantula was " somehow nowhere near as disconcerting as the image of Sky , looking washed out with platinum hair against a white background , crazily painting her face with a tube of red lipstick . " Michael Cragg of The Guardian felt that Ferreira 's friendship with the controversial Richardson showcased a " shift away from the pop princess she felt she was being moulded into " , and commented that the spider was " not for the faint @-@ hearted " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = John Lester = 
 John Ashby Lester ( August 1 , 1871 – September 3 , 1969 ) was an American cricketer , active in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . Lester was one of the Philadelphian cricketers who played from the end of the 19th century until the outbreak of World War I. His obituary in Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack , described him as " one of the great figures in American cricket . " During his career , he played in 53 matches for the Philadelphians , 47 of which are considered first class . From 1897 until his retirement in 1908 , Lester led the batting averages in Philadelphia and captained all the international home matches . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Lester was born in Penrith , Cumberland , England in 1871 . He began playing cricket at a very young age . He was playing a game in Yorkshire in 1892 when he met Dr. Isaac Sharpless . Sharpless was the president of Haverford College , and invited him to the United States to attend the school . In his early days as a student in Cumberland 's <unk> School , he had been described as a " very indifferent batsman " . It was only after entering Haverford that he developed his batting style . As a student at Haverford , Lester excelled as an athlete and a scholar and played football , track , tennis , and soccer . During his freshman year , he averaged 100 @.@ 5 runs per innings . Lester also won the Cope Bat every year during his time at Haverford . In his final season with the school in 1896 , he scored 1 @,@ 185 total runs and took 40 wickets for averages of 79 and 23 @.@ 2 , respectively . He also captained Haverford on their first overseas tour , scoring 105 against the MCC on his first appearance at Lord 's . On this tour , he created a great impression with an average of over 84 and prepared himself for the Philadelphian 's tour of England the following year . 
 = = = Tour of England in 1897 = = = 
 The tour undertaken by the Philadelphian cricketers was very ambitious . Though the results might have been less satisfactory than hoped for by its promoters , the tour was arranged mainly for educational purposes and few of those on the American side expected to win many matches . Previous tours had tended to involve amateur English sides as opponents , with a low level of competition . In 1897 a schedule was prepared including all of the top county cricket teams , the Oxford and Cambridge University teams , the Marylebone Cricket Club , and two other sides , though only a few of the counties thought it worthwhile to put their best elevens onto the field . Starting on June 7 at Oxford , the tour lasted for two months and ended in late July at The Oval . While it initially aroused some curiosity , many English fans lost interest until John Lester and the Philadelphians met the full Sussex team at Brighton on June 17 . Behind a dominant bowling performance by Bart King , Lester helped to seal the victory with his batting . In the first innings , Lester and King were partners in a fourth @-@ wicket stand of 107 , with Lester top @-@ scoring with 92 . He continued in the second innings with 34 not out . 
 Despite the excitement surrounding Lester 's and King 's performances , the Americans did not fare well overall . Fifteen matches were played , but only two were won , while the team lost nine and earned a draw in four . The other win came against Warwickshire . During this match at Edgbaston , Lester scored 35 runs in the first innings and 67 in the second . Lester was the best batsmen on the Philadelphian side ; beginning with 72 not out in his first match , he kept up his form all through the tour , scoring 891 runs for an average 37 @.@ 12 . Several counties offered him contracts to play in England . 
 = = = Tours of England in 1903 and 1908 = = = 
 John Lester was chosen to captain the Philadelphians in 1903 and 1908 on their tours to England . Against Leicestershire in August 1903 , Lester made his highest score in first @-@ class cricket . In the first innings , he made 126 not out , and this was followed by a respectable 64 in the second innings . His batting on this tour so impressed the critics that he was called the " one batsman ( among the Philadelphians ) who may almost ( be ) described as great " and that he " would soon be one of the greatest men of his day " In his last first @-@ class match on the 1908 tour , Lester posted a score of 34 in the first innings , but was dismissed LBW for nought in the second innings . He did manage to take 4 wickets in the Philadelphians ' loss to Kent . 
 = = Legacy and later life = = 
 John Lester helped to lift Philadelphia cricket to the highest levels of international play with his leadership and understanding of the sport . He is one of the few American cricketers noted in Cricket Scores and Biographies , which said that he was " a watchful batsman who could hit well and had plenty of strokes and strong defence . " In 1951 he authored A Century of Philadelphia Cricket , which was a definitive history of the game in the area . Lester was also integral in the foundation of the C.C. Morris Cricket Library when he proposed that cricket , " with a history and literature second to none should be given a permanent home in the United States . " In 1969 he made his final public appearance at a cricket function when the library was opened at Haverford . Lester received his PhD in education from Harvard University in 1902 and for many years was head of the English department at the Hill School Pottstown , Pennsylvania and served as a university professor . He died in 1969 and as a lasting memorial , the pavilion at Cope Field is named in his honor . 
 = = Teams = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 United States of America 
 = = = USA first @-@ class = = = 
 Philadelphia 
 = = = Philadelphia club = = = 
 Merion 
 = = Publications = = 
 Essays of Yesterday and Today . New York : Harcourt , Brace and Company , 1943 . 
 A Century of Philadelphia Cricket . Philadelphia : University of Pennsylvania Press , 1951 . 
 = Elizabeth F. Ellet = 
 Elizabeth Fries Lummis Ellet ( October 18 , 1818 – June 3 , 1877 ) was an American writer , historian and poet . She was the first writer to record the lives of women who contributed to the American Revolutionary War . 
 Born Elizabeth Fries Lummis , in New York , she published her first book , Poems , Translated and Original , in 1835 . She married the chemist William Henry Ellet and the couple moved to South Carolina . She had published several books and contributed to multiple journals . In 1845 she moved back to New York and took her place in the literary scene there . She was involved with a public scandal involving Edgar Allan Poe and Frances Sargent Osgood and , later , another involving Rufus Wilmot Griswold . Ellet 's most important work , The Women of the American Revolution , was published in 1845 . The three volume book profiled the lives of patriotic women in the early history of the United States . She continued writing until her death in 1877 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Elizabeth Fries Lummis was born in Sodus Point , New York , on October 18 , 1818 . Her mother was Sarah Maxwell ( 1780 – 1849 ) the daughter of American Revolutionary War captain John Maxwell . During the Revolution , John Maxwell was lieutenant of the first company raised in Sussex County , New Jersey , he was promoted to captain , and attached to the Second Regiment Hunterdon County Militia . He was also a captain in Colonel Spencer 's regiment of the Continental Army , from February 7 , 1777 , to April 11 , 1778 . He later joined the army of General George Washington as captain of a company of 100 volunteers known as Maxwell 's Company . 
 Her father was William Nixon Lummis ( 1775 – 1833 ) , a prominent doctor who studied medicine in Philadelphia under the famous physician Dr. Benjamin Rush . In the early part of 1800 , Dr. Lummis left Philadelphia and purchased the Pulteney estate in Sodus Point , Wayne County , New York . Elizabeth Lummis attended Aurora Female Seminary in Aurora , New York , where she studied , among other subjects , French , German , and Italian . Her first published work , at age 16 , was a translation of Silvio <unk> 's <unk> of Messina . 
 = = Career = = 
 In 1835 , Elizabeth Lummis published her first book , entitled Poems , Translated and Original , which included her tragedy , Teresa Contarini , based on the history of Venice , that was successfully performed in New York and other cities . Around this time she married William Henry Ellet ( 1806 – 1859 ) , a chemist from New York City . He graduated from Columbia College in New York and earned a gold medal for a dissertation on the compounds of cyanogen . The couple moved to Columbia , South Carolina , when he was made professor of chemistry , mineralogy and geology at South Carolina College in 1836 . He also discovered a new and inexpensive method of preparing guncotton , for which the state of South Carolina presented him a service of silver plate . 
 During this time Ellet published several books . In 1839 she wrote The Characters of Schiller , a critical essay on the writer Friedrich Schiller including her translation of many of his poems . She wrote Scenes in the Life of Joanna of Sicily , a history of the life styles of female nobility , and Rambles about the Country , a lively description of the scenery she had observed in her travels through the United States , in 1840 . She continued writing poems , translations and essays on European literature which she contributed to the American Monthly , the North American Review , the Southern Literary Messenger , the Southern Quarterly Review , and other periodicals . Ellet wrote abundantly in a wide variety of genres . 
 In 1845 , Ellet left her husband in the south , moving back to New York City where she resumed her place as a member of literary society along with such writers as Margaret Fuller , Anne Lynch Botta , Edgar Allan Poe , Rufus Wilmot Griswold , Anna Cora Mowatt and Frances Sargent Osgood . 
 = = = Scandal = = = 
 During this time Ellet was a participant in a notorious scandal involving Edgar Allan Poe and Frances Sargent Osgood , both of whom were married to others . Accounts of the particulars of the scandal and the sequence of events differ . At the time Poe was at the height of his fame , thanks to his work " The Raven " . A number of women in literary society sent him letters , including Ellet and Osgood . Some of the letters sent may have been flirtatious or amorous ones . Ellet also spent time with Poe discussing literary matters . It is possible that Ellet felt herself in competition with Osgood for Poe 's affections . During this time Poe had written several poems to and about Osgood , including " A Valentine " . 
 On one visit to Poe 's home in January 1846 , Ellet allegedly observed letters from Osgood , shown to her by Poe 's wife Virginia , and subsequently advised Osgood to ask for their return , implying to Osgood that they were an indiscretion . On behalf of Osgood , Margaret Fuller and Anne Lynch Botta asked Poe to return the letters . Poe , angered by their interference , suggested that Ellet had better " look after her own letters " . One such letter , written in German , asked Poe to " call for it at her residence this evening " , a phrase presumably meant to be seductive , though Poe either ignored it or did not understand its meaning . He then gathered up these letters from Ellet and left them at her house . Despite her letters having been returned , Ellet asked her brother " to demand of me the letters " . Her brother , Colonel William Lummis , did not believe that Poe had already returned them and threatened to kill him . In order to defend himself , Poe requested a pistol from Thomas Dunn English , who did not believe that Ellet ever sent Poe any letters . 
 Osgood 's husband , Samuel Stillman Osgood , threatened to sue Ellet unless she formally apologized . She retracted her statements in a letter to Osgood saying , " The letter shown me by Mrs Poe must have been a forgery created by Poe himself " . She put all the blame on Poe , suggesting the incident was because Poe was " intemperate and subject to acts of lunacy . " The rumor that Poe was insane was spread by Ellet and by other enemies of Poe and eventually reported in newspapers . After Osgood reunited with her husband , the scandal died down . Poe 's sick wife Virginia , however , was deeply affected by the scandal . She had been receiving anonymous letters , possibly from Ellet , which reported her husband 's alleged indiscretions as early as July 1845 . On her deathbed Virginia claimed " Mrs. E. had been her murderer . " As Poe described years later , " I scorned Mrs. E simply because she revolted me , and to this day she has never ceased her anonymous persecutions . " It is believed that Poe wrote the short story " Hop @-@ Frog " as a literary revenge on Ellet and others . 
 = = = The Women of the American Revolution = = = 
 Around 1846 , Ellet began a major project in historical writing : to profile the life stories of women who sacrificed for , and were committed to , the American Revolution . She did this by searching out unpublished letters and diaries , and by interviewing descendants of Revolutionary era and frontier women , becoming the first historian of the Revolution to carry out such an effort . She noted the " abundance of materials for the [ masculine ] history of action " and attempted to add balance by telling the feminine side , referring to the founding " mothers " as giving " nurture in the domestic sanctuary of that love of civil liberty which afterwards kindled into a flame and shed light on the world " . 
 She found so much information about female patriots that the first edition of The Women of the American Revolution ( 1848 ) had to be published in two volumes . These volumes were well received and a third volume of additional material was published in 1850 . Later historians consider these volumes represent her most important work . Ellet also authored Domestic History of the American Revolution summarizing the same material in narrative form , and also published in 1850 . 
 Ellet told the stories of women from every colony and from all ranks of society , with the exception of African Americans whose role she chose to ignore . Some of the women she wrote about , such as Martha Washington , Abigail Adams , Mercy Otis Warren and Ann Eliza Bleecker , among others , were famous in their own right . She also wrote of the women who were more obscure but equally valuable : the wives of heroes who , in the face of British encroachment , bravely raised children and defended their homes . She wrote , " It is almost impossible now to appreciate the vast influence of woman 's patriotism upon the destinies of the infant republic . " 
 <unk> and critic Rufus Wilmot Griswold had aided Ellet in the production of the book and granted her access to the records of the New @-@ York Historical Society , of which he was a member . She did not acknowledge his assistance , angering the vindictive Griswold . In a review Griswold said , " with the assistance of a few gentlemen more familiar than herself with our public and domestic experience , she has made a valuable and interesting work . " 
 = = = Further work = = = 
 Now an established and respected author , Ellet went on to write Family Pictures from the Bible in 1849 . In 1850 , she wrote Evenings at Woodlawn , a collection of German legends and traditions and Domestic History of the American Revolution , possibly the only history of the American Revolution told from the perspective of both men and women . From 1851 to 1857 she wrote Watching Spirits , Pioneer Women of the West , Novelettes of the Musicians and Summer Rambles in the West . This book was inspired by a boating trip along the Minnesota River in 1852 . The local town , Eden Prairie , Minnesota , got its name from Ellet and has dedicated a nature trail in her honor . 
 In 1857 , Ellet published a 600 @-@ page encyclopedia of American home economics entitled The Practical Housekeeper . The guide , which seemed to target middle to upper class readers , was organized into three parts : cooking , housekeeping and pharmaceutical concerns . Its contents included thousands of recipes and advice with references to philosophers , scientists , and ancient civilizations . There were also five hundred wood @-@ engraved illustrations . She wrote in the preface " No complete system of Domestic Economy , within the limits of a convenient manual , has been published in this country . " 
 Later works included Women Artists in All Ages and Countries ( 1859 ) , the first book of its kind to represent a history of women artists . She <unk> Queens of American Society ( 1867 ) , and Court Circles of the Republic ( 1869 ) , a look at the social life of eighteen presidents from George Washington to Ulysses S. Grant . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1850 , Ellet and her husband relocated to New York , where he spent his final years as a chemical consultant for the Manhattan Gas Company . 
 Ellet became involved with the divorce case between Rufus Griswold and his second wife , Charlotte Myers , in 1852 . Ellet and Ann S. Stephens wrote to Myers telling her not to allow the divorce , as well as to Harriet McCrillis , who intended to marry Griswold after the divorce , to end her relationship with him . After it was granted , Ellet and Stephens continued writing to Myers and persuaded her to repeal the divorce on September 23 , 1853 . On February 24 , 1856 , the appeal went to court , with Ellet and Stephens providing lengthy testimony against Griswold 's character . Neither Griswold nor Myers attended and the appeal was dismissed . When Griswold died in 1857 , Sarah Anna Lewis , a friend and writer , suggested that Ellet had worsened Griswold 's illness and that she " goaded Griswold to his death " . 
 In 1857 Ellet replaced Ann Stephens as literary editor of the New York Evening Express . Ellet 's husband died two years later in 1859 . She continued to write , and although they had no children , she promoted charities for impoverished women and children by speaking in public to raise funds . An Episcopalian most of her life , she converted to Catholicism in her later years . She died of Bright 's disease in New York City on June 3 , 1877 , and was buried beside her husband at Green @-@ Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ellet was the first historian to write about the relationship of women to the American Revolution . She felt that women shaped history by their influence , which was done through " sentiment " and " feeling " . This was so hard to define that she stated " History can do it no Justice " . Her book The Women of the American Revolution is still studied . 
 = = List of works = = 
 List of works taken from MSU Historic American project . 
 <unk> of Messina ( 1834 ) a translation 
 Poems , Translated and Original including the play Teresa <unk> ( 1835 ) 
 The Characters of Schiller ( 1839 ) 
 Joanna of Sicily ( 1840 ) 
 Rambles about the Country ( 1840 ) 
 The Women of the American Revolution ( 1848 – 50 ) ( 3 volumes ) 
 Evenings at Woodlawn ( 1849 ) 
 Family Pictures from the Bible ( 1849 ) 
 Domestic History of the American Revolution ( 1850 ) 
 Watching Spirits ( 1851 ) 
 <unk> of the Musicians ( 1851 ) 
 Pioneer Women of the West ( 1852 ) 
 Summer Rambles in the West ( 1853 ) , 
 The Practical Housekeeper ( 1857 ) 
 Women Artists in All Ages and Countries ( 1859 ) 
 The Queens of American Society ( 1867 ) 
 Court Circles of the Republic ( 1869 ) 
 = Language = 
 Language is the ability to acquire and use complex systems of communication , particularly the human ability to do so , and a language is any specific example of such a system . The scientific study of language is called linguistics . 
 Questions concerning the philosophy of language , such as whether words can represent experience , have been debated since Gorgias and Plato in Ancient Greece . Thinkers such as Rousseau have argued that language originated from emotions while others like Kant have held that it originated from rational and logical thought . 20th @-@ century philosophers such as Wittgenstein argued that philosophy is really the study of language . Major figures in linguistics include Ferdinand de Saussure and Noam Chomsky . 
 Estimates of the number of languages in the world vary between 5 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 000 . However , any precise estimate depends on a partly arbitrary distinction between languages and dialects . Natural languages are spoken or signed , but any language can be encoded into secondary media using auditory , visual , or tactile stimuli – for example , in whistling , signed , or braille . This is because human language is modality @-@ independent . Depending on philosophical perspectives regarding the definition of language and meaning , when used as a general concept , " language " may refer to the cognitive ability to learn and use systems of complex communication , or to describe the set of rules that makes up these systems , or the set of utterances that can be produced from those rules . All languages rely on the process of <unk> to relate signs to particular meanings . Oral and sign languages contain a phonological system that governs how symbols are used to form sequences known as words or morphemes , and a syntactic system that governs how words and morphemes are combined to form phrases and utterances . 
 Human language has the properties of productivity , <unk> , and displacement , and relies entirely on social convention and learning . Its complex structure affords a much wider range of expressions than any known system of animal communication . Language is thought to have originated when early hominins started gradually changing their primate communication systems , acquiring the ability to form a theory of other minds and a shared intentionality . This development is sometimes thought to have coincided with an increase in brain volume , and many linguists see the structures of language as having evolved to serve specific communicative and social functions . Language is processed in many different locations in the human brain , but especially in Broca 's and Wernicke 's areas . Humans acquire language through social interaction in early childhood , and children generally speak fluently when they are approximately three years old . The use of language is deeply entrenched in human culture . Therefore , in addition to its strictly communicative uses , language also has many social and cultural uses , such as signifying group identity , social stratification , as well as social grooming and entertainment . 
 Languages evolve and diversify over time , and the history of their evolution can be reconstructed by comparing modern languages to determine which traits their ancestral languages must have had in order for the later developmental stages to occur . A group of languages that descend from a common ancestor is known as a language family . The Indo @-@ European family is the most widely spoken and includes languages such as English , Russian , and Hindi ; the Sino @-@ Tibetan family , which includes Mandarin and the other Chinese languages , and Tibetan ; the Afro @-@ Asiatic family , which includes Arabic , Somali , and Hebrew ; the Bantu languages , which include Swahili , and Zulu , and hundreds of other languages spoken throughout Africa ; and the Malayo @-@ Polynesian languages , which include Indonesian , Malay , Tagalog , and hundreds of other languages spoken throughout the Pacific . The languages of the Dravidian family that are spoken mostly in Southern India include Tamil and Telugu . Academic consensus holds that between 50 % and 90 % of languages spoken at the beginning of the 21st century will probably have become extinct by the year 2100 . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 The English word language derives ultimately from Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European * dn ̥ <unk> ₂ s " tongue , speech , language " through Latin lingua , " language ; tongue " , and Old French language . The word is sometimes used to refer to codes , ciphers , and other kinds of artificially constructed communication systems such as formally defined computer languages used for computer programming . Unlike conventional human languages , a formal language in this sense is a system of signs for encoding and decoding information . This article specifically concerns the properties of natural human language as it is studied in the discipline of linguistics . 
 As an object of linguistic study , " language " has two primary meanings : an abstract concept , and a specific linguistic system , e.g. " French " . The Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure , who defined the modern discipline of linguistics , first explicitly formulated the distinction using the French word langage for language as a concept , langue as a specific instance of a language system , and parole for the concrete usage of speech in a particular language . 
 When speaking of language as a general concept , definitions can be used which stress different aspects of the phenomenon . These definitions also entail different approaches and understandings of language , and they inform different and often incompatible schools of linguistic theory . Debates about the nature and origin of language go back to the ancient world . Greek philosophers such as Gorgias and Plato debated the relation between words , concepts and reality . Gorgias argued that language could represent neither the objective experience nor human experience , and that communication and truth were therefore impossible . Plato maintained that communication is possible because language represents ideas and concepts that exist independently of , and prior to , language . 
 During the Enlightenment and its debates about human origins , it became fashionable to speculate about the origin of language . Thinkers such as Rousseau and Herder argued that language had originated in the instinctive expression of emotions , and that it was originally closer to music and poetry than to the logical expression of rational thought . Rationalist philosophers such as Kant and Descartes held the opposite view . Around the turn of the 20th century , thinkers began to wonder about the role of language in shaping our experiences of the world – asking whether language simply reflects the objective structure of the world , or whether it creates concepts that it in turn imposes on our experience of the objective world . This led to the question of whether philosophical problems are really firstly linguistic problems . The resurgence of the view that language plays a significant role in the creation and circulation of concepts , and that the study of philosophy is essentially the study of language , is associated with what has been called the linguistic turn and philosophers such as Wittgenstein in 20th @-@ century philosophy . These debates about language in relation to meaning and reference , cognition and consciousness remain active today . 
 = = = Mental faculty , organ or instinct = = = 
 One definition sees language primarily as the mental faculty that allows humans to undertake linguistic behaviour : to learn languages and to produce and understand utterances . This definition stresses the universality of language to all humans , and it emphasizes the biological basis for the human capacity for language as a unique development of the human brain . Proponents of the view that the drive to language acquisition is innate in humans argue that this is supported by the fact that all cognitively normal children raised in an environment where language is accessible will acquire language without formal instruction . Languages may even develop spontaneously in environments where people live or grow up together without a common language ; for example , creole languages and spontaneously developed sign languages such as Nicaraguan Sign Language . This view , which can be traced back to the philosophers Kant and Descartes , understands language to be largely innate , for example , in Chomsky 's theory of Universal Grammar , or American philosopher Jerry Fodor 's extreme <unk> theory . These kinds of definitions are often applied in studies of language within a cognitive science framework and in neurolinguistics . 
 = = = Formal symbolic system = = = 
 Another definition sees language as a formal system of signs governed by grammatical rules of combination to communicate meaning . This definition stresses that human languages can be described as closed structural systems consisting of rules that relate particular signs to particular meanings . This structuralist view of language was first introduced by Ferdinand de Saussure , and his structuralism remains foundational for many approaches to language . 
 Some proponents of Saussure 's view of language have advocated a formal approach which studies language structure by identifying its basic elements and then by presenting a formal account of the rules according to which the elements combine in order to form words and sentences . The main proponent of such a theory is Noam Chomsky , the originator of the generative theory of grammar , who has defined language as the construction of sentences that can be generated using transformational grammars . Chomsky considers these rules to be an innate feature of the human mind and to constitute the rudiments of what language is . By way of contrast , such transformational grammars are also commonly used to provide formal definitions of language are commonly used in formal logic , in formal theories of grammar , and in applied computational linguistics . In the philosophy of language , the view of linguistic meaning as residing in the logical relations between propositions and reality was developed by philosophers such as Alfred Tarski , Bertrand Russell , and other formal logicians . 
 = = = Tool for communication = = = 
 Yet another definition sees language as a system of communication that enables humans to exchange verbal or symbolic utterances . This definition stresses the social functions of language and the fact that humans use it to express themselves and to manipulate objects in their environment . Functional theories of grammar explain grammatical structures by their communicative functions , and understand the grammatical structures of language to be the result of an adaptive process by which grammar was " tailored " to serve the communicative needs of its users . 
 This view of language is associated with the study of language in pragmatic , cognitive , and interactive frameworks , as well as in sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology . Functionalist theories tend to study grammar as dynamic phenomena , as structures that are always in the process of changing as they are employed by their speakers . This view places importance on the study of linguistic typology , or the classification of languages according to structural features , as it can be shown that processes of <unk> tend to follow trajectories that are partly dependent on typology . In the philosophy of language , the view of pragmatics as being central to language and meaning is often associated with Wittgenstein 's later works and with ordinary language philosophers such as J. L. Austin , Paul Grice , John Searle , and W. O. Quine . 
 = = = Unique status of human language = = = 
 Human language is unique in comparison to other forms of communication , such as those used by non @-@ human animals . Communication systems used by other animals such as bees or apes are closed systems that consist of a finite , usually very limited , number of possible ideas that can be expressed . 
 In contrast , human language is open @-@ ended and productive , meaning that it allows humans to produce a vast range of utterances from a finite set of elements , and to create new words and sentences . This is possible because human language is based on a dual code , in which a finite number of elements which are meaningless in themselves ( e.g. sounds , letters or gestures ) can be combined to form an almost infinite number of larger units of meaning ( words and sentences ) . Furthermore , the symbols and grammatical rules of any particular language are largely arbitrary , so that the system can only be acquired through social interaction . The known systems of communication used by animals , on the other hand , can only express a finite number of utterances that are mostly genetically determined . 
 Several species of animals have proved to be able to acquire forms of communication through social learning : for instance a bonobo named <unk> learned to express itself using a set of symbolic <unk> . Similarly , many species of birds and whales learn their songs by imitating other members of their species . However , while some animals may acquire large numbers of words and symbols , none have been able to learn as many different signs as are generally known by an average 4 year old human , nor have any acquired anything resembling the complex grammar of human language . 
 Human languages also differ from animal communication systems in that they employ grammatical and semantic categories , such as noun and verb , present and past , which may be used to express exceedingly complex meanings . Human language is also unique in having the property of <unk> : for example , a noun phrase can contain another noun phrase ( as in " [ [ the chimpanzee ] ' s lips ] " ) or a clause can contain another clause ( as in " [ I see [ the dog is running ] ] " ) . Human language is also the only known natural communication system whose adaptability may be referred to as modality independent . This means that it can be used not only for communication through one channel or medium , but through several . For example , spoken language uses the auditive modality , whereas sign languages and writing use the visual modality , and braille writing uses the tactile modality . 
 Human language is also unique in being able to refer to abstract concepts and to imagined or hypothetical events as well as events that took place in the past or may happen in the future . This ability to refer to events that are not at the same time or place as the speech event is called displacement , and while some animal communication systems can use displacement ( such as the communication of bees that can communicate the location of sources of nectar that are out of sight ) , the degree to which it is used in human language is also considered unique . 
 = = Origin = = 
 Theories about the origin of language differ in regard to their basic assumptions about what language is . Some theories are based on the idea that language is so complex that one cannot imagine it simply appearing from nothing in its final form , but that it must have evolved from earlier pre @-@ linguistic systems among our pre @-@ human ancestors . These theories can be called continuity @-@ based theories . The opposite viewpoint is that language is such a unique human trait that it cannot be compared to anything found among non @-@ humans and that it must therefore have appeared suddenly in the transition from pre @-@ hominids to early man . These theories can be defined as discontinuity @-@ based . Similarly , theories based on Chomsky 's generative view of language see language mostly as an innate faculty that is largely genetically encoded , whereas functionalist theories see it as a system that is largely cultural , learned through social interaction . 
 The only prominent proponent of a discontinuity @-@ based theory of human language origins is linguist and philosopher Noam Chomsky . Chomsky proposes that " some random mutation took place , maybe after some strange cosmic ray shower , and it reorganized the brain , implanting a language organ in an otherwise primate brain . " Though cautioning against taking this story too literally , Chomsky insists that " it may be closer to reality than many other fairy tales that are told about evolutionary processes , including language . " 
 Continuity @-@ based theories are held by a majority of scholars , but they vary in how they envision this development . Those who see language as being mostly innate , for example psychologist Steven Pinker , hold the precedents to be animal cognition , whereas those who see language as a socially learned tool of communication , such as psychologist Michael <unk> , see it as having developed from animal communication in primates : either gestural or vocal communication to assist in cooperation . Other continuity @-@ based models see language as having developed from music , a view already espoused by Rousseau , Herder , Humboldt , and Charles Darwin . A prominent proponent of this view is archaeologist Steven <unk> . Stephen Anderson states that the age of spoken languages is estimated at 60 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 years and that : 
 Researchers on the evolutionary origin of language generally find it plausible to suggest that language was invented only once , and that all modern spoken languages are thus in some way related , even if that relation can no longer be recovered ... because of limitations on the methods available for reconstruction . 
 Because language emerged in the early prehistory of man , before the existence of any written records , its early development has left no historical traces , and it is believed that no comparable processes can be observed today . Theories that stress continuity often look at animals to see if , for example , primates display any traits that can be seen as analogous to what pre @-@ human language must have been like . And early human fossils can be inspected for traces of physical adaptation to language use or pre @-@ linguistic forms of symbolic behaviour . Among the signs in human fossils that may suggest linguistic abilities are the size of the brain relative to body mass , the presence of a larynx capable of advanced sound production and the nature of tools and other manufactured artifacts . 
 It is mostly undisputed that pre @-@ human australopithecines did not have communication systems significantly different from those found in great apes in general , but scholarly opinions vary as to the developments since the appearance of the genus Homo some 2 @.@ 5 million years ago . Some scholars assume the development of primitive language @-@ like systems ( proto @-@ language ) as early as Homo <unk> ( 2 @.@ 3 million years ago ) while others place the development of primitive symbolic communication only with Homo erectus ( 1 @.@ 8 million years ago ) or Homo heidelbergensis ( 0 @.@ 6 million years ago ) , and the development of language proper with Anatomically Modern Homo sapiens with the Upper Paleolithic revolution less than 100 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 = = The study of language = = 
 The study of language , linguistics , has been developing into a science since the first grammatical descriptions of particular languages in India more than 2000 years ago , after the development of the Brahmi script . Modern linguistics is a science that concerns itself with all aspects of language , examining it from all of the theoretical viewpoints described above . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The academic study of language is conducted within many different disciplinary areas and from different theoretical angles , all of which inform modern approaches to linguistics . For example , descriptive linguistics examines the grammar of single languages , theoretical linguistics develops theories on how best to conceptualize and define the nature of language based on data from the various extant human languages , sociolinguistics studies how languages are used for social purposes informing in turn the study of the social functions of language and grammatical description , neurolinguistics studies how language is processed in the human brain and allows the experimental testing of theories , computational linguistics builds on theoretical and descriptive linguistics to construct computational models of language often aimed at processing natural language or at testing linguistic hypotheses , and historical linguistics relies on grammatical and lexical descriptions of languages to trace their individual histories and reconstruct trees of language families by using the comparative method . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The formal study of language is often considered to have started in India with Pāṇini , the 5th century BC grammarian who formulated 3 @,@ 959 rules of Sanskrit morphology . However , Sumerian scribes already studied the differences between Sumerian and Akkadian grammar around 1900 BC . Subsequent grammatical traditions developed in all of the ancient cultures that adopted writing . 
 In the 17th century AD , the French Port @-@ Royal Grammarians developed the idea that the grammars of all languages were a reflection of the universal basics of thought , and therefore that grammar was universal . In the 18th century , the first use of the comparative method by British philologist and expert on ancient India William Jones sparked the rise of comparative linguistics . The scientific study of language was broadened from Indo @-@ European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt . Early in the 20th century , Ferdinand de Saussure introduced the idea of language as a static system of interconnected units , defined through the oppositions between them . 
 By introducing a distinction between diachronic and <unk> analyses of language , he laid the foundation of the modern discipline of linguistics . Saussure also introduced several basic dimensions of linguistic analysis that are still fundamental in many contemporary linguistic theories , such as the distinctions between <unk> and paradigm , and the <unk> @-@ parole distinction , distinguishing language as an abstract system ( langue ) , from language as a concrete manifestation of this system ( parole ) . 
 = = = Contemporary linguistics = = = 
 In the 1960s , Noam Chomsky formulated the generative theory of language . According to this theory , the most basic form of language is a set of syntactic rules that is universal for all humans and which underlies the grammars of all human languages . This set of rules is called Universal Grammar ; for Chomsky , describing it is the primary objective of the discipline of linguistics . Thus , he considered that the grammars of individual languages are only of importance to linguistics insofar as they allow us to deduce the universal underlying rules from which the observable linguistic variability is generated . 
 In opposition to the formal theories of the generative school , functional theories of language propose that since language is fundamentally a tool , its structures are best analyzed and understood by reference to their functions . Formal theories of grammar seek to define the different elements of language and describe the way they relate to each other as systems of formal rules or operations , while functional theories seek to define the functions performed by language and then relate them to the linguistic elements that carry them out . The framework of cognitive linguistics interprets language in terms of the concepts ( which are sometimes universal , and sometimes specific to a particular language ) which underlie its forms . Cognitive linguistics is primarily concerned with how the mind creates meaning through language . 
 = = Physiological and neural architecture of language and speech = = 
 Speaking is the default modality for language in all cultures . The production of spoken language depends on sophisticated capacities for controlling the lips , tongue and other components of the vocal apparatus , the ability to acoustically decode speech sounds , and the neurological apparatus required for acquiring and producing language . The study of the genetic bases for human language is at an early stage : the only gene that has definitely been implicated in language production is <unk> , which may cause a kind of congenital language disorder if affected by mutations . 
 = = = The brain and language = = = 
 The brain is the coordinating center of all linguistic activity ; it controls both the production of linguistic cognition and of meaning and the mechanics of speech production . Nonetheless , our knowledge of the neurological bases for language is quite limited , though it has advanced considerably with the use of modern imaging techniques . The discipline of linguistics dedicated to studying the neurological aspects of language is called neurolinguistics . 
 Early work in neurolinguistics involved the study of language in people with brain lesions , to see how lesions in specific areas affect language and speech . In this way , neuroscientists in the 19th century discovered that two areas in the brain are crucially implicated in language processing . The first area is Wernicke 's area , which is located in the posterior section of the superior temporal gyrus in the dominant cerebral hemisphere . People with a lesion in this area of the brain develop receptive aphasia , a condition in which there is a major impairment of language comprehension , while speech retains a natural @-@ sounding rhythm and a relatively normal sentence structure . The second area is Broca 's area , located in the posterior inferior frontal gyrus of the dominant hemisphere . People with a lesion to this area develop expressive aphasia , meaning that they know what they want to say , they just cannot get it out . They are typically able to understand what is being said to them , but unable to speak fluently . Other symptoms that may be present in expressive aphasia include problems with fluency , articulation , word @-@ finding , word repetition , and producing and comprehending complex grammatical sentences , both orally and in writing . Those with this aphasia also exhibit ungrammatical speech and show inability to use syntactic information to determine the meaning of sentences . Both expressive and receptive aphasia also affect the use of sign language , in analogous ways to how they affect speech , with expressive aphasia causing signers to sign slowly and with incorrect grammar , whereas a signer with receptive aphasia will sign fluently , but make little sense to others and have difficulties comprehending others ' signs . This shows that the impairment is specific to the ability to use language , not to the physiology used for speech production . 
 With technological advances in the late 20th century , <unk> have also incorporated non @-@ invasive techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) and electrophysiology to study language processing in individuals without impairments . 
 = = = Anatomy of speech = = = 
 Spoken language relies on human physical ability to produce sound , which is a longitudinal wave propagated through the air at a frequency capable of vibrating the ear drum . This ability depends on the physiology of the human speech organs . These organs consist of the lungs , the voice box ( larynx ) , and the upper vocal tract – the throat , the mouth , and the nose . By controlling the different parts of the speech apparatus , the airstream can be manipulated to produce different speech sounds . 
 The sound of speech can be analyzed into a combination of segmental and suprasegmental elements . The segmental elements are those that follow each other in sequences , which are usually represented by distinct letters in alphabetic scripts , such as the Roman script . In free flowing speech , there are no clear boundaries between one segment and the next , nor usually are there any audible pauses between words . Segments therefore are distinguished by their distinct sounds which are a result of their different articulations , and they can be either vowels or consonants . <unk> phenomena encompass such elements as stress , phonation type , voice timbre , and prosody or intonation , all of which may have effects across multiple segments . 
 Consonants and vowel segments combine to form syllables , which in turn combine to form utterances ; these can be distinguished phonetically as the space between two inhalations . <unk> , these different segments are characterized by different formant structures , that are visible in a spectrogram of the recorded sound wave ( See illustration of <unk> of the formant structures of three English vowels ) . <unk> are the amplitude peaks in the frequency spectrum of a specific sound . 
 Vowels are those sounds that have no audible friction caused by the narrowing or obstruction of some part of the upper vocal tract . They vary in quality according to the degree of lip aperture and the placement of the tongue within the oral cavity . Vowels are called close when the lips are relatively closed , as in the pronunciation of the vowel [ i ] ( English " ee " ) , or open when the lips are relatively open , as in the vowel [ a ] ( English " ah " ) . If the tongue is located towards the back of the mouth , the quality changes , creating vowels such as [ u ] ( English " oo " ) . The quality also changes depending on whether the lips are rounded as opposed to unrounded , creating distinctions such as that between [ i ] ( unrounded front vowel such as English " ee " ) and [ y ] ( rounded front vowel such as German " ü " ) . 
 Consonants are those sounds that have audible friction or closure at some point within the upper vocal tract . Consonant sounds vary by place of articulation , i.e. the place in the vocal tract where the airflow is obstructed , commonly at the lips , teeth , alveolar ridge , palate , velum , uvula , or glottis . Each place of articulation produces a different set of consonant sounds , which are further distinguished by manner of articulation , or the kind of friction , whether full closure , in which case the consonant is called occlusive or stop , or different degrees of aperture creating fricatives and approximants . Consonants can also be either voiced or unvoiced , depending on whether the vocal cords are set in vibration by airflow during the production of the sound . Voicing is what separates English [ s ] in bus ( unvoiced sibilant ) from [ z ] in buzz ( voiced sibilant ) . 
 Some speech sounds , both vowels and consonants , involve release of air flow through the nasal cavity , and these are called nasals or nasalized sounds . Other sounds are defined by the way the tongue moves within the mouth : such as the l @-@ sounds ( called laterals , because the air flows along both sides of the tongue ) , and the r @-@ sounds ( called rhotics ) that are characterized by how the tongue is positioned relative to the air stream . 
 By using these speech organs , humans can produce hundreds of distinct sounds : some appear very often in the world 's languages , whereas others are much more common in certain language families , language areas , or even specific to a single language . 
 = = Structure = = 
 When described as a system of symbolic communication , language is traditionally seen as consisting of three parts : signs , meanings , and a code connecting signs with their meanings . The study of the process of <unk> , how signs and meanings are combined , used , and interpreted is called semiotics . Signs can be composed of sounds , gestures , letters , or symbols , depending on whether the language is spoken , signed , or written , and they can be combined into complex signs , such as words and phrases . When used in communication , a sign is encoded and transmitted by a sender through a channel to a receiver who decodes it . 
 Some of the properties that define human language as opposed to other communication systems are : the arbitrariness of the linguistic sign , meaning that there is no predictable connection between a linguistic sign and its meaning ; the duality of the linguistic system , meaning that linguistic structures are built by combining elements into larger structures that can be seen as layered , e.g. how sounds build words and words build phrases ; the <unk> of the elements of language , meaning that the elements out of which linguistic signs are constructed are discrete units , e.g. sounds and words , that can be distinguished from each other and rearranged in different patterns ; and the productivity of the linguistic system , meaning that the finite number of linguistic elements can be combined into a theoretically infinite number of combinations . 
 The rules by which signs can be combined to form words and phrases are called syntax or grammar . The meaning that is connected to individual signs , morphemes , words , phrases , and texts is called semantics . The division of language into separate but connected systems of sign and meaning goes back to the first linguistic studies of de Saussure and is now used in almost all branches of linguistics . 
 = = = Semantics = = = 
 Languages express meaning by relating a sign form to a meaning , or its content . Sign forms must be something that can be perceived , for example , in sounds , images , or gestures , and then related to a specific meaning by social convention . Because the basic relation of meaning for most linguistic signs is based on social convention , linguistic signs can be considered arbitrary , in the sense that the convention is established socially and historically , rather than by means of a natural relation between a specific sign form and its meaning . 
 Thus , languages must have a vocabulary of signs related to specific meaning . The English sign " dog " denotes , for example , a member of the species Canis familiaris . In a language , the array of arbitrary signs connected to specific meanings is called the lexicon , and a single sign connected to a meaning is called a <unk> . Not all meanings in a language are represented by single words . Often , semantic concepts are embedded in the morphology or syntax of the language in the form of grammatical categories . 
 All languages contain the semantic structure of predication : a structure that predicates a property , state , or action . Traditionally , semantics has been understood to be the study of how speakers and interpreters assign truth values to statements , so that meaning is understood to be the process by which a predicate can be said to be true or false about an entity , e.g. " [ x [ is y ] ] " or " [ x [ does y ] ] " . Recently , this model of semantics has been complemented with more dynamic models of meaning that incorporate shared knowledge about the context in which a sign is interpreted into the production of meaning . Such models of meaning are explored in the field of pragmatics . 
 = = = Sounds and symbols = = = 
 Depending on modality , language structure can be based on systems of sounds ( speech ) , gestures ( sign languages ) , or graphic or tactile symbols ( writing ) . The ways in which languages use sounds or signs to construct meaning are studied in phonology . The study of how humans produce and perceive vocal sounds is called phonetics . In spoken language , meaning is produced when sounds become part of a system in which some sounds can contribute to expressing meaning and others do not . In any given language , only a limited number of the many distinct sounds that can be created by the human vocal apparatus contribute to constructing meaning . 
 Sounds as part of a linguistic system are called phonemes . <unk> are abstract units of sound , defined as the smallest units in a language that can serve to distinguish between the meaning of a pair of minimally different words , a so @-@ called minimal pair . In English , for example , the words bat [ <unk> ] and pat [ <unk> ] form a minimal pair , in which the distinction between / b / and / p / differentiates the two words , which have different meanings . However , each language contrasts sounds in different ways . For example , in a language that does not distinguish between voiced and unvoiced consonants , the sounds [ p ] and [ b ] ( if they both occur ) could be considered a single phoneme , and consequently , the two pronunciations would have the same meaning . Similarly , the English language does not distinguish phonemically between aspirated and non @-@ aspirated pronunciations of consonants , as many other languages like Korean and Hindi do : the unaspirated / p / in spin [ spɪn ] and the aspirated / p / in pin [ pʰɪn ] are considered to be merely different ways of pronouncing the same phoneme ( such variants of a single phoneme are called allophones ) , whereas in Mandarin Chinese , the same difference in pronunciation distinguishes between the words [ <unk> ] ' crouch ' and [ <unk> ] ' eight ' ( the accent above the á means that the vowel is pronounced with a high tone ) . 
 All spoken languages have phonemes of at least two different categories , vowels and consonants , that can be combined to form syllables . As well as segments such as consonants and vowels , some languages also use sound in other ways to convey meaning . Many languages , for example , use stress , pitch , duration , and tone to distinguish meaning . Because these phenomena operate outside of the level of single segments , they are called suprasegmental . Some languages have only a few phonemes , for example , <unk> and <unk> language with 11 and 10 phonemes respectively , whereas languages like <unk> may have as many as 141 phonemes . In sign languages , the equivalent to phonemes ( formerly called <unk> ) are defined by the basic elements of gestures , such as hand shape , orientation , location , and motion , which correspond to manners of articulation in spoken language . 
 Writing systems represent language using visual symbols , which may or may not correspond to the sounds of spoken language . The Latin alphabet ( and those on which it is based or that have been derived from it ) was originally based on the representation of single sounds , so that words were constructed from letters that generally denote a single consonant or vowel in the structure of the word . In syllabic scripts , such as the Inuktitut syllabary , each sign represents a whole syllable . In logographic scripts , each sign represents an entire word , and will generally bear no relation to the sound of that word in spoken language . 
 Because all languages have a very large number of words , no purely logographic scripts are known to exist . Written language represents the way spoken sounds and words follow one after another by arranging symbols according to a pattern that follows a certain direction . The direction used in a writing system is entirely arbitrary and established by convention . Some writing systems use the horizontal axis ( left to right as the Latin script or right to left as the Arabic script ) , while others such as traditional Chinese writing use the vertical dimension ( from top to bottom ) . A few writing systems use opposite directions for alternating lines , and others , such as the ancient Maya script , can be written in either direction and rely on graphic cues to show the reader the direction of reading . 
 In order to represent the sounds of the world 's languages in writing , linguists have developed the International Phonetic Alphabet , designed to represent all of the discrete sounds that are known to contribute to meaning in human languages . 
 = = = Grammar = = = 
 Grammar is the study of how meaningful elements called morphemes within a language can be combined into utterances . Morphemes can either be free or bound . If they are free to be moved around within an utterance , they are usually called words , and if they are bound to other words or morphemes , they are called affixes . The way in which meaningful elements can be combined within a language is governed by rules . The rules for the internal structure of words are called morphology . The rules of the internal structure of phrases and sentences are called syntax . 
 = = = = Grammatical categories = = = = 
 Grammar can be described as a system of categories and a set of rules that determine how categories combine to form different aspects of meaning . Languages differ widely in whether they are encoded through the use of categories or lexical units . However , several categories are so common as to be nearly universal . Such universal categories include the encoding of the grammatical relations of participants and predicates by grammatically distinguishing between their relations to a predicate , the encoding of temporal and spatial relations on predicates , and a system of grammatical person governing reference to and distinction between speakers and addressees and those about whom they are speaking . 
 = = = = Word classes = = = = 
 Languages organize their parts of speech into classes according to their functions and positions relative to other parts . All languages , for instance , make a basic distinction between a group of words that prototypically denotes things and concepts and a group of words that prototypically denotes actions and events . The first group , which includes English words such as " dog " and " song " , are usually called nouns . The second , which includes " run " and " sing " , are called verbs . Another common category is the adjective : words that describe properties or qualities of nouns , such as " red " or " big " . Word classes can be " open " if new words can continuously be added to the class , or relatively " closed " if there is a fixed number of words in a class . In English , the class of pronouns is closed , whereas the class of adjectives is open , since an infinite number of adjectives can be constructed from verbs ( e.g. " saddened " ) or nouns ( e.g. with the -like suffix , as in " noun @-@ like " ) . In other languages such as Korean , the situation is the opposite , and new pronouns can be constructed , whereas the number of adjectives is fixed . 
 Word classes also carry out differing functions in grammar . <unk> , verbs are used to construct predicates , while nouns are used as arguments of predicates . In a sentence such as " Sally runs " , the predicate is " runs " , because it is the word that predicates a specific state about its argument " Sally " . Some verbs such as " curse " can take two arguments , e.g. " Sally cursed John " . A predicate that can only take a single argument is called intransitive , while a predicate that can take two arguments is called transitive . 
 Many other word classes exist in different languages , such as conjunctions like " and " that serve to join two sentences , articles that introduce a noun , interjections such as " wow ! " , or <unk> like " splash " that mimic the sound of some event . Some languages have positionals that describe the spatial position of an event or entity . Many languages have classifiers that identify countable nouns as belonging to a particular type or having a particular shape . For instance , in Japanese , the general noun classifier for humans is nin ( 人 ) , and it is used for counting humans , whatever they are called : 
 san @-@ nin no <unk> ( <unk> ) lit . " 3 human @-@ classifier of student " — three students 
 For trees , it would be : 
 san @-@ bon no ki ( <unk> ) lit . " 3 classifier @-@ for @-@ long @-@ objects of tree " — three trees 
 = = = = Morphology = = = = 
 In linguistics , the study of the internal structure of complex words and the processes by which words are formed is called morphology . In most languages , it is possible to construct complex words that are built of several morphemes . For instance , the English word " unexpected " can be analyzed as being composed of the three morphemes " un- " , " expect " and " -ed " . 
 Morphemes can be classified according to whether they are independent morphemes , so @-@ called roots , or whether they can only co @-@ occur attached to other morphemes . These bound morphemes or affixes can be classified according to their position in relation to the root : prefixes precede the root , suffixes follow the root , and infixes are inserted in the middle of a root . Affixes serve to modify or elaborate the meaning of the root . Some languages change the meaning of words by changing the phonological structure of a word , for example , the English word " run " , which in the past tense is " ran " . This process is called ablaut . Furthermore , morphology distinguishes between the process of inflection , which modifies or elaborates on a word , and the process of derivation , which creates a new word from an existing one . In English , the verb " sing " has the inflectional forms " singing " and " sung " , which are both verbs , and the derivational form " singer " , which is a noun derived from the verb with the <unk> suffix " -er " . 
 Languages differ widely in how much they rely on morphological processes of word formation . In some languages , for example , Chinese , there are no morphological processes , and all grammatical information is encoded syntactically by forming strings of single words . This type of morpho @-@ syntax is often called isolating , or analytic , because there is almost a full correspondence between a single word and a single aspect of meaning . Most languages have words consisting of several morphemes , but they vary in the degree to which morphemes are discrete units . In many languages , notably in most Indo @-@ European languages , single morphemes may have several distinct meanings that cannot be analyzed into smaller segments . For example , in Latin , the word bonus , or " good " , consists of the root <unk> , meaning " good " , and the suffix <unk> , which indicates masculine gender , singular number , and nominative case . These languages are called fusional languages , because several meanings may be fused into a single morpheme . The opposite of fusional languages are agglutinative languages which construct words by stringing morphemes together in chains , but with each morpheme as a discrete semantic unit . An example of such a language is Turkish , where for example , the word <unk> , or " from your houses " , consists of the morphemes , ev @-@ ler @-@ <unk> @-@ den with the meanings house @-@ plural @-@ your @-@ from . The languages that rely on morphology to the greatest extent are traditionally called polysynthetic languages . They may express the equivalent of an entire English sentence in a single word . For example , in Persian the single word <unk> means I didn 't understand it consisting of morphemes na @-@ <unk> @-@ id @-@ am @-@ esh with the meanings , " <unk> " . As another example with more complexity , in the Yupik word <unk> , which means " He had not yet said again that he was going to hunt reindeer " , the word consists of the morphemes <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ ni @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> with the meanings , " reindeer @-@ hunt @-@ future @-@ say @-@ negation @-@ again @-@ <unk> " , and except for the morpheme <unk> ( " reindeer " ) none of the other morphemes can appear in isolation . 
 Many languages use morphology to cross @-@ reference words within a sentence . This is sometimes called agreement . For example , in many Indo @-@ European languages , adjectives must cross @-@ reference the noun they modify in terms of number , case , and gender , so that the Latin adjective bonus , or " good " , is inflected to agree with a noun that is masculine gender , singular number , and nominative case . In many polysynthetic languages , verbs cross @-@ reference their subjects and objects . In these types of languages , a single verb may include information that would require an entire sentence in English . For example , in the Basque phrase <unk> <unk> , or " you saw me " , the past tense auxiliary verb n @-@ au @-@ zu ( similar to English " do " ) agrees with both the subject ( you ) expressed by the n- prefix , and with the object ( me ) expressed by the <unk> suffix . The sentence could be directly transliterated as " see you @-@ did @-@ me " 
 = = = = Syntax = = = = 
 Another way in which languages convey meaning is through the order of words within a sentence . The grammatical rules for how to produce new sentences from words that are already known is called syntax . The syntactical rules of a language determine why a sentence in English such as " I love you " is meaningful , but " * love you I " is not . <unk> rules determine how word order and sentence structure is constrained , and how those constraints contribute to meaning . For example , in English , the two sentences " the slaves were cursing the master " and " the master was cursing the slaves " mean different things , because the role of the grammatical subject is encoded by the noun being in front of the verb , and the role of object is encoded by the noun appearing after the verb . Conversely , in Latin , both Dominus servos <unk> and <unk> <unk> dominus mean " the master was reprimanding the slaves " , because servos , or " slaves " , is in the accusative case , showing that they are the grammatical object of the sentence , and dominus , or " master " , is in the nominative case , showing that he is the subject . 
 Latin uses morphology to express the distinction between subject and object , whereas English uses word order . Another example of how syntactic rules contribute to meaning is the rule of inverse word order in questions , which exists in many languages . This rule explains why when in English , the phrase " John is talking to Lucy " is turned into a question , it becomes " Who is John talking to ? " , and not " John is talking to who ? " . The latter example may be used as a way of placing special emphasis on " who " , thereby slightly altering the meaning of the question . Syntax also includes the rules for how complex sentences are structured by grouping words together in units , called phrases , that can occupy different places in a larger syntactic structure . Sentences can be described as consisting of phrases connected in a tree structure , connecting the phrases to each other at different levels . To the right is a graphic representation of the syntactic analysis of the English sentence " the cat sat on the mat " . The sentence is analyzed as being constituted by a noun phrase , a verb , and a prepositional phrase ; the prepositional phrase is further divided into a preposition and a noun phrase , and the noun phrases consist of an article and a noun . 
 The reason sentences can be seen as being composed of phrases is because each phrase would be moved around as a single element if syntactic operations were carried out . For example , " the cat " is one phrase , and " on the mat " is another , because they would be treated as single units if a decision was made to emphasize the location by moving forward the prepositional phrase : " [ And ] on the mat , the cat sat " . There are many different formalist and functionalist frameworks that propose theories for describing syntactic structures , based on different assumptions about what language is and how it should be described . Each of them would analyze a sentence such as this in a different manner . 
 = = = <unk> and universals = = = 
 Languages can be classified in relation to their grammatical types . Languages that belong to different families nonetheless often have features in common , and these shared features tend to correlate . For example , languages can be classified on the basis of their basic word order , the relative order of the verb , and its constituents in a normal indicative sentence . In English , the basic order is SVO : " The snake ( S ) bit ( V ) the man ( O ) " , whereas for example , the corresponding sentence in the Australian language Gamilaraay would be d ̪ <unk> n ̪ ama d ̪ <unk> <unk> ( snake man bit ) , SOV . Word order type is relevant as a typological parameter , because basic word order type corresponds with other syntactic parameters , such as the relative order of nouns and adjectives , or of the use of prepositions or postpositions . Such correlations are called <unk> universals . For example , most ( but not all ) languages that are of the SOV type have postpositions rather than prepositions , and have adjectives before nouns . 
 All languages structure sentences into Subject , Verb , and Object , but languages differ in the way they classify the relations between actors and actions . English uses the nominative @-@ accusative word typology : in English transitive clauses , the subjects of both intransitive sentences ( " I run " ) and transitive sentences ( " I love you " ) are treated in the same way , shown here by the nominative pronoun I. Some languages , called ergative , Gamilaraay among them , distinguish instead between Agents and Patients . In ergative languages , the single participant in an intransitive sentence , such as " I run " , is treated the same as the patient in a transitive sentence , giving the equivalent of " me run " and " you love me " . Only in transitive sentences would the equivalent of the pronoun " I " be used . In this way the semantic roles can map onto the grammatical relations in different ways , grouping an intransitive subject either with Agents ( accusative type ) or Patients ( ergative type ) or even making each of the three roles differently , which is called the tripartite type . 
 The shared features of languages which belong to the same typological class type may have arisen completely independently . Their co @-@ occurrence might be due to universal laws governing the structure of natural languages , " language universals " , or they might be the result of languages evolving convergent solutions to the recurring communicative problems that humans use language to solve . 
 = = Social contexts of use and transmission = = 
 While humans have the ability to learn any language , they only do so if they grow up in an environment in which language exists and is used by others . Language is therefore dependent on communities of speakers in which children learn language from their elders and peers and themselves transmit language to their own children . Languages are used by those who speak them to communicate and to solve a plethora of social tasks . Many aspects of language use can be seen to be adapted specifically to these purposes . Due to the way in which language is transmitted between generations and within communities , language perpetually changes , diversifying into new languages or converging due to language contact . The process is similar to the process of evolution , where the process of descent with modification leads to the formation of a phylogenetic tree . 
 However , languages differ from a biological organisms in that they readily incorporate elements from other languages through the process of diffusion , as speakers of different languages come into contact . Humans also frequently speak more than one language , acquiring their first language or languages as children , or learning new languages as they grow up . Because of the increased language contact in the <unk> world , many small languages are becoming endangered as their speakers shift to other languages that afford the possibility to participate in larger and more influential speech communities . 
 = = = Usage and meaning = = = 
 The semantic study of meaning assumes that meaning is located in a relation between signs and meanings that are firmly established through social convention . However , semantics does not study the way in which social conventions are made and affect language . Rather , when studying the way in which words and signs are used , it is often the case that words have different meanings , depending on the social context of use . An important example of this is the process called deixis , which describes the way in which certain words refer to entities through their relation between a specific point in time and space when the word is uttered . Such words are , for example , the word , " I " ( which designates the person speaking ) , " now " ( which designates the moment of speaking ) , and " here " ( which designates the position of speaking ) . Signs also change their meanings over time , as the conventions governing their usage gradually change . The study of how the meaning of linguistic expressions changes depending on context is called pragmatics . <unk> is an important part of the way that we use language to point out entities in the world . <unk> is concerned with the ways in which language use is patterned and how these patterns contribute to meaning . For example , in all languages , linguistic expressions can be used not just to transmit information , but to perform actions . Certain actions are made only through language , but nonetheless have tangible effects , e.g. the act of " naming " , which creates a new name for some entity , or the act of " pronouncing someone man and wife " , which creates a social contract of marriage . These types of acts are called speech acts , although they can of course also be carried out through writing or hand signing . 
 The form of linguistic expression often does not correspond to the meaning that it actually has in a social context . For example , if at a dinner table a person asks , " Can you reach the salt ? " , that is , in fact , not a question about the length of the arms of the one being addressed , but a request to pass the salt across the table . This meaning is implied by the context in which it is spoken ; these kinds of effects of meaning are called conversational <unk> . These social rules for which ways of using language are considered appropriate in certain situations and how utterances are to be understood in relation to their context vary between communities , and learning them is a large part of acquiring communicative competence in a language . 
 = = = Language acquisition = = = 
 All healthy , normally developing human beings learn to use language . Children acquire the language or languages used around them : whichever languages they receive sufficient exposure to during childhood . The development is essentially the same for children acquiring sign or oral languages . This learning process is referred to as first @-@ language acquisition , since unlike many other kinds of learning , it requires no direct teaching or specialized study . In The Descent of Man , naturalist Charles Darwin called this process " an instinctive tendency to acquire an art " . 
 First language acquisition proceeds in a fairly regular sequence , though there is a wide degree of variation in the timing of particular stages among normally developing infants . From birth , newborns respond more readily to human speech than to other sounds . Around one month of age , babies appear to be able to distinguish between different speech sounds . Around six months of age , a child will begin babbling , producing the speech sounds or handshapes of the languages used around them . Words appear around the age of 12 to 18 months ; the average vocabulary of an eighteen @-@ month @-@ old child is around 50 words . A child 's first utterances are <unk> ( literally " whole @-@ sentences " ) , utterances that use just one word to communicate some idea . Several months after a child begins producing words , he or she will produce two @-@ word utterances , and within a few more months will begin to produce telegraphic speech , or short sentences that are less grammatically complex than adult speech , but that do show regular syntactic structure . From roughly the age of three to five years , a child 's ability to speak or sign is refined to the point that it resembles adult language . Studies published in 2013 have indicated that unborn fetuses are capable of language acquisition to some degree . 
 Acquisition of second and additional languages can come at any age , through exposure in daily life or courses . Children learning a second language are more likely to achieve native @-@ like fluency than adults , but in general , it is very rare for someone speaking a second language to pass completely for a native speaker . An important difference between first language acquisition and additional language acquisition is that the process of additional language acquisition is influenced by languages that the learner already knows . 
 = = = Language and culture = = = 
 Languages , understood as the particular set of speech norms of a particular community , are also a part of the larger culture of the community that speaks them . Languages differ not only in pronunciation , vocabulary , and grammar , but also through having different " cultures of speaking . " Humans use language as a way of signalling identity with one cultural group as well as difference from others . Even among speakers of one language , several different ways of using the language exist , and each is used to signal affiliation with particular subgroups within a larger culture . Linguists and anthropologists , particularly <unk> , <unk> , and linguistic anthropologists have specialized in studying how ways of speaking vary between speech communities . 
 Linguists use the term " varieties " to refer to the different ways of speaking a language . This term includes geographically or <unk> defined dialects as well as the <unk> or styles of subcultures . Linguistic anthropologists and sociologists of language define communicative style as the ways that language is used and understood within a particular culture . 
 Because norms for language use are shared by members of a specific group , communicative style also becomes a way of displaying and constructing group identity . Linguistic differences may become salient markers of divisions between social groups , for example , speaking a language with a particular accent may imply membership of an ethnic minority or social class , one 's area of origin , or status as a second language speaker . These kinds of differences are not part of the linguistic system , but are an important part of how people use language as a social tool for constructing groups . 
 However , many languages also have grammatical conventions that signal the social position of the speaker in relation to others through the use of registers that are related to social hierarchies or divisions . In many languages , there are stylistic or even grammatical differences between the ways men and women speak , between age groups , or between social classes , just as some languages employ different words depending on who is listening . For example , in the Australian language <unk> , a married man must use a special set of words to refer to everyday items when speaking in the presence of his mother @-@ in @-@ law . Some cultures , for example , have elaborate systems of " social deixis " , or systems of signalling social distance through linguistic means . In English , social deixis is shown mostly through distinguishing between addressing some people by first name and others by surname , and in titles such as " Mrs. " , " boy " , " Doctor " , or " Your Honor " , but in other languages , such systems may be highly complex and codified in the entire grammar and vocabulary of the language . For instance , in languages of east Asia such as Thai , Burmese , and Javanese , different words are used according to whether a speaker is addressing someone of higher or lower rank than oneself in a ranking system with animals and children ranking the lowest and gods and members of royalty as the highest . 
 = = = Writing , literacy and technology = = = 
 Throughout history a number of different ways of representing language in graphic media have been invented . These are called writing systems . 
 The use of writing has made language even more useful to humans . It makes it possible to store large amounts of information outside of the human body and retrieve it again , and it allows communication across distances that would otherwise be impossible . Many languages conventionally employ different genres , styles , and registers in written and spoken language , and in some communities , writing traditionally takes place in an entirely different language than the one spoken . There is some evidence that the use of writing also has effects on the cognitive development of humans , perhaps because acquiring literacy generally requires explicit and formal education . 
 The invention of the first writing systems is roughly contemporary with the beginning of the Bronze Age in the late 4th millennium BC . The Sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the Egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered to be the earliest writing systems , both emerging out of their ancestral proto @-@ literate symbol systems from 3400 – 3200 BC with the earliest coherent texts from about 2600 BC . It is generally agreed that Sumerian writing was an independent invention ; however , it is debated whether Egyptian writing was developed completely independently of Sumerian , or was a case of cultural diffusion . A similar debate exists for the Chinese script , which developed around 1200 BC . The pre @-@ Columbian Mesoamerican writing systems ( including among others Olmec and Maya scripts ) are generally believed to have had independent origins . 
 = = = Language change = = = 
 All languages change as speakers adopt or invent new ways of speaking and pass them on to other members of their speech community . Language change happens at all levels from the phonological level to the levels of vocabulary , morphology , syntax , and discourse . Even though language change is often initially evaluated negatively by speakers of the language who often consider changes to be " decay " or a sign of slipping norms of language usage , it is natural and inevitable . 
 Changes may affect specific sounds or the entire phonological system . Sound change can consist of the replacement of one speech sound or phonetic feature by another , the complete loss of the affected sound , or even the introduction of a new sound in a place where there had been none . Sound changes can be conditioned in which case a sound is changed only if it occurs in the vicinity of certain other sounds . Sound change is usually assumed to be regular , which means that it is expected to apply mechanically whenever its structural conditions are met , irrespective of any non @-@ phonological factors . On the other hand , sound changes can sometimes be sporadic , affecting only one particular word or a few words , without any seeming regularity . Sometimes a simple change triggers a chain shift in which the entire phonological system is affected . This happened in the Germanic languages when the sound change known as Grimm 's law affected all the stop consonants in the system . The original consonant * <unk> became / b / in the Germanic languages , the previous * b in turn became / p / , and the previous * p became / f / . The same process applied to all stop consonants and explains why Italic languages such as Latin have p in words like pater and <unk> , whereas Germanic languages , like English , have father and fish . 
 Another example is the Great Vowel Shift in English , which is the reason that the spelling of English vowels do not correspond well to their current pronunciation . This is because the vowel shift brought the already established orthography out of synchronization with pronunciation . Another source of sound change is the erosion of words as pronunciation gradually becomes increasingly indistinct and shortens words , leaving out syllables or sounds . This kind of change caused Latin mea <unk> to eventually become the French madame and American English ma 'am . 
 Change also happens in the grammar of languages as discourse patterns such as idioms or particular constructions become grammaticalized . This frequently happens when words or morphemes erode and the grammatical system is unconsciously rearranged to compensate for the lost element . For example , in some varieties of Caribbean Spanish the final / s / has eroded away . Since Standard Spanish uses final / s / in the morpheme marking the second person subject " you " in verbs , the Caribbean varieties now have to express the second person using the pronoun tú . This means that the sentence " what 's your name " is ¿ como te llamas ? [ <unk> te <unk> ] in Standard Spanish , but [ <unk> <unk> te <unk> ] in Caribbean Spanish . The simple sound change has affected both morphology and syntax . Another common cause of grammatical change is the gradual petrification of idioms into new grammatical forms , for example , the way the English " going to " construction lost its aspect of movement and in some varieties of English has almost become a full @-@ fledged future tense ( e.g. I 'm gonna ) . 
 Language change may be motivated by " language internal " factors , such as changes in pronunciation motivated by certain sounds being difficult to distinguish aurally or to produce , or through patterns of change that cause some rare types of constructions to drift towards more common types . Other causes of language change are social , such as when certain pronunciations become emblematic of membership in certain groups , such as social classes , or with ideologies , and therefore are adopted by those who wish to identify with those groups or ideas . In this way , issues of identity and politics can have profound effects on language structure . 
 = = = Language contact = = = 
 One important source of language change is contact and resulting diffusion of linguistic traits between languages . Language contact occurs when speakers of two or more languages or varieties interact on a regular basis . <unk> is likely to have been the norm throughout human history and most people in the modern world are multilingual . Before the rise of the concept of the ethno @-@ national state , <unk> was characteristic mainly of populations inhabiting small islands . But with the ideology that made one people , one state , and one language the most desirable political arrangement , <unk> started to spread throughout the world . Nonetheless , there are only 250 countries in the world corresponding to some 6000 languages , which means that most countries are multilingual and most languages therefore exist in close contact with other languages . 
 When speakers of different languages interact closely , it is typical for their languages to influence each other . Through sustained language contact over long periods , linguistic traits diffuse between languages , and languages belonging to different families may converge to become more similar . In areas where many languages are in close contact , this may lead to the formation of language areas in which unrelated languages share a number of linguistic features . A number of such language areas have been documented , among them , the Balkan language area , the Mesoamerican language area , and the Ethiopian language area . Also , larger areas such as South Asia , Europe , and Southeast Asia have sometimes been considered language areas , because of widespread diffusion of specific areal features . 
 Language contact may also lead to a variety of other linguistic phenomena , including language convergence , borrowing , and <unk> ( replacement of much of the native vocabulary with that of another language ) . In situations of extreme and sustained language contact , it may lead to the formation of new mixed languages that cannot be considered to belong to a single language family . One type of mixed language called pidgins occurs when adult speakers of two different languages interact on a regular basis , but in a situation where neither group learns to speak the language of the other group fluently . In such a case , they will often construct a communication form that has traits of both languages , but which has a simplified grammatical and phonological structure . The language comes to contain mostly the grammatical and phonological categories that exist in both languages . Pidgin languages are defined by not having any native speakers , but only being spoken by people who have another language as their first language . But if a Pidgin language becomes the main language of a speech community , then eventually children will grow up learning the pidgin as their first language . As the generation of child learners grow up , the pidgin will often be seen to change its structure and acquire a greater degree of complexity . This type of language is generally called a creole language . An example of such mixed languages is Tok Pisin , the official language of Papua New @-@ Guinea , which originally arose as a Pidgin based on English and Austronesian languages ; others are <unk> <unk> , the French @-@ based creole language spoken in Haiti , and Michif , a mixed language of Canada , based on the Native American language Cree and French . 
 = = Linguistic diversity = = 
 SIL Ethnologue defines a " living language " as " one that has at least one speaker for whom it is their first language " . The exact number of known living languages varies from 6 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 , depending on the precision of one 's definition of " language " , and in particular , on how one defines the distinction between languages and dialects . As of 2016 , Ethnologue cataloged 7 @,@ 097 living human languages . The Ethnologue establishes linguistic groups based on studies of mutual intelligibility , and therefore often includes more categories than more conservative classifications . For example , the Danish language that most scholars consider a single language with several dialects is classified as two distinct languages ( Danish and Jutish ) by the Ethnologue . 
 According to the Ethnologue , 389 languages ( nearly 6 % ) have more than a million speakers . These languages together account for 94 % of the world 's population , whereas 94 % of the world 's languages account for the remaining 6 % of the global population . To the right is a table of the world 's 10 most spoken languages with population estimates from the Ethnologue ( 2009 figures ) . 
 = = = Languages and dialects = = = 
 There is no clear distinction between a language and a dialect , notwithstanding a famous aphorism attributed to linguist Max Weinreich that " a language is a dialect with an army and navy " . For example , national boundaries frequently override linguistic difference in determining whether two linguistic varieties are languages or dialects . Hakka , Cantonese and Mandarin are , for example , often classified as " dialects " of Chinese , even though they are more different from each other than Swedish is from Norwegian . Before the Yugoslav civil war , Serbo @-@ Croatian was considered a single language with two dialects , but now Croatian and Serbian are considered different languages and employ different writing systems . In other words , the distinction may hinge on political considerations as much as on cultural differences , distinctive writing systems , or degree of mutual intelligibility . 
 = = = Language families of the world = = = 
 The world 's languages can be grouped into language families consisting of languages that can be shown to have common ancestry . Linguists recognize many hundreds of language families , although some of them can possibly be grouped into larger units as more evidence becomes available and in @-@ depth studies are carried out . At present , there are also dozens of language isolates : languages that cannot be shown to be related to any other languages in the world . Among them are Basque , spoken in Europe , Zuni of New Mexico , Purépecha of Mexico , Ainu of Japan , <unk> of Pakistan , and many others . 
 The language family of the world that has the most speakers is the Indo @-@ European languages , spoken by 46 % of the world 's population . This family includes major world languages like English , Spanish , Russian , and Hindustani ( Hindi / Urdu ) . The Indo @-@ European family achieved prevalence first during the Eurasian Migration Period ( c . 400 – 800 AD ) , and subsequently through the European colonial expansion , which brought the Indo @-@ European languages to a politically and often numerically dominant position in the Americas and much of Africa . The Sino @-@ Tibetan languages are spoken by 20 % of the world 's population and include many of the languages of East Asia , including Hakka , Mandarin Chinese , Cantonese , and hundreds of smaller languages . 
 Africa is home to a large number of language families , the largest of which is the Niger @-@ Congo language family , which includes such languages as Swahili , Shona , and Yoruba . Speakers of the Niger @-@ Congo languages account for 6 @.@ 9 % of the world 's population . A similar number of people speak the Afroasiatic languages , which include the populous Semitic languages such as Arabic , Hebrew language , and the languages of the Sahara region , such as the Berber languages and Hausa . 
 The Austronesian languages are spoken by 5 @.@ 5 % of the world 's population and stretch from Madagascar to maritime Southeast Asia all the way to Oceania . It includes such languages as Malagasy , Māori , Samoan , and many of the indigenous languages of Indonesia and Taiwan . The Austronesian languages are considered to have originated in Taiwan around 3000 BC and spread through the Oceanic region through island @-@ hopping , based on an advanced nautical technology . Other populous language families are the Dravidian languages of South Asia ( among them Kannada Tamil and Telugu ) , the Turkic languages of Central Asia ( such as Turkish ) , the Austroasiatic ( among them Khmer ) , and Tai – Kadai languages of Southeast Asia ( including Thai ) . 
 The areas of the world in which there is the greatest linguistic diversity , such as the Americas , Papua New Guinea , West Africa , and South @-@ Asia , contain hundreds of small language families . These areas together account for the majority of the world 's languages , though not the majority of speakers . In the Americas , some of the largest language families include the <unk> , Arawak , and Tupi @-@ Guarani families of South America , the Uto @-@ Aztecan , Oto @-@ <unk> , and Mayan of Mesoamerica , and the Na @-@ Dene and Algonquian language families of North America . In Australia , most indigenous languages belong to the Pama @-@ <unk> family , whereas Papua @-@ New Guinea is home to a large number of small families and isolates , as well as a number of Austronesian languages . 
 = = = Language endangerment = = = 
 Language endangerment occurs when a language is at risk of falling out of use as its speakers die out or shift to speaking another language . Language loss occurs when the language has no more native speakers , and becomes a dead language . If eventually no one speaks the language at all , it becomes an extinct language . While languages have always gone extinct throughout human history , they have been disappearing at an accelerated rate in the 20th and 21st centuries due to the processes of globalization and neo @-@ colonialism , where the economically powerful languages dominate other languages . 
 The more commonly spoken languages dominate the less commonly spoken languages , so the less commonly spoken languages eventually disappear from populations . The total number of languages in the world is not known . Estimates vary depending on many factors . The consensus is that there are between 6 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 000 languages spoken as of 2010 , and that between 50 – 90 % of those will have become extinct by the year 2100 . The top 20 languages , those spoken by more than 50 million speakers each , are spoken by 50 % of the world 's population , whereas many of the other languages are spoken by small communities , most of them with less than 10 @,@ 000 speakers . 
 The United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) operates with five levels of language endangerment : " safe " , " vulnerable " ( not spoken by children outside the home ) , " definitely endangered " ( not spoken by children ) , " severely endangered " ( only spoken by the oldest generations ) , and " critically endangered " ( spoken by few members of the oldest generation , often semi @-@ speakers ) . Notwithstanding claims that the world would be better off if most adopted a single common lingua franca , such as English or Esperanto , there is a consensus that the loss of languages harms the cultural diversity of the world . It is a common belief , going back to the biblical narrative of the tower of Babel , that linguistic diversity causes political conflict , but this is contradicted by the fact that many of the world 's major episodes of violence have taken place in situations with low linguistic diversity , such as the Yugoslav and American Civil War , or the genocide of Rwanda , whereas many of the most stable political units have been highly multilingual . 
 Many projects aim to prevent or slow this loss by revitalizing endangered languages and promoting education and literacy in minority languages . Across the world , many countries have enacted specific legislation to protect and stabilize the language of indigenous speech communities . A minority of linguists have argued that language loss is a natural process that should not be counteracted , and that documenting endangered languages for posterity is sufficient . 
 = = = Commentary notes = = = 
 = Siege of Lyme Regis = 
 The siege of Lyme Regis was an eight @-@ week blockade during the First English Civil War . The port of Lyme Regis , in Dorset , was considered to be of strategic importance because it controlled the main shipping route between Bristol and the English Channel . Thomas Ceeley and Robert Blake commanded the town 's Parliamentarian defences during the siege , which was laid by Prince Maurice between 20 April and 16 June 1644 . 
 At the start of the war , Lyme Regis was claimed by a pair of local members of parliament , and garrisoned for the Parliamentarians . King Charles I ordered the capture of the town in early 1644 , and sent his nephew , Maurice , with 5 @,@ 000 troops . The siege was laid on 20 April , but despite a steady bombardment , and three attempts to storm the town by ground , the earthen defences of the town that had been established by Blake held fast . Lyme Regis was regularly re @-@ provisioned and reinforced by sea , weakening the effectiveness of the siege , and on 14 June , Maurice withdrew from the siege in the face of a relieving army led by Robert Devereux , 3rd Earl of Essex . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the late 16th century , Lyme Regis was an important port , busier than Liverpool and one of the main links between England and mainland Europe . The combination of strong Puritan beliefs , and demands from King Charles I for ship money meant that upon the outbreak of the First English Civil War , the town was sympathetic to the Parliamentarian cause . Two local members of parliament ( MP ) , Thomas Trenchard and Walter Erle claimed Lyme Regis for the Parliamentarians in 1642 , and set about fortifying the town . Thomas Ceeley , another local MP , was assigned as governor of the town and its forces . He immediately set about removing those with Royalist loyalties from the area , and sent harrying forces around the region , as far as Exeter and Somerset . Lyme Regis had no permanent fortifications , and so Robert Blake established a set of earthen walls , ditches and forts around the perimeter of the town . 
 By the end of 1643 , most of the south @-@ west was under Royalist control ; only Plymouth , Poole and Lyme Regis held out against them . The Parliamentarians controlled the navy , and Lyme Regis was strategically important , due to its location between Bristol and the English Channel . In early 1644 , Charles I ordered Lyme Regis to be captured , and sent a large force under the command of his nephew , Prince Maurice . 
 = = Siege = = 
 Maurice marched towards Lyme Regis in March 1644 , and initially set up a garrison in the town of Beaminster . From there a detachment of troops captured and then razed <unk> House , a property of Erle 's that he had garrisoned . On 19 April , a fire devastated Beaminster and forced the Royalist troops to move , establishing their new quarters at Axminster . The following day , Maurice marched his army of around 4 @,@ 000 men to around 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) of Lyme Regis , and then after some posturing between the opposing forces , the Royalists captured Haye House , roughly 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 400 m ) from the town , which had been garrisoned with around thirty defenders . On the third day of the siege , the attackers set up their artillery on the west side of town , and began a bombardment , but the next day Ceeley sent a force of 190 men to attack the battery , and forced the Royalists from their position . New batteries were set up around the town , and the besieging forces continued to attack the town with their ordnance . On 28 April , Maurice ordered an advance on the town , but the attack got little further than the range of musket @-@ shot . The next day , the town was restocked with ammunition and food , and reinforced with just over a hundred men from two Parliamentarian ships , the Mary Rose and the Ann Joyce . 
 Throughout the war , the garrisoned army was supported by the women of the town ; they aided in the building of the earthen fortifications , and then later disguised themselves as men during the siege to make it appear that the town was held by more troops than it really was . They also ran ammunition around the town and helped to reload the weapons . Their efforts drew comparisons to Joan of Arc , and an essay was written by James Strong detailing their achievements , entitled " <unk> , or Feminine Valour <unk> discovered in West County Women , at the Siege of Lyme , 1644 . " 
 Over the following week , the Royalist forces held the siege , but did not engage with the town again until 6 May , when they attacked the town in three places during a thick fog . The defenders were caught out slightly , as many of their soldiers were eating their evening supper . The Parliamentarians rallied quickly , and within an hour had repelled the attack . An account kept by the Lyme Regis garrison records that around one hundred of the besieging army had been killed , while the garrison had only lost one man . The following day , Maurice requested a parley so that the dead could be buried . That request was granted , in exchange for the town 's defenders being able to claim any weaponry on the battleground . Over the next week , there was little fighting between the armies , and a further seven ships arrived to aid the town , including 240 soldiers from Sir William Waller 's army , and on 15 May a further 120 men were sent by the Earl of Warwick . 
 The Royalists turned their attention to the harbour over the next week , placing artillery units on the cliff @-@ tops above it , and bombarding any ships within . On the morning of 22 May , such an attack sunk a barge laden with malt and peas , and was followed by a raiding party of around 50 men that evening , who attacked the harbour , setting fire to the barges that remained . During the fighting to drive them back , Captain Thomas Pyne , who had commanded the town 's cavalry , was mortally wounded . Pyne died of fever four days later , despite the attentions of a surgeon . The Earl of Warwick arrived on 23 May with eight ships and the promise of as much help as he could provide , including 400 of his seamen to help garrison the town . Pyne 's funeral was held on 27 May , and upon the firing volley from the town 's ordnance and musketeers , the besieging army signalled a second attempt to storm the town . The town came under barrage from the enemy batteries , and scaling ladders were brought against the earthen fortifications . Once again the attack was repelled by the town 's defenders , and a parley request from Maurice in the immediate aftermath was turned down for fear of treachery . 
 The town was further reinforced with 300 sailors the next day , before another attack on the town was launched on 29 May . A few ships had been sent as a decoy to split the Royalist forces , but only succeeded in sending a small detachment of cavalry and foot away , though they quickly returned when it was clear that the ships were not going to land . Around midday , the batteries began to heavily bombard the town , followed by a ground attack which managed to breach the fortifications . After eight hours of fighting , the Parliamentarians rebuffed the attack . Fourteen more ships arrived two days later , bringing further provisions and ammunition , and news that a relieving force would be sent to aid the town . By this stage , Maurice realised that he was unlikely to be able to capture the town , and so was determined to destroy it instead ; fires were set on 1 June and then no attacks other than light bombardments were made until 11 June , when heavier , red @-@ hot shot was fired to try and set more fires in the town . 
 Despite orders to lay siege to the King 's headquarters at Oxford , Robert Devereux , 3rd Earl of Essex opted to attempt to reclaim the south @-@ west for the Parliamentarians , first retaking Weymouth , and then marching towards Lyme Regis . Hearing of the fall of Weymouth , and the impending arrival of the Earl of Essex 's relieving army , Maurice abandoned his siege during the night of 14 June . The 17th @-@ century historian Edward Hyde suggested that Maurice had suffered " some loss of reputation , for having lain so long with such a strength before so vile and untenable a place , without reducing it . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Maurice retreated to Exeter , while the Earl of Essex continued down into Devon and Cornwall , after sending Blake to capture Taunton . Essex 's campaign failed , suffering a total defeat at the Battle of Lostwithiel in early September 1644 . His remaining forces retreated back to Dorset , leaving only Plymouth , Lyme Regis and Taunton under Parliamentarian control in the south @-@ west . The Earl of Warwick sent a letter to Parliament , detailing the hardships endured by the town during the siege , and requesting " some speedy course will be taken for their relief " . Parliament voted to grant the town £ 1 @,@ 000 a year and that unconditional compensation should be paid to residents who had suffered losses in the siege . Lyme maintained a garrison through the war , finally disbanding in July 1647 . 
 = Ottoman cruiser Peyk @-@ i Şevket = 
 Peyk @-@ i Şevket was a torpedo cruiser of the Ottoman Navy , built in Germany in 1906 – 07 , the lead ship of her class , which included one other vessel . She was built by the Germaniawerft shipyard in Germany in 1906 – 07 , and was delivered to the Ottoman Navy in November 1907 . The ship 's primary armament consisted of three 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes and a pair of 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns , and she was capable of a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . A major reconstruction in the late 1930s revised her armament and rebuilt her bow and superstructure . 
 The ship was interned at British @-@ controlled Suez at the start of the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , and as a result she saw no action during the conflict . During the First Balkan War in 1913 , she bombarded Bulgarian troops threatening the Ottoman capital at Constantinople . Peyk @-@ i Şevket was torpedoed by the British submarine HMS E11 in August 1915 during the Dardanelles Campaign of World War I. Repairs lasted until 1917 , and in the final year of the war she served in the Black Sea , escorting troop ships to the Caucasus . Renamed Peyk in 1923 , the ship continued in service with the Turkish Navy following the collapse of the Ottoman Empire until 1944 , when she was decommissioned . She was broken up for scrap in 1953 – 54 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Peyk @-@ i Şevket , classified as a torpedo cruiser by the Ottoman Navy , was also sometimes referred to as a torpedo gunboat . She was 80 m ( 260 ft ) long , with a beam of 8 @.@ 4 m ( 28 ft ) and a draft of 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 ft 2 in ) . She displaced 775 t ( 763 long tons ; 854 short tons ) while on sea trials . The ship was powered by a pair of vertical triple @-@ expansion engines each driving a screw propeller . The engines were rated at 5 @,@ 100 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 800 kW ) for a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) ; Peyk @-@ i Şevket had a cruising radius of 3 @,@ 240 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 000 km ; 3 @,@ 730 mi ) . Her crew numbered 105 officers and enlisted men . 
 Peyk @-@ i Şevket 's primary offensive armament was her three 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . One was mounted in the bow , above water , and the other two were in deck @-@ mounted swivel launchers amidships . She was armed with a pair of 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns that were placed in shielded single mounts on the forecastle and quarterdeck . She also carried six 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) guns , four of which were mounted in sponsons , and a pair of 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns . She had no armor protection . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Peyk @-@ i Şevket was ordered on 18 January 1903 and laid down down in February 1906 at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel , Germany . She was launched on 15 November of that year , and completed in 1907 . After completing sea trials , she was transferred to the Ottoman Navy , arriving in Constantinople on 13 November , where she was formally commissioned into the Ottoman fleet . Rauf <unk> took command of the ship in 1908 , and held the position until 1911 . In 1909 , she and her sister participated in the first fleet maneuver conducted by the Ottoman Navy in twenty years . At the outbreak of the Italo @-@ Turkish War in September 1911 , Peyk @-@ i Şevket was in the Red Sea ; on 2 October , she encountered the Italian torpedo cruiser Aretusa and the gunboat Volturno off Al Hudaydah . The two Italian vessels forced Peyk @-@ i Şevket to flee into the port , bombarded the dock facilities , and then withdrew . Peyk @-@ i Şevket was later interned for the duration of the war in British @-@ controlled Suez . In March 1913 during the First Balkan War , the ship was sent to the Black Sea to support the Çatalca garrison , which was under renewed attacks by the Bulgarian army during the Second Battle of Çatalca . After heavy bombardment from the Ottoman fleet , including Peyk @-@ i Şevket , the Bulgarians were forced to retreat on 30 March . 
 On 3 August 1914 , Peyk @-@ i Şevket steamed to Constantinople , where she was scheduled to begin a lengthy overhaul . But due to the growing tensions in the region due to the outbreak of World War I in Europe , the ship was only painted and loaded with ammunition , fuel , and stores . On 20 November , Peyk @-@ i Şevket and the battlecruiser Yavuz Sultan Selim , formerly the German Goeben , for a patrol off the Bosporus . In December , the ship joined Yavuz Sultan Selim , the ex @-@ German light cruiser Midilli , and her sister Berk @-@ i Satvet to escort a convoy of four troop transports to Rize . On 22 June 1915 , Peyk @-@ i Şevket was nearly torpedoed by the British submarine HMS E12 in the Sea of Marmara while she was transporting ammunition to the Ottoman garrison at Çanakkale . Two months later , HMS E11 successfully torpedoed the ship on 6 August , causing serious damage . 
 The ship returned to service by 1917 , and as of July 1918 , the ship was back in service , being used as an escort for troopships between Constantinople and the Caucasus . She was decommissioned in the final weeks of the war , on 30 October 1918 , and laid up in Constantinople . On 30 November , the Ottoman Empire signed the Armistice of Mudros with the Entente powers , which concluded the conflict . 
 The ship was renamed Peyk in 1923 following the end of the Turkish War of Independence , which saw the Republic of Turkey replace the old Ottoman Empire . At the time , the ship was one of a handful of major warships still in active service , after more than a decade of near continuous war for the Turkish fleet . From 1925 to 1927 , she was modernized at the Gölcük Naval Shipyard and was recommissioned in 1927 . She was rebuilt in 1936 – 38 and incorporated substantial improvements . Her stem was replaced and her superstructure was rebuilt . The old gun armament was replaced with a pair of 88 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) 45 @-@ caliber guns and four 37 mm 40 @-@ caliber guns . The ship continued in service until 1944 , when she was stricken from the naval register . The ship was laid up in <unk> and broken up between 1953 and 1954 at the Gölcük shipyard . 
 = Virgin Atlantic Little Red = 
 Virgin Atlantic Little Red ( also referred to as Virgin Little Red and Little Red ) was a British airline subsidiary owned by Virgin Atlantic . It was created in 2012 as a way to provide competition for aviation giant British Airways ( BA ) on UK domestic mainland flights to Aberdeen , Edinburgh and Manchester from London Heathrow Airport . 
 During its operation , the airline operated four Airbus A320s wet leased from Irish airline Aer Lingus and served a network of four domestic destinations . The airline ceased operations in 2015 following low passenger numbers . 
 = = History = = 
 In 2012 , British Airways took over British Midland International ( BMI ) which gave them a monopoly on UK mainland flights from Heathrow . In order for the deal to be completed , the European Union Competition Commissioner decreed that BA would have to give up 14 of BMI 's landing slots at Heathrow to comply with EU competition regulations . 12 of these slots were set aside for domestic usage , which were bought by Virgin Atlantic after they outbid Aer Lingus for the required British domestic operating licence . Virgin announced that they would set up Virgin Atlantic Little Red as a subsidiary to use these slots to cover domestic UK mainland routes as Aer Lingus already provided competition for BA on flights to Northern Ireland from Heathrow . Little Red was later revealed to be operated on a wet @-@ lease by Aer Lingus whereby the planes would be operated by Aer Lingus but would bear Virgin Atlantic livery . The pilots would be employed by Aer Lingus , with cabin crew supplied by McGinley Aviation . The cabin crew would wear Virgin Little Red uniforms and had training from Virgin , despite the fact that airline had not previously operated narrow @-@ body aircraft . 
 Virgin announced that initially the airline would operate four daily flights between London Heathrow Airport and Manchester Airport , six daily flights between Heathrow and Edinburgh Airport , and three daily flights between Heathrow and Aberdeen Airport . The airline brand made its first flight on 31 March 2013 , flying from Manchester to Heathrow . 
 The new service was launched in 2013 with owner Sir Richard Branson stating his intent to compete with BA with " Virgin 's rock and roll spirit " and to allow Virgin Atlantic 's long haul passengers to connect to the rest of the UK using Virgin . In its first six months of operation , Little Red transported 250 @,@ 000 passengers . Despite Branson 's aim and a rise in passenger numbers during the first few months of Little Red 's existence , the majority of Little Red 's passengers were eventually using it for domestic flights only which led to flights often departing with only a third of seats sold . The Civil Aviation Authority published figures that revealed that Little Red had the worst load figures of any airline in aviation at the time with 37 @.@ 6 % of passenger seats occupied . International Airlines Group CEO , Willie Walsh had criticised Little Red calling it a " mistake " and stated " You cannot make money flying aircraft that are less than half full . " 
 = = Closure = = 
 Virgin had claimed that they were prepared to take losses on Little Red , estimated to be up to £ 3 million a week , in order to wait for an expansion in brand awareness . Virgin then stated that losses on Little Red would be covered by Virgin Atlantic 's transatlantic routes . Despite this , as a result of the low passenger numbers in October 2014 , it was announced that Little Red would cease to operate from September 2015 . This was attributed to BA 's dominance of the UK domestic market and Heathrow 's restrictions of the usage of the small number of slots available . The slot limitation issue had been mentioned at Little Red 's foundation in that the slots to Scottish airports could only be used to fly to Edinburgh and Aberdeen . It was also claimed in the media that passengers preferred to use low @-@ cost carriers such as EasyJet to fly to and from other London airports aside of Heathrow for domestic travel owing to pricing . 
 Little Red 's flights to Manchester ended in March 2015 with the final flights to Edinburgh and Aberdeen departing on 26 September 2015 . The planes were returned for Aer Lingus ' sole use in the Republic of Ireland following the final passenger fights of Little Red . After the closure of Little Red , all but three of the Heathrow slots were returned to BA and adsorbed back into their operation , thus granting them a monopoly on UK mainland domestic flights at Heathrow for the first time since British Midland Airways ( as BMI were named at the time ) moved into Heathrow in 1982 . However this was dependent on another airline not being willing to take the place of Little Red in running domestic flights from Heathrow . Virgin leased out the three slots it retained . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 During its operation , Virgin Atlantic Little Red 's fleet consisted of four Airbus A320s wet leased from Aer Lingus under a three @-@ year contract . The aircraft had 29 rows of seating with a 3 – 3 configuration , for a total of 174 seats . The fleet was painted with Virgin Atlantic livery with future plans to eventually repaint them with Little Red livery . However , due to the closure of operations , this rebrand of the planes never occurred and they retained their original livery . 
 There was consideration that Aer Lingus would take over the Little Red routes under their own brand with the Little Red fleet repainted . However they declined to do this stating that they wanted more flexibility with the returned aircraft to support their current fleet and operation . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 During its operation , Virgin Atlantic Little Red operated to four destinations in the United Kingdom . 
 Sources : 
 = Creid = 
 Creid ( Irish pronunciation : [ <unk> ] , meaning " Believe " ) is the arranged soundtrack to Square 's role @-@ playing video game Xenogears . It was written by the game 's composer Yasunori Mitsuda and performed by a musical ensemble dubbed Millennial Fair . It was released on April 22 , 1998 in Japan by DigiCube , and re @-@ released by Square Enix on June 29 , 2005 . Comprising ten tracks arranged from the Xenogears Original Soundtrack , the album is mostly done in Irish or Celtic music style , with minor influences of Japanese rock according to Mitsuda . Artists from Japan and Ireland were recruited for the project . Four of the five vocal tracks on the album were written by Junko Kudo and sung by Tetsuko Honma , while the title track " Creid " was written by Mitsuda and performed by Eimear Quinn . 
 The album was well received by critics , who praised both the originality of the concept as well as the execution and track selection . The work on the album inspired Mitsuda to bring Tomohiko Kira , the albums 's guitarist , back to have him perform in Chrono Cross ; this would eventually result in the latter game 's ending song " Radical Dreamers ~ Jewel which Cannot be Stolen ~ " . 
 = = Creation = = 
 Xenogears was Yasunori Mitsuda 's first major solo work , as his previous soundtracks were collaborations with other composers with the exception of the score to Radical Dreamers : Nusumenai Hōseki , which never saw an album release . According to Mitsuda , the music of Xenogears belongs to the traditional music genre . Though he first described it as stemming from " a world of [ his ] own imagining " rather than any specific country , he has also claimed a strong Irish or Celtic music influence . His musical approach for the original soundtrack was to insert Celtic influences into " easy @-@ to @-@ listen @-@ to " pop tracks rather than making either " dense " Celtic music or simple background music . For Creid , he expanded on this theme to create an album of arranged Xenogears music with a more prominent Celtic style . The album contains a mixture of vocal and instrumental tracks , and combines Japanese and Celtic music together in its pieces . The album 's title refers to two ideas , with one being " a message to those who feel they have lost sight of their ambitions for the flood of information this era surrounds us with " and the other an affirmation to himself that Mitsuda had " rediscovered [ his ] own path " . Mitsuda felt that with this album , he had " discovered the precise mode of musical expression [ he ] was seeking within " himself and " given form to the belief within [ his ] heart " . 
 In addition to Japanese musicians , several Irish artists contributed to Creid , including uilleann piper Davy Spillane — formerly of Moving Hearts and Riverdance — and Máire Breatnach , who had previously played fiddle on another Square album , Final Fantasy IV Celtic Moon . Mitsuda also asked guitarist Tomohiko Kira and singer Yoko Ueno to appear to the album after an acquaintance introduced him to them . Hidenobu " <unk> " Ootsuki worked on the album as an arranger and felt his work was made easier by his familiarity with Mitsuda 's music — Creid was his second arrangement project with Mitsuda , after Chrono Trigger Arranged Version : The Brink of Time , which he had worked on three years before . According to Ootsuki , Mitsuda and he were complementary in style , which resulted in an album leaving a lot of space and freedom for the listeners ' imagination . He felt that , since Chrono Trigger , Mitsuda 's musical style had changed to use less " strong " notes and include more sophistication ; upon hearing the Xenogears tracks he " literally " " couldn 't wait " to arrange them . Mitsuda has described their collaborative style as that he would first create the " basic backbone " of the song and form the idea of how he wanted the song " to turn out " , then take the result to Ootsuki for them to arrange together . The end result would then be changed in the process of recording , as " what sounds good on a synth module doesn 't always sound good on live instruments " , and occasionally the recording artists would " ad @-@ lib " parts that would make it into the final product . Mitsuda generally also chose the specific percussion instruments to be used while recording , rather than beforehand ; he feels that " as long as the final product turns out to be like what I want it to be , the process doesn 't really matter too much " . As working with the other artists gave him a sense of celebration , Mitsuda named the " imaginary band " of performers Millennial Fair and credited them as such in the album . 
 Creid was released by DigiCube on April 22 , 1998 and re @-@ released by Square Enix on June 29 , 2005 . The release date was only seven weeks after that of the original soundtrack album and ten after the publication of the game itself . Its ten tracks cover a duration of 49 : 01 . " Stars of Tears " and " Small Two of Pieces ~ Screeching Shards ~ " from the original soundtrack appear on the album as " Two Wings " and " Möbius " , respectively , while the other eight tracks keep the same titles . " Stars of Tears " , although included on the original album , did not appear in the game , as the scene it was to be played in , an opening cutscene to the game , was eliminated during development . The album features five vocal tracks and five instrumental tracks . Creid was the last album that Mitsuda worked on as an employee of Square ; three months after its release , in July 1998 , he resigned to work as a freelance artist and formed Procyon Studio to produce his work , though he continued to do work for Square such as the soundtrack to Chrono Cross the following year . 
 The main lyricist , Junko Kudo , wrote the lyrics to four of the five vocal tracks and had no previous experience with video game @-@ related projects ; she was surprised by the length of the game 's script when she asked to look at it . She had never met Mitsuda before she was asked to write the lyrics . Mitsuda first heard her work in a song by <unk> Yusa on Yusa 's 1988 album Hitomi <unk> , and describes himself as being very moved by the lyrics and <unk> a big fan of Kudo 's work . Although Mitsuda has said that he is generally not confident in his personal skills at writing lyrics , he wrote those of the title track , which were then translated from Japanese to Gaelic for the recording . Celtic singer Joanne Hogg of the band Iona , who was the singer from the original soundtrack , did not reprise her role in Creid . Instead , Tetsuko Honma sang the four tracks written by Kudo , while Eimear Quinn sang " Creid " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Creid was well received by reviewers such as Patrick Gann of RPGFan , who claimed that every track on the album was " amazing " and held the work to be Yasunori Mitsuda 's best . He especially applauded the " diverse multitude of instruments " and the fiddle playing of Máire Breatnach . Critics from Square Enix Music Online were also approving of the album , citing the album 's " real emotion " and " extremely enchanting themes " , with one reviewer naming it " one of the best arranged albums ever " . Another reviewer felt that , though it was in his opinion one of Mitsuda 's best works , some of the vocal performances such as " Two Wings " and " Spring Lullaby " held the album back . 
 RPGamer praised the album for its uniqueness and for " break [ ing ] away from the traditional ' arranged versions ' of RPG soundtracks " . They termed the songs " beautiful and moving " and especially praised the vocals as being an excellent mix of Japanese and Celtic influences . Elliot <unk> of the site , however , in his review of the album cited the vocals as a weaker spot in what he called " the blueprint after which all future arrange albums should be modeled " . Calling the album " a dream come true " , he noted his disappointment that singer Joanne Hogg did not return from the original soundtrack . Eric Bowling of Soundtrack Central was also enthusiastic about the album , calling it " a turning point in arranged soundtracks " and " simply beyond words to describe " . He noted " Lahan " as symbolizing the album as a whole , calling it a " coming together " of " diverse instruments and people " to create an energetic work of art . 
 Impressed with Tomohiko Kira 's guitar playing , Mitsuda laid out plans after Creid to have him perform in Chrono Cross , resulting in the latter game 's ending song " Radical Dreamers ~ Jewel which Cannot be Stolen ~ " . During their stay in Ireland , Mitsuda and the Creid album coordinator attended a live set of the folk band <unk> in a pub . As Mitsuda liked the concert , the coordinator encouraged the Irish band to do a Japanese live tour . No other Xenogears album has been produced by Square Enix after Creid , but an officially licensed tribute album titled Xenogears Light : An Arranged Album was published in limited quantities by the fan group OneUp Studios in 2005 . The album features 20 tracks arranged from the Xenogears score and performed with acoustic instruments , such as piano , flute , guitar , and violin . An unofficial album of remixes titled Humans + Gears was produced as a digital album by OverClocked Remix on October 19 , 2009 consisting of 33 tracks on two " discs " . While Creid is the only album released by the ensemble dubbed " Millennial Fair " , Mitsuda said in 2002 that he would like to try bringing back the formation , in some way , for another project . In February 2011 , Square Enix released Myth : The Xenogears Orchestral Album , a second arranged album of music from the game , in an orchestral style . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music composed by Yasunori Mitsuda . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All information is taken from the soundtrack 's liner notes . 
 Yasunori Mitsuda – composer , producer , arranger , keyboards , programming 
 Millennial Fair 
 Tetsuko " Techie " Honma – vocal on " Two Wings " , " Stairs of Light " , " Spring Lullaby " , and " Möbius " 
 Eimear Quinn – vocal on " Creid " 
 Yoko Ueno – chorus 
 Kimiko Komatsu – chorus 
 Hitoshi Watanabe – bass 
 <unk> ( Hiroshi Hata ) – electric guitar , acoustic guitar , electric sitar 
 Tomohiko Kira – bouzouki , electric guitar 
 Davy Spillane – uilleann pipes , low whistle 
 Laurie <unk> – tin whistle 
 <unk> <unk> – shakuhachi , shinobue 
