 Caligula accepted the powers of the principate as conferred by the senate and entered Rome on 28 March amid a crowd that hailed him as " our baby " and " our star " , among other nicknames . Caligula is described as the first emperor who was admired by everyone in " all the world , from the rising to the setting sun . " Caligula was loved by many for being the beloved son of the popular Germanicus , and because he was not Tiberius . Suetonius said that over 160 @,@ 000 animals were sacrificed during three months of public rejoicing to usher in the new reign . Philo describes the first seven months of Caligula 's reign as completely blissful . 
 Caligula 's first acts were said to be generous in spirit , though many were political in nature . To gain support , he granted bonuses to the military , including the Praetorian Guard , city troops and the army outside Italy . He destroyed Tiberius 's treason papers , declared that treason trials were a thing of the past , and recalled those who had been sent into exile . He helped those who had been harmed by the imperial tax system , banished certain sexual deviants , and put on lavish spectacles for the public , including gladiatorial games . Caligula collected and brought back the bones of his mother and of his brothers and deposited their remains in the tomb of Augustus . 
 In October 37 AD , Caligula fell seriously ill , or perhaps was poisoned . He soon recovered from his illness , but many believed that the illness turned the young emperor toward the diabolical : he started to kill off or exile those who were close to him or whom he saw as a serious threat . Perhaps his illness reminded him of his mortality and of the desire of others to advance into his place . He had his cousin and adopted son Tiberius Gemellus executed – an act that outraged Caligula 's and Gemellus 's mutual grandmother Antonia Minor . She is said to have committed suicide , although Suetonius hints that Caligula actually poisoned her . He had his father @-@ in @-@ law Marcus Junius Silanus and his brother @-@ in @-@ law Marcus Lepidus executed as well . His uncle Claudius was spared only because Caligula preferred to keep him as a laughing stock . His favorite sister Julia Drusilla died in 38 AD of a fever : his other two sisters , Livilla and Agrippina the Younger , were exiled . He hated being the grandson of Agrippa and slandered Augustus by repeating a falsehood that his mother was actually conceived as the result of an incestuous relationship between Augustus and his daughter Julia the Elder . 
 = = = Public reform = = = 
 In AD 38 , Caligula focused his attention on political and public reform . He published the accounts of public funds , which had not been made public during the reign of Tiberius . He aided those who lost property in fires , abolished certain taxes , and gave out prizes to the public at gymnastic events . He allowed new members into the equestrian and senatorial orders . 
 Perhaps most significantly , he restored the practice of democratic elections . Cassius Dio said that this act " though delighting the rabble , grieved the sensible , who stopped to reflect , that if the offices should fall once more into the hands of the many ... many disasters would result " . 
 During the same year , though , Caligula was criticized for executing people without full trials and for forcing his supporter Macro to commit suicide . 
 = = = Financial crisis and famine = = = 
 According to Cassius Dio , a financial crisis emerged in AD 39 . Suetonius places the beginning of this crisis in 38 . Caligula 's political payments for support , generosity and extravagance had exhausted the state 's treasury . Ancient historians state that Caligula began falsely accusing , fining and even killing individuals for the purpose of seizing their estates . 
 Historians describe a number of Caligula 's other desperate measures . In order to gain funds , Caligula asked the public to lend the state money . He levied taxes on lawsuits , weddings and prostitution . Caligula began auctioning the lives of the gladiators at shows . Wills that left items to Tiberius were reinterpreted to leave the items instead to Caligula . Centurions who had acquired property by plunder were forced to turn over spoils to the state . 
 The current and past highway commissioners were accused of incompetence and embezzlement and forced to repay money . According to Suetonius , in the first year of Caligula 's reign he squandered 2 @.@ 7 billion sesterces that Tiberius had amassed . His nephew Nero Caesar both envied and admired the fact that Gaius had run through the vast wealth Tiberius had left him in so short a time . 
 A brief famine of unknown extent occurred , perhaps caused by this financial crisis , but Suetonius claims it resulted from Caligula 's seizure of public carriages ; according to Seneca , grain imports were disturbed because Caligula repurposed grain boats for a pontoon bridge . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Despite financial difficulties , Caligula embarked on a number of construction projects during his reign . Some were for the public good , though others were for himself . 
 Josephus describes Caligula 's improvements to the harbours at Rhegium and Sicily , allowing increased grain imports from Egypt , as his greatest contributions . These improvements may have been in response to the famine . 
 Caligula completed the temple of Augustus and the theatre of Pompey and began an amphitheatre beside the Saepta . He expanded the imperial palace . He began the aqueducts Aqua Claudia and Anio Novus , which Pliny the Elder considered engineering marvels . He built a large racetrack known as the circus of Gaius and Nero and had an Egyptian obelisk ( now known as the " Vatican Obelisk " ) transported by sea and erected in the middle of Rome . 
 At Syracuse , he repaired the city walls and the temples of the gods . He had new roads built and pushed to keep roads in good condition . He had planned to rebuild the palace of Polycrates at Samos , to finish the temple of <unk> Apollo at Ephesus and to found a city high up in the Alps . He planned to dig a canal through the Isthmus of Corinth in Greece and sent a chief centurion to survey the work . 
 In 39 , Caligula performed a spectacular stunt by ordering a temporary floating bridge to be built using ships as pontoons , stretching for over two miles from the resort of Baiae to the neighboring port of Puteoli . It was said that the bridge was to rival that of the Persian king , Xerxes , crossing of the Hellespont . Caligula , who could not swim , then proceeded to ride his favorite horse , <unk> , across , wearing the breastplate of Alexander the Great . This act was in defiance of a prediction by Tiberius 's soothsayer Thrasyllus of Mendes that Caligula had " no more chance of becoming emperor than of riding a horse across the Bay of Baiae " . 
 Caligula had two large ships constructed for himself , which were recovered from the bottom of Lake Nemi during the dictatorship of Benito Mussolini . The ships were among the largest vessels in the ancient world . The smaller ship was designed as a temple dedicated to Diana . The larger ship was essentially an elaborate floating palace with marble floors and plumbing . Thirteen years after being raised , the ships were burned during an attack in the Second World War , and almost nothing remains of their hulls , though many archeological treasures remain intact in the museum at Lake Nemi and in the Museo Nazionale Romano ( Palazzo Massimo ) at Rome . 
 = = = Feud with the senate = = = 
 In AD 39 , relations between Caligula and the Roman Senate deteriorated . The subject of their disagreement is unknown . A number of factors , though , aggravated this feud . The Senate had become accustomed to ruling without an emperor between the departure of Tiberius for Capri in AD 26 and Caligula 's accession . Additionally , Tiberius 's treason trials had eliminated a number of pro @-@ Julian senators such as Asinius Gallus . 
 Caligula reviewed Tiberius 's records of treason trials and decided , based on their actions during these trials , that numerous senators were not trustworthy . He ordered a new set of investigations and trials . He replaced the consul and had several senators put to death . Suetonius reports that other senators were degraded by being forced to wait on him and run beside his chariot . 
 Soon after his break with the Senate , Caligula faced a number of additional conspiracies against him . A conspiracy involving his brother @-@ in @-@ law was foiled in late 39 . Soon afterwards , the Governor of Germany , Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus <unk> , was executed for connections to a conspiracy . 
 = = = Western expansion = = = 
 In AD 40 , Caligula expanded the Roman Empire into Mauretania and made a significant attempt at expanding into Britannia – even challenging Neptune in his campaign . The conquest of Britannia was fully realized by his successors . 
 = = = = Mauretania = = = = 
 Mauretania was a client kingdom of Rome ruled by Ptolemy of Mauretania . Caligula invited Ptolemy to Rome and then suddenly had him executed . Mauretania was annexed by Caligula and subsequently divided into two provinces , Mauretania Tingitana and Mauretania Caesariensis , separated by the river Malua . Pliny claims that division was the work of Caligula , but Dio states that in 42 AD an uprising took place , which was subdued by Gaius Suetonius Paulinus and Gnaeus <unk> <unk> , and the division only took place after this . This confusion might mean that Caligula decided to divide the province , but the division was postponed because of the rebellion . The first known equestrian governor of the two provinces was Marcus <unk> <unk> <unk> , in office in 44 AD . 
 Details on the Mauretanian events of 39 – 44 are unclear . Cassius Dio wrote an entire chapter on the annexation of Mauretania by Caligula , but it is now lost . Caligula 's move seemingly had a strictly personal political motive – fear and jealousy of his cousin Ptolemy – and thus the expansion may not have been prompted by pressing military or economic needs . However , the rebellion of <unk> had shown how exposed Africa <unk> was to its west and how the Mauretanian client kings were unable to provide protection to the province , and it is thus possible that Caligula 's expansion was a prudent response to potential future threats . 
 = = = = Britannia = = = = 
 There seems to have been a northern campaign to Britannia that was aborted . This campaign is derided by ancient historians with accounts of Gauls dressed up as Germanic tribesmen at his triumph and Roman troops ordered to collect seashells as " spoils of the sea " . The few primary sources disagree on what precisely occurred . Modern historians have put forward numerous theories in an attempt to explain these actions . This trip to the English Channel could have merely been a training and scouting mission . The mission may have been to accept the surrender of the British chieftain <unk> . " <unk> " , or <unk> in Latin , may be a metaphor for something else such as female genitalia ( perhaps the troops visited brothels ) or boats ( perhaps they captured several small British boats ) . 
 = = = Claims of divinity = = = 
 When several client kings came to Rome to pay their respects to him and argued about their nobility of descent , he allegedly cried out the Homeric line : " Let there be one lord , one king . " In AD 40 , Caligula began implementing very controversial policies that introduced religion into his political role . Caligula began appearing in public dressed as various gods and demigods such as Hercules , Mercury , Venus and Apollo . Reportedly , he began referring to himself as a god when meeting with politicians and he was referred to as " Jupiter " on occasion in public documents . 
 A sacred precinct was set apart for his worship at Miletus in the province of Asia and two temples were erected for worship of him in Rome . The Temple of Castor and Pollux on the forum was linked directly to the imperial residence on the Palatine and dedicated to Caligula . He would appear here on occasion and present himself as a god to the public . Caligula had the heads removed from various statues of gods and replaced with his own in some temples . It is said that he wished to be worshipped as " Neos Helios , " the " New Sun . " Indeed , he was represented as a sun god on Egyptian coins . 
 Caligula 's religious policy was a departure from that of his predecessors . According to Cassius Dio , living emperors could be worshipped as divine in the east and dead emperors could be worshipped as divine in Rome . Augustus had the public worship his spirit on occasion , but Dio describes this as an extreme act that emperors generally shied away from . Caligula took things a step further and had those in Rome , including senators , worship him as a tangible , living god . 
 = = = Eastern policy = = = 
 Caligula needed to quell several riots and conspiracies in the eastern territories during his reign . Aiding him in his actions was his good friend , Herod Agrippa , who became governor of the territories of <unk> and Trachonitis after Caligula became emperor in AD 37 . 
 The cause of tensions in the east was complicated , involving the spread of Greek culture , Roman Law and the rights of Jews in the empire . 
 Caligula did not trust the prefect of Egypt , Aulus <unk> Flaccus . Flaccus had been loyal to Tiberius , had conspired against Caligula 's mother and had connections with Egyptian separatists . In AD 38 , Caligula sent Agrippa to Alexandria unannounced to check on Flaccus . According to Philo , the visit was met with jeers from the Greek population who saw Agrippa as the king of the Jews . Flaccus tried to placate both the Greek population and Caligula by having statues of the emperor placed in Jewish synagogues . As a result , riots broke out in the city . Caligula responded by removing Flaccus from his position and executing him . 
 In AD 39 , Agrippa accused Herod Antipas , the <unk> of Galilee and Perea , of planning a rebellion against Roman rule with the help of Parthia . Herod Antipas confessed and Caligula exiled him . Agrippa was rewarded with his territories . 
 Riots again erupted in Alexandria in AD 40 between Jews and Greeks . Jews were accused of not honoring the emperor . Disputes occurred in the city of <unk> . Jews were angered by the erection of a clay altar and destroyed it . In response , Caligula ordered the erection of a statue of himself in the Jewish Temple of Jerusalem , a demand in conflict with Jewish monotheism . In this context , Philo wrote that Caligula " regarded the Jews with most especial suspicion , as if they were the only persons who cherished wishes opposed to his " . 
 The Governor of Syria , Publius Petronius , fearing civil war if the order were carried out , delayed implementing it for nearly a year . Agrippa finally convinced Caligula to reverse the order . 
 = = = Scandals = = = 
 Philo of Alexandria and Seneca the Younger describe Caligula as an insane emperor who was self @-@ absorbed , angry , killed on a whim , and indulged in too much spending and sex . He is accused of sleeping with other men 's wives and bragging about it , killing for mere amusement , deliberately wasting money on his bridge , causing starvation , and wanting a statue of himself erected in the Temple of Jerusalem for his worship . Once , at some games at which he was presiding , he ordered his guards to throw an entire section of the crowd into the arena during intermission to be eaten by animals because there were no criminals to be prosecuted and he was bored . 
 While repeating the earlier stories , the later sources of Suetonius and Cassius Dio provide additional tales of insanity . They accuse Caligula of incest with his sisters , Agrippina the Younger , Drusilla , and Livilla , and say he prostituted them to other men . They state he sent troops on illogical military exercises , turned the palace into a brothel , and , most famously , planned or promised to make his horse , <unk> , a consul , and actually appointed him a priest . 
 The validity of these accounts is debatable . In Roman political culture , insanity and sexual perversity were often presented hand @-@ in @-@ hand with poor government . 
 = = = Assassination and aftermath = = = 
 Caligula 's actions as emperor were described as being especially harsh to the senate , to the nobility and to the equestrian order . According to Josephus , these actions led to several failed conspiracies against Caligula . Eventually , officers within the Praetorian Guard led by Cassius Chaerea succeeded in murdering the emperor . The plot is described as having been planned by three men , but many in the senate , army and equestrian order were said to have been informed of it and involved in it . 
 The situation had escalated when , in 40 AD , Caligula announced to the senate that he planned to leave Rome permanently and to move to Alexandria in Egypt , where he hoped to be worshiped as a living god . The prospect of Rome losing its emperor and thus its political power was the final straw for many . Such a move would have left both the senate and the Praetorian Guard powerless to stop Caligula 's repression and debauchery . With this in mind Chaerea convinced his fellow conspirators to put their plot into action quickly . 
 According to Josephus , Chaerea had political motivations for the assassination . Suetonius sees the motive in Caligula calling Chaerea derogatory names . Caligula considered Chaerea effeminate because of a weak voice and for not being firm with tax collection . Caligula would mock Chaerea with names like " Priapus " and " Venus " . 
 On 22 January 41 ( Suetonius gives the date as 24 January ) , Cassius Chaerea and other guardsmen accosted Caligula as he addressed an acting troupe of young men during a series of games and dramatics held for the Divine Augustus . Details recorded on the events vary somewhat from source to source , but they agree that Chaerea stabbed Caligula first , followed by a number of conspirators . Suetonius records that Caligula 's death resembled that of Julius Caesar . He states that both the elder Gaius Julius Caesar ( Julius Caesar ) and the younger Gaius Julius Caesar ( Caligula ) were stabbed 30 times by conspirators led by a man named Cassius ( Cassius Longinus and Cassius Chaerea ) . By the time Caligula 's loyal Germanic guard responded , the Emperor was already dead . The Germanic guard , stricken with grief and rage , responded with a rampaging attack on the assassins , conspirators , innocent senators and bystanders alike . 
 The <unk> ( underground corridor ) beneath the imperial palaces on the Palatine Hill where this event took place was discovered by archaeologists in 2008 . 
 The senate attempted to use Caligula 's death as an opportunity to restore the republic . Chaerea tried to persuade the military to support the senate . The military , though , remained loyal to the idea of imperial monarchy . The grieving Roman people assembled and demanded that Caligula 's murderers be brought to justice . Uncomfortable with lingering imperial support , the assassins sought out and stabbed Caligula 's wife , <unk> , and killed their young daughter , Julia Drusilla , by smashing her head against a wall . They were unable to reach Caligula 's uncle , Claudius ; after a soldier , Gratus , found Claudius hiding behind a palace curtain he was spirited out of the city by a sympathetic faction of the Praetorian Guard to the nearby Praetorian camp . 
 Claudius became emperor after procuring the support of the Praetorian Guard . He ordered the execution of Chaerea and of any other known conspirators involved in the death of Caligula . According to Suetonius , Caligula 's body was placed under turf until it was burned and entombed by his sisters . He was buried within the Mausoleum of Augustus ; in 410 , during the Sack of Rome ashes in the tomb were scattered . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 The history of Caligula 's reign is extremely problematic as only two sources contemporary with Caligula have survived — the works of Philo and Seneca . Philo 's works , On the Embassy to Gaius and Flaccus , give some details on Caligula 's early reign , but mostly focus on events surrounding the Jewish population in Judea and Egypt with whom he sympathizes . Seneca 's various works give mostly scattered anecdotes on Caligula 's personality . Seneca was almost put to death by Caligula in AD 39 likely due to his associations with conspirators . 
 At one time , there were detailed contemporaneous histories on Caligula , but they are now lost . Additionally , the historians who wrote them are described as biased , either overly critical or praising of Caligula . Nonetheless , these lost primary sources , along with the works of Seneca and Philo , were the basis of surviving secondary and tertiary histories on Caligula written by the next generations of historians . A few of the contemporaneous historians are known by name . Fabius Rusticus and Cluvius Rufus both wrote condemning histories on Caligula that are now lost . Fabius Rusticus was a friend of Seneca who was known for historical embellishment and misrepresentation . Cluvius Rufus was a senator involved in the assassination of Caligula . 
 Caligula 's sister , Agrippina the Younger , wrote an autobiography that certainly included a detailed explanation of Caligula 's reign , but it too is lost . Agrippina was banished by Caligula for her connection to Marcus Lepidus , who conspired against Caligula . The inheritance of Nero , Agrippina 's son and the future emperor , was seized by Caligula . <unk> , a poet , produced a number of flattering writings about Caligula , but they too are lost . 
 The bulk of what is known of Caligula comes from Suetonius and Cassius Dio . Suetonius wrote his history on Caligula 80 years after his death , while Cassius Dio wrote his history over 180 years after Caligula 's death . Cassius Dio 's work is invaluable because it alone gives a loose chronology of Caligula 's reign . 
 A handful of other sources add a limited perspective on Caligula . Josephus gives a detailed description of Caligula 's assassination . Tacitus provides some information on Caligula 's life under Tiberius . In a now lost portion of his Annals , Tacitus gave a detailed history of Caligula . Pliny the Elder 's Natural History has a few brief references to Caligula . 
 There are few surviving sources on Caligula and no surviving source paints Caligula in a favorable light . The paucity of sources has resulted in significant gaps in modern knowledge of the reign of Caligula . Little is written on the first two years of Caligula 's reign . Additionally , there are only limited details on later significant events , such as the annexation of Mauretania , Caligula 's military actions in Britannia , and his feud with the Roman Senate . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 All surviving sources , except Pliny the Elder , characterize Caligula as insane . However , it is not known whether they are speaking figuratively or literally . Additionally , given Caligula 's unpopularity among the surviving sources , it is difficult to separate fact from fiction . Recent sources are divided in attempting to ascribe a medical reason for his behavior , citing as possibilities encephalitis , epilepsy or meningitis . The question of whether or not Caligula was insane ( especially after his illness early in his reign ) remains unanswered . 
 Philo of Alexandria , Josephus and Seneca state that Caligula was insane , but describe this madness as a personality trait that came through experience . Seneca states that Caligula became arrogant , angry and insulting once becoming emperor and uses his personality flaws as examples his readers can learn from . According to Josephus , power made Caligula incredibly conceited and led him to think he was a god . Philo of Alexandria reports that Caligula became ruthless after nearly dying of an illness in the eighth month of his reign in AD 37 . Juvenal reports he was given a magic potion that drove him insane . 
 Suetonius said that Caligula suffered from " falling sickness " , or epilepsy , when he was young . Modern historians have theorized that Caligula lived with a daily fear of seizures . Despite swimming being a part of imperial education , Caligula could not swim . <unk> are discouraged from swimming in open waters because unexpected fits in such difficult rescue circumstances can be fatal . Additionally , Caligula reportedly talked to the full moon . Epilepsy was long associated with the moon . 
 Some modern historians think that Caligula suffered from hyperthyroidism . This diagnosis is mainly attributed to Caligula 's irritability and his " stare " as described by Pliny the Elder . 
 = = = Possible rediscovery of burial site = = = 
 On 17 January 2011 , police in Nemi , Italy , announced that they believed they had discovered the site of Caligula 's burial , after arresting a thief caught smuggling a statue which they believed to be of the emperor . The claim has been met with scepticism by Cambridge historian Mary Beard . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = In film = = = 
 Welsh actor Emlyn Williams was cast as Caligula in the never @-@ completed 1937 film I , Claudius . 
 American actor Jay Robinson famously portrayed a sinister and scene @-@ stealing Caligula in two epic films of the 1950s , The Robe ( 1953 ) and its sequel Demetrius and the Gladiators ( 1954 ) . 
 A feature @-@ length historical film Caligula was completed in 1979 , in which Malcolm McDowell played the lead role . The film alienated audiences with explicit sex and violence . Although reviews were overwhelmingly negative ( though McDowell 's performance as the title character was praised ) , the film is considered to be a cult classic . 
 David Brandon portrayed Caligula in the 1982 Italian exploitation film Emperor Caligula , the Untold Story which was directed by Joe D 'Amato . 
 Courtney Love appeared as Caligula in a fake trailer for Gore Vidal 's Caligula , ostensibly a remake of the 1979 film , but actually a parodic short film by conceptual artist Francesco <unk> . 
 Szabolcs Hajdu portrayed Caligula in the 1996 film Caligula . 
 = = = In literature and theatre = = = 
 Caligula , by French author Albert Camus , is a play in which Caligula returns after deserting the palace for three days and three nights following the death of his beloved sister , Drusilla . The young emperor then uses his unfettered power to " bring the impossible into the realm of the likely " . 
 In the 1934 novel I , Claudius by English writer Robert Graves , Caligula is presented as being a murderous sociopath from his childhood , who became clinically insane early in his reign . At the age of only seven , he drove his father Germanicus to despair and death by secretly terrorising him . Graves 's Caligula commits incest with all three of his sisters and is implied to have murdered Drusilla . 
 In the BBC series based on Graves ' novel ( where the role is played by John Hurt ) , Caligula , although unhinged since early childhood , becomes dangerously psychotic after an apparent epileptic seizure and awakens believing that he has metamorphosed into the god Zeus . He kills Drusilla while trying to reenact the birth of Athena by cutting his child from her womb . 
 In 1941 , Edgar Rice Burroughs wrote I Am a Barbarian . The story is pitched as a free translation of the memoirs of Britannicus ( a fictional character created by Burroughs ) who was the slave of Caligula from early childhood till Caligula 's death . 
 The character Ellsworth Toohey in Ayn Rand 's 1943 novel The Fountainhead references Caligula in his climactic speech to Peter Keating stating , " Remember the Roman Emperor who said he wished humanity had a single neck so he could cut it ? People have laughed at him for centuries . But we 'll have the last laugh . We 've accomplished what he couldn 't accomplish . We 've taught men to unite . This makes one neck ready for one leash . " 
 The play The Reckoning of Kit and Little Boots , by Nat Cassidy , examines the lives of the Elizabethan playwright Christopher Marlowe and Caligula , with the fictional conceit that Marlowe was working on a play about Caligula around the time of his own murder . It emphasizes the similarities between the two characters — both stabbed to death at 29 , both in part as a result of their controversial religious perspectives . The play focuses on Caligula 's love for his sister Drusilla and his deep @-@ rooted loathing for Tiberius . It received its world premiere in New York City in June 2008 . 
 Eugene O 'Neill 's play Lazarus Laughed features the young Caligula as one of its pinnacle characters , where he is portrayed as a psychopath who believes he will only be happy once Tiberius is dead and he is the Caesar . 
 = = = In music = = = 
 Canadian death metal band Ex Deo released an album called Caligula , styled as <unk> . The band 's video , " I Caligula " , features Caligula and other members of his court that were important in his rule . 
 The Dickies ' 1989 album Second Coming includes the song " Caligula , " which relates his origins and reign of terror . 
 = = = In television = = = 
 Caligula has been portrayed in a number of television series : 
 Ralph Bates in the 1968 ITV television series The Caesars ; 
 John Hurt in the 1976 BBC television series I , Claudius ; 
 John McEnery in the 1985 miniseries A.D. ; 
 Tony Hawks in the Red Dwarf episode " Meltdown " ( 1991 ) ; 
 Alexis Arquette in season six of Xena : Warrior Princess ( 2001 ) ; 
 Simon Farnaby and <unk> Hartley in " Horrible Histories " ; 
 John Simm in the 2004 miniseries Imperium Nerone . 
 Simon Gower in the 2015 miniseries A.D. The Bible Continues 
 = High Line ( New York City ) = 
 The High Line ( also known as the High Line Park ) is a 1 @.@ 45 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 2 @.@ 33 km ) New York City linear park built in Manhattan on an elevated section of a disused New York Central Railroad spur called the West Side Line . Inspired by the 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometer ) Promenade <unk> ( tree @-@ lined walkway ) , a similar project in Paris completed in 1993 , the High Line has been redesigned and planted as an aerial greenway and rails @-@ to @-@ trails park . 
 The High Line Park is built on the disused southern portion of the West Side Line running to the Lower West Side of Manhattan . It runs from Gansevoort Street – three blocks below 14th Street – in the Meatpacking District , through Chelsea , to the northern edge of the West Side Yard on 34th Street near the Javits Convention Center . An unopened spur extends above 30th Street to Tenth Avenue . Formerly , the West Side Line went as far south as a railroad terminal to Spring Street just north of Canal Street , however most of the lower section was demolished in 1960 , with another small portion of the lower section being demolished in 1991 . 
 <unk> of the railway into an urban park began construction in 2006 , with the first phase opening in 2009 , and the second phase opening in 2011 . The third and final phase officially opened to the public on September 21 , 2014 . A short stub above Tenth Avenue and 30th Street is still closed as of September 2014 , but will open by 2017 , once the Hudson Yards Redevelopment Project is completed . The project has spurred real estate development in the neighborhoods that lie along the line . As of September 2014 , the park gets nearly 5 million visitors annually . 
 = = Description = = 
 The park extends from Gansevoort Street to 34th Street . At 30th Street , the elevated tracks turn west around the Hudson Yards Redevelopment Project to the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center on 34th Street , though the northern section is expected to be integrated within the Hudson Yards development and the Hudson Park and Boulevard . When the Hudson Yards Redevelopment Project 's Western Rail Yard is finished in 2018 , it will be elevated above the High Line Park , so an exit along the viaduct will be located over the West Side Yard , exiting out to the Western Rail Yard of Hudson Yards . The 34th Street entrance is at grade level , with wheelchair access . 
 The park is open daily from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. in the winter , 10 p.m. in the spring and fall , and 11 p.m. in the summer , except for the Interim Walkway west of 11th Avenue , which is open until dusk . It can be reached through eleven entrances , five of which are accessible to people with disabilities . The wheelchair @-@ accessible entrances , each with stairs and an elevator , are at Gansevoort , 14th , 16th , 23rd , and 30th Streets . Additional staircase @-@ only entrances are located at 18th , 20th , 26th , and 28th Streets , and 11th Avenue . Street level access is available at 34th Street via an " Interim Walkway " between 30th Street / 11th Avenue and 34th Street . 
 = = = Route = = = 
 At the Gansevoort Street end , which runs north @-@ south , the stub end over Gansevoort Street is named the Tiffany and Co . Foundation Overlook , dedicated in July 2012 ; the foundation was a major backer of the park . Then , it passes under The Standard hotel , and through a passage at 14th Street . At 14th Street , the High Line is split into two sides of different elevations ; the Diller @-@ Von Furstenberg Water Feature , opened in 2010 , is featured on the lower side , and a <unk> on the upper side . 
 Then , the High Line passes under the Chelsea Market , a food hall , at 15th Street . A spur connecting the viaduct to the National Biscuit Company building splits off at 16th Street ; this spur is closed to the public . The Tenth Avenue Square , an amphitheater located on the viaduct , is at 17th Street , where the High Line crosses over Tenth Avenue from southeast to northwest . At 23rd Street , there is the 23rd Street Lawn , a lawn where visitors can rest . Then , between 25th and 26th Streets , a ramp takes visitors above the viaduct , with a scenic overlook facing east at 26th Street . The Philip Falcone and Lisa Maria Falcone flyover , as it is called , is named after two major donors to the park ; this ramp was based on plans for a Phase 1 flyover that was never built . 
 The park then curves west to Phase 3 and merges into the Tenth Avenue Spur , the latter of which stretches over 30th Street to Tenth Avenue and will open in 2017 . On Phase 3 , there is another ramp taking visitors above the viaduct at 11th Avenue , as well as a play area consisting of rail ties and modified , silicone @-@ covered beams and stanchions coming out of the structure called the " Pershing Beams " , a gathering space with multiple benches , and a set of three trackways where one could walk between the railway tracks . There are also seesaw @-@ like benches , as well as benches that , much like a xylophone , contain parts that make sounds when tapped . An " interim walkway " between 11th Avenue and 30th Street and 34th Street divides the viaduct into two sides – a gravel walkway and an un @-@ renovated section still with rail tracks ; this walkway is open only temporarily , and will close for renovation once the Tenth Avenue spur is completed . The High Line turns north to a point just east of Twelfth Avenue . At 34th Street , it curves east , and the park ends at a wheelchair ramp midway between 12th and 11th Avenues . 
 = = = Attractions = = = 
 The park 's attractions include naturalized plantings that are inspired by the landscape that grew on the disused tracks , and views of the city and the Hudson River . The trail is made of pebble @-@ dash concrete walkways that swells and constricts , swings from side to side , and divides into concrete tines that meld the <unk> with the planting embedded in railroad gravel mulch . Stretches of track and ties recall the High Line 's former use . Portions of track are adaptively re @-@ used for rolling lounges positioned for river views . Most of the planting , which includes 210 species , is of rugged meadow plants , including clump @-@ forming grasses , <unk> , and <unk> , with scattered stands of sumac and <unk> , but not limited to American natives . At the Gansevoort Street end , a grove of mixed species of birch already provides some dappled shade by late afternoon . <unk> timber for the built @-@ in benches has come from a managed forest certified by the Forest Stewardship Council , to ensure sustainable use and the conservation of biological diversity , water resources , and fragile ecosystems . 
 The High Line Park also has cultural attractions . As part of a long @-@ term plan for the park to host temporary installations and performances of various kinds . Creative Time , Friends of the High Line , and the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation commissioned The River That Flows Both Ways by Spencer Finch as the inaugural art installation . The work is integrated into the window bays of the former Nabisco Factory loading dock , as a series of 700 purple and grey colored glass panes . Each color is exactly calibrated to match the center pixel of 700 digital pictures , one taken every minute , of the Hudson River , therefore presenting an extended portrait of the river that gives the work its name . Creative Time worked with the artist to realize the site @-@ specific concept that emerged when he saw the rusted , disused mullions of the old factory , which metal and glass specialists <unk> Design helped to prepare and reinstall . 
 The summer of 2010 featured a sound installation by Stephen <unk> , composed from bells heard through New York . Lauren Ross , formerly director of the alternative art space White Columns , served as the first curator for the High Line Park . During the construction of the second phase between 20th and 30th Streets , several artworks were installed including , Sarah Sze 's " Still Life with Landscape ( Model for a Habitat ) " a sculpture made of steel and wood , located on the line near 20th and 21st Streets ; this structure was built as a house for fauna such as birds and butterflies . Kim Beck 's " Space Available " was installed on the roofs of three buildings visible from the southern end . Three 20 @-@ by @-@ 12 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 by 3 @.@ 7 m ) sculptures looked like the armature of empty billboards , constructed like theater backdrops , so they look three @-@ dimensional from a distance . Also installed during the second phase of construction was Julianne Swartz 's " Digital Empathy " , a work that utilizes audio messages at restrooms , elevators , and water fountains . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Rail line = = = 
 In 1847 , the City of New York authorized street @-@ level railroad tracks down Manhattan 's West Side to ship freight . For safety , the railroads hired men called the " West Side Cowboys " to ride horses and wave flags in front of the trains . However , so many accidents occurred between freight trains and other traffic that Tenth Avenue became known as " Death Avenue " . 
 After years of public debate about the hazard , in 1929 the city , the state of New York , and the New York Central Railroad agreed on the West Side Improvement Project , a large project conceived by Robert Moses that also included the construction of the West Side Elevated Highway . The 13 @-@ mile ( 21 km ) project eliminated 105 street @-@ level railroad crossings and added 32 acres ( 13 ha ) to Riverside Park . It cost more than US $ 150 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( about US $ 2 @,@ 067 @,@ 151 @,@ 000 today ) . 
 The High Line viaduct , then a portion of the New York Connecting Railroad 's West Side Line , opened to trains in 1934 . It originally ran from 34th Street to St. John 's Park Terminal at Spring Street , and was designed to go through the center of blocks rather than over the avenue . It connected directly to factories and warehouses , allowing trains to load and unload their cargo inside buildings . Milk , meat , produce , and raw and manufactured goods could be transported and unloaded without disturbing traffic on the streets . This also reduced the load for the Bell Laboratories Building ( which has housed the <unk> Artists Community since 1970 ) , as well as for the former Nabisco plant in the Chelsea Market building , which were served from protected sidings within the structures . 
 The train also passed underneath the Western Electric complex at Washington Street . This section still exists as of May 18 , 2008 , and is not connected with the rest of the developed park . 
 The growth of interstate trucking in the 1950s led to a drop in rail traffic throughout the nation . By 1960 , the southernmost section of the line was demolished due to low use . This section started at Gansevoort Street and ran down Washington Street as far as Spring Street just north of Canal Street , representing almost half of the line . The last train on the remaining part of the line was operated by Conrail in 1980 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , a group of property owners with land under the line lobbied for the demolition of the entire structure . Peter <unk> , a Chelsea resident , activist , and railroad enthusiast , challenged the demolition efforts in court and tried to re @-@ establish rail service on the line . However , during the late 1980s , the north end of the High Line was disconnected from the rest of the national railroad system because it was expected that the High Line would be demolished . Due to the construction of the Empire Connection to Penn Station , which opened in spring 1991 , new tracks were routed to the new Empire Connection tunnel built underground to Penn Station . A small section of the High Line in the West Village , from Bank to Gansevoort Streets , was taken apart in 1991 , despite objections by people who wanted to keep the High Line . 
 In the 1990s , as the line lay unused and in disrepair ( despite the fact that the riveted @-@ steel elevated structure was structurally sound ) it became known to a few urban explorers and local residents for the tough , drought @-@ tolerant wild grasses , shrubs , and rugged trees such as sumac that had sprung up in the gravel along the abandoned railway . It was slated for demolition under the administration of then @-@ mayor Rudy Giuliani . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 1999 , the nonprofit organization Friends of the High Line was formed by Joshua David and Robert Hammond , residents of the neighborhood that the line ran through . They advocated for the line 's preservation and reuse as public open space , so that it would become an elevated park or greenway , similar to the Promenade <unk> in Paris . CSX Transportation , which owned the High Line , had given photographer Joel Sternfeld permission to photograph the line for a year . These photographs of the natural beauty of the meadow @-@ like <unk> of the railway , discussed in an episode of the documentary series Great Museums , were used at public meetings whenever the subject of saving the High Line was discussed . Fashion designer Diane von Fürstenberg , who had moved her New York City headquarters to the Meatpacking District in 1997 , organized fund @-@ raising events for the campaign in her studio , along with her husband , Barry Diller . <unk> community support of public redevelopment of the High Line for pedestrian use grew , and in 2004 , the New York City government committed $ 50 million to establish the proposed park . New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg and City Council Speakers Gifford Miller and Christine C. Quinn were important supporters . In total , funders of the High Line Park raised more than $ 150 million ( equivalent to $ 165 @,@ 449 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . 
 On June 13 , 2005 , the U.S. Federal Surface Transportation Board issued a certificate of interim trail use , allowing the city to remove most of the line from the national railway system . On April 10 , 2006 , Mayor Bloomberg presided over a ceremony that marked the beginning of construction . The park was designed by the James Corner 's New York @-@ based landscape architecture firm Field Operations and architects Diller Scofidio + Renfro , with garden design from Piet Oudolf of the Netherlands , lighting design from L 'Observatoire International , and engineering design by Buro Happold . The New York City Department of City Planning director and Chair of the City Planning Commission Amanda Burden actively contributed to the success of project development . 
 Major backers included Philip Falcone , Diane von Fürstenberg , Barry Diller , and von Fürstenberg 's children , Alexander von Fürstenberg and Tatiana von Fürstenberg . Hotel developer Andre Balazs , owner of the Chateau Marmont in Los Angeles , built the 337 @-@ room Standard Hotel , straddling the High Line at West 13th Street . 
 The southernmost section , from Gansevoort Street to 20th Street , opened as a city park on June 8 , 2009 . This southern section includes five stairways and elevators at 14th Street and 16th Street . Around the same time , construction for the second section began . 
 On June 7 , 2011 , a ribbon was cut to open the second section from 20th Street to 30th Street , with Mayor Michael Bloomberg , New York City Council Speaker Christine Quinn , Manhattan Borough President Scott Stringer , and Congressman Jerrold Nadler in attendance . 
 In 2011 , CSX Transportation , the then @-@ owner of the northernmost section , from 30th to 34th Streets , agreed in principle to donate the section to the city , while the Related Companies , which owns the development rights to the West Side Rail Yards , agreed not to tear down the spur that crosses 10th Avenue . Construction on the final section was started in September 2012 . 
 On September 20 , 2014 , a ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony for the High Line was held , followed by the opening of the third section of the High Line Park on September 21 , and a procession down the High Line . The third phase , costing US $ 76 million , is divided into two parts . The first part , costing US $ 75 million , which opened on September 21 , is from the end of the existing Phase 2 of the High Line to the line 's terminus at 34th Street west of 11th Avenue . The second part , the spur , was going to contain such amenities as a bowl @-@ shaped theater but has changed and will provide more room to install ambitious artworks curated by the public art program . The Spur will also provide much @-@ needed storage space for park operations , maintenance , and horticulture , as well as additional public restrooms . It will also be integrated with 10 Hudson Yards , which has already been built over the High Line Spur as of December 2013 ; the spur will not open until sometime in 2017 . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 The recycling of the railway into an urban park has brought on the revitalization of Chelsea , which had been " gritty " and in generally poor condition in the late twentieth century . It has also spurred real estate development in the neighborhoods that lie along the line . Mayor Bloomberg noted that the High Line project has helped usher in something of a renaissance in the neighborhood : by 2009 , more than 30 projects were planned or under construction nearby . Residents who have bought apartments next to the High Line Park have adapted to its presence in varying ways , but most responses are positive ; some , however , claim that the park became a " tourist @-@ clogged catwalk " since it opened . The real estate boom has not been victimless , however , many well @-@ established businesses in west Chelsea have closed due to loss of neighborhood customer base or rent increases . 
 Crime has been very low in the park . Shortly after the second section opened in 2011 , The New York Times reported that there have been no reports of major crimes such as assaults or robberies since its first phase opened two years prior . Parks Enforcement Patrols have written summonses for various infractions of park rules , such as walking dogs or riding bicycles on the walkway , but at a rate lower than in Central Park . Park advocates attributed that to the high visibility of the High Line from the surrounding buildings , a feature of traditional urbanism espoused by author Jane Jacobs nearly fifty years earlier . According to Joshua David , a co @-@ founder of Friends of the High Line , " Empty parks are dangerous ... Busy parks are much less so . You 're virtually never alone on the High Line . " 
 A New Yorker columnist , in a review of the <unk> restaurant ( which took over the space of the classic Empire Diner ) , complained that " the new Chelsea that is emerging on weekends as visitors flood the elevated park ... [ as ] <unk> , overpriced , and shiny . " 
 The success of the High Line in New York City has encouraged the leaders of other cities , such as Mayor Rahm Emanuel of Chicago , who see it as " a symbol and catalyst " for gentrifying neighborhoods . Several cities also have plans to renovate some railroad infrastructure into park land , including Philadelphia and St. Louis . In Chicago , where the Bloomingdale Trail , a 2 @.@ 7 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) long linear park on former railroad infrastructure , will run through several neighborhoods . One estimate is that it costs substantially less to redevelop an abandoned urban rail line into a linear park than to demolish it . James Corner , one of the Bloomingdale Trail 's designers , said , " The High Line is not easily replicable in other cities , " observing that building a " cool park " requires a " framework " of neighborhoods around it in order to succeed . In Queens , the Queensway , a proposed aerial rail trail , is being considered for reactivation along the right @-@ of @-@ way of the former LIRR Rockaway Beach Branch . Other cities around the world are planning elevated rails @-@ to @-@ trails parks . One writer called this the " High Line effect " . 
 Due to the popularity of the High Line , there have been several proposals for museums along its path . The Dia Art Foundation considered , but rejected , a proposal to build a museum at the Gansevoort Street terminus . On that site , the Whitney Museum has built a new home for its collection of American art . The building was designed by Renzo Piano and opened on May 1 , 2015 . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The High Line has been depicted in numerous media works , before and after its redevelopment . The 1979 film Manhattan included a shot of the High Line , as director and star Woody Allen speaks the first line : " Chapter One . He adored New York City . " Director Zbigniew Rybczyński shot the video for Art Of Noise 's recording Close ( to the Edit ) on the High Line in 1984 . 
 In 2001 , two years after the formation of the nonprofit Friends of the High Line , photographer Joel Sternfeld documented the dilapidated conditions and the natural flora of the line in his book Walking the High Line . The book also contained essays by writer Adam Gopnik and historian John R. <unk> . Sternfeld 's work was regularly discussed and exhibited during the 2000s as the rehabilitation project moved forward . In a similar vein , Alan Weisman 's 2007 book The World Without Us discussed the High Line as an example of the reappearance of the wild in an abandoned area . That same year chase scenes from the zombie apocalypse film I Am Legend were filmed there and in the Meatpacking District . The 2009 hip @-@ hop song " The High Line " by Kinetics & One Love is a pro @-@ green song that uses the High Line , before its conversion into a park , as an example of nature 's reclamation of man @-@ made structures . 
 With the opening of the High Line Park , many films and television shows have set sequences there . In 2011 , the television series Louie used the High Line as a setting for one of the title character 's dates . Other works to set scenes on the High Line since it opened include the HBO series Girls , the Simpsons episode " Moonshine River " , and the film What Maisie Knew . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 The High Line 
 = Star of Bethlehem = 
 The Star of Bethlehem , also called the Christmas Star , revealed the birth of Jesus to the Biblical Magi , and later led them to Bethlehem , according to Christian tradition . The star appears only in the nativity story of the Gospel of Matthew , where astrologers from the east are inspired by the star to travel to Jerusalem . There they meet King Herod of Judea , and ask where the king of the Jews had been born . Herod , following a verse from the Book of Micah interpreted as a prophecy , directs them to Bethlehem , to the south of Jerusalem . The star leads them to Jesus ' home in the town , where they worship him and give him gifts . The wise men are then given a divine warning not to return to Herod so they return home by a different route . 
 Many Christians see the star as a miraculous sign to mark the birth of the Christ ( or Messiah ) . Some theologians claimed that the star fulfilled a prophecy , known as the Star Prophecy . Astronomers have made several attempts to link the star to unusual astronomical events , such as a conjunction of Jupiter and Venus , a comet or a supernova . 
 Many modern scholars do not consider the story to be describing a historical event but a pious fiction created by the author of the Gospel of Matthew . 
 The subject is a favorite at planetarium shows during the Christmas season , although the Biblical account describes Jesus with a broader Greek word , which can mean either " infant " or " child " ( <unk> ) , rather than the more specific word for infant ( <unk> ) , possibly implying that some time has passed since the birth . The visit is traditionally celebrated on Epiphany ( January 6 ) in Western Christianity . 
 = = Matthew 's narrative = = 
 In the Gospel of Matthew account , the Magi ( often translated as " wise men " , but more accurately astrologers or astronomers ) arrive at the court of Herod in Jerusalem and tell the king of a star which signifies the birth of the King of the Jews : 
 Now after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king , behold , wise men from the East came to Jerusalem , saying , Where is He who has been born King of the Jews ? For we have seen His star in the East [ or at its rising ] and have come to worship Him . When Herod the king heard this , he was troubled , and all Jerusalem with him . And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together , he inquired of them where the Christ was to be born . 
 Herod is " troubled " , not because of the appearance of the star , but because the Magi have told him that a " king of the Jews " had been born , which he understands to refer to the Messiah , a leader of the Jewish people whose coming was believed to be foretold in scripture . So he asks his advisors where the Messiah would be born . They answer Bethlehem , birthplace of King David , and quote the prophet Micah . The king passes this information along to the Magi . 
 Then Herod , when he had secretly called the wise men , determined from them what time the star appeared . And he sent them to Bethlehem and said , Go and search carefully for the young Child , and when you have found Him , bring back word to me , that I may come and worship Him also . When they heard the king , they departed ; and behold , the star which they had seen in the East went before them , till it came and stood over where the young Child was . When they saw the star , they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy . And when they had come into the house , they saw the young Child with Mary His mother , and fell down and worshiped Him . And when they had opened their treasures , they presented gifts to Him : gold , frankincense , and myrrh . 
 Matthew 's account suggests that the Magi knew from the star that the " king of the Jews " had been born even before they arrived in Jerusalem . They present Jesus with gifts of gold , frankincense , and myrrh , and as verse 11 describes , they find the mother and child not in a manger but in a house . In a dream , they are warned not to return to Jerusalem , so they leave for their own country by another route . When Herod realizes he has been tricked , he orders the execution of all male children in Bethlehem " two years old and younger , " based on the age the child could be in regard to the information the magi had given him concerning the time the star first appeared . Joseph , warned in a dream , takes his family to Egypt for their safety . The Gospel links the escape to a verse from scripture , which it interprets as a prophecy : " Out of Egypt I called my son . " This was a reference to the departure of the Hebrews from Egypt under Moses , so the quote suggests that Matthew saw the life of Jesus as recapitulating the story of the Jewish people , with Judea representing Egypt and Herod standing in for pharaoh . After Herod dies , Joseph and his family return from Egypt , and settle in Nazareth in Galilee . This is also said to be a fulfillment of a prophecy ( " He will be called a <unk> , " ( <unk> ) for which no scriptural reference is known . The word " Nazareth " is related to the word " <unk> " which means " sprout " , and which some Bible commentators think refers to Isaiah 11 : 1 , " And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of Jesse , and a branch out of his roots shall bear fruit . " ( ESV ) . 
 = = Explanations = = 
 = = = Pious fiction = = = 
 Many scholars who see the Gospel Nativity stories as later apologetic accounts created to establish the Messianic status of Jesus , regard the Star of Bethlehem as a pious fiction . Aspects of Matthew 's account which have raised questions of the historical event include : Matthew is the only one of the four gospels which mentions either the Star of Bethlehem or the Magi . In Mark 6 : 1 @-@ 4 , the author of the Gospel of Mark , considered by modern text scholars to be the oldest of the Gospels , does not appear to be aware of the Bethlehem nativity story . A character in the Gospel of John states that Jesus is from Galilee , and not Bethlehem . The Gospels often described Jesus as " of Nazareth , " but never as " of Bethlehem " . Scholars suggest that Jesus was born in Nazareth and that the Bethlehem nativity narratives reflect a desire by the Gospel writers to present his birth as the fulfillment of prophecy . The Matthew account conflicts with that given in the Gospel of Luke , in which the family of Jesus already live in Nazareth , travel to Bethlehem for the census , and return home almost immediately . 
 Matthew 's description of the miracles and portents attending the birth of Jesus can be compared to stories concerning the birth of Augustus ( 63 BC ) . Linking a birth to the first appearance of a star was consistent with a popular belief that each person 's life was linked to a particular star . Magi and astronomical events were linked in the public mind by the visit to Rome of a delegation of magi at the time of a spectacular appearance of Halley 's Comet in AD 66 , about the time the Gospel of Matthew was being composed . This delegation was led by King Tiridates of Armenia , who came seeking confirmation of his title from Emperor Nero . Ancient historian Dio Cassius wrote that , " The King did not return by the route he had followed in coming , " a line echoed in Matthew 's account . 
 = = = Fulfillment of prophecy = = = 
 The ancients believed that astronomical phenomena were connected to terrestrial events . Miracles were routinely associated with the birth of important people , including the Hebrew patriarchs , as well as Greek and Roman heroes . 
 The Star of Bethlehem is traditionally linked to the Star Prophecy in the Book of Numbers : 
 Although clearly intended to refer to a time that was long past , since the kingdom of Moab had long ceased to exist by the time the Gospels were being written , this passage had become widely seen as a reference to the coming of a Messiah . It was , for example , cited by Josephus , who believed it referred to Emperor Vespasian . Origen , one of the most influential early Christian theologians , connected this prophecy with the Star of Bethlehem : 
 If , then , at the commencement of new dynasties , or on the occasion of other important events , there arises a comet so called , or any similar celestial body , why should it be matter of wonder that at the birth of Him who was to introduce a new doctrine to the human race , and to make known His teaching not only to Jews , but also to Greeks , and to many of the barbarous nations besides , a star should have arisen ? Now I would say , that with respect to comets there is no prophecy in circulation to the effect that such and such a comet was to arise in connection with a particular kingdom or a particular time ; but with respect to the appearance of a star at the birth of Jesus there is a prophecy of <unk> recorded by Moses to this effect : There shall arise a star out of Jacob , and a man shall rise up out of Israel . 
 Origen suggested that the Magi may have decided to travel to Jerusalem when they " conjectured that the man whose appearance had been foretold along with that of the star , had actually come into the world " . 
 The Magi are sometimes called " kings " because of the belief that they fulfill prophecies in Isaiah and Psalms concerning a journey to Jerusalem by gentile kings . Isaiah mentions gifts of gold and incense . In the Septuagint , the Greek translation of the Old Testament probably used by Matthew , these gifts are given as gold and frankincense , similar to Matthew 's " gold , frankincense , and myrrh . " The gift of myrrh symbolizes mortality , according to Origen . 
 While Origen argued for a naturalistic explanation , John Chrysostom viewed the star as purely miraculous : " How then , tell me , did the star point out a spot so confined , just the space of a manger and shed , unless it left that height and came down , and stood over the very head of the young child ? And at this the evangelist was hinting when he said , " Lo , the star went before them , till it came and stood over where the young Child was . " 
 = = = Astronomical object = = = 
 Although magi ( Greek <unk> ) is usually translated as " wise men , " in this context it probably means " astronomer " or " astrologer " . The involvement of astrologers in the story of the birth of Jesus was problematic for the early Church , because they condemned astrology as demonic ; a widely cited explanation was that of Tertullian , who suggested that astrology was allowed ' only until the time of the Gospel ' . 
 = = = = Planetary conjunction = = = = 
 In 1614 , German astronomer Johannes Kepler determined that a series of three conjunctions of the planets Jupiter and Saturn occurred in the year 7 BC . He argued ( incorrectly ) that a planetary conjunction could create a nova , which he linked to the Star of Bethlehem . Modern calculations show that there was a gap of nearly a degree ( approximately twice a diameter of the moon ) between the planets , so these conjunctions were not visually impressive . An ancient almanac has been found in Babylon which covers the events of this period , but does not indicate that the conjunctions were of any special interest . In the 20th century , Prof. Karlis <unk> , an astronomer , argued that this was an astronomical event where Jupiter and Saturn were in a triple conjunction in the constellation Pisces . Archaeologist and Assyriologist Simo <unk> has also suggested this explanation . 
 In 3 – 2 BC , there was a series of seven conjunctions , including three between Jupiter and Regulus and a strikingly close conjunction between Jupiter and Venus near Regulus on June 17 , 2 BC . " The fusion of two planets would have been a rare and awe @-@ inspiring event " , according to Roger Sinnott . Another Venus – Jupiter conjunction occurred earlier in August , 3 BC . These events however occurred after the generally accepted date of 4 BC for the death of Herod . Since the conjunction would have been seen in the west at sunset it could not have led the magi south from Jerusalem to Bethlehem . 
 = = = = Comet = = = = 
 Other writers suggest that the star was a comet . Halley 's Comet was visible in 12 BC and another object , possibly a comet or nova , was seen by Chinese and Korean stargazers in about 5 BC . This object was observed for over seventy days with no movement recorded . Ancient writers described comets as " hanging over " specific cities , just as the Star of Bethlehem was said to have " stood over " the " place " where Jesus was ( the town of Bethlehem ) . However , this is generally thought unlikely as in ancient times comets were generally seen as bad omens . The comet explanation has been recently promoted by Colin Nicholl . His theory involves a hypothetical comet which could have appeared in 6 BC . 
 = = = = Supernova = = = = 
 A recent ( 2005 ) hypothesis is that the star of Bethlehem was a supernova or hypernova occurring in the nearby Andromeda Galaxy . Although it is difficult to detect a supernova remnant in another galaxy , or obtain an accurate date of when it occurred , supernovae remnants have been detected in Andromeda . 
 = = = = Heliacal rising = = = = 
 The Magi told Herod that they saw the star " in the East , " or according to some translations , " at its rising " , which may imply the routine appearance of a constellation , or an asterism . One theory interprets the phrase in Matthew 2 : 2 , " in the east , " as an astrological term concerning a " heliacal rising . " This translation was proposed by <unk> and Heinrich Voigt , among others . The view was rejected by the philologist Franz Boll ( 1867 – 1924 ) . Two modern translators of ancient astrological texts insist that the text does not use the technical terms for either a heliacal or an <unk> rising of a star . However , one concedes that Matthew may have used layman 's terms for a rising . 
 = = = = Double occultation = = = = 
 Astronomer Michael R. Molnar argues that the " star in the east " refers to an astronomical event with astrological significance in the context of ancient Greek astrology . He suggests a link between the Star of Bethlehem and a double occultation of Jupiter by the moon on March 20 and April 17 of 6 BC in Aries , particularly the second occultation on April 17 . <unk> of planets by the moon are quite common , but Firmicus Maternus , an astrologer to Roman Emperor Constantine , wrote that an occultation of Jupiter in Aries was a sign of the birth of a divine king . He argues that Aries rather than Pisces was the zodiac symbol for Judea , a fact that would affect previous interpretations of astrological material . Molnar ’ s theory was debated by scientists , theologians , and historians during a colloquium on the Star of Bethlehem at the Netherlands ’ University of Groningen in October 2014 . Harvard astronomer Owen Gingerich supports Molnar ’ s explanation but noted technical questions . " The gospel story is one in which King Herod was taken by surprise , " said Gingerich . " So it wasn ’ t that there was suddenly a brilliant new star sitting there that anybody could have seen [ but ] something more subtle . " Astronomer David A. Weintraub says , " If Matthew ’ s wise men actually undertook a journey to search for a newborn king , the bright star didn ’ t guide them ; it only told them when to set out . " 
 The events were quite close to the sun and would not have been visible to the naked eye . 
 = = = = Jupiter ’ s annual cycle = = = = 
 Another theory connects the star to a series of unique , but generally unspectacular celestial events involving the planet Jupiter . Babylonian astronomers sometimes referred to the planet as <unk> , meaning the " white star . " The celestial events , which were centered on the planet 's annual cycle , could have been symbolically associated with Judaism and the Messiah . This conception of the star has been referred to as “ a serious study of what could have been a messianic Jewish perspective concerning the heavens two millennia ago . ” 
 = = = = Regulus , Jupiter , and Venus = = = = 
 Attorney Frederick Larson examined the biblical account in the Gospel of Matthew , chapter 2 and found the following nine qualities of Bethlehem 's Star : It signified birth , it signified kingship , it was related to the Jewish nation , and it rose " in the East " ; King Herod had not been aware of it ; it appeared at an exact time ; it endured over time ; and , according to Matthew , it was in front of the Magi when they traveled south from Jerusalem to Bethlehem , and then it stopped over Bethlehem . 
 Using astronomy software , and an article written by astronomer Craig Chester based on the work of Ernest Martin , Larson thinks all nine characteristics of the Star of Bethlehem are found in events that took place in the skies of 3 @-@ 2 BC . Highlights include a triple conjunction of Jupiter , called the king planet , with the fixed star Regulus , called the king star , starting in September 3 BC . Larson believes that may be the time of Jesus ' conception . 
 By June of 2 BC , nine months later , the human conception period , Jupiter had continued moving in its orbit around the sun and appeared in close conjunction with Venus with Venus in June of 2 BC . In Hebrew Jupiter is called " <unk> " , meaning " righteousness " , a term also used for the Messiah , and suggested that because the planet Venus represents love and fertility , so Chester had suggested astrologers would have viewed the close conjunction of Jupiter and Venus as indicating a coming new king of Israel , and Herod would have taken them seriously . Astronomer Dave <unk> independently found the June 2 BC planetary conjunction , and noted it would have appeared as a " bright beacon of light " . 
 Jupiter next continued to move and then it stopped in its apparent retrograde motion on December 25 of 2 BC over the town of Bethlehem . Since planets in their orbits have a " stationary point " , a planet moves eastward through the stars but " After it passes the opposite point in the sky from the sun , it appears to slow , come to a full stop , and move backward ( westward ) for some weeks . Again it slows , stops , and resumes its eastward course , " said Chester . The date of December 25 that Jupiter appeared to stop while in retrograde took place in the season of Hanukkah , and is the date later chosen to celebrate Christmas . 
 = = Relating the star historically to Jesus ' birth = = 
 If the story of the Star of Bethlehem described an actual event , it might identify the year Jesus was born . The Gospel of Matthew describes the birth of Jesus as taking place when Herod was king . According to Josephus , Herod died after a lunar eclipse and before a Passover Feast . The eclipse is usually identified as the eclipse of March 13 , 4 BC . Other scholars suggested dates in 5 BC , because it allows seven months for the events Josephus documented between the lunar eclipse and the Passover than the 29 days allowed by lunar eclipse in 4 BC . Others suggest it was an eclipse in 1 BC . The narrative implies that Jesus was born sometime between the first appearance of the star and the appearance of the Magi at Herod 's court . That the king is said to have ordered the execution of boys two years of age and younger , implies that the Star of Bethlehem appeared within the preceding two years . Some scholars date the birth of Jesus as 6 – 4 BC , while others suggest Jesus ' birth was in 3 / 2 BC . 
 The Gospel of Luke says the census from Caesar Augustus took place when Quirinius was governor of Syria . <unk> suggests this took place in AD 6 , nine years after the death of Herod , and that the family of Jesus left Bethlehem shortly after the birth . Some scholars explain the apparent disparity as an error on the part of the author of the Gospel of Luke , concluding that he was more concerned with creating a symbolic narrative than a historical account , and was either unaware of , or indifferent to , the chronological difficulty . 
 However , there is some debate among Bible translators about the correct reading of Luke 2 : 2 . Instead of translating the registration as taking place " when " Quirinius was governor of Syria , some versions translate it as " before " or use " before " as an alternative , which Harold <unk> , F.F. Bruce , Ben Witherington and others have suggested may be the correct translation . While not in agreement , Emil Schürer also acknowledged that such a translation can be justified grammatically . According to Josephus , the tax census conducted by the Roman senator Quirinius particularly irritated the Jews , and was one of the causes of the Zealot movement of armed resistance to Rome . From this perspective , Luke may have been trying to differentiate the census at the time of Jesus ’ birth from the tax census mentioned in Acts 5 : 37 that took place under Quirinius at a later time . One ancient writer identified the census at Jesus ’ birth , not with taxes , but with a universal pledge of allegiance to the emperor . 
 Jack Finegan noted some early writers ' reckoning of the regnal years of Augustus are the equivalent to 3 / 2 BC , or 2 BC or later for the birth of Jesus , including Irenaeus ( 3 / 2 BC ) , Clement of Alexandria ( 3 / 2 BC ) , Tertullian ( 3 / 2 BC ) , Julius Africanus ( 3 / 2 BC ) , Hippolytus of Rome ( 3 / 2 BC ) , Hippolytus of Thebes ( 3 / 2 BC ) , Origen ( 3 / 2 BC ) , Eusebius of Caesarea ( 3 / 2 BC ) , Epiphanius of Salamis ( 3 / 2 BC ) , Cassiodorus Senator ( 3 BC ) , Paulus Orosius ( 2 BC ) , Dionysus Exiguus ( 1 BC ) , and <unk> of the Year 354 ( AD 1 ) . Finegan places the death of Herod in 1 BC , and says if Jesus was born two years or less before Herod the Great died , the birth of Jesus would have been in 3 or 2 BC . Finegan also notes the <unk> reckoned Christ 's birth with the equivalent of 4 BC or AD 9 . 
 = = Religious interpretations = = 
 = = = Eastern Orthodoxy = = = 
 In the Orthodox Church , the Star of Bethlehem is interpreted as a miraculous event of symbolic and pedagogical significance , regardless of whether it coincides with a natural phenomenon ; a sign sent by God to lead the Magi to the Christ Child . This is illustrated in the <unk> of the Nativity : 
 In Orthodox Christian iconography , the Star of Bethlehem is often depicted not as golden , but as a dark <unk> , a semicircle at the top of the icon , indicating the <unk> Light of Divine grace , with a ray pointing to " the place where the young child lay " ( Matt 2 : 9 ) . Sometimes the faint image of an angel is drawn inside the <unk> . 
 = = = Mormonism = = = 
 Mormons believe that the Star of Bethlehem was an actual astronomical event visible the world over . In the Book of Mormon , which they believe contains writings of ancient prophets , Samuel the <unk> prophesies that a new star will appear as a sign that Jesus has been born , and Nephi later writes about the fulfillment of this prophecy . 
 = = = Jehovah 's Witnesses = = = 
 Among Jehovah 's Witnesses the Star of Bethlehem is seen as a product of Satan , rather than a sign from God , since the star led the astrologers to Jerusalem where they met King Herod 's plan to kill Jesus . 
 = = = Seventh @-@ day Adventist = = = 
 In The Desire of Ages , Ellen White states " That star was a distant company of shining angels , but of this the wise men were ignorant . " 
 = = Depiction in art = = 
 Paintings and other pictures of the Adoration of the Magi may include a depiction of the star in some form . In the fresco by Giotto di Bondone , it is depicted as a comet . In the tapestry of the subject designed by Edward Burne @-@ Jones ( and in the related watercolour ) , the star is held by an angel . 
 The colourful star lantern known as a <unk> is a cherished and ubiquitous symbol of the holiday for Filipinos , its design and light recalling the star . In its basic form , the <unk> has five points and two " tails " that evoke rays of light pointing the way to the stable , and candles inside the lanterns have been superseded by electric illumination . 
 In the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem , a silver star with 14 undulating rays marks the location traditionally claimed to be that of Jesus ' birth . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 " The Star " was an episode of The Twilight Zone during its run in the 1980s , based on the science fiction short story " The Star " by English writer Arthur C. Clarke . 
 A distant space ship comes across a supernova that was calculated to have occurred in approximately <unk> , at a distance of 3 @,@ 000 light @-@ years . A well @-@ developed civilization was eradicated by the supernova and one of the astronauts , who was also a priest , had a crisis of faith about why God would let such a civilization die to herald the birth of Christ . Another astronaut shows him a recording from that civilization populace stating that they realized they were at the peak of their time and had to make way for a new people . They had left their art and music behind as a legacy to the future generations . 
 = = = Christmas carols = = = 
 The star is often alluded to in Christmas carols about the Magi . For example , " We Three Kings " has the refrain : 
 = The Pilot ( Friends ) = 
 The Pilot episode ( also known as " The One Where It All Began " , " The One Where Monica Gets a New <unk> " , and " The First One " ) of the American situation comedy series Friends premiered on NBC ( National Broadcasting Company ) on September 22 , 1994 . It was written by series creators David Crane and Marta Kauffman , and directed by James Burrows . The pilot introduces six friends who live and work in New York City ; Monica ( Courteney Cox ) sleeps with a wine seller after their first date but is horrified to discover he tricked her into bed ; her brother Ross ( David Schwimmer ) is depressed after his lesbian ex @-@ wife moves her things out of their apartment ; Monica 's old schoolfriend Rachel ( Jennifer Aniston ) moves in with Monica after running out of her wedding ; and their friends , Joey , Chandler , and Phoebe ( Matt LeBlanc , Matthew Perry , and Lisa Kudrow , respectively ) offer them each support and advice . 
 Crane and Kauffman pitched their original idea to network NBC in December 1993 . NBC liked it and commissioned a complete script , which was submitted in March 1994 . Before the script was finished , casting for the six main roles began ; 75 actors were seen for each part . The pilot was taped on May 4 , 1994 at Warner Bros. ' studios in Burbank , California . After making final edits to the episode , executive producer Kevin Bright submitted it on May 11 , two days before NBC was due to announce the schedule . Satisfied with the completed pilot , NBC ordered 12 more episodes for the first season . The episode was watched by approximately 22 million viewers , making it the fifteenth @-@ most @-@ watched television show of the week . Critics compared the show unfavorably to Seinfeld and Ellen , noting the similarities all three series had in depicting friends conversing about their lives . The cast , particularly Schwimmer , were complimented , though there was some concern that the character roles were undeveloped . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Before a date with Paul the " wine guy " , Monica is teased by her friends , Chandler and Joey , at The Central Perk coffee shop . Ross , Monica 's older brother , arrives at the coffee shop , upset after discovering his ex @-@ wife , a recently out lesbian , has moved out of his apartment to begin a new relationship with her partner . A young woman suddenly arrives wearing a wet wedding dress , whom Monica recognizes as her high school best friend , Rachel . Monica introduces her to the others as Rachel reveals she left her fiancé at the altar . After Rachel 's father denies her financial assistance , Monica reluctantly takes Rachel in as a new roommate . 
 Meanwhile , Joey and Chandler console Ross while helping him assemble new furniture . Ross begins to wonder if any woman would be " the right one " for him . Monica goes on her first date with Paul , and while he seems decent and respectful , she discovers from a colleague that he has a bad reputation as a womanizer , ending her hopes that she will find a mate . Ross realizes that Rachel could be the beginning of a new hope for him . He successfully brings up the idea to Rachel of asking her out sometime , and later confesses to Monica about the potential <unk> and cute boy Joey starts his new job <unk> the musical in this series 
 In the final scene , the entire group are in Central Perk having coffee with Rachel , who begins a new career as a coffee shop waitress . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Creators and writers David Crane and Marta Kauffman were known in the television industry for writing the cable television series Dream On . A second series by the duo , Family Album , had premiered on CBS in the Fall 1993 season but was cancelled after airing six episodes . In November 1993 , they began developing three new television pilots from their offices at Warner Bros. Television that could premiere in the Fall 1994 season . As Dream On had won them clout in Hollywood , they aimed to pitch one of their ideas to NBC ; Insomnia Cafe , about six friends who live and work in New York City , was pitched as a seven @-@ page treatment to the network in December 1993 . 
 " It 's about sex , love , relationships , careers , a time in your life when everything 's possible . And it 's about friendship because when you 're single and in the city , your friends are your family . " 
 — Part of Crane and Kauffman 's original pitch for Insomnia Cafe 
 NBC bought the pitch as a put pilot , meaning they risked financial penalties if the pilot was not filmed . To get an idea of how their characters would behave , Kauffman interviewed several of her children 's twenty @-@ something babysitters . She and Crane wrote the script in three days . James Burrows , known for directing Cheers , was hired to direct it . He liked the script , though asked for Joey , who was originally written similarly to Chandler , to be " dumbed up a bit " . The script was completed in early March 1994 , though before then eight @-@ line character breakdowns had been sent to acting agencies in Los Angeles , New York and Chicago . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 1 @,@ 000 actors replied to the callouts for each role , but only 75 were called in to read for the casting director . Those who received a callback read again in front of Crane , Kauffman and their production partner Kevin S. Bright . At the end of March , the potential actors had been reduced to three or four for each part ; they read for Les Moonves , president of Warner Bros. Television . David Schwimmer was first to be cast . He was in Chicago doing a stage adaptation of The Master and Margarita when his agent offered him the audition . He was not interested in doing television after a bad experience appearing in Monty , but changed his mind when he learned that it was an ensemble script . Unknown to him , Crane and Kauffman had remembered him from when he auditioned for an earlier pilot of theirs ; they had written the part of Ross with Schwimmer in mind to play him . Eric McCormack also auditioned for the role several times . He later became famous for his lead role in the sitcom Will & Grace . 
 Courteney Cox was the most well @-@ known of the six main actors . She was being considered for Rachel , but Cox read the script and thought she was a better fit for Monica . After reading for Monica instead , she won the role . Nancy McKeon also read for the part . Jennifer Aniston read for the part of Rachel after initially being considered for Monica . Her contract with the CBS TV series Muddling Through meant that any role with Friends would be in second position to the series . The CBS show was not scheduled to be broadcast until mid @-@ 1994 , after NBC 's announcement of whether Friends would be greenlit ; if Muddling Through became a ratings success and CBS enforced Aniston 's contract , Friends would have had to recast her . Within three days of first auditioning for Friends Aniston nonetheless got the role , because NBC Entertainment president Warren Littlefield correctly expected that Muddling Through would immediately fail . Crane and Kauffman wanted Joey to be " a guy 's guy " who loves " women , sports , women , New York , women " . The actors auditioned using the " grab a spoon " scene , and many arrived in character with " lots of chest showing " . As the Joey character was not developed much in the script , Matt LeBlanc just used his experience playing " this Italian , kind of dim character " from Vinny and Bobby . He had at least eight auditions for the part , and in his final one read with Aniston and Cox . 
 Chandler and Phoebe had originally been written as more secondary characters who were just there to provide humor around the other four ; Matthew Perry described Chandler in the pilot script as " an observer of other people 's lives " . They had become part of the core group by the time casting concluded . Crane believed that the part of Chandler , described in the character breakdown as " a droll , dry guy " , would be the easiest to cast , though it proved more difficult than he initially hoped . Perry had previously worked with Kauffman and Crane on an episode of Dream On , and requested an audition when he identified with the character . He was turned down due to his involvement as a cast member in LAX 2194 , a television pilot about airport baggage handlers in the future . After the producers of Friends saw LAX 2194 , it became clear to them that it would not be picked up for a series , and Perry was granted an audition . He read for the role near the end of the casting period and got it in under a week . Before Perry was cast , Craig Bierko was first choice for the role . Bierko was a friend of Perry 's , and Perry coached him for his audition to help him get to know what the Chandler character was like . Jon Cryer had also auditioned for the part . He was doing a play in London and read for a British casting director , though his audition tape did not arrive at Warner Bros. in time for him to be considered . 
 Many actresses who read for Phoebe arrived at the audition in character , wearing " bell bottoms and clunky shoes and nose rings " . Kathy Griffin and Jane Lynch auditioned for the role . Lisa Kudrow won the role because the producers liked her as Ursula , the waitress in Mad About You . She was second to be cast , though there was about a month between her and Schwimmer being signed on . Many of the actors seen by Moonves were " too theatrical " in performing comedy ; Crane described the six successful actors as being the only ones who " nailed " their parts . The six actors met for the first time altogether at the read @-@ through on April 28 , 1994 . John Allen Nelson and Clea Lewis guest @-@ star as Paul and Franny , Monica 's date and co @-@ worker respectively . Cynthia Mann appears as a Central Perk waitress . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 A dress rehearsal was held on May 2 , two days before taping . Several NBC executives watched the rehearsal and were concerned that Monica did not care enough about Paul to sleep with him on their first date . NBC West Coast president Don Ohlmeyer believed that the audience would perceive her as " a slut " . Crane , Kauffman and Warner Bros. executives disagreed , and surveyed the other people watching the rehearsal to support their position . Despite the audience agreeing with them , they had to take NBC 's considerations into account in case they lost the commission ; they rewrote Monica 's lines to show that she cared about Paul . NBC also wanted a scene removed that implied the supposedly @-@ impotent Paul was getting an erection , as it would violate network standards . Crane and Kauffman rewrote the scene and found they preferred the new version , as it made the scene " smart and subtler " . They sought to protect other parts of the script , some major and some minor ; NBC wanted two of the pilot 's three storylines downplayed to subplots , but the writers were adamant that all three should carry equal weight . They also favored not cutting the " Mr. Potato Head " line . Their final script draft was completed on May 3 . 
 The episode was taped on May 4 at Warner Bros. ' studios in Burbank , California . A total of eight hours of material was filmed ( two hours from each of the four cameras ) , which was edited down to 22 minutes under Bright 's supervision . Bright submitted it to NBC on May 10 , 72 hours before the fall schedule was announced . NBC ordered Bright to make further edits , which he completed at 1 a.m. on May 11 . On May 12 , NBC screened the finished pilot to focus groups , who gave positive but mixed reactions . The network announced the fall schedule on May 13 and ordered an additional 12 episodes of Friends for its first season . Crane and Kauffman immediately received telephone calls from writers ' agents who wanted to get their clients jobs on the series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was first broadcast on NBC on September 22 , 1994 in the 8 : 30 – 9 p.m. ( EST ) timeslot . It ranked as the fifteenth @-@ most @-@ watched television show of the week , scoring a 14 @.@ 7 / 23 Nielsen rating ( each point represented 954 @,@ 000 households ) and nearly 22 million viewers . 
 Critics likened the episode to Seinfeld and Ellen ; Tom Feran in The Plain Dealer wrote that it traded " vaguely and less successfully on the hanging @-@ out style of Seinfeld " , and Ann Hodges of the Houston Chronicle called it " the new Seinfeld wannabe , but it will never be as funny as Seinfeld . Even as Seinfeld is now , which isn 't as funny as it used to be " . Hodges criticized the " <unk> dull social circle " as " short to the point of painful in brainpower " . Robert Bianco in The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette wrote that the " constant comic bantering grows a little tired , just as it would if it ever actually happened in real life " , and questioned why the six characters had so much free time to talk about dates . In the Los Angeles Daily News , Ray Richmond , who had also seen the following two episodes , called the cast a " likeable , youth ensemble " with " good chemistry " . He added that while Friends was " one of the brighter comedies of the new season " , the pilot was " very weak " . Diane Holloway for the Austin American @-@ Statesman questioned Friends ' billing as a " sophisticated comedy " , writing , " What 's sophisticated about a guy who dreams his penis is a telephone ? " She called the scene where Monica discovers Paul 's impotence was a lie the least funny part of the episode , though conceded that the episode as a whole did have some funny moments . Robert P. Laurence wrote in The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune that " A lot happens , but you 'll still get the feeling you 've seen Friends before " , calling it " Seinfeld Plus Two . Or Ellen Plus Five . " In the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , Ginny Holbert rated the episode three stars , and wrote " The clever series [ ... ] stars an appealing group of actors who are just a bit funnier and better @-@ looking than your average friend " but that Joey and Rachel 's characteristics were under @-@ developed . 
 The Los Angeles Times called it " flat @-@ out the best comedy series of the new season " . Variety 's Tony Scott had optimistic hopes for the series ; he enjoyed the premise but was concerned that dialogue from the writers of Dream On should be " snappier " . Scott was also concerned that the Monica storyline set a bad example to younger viewers ; " Friends touts promiscuity and offers liberal samples of an openness that borders on empty @-@ headedness " . He singled out Cox and Schwimmer as the best actors of the ensemble . Robert Bianco was complimentary of Schwimmer , calling him " terrific " . He also praised the female leads , but wrote that Perry 's role as Chandler was " undefined " and that LeBlanc was " relying too much on the same brain @-@ dead stud routine that was already tired the last two times he tried it " . Entertainment Weekly rates the episode B + and states that " After 22 minutes , these six people are believably set up as lifelong buddies " . Ross 's line , " Do the words ' Billy , Don 't Be a Hero ' mean anything to you ? " is singled out as the best line of the episode . The authors of Friends Like Us : The Unofficial Guide to Friends call it a " good , solid start to the series " but " the regular cast ( particularly Perry and Schwimmer ) might be trying just a little too hard " . Schwimmer recalls enjoying the physical humor involving Ross , particularly the scene where Ross greets Rachel and opens an umbrella on her . 
 The episode was syndicated for the first time on September 21 , 1998 . Several deleted scenes were restored to the episode , bringing its total running time to 37 minutes , for a one @-@ hour timeslot . It gained a rating of 5 @.@ 8 / 10 , averaged across 40 stations . This made Friends the third @-@ highest @-@ rated off @-@ network syndicated sitcom to air at that time , behind Home Improvement and Seinfeld . 
 = Sierra Leone women 's national football team = 
 The Sierra Leone women 's national football team represents Sierra Leone in international women 's association football . The team is governed by the Sierra Leone Football Association and is part of the Confederation of African Football . Sierra Leone has played only four FIFA recognised matches , two in 1994 and two in 2010 . The country has under @-@ 17 and under @-@ 20 women 's national sides . The development of women 's football in Sierra Leone faces challenges present throughout the continent . Domestically , it faces its own issues including the lack of a women 's domestic competition and the decline in popularity of the sport among women . 
 = = History = = 
 Sierra Leone women 's national football team is nicknamed the Sierra Queens . In 1985 , almost no country in the world had a women 's national football team , including Sierra Leone who did not play their first matches until around 1994 when they participated in the qualification phase of the 1995 FIFA Women 's World Cup . In a game in Nigeria on 6 November 1994 , Sierra Leone women 's national football team lost 0 – 9 to Nigeria after being down 0 – 6 at the half . In a game in Freetown on 20 November 1994 , Sierra Leone women 's national football team lost 0 – 2 to Nigeria after being down 0 – 2 at the half . These two games represent half of all games the team has played in its history . The team 's other two games took place during the preliminary rounds of the 2010 Women 's Championship tournament in Africa , which was part of the Olympic qualification process , where Sierra Leone lost during the preliminary round once 2 – 3 to Guinea in Conakry on 7 March 2010 and tied Guinea 1 – 1 in Freetown on 20 March 2010 . Following this match , the team did not play an international match on any level for at least a year and did not participate 2011 All Africa Games . In March 2012 , Sierra Leone was ranked the 135th best in the world and the 26th best in Africa . They improved their ranking to 130th best in the world in June 2012 but at still at the bottom of the world rankings alongside 46 other women 's national teams . The team 's best ever rank was 128th , which was in 2010 , and their worst ever ranking was 136 , which they were ranked in 2011 . 
 = = = Under @-@ 17 national team = = = 
 Sierra Leone has a Sierra Leone women 's national under @-@ 17 football team . They were supposed to compete in the African Women U @-@ 17 Championship Qualifying Tournament 2010 . Togo won the first round because Sierra Leone withdrew from the competition . They competed in the CAF qualifiers for the FIFA U @-@ 17 World Cup that will be held in Azerbaijan in September 2012 . They did not advance out of their region . The team was supposed to play the Gambia women 's national under @-@ 17 football team in a qualifying match for the 2012 U @-@ 17 Qualifying Tournament . Sierra Leone lost the first leg in Banjul , Gambia 0 – 3 . The return match was delayed for 24 hours . The team 's head coach attributed the loss to poor refereeing . The game against Gambia was the country 's first junior national international match . The second match was one by Sierra Leone 3 – 1 . Gambia won the first match in 3 @-@ 0 in a game played in Banjul . The return match was delayed in for 24 hours and played in Makeni . Gambia beat Sierra Leone to qualify for the final round with an aggregate score of 4 @-@ 3 . 
 The team is coached by Hannah Williams , while Tamba Moses was the assistant coach . Squad members included Cecilia Bangura , <unk> Kamara , Hannah Conteh , Haja Kamara , <unk> Sesay , Sarah Bangura , <unk> Turay , <unk> <unk> , <unk> Max @-@ Macauley , Aminata <unk> , Zainab Sesay , Alice <unk> , Adama Sesay , <unk> Kamara , <unk> Kamara , <unk> <unk> , Nasu <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . The cost of travel for the team was paid for by <unk> , the country 's only cement company . The company 's managing director rationalised the decision to pay saying , " We received the request from the <unk> at a very short notice but we decided to help because we want to see female football grow from the grass @-@ roots level and also to meet our corporate social responsibility . We are happy about helping out the female team and we hope they 'll eliminate their Gambian counterpart . " Members of the under @-@ 17 team are drawn from the Airtel Rising Stars tournament . 
 = = = Under @-@ 20 national team = = = 
 Sierra Leone has a Sierra Leone women 's national under @-@ 20 football team . They competed in the 2010 / 2011 FIFA U @-@ 20 CAF Women 's World Cup qualifying competition . They did not advance to the U20 Women 's World Cup . They competed in the preliminary rounds of the 2010 CAF FIFA U20 World Cup . In the preliminary round , they did not have to play as <unk> withdrew from the tournament . In the first round , they were supposed to play Nigeria but withdrew from the tournament . They were supposed to compete in the 2010 African Women U @-@ 20 Championship Qualifying competition meeting Togo in the first round , but Togo earned a walk over win against Sierra Leone . Sierra Leone eventually withdrew from the competition . The announcement was made a week after the under @-@ 17 lost 0 – 3 to Gambia . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Early development of the women 's game at the time colonial powers brought football to Sierra Leone and the continent was limited , as colonial powers in the region tended to take concepts of patriarchy and women 's participation in sport with them to local cultures that already had similar concepts already embedded in them . Other factors on the continent impact the development of the game , including limited access to education , poverty among women in the wider society , and fundamental inequality present in the society that occasionally allows for female specific human rights abuses . When quality players are developed in Africa , they often leave for greater opportunities elsewhere Continent wide ; most of the funding for women 's football in a country and for the women 's national team comes from FIFA , not the national football association . Future success for women 's football in Africa is dependent on improved facilities and access by women to these facilities . Attempting to commercialise the game is not the solution , as demonstrated by the existence of many youth and women 's football camps held on the continent that have resulted in improved national team performance as players progressed through the system . 
 The United Nations ranked Sierra Leone 180 out of 187 on their Human Development Index . One of the major factors in this low world ranking was gender inequality . Despite a civil war in the country , football remained important to many young people , regardless of gender , in the country . The reason was that football was seen as one way of understanding life by watching what happened on the pitch . In 2007 , a football administrator from the country is in charge of the women 's football committee in the West African Football Union . In 2011 , Brazilian women 's football superstar Marta visited the country and met with the national team . Her visit was part of the United Nations Development Programme where Marta is a Goodwill Ambassador . In 2011 , there was no national women 's league in the country . In 2012 , Girls Football League was launched by the Craig Bellamy Foundation after a pilot programme in 2010 / 2012 in Makeni that included four teams . Girls participating in the programme are given scholarships to attend , with 93 % attending school regularly while involved with the programme , a much higher percentage than the national average for female school attendance . 
 Women are football spectators , watching live games in rural and remote areas of the country . Rights to broadcast the 2011 Women 's World Cup in the country were bought by the African Union of Broadcasting and Supersport International . The popularity of the sport is declining in the country for women . 
 = Warrior @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Warrior @-@ class cruiser was a class of four armoured cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . After commissioning , all four sister ships were assigned to the Channel and Home Fleets until 1913 when Warrior was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet . After the start of World War I in August 1914 , Warrior participated in the pursuit of the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben and light cruiser SMS Breslau and her three sisters were assigned to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron of the Grand Fleet . Warrior joined the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Grand Fleet in late 1914 . Neither squadron participated in any of the naval battles in the North Sea in 1915 . Natal was destroyed by a magazine explosion in late 1915 and only two of the ships participated in the Battle of Jutland in 1916 . Cochrane was not engaged during the battle , but Warrior was heavily damaged and sank the following morning . 
 Achilles was assigned to blockade duty after the battle and sank a German commerce raider in early 1917 . Both of the surviving sisters became convoy escorts in 1917 before returning home in 1918 . Cochrane supported the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War in mid @-@ 1918 . She ran aground in the River Mersey in late 1918 and broke in two . Achilles became a training ship in late 1918 and was sold for scrap in 1921 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The four armoured cruisers of the 1903 – 1904 Naval Programme were originally intended to be repeats of the preceding Duke of Edinburgh class , but complaints from the fleet that the low placement of the secondary armament of earlier ships of this type meant that the guns could not be fought in anything other than a dead calm sea caused the issue to be reviewed by the Board of Admiralty in late 1903 and early 1904 . Based on the Duke of Edinburghs , the Warriors were expected to be lighter , which allowed weight to be used for changing the secondary armament . Officers from the fleet suggested changing the armament to four 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 191 mm ) guns in single @-@ gun turrets raised to the upper deck . As the ships had only just begun construction , the change would cost a total of £ 250 @,@ 000 for all four ships and the Admiralty approved the change on 30 March 1904 . 
 The Warrior @-@ class ships were designed to displace 13 @,@ 550 long tons ( 13 @,@ 770 t ) , but they proved to be lighter as built , even after the change in armament , displacing 13 @,@ 200 – 13 @,@ 350 long tons ( 13 @,@ 410 – 13 @,@ 560 t ) at normal load and 14 @,@ 500 long tons ( 14 @,@ 700 t ) ( fully loaded ) . The ships had an overall length of 505 feet 6 inches ( 154 @.@ 1 m ) and a length between perpendiculars of 480 ft ( 146 @.@ 3 m ) . They had a beam of 73 feet 6 inches ( 22 @.@ 4 m ) and a deep draught of 26 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 1 m ) forward and 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 4 m ) aft . 
 The ships ' complement was 770 officers and enlisted men . They were much steadier gun platforms than their predecessors with a metacentric height of 2 @.@ 75 feet ( 0 @.@ 8 m ) So much so that Achilles and Natal were the best @-@ shooting ships in the fleet in 1907 and 1909 respectively . Very good sea boats , according to naval historian Oscar Parkes , " they gained the reputation of being the best cruisers we ( the British ) ever built . " 
 The cruisers were powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which produced a total of 23 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 17 @,@ 520 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . The engines were powered by steam from 19 Yarrow boilers and six cylindrical boilers that had a working pressure of 225 psi ( 1 @,@ 551 kPa ; 16 kgf / cm2 ) . The ships carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 050 long tons ( 2 @,@ 080 t ) of coal and an additional 600 long tons ( 610 t ) of fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full capacity , they could steam for 7 @,@ 960 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 740 km ; 9 @,@ 160 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Warriors ' main armament consisted of six 45 @-@ calibre BL 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch Mk X guns in single @-@ gun turrets . The guns were distributed in two centreline turrets , one each fore and one aft of the superstructure , and four wing turrets disposed in the corners about the funnels . The centreline turrets could traverse a total of 285 ° while the wing turrets were limited to 120 ° on the broadside due to muzzle blast . The gun had an elevation range of − 5 ° to + 15 ° . The 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) shell weighed 380 pounds ( 172 @.@ 4 kg ) and was fired at a maximum muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 778 ft / s ( 847 m / s ) . This gave it a range of 15 @,@ 500 yards ( 14 @,@ 200 m ) at maximum elevation . The gun 's rate of fire was about three rounds per minute and the ships carried 100 rounds for each gun . 
 Their secondary armament of four 50 @-@ calibre BL 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk II guns was arranged in four turrets amidships . The guns could only traverse about 110 ° on the broadside . They had an elevation range of − 7 @.@ 5 ° to + 15 ° that gave them a range of 14 @,@ 238 yards ( 13 @,@ 019 m ) at an elevation with their 200 @-@ pound ( 90 @.@ 7 kg ) shell . The guns had a rate of fire of about four rounds per minute and each gun was provided with 100 rounds . 
 Twenty @-@ four Vickers quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 3 @-@ pounder guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats , six on turret roofs and eighteen in the superstructure , all on pivot mounts . These guns were too small to be useful against the torpedo boats before they got within torpedo range . They fired a 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) shell that weighed 3 @.@ 3 pounds ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) and was fired at a maximum muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 587 ft / s ( 789 m / s ) . This gave it a range of 7 @,@ 550 yards ( 6 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of + 20 ° . 250 rounds were carried for each gun . 
 The ships also mounted three submerged 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes . They carried a total of eighteen torpedoes in addition to the six 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedoes that could be used by the two 45 @-@ foot ( 13 @.@ 7 m ) steam pinnaces . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The Warrior @-@ class ships had a 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) waterline armour belt of Krupp cemented armour that covered 260 feet ( 79 @.@ 2 m ) of the hull amidships . It covered the side of the ship up to the upper deck , a height of 14 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 42 m ) above the waterline and reached 4 feet 10 inches ( 1 @.@ 47 m ) below it . Between the central citadel and the bow , the belt armour was 4 inches ( 102 mm ) thick and it extended to the stern with a thickness of 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . Transverse bulkheads six inches thick protected the citadel from raking fire . 
 The faces of the main gun turrets were 7 @.@ 5 inches thick with 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 140 mm ) sides and a 2 @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) roof . The secondary gun turrets were a newer design and had armour 6 – 8 @-@ inch ( 152 – 203 mm ) thick and the same roof thickness as the other turrets . The barbettes were protected by six inches of armour as were the ammunition hoists , although the armour for those thinned to three inches between the armour belt . The thickness of the lower deck was only .75 inches ( 19 mm ) except for a patch of 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 38 mm ) armour over the steering gear and another 2 inches ( 51 mm ) thick over the engine cylinders . The sides of the conning tower were 10 inches ( 254 mm ) thick . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 Only the modifications for Cochrane are known in detail , but it is likely that her sisters received the same modifications at some point . The funnels proved to be too short in service and they were raised around 1912 to keep the superstructure free of smoke in a following wind . A single Hotchkiss QF 6 @-@ pounder anti @-@ aircraft gun on a high @-@ angle mounting was mounted on the quarterdeck in 1915 . It had a maximum depression of 8 ° and a maximum elevation of 60 ° . The gun fired a 6 @-@ pound ( 2 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 765 ft / s ( 538 m / s ) at a rate of fire of 20 rounds per minute . They had a maximum ceiling of 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) , but an effective range of only 1 @,@ 200 yards ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) . It was replaced by a QF 3 inch 20 cwt guns on a high @-@ angle mount in 1916 . This gun had a maximum depression of 10 ° and a maximum elevation of 90 ° . It fired a 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ( 760 m / s ) at a rate of 12 – 14 rounds per minute . It had a maximum effective ceiling of 23 @,@ 500 ft ( 7 @,@ 200 m ) . A pair of Vickers QF three @-@ pounders on high @-@ angle mountings were probably installed amidships during 1915 – 16 . They could elevate to + 80 ° and depress to -5 ° . This gun had a rate of fire of 25 rounds per minute and a maximum ceiling of 15 @,@ 000 ft ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) , but an effective range of only 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) . 
 The guns on top of Cochrane 's centreline 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch turrets were removed in 1915 – 16 . The aftermost 3 @-@ pounder guns on the superstructure were removed during 1917 as well as the guns on top of the forward 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch wing turrets . This reduced her total to twenty 3 @-@ pounder guns , excluding the AA guns . Cochrane 's foremast was converted to a tripod mast to support the weight of a fire @-@ control director in 1917 , but the director was not actually fitted until August 1918 . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 After completion , the four sisters were assigned to the cruiser squadrons of the Channel and Home Fleets . Natal and Cochrane escorted the royal yacht in 1911 – 12 for the newly crowned King George V 's trip to India to attend the Delhi Durbar and Natal carried the body of the U.S. Ambassador to Great Britain , Whitelaw Reid , back to New York in December 1912 . Warrior was transferred to the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet in 1913 . 
 At the beginning of World War I , Natal , Achilles and Cochrane were assigned to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron of the Grand Fleet and Warrior was in the Mediterranean . The latter ship was involved in the pursuit of the Goeben and Breslau , but the squadron commander , Rear Admiral Ernest Troubridge , declined to engage the German ships . Warrior remained in the Mediterranean until she was assigned the Grand Fleet in December 1914 and rejoined the 1st Cruiser Squadron . The other three ships remained with the 2nd Cruiser Squadron for most of their careers and did not participate in any of the early naval battles of the war . Natal was sunk by a magazine explosion near Cromarty on 30 December 1915 , killing an estimated 390 – 421 persons on board . Most of her wreck was slowly salvaged over the decades until the remnants were demolished in the 1970s so they were no longer a hazard to navigation . 
 Achilles was refitting in May 1916 and did not participate in the Battle of Jutland although both of her surviving sisters did . Warrior was heavily damaged by German capital ships during the battle , losing 71 crewmen killed and 36 wounded . She took on a lot of water and foundered the following morning after her crew was evacuated . The 2nd Cruiser Squadron was not engaged during the battle and did not fire a shot . Achilles was assigned blockade duties in the North Sea after the battle and sank the German raider Leopard in early 1917 . Both of the surviving ships were briefly transferred to the North America and West Indies Station in late 1917 for convoy escort duties before returning home in early 1918 . Achilles began a lengthy refit in February 1918 while Cochrane was based in Murmansk in mid @-@ 1918 during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . She became stranded in the Mersey on 14 November 1918 and broke in two . The wreck was broken up in place by June 1919 . Achilles , the last surviving sister , became a training ship in late 1918 and was sold for scrap in May 1921 . 
 = Justin De Fratus = 
 Justin Andrew De Fratus ( born October 21 , 1987 ) is an American professional baseball relief pitcher in the Washington Nationals organization . De Fratus grew up in Oxnard , California and played baseball in high school prior to playing at Ventura College . The Philadelphia Phillies selected him in the 11th round of the 2007 Major League Baseball draft . He methodically moved his way up through the Phillies system , spending about one year at each level from rookie to Class A , and then moving through two levels per season in 2010 and 2011 . In 2011 , De Fratus made his MLB debut and , by 2013 , he was a regular member of the Phillies bullpen after a few years of splitting time between the major leagues and Triple @-@ A. In 2014 , he used his slider to " dominate the league " , and establish himself as a reliable reliever capable of pitching in late @-@ inning situations . 
 De Fratus has a two @-@ pitch repertoire that consists of a fastball and a slider , the latter of which is his out pitch . He embraces a propensity to work quickly on the mound , and use a lower arm slot . Off the field , De Fratus is a member of the Roman Catholic church , and uses baseball to strengthen his faith . He sees evangelism as a duty of Christians , and would like to go to seminary when he finishes his baseball career . 
 = = Early life = = 
 De Fratus attended Rio Mesa High School in Oxnard , California , from which he graduated in 2005 ; he was a fan of the Los Angeles Dodgers . His high school coach , David <unk> , asserted that he could pitch in the major leagues for a long time , saying , " He definitely has the stuff to pitch in the majors . Justin has the stuff , but he also has the confidence . The odds were against him being drafted in the 11th round out of Ventura College . " De Fratus was the first Rio Mesa player to reach the majors during <unk> 's tenure . He went on to attend Ventura College where , like at Rio Mesa , he was a starting pitcher . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 The Phillies selected De Fratus with the 353rd overall pick in the 11th round of the 2007 Major League Baseball draft , and assigned him to the Gulf Coast League Phillies , the Phillies ' rookie level minor league affiliate , with whom he went 2 – 3 with a 4 @.@ 30 earned run average ( ERA ) in 10 games ( eight starts ) . The next season , 2008 , he advanced to the Williamsport Crosscutters , and went 6 – 5 with a 3 @.@ 67 ERA in 14 starts . He led the New York – Penn League in innings pitched , pitching at least six in almost 65 % of his starts ; the Phillies named him their minor league player of the week in mid @-@ June . Before the 2009 season , at the decision of Phillies minor league pitching coordinator Gorman <unk> and assistant general manager Chuck <unk> , De Fratus became predominantly a relief pitcher so he was " not sitting down four games out of the week " and could be a more focused pitcher . He took his first crack at relief pitching with the Lakewood Blue Claws , and ultimately began to flourish , earning Phillies minor league player of the week honors , and a spot in the South Atlantic League all @-@ star game . On the season , he posted a 5 – 6 record with a 3 @.@ 19 ERA in 36 games ( though still with 12 starts ) . After the season , he participated in the Florida Instructional League . He had a successful 2010 season , splitting time between the High @-@ A Clearwater Threshers and Double @-@ A Reading Phillies , and posting a 1 @.@ 94 ERA with 21 saves in 49 games . 
 = = = Major leagues = = = 
 = = = = Philadelphia Phillies = = = = 
 De Fratus began the 2011 season with Double @-@ A Reading , and was promoted to Triple @-@ A Lehigh Valley on June 16 after much success in Reading . He recorded seven saves with Lehigh Valley , and was named the Phillies minor league player of the week in late August , before making his MLB debut with the Philadelphia Phillies on September 18 , 2011 , after joining the team as a September callup . During his debut , an opposing batter fouled a ball off , and De Fratus 's brother caught the ball . Ultimately , it was a scoreless debut , and he went on to pitch four more big @-@ league games that season . At the end of the season , Baseball America rated him the seventh @-@ best prospect in the Phillies ' minor league system . Before 2012 , like in 2011 , he was given an opportunity to open the season in the Phillies bullpen , but ended up injuring his shoulder , and missing much of the season . He called the injury a " beat down " both physically and mentally , but he returned and pitched with the big @-@ league club in September . At the conclusion of the season , he was mentally exhausted and used golf to help " divert " his attention from baseball , playing over 50 rounds in the offseason ; he credited golf with helping him overcome the mental exhaustion he faced after the season , and entered 2013 in a relaxed frame of mind . 
 By 2013 , De Fratus was a regular member of the bullpen , pitching in 58 games with the big @-@ league club ; he performed well enough to be considered likely to open the 2014 season firmly implanted in the Phillies bullpen . He broke spring training 2014 with the major league team , but after four appearances , he was optioned back to the minor leagues to work on commanding his pitches , notwithstanding the Phillies ' dearth of other right @-@ handed relieving options . While at Lehigh Valley , he spent a significant amount of time reviewing film from his outings in 2011 and 2012 , from which he learned that he had a faster pace when pitching , a more aggressive pitching style , and a lower arm slot . Just under a month later , in late May , he was recalled to the major league team , and had much success ( 11 consecutive scoreless appearances ) as part of a Phillies ' bullpen that drastically improved from the beginning of the season , and , statistically , was among the best in the major leagues in early June . De Fratus ' drastically improved command helped him halve his career walk rate – he walked just 5 @.@ 5 % of batters he faced in 2014 , which contributed to a " breakout " season . Although he was overshadowed by the emergence of fellow relief pitcher Ken Giles , De Fratus established himself as a reliable late @-@ innings reliever for the future . 
 = = = = Seattle Mariners = = = = 
 A free agent following the 2015 season , De Fratus signed a one @-@ year contract with the Seattle Mariners on December 2 . He was released on March 16 , 2016 , and re @-@ signed to a minor league contract the following day . 
 = = = = Texas Rangers = = = = 
 On June 11 , 2016 , De Fratus was traded to the Texas Rangers . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 A fastball and a slider comprise De Fratus 's pitching repertoire ; his fastball averages about 93 miles per hour ( 150 km / h ) , but occasionally touches 95 miles per hour ( 153 km / h ) , while his slider is about 10 miles per hour ( 16 km / h ) slower than that . His slider was able to " dominate the league " in 2014 , and although he does not total as many strikeouts as some relievers , he has established himself as a dependable piece in the Phillies ' bullpen . Early in his career , De Fratus aspired to be a closer , but after realizing that an " all @-@ or @-@ nothing " mentality was not necessarily conducive to success , he sought to relax more and focus on being a quality setup reliever , projecting confidence on the mound . Especially in the Phillies ' young bullpen , the need for reliable late @-@ innings relievers was great , underscoring the importance of De Fratus 's emergence . He is most successful when he utilizes a lower arm angle , and works quickly on the mound . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 De Fratus is a devout Roman Catholic who , though he was raised in a large Catholic family , struggled with his faith after an injury early in his career , but ultimately determined the injury was a gift from God to help him better understand his faith : " I really feel that the setback was God telling me , ‘ Hey you are not done . You are not done yet figuring out what you need to figure out , and I am going to give you a little more time . ’ There is a big reason why that injury happened and I feel that I used it as best as I could have . " He noted that he would like to take classes at a seminary to help proselytize to others . Early in his professional career , he struggled to find fellow Catholics , and noted that most of his teammates were either Protestants or not religious . Moreover , in many small towns that house minor league teams , there are no Catholic churches , so De Fratus found it easy to slide away from leading a Catholic lifestyle . However , upon realizing that there is more to life than material success , he discovered a need for God , and has thus developed his faith . Aside from his faith , he enjoys writing and recording music , and playing the guitar . He has two brothers , the older of whom , Steve , played in the minor leagues , and the younger of whom , Chris , caught a foul ball during De Fratus 's major league debut . 
 During the offseason preceding the 2015 season , De Fratus became involved in some controversy involving Phillies blogger Bill Baer and the Black Lives Matter campaign when he tweeted , " I 'm sick of this black vs white and men vs women garbage that 's been going on . We 're just people . # <unk> , " to which Baer responded with a scathing column on Crashburn Alley , a blog affiliated with ESPN , in which he stated that De Fratus is " complicit in perpetuating a system which inflicts violence on those who didn ’ t have the luxury of being born white and male and straight and in an economically @-@ stable area . " Subsequently , De Fratus penned a retort to Baer via Facebook , in which he commented , " I sincerely hope that you will take the time to talk to me personally next time before you decide to hide behind your computer screen and criticize me , my upbringing and my character based on 140 characters . I do not apologize for anything I have said . I have a platform and I WILL use it for the agenda of love . " 
 = George P. Burdell = 
 George P. Burdell is a fictitious student officially enrolled at Georgia Tech in 1927 as a practical joke . Since then , he has supposedly received all undergraduate degrees offered by Georgia Tech , served in the military , gotten married , and served on Mad magazine 's Board of Directors , among other accomplishments . Burdell at one point led the online poll for Time 's 2001 Person of the Year award . He has evolved into an important and notorious campus tradition ; all Georgia Tech students learn about him at orientation . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 George P. Burdell was created by William Edgar " Ed " Smith , BS in Ceramic Engineering , 1927 . Smith conceived the idea for Burdell when he received two Georgia Tech enrollment forms . In a 1977 Atlanta Newspaper interview , Smith said that he originally intended to enroll his Academy of Richmond County principal , George P. Butler , but instead changed the last name to Burdell , the maiden name of his best friend 's mother . 
 After enrolling him , Smith signed Burdell up for all the same classes he had . Smith would do all schoolwork twice , changing it slightly to avoid professors catching his sham . When he had a test , he would take it twice and then turn it in under both names . By 1930 , the school had awarded Burdell a bachelor 's degree , and a few years later awarded the fictitious student a master 's degree . The college listed him as an official alumnus , even though his name has remained on the active student rolls . In 1930 , the ANAK Society , Georgia Tech 's oldest secret society , offered Burdell membership . 
 An early prank to use Burdell 's name came after someone was snubbed by a fraternity he had intended to join . " That irritated [ him ] . He went out and ordered a truckload of furniture to be delivered <unk> to that fraternity . Of course , the order was made by George P. Burdell . " 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 During World War II , service members continued the hoax , with Burdell 's name appearing on various fronts . For example , he was listed on the flight crew of a B @-@ 17 bomber , flying twelve missions over Europe with the 8th Air Force in England , until a Georgia Tech graduate became the new operations officer for the crew , recognized the name on the flight log , and ended the charade . 
 = = = Postwar = = = 
 In 1958 , members of the senior class of Agnes Scott College announced the wedding engagement of Burdell and fictional Agnes Scott student Ramona Cartwright in the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution . The 50th wedding anniversary , of " Mr. and Mrs. George P. Burdell from Atlanta " was acknowledged in the September 23 , 2006 broadcast of A Prairie Home Companion . 
 George P. Burdell is listed as a basketball letterman from 1956 to 1958 in the Georgia Tech Basketball yearbook . In 1969 , Georgia Tech computerized its class registration , believing it had successfully found a way to keep students from registering Burdell for class that semester . As it turned out , hackers registered him for every class in the Institute that quarter , over 3 @,@ 000 credit hours . He was subsequently re @-@ enrolled several times , including in 1975 and 1980 . 
 The publishers of Mad magazine listed Burdell as a member of its Board of Directors from 1969 until 1981 . In 1991 a check from Kraft Foods bore the signature " George P. Burdell " . When Time magazine was attempting to select their Person of the Year for 2001 , George Burdell was the leading candidate ( holding at least 57 % of the votes ) until the magazine removed him from the running . Credit cards have been issued in his name . 
 WREK , the Georgia Tech student radio station , lists him as a staff member , and he is credited for playing baritone on the 1995 album Jesus Christ Superstar : A Resurrection , which was made in Atlanta by musicians from the local alternative rock scene . In 2000 , Burdell was named an alternate delegate to the Democratic National Convention from Georgia . Burdell was credited as a member of the choir of the 2006 album There is a Place . George 's fictitious son , George P. Burdell Junior , has been a proctor for several classes at Georgia Tech . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Burdell is a campus icon at Georgia Tech , and incoming freshmen are introduced to him as one of the greatest alumni to graduate from the school . George P. Burdell is often paged over the public @-@ address system during football games and also at airports , bars , and hotels . Georgia Tech students or alumni often use his name as an alias when they do not want to disclose their real name . There is a store in Georgia Tech 's student center named " Burdell 's " . 
 During a speech made by US President Barack Obama being held at Georgia Tech in the McCamish Pavilion on March 10 , 2015 , the president jokingly indicated that he was supposed to be introduced by George P. Burdell , but no one could find George . 
 = Typhoon Utor ( 2006 ) = 
 Typhoon Utor , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Seniang , swept through the central Philippines in December 2006 , exacerbating the damage left behind by previous Philippine typhoon strikes that year . Residual moisture from the tropical cyclone indirectly contributed to extensive flooding in Malaysia . Utor originated from an area of disturbed weather that organized into a tropical depression on December 7 west @-@ southwest of Yap . The cyclone steadily progressed westward while gradually intensifying , reaching tropical storm intensity late on December 7 . On December 9 and the ensuing two days , Utor crossed the central Philippines and reached typhoon strength before weakening somewhat upon entry into the South China Sea . Reintensification ensued afterwards , and Utor reached its peak intensity on December 13 with maximum sustained winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) shortly after regaining typhoon strength . However , wind shear and dry air began to take its toll on Utor thereafter , quickly weakening the storm until its dissipation on December 15 . 
 Due to the destruction wrought by Typhoon Durian just weeks prior , preparations began in earnest in the Philippines . Over 91 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from areas at risk , primarily from Albay . Two major summits to be held in Cebu were postponed as a result of the forecast inclement weather . In addition , recovery efforts for victims of Durian had to be suspended and all domestic flights in the Philippines were cancelled . Utor 's impacts in the central Philippines were extensive , with 30 casualties reported and the damage toll reaching US $ 15 @.@ 8 million . Widespread power outages affected the entirety of Eastern Visayas . Numerous ships sunk as a result of rough seas generated by the typhoon , including a ferry carrying 104 passengers and crew . Following the storm , relief agencies began to allocate resources to those affected by the typhoon , in turn also adding to relief efforts for the three Philippine typhoons which preceded Utor . <unk> efforts also took place in Vietnam , Thailand , and Malaysia , while the Paracel Islands sustained marked damage but no fatalities . Although the storm mostly dissipated in the South China Sea , Utor 's remnant moisture later contributed in part to Peninsular Malaysia 's worst flood event in recorded history , as copious amounts of precipitation fell over a short , four @-@ day period . Eight people were killed by the floods which were worst in Kota Tinggi and Segamat District . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The predecessor to Typhoon Utor was first noted by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) as a cluster of thunderstorms southeast of Chuuk on December 2 . Over the next few days , a center of circulation accompanied by intermittent shower activity began to develop in the presence of favorable conditions . At 00 : 00 UTC on December 7 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) determined that the disturbance had become sufficiently organized to be considered a tropical depression ; at the time the cyclone was centered 175 km ( 110 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Yap . Tracking westward under the influence of a powerful subtropical ridge to its north , the depression strengthened into a tropical storm at 18 : 00 UTC . In accordance , the storm was given the name Utor ; this name had been submitted by the United States and means " squall line " . 
 Utor 's development following its naming was slow , but quickened as the tropical storm neared the Philippines . The tropical cyclone reached the southeastern coast of Samar by 06 : 00 UTC on December 9 and began tracking through the central Philippine archipelago over the next two days . Despite its interaction with the nearby islands , Utor continued to strengthen without much impediment and reached typhoon strength in the Visayan Sea at 12 : 00 UTC that day . Twelve hours later , the typhoon attained an initial peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 955 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 20 inHg ) in the Sibuyan Sea according to the JMA . The JTWC analyzed an intensity of ( 185 km / h ) 115 mph at that time . By 12 : 00 UTC on December 10 , Utor had emerged into the South China Sea . 
 Although Utor tracked back over water on December 10 , the storm began to weaken due to increasing wind shear and dry air from the west . As a result , the JMA downgraded Utor to severe tropical storm intensity upon its emergence into the South China Sea . Despite these hindering conditions , the storm 's improved outflow was sufficient enough to enable redevelopment . At 18 : 00 UTC on December 11 , the JMA once again upgraded the system to typhoon strength southeast of Hainan . Intensification continued until Utor peaked with winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 945 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 91 inHg ) the next day . This strength was held for only twelve hours before Utor 's outflow began to succumb to the wind shear and dry air stemming from the monsoonal flow it had previously suppressed . Traveling in a tight clockwise loop , the typhoon rapidly weakened on December 13 ; by the following day Utor was a minimal tropical storm . At 06 : 00 UTC on December 14 , the storm degenerated into a tropical depression and continued to execute a small anticyclonic loop before dissipating on December 15 . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 Although the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) did not recommend their delay , both the 2006 ASEAN and East Asia summits in Cebu City were postponed due to the threat of Utor impacting the city ; officials denied allegations that the postponements were instead due to a possible terrorist attack . This was the first time than an ASEAN summit had been postponed due to inclement weather . Potentially hazardous conditions also delayed humanitarian aid to victims of Typhoon Durian , which struck the Philippines in late November . The first Public Storm Warning Signals for the Philippines were issued by the PAGASA on December 8 for several islands in the central Philippines . The third level of the four @-@ tier warning system was issued for Samar , Leyte , and <unk> . With landfall imminent on December 9 , 15 @,@ 000 people were evacuated to temporary evacuation shelters from around 12 villages . This figure increased to 59 @,@ 000 people as landfall occurred and later to 91 @,@ 121 with the storm passing over the Philippines . Most of the evacuees were from Albay due to fears of deadly mudslides and lahars associated with Mount Mayon as witnessed during Typhoon Durian . In addition , the Philippines Office of Civil Defense considered relocating Typhoon Durian refugees in the Bicol Region to special " holding areas " . Other domestic flights were also cancelled . 
 Utor caused extensive power outages in Cebu , Leyte , and Boracay , resulting in widespread loss of telecommunication . A single electric pole in northern Cebu caught fire during the storm , cutting out power to eight peripheral towns . Downtown Tacloban also suffered a blackout . Off of Boracay , a boat operator was killed after their ship capsized . Another 67 ships , which consisted of speedboats and ferries , sunk during the storm 's passage . Buildings were unroofed and trees were torn apart on the island , littering its beaches with debris . A barge was forced by large waves into the pier at San Agustin , Romblon , resulting in the spilling of 25 @,@ 000 L ( 6 @,@ 600 gal ) of diesel fuel . Two children were killed in Tacloban and Capiz as a result of falling trees ; an additional three people in Capiz were feared to have drowned due to floods . Two thousand people became stranded after the Philippine Coast Guard cancelled the operation of 43 ferry services . Similarly , 8 @,@ 000 people became stranded at seaports after the coast guard barred vessels from sailing . Extensive damage occurred in Occidental Mindoro , where 422 homes were destroyed and an additional 1 @,@ 421 damaged . Rough seas caused the outriggers on a ferry between Batangas and Puerto Galera , Oriental Mindoro to break apart , causing the ship to begin disintegrating offshore . However , the 104 passengers and crew on board were able to escape and were later rescued . Further north in southern Luzon , roads and bridges were rendered impassable after sustaining damage . 
 A state of emergency was declared for Aklan , where property damage equated to ₱ 51 million ( US $ 1 million ) . The Central Visayas region of the Philippines suffered the worst impacts , with a damage cost of ₱ 345 @.@ 2 million ( US $ 7 million ) , primarily to agriculture . Following the storm 's passage , chapters of the Philippine Red Cross assisted in relief efforts in impacted areas . The Philippine Department of Social Welfare and Development allocated ₱ 27 @.@ 7 million ( US $ 600 @,@ 000 ) to relief efforts . Food and sheltering were provided to 2 @,@ 615 people in three provinces by the Adventist Development and Relief Agency . Many localized relief agencies donated sacks of rice to impacted residents . The United Nations appealed for US $ 46 million for use in recovery efforts following Utor in addition to the three Philippine typhoons which preceded it . Overall , the impacts of Utor killed 30 people and injured 44 in the Philippines . Another eight people were never accounted for . The damage toll wrought by Utor amounted to US $ 15 @.@ 8 million . Furthermore , 36 @,@ 542 houses were damaged by Utor , of which 9 @,@ 439 were destroyed . Capiz and Aklan were the areas that sustained the most residential damage . People who were evacuated out of hazardous regions in advance of Utor were able to return home beginning on December 18 , nine days after initial landfall . 
 = = = Elsewhere in Southeastern Asia = = = 
 Thailand 's Royal Irrigation Department released water from local dams in order to mitigate a potential flood event caused by Utor . Flooded areas of the western half of the country drained floodwaters into the Chao Phraya River . Off of Malaysia , a rough sea warning for coastal stretches of Sabah and northern Sarawak due to the threat of high wind @-@ swept waves caused by Utor . In Vietnam , delegations were sent to coastal areas to guide residents in preparing for Utor and secure fishing boats , while troops were sent to reinforce buildings and fortify sea defenses . Preparations for " mass evacuations " also went into effect , particularly along Vietnam 's central coastline . Border guards called back 3 @,@ 785 fishing vessels with over 21 @,@ 000 fishermen to shore . Aircraft , automobiles , canoes , and ships were dispatched into threatened areas to disseminate information regarding the typhoon . Similar precautionary measures took place in Hainan , where more than 20 @,@ 000 fishing boats were called back to shore . Forty @-@ nine people were evacuated out of the Paracel Islands due to the threat of the typhoon . 
 As Utor was traversing the South China Sea , a fishing boat became stranded near <unk> Reef in the Paracel Islands ; the occupants were rescued by a rescue ship operated by the Hainan Maritime Bureau , though five were flown to hospitals for medical treatment . A total of 140 sheds on the islands of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Bei Dao were flattened by the passing typhoon , while a ship at harbor sank and five others ran aground . On the Qilian Yu island sub @-@ group , 98 fishermen on the islands were rescued by the Nanhai Rescue Bureau following days without clean water and food supplies . Utor had destroyed all of the islands ' bunkhouses , resulting in requests for rescue . 
 Moisture associated with Utor was partially blamed for heavy rains which produced extensive flooding in Peninsular Malaysia ; these floods were the first in a long string of flood events that would plague the region until February 2007 . The tropical moisture acted in tandem with wind shear and a monsoonal flow to produce continuous precipitation over the Malaysian states of Pahang , Johor , and Malacca . Rainfall peaked at 567 @.@ 8 mm ( 22 @.@ 35 in ) in Bandar <unk> Shah over a four @-@ day period , with similar rainfall totals occurring elsewhere . These floods were considered the worst in the history of southern Malaysia . The worst @-@ affected areas were Segamat and Kota Tinggi , where both towns were inaccessible by land after all main roads leading to those towns were flooded . Eight fatalities resulted from the historical flooding . 
 = Tropical cyclone = 
 A tropical cyclone is a rapidly rotating storm system characterized by a low @-@ pressure center , a closed low @-@ level atmospheric circulation , strong winds , and a spiral arrangement of thunderstorms that produce heavy rain . Depending on its location and strength , a tropical cyclone is referred to by names such as hurricane ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) , typhoon / <unk> / , tropical storm , cyclonic storm , tropical depression , and simply cyclone . 
 Tropical cyclones typically form over large bodies of relatively warm water . They derive their energy through the evaporation of water from the ocean surface , which ultimately <unk> into clouds and rain when moist air rises and cools to saturation . This energy source differs from that of mid @-@ latitude cyclonic storms , such as nor 'easters and European windstorms , which are fueled primarily by horizontal temperature contrasts . The strong rotating winds of a tropical cyclone are a result of the conservation of angular momentum imparted by the Earth 's rotation as air flows inwards toward the axis of rotation . As a result , they rarely form within 5 ° of the equator . Tropical cyclones are typically between 100 and 2 @,@ 000 km ( 62 and 1 @,@ 243 mi ) in diameter . 
 Tropical refers to the geographical origin of these systems , which form almost exclusively over tropical seas . Cyclone refers to their cyclonic nature , with wind blowing counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere . The opposite direction of circulation is due to the Coriolis effect . 
 In addition to strong winds and rain , tropical cyclones are capable of generating high waves , damaging storm surge , and tornadoes . They typically weaken rapidly over land where they are cut off from their primary energy source . For this reason , coastal regions are particularly vulnerable to damage from a tropical cyclone as compared to inland regions . Heavy rains , however , can cause significant flooding inland , and storm surges can produce extensive coastal flooding up to 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) from the coastline . Though their effects on human populations are often devastating , tropical cyclones can relieve drought conditions . They also carry heat energy away from the tropics and transport it toward temperate latitudes , which may play an important role in modulating regional and global climate . 
 = = Physical structure = = 
 Tropical cyclones are areas of relatively low pressure in the troposphere , with the largest pressure perturbations occurring at low altitudes near the surface . On Earth , the pressures recorded at the centers of tropical cyclones are among the lowest ever observed at sea level . The environment near the center of tropical cyclones is warmer than the surroundings at all altitudes , thus they are characterized as " warm core " systems . 
 = = = Wind field = = = 
 The near @-@ surface wind field of a tropical cyclone is characterized by air rotating rapidly around a center of circulation while also flowing radially inwards . At the outer edge of the storm , air may be nearly calm ; however , due to the Earth 's rotation , the air has non @-@ zero absolute angular momentum . As air flows radially inward , it begins to rotate cyclonically ( counter @-@ clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere , and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere ) in order to conserve angular momentum . At an inner radius , air begins to ascend to the top of the troposphere . This radius is typically coincident with the inner radius of the eyewall , and has the strongest near @-@ surface winds of the storm ; consequently , it is known as the radius of maximum winds . Once aloft , air flows away from the storm 's center , producing a shield of cirrus clouds . 
 The previously mentioned processes result in a wind field that is nearly axisymmetric : Wind speeds are low at the center , increase rapidly moving outwards to the radius of maximum winds , and then decay more gradually with radius to large radii . However , the wind field often exhibits additional spatial and temporal variability due to the effects of localized processes , such as thunderstorm activity and horizontal flow instabilities . In the vertical direction , winds are strongest near the surface and decay with height within the troposphere . 
 = = = Eye and center = = = 
 At the center of a mature tropical cyclone , air sinks rather than rises . For a sufficiently strong storm , air may sink over a layer deep enough to suppress cloud formation , thereby creating a clear " eye " . Weather in the eye is normally calm and free of clouds , although the sea may be extremely violent . The eye is normally circular in shape , and is typically 30 – 65 km ( 19 – 40 mi ) in diameter , though eyes as small as 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) and as large as 370 km ( 230 mi ) have been observed . 
 The cloudy outer edge of the eye is called the " eyewall " . The eyewall typically expands outward with height , resembling an arena football stadium ; this phenomenon is sometimes referred to as the stadium effect . The eyewall is where the greatest wind speeds are found , air rises most rapidly , clouds reach to their highest altitude , and precipitation is the heaviest . The heaviest wind damage occurs where a tropical cyclone 's eyewall passes over land . 
 In a weaker storm , the eye may be obscured by the central dense overcast , which is the upper @-@ level cirrus shield that is associated with a concentrated area of strong thunderstorm activity near the center of a tropical cyclone . 
 The eyewall may vary over time in the form of eyewall replacement cycles , particularly in intense tropical cyclones . Outer rainbands can organize into an outer ring of thunderstorms that slowly moves inward , which is believed to rob the primary eyewall of moisture and angular momentum . When the primary eyewall weakens , the tropical cyclone weakens temporarily . The outer eyewall eventually replaces the primary one at the end of the cycle , at which time the storm may return to its original intensity . 
 = = = Intensity = = = 
 Storm " intensity " is defined as the maximum wind speed in the storm . This speed is taken as either a 1 @-@ minute or a 10 @-@ minute average at the standard reference height of 10 meters . The choice of averaging period , as well as the naming convention for classifying storms , differs across forecast centers and ocean basins . 
 On occasion , tropical cyclones may undergo a meteorological condition known as rapid deepening , a period in which the minimum sea @-@ level pressure of a tropical cyclone decreases by <unk> in a 24 @-@ hour period . In order for rapid deepening to occur , several conditions must be in place . Water temperatures must be extremely warm ( near or above 30 ° C , 86 ° F ) , and water of this temperature must be sufficiently deep such that waves do not <unk> cooler waters to the surface . Wind shear must be low ; when wind shear is high , the convection and circulation in the cyclone will be disrupted . Usually , an anticyclone in the upper layers of the troposphere above the storm must be present as well — for extremely low surface pressures to develop , air must be rising very rapidly in the eyewall of the storm , and an upper @-@ level anticyclone helps channel this air away from the cyclone efficiently . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 There are a variety of metrics commonly used to measure storm size . The most common metrics include the radius of maximum wind , the radius of 34 @-@ knot wind ( i.e. gale force ) , the radius of outermost closed isobar ( <unk> ) , and the radius of vanishing wind . An additional metric is the radius at which the cyclone 's relative vorticity field decreases to 1 × 10 − 5 s − 1 . 
 On Earth , tropical cyclones span a large range of sizes , from 100 – 2 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 62 – 1 @,@ 243 mi ) as measured by the radius of vanishing wind . They are largest on average in the northwest Pacific Ocean basin and smallest in the northeastern Pacific Ocean basin . If the radius of outermost closed isobar is less than two degrees of latitude ( 222 km ( 138 mi ) ) , then the cyclone is " very small " or a " midget " . A radius of 3 – 6 latitude degrees ( 333 – 670 km ( 207 – 416 mi ) ) is considered " average sized " . " Very large " tropical cyclones have a radius of greater than 8 degrees ( 888 km ( 552 mi ) ) . Observations indicate that size is only weakly correlated to variables such as storm intensity ( i.e. maximum wind speed ) , radius of maximum wind , latitude , and maximum potential intensity . 
 Size plays an important role in modulating damage caused by a storm . All else equal , a larger storm will impact a larger area for a longer period of time . Additionally , a larger near @-@ surface wind field can generate higher storm surge due to the combination of longer wind fetch , longer duration , and enhanced wave setup . 
 The upper circulation of strong hurricanes extends into the tropopause of the atmosphere , which at low latitudes is 15 @,@ 000 – 18 @,@ 000 metres ( 50 @,@ 000 – 60 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 = = Physics and energetics = = 
 The three @-@ dimensional wind field in a tropical cyclone can be separated into two components : a " primary circulation " and a " secondary circulation " . The primary circulation is the rotational part of the flow ; it is purely circular . The secondary circulation is the overturning ( in @-@ up @-@ out @-@ down ) part of the flow ; it is in the radial and vertical directions . The primary circulation has the strongest winds and is responsible for the majority of the damage a storm causes , while the secondary circulation is slower but governs the energetics of the storm . 
 = = = Secondary circulation : a Carnot heat engine = = = 
 A tropical cyclone 's primary energy source is the evaporation of water from the ocean surface , which ultimately <unk> into clouds and rain when the warm moist air rises and cools to saturation . The energetics of the system may be idealized as an atmospheric Carnot heat engine . First , inflowing air near the surface acquires heat primarily via evaporation of water ( i.e. latent heat ) at the temperature of the warm ocean surface ( during evaporation , the ocean cools and the air warms ) . Second , the warmed air rises and cools within the eyewall while conserving total heat content ( latent heat is simply converted to sensible heat during condensation ) . Third , air outflows and loses heat via infrared radiation to space at the temperature of the cold tropopause . Finally , air subsides and warms at the outer edge of the storm while conserving total heat content . The first and third legs are nearly isothermal , while the second and fourth legs are nearly <unk> . This in @-@ up @-@ out @-@ down overturning flow is known as the secondary circulation . The Carnot perspective provides an upper bound on the maximum wind speed that a storm can attain . 
 Scientists estimate that a tropical cyclone releases heat energy at the rate of 50 to 200 exajoules ( 1018 J ) per day , equivalent to about 1 PW ( 1015 watt ) . This rate of energy release is equivalent to 70 times the world energy consumption of humans and 200 times the worldwide electrical generating capacity , or to exploding a 10 @-@ megaton nuclear bomb every 20 minutes . 
 = = = Primary circulation : rotating winds = = = 
 The primary rotating flow in a tropical cyclone results from the conservation of angular momentum by the secondary circulation . Absolute angular momentum on a rotating planet <formula> is given by 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the Coriolis parameter , <formula> is the azimuthal ( i.e. rotating ) wind speed , and <formula> is the radius to the axis of rotation . The first term on the right hand side is the component of planetary angular momentum that projects onto the local vertical ( i.e. the axis of rotation ) . The second term on the right hand side is the relative angular momentum of the circulation itself with respect to the axis of rotation . Because the planetary angular momentum term vanishes at the equator ( where <formula> ) , tropical cyclones rarely form within 5 ° of the equator . 
 As air flows radially inward at low levels , it begins to rotate cyclonically in order to conserve angular momentum . Similarly , as rapidly rotating air flows radially outward near the tropopause , its cyclonic rotation decreases and ultimately changes sign at large enough radius , resulting in an upper @-@ level anti @-@ cyclone . The result is a vertical structure characterized by a strong cyclone at low levels and a strong anti @-@ cyclone near the tropopause ; from thermal wind balance , this corresponds to a system that is warmer at its center than in the surrounding environment at all altitudes ( i.e. " warm @-@ core " ) . From hydrostatic balance , the warm core translates to lower pressure at the center at all altitudes , with the maximum pressure drop located at the surface . 
 = = = Maximum potential intensity = = = 
 Due to surface friction , the inflow only partially conserves angular momentum . Thus , the sea surface lower boundary acts as both a source ( evaporation ) and sink ( friction ) of energy for the system . This fact leads to the existence of a theoretical upper bound on the strongest wind speed that a tropical cyclone can attain . Because evaporation increases linearly with wind speed ( just as climbing out of a pool feels much colder on a windy day ) , there is a positive feedback on energy input into the system known as the Wind @-@ Induced Surface Heat Exchange ( <unk> ) feedback . This feedback is offset when frictional dissipation , which increases with the cube of the wind speed , becomes sufficiently large . This upper bound is called the " maximum potential intensity " , <formula> , and is given by 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the temperature of the sea surface , <formula> is the temperature of the outflow ( [ K ] ) , <formula> is the enthalpy difference between the surface and the overlying air ( [ J / kg ] ) , and <formula> and <formula> are the surface exchange coefficients ( dimensionless ) of enthalpy and momentum , respectively . The surface @-@ air enthalpy difference is taken as <formula> , where <formula> is the saturation enthalpy of air at sea surface temperature and sea @-@ level pressure and <formula> is the enthalpy of boundary layer air overlying the surface . 
 The maximum potential intensity is predominantly a function of the background environment alone ( i.e. without a tropical cyclone ) , and thus this quantity can be used to determine which regions on Earth can support tropical cyclones of a given intensity , and how these regions may evolve in time . Specifically , the maximum potential intensity has three components , but its variability in space and time is due predominantly to the variability in the surface @-@ air enthalpy difference component <formula> . 
 = = = = Derivation = = = = 
 A tropical cyclone may be viewed as a heat engine that converts input heat energy from the surface into mechanical energy that can be used to do mechanical work against surface friction . At equilibrium , the rate of net energy production in the system must equal the rate of energy loss due to frictional dissipation at the surface , i.e. 
 <formula> 
 The rate of energy loss per unit surface area from surface friction , <formula> , is given by 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the density of near @-@ surface air ( [ kg / m3 ] ) and <formula> is the near surface wind speed ( [ m / s ] ) . 
 The rate of energy production per unit surface area , <formula> is given by 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the heat engine efficiency and <formula> is the total rate of heat input into the system per unit surface area . Given that a tropical cyclone may be idealized as a Carnot heat engine , the Carnot heat engine efficiency is given by 
 <formula> 
 Heat ( enthalpy ) per unit mass is given by 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the heat capacity of air , <formula> is air temperature , <formula> is the latent heat of vaporization , and <formula> is the concentration of water vapor . The first component corresponds to sensible heat and the second to latent heat . 
 There are two sources of heat input . The dominant source is the input of heat at the surface , primarily due to evaporation . The bulk aerodynamic formula for the rate of heat input per unit area at the surface , <formula> , is given by 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> represents the enthalpy difference between the ocean surface and the overlying air . The second source is the internal sensible heat generated from frictional dissipation ( equal to <formula> ) , which occurs near the surface within the tropical cyclone and is recycled to the system . 
 <formula> 
 Thus , the total rate of net energy production per unit surface area is given by 
 <formula> 
 Setting <formula> and taking <formula> ( i.e. the rotational wind speed is dominant ) leads to the solution for <formula> given above . This derivation assumes that total energy input and loss within the system can be approximated by their values at the radius of maximum wind . The inclusion of <formula> acts to multiply the total heat input rate by the factor <formula> . Mathematically , this has the effect of replacing <formula> with <formula> in the denominator of the Carnot efficiency . 
 An alternative definition for the maximum potential intensity , which is mathematically equivalent to the above formulation , is 
 <formula> 
 where CAPE stands for the Convective Available Potential Energy , <formula> is the CAPE of an air parcel lifted from saturation at sea level in reference to the environmental sounding , <formula> is the CAPE of the boundary layer air , and both quantities are calculated at the radius of maximum wind . 
 = = = = Characteristic values and variability on Earth = = = = 
 On Earth , a characteristic temperature for <formula> is 300 K and for <formula> is 200 K , corresponding to a Carnot efficiency of <formula> . The ratio of the surface exchange coefficients , <formula> , is typically taken to be 1 . However , observations suggest that the drag coefficient <formula> varies with wind speed and may decrease at high wind speeds within the boundary layer of a mature hurricane . Additionally , <formula> may vary at high wind speeds due to the effect of sea spray on evaporation within the boundary layer . 
 A characteristic value of the maximum potential intensity , <formula> , is 80 m / s . However , this quantity varies significantly across space and time , particularly within the seasonal cycle , spanning a range of 0 – 100 m / s . This variability is primarily due to variability in the surface enthalpy disequilibrium ( <formula> ) as well as in the thermodynamic structure of the troposphere , which are controlled by the large @-@ scale dynamics of the tropical climate . These processes are modulated by factors including the sea surface temperature ( and underlying ocean dynamics ) , background near @-@ surface wind speed , and the vertical structure of atmospheric radiative heating . The nature of this modulation is complex , particularly on climate time @-@ scales ( decades or longer ) . On shorter time @-@ scales , variability in the maximum potential intensity is commonly linked to sea surface temperature perturbations from the tropical mean , as regions with relatively warm water have thermodynamic states much more capable of sustaining a tropical cyclone than regions with relatively cold water . However , this relationship is indirect via the large @-@ scale dynamics of the tropics ; the direct influence of the absolute sea surface temperature on <formula> is weak in comparison . 
 = = = Interaction with the upper ocean = = = 
 The passage of a tropical cyclone over the ocean causes the upper layers of the ocean to cool substantially , which can influence subsequent cyclone development . This cooling is primarily caused by wind @-@ driven mixing of cold water from deeper in the ocean with the warm surface waters . This effect results in a negative feedback process that can inhibit further development or lead to weakening . Additional cooling may come in the form of cold water from falling raindrops ( this is because the atmosphere is cooler at higher altitudes ) . Cloud cover may also play a role in cooling the ocean , by shielding the ocean surface from direct sunlight before and slightly after the storm passage . All these effects can combine to produce a dramatic drop in sea surface temperature over a large area in just a few days . 
 = = Major basins and related warning centers = = 
 There are six Regional Specialized Meteorological Centers ( RSMCs ) worldwide . These organizations are designated by the World Meteorological Organization and are responsible for tracking and issuing bulletins , warnings , and advisories about tropical cyclones in their designated areas of responsibility . In addition , there are six Tropical Cyclone Warning Centers ( TCWCs ) that provide information to smaller regions . 
 The RSMCs and TCWCs are not the only organizations that provide information about tropical cyclones to the public . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issues advisories in all basins except the Northern Atlantic for the purposes of the United States Government . The Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) issues advisories and names for tropical cyclones that approach the Philippines in the Northwestern Pacific to protect the life and property of its citizens . The Canadian Hurricane Center ( CHC ) issues advisories on hurricanes and their remnants for Canadian citizens when they affect Canada . 
 On March 26 , 2004 , Cyclone Catarina became the first recorded South Atlantic cyclone , striking southern Brazil with winds equivalent to Category 2 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . As the cyclone formed outside the authority of another warning center , Brazilian meteorologists initially treated the system as an extratropical cyclone , but later on classified it as tropical . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Worldwide , tropical cyclone activity peaks in late summer , when the difference between temperatures aloft and sea surface temperatures is the greatest . However , each particular basin has its own seasonal patterns . On a worldwide scale , May is the least active month , while September is the most active month . November is the only month in which all the tropical cyclone basins are active . 
 = = = Times = = = 
 In the Northern Atlantic Ocean , a distinct cyclone season occurs from June 1 to November 30 , sharply peaking from late August through September . The statistical peak of the Atlantic hurricane season is September 10 . The Northeast Pacific Ocean has a broader period of activity , but in a similar time frame to the Atlantic . The Northwest Pacific sees tropical cyclones year @-@ round , with a minimum in February and March and a peak in early September . In the North Indian basin , storms are most common from April to December , with peaks in May and November . In the Southern Hemisphere , the tropical cyclone year begins on July 1 and runs all year @-@ round encompassing the tropical cyclone seasons , which run from November 1 until the end of April , with peaks in mid @-@ February to early March . 
 = = = Factors = = = 
 The formation of tropical cyclones is the topic of extensive ongoing research and is still not fully understood . While six factors appear to be generally necessary , tropical cyclones may occasionally form without meeting all of the following conditions . In most situations , water temperatures of at least 26 @.@ 5 ° C ( 79 @.@ 7 ° F ) are needed down to a depth of at least 50 m ( 160 ft ) ; waters of this temperature cause the overlying atmosphere to be unstable enough to sustain convection and thunderstorms . Another factor is rapid cooling with height , which allows the release of the heat of condensation that powers a tropical cyclone . High humidity is needed , especially in the lower @-@ to @-@ mid troposphere ; when there is a great deal of moisture in the atmosphere , conditions are more favorable for disturbances to develop . Low amounts of wind shear are needed , as high shear is disruptive to the storm 's circulation . Tropical cyclones generally need to form more than 555 km ( 345 mi ) or five degrees of latitude away from the equator , allowing the Coriolis effect to deflect winds blowing towards the low pressure center and creating a circulation . Lastly , a formative tropical cyclone needs a preexisting system of disturbed weather . Tropical cyclones will not form spontaneously . Low @-@ latitude and low @-@ level westerly wind bursts associated with the Madden @-@ Julian oscillation can create favorable conditions for tropical cyclogenesis by initiating tropical disturbances . 
 = = = Locations = = = 
 Most tropical cyclones form in a worldwide band of thunderstorm activity near the equator , referred to as the Intertropical Front ( ITF ) , the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) , or the monsoon trough . Another important source of atmospheric instability is found in tropical waves , which contribute to the development of about 85 % of intense tropical cyclones in the Atlantic ocean and become most of the tropical cyclones in the Eastern Pacific . The majority forms between 10 and 30 degrees of latitude away of the equator , and 87 % forms no farther away than 20 degrees north or south . Because the Coriolis effect initiates and maintains their rotation , tropical cyclones rarely form or move within 5 degrees of the equator , where the effect is weakest . However , it is still possible for tropical systems to form within this boundary as Tropical Storm Vamei and Cyclone Agni did in 2001 and 2004 , respectively . 
 = = Movement = = 
 The movement of a tropical cyclone ( i.e. its " track " ) is typically approximated as the sum of two terms : " steering " by the background environmental wind and " beta drift " . 
 = = = Environmental steering = = = 
 Environmental steering is the dominant term . Conceptually , it represents the movement of the storm with the background environment , akin to " leaves carried along by a stream " . Physically , the flow field in the vicinity of a tropical cyclone may be decomposed into two parts : the flow associated with the storm itself , and the large @-@ scale background flow of the environment in which the storm is embedded . In this way , tropical cyclone motion may be represented to first @-@ order simply as the advection of the storm by the local environmental flow . This environmental flow is termed the " steering flow " . 
 Climatologically , tropical cyclones are steered primarily westward by the east @-@ to @-@ west trade winds on the equatorial side of the subtropical ridge — a persistent high @-@ pressure area over the world 's subtropical oceans . In the tropical North Atlantic and Northeast Pacific oceans , the trade winds steer tropical easterly waves westward from the African coast toward the Caribbean Sea , North America , and ultimately into the central Pacific ocean before the waves dampen out . These waves are the precursors to many tropical cyclones within this region . In contrast , in the Indian Ocean and Western Pacific in both hemispheres , tropical cyclogenesis is influenced less by tropical easterly waves and more by the seasonal movement of the Inter @-@ tropical Convergence Zone and the monsoon trough . Additionally , tropical cyclone motion can be influenced by transient weather systems , such as extratropical cyclones . 
 = = = Beta drift = = = 
 In addition to environmental steering , a tropical cyclone will tend to drift slowly poleward and westward , a motion known as " beta drift " . This motion is due to the superposition of a vortex , such as a tropical cyclone , onto an environment in which the Coriolis force varies with latitude , such as on a sphere or beta plane . It is induced indirectly by the storm itself , the result of a feedback between the cyclonic flow of the storm and its environment . 
 Physically , the cyclonic circulation of the storm <unk> environmental air poleward east of center and equatorial west of center . Because air must conserve its angular momentum , this flow configuration induces a cyclonic gyre equatorward and westward of the storm center and an anticyclonic gyre poleward and eastward of the storm center . The combined flow of these gyres acts to <unk> the storm slowly poleward and westward . This effect occurs even if there is zero environmental flow . 
 = = = Multiple storm interaction = = = 
 A third component of motion that occurs relatively infrequently involves the interaction of multiple tropical cyclones . When two cyclones approach one another , their centers will begin orbiting cyclonically about a point between the two systems . Depending on their separation distance and strength , the two vortices may simply orbit around one another or else may spiral into the center point and merge . When the two vortices are of unequal size , the larger vortex will tend to dominate the interaction , and the smaller vortex will orbit around it . This phenomenon is called the Fujiwhara effect , after <unk> Fujiwhara . 
 = = = Interaction with the mid @-@ latitude westerlies = = = 
 Though a tropical cyclone typically moves from east to west in the tropics , its track may shift poleward and eastward either as it moves west of the subtropical ridge axis or else if it interacts with the mid @-@ latitude flow , such as the jet stream or an extratropical cyclone . This motion , termed " recurvature " , commonly occurs near the western edge of the major ocean basins , where the jet stream typically has a poleward component and extratropical cyclones are common . An example of tropical cyclone recurvature was Typhoon Ioke in 2006 . 
 = = = Landfall = = = 
 The landfall of a tropical cyclone occurs when a storm 's surface center , moves over a coastline . Storm conditions may be experienced on the coast and inland hours before landfall ; in fact , a tropical cyclone can launch its strongest winds over land , yet not make landfall . NOAA uses the term " direct hit " to describe when a location ( on the left side of the eye ) falls within the radius of maximum winds ( or twice that radius if on the right side ) , whether or not the hurricane 's eye made landfall . 
 = = Dissipation = = 
 = = = Factors = = = 
 A tropical cyclone can cease to have tropical characteristics in several different ways . One such way is if it moves over land , thus depriving it of the warm water it needs to power itself , quickly losing strength . Most strong storms lose their strength very rapidly after landfall and become disorganized areas of low pressure within a day or two , or evolve into extratropical cyclones . There is a chance a tropical cyclone could regenerate if it managed to get back over open warm water , such as with Hurricane Ivan . If it remains over mountains for even a short time , weakening will accelerate . Many storm fatalities occur in mountainous terrain , when diminishing cyclones unleash their moisture as torrential rainfall . This may lead to deadly floods and mudslides , as was the case with Hurricane Mitch in 1998 . Without warm surface water , the storm cannot survive . 
 A tropical cyclone can dissipate when it moves over waters significantly below 26 @.@ 5 ° C ( 79 @.@ 7 ° F ) . This will cause the storm to lose its tropical characteristics , such as a warm core with thunderstorms near the center , and become a remnant low @-@ pressure area . These remnant systems may persist for up to several days before losing their identity . This dissipation mechanism is most common in the eastern North Pacific . Weakening or dissipation can occur if it experiences vertical wind shear , causing the convection and heat engine to move away from the center ; this normally ceases development of a tropical cyclone . In addition , its interaction with the main belt of the Westerlies , by means of merging with a nearby frontal zone , can cause tropical cyclones to evolve into extratropical cyclones . This transition can take 1 – 3 days . Even after a tropical cyclone is said to be extratropical or dissipated , it can still have tropical storm force ( or occasionally hurricane / typhoon force ) winds and drop several inches of rainfall . In the Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean , such tropical @-@ derived cyclones of higher latitudes can be violent and may occasionally remain at hurricane or typhoon @-@ force wind speeds when they reach the west coast of North America . These phenomena can also affect Europe , where they are known as European windstorms ; Hurricane Iris 's extratropical remnants are an example of such a windstorm from 1995 . A cyclone can also merge with another area of low pressure , becoming a larger area of low pressure . This can strengthen the resultant system , although it may no longer be a tropical cyclone . Studies in the 2000s have given rise to the hypothesis that large amounts of dust reduce the strength of tropical cyclones . 
 = = = Artificial dissipation = = = 
 In the 1960s and 1970s , the United States government attempted to weaken hurricanes through Project Stormfury by seeding selected storms with silver iodide . It was thought that the seeding would cause supercooled water in the outer rainbands to freeze , causing the inner eyewall to collapse and thus reducing the winds . The winds of Hurricane Debbie — a hurricane seeded in Project Stormfury — dropped as much as 31 % , but Debbie regained its strength after each of two seeding forays . In an earlier episode in 1947 , disaster struck when a hurricane east of Jacksonville , Florida promptly changed its course after being seeded , and smashed into Savannah , Georgia . Because there was so much uncertainty about the behavior of these storms , the federal government would not approve seeding operations unless the hurricane had a less than 10 % chance of making landfall within 48 hours , greatly reducing the number of possible test storms . The project was dropped after it was discovered that eyewall replacement cycles occur naturally in strong hurricanes , casting doubt on the result of the earlier attempts . Today , it is known that silver iodide seeding is not likely to have an effect because the amount of supercooled water in the rainbands of a tropical cyclone is too low . 
 Other approaches have been suggested over time , including cooling the water under a tropical cyclone by towing icebergs into the tropical oceans . Other ideas range from covering the ocean in a substance that inhibits evaporation , dropping large quantities of ice into the eye at very early stages of development ( so that the latent heat is absorbed by the ice , instead of being converted to kinetic energy that would feed the positive feedback loop ) , or blasting the cyclone apart with nuclear weapons . Project Cirrus even involved throwing dry ice on a cyclone . These approaches all suffer from one flaw above many others : tropical cyclones are simply too large and short @-@ lived for any of the weakening techniques to be practical . 
 = = Effects = = 
 Tropical cyclones out at sea cause large waves , heavy rain , flood and high winds , disrupting international shipping and , at times , causing shipwrecks . Tropical cyclones stir up water , leaving a cool wake behind them , which causes the region to be less favorable for subsequent tropical cyclones . On land , strong winds can damage or destroy vehicles , buildings , bridges , and other outside objects , turning loose debris into deadly flying projectiles . The storm surge , or the increase in sea level due to the cyclone , is typically the worst effect from landfalling tropical cyclones , historically resulting in 90 % of tropical cyclone deaths . The broad rotation of a landfalling tropical cyclone , and vertical wind shear at its periphery , spawns tornadoes . Tornadoes can also be spawned as a result of eyewall mesovortices , which persist until landfall . 
 Over the past two centuries , tropical cyclones have been responsible for the deaths of about 1 @.@ 9 million people worldwide . Large areas of standing water caused by flooding lead to infection , as well as contributing to mosquito @-@ borne illnesses . Crowded evacuees in shelters increase the risk of disease propagation . Tropical cyclones significantly interrupt infrastructure , leading to power outages , bridge destruction , and the hampering of reconstruction efforts . On average , the Gulf and east coasts of the United States suffer approximately US $ 5 billion ( 1995 US $ ) in cyclone damage every year . The majority ( 83 % ) of tropical cyclone damage is caused by severe hurricanes , category 3 or greater . However , category 3 or greater hurricanes only account for about one @-@ fifth of cyclones that make landfall every year . 
 Although cyclones take an enormous toll in lives and personal property , they may be important factors in the precipitation regimes of places they impact , as they may bring much @-@ needed precipitation to otherwise dry regions . Tropical cyclones also help maintain the global heat balance by moving warm , moist tropical air to the middle latitudes and polar regions , and by regulating the thermohaline circulation through upwelling . The storm surge and winds of hurricanes may be destructive to human @-@ made structures , but they also stir up the waters of coastal estuaries , which are typically important fish breeding locales . Tropical cyclone destruction spurs redevelopment , greatly increasing local property values . 
 When hurricanes surge upon shore from the ocean , salt is introduced to many freshwater areas and raises the salinity levels too high for some habitats to withstand . Some are able to cope with the salt and recycle it back into the ocean , but others can not release the extra surface water quickly enough or do not have a large enough freshwater source to replace it . Because of this , some species of plants and vegetation die due to the excess salt . In addition , hurricanes can carry toxins and acids onto shore when they make landfall . The flood water can pick up the toxins from different spills and contaminate the land that it passes over . The toxins are very harmful to the people and animals in the area , as well as the environment around them . The flooding water can also spark many dangerous oil spills . 
 = = Observation and forecasting = = 
 = = = Observation = = = 
 Intense tropical cyclones pose a particular observation challenge , as they are a dangerous oceanic phenomenon , and weather stations , being relatively sparse , are rarely available on the site of the storm itself . In general , surface observations are available only if the storm is passing over an island or a coastal area , or if there is a nearby ship . Real @-@ time measurements are usually taken in the periphery of the cyclone , where conditions are less catastrophic and its true strength cannot be evaluated . For this reason , there are teams of meteorologists that move into the path of tropical cyclones to help evaluate their strength at the point of landfall . 
 Tropical cyclones far from land are tracked by weather satellites capturing visible and infrared images from space , usually at half @-@ hour to quarter @-@ hour intervals . As a storm approaches land , it can be observed by land @-@ based Doppler weather radar . Radar plays a crucial role around landfall by showing a storm 's location and intensity every several minutes . 
 In situ measurements , in real @-@ time , can be taken by sending specially equipped reconnaissance flights into the cyclone . In the Atlantic basin , these flights are regularly flown by United States government hurricane hunters . The aircraft used are WC @-@ 130 Hercules and WP @-@ 3D Orions , both four @-@ engine turboprop cargo aircraft . These aircraft fly directly into the cyclone and take direct and remote @-@ sensing measurements . The aircraft also launch GPS dropsondes inside the cyclone . These <unk> measure temperature , humidity , pressure , and especially winds between flight level and the ocean 's surface . A new era in hurricane observation began when a remotely piloted Aerosonde , a small drone aircraft , was flown through Tropical Storm Ophelia as it passed Virginia 's Eastern Shore during the 2005 hurricane season . A similar mission was also completed successfully in the western Pacific ocean . This demonstrated a new way to probe the storms at low altitudes that human pilots seldom dare . 
 = = = Forecasting = = = 
 Because of the forces that affect tropical cyclone tracks , accurate track predictions depend on determining the position and strength of high- and low @-@ pressure areas , and predicting how those areas will change during the life of a tropical system . The deep layer mean flow , or average wind through the depth of the troposphere , is considered the best tool in determining track direction and speed . If storms are significantly sheared , use of wind speed measurements at a lower altitude , such as at the 70 kPa pressure surface ( 3 @,@ 000 metres or 9 @,@ 800 feet above sea level ) will produce better predictions . Tropical forecasters also consider smoothing out short @-@ term wobbles of the storm as it allows them to determine a more accurate long @-@ term trajectory . High @-@ speed computers and sophisticated simulation software allow forecasters to produce computer models that predict tropical cyclone tracks based on the future position and strength of high- and low @-@ pressure systems . Combining forecast models with increased understanding of the forces that act on tropical cyclones , as well as with a wealth of data from Earth @-@ orbiting satellites and other sensors , scientists have increased the accuracy of track forecasts over recent decades . However , scientists are not as skillful at predicting the intensity of tropical cyclones . The lack of improvement in intensity forecasting is attributed to the complexity of tropical systems and an incomplete understanding of factors that affect their development . 
 = = Classifications , terminology , and naming = = 
 = = = Intensity classifications = = = 
 Tropical cyclones are classified into three main groups , based on intensity : tropical depressions , tropical storms , and a third group of more intense storms , whose name depends on the region . For example , if a tropical storm in the Northwestern Pacific reaches hurricane @-@ strength winds on the Beaufort scale , it is referred to as a typhoon ; if a tropical storm passes the same benchmark in the Northeast Pacific Basin , or in the North Atlantic , it is called a hurricane . Neither " hurricane " nor " typhoon " is used in either the Southern Hemisphere or the Indian Ocean . In these basins , storms of a tropical nature are referred to as either tropical cyclones , severe tropical cyclones or very intense tropical cyclones . 
 As indicated in the table below , each basin uses a separate system of terminology , which can make comparisons between different basins difficult . In the Pacific Ocean , hurricanes from the Central North Pacific sometimes cross the 180th meridian into the Northwest Pacific , becoming typhoons ( such as Hurricane / Typhoon Ioke in 2006 ) ; on rare occasions , the reverse will occur . It should also be noted that typhoons with 1 @-@ minute sustained winds greater than 67 metres per second ( m / s ) , over 150 miles per hour ( 240 km / h ) , are called Super Typhoons by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . 
 = = = = Tropical depression = = = = 
 A tropical depression or tropical low is a tropical disturbance , that has a clearly defined surface circulation , which has maximum sustained winds of less than 34 kn ( 39 mph ; 63 km / h ) . Within the Southern Hemisphere , the depression can have gale force or stronger winds in one or more quadrants , but not near the centre . 
 = = = = Tropical storm = = = = 
 A tropical storm is an organized system of strong thunderstorms with a defined surface circulation and maximum sustained winds between 34 knots ( 63 km / h ) and 64 knots ( 119 km / h ) . At this point , the distinctive cyclonic shape starts to develop , although an eye is not usually present . Government weather services first assign names to systems that reach this intensity ( thus the term named storm ) . Although tropical storms are less intense than a hurricane they can produce significant damage . The shear force of winds can blow off shingles , and air borne objects can cause damage to power lines , roofing and siding . More dangerous is the heavy rain fall causing inland flooding . 
 = = = = Hurricane or typhoon = = = = 
 A hurricane or typhoon ( sometimes simply referred to as a tropical cyclone , as opposed to a depression or storm ) is a system with sustained winds of at least 34 metres per second ( 66 kn ) or 74 miles per hour ( 119 km / h ) . A cyclone of this intensity tends to develop an eye , an area of relative calm ( and lowest atmospheric pressure ) at the center of circulation . The eye is often visible in satellite images as a small , circular , cloud @-@ free spot . Surrounding the eye is the eyewall , an area about 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) to 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) wide in which the strongest thunderstorms and winds circulate around the storm 's center . Maximum sustained winds in the strongest tropical cyclones have been estimated at about 95 metres per second ( 185 kn ) or 346 kilometres per hour ( 215 mph ) . 
 = = = Origin of storm terms = = = 
 The word typhoon , which is used today in the Northwest Pacific , may be derived from Arabic <unk> ( <unk> ) ( similar in Hindi / Urdu and Persian ) , which in turn originates from Greek Typhon ( <unk> ) , a monster from Greek mythology associated with storms . The related Portuguese word <unk> , used in Portuguese for typhoons , is also derived from Typhon . The word is also similar to Chinese " <unk> " ( Simplified Chinese : <unk> ) ( <unk> = wind ) , " <unk> " in Cantonese ( Traditional Chinese : <unk> ) , " <unk> " ( <unk> ) in Japanese , and " <unk> " ( <unk> ) in Korean . 
 The word hurricane , used in the North Atlantic and Northeast Pacific , is derived from <unk> , the Spanish word for the Carib / Taino storm god , <unk> . This god is believed by scholars to have been at least partially derived from the Mayan creator god , Huracan . Huracan was believed by the Maya to have created dry land out of the turbulent waters . The god was also credited with later destroying the " wooden people " , the precursors to the " maize people " , with an immense storm and flood . Huracan is also the source of the word <unk> , another word for a particularly strong European windstorm . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 The practice of using names to identify tropical cyclones goes back many years , with systems named after places or things they hit before the formal start of naming . The system currently used provides positive identification of severe weather systems in a brief form , that is readily understood and recognized by the public . The credit for the first usage of personal names for weather systems , is generally given to the Queensland Government Meteorologist Clement Wragge who named systems between 1887 @-@ 1907 . This system of naming weather systems subsequently fell into disuse for several years after Wragge retired , until it was revived in the latter part of World War II for the Western Pacific . Formal naming schemes have subsequently been introduced for the North and South Atlantic , Eastern , Central , Western and Southern Pacific basins as well as the Australian region and Indian Ocean . 
 At present tropical cyclones are officially named by one of eleven meteorological services and retain their names throughout their lifetimes to provide ease of communication between forecasters and the general public regarding forecasts , watches , and warnings . Since the systems can last a week or longer and more than one can be occurring in the same basin at the same time , the names are thought to reduce the confusion about what storm is being described . Names are assigned in order from predetermined lists with one , three , or ten @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of more than 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) depending on which basin it originates . However , standards vary from basin to basin with some tropical depressions named in the Western Pacific , while tropical cyclones have to have a significant amount of gale @-@ force winds occurring around the center before they are named within the Southern Hemisphere . The names of significant tropical cyclones in the North Atlantic Ocean , Pacific Ocean , and Australian region are retired from the naming lists and replaced with another name . 
 = = Notable tropical cyclones = = 
 Tropical cyclones that cause extreme destruction are rare , although when they occur , they can cause great amounts of damage or thousands of fatalities . The 1970 Bhola cyclone is the deadliest tropical cyclone on record , killing more than 300 @,@ 000 people and potentially as many as 1 million after striking the densely populated Ganges Delta region of Bangladesh on November 13 , 1970 . Its powerful storm surge was responsible for the high death toll . The North Indian cyclone basin has historically been the deadliest basin . Elsewhere , Typhoon Nina killed nearly 100 @,@ 000 in China in 1975 due to a 100 @-@ year flood that caused 62 dams including the Banqiao Dam to fail . The Great Hurricane of 1780 is the deadliest North Atlantic hurricane on record , killing about 22 @,@ 000 people in the Lesser Antilles . A tropical cyclone does not need to be particularly strong to cause memorable damage , primarily if the deaths are from rainfall or mudslides . Tropical Storm Thelma in November 1991 killed thousands in the Philippines , although the strongest typhoon to ever make landfall on record was Typhoon Haiyan on November 2013 , causing widespread devastation in the Eastern Visayas and killing at least 6 @,@ 300 people in that country alone . In 1982 , the unnamed tropical depression that eventually became Hurricane Paul killed around 1 @,@ 000 people in Central America . 
 Hurricane Katrina is estimated as the costliest tropical cyclone worldwide , causing $ 81 @.@ 2 billion in property damage ( 2008 USD ) with overall damage estimates exceeding $ 100 billion ( 2005 USD ) . Katrina killed at least 1 @,@ 836 people after striking Louisiana and Mississippi as a major hurricane in August 2005 . Hurricane Sandy is the second most destructive tropical cyclone in U.S history , with damages totaling $ 68 billion ( 2012 USD ) , and with damage costs at $ 37 @.@ 5 billion ( 2012 USD ) , Hurricane Ike is the third most destructive tropical cyclone in U.S history . The Galveston Hurricane of 1900 is the deadliest natural disaster in the United States , killing an estimated 6 @,@ 000 to 12 @,@ 000 people in Galveston , Texas . Hurricane Mitch caused more than 10 @,@ 000 fatalities in Central America , making it the second deadliest Atlantic hurricane in history . Hurricane Iniki in 1992 was the most powerful storm to strike Hawaii in recorded history , hitting Kauai as a Category 4 hurricane , killing six people , and causing U.S. $ 3 billion in damage . Kauai was also struck by Hurricanes Dot ( 1959 ) and Iwa ( 1982 ) ( see List of Hawaii hurricanes ) . Other destructive Eastern Pacific hurricanes include Pauline and Kenna , both causing severe damage after striking Mexico as major hurricanes . In March 2004 , Cyclone Gafilo struck northeastern Madagascar as a powerful cyclone , killing 74 , affecting more than 200 @,@ 000 , and becoming the worst cyclone to affect the nation for more than 20 years . 
 The most intense storm on record was Typhoon Tip in the northwestern Pacific Ocean in 1979 , which reached a minimum pressure of 870 hectopascals ( 26 inHg ) and maximum sustained wind speeds of 165 knots ( 85 m / s ) or 190 miles per hour ( 310 km / h ) . The highest maximum sustained wind speed ever recorded was 185 knots ( 95 m / s ) or 215 miles per hour ( 345 km / h ) in Hurricane Patricia in 2015 , which is the most intense cyclone ever recorded in the Western Hemisphere . Typhoon Nancy in 1961 also had recorded wind speeds of 185 knots ( 95 m / s ) or 215 miles per hour ( 346 km / h ) , but recent research indicates that wind speeds from the 1940s to the 1960s were gauged too high , and this is no longer considered the storm with the highest wind speeds on record . Likewise , a surface @-@ level gust caused by Typhoon Paka on Guam in late 1997 was recorded at 205 knots ( 105 m / s ) or 235 miles per hour ( 378 km / h ) . Had it been confirmed , it would be the strongest non @-@ tornadic wind ever recorded on the Earth 's surface , but the reading had to be discarded since the anemometer was damaged by the storm . 
 In addition to being the most intense tropical cyclone on record based on pressure , Tip was the largest cyclone on record , with tropical storm @-@ force winds 2 @,@ 170 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 350 mi ) in diameter . The smallest storm on record , Tropical Storm Marco , formed during October 2008 , and made landfall in Veracruz . Marco generated tropical storm @-@ force winds only 37 kilometres ( 23 mi ) in diameter . 
 Hurricane John is the longest @-@ lasting tropical cyclone on record , lasting 31 days in 1994 . Before the advent of satellite imagery in 1961 , however , many tropical cyclones were underestimated in their durations . John is also the longest @-@ tracked tropical cyclone in the Northern Hemisphere on record , which had a path of 8 @,@ 250 mi ( 13 @,@ 280 km ) . Cyclone Rewa of the 1993 @-@ 94 South Pacific and Australian region cyclone seasons had one of the longest tracks observed within the Southern Hemisphere , traveling a distance of over 5 @,@ 545 mi ( 8 @,@ 920 km ) during December 1993 and January 1994 . 
 = = Changes caused by El Niño @-@ Southern Oscillation = = 
 Most tropical cyclones form on the side of the subtropical ridge closer to the equator , then move poleward past the ridge axis before recurving into the main belt of the Westerlies . When the subtropical ridge position shifts due to El Niño , so will the preferred tropical cyclone tracks . Areas west of Japan and Korea tend to experience much fewer September – November tropical cyclone impacts during El Niño and neutral years . During El Niño years , the break in the subtropical ridge tends to lie near 130 ° E which would favor the Japanese archipelago . During El Niño years , Guam 's chance of a tropical cyclone impact is one @-@ third more likely than of the long @-@ term average . The tropical Atlantic ocean experiences depressed activity due to increased vertical wind shear across the region during El Niño years . During La Niña years , the formation of tropical cyclones , along with the subtropical ridge position , shifts westward across the western Pacific ocean , which increases the landfall threat to China and much greater intensity in the Philippines . 
 = = Long @-@ term activity trends = = 
 While the number of storms in the Atlantic has increased since 1995 , there is no obvious global trend ; the annual number of tropical cyclones worldwide remains about 87 ± 10 ( Between 77 and 97 tropical cyclones annually ) . However , the ability of climatologists to make long @-@ term data analysis in certain basins is limited by the lack of reliable historical data in some basins , primarily in the Southern Hemisphere , while noting that a significant downward trend in tropical cyclone numbers has been identified for the region near Australia ( based on high quality data and accounting for the influence of the El Niño @-@ Southern Oscillation ) . In spite of that , there is some evidence that the intensity of hurricanes is increasing . Kerry Emanuel stated , " Records of hurricane activity worldwide show an upswing of both the maximum wind speed in and the duration of hurricanes . The energy released by the average hurricane ( again considering all hurricanes worldwide ) seems to have increased by around 70 % in the past 30 years or so , corresponding to about a 15 % increase in the maximum wind speed and a 60 % increase in storm lifetime . " 
 Atlantic storms are becoming more destructive financially , as evidenced by the fact that five of the ten most expensive storms in United States history have occurred since 1990 . According to the World Meteorological Organization , " recent increase in societal impact from tropical cyclones has been caused largely by rising concentrations of population and infrastructure in coastal regions . " Pielke et al . ( 2008 ) normalized mainland U.S. hurricane damage from 1900 – 2005 to 2005 values and found no remaining trend of increasing absolute damage . The 1970s and 1980s were notable because of the extremely low amounts of damage compared to other decades . The decade 1996 – 2005 was the second most damaging among the past 11 decades , with only the decade 1926 – 1935 surpassing its costs . The most damaging single storm is the 1926 Miami hurricane , with $ 157 billion of normalized damage . 
 Often in part because of the threat of hurricanes , many coastal regions had sparse population between major ports until the advent of automobile tourism ; therefore , the most severe portions of hurricanes striking the coast may have gone unmeasured in some instances . The combined effects of ship destruction and remote landfall severely limit the number of intense hurricanes in the official record before the era of hurricane reconnaissance aircraft and satellite meteorology . Although the record shows a distinct increase in the number and strength of intense hurricanes , therefore , experts regard the early data as suspect . 
 The number and strength of Atlantic hurricanes may undergo a 50 – 70 year cycle , also known as the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation . Nyberg et al. reconstructed Atlantic major hurricane activity back to the early 18th century and found five periods averaging 3 – 5 major hurricanes per year and lasting 40 – 60 years , and six other averaging 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 major hurricanes per year and lasting 10 – 20 years . These periods are associated with the Atlantic multidecadal oscillation . Throughout , a decadal oscillation related to solar irradiance was responsible for enhancing / dampening the number of major hurricanes by 1 – 2 per year . 
 Although more common since 1995 , few above @-@ normal hurricane seasons occurred during 1970 – 94 . Destructive hurricanes struck frequently from 1926 to 1960 , including many major New England hurricanes . Twenty @-@ one Atlantic tropical storms formed in 1933 , a record only recently exceeded in 2005 , which saw 28 storms . Tropical hurricanes occurred infrequently during the seasons of 1900 – 25 ; however , many intense storms formed during 1870 – 99 . During the 1887 season , 19 tropical storms formed , of which a record 4 occurred after November 1 and 11 strengthened into hurricanes . Few hurricanes occurred in the 1840s to 1860s ; however , many struck in the early 19th century , including an 1821 storm that made a direct hit on New York City . Some historical weather experts say these storms may have been as high as Category 4 in strength . 
 These active hurricane seasons predated satellite coverage of the Atlantic basin . Before the satellite era began in 1960 , tropical storms or hurricanes went undetected unless a reconnaissance aircraft encountered one , a ship reported a voyage through the storm , or a storm hit land in a populated area . 
 Proxy records based on paleotempestological research have revealed that major hurricane activity along the Gulf of Mexico coast varies on timescales of centuries to millennia . Few major hurricanes struck the Gulf coast during 3000 – 1400 BC and again during the most recent millennium . These quiescent intervals were separated by a hyperactive period during 1400 BC and 1000 AD , when the Gulf coast was struck frequently by catastrophic hurricanes and their landfall probabilities increased by 3 – 5 times . This millennial @-@ scale variability has been attributed to long @-@ term shifts in the position of the Azores High , which may also be linked to changes in the strength of the North Atlantic Oscillation . 
 According to the Azores High hypothesis , an anti @-@ phase pattern is expected to exist between the Gulf of Mexico coast and the Atlantic coast . During the quiescent periods , a more northeasterly position of the Azores High would result in more hurricanes being steered towards the Atlantic coast . During the hyperactive period , more hurricanes were steered towards the Gulf coast as the Azores High was shifted to a more southwesterly position near the Caribbean . Such a displacement of the Azores High is consistent with paleoclimatic evidence that shows an abrupt onset of a drier climate in Haiti around 3200 14C years BP , and a change towards more humid conditions in the Great Plains during the late @-@ Holocene as more moisture was pumped up the Mississippi Valley through the Gulf coast . Preliminary data from the northern Atlantic coast seem to support the Azores High hypothesis . A 3000 @-@ year proxy record from a coastal lake in Cape Cod suggests that hurricane activity increased significantly during the past 500 – 1000 years , just as the Gulf coast was amid a quiescent period of the last millennium . 
 = = Global warming = = 
 According to IPCC <unk> 2012 , " attribution of single extreme events to anthropogenic climate change is challenging " . On one hand , the report said that there is " medium evidence " that long @-@ term trends in normalized losses have not been attributed to tropical and extratropical [ winter ] storms . On the other hand , the report also noted that much more research is needed in part due to " confounding factors " that might have increased losses , such as increased population and development in at @-@ risk areas , and those that might have decreased losses , such as better forecasting , emergency alert systems , emergency management , building codes , and near @-@ instantaneous media coverage of weather emergencies . 
 Some experts who agree that we can not yet detect any increase in frequency or intensity of tropical cyclones include Thomas Knutson , and Roger Pielke Jr .. 
 Others say that there is evidence for a causal connection . The U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory performed a simulation to determine if there is a statistical trend in the frequency or strength of tropical cyclones over time . The simulation concluded " the strongest hurricanes in the present climate may be upstaged by even more intense hurricanes over the next century as the earth 's climate is warmed by increasing levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere " . 
 In another simulation done by Kerry Emanuel , application of a tropical cyclone <unk> technique to six <unk> @-@ generation global climate models run under historical conditions and under the <unk> emissions projection indicates an increase in global tropical cyclone activity , most evident in the North Pacific region but also noticeable in the North Atlantic and South Indian Oceans . In these regions , both the frequency and intensity of tropical cyclones are projected to increase . This result contrasts with the result of applying the same <unk> technique to <unk> @-@ generation models , which generally predict a small decrease of global tropical cyclone frequency . 
 In an article in Nature , meteorology professor Kerry Emanuel stated that potential hurricane destructiveness , a measure combining hurricane strength , duration , and frequency , " is highly correlated with tropical sea surface temperature , reflecting well @-@ documented climate signals , including multidecadal oscillations in the North Atlantic and North Pacific , and global warming " . Emanuel predicted " a substantial increase in hurricane @-@ related losses in the twenty @-@ first century " . In more recent work , Emanuel states that new climate modeling data indicates " global warming should reduce the global frequency of hurricanes . " According to the Houston Chronicle , the new work suggests that , even in a dramatically warming world , hurricane frequency and intensity may not substantially rise during the next two centuries . 
 P.J. Webster and others published an article in Science examining the " changes in tropical cyclone number , duration , and intensity " over the past 35 years , the period when satellite data has been available . Their main finding was although the number of cyclones decreased throughout the planet excluding the north Atlantic Ocean , there was a great increase in the number and proportion of very strong cyclones . 
 The strength of the reported effect is surprising in light of modeling studies that predict only a one @-@ half category increase in storm intensity as a result of a ~ 2 ° C ( 3 @.@ 6 ° F ) global warming . Such a response would have predicted only a ~ 10 % increase in Emanuel 's potential destructiveness index during the 20th century rather than the ~ 75 – 120 % increase he reported . Second , after adjusting for changes in population and inflation , and despite a more than 100 % increase in Emanuel 's potential destructiveness index , no statistically significant increase in the monetary damages resulting from Atlantic hurricanes has been found . 
 Sufficiently warm sea surface temperatures are considered vital to the development of tropical cyclones . Although neither study can directly link hurricanes with global warming , the increase in sea surface temperatures is believed to be due to both global warming and natural variability , e.g. the hypothesized Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation ( AMO ) , although an exact attribution has not been defined . However , recent temperatures are the warmest ever observed for many ocean basins . 
 In February 2007 , the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change released its fourth assessment report on climate change . The report noted many observed changes in the climate , including atmospheric composition , global average temperatures , ocean conditions , and others . The report concluded the observed increase in tropical cyclone intensity is larger than climate models predict . In addition , the report considered that it is likely that storm intensity will continue to increase through the 21st century , and declared it more likely than not that there has been some human contribution to the increases in tropical cyclone intensity . However , there is no universal agreement about the magnitude of the effects anthropogenic global warming has on tropical cyclone formation , track , and intensity . For example , critics such as Chris Landsea assert that man @-@ made effects would be " quite tiny compared to the observed large natural hurricane variability " . A statement by the American Meteorological Society on February 1 , 2007 stated that trends in tropical cyclone records offer " evidence both for and against the existence of a detectable anthropogenic signal " in tropical cyclogenesis . Although many aspects of a link between tropical cyclones and global warming are still being " hotly debated " , a point of agreement is that the strength of destructiveness no individual tropical cyclone or season can be attributed entirely to global warming . Research reported in the September 3 , 2008 issue of Nature found that the strongest tropical cyclones are getting stronger , in particular over the North Atlantic and Indian oceans . Wind speeds for the strongest tropical storms increased from an average of 225 km / h ( 140 mph ) in 1981 to 251 km / h ( 156 mph ) in 2006 , while the ocean temperature , averaged globally over all the regions where tropical cyclones form , increased from 28 @.@ 2 ° C ( 82 @.@ 8 ° F ) to 28 @.@ 5 ° C ( 83 @.@ 3 ° F ) during this period . 
 = = Related cyclone types = = 
 In addition to tropical cyclones , there are two other classes of cyclones within the spectrum of cyclone types . These kinds of cyclones , known as extratropical cyclones and subtropical cyclones , can be stages a tropical cyclone passes through during its formation or dissipation . An extratropical cyclone is a storm that derives energy from horizontal temperature differences , which are typical in higher latitudes . A tropical cyclone can become extratropical as it moves toward higher latitudes if its energy source changes from heat released by condensation to differences in temperature between air masses ; although not as frequently , an extratropical cyclone can transform into a subtropical storm , and from there into a tropical cyclone . From space , extratropical storms have a characteristic " comma @-@ shaped " cloud pattern . Extratropical cyclones can also be dangerous when their low @-@ pressure centers cause powerful winds and high seas . 
 A subtropical cyclone is a weather system that has some characteristics of a tropical cyclone and some characteristics of an extratropical cyclone . They can form in a wide band of latitudes , from the equator to 50 ° . Although subtropical storms rarely have hurricane @-@ force winds , they may become tropical in nature as their cores warm . From an operational standpoint , a tropical cyclone is usually not considered to become subtropical during its extratropical transition . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In popular culture , tropical cyclones have made several appearances in different types of media , including films , books , television , music , and electronic games . These media often portray tropical cyclones that are either entirely fictional or based on real events . For example , George Rippey Stewart 's Storm , a best @-@ seller published in 1941 , is thought to have influenced meteorologists on their decision to assign female names to Pacific tropical cyclones . Another example is the hurricane in The Perfect Storm , which describes the sinking of the Andrea Gail by the 1991 Perfect Storm . Hypothetical hurricanes have been featured in parts of the plots of series such as The Simpsons , Invasion , Family Guy , Seinfeld , Dawson 's Creek , Burn Notice and CSI : Miami . The 2004 film The Day After Tomorrow includes several mentions of actual tropical cyclones and features fantastical " hurricane @-@ like " , albeit non @-@ tropical , Arctic storms . 
 = Charles Pearson = 
 Charles Pearson ( 4 October 1793 – 14 September 1862 ) was Solicitor to the City of London , a reforming campaigner , and – briefly – Member of Parliament for Lambeth . He campaigned against corruption in jury selection , for penal reform , for the abolition of capital punishment , and for universal suffrage . 
 Pearson used his influence as City Solicitor to promote improvements to transport communications . Initially , he proposed a central railway station for the City , accessed by tunnel , that would be used by multiple railway companies enabling workers to commute to the City from further away . When this plan was rejected , Pearson promoted an underground railway connecting the capital 's northern termini . The resulting Metropolitan Railway was the first underground railway in the world and led to the development of the extensive London Underground network and the rapid expansion of the capital . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Pearson was born on 4 October 1793 at 25 Clement 's Lane in the City of London , the son of Thomas Pearson , an upholsterer and feather merchant , and his wife Sarah . After education in Eastbourne , he was apprenticed to his father but instead studied law and qualified as a solicitor in 1816 . In 1817 , he was released from his indenture by the Haberdashers ' Company and married Mary Martha Dutton . The couple had one child , Mary Dutton Pearson , born in 1820 . 
 = = City career and campaigning = = 
 In 1817 , Pearson was elected a councilman of the City of London Corporation for Bishopsgate ward and served in that role from 1817 to 1820 and from 1830 to 1836 as well . He served as chairman of the City board of health from 1831 to 1833 . In 1839 , he gave up his extensive private practice and was appointed City Solicitor , holding that office until his death . 
 Despite his comfortable upbringing and his high social status , Pearson was a radical , and throughout his life he fought a number of campaigns on progressive and reforming issues including the removal from the Monument inscription blaming the Great Fire of London on Catholics , the abolition of packed special jury lists for political trials , and the overturning of the ban on Jews becoming brokers in the City . Pearson was in favour of the disestablishment of the Church of England and opposed capital punishment . Politically , he supported universal suffrage and electoral reform to balance the sizes of parliamentary constituencies . He unsuccessfully attempted to break the local monopolies developed by the gas companies , calling for the distribution pipework to be owned collectively by the consumers . 
 Pearson was a Liberal and was elected at the 1847 general election as a Member of Parliament for Lambeth . His campaign was prompted by a desire to promote his penal reform campaign in parliament . He resigned his seat in 1850 thorough the mechanism of accepting the Stewardship of the Chiltern Hundreds . 
 = = = Campaigning for an underground railway = = = 
 Recognising the increasing congestion in the City and its rapidly growing suburbs , Pearson published a pamphlet in 1845 calling for the construction of an underground railway through the Fleet valley to Farringdon . The proposed railway would have been an atmospheric railway with trains pushed through tunnels by compressed air . Although the proposal was ridiculed and came to nothing ( and would almost certainly have failed if it had been built , due to the shortcomings of the technology proposed ) , Pearson continued to lobby for a variety of railway schemes throughout the 1840s and 1850s . 
 In 1846 , Pearson proposed with the support of the City Corporation a central railway station for London located in Farringdon that was estimated to cost £ 1 million ( approximately £ 87 @.@ 3 million today ) . The station , to be shared by multiple railway companies , was to be approached from the north in a covered cutting 80 feet ( 24 m ) wide . Pearson 's aim in promoting this plan was to facilitate the improvement of the social conditions of City workers by enabling them to commute into London on cheap trains from new residential developments of good quality , cheap homes built outside the capital . The 1846 Royal Commission on Metropolitan Railway Termini rejected the proposal , preferring to define a limit around the centre of the capital into which no new railway lines could be extended . 
 In 1854 , a Royal Commission was set up to examine a number of new proposals for railways in London . Pearson made a proposal for a railway connecting the London Termini and presented as evidence the first survey of traffic coming into London which demonstrated the high level of congestion caused by the huge number of carts , cabs and omnibuses filling the roads . Pearson 's commentary on this was that : 
 the overcrowding of the city is caused , first by the natural increase in the population and area of the surrounding district ; secondly , by the influx of provincial passengers by the great railways North of London , and the obstruction experienced in the streets by omnibuses and cabs coming from their distant stations , to bring the provincial travellers to and from the heart of the city . I point next to the vast increase of what I may term the migratory population , the population of the city who now oscillate between the country and the city , who leave the City of London every afternoon and return every morning . 
 Many of the proposed schemes were rejected , but the Commission did recommend that a railway be constructed linking the termini with the docks and the General Post Office at St. Martin 's Le Grand . A private bill for the Metropolitan Railway between Praed Street in Paddington and Farringdon received assent on 7 August 1854 . 
 Although not a director or significant shareholder of the new company , Pearson continued to promote the project over the next few years and use his influence to help the company raise the £ 1 million of capital needed for the construction of the line . He issued a pamphlet , A twenty minutes letter to the citizens of London , in favour of the Metropolitan Railway and City Station , encouraging investment and he even persuaded the City of London to invest on the basis that the railway would alleviate the City 's congestion problems . Once the railway was in operation , the City sold its shares at a profit . By 1860 , the funds had been collected and the final route decided . Work on the railway started ; taking less than three years to excavate through some of the worst slums of Victorian London and under some of the busiest streets . 
 Pearson died of dropsy on 14 September 1862 at his home at West Hill , Wandsworth , and did not live to see the opening of the Metropolitan Railway on 10 January 1863 . Pearson had refused the offer of a reward from the grateful railway company , but , shortly after the railway 's opening , his widow was granted an annuity of £ 250 per year . 
 He was buried at West Norwood Cemetery on 23 September 1862 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Transport writer Christian Wolmar considers Pearson to have " by far the best claim " to be the first to propose the idea of an underground railway to deal with London 's congestion problem . Michael Robbins considers that " without Pearson 's constant advocacy – his gadfly conduct , which he managed to combine with holding high office in the City of London – the Metropolitan Railway , the first of its kind in the world , and the nucleus of London 's underground system , could not have come into existence when it did . " 
 When it opened , the Metropolitan Railway had a significant impact on street traffic , particularly cabs and omnibuses but these quickly recovered to near their former levels , despite the Metropolitan Railway also carrying over 9 million passengers in its first year of operation . The Metropolitan Railway and the network of underground lines that grew from it was the first in the world and the idea was not adopted elsewhere until 1896 when the Budapest Metro and the Glasgow Subway were both opened . Without Pearson 's promotion of the idea of an underground railway when he did it is possible that transport developments at the end of the 19th century developments , such as electric trams and vehicles powered by internal combustion engines , might have meant the underground solution was ignored . The expansion of the capital that the underground network and its suburban surface extensions enabled was considerable and rapid and helped the population of what is now Greater London to increase from 3 @,@ 094 @,@ 391 in 1861 to 6 @,@ 226 @,@ 494 in 1901 . 
 = New Waveland Cafe and Clinic = 
 The New Waveland Café and New Waveland Clinic together formed a disaster response center consisting of a combination café , soup kitchen , medical clinic , donation center , and market , that operated free of charge from September 5 to December 1 , 2005 in immediate Post @-@ Katrina Mississippi Gulf Coast in Waveland , Hancock County , Mississippi . The cafe and clinic were founded in response to Hurricane Katrina and provided free food and free medical care to hurricane victims for three months . They were located in tents in the parking lot of Fred 's Department Store at 790 Hwy 90 in Waveland , across the street from the destroyed and gutted Waveland Police Department . The New Waveland Cafe served three free meals every day to thousands of residents and volunteers . The New Waveland Clinic provided free health care to over 5 @,@ 500 patient contacts . As well , a group of hippies and Christians came together to form a unique group which worked together to provide emergency relief . 
 = = Impact of Katrina = = 
 Hancock County is an ocean @-@ side county situated in Southern Mississippi . As such , it has a long history of hurricanes . In 1969 the county was leveled by Hurricane Camille . 
 In 2000 the county had a population of 42 @,@ 967 . A vast majority of this population was exposed to the harsh effects of Hurricane Katrina . Hurricane Katrina made landfall on the US Gulf Coast on August 29 , 2005 as a Category 3 hurricane . The town of Waveland was destroyed and has been described as " worst punishment Katrina could mete out " . Official reports stated that approximately 50 people died when Waveland was hit directly by the eyewall of Katrina and the 32 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) storm surge . Hurricane Katrina came ashore during the high tide of 8 : 01AM , + 2 @.@ 2 feet more . Hurricane Katrina damaged over 40 Mississippi libraries . The Waveland Public Library was a total loss requiring a complete rebuild . 
 = = Cafe = = 
 The cafe originated when friends from the Rainbow Family began to communicate with each other about a possible response to the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina . The Rainbow Family are best known for the Rainbow Gathering , a large , primitive type camping event in which up to 20 @,@ 000 people attend . Those who attend these gatherings have become skilled at making and serving food for extremely large groups of people for long periods of time and in very basic situations . The cafe operated free of charge and was supported solely by donations . The cafe served up to 4000 meals three times a day . The volunteers who built and ran the cafe were all attendees of Rainbow Gatherings . As attendees of Rainbow Gatherings , the cafe volunteers often appeared to look like hippies . They were reported to have " piercings " and " dreadlocks " . 
 = = Clinic = = 
 The New Waveland Clinic was a temporary emergency clinic set up by Brad " Baruch " Stone on August 28 , 2005 and housed in tents . Stone used his skills as an emergency medical technician ( EMT ) and previous experiences as a volunteer coordinator at the CALM Medical Clinic in order to build and administrate the clinic . The clinic recruited volunteer doctors , medical students , nurses , pharmacists , EMTs and paramedics from different parts of the United States to volunteer for a week at a time . Medications and medical tools were donated by dozens of organizations including Pfizer , which donated the majority of the medications used . During its three months of operation , the clinic had over 5 @,@ 500 documented patient encounters . 
 The clinic was equipped and staffed by physicians specializing in family medicine , internal medicine , pediatrics and psychiatry . The clinic operated primarily as a walk @-@ in clinic where patients could see a doctor for all complaints and receive free medication . Due to the lack of a functioning emergency room the clinic was sometimes utilized as a facility to stabilize a patient while an ambulance was en route to transport the patient to an emergency room . The closest hospitals were 42 miles ( 68 km ) to the west at the Louisiana Heart Hospital in Lacombe , Louisiana or the Northshore Medical Center in Slidell , Louisiana , or 35 miles ( 56 km ) to the east at the Gulfport Memorial Hospital in Gulfport , Mississippi . The local hospital , Hancock County Medical Center , was incapacitated due to the hurricane . There were no X @-@ ray or blood laboratory available with the exception of urinalysis testing strips and <unk> . As such physicians were described to be practicing battlefield medicine in a <unk> unit . 
 = = Volunteers = = 
 A unique bond between two very disparate groups was formed as a result of the hurricane . Two groups , the Bastrop Christian Outreach Center ( <unk> ) and attendees of the counter @-@ culture Rainbow Gathering , arrived around the same time in Waveland . The <unk> efforts were led by Reverend Colonel Pete and Fay Jones who were among some of the first responders . Each group represented very different philosophies and had little common faith , each was able to put aside their differences and focus entirely on their humanitarian efforts . The cooperation between the two groups was described as " unlikely " , a " bunch of hippies and evangelical Christians " and the " unlikeliest of bedfellows " . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 As all buildings and structures were destroyed due to the high winds and flooding , the entire relief effort took place under temporary , tent @-@ based structures . The cafe was housed in a large geodesic dome , usually found at the Burning Man festival . 
 The clinic originally started with two tents purchased at a supermarket . After 3 weeks of operation a 20 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) , 10 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) tent was donated and erected . A month later an additional 40 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 12 m ) , 10 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) was added on . 
 = Cedar Point = 
 Cedar Point is a 365 @-@ acre ( 148 ha ) amusement park located on a Lake Erie peninsula in Sandusky , Ohio . Opened in 1870 , it is the second @-@ oldest operating amusement park in the United States behind Lake <unk> . Cedar Point is owned and operated by Cedar Fair and is considered the flagship of the amusement park chain . Known as " America 's Roller Coast " , the park features a world @-@ record 71 rides , including 17 roller coasters which are second @-@ most in the world behind Six Flags Magic Mountain . Its newest roller coaster , Valravn , opened in May 2016 . 
 Cedar Point 's normal operating season runs from early May until Labor Day in September . The park then reopens only on weekends until the end of October or early November for a Halloween @-@ themed event known as HalloWeekends . Other attractions near the park include a one @-@ mile @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) white @-@ sand beach , an outdoor water park called Soak City , an indoor water park called Castaway Bay , an area known as Challenge Park , two marinas , and several nearby resorts . 
 The park has reached several milestones . It is the only amusement park in the world with five roller coasters taller than 200 feet ( 61 m ) – Magnum XL @-@ 200 , Millennium Force , Wicked Twister , Top Thrill Dragster , and Valravn – and is the only park with roller coasters in all four height classifications . Cedar Point also received the Golden Ticket Award for " Best Amusement Park in the World " from Amusement Today for 16 consecutive years from 1997 @-@ 2013 . As of 2015 , the park is the most visited seasonal amusement park in the United States with an estimated 3 @.@ 51 million visitors in 2015 . The park also has several buildings that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = History = = 
 In the mid @-@ 19th century , the south shore region of Lake Erie was a popular vacation destination for the emerging middle class in the United States . The lake islands , such as <unk> Island and South Bass Island , were gaining a reputation for their freshwater bathing resorts . The Cedar Point peninsula , named for its abundance of cedar trees , was originally known for its fishing . Local fishermen leased land and built living quarters there . Sandusky , which featured an important shipping harbor and two railroads , transformed into a major economic center over the next three decades . Railroad and steamship travel supported an emerging tourism industry , and rapid development of the area began . 
 In the 1860s during the American Civil War , housing for a battery of four field artillery pieces was constructed at the tip of the peninsula . It was used to defend a prison for Confederate soldiers on nearby Johnson 's Island . Louis <unk> , a German immigrant , built two boats to transport the prisoners . In 1870 , he began to ferry locals to the Cedar Point peninsula , which was regaining popularity as a summer picnic destination . <unk> opened a bathhouse on the north shore of the peninsula and the same year built a beer garden with a small dance floor . He charged 25 cents per person to ride from Sandusky to Cedar Point on his boat , Young Reindeer . This marked the beginning of Cedar Point as an amusement park . 
 Benjamin F. Dwelle and Captain William Slackford leased land on the peninsula in 1882 and built eight new bathhouses , a dance hall and wooden walkways on the beach . The steamboats R.B. Hayes and <unk> provided transport to <unk> 's Cove and Cedar Point Lighthouse . Building on early success , Dwelle and Slackford continued to expand the park each year and added picnic tables , cleared acres of brush , and built a baseball diamond . In 1888 , after Slackford became ill , Dwelle entered a more lucrative partnership with Adam Stoll and Louis Adolph , who owned land at Cedar Point , and investors Charles <unk> and Jacob <unk> . The partnership 's first venture was constructing a Grand Pavilion , which opened in 1888 . It was a two @-@ story theater and concert hall with a bowling alley and photographer 's studio . The building was recognized for its unusual architecture , and still stands in the park . The first amusement ride at Cedar Point , a water toboggan ride consisting of a ramp that launched riders into Lake Erie , opened in 1890 . Electricity was installed at Cedar Point in 1891 . The first roller coaster , Switchback Railway , opened the following year . It stood 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) high and had a top speed of 10 miles per hour ( 16 km / h ) . The Switchback Railway was designed as two identical tracks side @-@ by @-@ side – one for the ride down and the other for the train to be hauled back to the top by the ride attendant . 
 = = = Boeckling era = = = 
 Representatives of the Lake Erie and Western Railroad purchased the peninsula for US $ 256 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to about $ 7 @,@ 281 @,@ 700 in 2015 ) in 1897 , and formed the Cedar Point Pleasure Resort Company . The company appointed George A. Boeckling , a businessman from Indiana , as the park 's new manager . Under his tenure , the peninsula was transformed from a picnic ground into a nationally recognized amusement park and resort destination . 
 The second roller coaster at Cedar Point , the Figure @-@ Eight Roller Toboggan , debuted in 1902 . It was moved several years later and renamed The Racer . A pony track was built near the beach the same year . Mosquitos were becoming a problem , so in 1904 , the park hired the Detroit Dredging Company to drain swampy areas on the peninsula . Detroit Dredging connected a series of lagoons to form a water passageway that quickly became one of the park 's signature attractions . Aside from sightseeing passenger boats , the passageway was used to transport coal to power plants near the center of the peninsula . The historic Hotel Breakers opened in 1905 as one of the largest hotels in the Midwest ; it had 600 guest rooms and a cafe that could seat 400 guests . A new area of the park called " Amusement Circle " was designed in 1906 to link the pier to the beach . It was located southeast of the Coliseum , a large arena built the same year that featured a grand ballroom and other attractions . 
 In 1908 , the Dip the Dips Scenic Railway roller coaster opened but was soon overshadowed in 1912 by the larger Leap the Dips ride . In 1917 , Dip the Dips was razed and replaced by the Leap Frog Scenic Railway . With three roller coasters and a growing variety of other rides , Cedar Point was beginning to grow as an amusement park , though that was not Boeckling 's priority . He marketed the peninsula primarily as a bathing resort complete with shows , exhibits , motion pictures , and other forms of entertainment , but did not emphasize the park 's rides . 
 Many more hotels and restaurants were constructed in the remaining years of Boeckling 's tenure , including Hotel Cedars , White House Hotel , Crystal Rock Castle , and Crystal Gardens Ballroom . The Cyclone , a rickety and rough coaster , was built in 1926 . Cedar Point continued to update its ride attractions , replacing the Racer , the Circle Swing , and many other rides to make way for a Shoot @-@ the @-@ Chutes water ride , a Tilt @-@ A @-@ Whirl , and fun houses such as Noah 's Ark and Bluebeard 's Palace . Boeckling 's health began to deteriorate in the late 1920s . In 1931 , Boeckling became confined to a wheelchair , but he continued to oversee park operations , and was pushed around Cedar Point by an employee or relative . His condition worsened , however , and he eventually had to remain indoors . Boeckling died on July 24 , 1931 from <unk> . His portrait in the lobby of Breakers Hotel was draped in black . Flags in the resort and on the G.A. Boeckling steamboat were lowered to half mast . 
 = = = After Boeckling @-@ George A Roose Era = = = 
 Edward Smith took over Cedar Point 's management after the death of Boeckling . Little expansion happened through the 1930s ; one of the few rides built in that period was the Tumble Bug . The decaying Leap the Dips coaster was demolished in the mid @-@ 1930s . In the late 1930s , the resort was on the brink of being sold to the state of Ohio for $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . After the 1938 season , the directors had the second floor of the Coliseum modernized in the art deco style with a new stage . In the middle , the giant dance floor remained . Some of the top bands of the time played in the ballroom . As a result , it kept Cedar Point operating through the rest of the Depression . Momma Berardi 's Home Made French Fries came to Cedar Point , Momma Berardi 's family played an important role in the food industry at Cedar Point . Momma Berardi 's fries were sold there from 1942 until 1978 , winning four Reader 's Choice Awards . 
 By the end of World War II , Cedar Point was in need of financial help . The wood of the Cyclone roller coaster was rotting , the boardwalk was cracked in many places , and the fishing dock was in need of repair . In 1946 , Cedar Point 's oldest still @-@ existing ride , the Midway Carousel , was installed . By 1951 , the Cyclone coaster was razed because of its poor condition , leaving the resort without a roller coaster . While the Cyclone was departing , the <unk> @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Dark , Rocket Ships , and Loop @-@ A @-@ Plane were newly installed . Cedar Point Causeway was built in 1957 , and is still in use . The president of Cedar Point , Bernie <unk> , was replaced by George Roose around 1958 , and Emile Legros was elected chairman that same year . 
 In the 1950s , the Pagoda Gift Shop was a post @-@ office and the Crystal Rock Castle was turned into a maintenance shop in the late @-@ 1950s . In 1959 , the hotels were repainted , new admission gates were installed , and over $ 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 was spent to refresh Cedar Point . The park 's first roller coaster since the Cyclone , the Wild Mouse , was built . The resort also got a new kind of ride , a monorail that was the most popular ride in 1959 . Breakers Hotel was restored , and the neglected cottages were demolished . The Coliseum and Grand Pavilion were both painted and remodeled . The Crystal Rock Castle Maintenance Shop , bathhouses , and the old powerhouse were demolished , and a new $ 50 @,@ 000 bathhouse , boiler house , and maintenance shop were built in their place . 
 In the 1960s , the idea of " pay one price " season passes became common . On March 28 , 1960 , Cedar Point announced plans to transform the park into a " Disneyland " amusement center . Those plans fell through , however . Cedar Point & Lake Erie Railroad opened in 1963 , transporting passengers from the middle of the park to the back . In 1964 , Cedar Point built its oldest surviving roller coaster , the Blue Streak . It was named after the local high school 's sports teams , the Sandusky Blue Streaks . Jungle Larry 's Safari Island was a well @-@ known attraction that operated from 1965 until 1994 despite the death of Jungle Larry in 1984 . The Cedar Creek Mine Ride opened in 1969 ; it is currently the second oldest roller coaster at Cedar Point . 
 In 1970 , the Centennial Theatre , named in honor of Cedar Point 's 100th anniversary , was built . 1972 brought Giant Wheel and the now @-@ defunct Jumbo Jet coaster which was noted for being the fastest around . In 1975 , Robert L. Munger Jr. took over as president of Cedar Point after Roose retired . The record @-@ breaking Corkscrew roller coaster was built in 1976 ; it was the first roller coaster to span a midway and have three inversions . Gemini opened in 1978 and was advertised as the tallest , fastest and steepest roller coaster in the world . A kiddie coaster , named Jr . Gemini ( now known as Wilderness Run ) , opened the following year across from the original version . White Water Landing opened in 1982 , replacing the original Shoot the Rapids log flume . In 1983 , Demon Drop was built at the front of the park . Avalanche Run opened in 1985 close to the beach , and would later be re @-@ themed as Disaster Transport . That same year , the San Francisco Earthquake Ride was transformed into the Berenstain Bear Country . 
 = = = Dick Kinzel era = = = 
 In 1986 , Robert L. Munger Jr , the President and CEO of Cedar Fair , stepped down due to health issues , and was replaced by Richard " Dick " Kinzel . Thunder Canyon , a river rafting ride manufactured by Intamin , also opened in 1986 . In 1987 , Iron Dragon , a suspended roller coaster , debuted on the Million Dollar Midway near the Cedar Point & Lake Erie Railroad station . In 1988 , Soak City , Cedar Point 's outdoor water park , was constructed near Hotel Breakers . It features speed slides , more than 10 body and tube slides , a family raft ride , a water playhouse and two lazy rivers . 
 Several new rides and roller coasters opened at Cedar Point since 1989 have been record @-@ breakers . Magnum XL @-@ 200 debuted in 1989 , breaking the world height and speed records . It was the first roller coaster to exceed a height of 200 feet ( 61 m ) and speeds over 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) and was the first hypercoaster in the world . For the 1990 season , Avalanche Run was transformed into Disaster Transport , the ride was fully enclosed and special effects were added . In recent years the special effects and theming were removed , leaving the ride almost completely dark . Mean Streak opened in 1991 as the northernmost attraction in the park . It broke records for the fastest and tallest wooden roller coaster in the world , reaching speeds of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) and a height of 161 feet ( 49 m ) . Challenge Park was built between Hotel Breakers and Soak City in 1992 . Challenge Park includes a Ripcord , Skyscraper , and two eighteen @-@ hole mini @-@ golf courses . 
 Snake River Falls was constructed in 1993 because of the popularity of Soak City . The 82 @-@ foot ( 25 m ) -tall structure sends riders plunging down at 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) . At the bottom of the hill , the ride ends with a splash landing in which the boat creates a large wave , splashing spectators on an overlooking bridge . When it opened , it was the tallest and fastest water ride in the world . In 1994 , Cedar Point installed Raptor . The Mill Race log flume was removed from the park , and the circular Calypso was relocated to make room for Raptor , the first inverted roller coaster to feature a Cobra Roll . In December 1994 , the park held Christmas in the Park for the first and last time . The Midway Carousel was open , and a horse @-@ drawn carriage gave behind @-@ the @-@ scenes tours of the park , and the midway held many Christmas festivals , including a Christmas tree . In 1996 , Cedar Point opened Mantis , then the tallest , steepest , and fastest stand @-@ up roller coaster in the world . The original name for Mantis was " Banshee " , but many people thought it was offensive and the name was changed . In 1997 , the park added HalloWeekends , a Halloween event with haunted houses and mazes during the Halloween season . Camp Snoopy debuted in 1999 ; it features eight Snoopy @-@ themed attractions , with the exception of a Tilt @-@ a @-@ Whirl . The area also features a junior roller coaster built by Vekoma , Woodstock Express . 
 Cedar Point built the first giga coaster , Millennium Force , in 2000 . When it debuted , it was the tallest and fastest complete circuit coaster in the world , reaching speeds of 93 miles per hour ( 150 km / h ) and heights of 310 ft ( 94 m ) . In 2002 , Wicked Twister opened as the first second @-@ generation Intamin inverted impulse roller coaster . Today , Wicked Twister is the tallest ( 215 ft ) and fastest 72 miles per hour ( 116 km / h ) inverted impulse roller coaster in the world . Top Thrill Dragster debuted as the first strata coaster in 2003 and was the tallest , 420 ft ( 130 m ) , and fastest , 120 miles per hour ( 190 km / h ) , roller coaster in the world . It is currently second @-@ tallest in the world. maXair debuted in 2005 as only the second <unk> Giant Frisbee ride in the United States . Dan Keller also retired as Vice President and general manager . He was replaced by John Hildebrandt , who was the VP and GM of Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom since May 2004 . In 2006 , Skyhawk was built next to Snake River Falls , it is currently the tallest Screamin ' Swing in the world . In the 2007 season , Cedar Point built Maverick , which features a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) drop at a 95 @-@ degree angle and includes an LSM launch in the middle of the ride reaching speeds of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) . In 2008 , Cedar Point introduced Planet Snoopy , a kids ' area constructed on the site of Peanuts Playground ; it consists of family and children 's rides relocated from Cedar Point 's sister park Geauga Lake after it closed . The area also consists of a " Kids Only " restaurant called Joe Cool Cafe , which has a small menu for adults . Starlight Experience , a night @-@ time LED light extravaganza with floats themed to the four seasons , debuted in 2009 . This $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 attraction takes place on the Frontier Trail nightly beginning at twilight . In order to prepare for Starlight Experience , the Frontier Trail closes for approximately 30 minutes before the event . In 2010 , Cedar Point added a new flume ride on the park 's Frontier Trail named Shoot the Rapids , which includes two drops and a three @-@ minute journey through a rustic western environment . The ride was later removed in 2015 due to a history of low ridership and mechanical issues . WindSeeker , a 301 @-@ foot ( 92 m ) tall tower that spins riders along the shoreline of Lake Erie , was introduced in 2011 . WindSeeker did not open on time due to construction delays and opened to the public on June 14 , 2011 . 
 = = = Matt Ouimet era = = = 
 On June 20 , 2011 , Cedar Fair announced that Dick Kinzel would retire on January 3 , 2012 , and Matt Ouimet would become the CEO of the company . Ouimet was employed by The Walt Disney Company for 17 years , served as president of Disney Cruise Line and the Disneyland Resort . 
 In 2012 , Cedar Point added Dinosaurs Alive ! , a walk @-@ through exhibit featuring approximately 50 life @-@ size animatronic dinosaurs . It is located on Adventure Island and replaced the Paddlewheel Excursions boat cruise ride . A six @-@ lane mat racer slide complex called Dragster H2O was added to Soak City . The slides around Dragster H2O were repainted and the Speed Slides were dismantled to make room for Dragster H2O . Cedar Point also introduced Fast Lane , their version of a fast @-@ pass system , and a new nighttime show , Luminosity – Ignite the Night ! . Cedar Point also removed WildCat for the 2012 season to make room for Luminosity . This was the first time since 1978 that a roller coaster was removed from Cedar Point . 
 On July 13 , 2012 , Cedar Point announced the removal of Disaster Transport and Space Spiral . Exactly a month later , Cedar Point announced GateKeeper , the longest wing coaster in the world , which opened on May 11 , 2013 . Along with GateKeeper , a new main entrance plaza was constructed , replacing the entrance that was built in the 1960s . It features two 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) -tall support columns that the trains go through . Cedar Point is investing $ 60 million in its hotel resorts over three years , starting in the 2013 – 2014 offseason . At the end of the 2013 season , John Hildebrandt retired as the park 's general manager and was replaced by Jason McClure , the former VP and GM of Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom . 
 In 2014 , Cedar Point added two new family attractions called Pipe Scream and Lake Erie Eagles and also added a thrill ride , SlingShot . Many improvements were also made to Camp Snoopy and the Gemini Midway , including relocating and <unk> a few rides . In 2015 , the stand @-@ up coaster , Mantis was repainted green and orange and received new trains to become Rougarou , a floorless coaster . Also in 2015 , Hotel Breakers received a 25 million dollar renovation . A dive coaster Valravn debuted in 2016 as the tallest , fastest , and longest dive coaster in the world . It stands 223 feet tall and travels at speeds of up to 73 miles per hour replacing the 40 year @-@ old Good Time Theater and relocating Calypso to the beach area near Wicked Twister and was renamed Tiki Twirl . Valravn also replaced the Turnpike Cars , an Antique Car ride . Raptor and Top Thrill Dragster received a fresh coat of paint that same year . 
 = = = Attraction timeline = = = 
 = = = = Before 1960 = = = = 
 1870 : Cedar Point opens 
 1892 : Switchback Railway opens 
 1899 : Bay Shore Hotel opens 
 1902 : Figure @-@ Eight Roller Toboggan opens 
 1905 : Hotel Breakers opens 
 1907 : Switchback Railway closes 
 1908 : Dip the Dips Scenic Railway opens 
 1910 : Racer opens 
 1912 : Leap the Dips opens 
 1917 : Dip the Dips Scenic Railway closes 
 1918 : High Frolics opens 
 1925 : Noah 's Ark opens 
 1928 : Racer closes 
 1929 : Cyclone opens 
 1934 : Tumble Bug opens 
 1935 : Leap the Dips closes 
 1940 : High Frolics closes 
 1946 : Midway Carrousel opens 
 1951 : Cyclone closes 
 1952 : Super Coaster opens 
 1955 : Fascination opens 
 1957 : The Cedar Point Causeway opens 
 1958 : Cadillac Cars open 
 1959 : Monorail , Turnpike Cars , and Wild Mouse opens ; Noah 's Ark closes ; Construction is completed on the Cedar Point Marina 
 = = = = 1960 to 1979 = = = = 
 1960 : <unk> opens 
 1961 : Sky wheel , Rotor , and Star Voyager ( formerly called Super Jets ) open 
 1962 : Sky Ride and <unk> opens 
 1963 : Cedar Point & Lake Erie Railroad and Mill Race open ; Wild Mouse closes 
 1964 : Blue Streak , and Paddlewheel Excursions ( formerly called Western Cruise ) open 
 1965 : Space Spiral , Earthquake , and Jungle Larry 's African Safari open 
 1966 : Pirate Ride , Trabant , and Upside Down Funhouse opens 
 1967 : Cedar Downs Racing Derby , Second Rotor , Sealand Marine exhibit , Shoot @-@ the @-@ Rapids , and Frontiertown open ; Super Coaster closes 
 1968 : Frontier Lift , Kiddieland Carousel and Sky Slide open 
 1969 : Cedar Creek Mine Ride , Antique Cars , and the Town Hall Museum open ; <unk> closes 
 1970 : WildCat , Bayern Kurve , Dodgem No. 2 , Monster , Schwabinchen , Calypso , Super <unk> , Centennial Theatre , Kiddy Kingdom , and Tiki Twirl open 
 1971 : Frontier Trail and Camper Village RV Campground open ; Zugspitze closes 
 1972 : Frontiertown Carousel , Jumbo Jet , Giant Wheel and Matterhorn open 
 1975 : The Cedar Point Cinema opens 
 1976 : Corkscrew and Troika open 
 1977 : Witches ' Wheel opens 
 1978 : Gemini opens ; Jumbo Jet was closed down 
 1979 : Jr . Gemini and Wave Swinger open 
 = = = = 1980 to 1999 = = = = 
 1980 : Oceana Dolphin stadium opens ; Sky Wheel closes ; 
 1981 : Ocean Motion opens ; Sky Wheel , Funhouse and Shoot @-@ the @-@ Rapids close 
 1982 : White Water Landing and Kid Arthur 's Court open 
 1983 : Demon Drop opens 
 1984 : Tiki Twirl , Rotor , Bayern Curve and Earthquake close 
 1985 : Avalanche Run and Berenstain Bear Country indoor complex opens , Frontier Lift closes ; WildCat , Matterhorn and Super Himalaya moved to make room for Avalanche Run ; Schwabinchen relocated near Ocean Motion 
 1986 : Thunder Canyon opens ; Sir Rub @-@ A @-@ Dub 's Tubs added to Kiddy Kingdom 
 1987 : Iron Dragon opens ; Monster is relocated to make room for Iron Dragon ; Western Cruise station is moved and renamed Paddlewheel Excursions to make room for Iron Dragon 
 1988 : Soak City waterpark opens 
 1989 : Magnum XL @-@ 200 opens 
 1990 : Sandcastle Suites ; Main Stream and Tadpole Town added to Soak City ; Trabant closes ; Avalanche Run is transformed into Disaster Transport 
 1991 : Mean Streak opens ; Sky Slide closes 
 1992 : Challenge Park opens ; Outdoor complex added to Berenstain Bear Country 
 1993 : Snake River Falls opens ; Mill Race closes 
 1994 : Raptor opens ; Jungle Larry 's African Safari closes ; Calypso and Midway Carousel relocated to make room for Raptor ; Turnpike Cars reduced to make room for Raptor ; Christmas in the Park is held for the first and last time 
 1995 : Zoom Flume , Renegade River and Choo @-@ Choo Lagoon added to Soak City ; Breakers East is added to Hotel Breakers ; Laser Light Show 
 1996 : Mantis and Ripcord open ; Pirate Ride closes 
 1997 : Chaos opens ; Soak city expansion ; HalloWeekends introduced for the first time 
 1998 : Power Tower opens ; Bumper Boats relocated from Kiddy Kingdom to Gemini Midway 
 1999 : Camp Snoopy opens ; Breakers Tower is added to Hotel Breakers ; Super Himalaya is relocated to make room for Camp Snoopy ; Oceana Dolphin stadium is renamed The Aquatic Stadium with new show , Splash ! ; Kid Arthur 's Court closes 
 = = = = 2000 to present = = = = 
 2000 : Millennium Force and Breakers Express open ; Giant Wheel relocated to make room for Millennium Force 
 2001 : Lighthouse Point opens ; The Aquarium closes ; <unk> is open 4 months before being demolished , Dodgem No.1 closes 
 2002 : Wicked Twister opens ; " Snoopy Rocks ! On Ice " ice skating show . The Cedar Point Cinema is converted into the Good Time Theatre ; Schwabinchen closes 
 2003 : Top Thrill Dragster opens ; Swan Boats close ; Troika and Chaos are relocated to make room for Top Thrill Dragster ; Troika and WildCat repainted 
 2004 : $ 10 million in capital improvements with expansions at Lighthouse Point luxury camping complex ; Splash City added to Soak City ; Iron Dragon repainted 
 2005 : maXair opens ; White Water Landing closes ; Magnum XL @-@ 200 repainted 
 2006 : Skyhawk opens ; Hot Summer Lights nighttime show 
 2007 : Maverick opens ; Peanuts Playground closes 
 2008 : Planet Snoopy and <unk> open ; The Aquatic Stadium is renamed Extreme Sports Stadium with new show , All Wheels Extreme 
 2009 : Starlight Experience opens ; Demon Drop closes 
 2010 : Shoot the Rapids opens ; Chaos closes 
 2011 : WindSeeker opens ; Ocean Motion relocated to the former Demon Drop site to make room for WindSeeker ; Paddlewheel Excursions and WildCat close , Speed Slides in Soak City close ; Millennium Force repainted 
 2012 : Dinosaurs Alive ! opens ; Dragster H2O added to Soak City ; Fast Lane ; Iron Dragon midway renamed Celebration Plaza with new show , Luminosity – Ignite the Night ! ; Disaster Transport and Space Spiral close 
 2013 : GateKeeper opens ; New entrance plaza ; Bumper Boats close 
 2014 : Pipe Scream , Lake Erie Eagles , and SlingShot open ; Frog Hopper renamed Woodstock 's Airmail and relocated to Camp Snoopy ; Jr . Gemini entrance moved to Camp Snoopy and renamed Wilderness Run ; Mantis , Turnpike Cars , Sir Rub @-@ a @-@ Dubs Tubs and Good Time Theatre close 
 2015 : Rougarou opens ; Hotel Breakers renovation completed ; Calypso renamed Tiki Twirl and relocated ; Dodgem relocated ; Good Time Theater removed for Valravn in 2016 ; Maverick gets new restraints 
 2016 : Valravn opens ; Raptor & Top Thrill Dragster re @-@ painted ; Challenge Racing , Skyscraper , and Shoot the Rapids removed 
 Sources : 
 = = Present attractions = = 
 = = = Roller coasters = = = 
 Cedar Point contains 17 roller coasters , second @-@ most in the world behind Six Flags Magic Mountain which has 19 . 
 = = = Thrill rides = = = 
 Cedar Point has 17 thrill rides . The newest is SlingShot , introduced in 2014 . 
 = = = Family rides = = = 
 Cedar Point has 9 family rides . 
 = = = Water rides = = = 
 Cedar Point has two water rides , excluding the rides in Soak City . 
 = = = Kids ' rides = = = 
 Kiddy Kingdom opened in 1970 as Kiddieland but was renamed in 1993 . It is located near the first aid station and maXair . It contains 10 rides . 
 Opened in 2008 , Planet Snoopy is Cedar Point 's newest children 's area. replacing Peanuts playground . All of its rides come from the defunct Geauga Lake park . It is located near WindSeeker and contains eight rides . 
 Camp Snoopy opened in 1999 and is located near the entrance to Dinosaurs Alive ! . It contains six rides and two kiddie coasters . 
 = = = Challenge Park = = = 
 Challenge Park , located between Cedar Point and Soak City , was opened in 1992 . Its attractions require extra payment over the Cedar Point admission charge . Guests must get their hand stamped to re @-@ enter Cedar Point . 
 On January 14 , 2002 , one of the three towers of the <unk> ride in Challenge Park , which had been opened four months before , collapsed . No one was in the park and only minimal damage was reported . The ride was demolished later that year . Cedar point removed skyscraper and the go karts due to low ridership and popularity . 
