 The student body of Stuyvesant is represented by the Stuyvesant Student Union , a group of elected and appointed students who serve the student body in two important areas : improving student life by promoting and managing extracurricular activities ( clubs and publications ) , and by organizing out @-@ of @-@ school activity such as city excursions or fund @-@ raisers ; and providing a voice to the student body in all discussion of school policy with the administration . 
 = = = Clubs and publications = = = 
 Stuyvesant offers clubs , publications , teams and other opportunities under a system similar to that of many colleges . It hosts over 200 clubs ranging from The Thinkers ( philosophy ) club , to the Photography Club . The sheer number of clubs at the school is due to Stuyvesant 's relatively free policy of " student rule " . Most clubs are entirely student run , requiring only a Faculty Advisor to maintain their existence . One example of this policy is the Stuyvesant Model UN club , which is one of the largest clubs in the school . The club attends as many as 6 Model UN Conferences each year , held at various colleges across the Northeast . The club also hosts <unk> , an annual conference organized and run almost entirely by the students . Stuyvesant also has a Junior State of America program ( a political debate club ) . The Stuyvesant Theater Community puts on three student @-@ run productions a year ( a fall musical , a winter drama , and a spring comedy ) as well as a one @-@ act festival and several smaller studio productions . Key Club International 's branch at Stuyvesant was founded in 1990 . With over 350 members , it is one of the largest clubs in the school . 
 = = = = The Spectator = = = = 
 The Spectator is Stuyvesant 's official in @-@ school newspaper , which is published biweekly and is independent from the school . It contains twelve sections : news , features , op @-@ ed , arts & entertainment , sports , photography , art , layout , copy , business , humor , and web . There are over 250 total staff members who help with publication . At the beginning of the fall and spring terms , there are recruitments , but interested students may join at any time . 
 The Spectator , founded in 1915 , is one of Stuyvesant 's oldest publications . It has a long @-@ standing connection with its older namesake , Columbia University 's Columbia Daily Spectator , and has been recognized by the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism 's Columbia Scholastic Press Association . 
 = = = = The Voice = = = = 
 The Voice was founded in the 1973 – 4 academic year as an independent publication only loosely sanctioned by school officials . It had the appearance of a magazine and gained a large readership . The Voice attracted a considerable amount of controversy and a First Amendment lawsuit , after which the administration forced it to go off @-@ campus and to turn commercial in 1975 – 6 . 
 In the beginning of the 1975 – 6 academic year , The Voice decided to publish the results of a confidential random survey measuring the " sexual attitudes , preferences , knowledge and experience " of the students . The administration refused to permit The Voice to distribute the questionnaire , and the Board of Education refused to intervene , believing that " irreparable psychological damage " would be occasioned on some of the students receiving it . 
 The editor @-@ in @-@ chief of The Voice , Jeff <unk> , brought a First Amendment challenge to this decision in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York in front of Judge Constance Baker Motley . Judge Motley , relying on the relatively recent Supreme Court precedent Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District ( holding that " undifferentiated fear or apprehension of disturbance is not enough to overcome the right to freedom of expression " ) , ordered the Board of Education to come up with an arrangement permitting the distribution of the survey to the juniors and seniors . 
 However , Judge Motley 's ruling was overturned on appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit . Judge J. Edward Lumbard , joined by Judge Murray <unk> and over an impassioned dissent by Judge Walter R. Mansfield , held that the distribution of the questionnaires was properly disallowed by the administration as there was " a substantial basis for defendants ' belief that distribution of the questionnaire would result in significant emotional harm to a number of students throughout the Stuyvesant population . " The Supreme Court denied certiorari review . 
 = = = Academic teams = = = 
 Stuyvesant 's academic teams include its nationally recognized Speech and Debate team , Science Olympiad , Quiz Bowl , chess , and math , which regularly compete successfully at major regional ( New York State Mathematics League ) , national ( American Regions Mathematics League ) , and international ( International Mathematical Olympiad ) tournaments , and whose members fill up a considerable percentage of the New York City Math Team . A FIRST Robotics team , <unk> , first competed in 2001 , and has since grown and won many regional competitions , most recently the New York Regional in 2016 , as well as winning the Curie Division at the 2016 FIRST Robotics Championship in St. Louis . Stuyvesant also has a Model United Nations team , a Junior State of America chapter , and a Model Congress team which competes at regional colleges . The Model United Nations team hosts <unk> , an annual conference which takes place at Stuyvesant . 
 = = = SING ! = = = 
 The annual theater competition known as SING ! pits seniors , juniors , and " <unk> @-@ <unk> " ( freshmen and sophomores working together ) against each other in a contest to put on the best performance . Started in 1947 at Midwood High School in Brooklyn , SING ! is a tradition at many New York City high schools . At Stuyvesant , SING ! started as a small event in 1973 and has grown to a huge school @-@ wide event — in 2005 , nearly 1 @,@ 000 students participated . The entire production is written , directed , produced , and funded by students . Their involvement ranges from being members of the production 's casts , choruses , or costume and tech crews to Irish dance , Step , Bollywood , Hip @-@ Hop , Swing , Ballet , Jazz or Latin dance groups . SING ! begins in late January to February and culminates in final performances on three nights in March / April . Scoring is done on each night 's performances and the winner is determined by the overall total . 
 = = Student body = = 
 Stuyvesant has contributed to the education of several Nobel laureates , winners of the Fields Medal and the Wolf Prize , and other accomplished alumni . In recent years , it has had the second highest number of National Merit Scholarship semi @-@ finalists , behind Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology in Alexandria , Virginia . Over the past nine years ( 2002 – 2010 ) , Stuyvesant has produced 103 semi @-@ finalists and 13 finalists on the Intel Science Talent Search , the second most of any secondary school in the United States . 
 For most of the 20th century , the student body at Stuyvesant was heavily Jewish . A significant influx of Asian students began in the 1970s . For the 2013 academic year , the student body was 72 @.@ 31 % Asian and 21 @.@ 44 % Caucasian , 1 @.@ 03 % African American , 2 @.@ 34 % Hispanic and 3 % unknown / other . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Notable scientists among Stuyvesant alumni include mathematician Paul Cohen ( 1950 ) , string theorist Brian Greene ( 1980 ) , physicist Lisa Randall ( 1980 ) , and genomic researcher Eric Lander ( 1974 ) . Other prominent alumni include civil rights leader Robert Parris Moses , entertainers such as Thelonious Monk ( 1935 ) , and actors Lucy Liu ( 1986 ) , Tim Robbins ( 1976 ) , and James Cagney ( 1918 ) , comedian Paul Reiser ( 1973 ) and NBA basketball player and game fixer and bookmaker Jack <unk> ( 1949 ) . In business , government and politics , former United States Attorney General Eric Holder ( 1969 ) is a Stuyvesant alumnus , as are Senior Advisor to President Obama David Axelrod ( 1972 ) , former adviser to President Clinton Dick Morris ( 1964 ) , and founder of <unk> Public Relations Ronn <unk> ( 1992 ) . Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning author Frank McCourt taught English at Stuyvesant before the publication of his memoirs Angela 's Ashes , ' Tis , and Teacher Man . Teacher Man 's third section , titled Coming Alive in Room 205 , concerns McCourt 's time at Stuyvesant , and mentions a number of students and faculty . New York City Council member Eva Moskowitz ( 1982 ) graduated from the school , as did the creator of the BitTorrent protocol , Bram Cohen ( 1993 ) . 
 Four Nobel laureates are also alumni of Stuyvesant : 
 Joshua Lederberg ( 1941 ) – Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine , 1958 
 Robert Fogel ( 1944 ) – Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences , 1993 
 Roald Hoffmann ( 1954 ) – Nobel Prize in Chemistry , 1981 
 Richard Axel ( 1963 ) – Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine , 2004 
 = George S. Armstrong = 
 George Seale Armstrong ( May 16 , 1867 – June 9 , 1947 ) was a Canadian businessman and politician . He served on the Edmonton City Council from 1907 to 1910 and as Mayor of Edmonton from 1910 to 1912 . 
 Armstrong was born in what would soon become the province of Ontario in 1867 . After briefly teaching school , he entered the business industry , as a druggist . After initially gaining experience in politics on the council of Eastnor Township , he relocated west to the city of Edmonton , Alberta . In Edmonton , he established his pharmaceutical business once again and worked briefly with his brother on real estate and construction projects . In 1907 , he ran for election to the Edmonton City Council and was elected to a two @-@ year term . In 1910 , he decided to run for the mayoralty in the municipal election ; uncontested as the only nominated candidate on election day , Armstrong was acclaimed to the mayor 's chair for the upcoming year . During his term , several issues were brought up to attention , including the city 's need of a new civic building and the possibility of two new gas plants for the city . 
 His first term as mayor also saw the issue of possible amalgamation of the " twin cities " of Edmonton and Strathcona , an issue that had been spoken of as a possibility in the previous few years . Approved by councils of both cities , a successful plebiscite was held , and bylaws permitting the merge were passed and Edmonton 's annex of Strathcona came into effect in February 1912 . Armstrong put his name up once again in the mayoral election mandated by the agreement and defeated his rival candidate , and thus became the first post @-@ amalgamation mayor of the city of Edmonton . During his term , he introduced a new hospital , improvements to the street rail system , and commissioning a report on the expansion of the city . Another election was held later that December , and he did not stand for re @-@ election . 
 Armstrong later gained employment with the Edmonton post office after leaving the office of mayor , in which he would later rise to the position of postmaster , which he served in for 14 years . Armstrong also operated his drug store once again . He remained at the post office until his retirement in 1937 , and died ten years later in Edmonton at the age of 80 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Armstrong was born in 1867 at Hopeville , Canada West , to William and Sarah ( née Seale ) Armstrong . After attending schools in Mount Forest , Ontario , Armstrong briefly became a schoolteacher before moving to Lion 's Head , Ontario where entered the pharmacy business . Armstrong would also spend some time at Eastnor Township , Ontario , where he served on the town council and as treasurer , from 1903 to 1905 . He then moved west and settle at the city of Edmonton , Alberta , in 1906 . That same year he opened up the Armstrong Drug Store , on <unk> Avenue and Boyle Street ( presently 97 Street and 103 Avenue ) . In his early years in Edmonton he also involved himself in several real estate ventures and construction projects along with his brother , Gordon . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 In 1906 , at a citizen 's meeting at a local store , Armstrong 's name was speculated as a possible candidate for alderman for the upcoming 1906 election . Armstrong , despite being a newcomer to the city , was open to the fact of running in the election , but ultimately did not run . Armstrong would however decide to run for council as an alderman in the 1907 election , on a platform based on assuring the <unk> of utilities to the people of Edmonton , as well as ensuring a sense of openness as a council to the people . During the time leading up to the election , he also voiced his opposition to the city 's arbitrary divisions into sections . He was elected to council for a two @-@ year term , receiving 774 votes , finishing second in a field of 12 candidates . Despite being a preferred candidate for the mayoralty in 1909 , he opted to run for council instead and was re @-@ elected for another two @-@ year term in the 1909 election . In 1910 , his name was once again speculated to run for the mayoralty of the city in the upcoming election , with many citizens approaching him to run . He later decided in favour of running , publishing an acceptance letter in the Edmonton Bulletin stating : 
 To the Electors of the City of Edmonton , 
 Ladies and Gentleman — At the request of a large number of ratepayers I have consented to be a candidate for Mayor at the coming municipal election . My platform and address to the <unk> will appear in the press in a few days . 
 <unk> yours , . 
 His platform would consist of the main points of leading the city out of debt , assuring the completion of city projects that were in progress before introducing news ones , and again , ensuring that utilities were available to everyone and were of high quality . He had also expressed desire to amalgamate the existing city of Edmonton with the city of Strathcona , which was divided from Edmonton by the North Saskatchewan River , situated on the south . Though former councillor William Harold Clark was urged to run by a group of citizens , Armstrong would be the only nominated mayoral candidate when nomination deadline day came , and thus he was acclaimed mayor ; the first occurrence since Kenneth W. MacKenzie was acclaimed in 1900 . Amongst his supporters for his candidacy were outgoing mayor Robert Lee and former mayor Charles May . 
 = = First mayoral term , 1911 = = 
 During his first term as mayor , Armstrong oversaw many issues that concerned the city . In March 1911 , he expressed his support for a new city hall building to be built , expressing his dissatisfaction with the existing building that housed the council and civic employees , mentioning the ever @-@ expanding number of staff . Later in that year , a committee would be formed concerning the issue , and a new structure would be planned with a planned cost of one million dollars . In July of that same year , he would sign a bylaw that would allow an American entrepreneur to establish a gas plant in the city , an issue that had been presented to council for debate several months prior . Later that year , the prospect of a municipal gas plant would also be supplied to city council . In July 1911 , when , along with the city council , he dismissed a pair of city commissioners after months of debate . The firing triggered a by @-@ election when alderman James H. McKinley would resign in protest to the action . In 1911 , he also served as a vice president of the Union of Alberta Municipalities . Involved in national and provincial affairs , he voiced his support for a canal to be constructed in the Georgian Bay of Lake Huron , stating that the presence of such canal would improve the trading relations of Canada with the United States by allowing an easier route between the two countries . He also was in favour of a hydroelectric project in the Athabasca River . Additionally , during this first term as mayor , Armstrong also oversaw the city 's festivities on George V 's coronation and moved to form a municipal purchasing department . 
 = = = Amalgamation of Edmonton = = = 
 Another issue presented to council during his first term in office was that of potential amalgamation with the city south of the North Saskatchewan River , Strathcona . Regarding the issue , Armstrong would gauge public interest as in favour of it , stating he was " satisfied that [ it ] would carry " . The particular issue had been in works as early as 1909 , when draft versions of a bylaw permitting the two cities to join where presented to each respective city council , but serious talks had not begun until this particular year . Plans for the action were set out by negotiations of a committee of both cities , reaching an agreement with conditions including an election to be held after the amalgamation law takes place , a new bridge to be constructed over the river separating the two cities , and the expansion of the street rail system to cover the land of the unified cities . It was also hoped at the time that being a larger city would lower taxes . A plebiscite was held in both Edmonton and Strathcona on September 26 , 1911 , with results at both municipalities overwhelmingly in favour of the joining of the two " twin cities " . With the law passed by council on December 19 , 1911 and approved by the Legislative Assembly of Alberta , the amalgamation was set for February 1 , 1912 , with the first combined election to take place on February 16 . The population of the new combined city would rise to over 40 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = Second term in office , 1912 = = 
 Armstrong would later declare his candidacy for that particular election ( the Edmonton municipal election , February 1912 ) , for the position of what was referred to as the first mayor of " Greater Edmonton " Stating that in his belief , 1911 was one of the most successful years in the history of the city , he ran on the premise that he had unfinished work from his first term , stating , " I ask for a continuance of your confidence , support and influence to allow me an opportunity to complete those undertakings which are in the best interests of Greater Edmonton " . His opponent , Bryce J. Saunders charged that the city had long lacked efficiency in its utilities , particular the water supply , which he believed in the public ownership of . Armstrong would later go on to defeat Saunders in the general election , 1791 votes to Saunders ' 1072 , a margin of just over 700 , with a voter turnout of around 30 percent . 
 During his brief second term as mayor in 1912 , Armstrong and council approved a plan to construct 110 miles of electric railway lines in the city , considered legislation permitting band concerts on Sundays , oversaw the opening of the Royal Alexandra Hospital , advocated for the availability of housing accommodations for all Edmontonians in the face of an influx of new settlers , and welcomed a visit from Governor General of Canada Prince Arthur , Duke of Connaught and Strathearn to the city , planning a grand celebration . It was also in 1912 that the Hudson 's Bay Company put its Edmonton land holdings on the market , the first bridge across the North Saskatchewan River in the city 's east end opened , and that Armstrong commissioned a master plan for the newly amalgamated city , from an American firm based out of Minneapolis named Morell and Nichols . Among the suggestions in the report was the recommendation for a civic square to be built , which was opened 53 years later as Sir Winston Churchill Square . In his final week as mayor , the retiring Armstrong delivered the city 's annual report at an annual meeting , thanked the people of Edmonton for entrusting him as mayor , and advised his successor to be fiscally responsible ; stating , " If a reckless administration gets in next year , Edmonton will become a city like I was in recently , where they could not borrow enough money to clean their streets . " In the election held later that week , he would be succeeded by former mayor from 1901 – 04 , William Short , whom he supported and campaigned for . Armstrong was later honoured with an informal gathering in the city council chamber where he was presented with a gift of silverware ; with the city fire chief proclaiming that " Mayor Armstrong is bound to become a historical character " . 
 = = Post mayoral career = = 
 The year after he left office as mayor , Armstrong began work with the Edmonton post office . After being recommended for the position by city notables , he was named postmaster of the city on November 12 , 1913 . In the same year he oversaw the construction of a new building on <unk> Avenue , the Fairbairn Block , mainly for use by his business but with additional space for offices and housing in the upper levels . In 1920 , Armstrong was involved in a legal case involving his office as postmaster when he was accused in the 1919 disappearance of a sum of $ 50 @,@ 000 from the post office . Although exonerated in 1920 , he would again be arrested in 1923 and charged with theft . During the trial , it was testified that a witness had seen Armstrong on the day of the robbery , with only a paper in his hand as if he were heading out . Armstrong , who had proclaimed his innocence , and provided evidence for the trial was eventually acquitted and found not guilty of the charges in a decision made on May 29 , which was followed by an eruption of applause . Later in 1923 , Armstrong was appointed postmaster of the Strathcona ( south side ) Post Office . He remained with the post office until he retired in January 1937 . At the time of his retirement he was serving as postmaster of the south post office . In his years with the post office , he served a total of 14 years as postmaster . The Armstrong Drug Store would later go through multiple owners until its closing on December 10 , 1993 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Armstrong married Margaret Irene McFarlane in 1893 at Greenock ( Bruce County ) , Ontario . They had one daughter , Helen Laverne Armstrong . After Margaret died , George remarried to Jessie Mathieson at Elora , Ontario in 1897 . With her he had a son and daughter , William Sloan Seale Armstrong and Jessie Eileen Armstrong Watson . He was a member of a hospital board , the Edmonton Exhibition Board and the Masonic Order . He was affiliated with the Presbyterian Church and later the United Church of Canada , attending Robertson United Church in Edmonton , where he served as an elder . Politically , he aligned himself with the Conservative Party of Canada . In his free time he enjoyed the sports of baseball and football . He died at a hospital in Edmonton on June 9 , 1947 at the age of 80 , after an illness of two weeks . He was survived by his wife and children as well as a brother . He was later interred at the Edmonton Cemetery after his funeral held at Robertson United Church . His wife Jessie died in 1952 and was interred next to him . The Edmonton Historical Board states that Armstrong was remembered as " hardworking , fair and honest person who served our city well during a time of rapid change and growth " . 
 Armstrong Industrial , an Edmonton industrial park located in the northwestern part of the city near the Yellowhead Trail , is named in his honour . His former residence , located at 10050 117 Street in Edmonton was designated as a Heritage Building by the Edmonton Historical Board . 
 = Arizona State Route 85 = 
 State Route 85 ( SR 85 ) is a 128 @.@ 86 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 207 @.@ 38 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Arizona . The highway runs from the United States @-@ Mexico border near Lukeville to the north ending at Interstate 10 ( I @-@ 10 ) in Buckeye . The highway also intersects I @-@ 8 in Gila Bend and serves as a connector between I @-@ 8 and I @-@ 10 and for travelers between Phoenix and Yuma as well as San Diego . SR 85 between I @-@ 10 and I @-@ 8 , as well as I @-@ 8 between SR 85 and I @-@ 10 in Casa Grande , is touted as a bypass of the Phoenix area for long @-@ distance travelers on I @-@ 10 . 
 SR 85 was established in 1936 as a route between Gila Bend and Ajo . It was extended southward to the US @-@ Mexico border in 1955 , and extended northward to Phoenix when it replaced U.S. Route 80 ( US 80 ) in 1977 . The northern end of the highway was realigned in 1994 onto the connecting highway between I @-@ 10 and Buckeye . The remaining portion of the highway between Buckeye and Phoenix was gradually turned over to the cities and county along the route during the 1990s with the final portion turned over in 2001 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The southern terminus of SR 85 is located at the United States @-@ Mexico border near Lukeville in Pima County . The road continues across the border into Mexico to the town of Sonoita as Mexican Federal Highway 8 . SR 85 heads north from the border as a two @-@ lane road , passing through the Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument . The highway leaves the monument boundary and heads to a junction with SR 86 in Why . SR 86 heads east from this junction towards Tucson and southeastern Arizona . SR 85 heads northwest from this junction to the town of Ajo . From Ajo , the highway heads north and enters the Barry M. Goldwater Air Force Range . While within the range , the highway enters Maricopa County . After the highway passes through the range , it continues towards the north to a junction with I @-@ 8 in Gila Bend . After passing I @-@ 8 , the highway intersects the business loop of I @-@ 8 and turns towards the east to run concurrently with business loop along Pima Street in Gila Bend . The two highways split , with the business loop heading towards the southeast and SR 85 heading northeast providing access to Gila Bend Municipal Airport 
 SR 85 continues north from Gila Bend towards the Phoenix Metropolitan Area . This stretch of highway north of Gila Bend is a part of the National Highway System . The highway passes near the western edge of the Sonoran Desert National Monument and also provides access to the Buckeye Hills Recreational Area . SR 85 continues northward to a crossing of the Gila River as it nears Buckeye . The highway intersects Buckeye Road which is where the original routing of US 80 and later SR 85 followed into Phoenix before being rerouted onto its current alignment . The highway continues towards the north , crossing over the Buckeye Canal before reaching its northern terminus at exit 112 on I @-@ 10 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first numbered highway along the SR 85 corridor was established in 1927 between Gila Bend and Phoenix as US 80 . At the time , it was only paved from Phoenix to Hassayampa . Although not paved between Hassayampa and Gila Bend , it was an improved road . This original routing of US 80 still exists as Old US 80 west of the SR 85 alignment . A dirt road between Gila Bend and Ajo did exist at this time , but it was not a part of the state highway system . By 1935 , the entire route of US 80 between Gila Bend and Phoenix had been paved . The road south of Gila Bend had also been improved to a gravel road . 
 In 1936 , SR 85 was established , but it only extended as far north as Gila Bend and as far south as Ajo . By 1938 , SR 85 had been paved as well as the portion between Ajo and Why that would eventually become part of SR 85 . The portion between Why and the border with Mexico began showing up on maps at this time as a gravel road . In 1943 , the portion of the highway between Ajo and Why was added to the state highway system , but as SR 86 , when it was extended west from Tucson to Ajo . In 1955 , the highway was extended to Lukeville at the United States @-@ Mexico border with an overlap with SR 86 between Ajo and Why when a county road was added to SR 85 . 
 In 1973 , the connector between I @-@ 10 and Baseline Road was established , and was redesignated in 1978 as a spur route of SR 85 . As the old , indirect US 80 was removed from Arizona , SR 85 was extended north in 1977 over the old alignment of US 80 to Buckeye and extended east to Phoenix . Portions of the route in Buckeye and Phoenix were turned over to their respective cities for maintenance in 1990 . The following year , a portion of the highway between Avondale and Phoenix was turned over to Maricopa County for maintenance . Also in 1991 , the overlap between SR 85 and SR 86 was eliminated and the western terminus of SR 86 was changed to its junction with Route 85 in Why . In 1994 , the northern end of SR 85 was moved onto the SR 85 Spur that connected to I @-@ 10 and the remaining portions along the old alignment to the east were redesignated as a temporary route of SR 85 . In 1999 , the portion of the old route in Avondale was turned over to the city for maintenance . The portion of the old route around the state capitol complex , the last remaining section of the old route between Phoenix and Buckeye , was turned over to the city of Phoenix in 2001 . 
 = = Future = = 
 The segment of SR 85 between Buckeye and Gila Bend is a connector between I @-@ 8 and I @-@ 10 , and serves both as a connector from I @-@ 8 from San Diego , California to Phoenix . This segment is being upgraded to a divided highway , and is planned to become a freeway . Most of the four @-@ lane road upgrades have already been completed . 
 In 2010 an environmental study into building a freeway to freeway interchange in Gila Bend from SR 85 to I @-@ 8 was completed by ADOT and the Federal Highway Administration . The study found no significant impact on the local environment and outlined a finalized full freeway standard design , bypassing the I @-@ 8 Business / Maricopa Road intersection SR 85 currently traverses through . A diamond interchange Exit 121 is planned at Maricopa Road / I @-@ 8 Business along with a second diamond interchange slightly northeast of the proposed Exit 121 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The mileposts north of Gila Bend reflect the mileage of old US 80 in proximity to the California state line . 
 = Rugby union at the Summer Olympics = 
 Rugby union has been a men 's medal sport at the modern Summer Olympic Games , being played at four of the first seven competitions . The sport debuted at the 1900 Paris games where the gold medal was won by the host nation . It was subsequently featured at the London games in 1908 , the Antwerp games in 1920 and the Paris games in 1924 . The United States is the most successful nation in Olympic rugby tournaments , having won the gold medal in both 1920 and 1924 ; France has the most medals , one gold ( in 1900 ) and two silvers ( in 1920 and 1924 ) . 
 Shortly after the 1924 games , the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) dropped rugby union as an Olympic sport . Since then there have been numerous attempts to bring the sport back to the Olympic programme . In October 2009 the IOC voted at its session in Copenhagen to include the sevens version of the sport in the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro . The event made its debut in an Olympic programme at the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics . 
 = = Inclusion = = 
 The sport was introduced by Pierre de Coubertin , who is famous for reviving the modern Olympics . He also helped to establish rugby in France , refereeing the first domestic French club championship in 1892 and France 's first international , on New Year ’ s Day , 1906 , at Parc des Princes . Coubertin formed the IOC in 1894 , but rugby union was not featured until the II Olympiad . 
 = = = 1900 = = = 
 Three National Olympic Committees ( NOCs ) , France , Germany and Great Britain , entered teams at the 1900 games . The German and British teams were not national teams in the current sense of the word : Moseley Wanderers RFC represented Great Britain and the Frankfurt Club represented Germany . Rules were also different from today 's ; 3 points , not 5 , were awarded for tries and 4 , not 3 , were given for a drop goal . Also , 4 points were awarded for a goal from mark , which would be reduced to 3 points in 1905 and eliminated completely in 1977 . Points for penalties and conversions , 3 and 2 respectively , were the same as in the modern game . 
 France won the gold , beating Great Britain 27 points to 8 and defeating Germany 27 points to 17 . Other sources list the German team as second , because of the points difference , but no such determination was made in 1900 . 6 @,@ 000 people watched the game between France and Great Britain , which was the largest crowd at the games . Constantin Henriquez , a player on the French team , is the first known coloured athlete to compete in the Olympic Games . 
 = = = 1908 = = = 
 Rugby union was not played at the 1904 games in St. Louis , nor at the 1906 Intercalated Games , but was included in 1908 , when the Olympics were held in the sport 's native country . The Rugby Football Union ( RFU ) was involved in the organization of the sport at this edition of the Olympics . Like the 1900 games , three teams entered : Australasia ( representing Australia and New Zealand ) , France , and hosts Great Britain ( which included the whole of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland ) . France pulled out prior to the commencement of the tournament , being unable to field a representative team . Australasia was represented by the Wallabies , who were already on tour in Britain . As the best English and Welsh players were on tour in New Zealand at the time , Great Britain was represented by the Cornwall county team , who were chosen by the RFU as an appropriate side after they defeated Durham in the 1907 English county championship . The choice of Cornwall was controversial , as only three of their players had ever represented England and the Wallabies had defeated them 18 points to five . 
 As expected , Australasia defeated Great Britain , claiming the gold medal , the score being 32 points to three . The match at the White City Stadium was played under poor conditions , in fog and on a slippery field . Two of the Australian team members would later win another Olympic gold medal . Danny Carroll would win another rugby gold with the United States in 1920 , while Sydney Middleton would win a gold medal in rowing at the 1912 Games , where rugby was not on the programme . The sport also failed to appear on the provisional schedule of the 1916 Summer Olympics , which were cancelled due to World War I. 
 = = = 1920 = = = 
 A campaign to send an American side to the 1920 games in Antwerp started in California after a Berkeley rugby union touring party returned from British Columbia undefeated in 1920 . The United States Olympic Committee ( USOC ) granted permission for entry . A pool of players from Stanford , Berkeley , and Santa Clara made up the squad . 1908 champion Danny Carroll , a player @-@ coach at Stanford at the time , was the team 's most prominent member . When the U.S. arrived in Antwerp , the Czechoslovakian and Romanian teams had withdrawn , leaving only France and the United States . The English RFU had decided not to enter a team , so as not to interfere with the start of the English domestic season . 
 The only match was played in rain in front of around 20 @,@ 000 spectators . The U.S. , featuring many players new to the sport of rugby , caused a shock by winning the only match eight points to zero , all points being scored in the second half . One of the U.S. team members , Morris Kirksey , took home two more medals from Antwerp , finishing second to Charles Paddock in the 100 meters dash , and anchoring the winning 4 × 100 meters relay team . 
 = = = 1924 = = = 
 The sport was again included in the subsequent 1924 games in Paris . The USOC decided to send a team in order to defend their gold medal . Along with the U.S. and the host nation , Romania entered . The American team was again made up of mainly Californian players , seven of whom were members of the 1920 team . The U.S. squad departed on a seven @-@ day voyage to England on an ocean liner from New York City . 
 The U.S. defeated Romania 37 to 0 in front of a crowd of 6 @,@ 000 . France then defeated Romania 61 to 3 and entered the final game as favorites . The gold medal game was played on 18 May in front of 21 @,@ 000 spectators at the Colombes venue , which had a large wire fence built around the field for the game . The U.S. defeated France 17 to 3 , becoming the only team to win gold twice in the sport . At the final whistle the pitch was invaded and the French team , aided by the police , did their best to protect their opponents . The medal ceremony took place with police protection – gold for the U.S. , silver for France , and bronze for Romania . 
 Rare vintage footage of the 1924 Gold Medal match was included in the rugby documentary , A Giant Awakens : the Rise of American Rugby . 6 + + 
 = = Exclusion = = 
 The pitch invasion at the 1924 Paris Olympics had given rugby a poor image and this , together with the problems of attracting sufficient teams to make it a viable sport and the desire to include more individual and women 's events , spelled the death knell for rugby at the Olympics . 
 Baron Pierre De Coubertin stepped down as head of the Olympic Movement after 1925 and with his departure the sport lost one of its major advocates . In 1928 the IOC turned down a request to stage rugby at the Amsterdam games . An exhibition tournament was held at the 1936 Berlin Games , with France , Germany , Italy and Romania competing . In what was , to date , the last rugby match played at the Olympics , France beat Germany in the final 19 to 14 . 
 In 1976 , 22 African countries and Guyana boycotted the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal , after their demand to have New Zealand excluded was not met . A New Zealand rugby team had toured South Africa , which had been banned from the Olympics since 1964 because of its apartheid politics . Rugby union not being an Olympic sport , the IOC declined to exclude New Zealand . 
 = = Efforts for re @-@ inclusion = = 
 Italy in 1960 , the Soviet Union in 1980 , and South Korea in 1988 made requests to have rugby union brought back . The 1980 request did not pass , and the 1988 games came close but failed to see the sport 's admission , which was backed by the International Rugby Football Board ( now , World Rugby ( WR ) ) . 
 Apart from supporting the individual host cities ' requests , the IRB did not focus its own efforts on returning the sport to the Olympics until the early 1990s , when efforts began to reunite the two movements with a series of informal meetings between the then IRB Secretary , Keith Rowlands , and the British Olympic Association Secretary , Dick Palmer . In 1994 , when Vernon Pugh QC of Wales was elected Chairman of the IRB , the march towards Olympic recognition began in earnest . Pugh convinced the IRB Council that Olympic membership – initially as a non @-@ participation sport – would be beneficial to rugby and offer the IRB member unions membership of their National Olympic Committees . Many European Federations , such as France , Italy and Romania , had been members of their National Olympic Committees for decades . The demand to get rugby back in the Olympics mounted as more rugby nations from Africa , Asia , Oceania and the Americas joined the IRB , because it was a sport seen as providing a realistic medal opportunity for a number of smaller nations . 
 A significant step in the process of acceptance back into the Olympic Movement was achieved at a ceremony held in Cardiff in November 1994 , when the IRB was officially confirmed as a Recognised International Federation of the IOC . At that ceremony , International Olympic Committee President , Juan Antonio Samaranch , pointed out that rugby 's history and values were very much in tune with the Olympic philosophy and traditions . This historic meeting in Cardiff led to IRB representation at annual IOC meetings and consideration for inclusion in the programme of future Olympic Games . In 2002 , a plan was presented to induct rugby sevens , golf and the Chinese martial art of wushu . 
 Sevens was one of five sports that submitted a proposal to the IOC at a meeting in Singapore for inclusion in the 2012 games . The IOC stated that no sport would be added unless others were dropped . The IRB was confident that the sport would finally be included in the official Olympic programme . However , the selection of two sports out of the five nominees as potential 2012 sports went to squash and karate , as determined by a voting procedure . 
 Most recently , rugby sevens competed with golf for two available spaces in the 2016 Olympics . The final decision was made at the IOC Session in Copenhagen in October 2009 . The IRB used a number of high @-@ profile people and events to influence the IOC to include sevens at the 2016 games . In March 2009 , two senior delegates from the IOC attended the Rugby World Cup Sevens in Dubai at the invitation of the IRB . The event attracted 78 @,@ 000 fans over the three days and saw Wales crowned Men ’ s World Champions and Australia won the first ever Women 's World Cup . 
 Along with the World Cup , the IRB enlisted some of rugby ’ s biggest names to assist in the bid . In March 2009 , Jonah Lomu and Lawrence Dallaglio were announced as ambassadors for the bid and in April 2009 Waisale Serevi was unveiled as an ambassador to coincide with the Oceania National Olympic Committees ' general assembly . May 2009 saw the IRB announce that they would drop the Rugby World Cup Sevens in order to improve the chances of the sport being included . The benefit of this move would be to make the Olympics the premier event in international rugby sevens . 
 As well as rugby sevens , baseball and softball , which were dropped from the Olympic programme in 2005 , karate , squash , golf and roller sports ( inline speed skating ) were all seeking to be included in the 2016 games and leaders of the seven sports made formal presentations to the IOC executive board in June 2009 . A new system was in place at this session in which a sport now needs only a simple majority rather than the two @-@ thirds majority that was required before . 
 On 13 August 2009 it was announced that the IOC executive board was recommending rugby sevens for inclusion in the 2016 Olympic Games and on 9 October 2009 the full IOC , at its 121st IOC Session in Copenhagen , voted to include Rugby Sevens in the 2016 games . 
 Separate competitions for men and women will be held , using a similar format to the existing IRB Sevens World Series . The IRB had originally proposed including 12 teams of each sex , the same number as other team ball sports events . During the IRB 's presentation at the IOC Session , two IOC members asked why only 12 teams were included . IRB Chief Executive Mike Miller responded , " We followed the guidance of the Executive Members of the IOC , but if the IOC feels we should have more teams , we will add more . " 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Games = = = 
 = = = Cumulative = = = 
 = = Nations = = 
 Only players who participated in at least one match are counted . 
 = = Notable rugby players involved in the Olympics = = 
 A number in other fields have also been notable rugby players , these include : 
 Pierre de Coubertin , founder of the modern Olympics , was a rugby fan and referee of the first ever French championship rugby union final on 20 March 1892 between Racing Club de France and Stade Français . 
 Jean <unk> , France and track events . 
 Stan Harris 
 Eric Liddell , Scotland and track events . 
 Chris MacKintosh 
 Heather Moyse , Canada and gold in Olympic bobsleigh . 
 James Cecil Parke , Ireland and track events ( also represented Ireland in cricket and golf , and as well as competing at Wimbledon and in the Davis Cup ) 
 Noel Purcell , Ireland and gold in Olympic water polo – the first Olympic internationalist to represent two countries , Great Britain and the Irish Free State . 
 David Robertson ( golfer ) 
 Jacques Rogge , Belgium international and former IOC president . 
 Constantin Henriquez , Haitian rugby player who won gold for France . 
 Attie van Heerden 
 Danny Crates , who has carried the torch twice at the Olympics , and is a notable Paralympian , also plays competitive rugby . 
 Kevin O 'Flanagan , Ireland international . Represented Ireland on the International Olympic Committee 
 Victor Costello , who competed for Ireland in the shot put at the 1992 Games in Barcelona before winning 39 caps for the Ireland rugby union team . 
 = United States Senate election in New York , 2000 = 
 The United States Senate election in New York in 2000 was held on November 7 , 2000 . First Lady of the United States Hillary Rodham Clinton , the first First Lady to run for political office , defeated Congressman Rick Lazio . The general election coincided with the presidential election . 
 The race began in November 1998 when four @-@ term incumbent New York Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan announced his retirement . Both the Democratic Party and Republican Party sought high @-@ profile candidates to compete for the open seat . By early 1999 Clinton and Mayor of New York City Rudolph Giuliani were the likely respective nominees . Clinton and her husband , President Bill Clinton , purchased a house in Chappaqua , New York , in September 1999 ; she thereby became eligible for the election , although she faced characterizations of carpetbagging since she had never resided in the state before . The lead in statewide polls swung from Clinton to Giuliani and back to Clinton as the campaigns featured both successful strategies and mistakes as well as dealing with current events . In late April and May 2000 , Giuliani 's medical , romantic , marital , and political lives all collided in a tumultuous four @-@ week period , culminating in his withdrawing from the race on May 19 . 
 The Republicans chose lesser @-@ known Congressman Rick Lazio to replace him . The election included a record $ 90 million in campaign expenditures between Clinton , Lazio , and Giuliani and national visibility . Clinton showed strength in normally Republican upstate areas and a debate blunder by Lazio solidified Clinton 's previously shaky support among women . Clinton won the election in November 2000 with 55 percent of the vote to Lazio 's 43 percent . 
 = = An open seat draws high @-@ profile candidates = = 
 When four @-@ term New York Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan announced his retirement in November 1998 , his previously safe Senate seat became open in the 2000 U.S. Senate election . Both parties tried to find high @-@ profile candidates to run for it . 
 New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani , who was prevented by term limits from running for mayoral reelection in 2001 , immediately indicated interest . Due to his high profile and visibility , Giuliani was supported by the state Republican Party , even though he had irritated many by endorsing incumbent Democratic Governor Mario Cuomo over Republican George Pataki in 1994 . Giuliani became the presumptive Republican nominee , and by April 1999 had formed a formal exploratory committee for a Senate run . There were still possible Republican primary opponents . Rick Lazio , a Congressman representing Suffolk County on Long Island , was raising money and had a candidacy announcement scheduled for August 16 ; he had openly discussed a primary against Giuliani , believing his more conservative record would be appealing to Republican primary voters . In early August , under pressure from state and national Republican figures , Pataki endorsed Giuliani . Pataki prevailed upon Lazio to forgo his candidacy , which Lazio agreed to despite frustration that Giuliani had still not officially announced that he was running ; Lazio said , " If the mayor wants to be a candidate , I think he needs to get into this race . It 's time to put the soap opera aside and step up to the plate . " Nassau County Congressman Pete King also considered running and had raised some funds . 
 New York Congresswoman Nita Lowey was the candidate first expected to be the Democratic nominee , while other mentioned possible candidates included Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Andrew Cuomo , New York State Comptroller Carl McCall , and New York Congresswoman Carolyn Maloney . State Democratic figures were concerned that neither Lowey nor the others had the star power to rival Giuliani , and that the seat would be lost . Late in 1998 , prominent Democratic politicians and advisors , including New York Representative Charles Rangel , urged First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton to run for the New York Senate seat . An unprecedented action if she did it , Clinton spent considerable time mulling over the idea while Lowey waited in the wings . Her political advisors told her the race would be difficult and some of them told her she would lose . She waited for the impeachment proceedings of Bill Clinton to conclude , which it did with his acquittal on February 12 , 1999 . 
 = = Clinton 's early campaign = = 
 On February 16 , 1999 , the First Lady 's office announced that she was considering running for the Senate position . Once it was clear Clinton was going to run , Lowey stepped aside , although she would be disappointed at the lost opportunity . On July 7 , 1999 , Clinton formally announced an exploratory committee for the Senate run ; the setting was Moynihan 's farm in <unk> Corners , in rural Delaware County . Bill Clinton was less than enthusiastic about her candidacy . The staging of the event was brokered by the Clintons ' political consultant Mandy Grunwald . Hillary Clinton embarked upon a " listening tour " of all parts of New York after her entrance into the race . She planned to visit all 62 counties in New York , talking to New Yorkers in small @-@ group settings according to the principles of retail politics . During the race , she spent considerable time campaigning in traditionally Republican upstate regions . Clinton faced charges of carpetbagging , since she had never resided in the State of New York nor directly participated in state politics prior to her Senate race . 
 Meanwhile , in September 1999 , the Clintons purchased a $ 1 @.@ 7 million , 11 @-@ room , Dutch Colonial style home in Chappaqua , New York , north of New York City . Even the commonplace activity of house hunting leading up to this was the subject of considerable media attention ; coverage of personal lives would be the norm in this contest of two " electrifying and polarizing figures " ( as one reporter put it ) . In November 1999 , Hillary Clinton announced that she would set aside most of her official duties as First Lady in order to take up residency in New York and pursue her campaign . Her move @-@ in took place in January 2000 , with the house furnished with many of the couple 's possessions from their Arkansas days . It became the first time since Woodrow Wilson 's first wife died in 1914 that a president lived in the White House without a spouse . 
 The early stages of her campaign were not without mistakes , and as she later wrote , " Mistakes in New York politics aren 't easily brushed aside . " In a much @-@ publicized move , Clinton donned a New York Yankees baseball cap at a June 1999 event when she had been a lifelong fan of the Chicago Cubs . This brought her much criticism , and Thomas Kuiper would later write an anti @-@ Clinton book titled : I 've Always Been a Yankees Fan : Hillary Clinton in Her Own Words . Clinton said she had to develop an American League rooting interest , since fans of the Cubs were not expected to root for the American League Chicago White Sox . In her 2003 autobiography , she said that putting on the hat had been a " bad move " , but reiterated what had been reported in the press prior to the incident , that she had been " a die @-@ hard Mickey Mantle fan ; " the book included a photograph of her with a Yankees cap on from 1992 . 
 More seriously , on November 11 , 1999 , at the dedication of a U.S.-funded health program in the West Bank , she exchanged kisses with Suha Arafat , wife of Palestinian President Yasser Arafat , after Suha Arafat had delivered a speech claiming that Israel had deliberately poisoned Palestinians through environmental degradation and the use of " poisonous gas " . Some Israeli supporters said that Clinton never should have kissed the wife of the Palestinian leader , especially after such inflammatory remarks . The following day , Clinton denounced Suha Arafat 's allegations , and said that Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat had told her Suha Arafat had been referring to ' tear gas ' and not ' poison gas ' . The kiss became a campaign issue , especially with Jewish voters . Clinton said it as a formality akin to a handshake , saying that to not have done so would have caused a diplomatic incident . Clinton later wrote that the live Arabic @-@ to @-@ English translation had failed to convey the accurate nature of her remarks : " Had I been aware of her hateful words , I would have denounced them on the spot . " 
 Somewhat surprisingly , Clinton faced an erosion of support from women voters during her campaign , with her numbers declining throughout 1999 . This was partly a typical pattern seen with women candidates where they have an early surge of female support , which then wears off , and it was partly due to her early campaign stumbles . But it also reflected the particular set of mixed feelings that women had towards Clinton 's marriage and the ambition and the power she derived from it . The problem was especially acute among some female demographics ; one of her longtime advisers later said , " Women in the educated professional class ? They fucking couldn 't stand her . We could never figure out why . We had psychologists come in . " 
 Clinton 's campaign to all counties , carried by a Ford conversion van , helped to defuse the carpetbagger issue , with many New York residents saying that Clinton " seems like one of us . " She discussed local issues such as price supports for the dairy industry , fares for air travel , college tuition levels , and the brain drain in parts of the state . Her political positions were well matched to the different constituencies in the state that she targeted . In a January 2000 appearance on the Late Show with David Letterman , she established a rapport with the host that would continue throughout her Senate years and into her 2008 presidential campaign . Clinton formally announced her official candidacy in Purchase , New York in February 2000 , adopting the simple name " Hillary " for her campaign literature . 
 <unk> of the press since her husband 's 1992 presidential campaign and her early days as First Lady , she imposed limits on her availability to the press van following her . Associated Press reporter Beth Harpaz later recounted a typical day from this time : " But we 'd been told there 'd be no ' avail ' today , and we 'd accepted it . That didn 't prevent me from feeling slightly humiliated . I was so worn down and so exasperated by the lack of access and the lack of news in this campaign that I 'd given up fighting . " 
 = = Early campaign of Giuliani = = 
 An early January 1999 Marist Institute of Public Opinion poll showed Giuliani trailing Clinton by 10 points . By January 2000 , the Marist poll showed Giuliani up by 9 points . Giuliani 's tactics involved intentionally baiting the Clinton campaign with deliberate <unk> , keeping them off balance and behind in the response cycle . Giuliani emphasized his depiction of Clinton as a carpetbagger . He made a one @-@ day visit to Little Rock , Arkansas , where he announced he would fly the Arkansas state flag over New York 's City Hall . When Hillary Clinton visited New York from Washington , he said , “ I hope she knows the way . I hope she doesn ’ t get lost on one of the side streets . ” Giuliani 's campaign prepared a 315 @-@ page opposition research dossier that went back to her time at Wellesley College ; it included eleven pages of what they termed " Stupid Actions and Remarks " . The Giuliani campaign had no problems raising money , getting over 40 percent of its funds from out @-@ of @-@ state and <unk> Clinton overall two @-@ to @-@ one . 
 The Giuliani campaign showed some structural weaknesses . So closely identified with New York City , he had somewhat limited appeal to naturally Republican voters in Upstate New York . The Farmersville Garbage Scandal was indicative of his lower levels of support upstate . By late December 1999 , Clinton adapted to Giuliani 's psychological warfare , saying in response to one such gambit , " I can ’ t be responding every time the mayor gets angry . Because that ’ s all I would do . " A February 2000 attempt by Giuliani to capitalize on a Clinton campaign event 's accidental playing of Billy Joel 's suburban drug tale " Captain Jack " led to more ridicule for him than for her . 
 On March 11 , 2000 , Giuliani and Clinton met face @-@ to @-@ face for the first time since the campaigning began , at the New York Inner Circle press dinner , an annual event in which New York politicians and the press corps stage skits , roast each other and make fun of themselves , with proceeds going to charity . Giuliani was on stage in male disco garb spoofing John Travolta in Saturday Night Fever , but also appeared in drag in taped video clips that reworked the " Rudy / <unk> " theme of a past Inner Circle dinner , as well as in an exchange with Joan Rivers that sought to make fun of Clinton . Other performers ' skits made fun of Clinton 's Yankees claim and the infidelity of her husband . 
 The New York Police Department 's fatal shooting of Patrick <unk> on March 15 , 2000 inflamed Giuliani 's already strained relations with the city 's minority communities , and Clinton seized on it as a major campaign issue . By April , reports showed Clinton gaining upstate and generally <unk> Giuliani , who stated that his duties as mayor prevented him from campaigning more . He gave priority to city duties over campaign activities . Some Giuliani aides and national Republican figures concluded that his interest in the campaign was flagging , as although he was desirous of winning in political combat against a Clinton , he was by nature an executive personality and the prospect of serving as one of a hundred legislators was unappealing to him . 
 By this time , Clinton was 8 to 10 points ahead of Giuliani in the polls . In retrospect , The New York Times would write that the battle so far between the two had comprised " a blistering year of mental gamesmanship , piercing attacks , contrasts in personalities and positions , and blunders , played out by two outsize political figures in a super @-@ heated atmosphere . " 
 = = A tumultuous four weeks = = 
 Giuliani 's marriage to his wife , broadcast journalist and actress Donna Hanover , had been distant since 1996 , and the two were rarely seen in public together . There had been no formal announcement of any change in their relationship , although Hanover had indicated that she and their children would not move to Washington if Giuliani won the race . Beginning in October 1999 , a new woman was being spotted at mayoral functions . By March 2000 , Giuliani had stopped wearing his wedding ring and was being seen more in the company of this other woman , including at the Inner Circle press dinner , the St. Patrick 's Day parade , and town hall meetings , but it was not yet fully clear whether the relationship was personal or professional . While this woman had become a frequent subject of insider talk among the New York political circle , she had not been mentioned in the press . 
 On April 20 Hanover announced that she would soon be taking over the lead role in Eve Ensler 's controversial play The Vagina Monologues . Political observers speculated that Hanover was partly engaging in a political act against her husband , as Ensler was a friend and supporter of Hillary Clinton and the role would not go over well with social conservatives within the Republican Party . Giuliani declined to say whether he would attend one of her performances . On April 22 , the New York Post obtained photographs of Giuliani openly strolling on a Manhattan street with the other woman after they left a restaurant , but did not have more than a first name for her ; the Post sat on the story , but it was clear the relationship was a personal one . 
 On April 26 , television channel <unk> reported that Giuliani had undergone a second round of tests for prostate cancer at Mount Sinai Medical Center ; the same disease had led to the death of his father . On April 28 , Giuliani held a news conference to announce that he did in fact have prostate cancer , but it was in an early stage . He was unsure of which of several types of treatment he might undergo , and that decision would impact whether he could stay in the senate race or not . Hanover was not present at the conference , but issued a note saying she would support him in his decision process . 
 As Giuliani mulled over his medical options , on May 1 Hanover announced that she was postponing her appearance in The Vagina Monologues due to " personal family circumstances . " On May 2 the New York Daily News published a brief item about Giuliani 's other woman , without name or description . On May 3 the New York Post finally published its photographs of Giuliani and the woman , now identified as Judith Nathan , leaving a restaurant together , under the front page headline " Rudy 's Mystery Brunch Pal is Upper East Side <unk> " . ( Some observers felt that Giuliani , known for his ability to manipulate the New York media , had been eager for news of the relationship to come out . ) Later that day , Giuliani responded to a barrage of questions on the subject at a news conference by acknowledging Judith Nathan publicly for the first time , calling her " a very good friend " and expressing his annoyance that her privacy was being invaded . The next days were filled with New York media coverage on Nathan 's background and on the relationship . On May 6 Hanover held an unusually @-@ located news conference at the back of St. Patrick 's Cathedral before the funeral of Cardinal John O 'Connor ; visibly trembling , she said , " I will be supportive of Rudy in his fight against his illness , as this marriage and this man have been very precious to me . " The following day half the press tried to stake out Nathan 's known locations while the rest pestered Nathan 's hometown relatives in Hazleton , Pennsylvania ; Giuliani looked weak in a public appearance . 
 On May 10 , Giuliani held what The New York Times described as an " extraordinary , emotional news conference " in Bryant Park to announce that he was seeking a separation from Hanover , saying , " This is very , very painful . For quite some time it 's probably been apparent that Donna and I lead in many ways independent and separate lives . " Regarding Nathan , Giuliani said " I 'm going to need her now more than maybe I did before , " making reference to his battle with cancer and her background in nursing . Regarding the senate race , he again did not commit to a decision , saying , " I don 't really care about politics right now . I 'm thinking about my family , the people that I love and what can be done that 's honest and truthful and that protects them the best . I 'm not thinking about politics . Politics comes at least second , maybe third , maybe fourth , somewhere else . It 'll all work itself out some way politically . " Giuliani had , however , neglected to inform Hanover in advance of his announcement ; her reaction was described as distraught . Three hours later , she held her own news conference at Gracie Mansion , where she said , " Today 's turn of events brings me great sadness . I had hoped to keep this marriage together . For several years , it was difficult to participate in Rudy 's public life because of his relationship with one staff member . " In this , she was making reference to <unk> <unk> , the former communications director for Giuliani ; Vanity Fair had reported in 1997 that <unk> and Giuliani were having an affair , which both of them had denied . Hanover continued , " Beginning last May , I made a major effort to bring us back together . Rudy and I re @-@ established some of our personal intimacy through the fall . At that point , he chose another path . " 
 State Republican leaders , who until now had avoided talk of replacements for Giuliani should he not run , now gave more attention to the matter , with the state party convention coming up on May 30 . Former possible contenders Rick Lazio and Pete King immediately indicated they were available ; other names mentioned included Wall Street financier Theodore J. Forstmann and Governor Pataki , although the latter indicated no interest . Giuliani continued to ponder his senate race decision ; when he had dinner with Nathan on May 12 , they were trailed by a flock of photographers . Giuliani canceled campaigning and fundraising trips to upstate New York and California on May 13 , suggesting he would not run , but then resumed fundraising and suggested he was inclined towards running on May 15 . Two Republican county chairmen became upset at the indecision , saying , " Like Waiting for Godot , we have Waiting for Rudy , " and , " We need a decision . Like tomorrow would be nice . Because this is getting ridiculous . " A top state Republican said , " He seem [ s ] to like the attention . He seems to be going through some sort of catharsis in public . And we 're like psychiatrists watching it . I can 't quite figure it out . I don 't think anybody can . " Clinton , meanwhile , said as little as possible about the situation , preferring to let Giuliani 's drama play out on its own ; on May 17 , as he huddled with his doctors over whether to choose surgery or radiation as his treatment while facing conflicting political advice from his aides , she won the unanimous approval of delegates to the Democratic Party state convention at the Pepsi Arena in Albany , New York , giving a constrained acceptance speech because she did not know her general election opponent . 
 Finally , on May 19 , Giuliani held what The New York Times again described as " an emotional , riveting news conference " that " reached a new level of introspection " to announce that he was dropping out of the senate race : " This is not the right time for me to run for office . If it were six months ago or it were a year from now or the timing were a little different , maybe it would be different . But it isn 't different and that 's the way life is . " He added that , " I used to think the core of me was in politics , probably . It isn 't . When you feel your mortality and your humanity you realize that , that the core of you is first of all being able to take care of your health . " He said that he would instead devote the remainder of his mayoralty trying to overcome the hostile relations he had with many of the city 's minority groups . 
 = = A change of Republicans : Lazio = = 
 While previous Republican nominee candidates and fellow Long Island Congressmen Rick Lazio and Pete King had both indicated an interest in replacing Giuliani , upon Giuliani 's withdrawal the state party quickly rallied around Lazio , who had more campaign funds and who was viewed as a potentially strong candidate . In particular , Governor Pataki — who never cared much for Giuliani to begin with — was strongly in favor of Lazio , and praised him as " fresh , unencumbered challenger " to Clinton . This also caused a shuffle in New York 's unique third @-@ party ballot @-@ line alignments : the Liberal Party of New York , which was previously set to run Giuliani ( whom they had supported in all three of his mayoral races ) , now switched to Clinton , while the Conservative Party of New York , which had previously been loath to endorse the socially liberal Giuliani ( and was set to nominate former Westchester Congressman Joe DioGuardi ) lined up behind Lazio . Lazio accepted the unanimous approval of delegates to the Republican Party state convention at a hotel ballroom in Buffalo on May 30 . 
 Clinton now faced a lesser @-@ known candidate in Lazio . While a relative moderate among House Republicans , Lazio had frequently supported former House Speaker Newt Gingrich , a largely despised figure among many New Yorkers . Lazio did bring to the table an ethnic suburban background familiar to many New Yorkers , and had a reputation as an energetic campaigner . 
 One formality left were New York 's late @-@ in @-@ the @-@ season primary elections on September 12 , which in this case merely served to ratify the state party conventions ' choices . Lazio won unopposed , while Clinton won 82 percent of the vote in easily defeating unknown Manhattan doctor Mark McMahon , who ran on the grounds that " the Clintons have tried to hijack the Democratic Party . " For her part , Clinton said that she was " surprised , in a way [ to see her name in the voting booth ] . I stood there for a minute , staring at my name . " In any case , the general election was already well underway . 
 = = Democratic primary results = = 
 = = Republican primary = = 
 = = = Polling = = = 
 = = General election = = 
 = = = Polling = = = 
 = = General election campaign = = 
 The contest drew considerable national attention and both candidates were well @-@ funded . By the end of the race , Democrat Clinton and Republicans Lazio and Giuliani had spent a combined $ 90 million , the most of any U.S. Senate race in history . Lazio outspent Clinton $ 40 million to $ 29 million , with Clinton also getting several million dollars in soft money from Democratic organizations . Among Clinton antagonists circles , direct mail @-@ based fundraising groups such as the Emergency Committee to Stop Hillary Rodham Clinton sprung up , sending out solicitations regarding the " carpetbagging " issue : just as one Clinton leaves office , another one runs . 
 Clinton secured a broad base of support , including endorsements from conservation groups and organized labor , but notably not the New York City police union which endorsed Lazio while firefighters supported Hillary . While Clinton had a solid base of support in New York City , candidates and observers expected the race to be decided in upstate New York where 45 percent of the state 's voters live . During the campaign , Clinton vowed to improve the economic picture in upstate New York , promising that her plan would deliver 200 @,@ 000 New York jobs over six years . Her plan included specific tax credits with the purpose of rewarding job creation and encouraging business investment , especially in the high @-@ tech sector . She called for targeted personal tax cuts for college tuition and long @-@ term care . Lazio faced a unique tactical problem campaigning upstate . The major issue there was the persistently weak local economy , which Lazio hoped to link to his opponent 's husband 's tenure in office . Attacks on the state of the upstate economy were frequently interpreted as criticism of incumbent Republican governor George Pataki , however , limiting the effect of this line of attack . 
 Opponents continued to make the carpetbagging issue a focal point throughout the race and during debates . Talk radio hammered on this , with New York @-@ based Sean Hannity issuing a daily mantra , " Name me three things Hillary Clinton has ever done for the people of New York ! " Clinton 's supporters pointed out that the state was receptive to national leaders , such as Robert F. Kennedy who was elected to the Senate in 1964 despite similar accusations . In the end , according to exit polls conducted in the race , a majority of the voters dismissed the carpetbagging issue as unimportant . 
 During the campaign , Independent Counsel Robert Ray filed his final reports regarding the long @-@ running Whitewater , " Travelgate " , and " Filegate " investigations of the White House , each of which included specific investigations of Hillary Clinton actions . The reports exonerated her on the files matter , said there was insufficient evidence regarding her role in Whitewater , and said that she had made factually false statements regarding the Travel Office firings but there was insufficient evidence to prosecute her . Although The New York Times editorialized that the release of the reports seemed possibly timed to coincide with the Senate election , in practice the findings were not seen as likely to sway many voters ' opinions . 
 A September 13 , 2000 debate between Lazio and Clinton proved important . Lazio was on the warpath against soft money and the amounts of it coming from the Democratic National Committee into Clinton 's campaign , and challenged Clinton to agree to ban soft money from both campaigns . He left his podium and waved his proposed paper agreement in Clinton 's face ; many debate viewers thought he had invaded her personal space and as a result Clinton 's support among women voters solidified . 
 Late in the campaign Lazio criticised Clinton for accepting campaign donations from various Arab groups in the wake of the USS Cole attack . This issue caused former New York Mayor Ed Koch to take out ads telling Lazio to " stop with the sleaze already , " and did not change the dynamic of the race . 
 = = Results = = 
 Per New York State law , Clinton and Lazio totals include their minor party line votes : Liberal Party of New York and Working Families Party for Clinton , Conservative Party for Lazio . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Clinton won the election on November 7 with 55 % of the vote to Lazio 's 43 % , a difference larger than most observers had expected . Clinton won the traditionally Democratic base of New York City by large margins , and carried suburban Westchester County , but lost heavily populated Long Island , part of which Lazio represented in Congress . She won surprising victories in Upstate counties , such as Cayuga , Rensselaer , and Niagara , to which her win has been attributed . 
 In comparison with other results , this 12 % margin was smaller than Gore 's 25 % margin over Bush in the state Presidential contest , was slightly larger than the 10 % margin by which fellow New York senator Charles Schumer defeated incumbent Republican Al D 'Amato in the hotly contested 1998 race , but was considerably smaller than the 47 % margin by which Senator Schumer won reelection in 2004 against little @-@ known Republican challenger Howard Mills . The victory of a Democrat in the Senate election was not assured , because in recent decades the Republicans had won about half the elections for governor and senator . 
 Lazio 's bid was handicapped by the weak performance of George W. Bush in New York in the 2000 election , but it is also clear Hillary Clinton had made substantial inroads in upstate New York prior to Lazio 's entry into the race . Exit polls also showed a large gender gap with Clinton running stronger than expected among moderate women and unaffiliated women . 
 = = Post @-@ election charges = = 
 = = = Hasidic pardons = = = 
 In January 2001 , two months after Hillary Clinton 's election to the Senate , President Clinton pardoned four residents of the New Square Hasidic enclave in Rockland County , New York , who had been convicted of defrauding the federal government of $ 30 million by establishing a fictitious religious school . New Square had voted almost unanimously for Hillary Clinton in the New York Senate race . A lawyer following the matter stated that even if Hillary Clinton had promised to lobby her husband for clemency in exchange for the town 's votes — a claim for which there was no proof — it would be difficult to establish a crime had taken place : " Politicians make promises all the time . That 's nothing new — or illegal . " Hillary Clinton acknowledged sitting in on a post @-@ election meeting discussing possible clemency for the four , but said she had played no part in her husband 's decision . 
 A federal investigation launched to investigate various Clinton pardons , closed its investigation of the New Square matter in June 2002 by taking no action against Bill Clinton , Hillary Clinton , or any residents of New Square . 
 = = = Hollywood fundraiser = = = 
 Hillary Clinton 's former finance director , David Rosen , was indicted on January 7 , 2005 on campaign finance charges related to a fund @-@ raising event produced by Peter F. Paul . Paul , a convicted drug dealer who would soon after be convicted on stock fraud charges after being extradited from Brazil , stated that he spent $ 1 @.@ 2 million to produce the August 12 , 2000 Hollywood Gala Salute to President William Jefferson Clinton event , which was both a tribute to honor President Clinton and a fundraiser for the First Lady 's 2000 Senate campaign . The Justice Department indictment charged Rosen with filing false reports with the Federal Election Commission by reporting only $ 400 @,@ 000 in contributions . On May 27 , 2005 , the jury acquitted Rosen on all counts . On January 5 , 2006 it was reported that Clinton 's campaign group agreed to pay a $ 35 @,@ 000 fine related to the underreporting of the fundraiser 's expenses . 
 Peter Paul has also filed a civil suit in this matter , Paul v. Clinton . On April 10 , 2006 , the judge in charge of the case removed Hillary Clinton as a defendant , citing a lack of evidence . However , she may still be called to testify as a witness in the case . The removal was upheld by the California Second District Court of Appeal on October 16 , 2007 . 
 Meanwhile , by the time of Hillary Clinton 's 2008 presidential campaign , a 13 @-@ minute video produced by Paul and describing his various allegations against Hillary Clinton had become quite popular on the Internet , gaining 1 @.@ 4 million hits on Google Video and about 350 @,@ 000 on YouTube in a single week in October 2007 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Clinton 's victory would establish her as an effective campaigner and an electoral force on her own , able to capture Republican and independent votes and overcome her polarizing image . She would easily win re @-@ election in 2006 , and in 2007 began her presidential campaign for 2008 . 
 Lazio gave up his House seat to run for Senate . Following his defeat , which set a record for the most money spent in a losing Senate effort , he took positions in the corporate world and avoided electoral politics until becoming a candidate in New York 's 2010 gubernatorial election . However , he was defeated by a wide margin in the Republican primary . 
 Giuliani would undergo treatment for his cancer and eventually recover ; he would also divorce Donna Hanover and eventually marry Judith Nathan . After his campaign withdrawal , his political future looked uncertain at best . But less than a year after the senate general election , the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks took place , with Giuliani still mayor . Giuliani 's performance in the aftermath of September 11 earned him many accolades and resurrected his political prospects . After a successful stint in the private sector , in 2007 he also began his presidential campaign for 2008 . 
 Throughout much of 2007 , Clinton and Giuliani led in national polls for their parties ' respective nominations , and media reports often looked back to the 2000 " race that wasn 't " as a preview of what might lie in wait for the entire nation in 2008 . Such extrapolating ended with the Giuliani campaign 's precipitous decline and January 2008 withdrawal . Clinton as well failed to gain the 2008 nomination and , in June 2008 , she finished in a close second place to Illinois Senator Barack Obama . 
 In December 2008 , Lowey would have another chance at the Senate seat , when Clinton was nominated for U.S. Secretary of State by President @-@ elect Obama and Lowey was considered a front @-@ runner to be named as her appointed replacement . But Lowey withdrew from consideration , as in the intervening years she had gained enough seniority to become one of the powerful " cardinals " on the House Appropriations Committee and did not want to relinquish that position . When Caroline Kennedy announced her interest in the vacancy , comparisons were drawn to Clinton in 2000 , with both being famous people seeking to hold elective office for the first time . Others pointed out that Clinton had won election to the office while Kennedy would first be appointed . In any case , Kennedy 's effort soon faltered , in part due to not having the same desire or willingness to work for the seat as Clinton had had , and she soon withdrew as abruptly as she had entered . 
 Kirsten Gillibrand received the appointment , and attention then turned to who would run against her in the 2010 Senate special election . By November 2009 , Giuliani was seriously considering a run for his old would @-@ have @-@ been Senate seat , but the following month he announced he was not running for it or anything else in 2010 , possibly signalling an end to his political career . 
 = The Boat Race 1981 = 
 The 127th Boat Race took place on 4 April 1981 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Umpired by former Oxford rower Ronnie Howard , it was won by Oxford who passed the finishing post eight lengths ahead of Cambridge , their largest margin of victory since 1898 . The race saw Oxford coxed by Sue Brown , the first female cox in the history of the event . 
 In the reserve race , Isis beat Goldie by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , and in the Women 's Boat Race , Oxford were victorious . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Cambridge by a canvas in the previous year 's race . However Cambridge held the overall lead , with 68 victories to Oxford 's 57 . The race was sponsored for fifth time by Ladbrokes . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 Christopher Dodd writing in The Guardian noted Oxford 's aggressiveness during the preparations for the race , suggesting that they were " set to humiliate their opponents if they possibly can . " Dodd went on to predict that Oxford would win by their greatest margin since the 1898 race . Meanwhile , Cambridge had reorganised their seating order the week before the race . Oxford 's boat was named after Russell Crockford who had rowed in Oxford 's successful 1978 and 1979 races . He was killed in a car accident the previous year on his way to a regatta in Australia . 
 Umpire Ronnie Howard modified the starting arrangements , making the boats commence the race closer together to dissuade the coxes steering into one another from the start . He warned both coxes that should they foul , he would disqualify them . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Sue Brown was selected to cox the Oxford boat , and became the first female competitor in the history of the Boat Race . Although she had learned to cox at Wadham , she had already been selected to represent Great Britain in the Women 's coxed fours at the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow . She had impressed Oxford coach Dan Topolski who chose her for the Dark Blues . Her selection caused a furore ; according to Dodd , " Sue Brown must have passed before more shutters than anyone except for Lady Diana Spencer " . She was advised by Colin Moynihan who had coxed Oxford to their largest victory of the century in the 1977 race . Boris Rankov was making his fourth appearance , but this time as a junior fellow of St Hugh 's , rather than as an undergraduate at Corpus Christi . In doing so , he became the first representative of a women 's college in the men 's Boat Race . 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 13 st 8 lb ( 86 @.@ 0 kg ) , 1 @.@ 5 pounds ( 0 @.@ 68 kg ) more per rower than their opponents . The race saw the return of no fewer than twelve former Blues , six in each crew . Only Richard Yonge , Richard <unk> and Brown for Oxford and R. Stephens , M. Clark and Mike Cowie for Cambridge were new to the race . Graeme Hall was the Cambridge finishing coach , while Oxford 's Dan Topolski took over that role from Steve Royle two weeks prior to the race . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford were strong pre @-@ race favourites ; Ladbrokes themselves quoted Oxford at odds of five @-@ to @-@ one on to win . Cambridge won the toss for the first time in seven years and elected to start on the Surrey station . The race started at 1 pm under umpire Howard 's guidance . Both crews rating equally off the start , Oxford took an early lead and lead by nine seconds by the Mile Post , allowing her to move the Dark Blue boat in front of Cambridge . Pushing her crew to <unk> Cambridge , Oxford extended their lead to 10 seconds by Hammersmith Bridge , 14 seconds by Chiswick Steps , 18 seconds by Barnes Bridge and 23 seconds by the finishing post . Oxford won their sixth consecutive victory by eight lengths in a time of 18 minutes 11 seconds , the largest margin of victory since the Cambridge won the 1973 race by thirteen lengths , and the largest margin of victory in the 20th century for the Dark Blues . 
 In the reserve race , Isis beat Goldie by five lengths , their second consecutive victory . In the 36th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Oxford triumphed , their second consecutive victory . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Oxford cox Brown avoided the traditional soaking in the Thames . She later commented : " I steered extremely badly , but we still won . " Her coach Topolski said " She did a brilliant job . " Dodd , writing in The Guardian , described Oxford 's victory as " crushing " following their " undramatic and calculated performance " . Jim Railton of The Times was impressed : " Without a doubt it is one of the finest crews Oxford have ever produced , arguably the best . " 
 = Launch Party = 
 " Launch Party " is the fifth and sixth episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's fifty @-@ eighth and fifty @-@ ninth episode overall . The episode was written by Jennifer Celotta and directed by Ken Whittingham . It first aired in the United States on October 11 , 2007 on NBC . 
 In this episode , Dunder Mifflin prepares for the launch of their new website . Dwight tries to outsell the website , Andy makes a move for Angela , and Michael kidnaps a pizza delivery boy ( Kevin McHale ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the opening scene , Michael has arranged a meeting to discuss making the Quarterly Report more exciting , unaware that the office workers are all more interested in the DVD screensaver , and believes their disappointment whenever the bouncing box on the screensaver doesn 't make it into a corner are reactions to his statements . Eventually , the box does make it into a corner , and the cheering employees all leave , to his confusion . 
 Dunder Mifflin is preparing a party for the launch of their new website " Dunder Mifflin Infinity " . Since Jan Levenson ( Melora Hardin ) doesn 't want to go to the launch party , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) invites Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) , who makes Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) take her place . Only after they reach New Jersey does Jim realize that Michael received an " invitation " to a chat room , not the actual party . Jim also reveals that he turned down the Corporate job that Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) accepted . Michael returns to Scranton dejected and attempts to plan a better party . This irritates party planner Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) , who has already been in an exceptionally irritable mood . She viciously and patronizingly takes out her frustrations on fellow Party Planning Committee member Phyllis , who quits the committee in frustration . 
 Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) decides to compete against the website to see who can make more sales . Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) keeps a running tally of reams sold , blowing an <unk> each time Dwight makes a sale . Irritated by the distraction , Jim and Pam plot a prank . They send Dwight instant messages pretending to be the company 's computer system , taunting Dwight to believe it has achieved self @-@ awareness . Dwight wins the challenge , but when he gloats to Angela about his victory , she rejects him outright and makes it clear that they are broken up for good . She also asks Pam to set her up with a single friend of hers . Pam , feeling sorry for Dwight , sends another message as the computer acknowledging him as a superior being . Andy later sets up a conference call with some of his old Cornell friends to serenade Angela with Take a Chance on Me ; she doesn 't agree to date him , but appears to be somewhat charmed by the spectacle . 
 Michael finally realizes that Ryan doesn 't respect him , and once he gets online for the party 's chat room he snaps that Dwight single @-@ handedly outsold DMI and curses at Ryan . But his emotional reactions haven 't stopped for the night : he is angered after everyone complains that he confused the office 's favorite pizza place ( Alfredo 's Pizza Cafe , which is a real restaurant in Scranton ) with a terrible pizza place ( Pizza by Alfredo , which is fictional ) . When his coupon is then refused , he takes a stand for justice and holds the teenaged delivery driver ( Kevin McHale ) hostage , with both he and Dwight acting out their frustrations about Ryan and Angela , respectively . After some time , Michael realizes he is breaking the law and lets the kid go , and then heads up to crash the party in NYC and get some sushi , with Dwight joining him . They get to enjoy a little leftover food , but Michael 's most cheered when one of the younger Corporate workers says they liked his rant against Ryan and " It was funny to see Ryan embarrassed by all that " , and heads home in good spirits . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Launch Party " was the sixth episode of the series directed by Ken Whittingham . Whittingham had previously directed " Health Care " , " Michael 's Birthday " , " The Convention " , " The Merger " , and " Phyllis ' Wedding " . " Launch Party " was written by Jennifer Celotta , making it the sixth episode written by her . 
 According to Jennifer Celotta , the idea for the first scene of the episode where the office workers are watching a logo bounce around a television screen , came when the writers were in a room watching the DVD logo bounce around the television screen , and were arguing about whether it would ever hit the corner . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Launch Party " received a 5 @.@ 2 Nielsen Rating and an 8 % Share . The episode was watched by 8 @.@ 91 million viewers and achieved a 4 @.@ 7 / 11 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic . 
 " Launch Party " received mixed reviews from critics . TV Squad 's Jay Black wondered why the writers " feel the need to veer off into increasingly more ridiculous places " , especially because The Office is " hailed by critics and adored by fans for its ability to find humor in the smallest pieces of real @-@ life human interaction " . Black did say that except for the kidnapping , he " thought tonight 's episode was the best of the season . " Travis Fickett of IGN wrote that " Launch Party " was " a very entertaining episode with some terrific moments . " Fickett did say that with all the hour @-@ long episodes " things start to feel stretched and some scenes take on a sense of redundancy and certain storylines seem to peter out before they even get going . " 
 = French battleship Courbet ( 1911 ) = 
 Courbet was the lead ship of her class , the first dreadnoughts built for the French Navy . She was completed before World War I and named in honour of Admiral Amédée Courbet . She spent the war in the Mediterranean , helping to sink the Austro @-@ Hungarian protected cruiser Zenta in August 1914 . She spent the rest of the war providing cover for the Otranto Barrage that blockaded the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in the Adriatic Sea . Although upgraded several times before World War II , she was not deemed to be a first @-@ class battleship and spent most of the interwar period as a gunnery training ship . 
 Upon the German invasion of France , beginning on 10 May 1940 , Courbet was hastily rearmed . She supported Allied troops in the defence of Cherbourg during June , later that month taking refuge in England . As part of Operation Catapult , she was seized in Portsmouth by British forces on 3 July and was turned over to the Free French a week later . She was used as a patrol vessel depot ship and an anti @-@ aircraft ship there until 31 March 1941 when she was disarmed and hulked . Her engines and boilers were removed in 1944 to prepare her for use as a breakwater during the Normandy landings in June 1944 . She was scrapped where she lay after the war . 
 = = Description = = 
 Courbet was 166 metres ( 544 ft 7 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 27 metres ( 88 ft 7 in ) and at full load a draft of 9 @.@ 04 metres ( 29 ft 8 in ) at the bow . She displaced 23 @,@ 475 tonnes ( 23 @,@ 100 long tons ) at standard load and 25 @,@ 579 tonnes ( 25 @,@ 180 long tons ) at full load . She proved to be rather wet in service as she was bow @-@ heavy because of the superimposed turrets forward . 
 Courbet had four propeller shafts powered by four Parsons direct @-@ drive steam turbines , rated at 28 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 20 @,@ 880 kW ) . Twenty @-@ four Niclausse boilers provided steam for her turbines . These boilers were coal @-@ burning with auxiliary oil sprayers . She had a designed speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) , although she reached 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) during trials . She carried up to 2 @,@ 700 long tons ( 2 @,@ 700 t ) of coal and 906 long tons ( 921 t ) of oil and could steam for 4 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 800 km ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 12 mph ; 19 km / h ) . 
 Courbet 's main armament consisted of twelve 305 @-@ millimetre ( 12 in ) Mle 1910 45 @-@ calibre guns mounted in six twin gun turrets , with two turrets superimposed fore and aft , and one on each flank of the ship . For anti @-@ torpedo boat defence she carried twenty @-@ two 138 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) Mle 1910 guns , which were mounted in casemates . Four 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Modèle 1902 Hotchkiss guns were fitted , two on each beam . She was also armed with four 450 @-@ millimetre ( 18 in ) submerged Modèle 1909 torpedo tubes with twelve torpedoes . 
 Courbet 's waterline armoured belt extended well below the waterline as the French were concerned about protection from underwater hits . Her main armour was also thinner than that of her British or German counterparts , but covered more area . It was 270 mm ( 11 in ) thick between the fore and aft turrets and tapered to 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) towards the bow and stern . It extended 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 ft 10 in ) below the normal waterline . Above the main belt was another belt , 180 mm thick , that covered the sides , and the secondary armament , up to the forecastle deck , 4 @.@ 5 m ( 15 ft ) deep , between the fore and aft turrets . The conning tower had armour 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The main gun turrets had 290 mm ( 11 @.@ 4 in ) of armour on their faces , 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) on their sides and roofs 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick . Their barbettes had 280 mm ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) of armour . There was no anti @-@ torpedo bulkhead although there was a longitudinal bulkhead abreast the machinery spaces that was used either as a coal bunker or left as a void . 
 = = Career = = 
 Courbet was built by the Arsenal de Lorient , at Lorient . Her keel was laid down on 1 September 1910 and she was launched on 23 September 1911 . She was completed on 19 November 1913 and finished her trials before World War I began the following year . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Courbet joined the 1st Division of the 1st Squadron of the French Mediterranean Fleet , at Toulon , upon commissioning in 1913 . She became the flagship of Vice @-@ Amiral Augustin Boué de Lapeyrère , commander of the 1st Squadron , after the beginning of the war until 12 April 1915 . Lapeyrère decided immediately on a sweep into the Adriatic to surprise the Austrian vessels enforcing a blockade of Montenegro and the Anglo @-@ French force , which included her sister ship Jean Bart , succeeded in cutting off and sinking the Austro @-@ Hungarian protected cruiser Zenta in an engagement off Antivari on 16 August 1914 , although her accompanying destroyer managed to escape . She spent most of the rest of 1914 providing gunfire support for the Montenegrin Army until U @-@ 12 hit Jean Bart on 21 December with a torpedo . This forced the battleships to fall back to either Malta or Bizerte to cover the Otranto Barrage . After the French occupied the neutral Greek island of Corfu in 1916 she moved forward to Corfu and Argostoli , but her activities were very limited as much of her crew was used to man anti @-@ submarine ships . Before the end of the war she was fitted with seven 75 @-@ millimetre ( 3 in ) Mle 1918 anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in single mounts . These guns were adaptations of the famous French Mle 97 75 @-@ mm field gun . 
 = = = Interwar years = = = 
 Courbet served as Vice @-@ Amiral Charlier 's flagship between 6 June 1919 and 20 October 1920 . The following year she became a gunnery training ship at Toulon , but she suffered a serious boiler fire in June 1923 that required repairs , so she was given the first of her upgrades between 9 July 1923 and 16 April 1924 , at La Seyne @-@ sur @-@ Mer . This included replacing one set of boilers with oil @-@ fired boilers , trunking together her two forward funnels , increasing the maximum elevation of the main armament from 12 ° to 23 ° , removal of her bow armour to make her more seaworthy , the installation of a fire @-@ control director , with a 4 @.@ 57 metres ( 15 ft 0 in ) rangefinder , atop the new tripod foremast as well as the installation of an experimental 7 @.@ 6 metres ( 24 ft 11 in ) rangefinder on top of her conning tower . She had another boiler fire in August 1924 and remained under repair for the rest of the year , but resumed her duties as a gunnery training ship upon her return from the dockyard . 
 She was refitted again between 15 January 1927 and 12 January 1931 . This was much more extensive than her earlier refit as another set of boilers was converted to oil @-@ firing , her high and medium pressure direct @-@ drive turbines were replaced by geared turbines and her fire @-@ control systems were comprehensively upgraded . A large cruiser @-@ type fire @-@ control director was added atop the foremast with a 4 @.@ 57 @-@ m coincidence rangefinder and a 3 @-@ metre ( 9 ft 10 in ) stereo rangefinder . The rangefinder above the conning tower was replaced by a duplex unit carrying two 4 @.@ 57 @-@ m rangefinders and another 4 @.@ 57 @-@ m rangefinder was added in an armoured hood next to the main mast . Two directors for the secondary guns were added on the navigation bridge , each with a 2 @-@ metre ( 6 ft 7 in ) coincidence rangefinder . A 8 @.@ 2 metres ( 26 ft 11 in ) rangefinder was added to the roof of ' B ' turret , the second one from the bow . Her Mle 1918 AA guns were exchanged for Mle 1922 guns and they were provided with three 1 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 4 ft 11 in ) rangefinders , one on top of the duplex unit on the conning tower , one on ' B ' turret and one in the aft superstructure . The 75 @-@ mm guns had a maximum depression of 10 ° and a maximum elevation of 90 ° . They fired a 5 @.@ 93 @-@ kilogram ( 13 @.@ 1 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 850 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) at a rate of fire of 8 – 18 rounds per minute and had a maximum effective ceiling of 8 @,@ 000 metres ( 26 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 She was transferred from the gunnery school to the navigation school in 1937 , before her final refit between 1 April 1937 and 19 September 1938 that removed her torpedo tubes and overhauled her boilers . By 1939 she reverted to her role as a gunnery training ship , but she was ordered to Brest and Quiberon with her sister Paris upon the outbreak of World War II . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Courbet and her sister Paris formed a Fifth Squadron at the beginning of the war . They were transferred to the Atlantic to continue their training duties without interference . Both ships were ordered restored to operational status on 21 May 1940 by Amiral Mord and they were given six Hotchkiss 13 @.@ 2 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 52 in ) twin machine gun mounts and two single 13 @.@ 2 @-@ mm Browning machine guns at Cherbourg . Courbet was ordered to provide gunfire support to the defenders of Cherbourg against the advancing 7th Panzer Division and covered the evacuation of the town by the Allies , although the lack of spotting aircraft meant that she was not particularly effective in that role . 
 Courbet sailed for Portsmouth on 20 June . She was seized there , as part of Operation Catapult , by British forces on 3 July and a week later was turned over to the Free French , who used her as a depot and an anti @-@ aircraft ship in Portsmouth until 31 March 1941 when she was disarmed . Up to April 1944 she was deployed as a target ship in Scotland . At Loch <unk> she was initially used as a target vessel for the " Highball " trials . " Highball " was a smaller version of " Upkeep " used in the Dambuster Raid . She remained in use as a depot and target ship until she was earmarked for use as a " Gooseberry " breakwater at Sword Beach during the Battle of Normandy . She had to be towed from Weymouth on 7 June by the British tugboats <unk> Growler and <unk> <unk> as her engines and boilers had been removed earlier and replaced with concrete . She was scuttled on 9 June and was hit by <unk> manned torpedoes during the nights of 15 – 16 and 16 – 17 August . She was scrapped in place after the war . 
 = I 'm That Chick = 
 " I 'm That Chick " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her eleventh studio album , E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . A disco track with influences of R & B , it was written by Carey , Johntá Austin and production duo Stargate ( Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor E. Hermansen ) . It contains elements of a song called " Off the Wall " originally performed by Michael Jackson . Rod Temperton , the songs composer , received a songwriting for " I 'm That Chick " as result . The track was positively received amongst most music critics , many of whom called it the best song on the album and praised is disco composition . Carey performed " I 'm That Chick " on The Hills season premiere party , the 2008 Fashion Rocks , Canadian Idol , and included it on the set @-@ list of her eighth concert tour , The Elusive Chanteuse Show ( 2014 ) . It peaked at number 82 on the U.S. Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " I 'm That Chick " was written by Mariah Carey , Johntá Austin and production duo Stargate ( Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor E. Hermansen ) for Carey 's eleventh studio album , E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . It was produced by Carey for Maroon Entertainment and by Stargate on behalf of Delirious Blacksmith Management Ltd . Copyright is held by Rye Songs which is administered by Songs of Universal ( BMI ) / Zomba Songs / Sony ATV Publishing Ltd . / EMI Music Publishing / Naked Under My Clothes / Chrysalis Music ( ASCAP ) . The song contains elements of " Off the Wall " , written by Rod Temperton in 1980 and originally performed by Michael Jackson . Temperton received as songwriting credit as a result . " Off the Wall " is published by <unk> and administered by Almo Music Corp ( ASCAP ) . The track was recorded by Eriksen and Brian Garten at Roc the Mic Studios in New York City and Honeysouth Studios in Miami , and mixed by Phil Tan for <unk> Productions Ltd. at Soapbox Studios in Atlanta . Tan was assisted Josh Houghkirk , All instrumentation was provided for and performed by Eriksen and Hermansen . Carey performed background vocals along with Johnson and MaryAnn Tatum . 
 It is a disco song with R & B influences The Guardian 's Alex Macpherson noted that the R & B element borrowed from 2008 trend in the genre of using a time signature of 44 . He thought that the disco style of the song was reminiscent of some of Carey 's compositions in the beginning of her career , and believed that it was not a coincidence that Carey 's album shares its name with one released by Giorgio Moroder , a disco and EDM DJ and producer , 1979 . Carey employs a " gritty " but " effortless " " feathery vocal approach " on the track , similar to that of Jackson 's on " Off the Wall " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe declared " I 'm That Chick " as the best track on the album . PopMatters writer Evan Sawdey wrote " the few times that she is handed a truly effortless stunner on E = MC2 , she absolutely knocks it out of the park " with regard to " I 'm That Chick " and " Side Effects " . He continued to write that the former " could very well be the disc ’ s highlight " , but felt that Carey sounded like an unknown popstar . However , Jayanthi Daniels of The New York Sun was critical of " I 'm That Chick " as well as " Side Effects " , describing them as " throwaway pop tracks " on a hip @-@ hop album . The Advocate 's Sara Levy called described the track as " irresistible " and a " coy surprise " , while Nick Levine of Digital Spy similarly wrote that it is " irresistible disco candy . " Joey Guerra from the Houston Chronicle felt that the " Off the Wall " sample " breathed life " into the track , writing that the only things which are missing are " roller skates and short @-@ shorts " . Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine gave a detailed evaluation of the song 's composition , comparing it to Carey 's 2001 soundtrack album Glitter and to Janet Jackson 's 2008 song " <unk> " : 
 'I 'm That Chick ' is a retro <unk> in the best , most Glitter @-@ <unk> sense . It 's pinker than Pepto @-@ Bismol and just as soothing , and for whatever reason , Mariah 's fudged enunciation on the chorus turns ' I 'm that chick you like ' into ' I 'll have chicken , lite . ' The triumph of the song is that , when all of our dance @-@ floor divas these days seem to throw one disco @-@ descendant banger on their otherwise hip @-@ hop @-@ hybrid LPs almost out of obligation , ' I 'm That Chick ' doesn 't feel even as tokenistic as Janet 's ' Feedback ' ( which I like more , but only out of context ) . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On March 25 , 2008 , Carey was featured as the special guest performer at The Hills season premiere party , an event marking the start of a span of ten episodes airing in between season three and four . Carey performed " Touch My Body " , " I 'm That Chick " and " We Belong Together " . After the performance , Carey received strong praise from the program 's cast members , with Lauren Conrad saying " I 've always been a huge Mariah fan , and she 's just so beautiful and talented ' , while Whitney Port and Audrina Patridge referred to Carey as " an amazing singer " , while claiming to have listened to her music from a young age . On July 22 , 2008 , Carey was announced as one of the performers at the 2008 Fashion Rocks ceremony . At the event on September 6 , 2008 , the event opened with a live performance of " Just Stand Up " , a charity single in which Carey partook alongside other female artists including Carrie Underwood . Carey later performed " I 'm That Chick " alongside several male dancers , opening the song with a spontaneous a cappella of the track 's chorus to positive critical response . A writer from Marie Claire complimented the performance , describing the rendition as " true <unk> Mariah style " . A few days later , Carey reprised her performance of " I 'm That Chick " on Canadian Idol , along with " We Belong Together " . The track was included on the set @-@ list Carey 's eighth concert tour The Elusive Chanteuse Show in 2014 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Expo 67 = 
 The 1967 International and Universal Exposition or Expo 67 , as it was commonly known , was a general exhibition , Category One World 's Fair held in Montreal , Quebec , Canada , from April 27 to October 29 , 1967 . It is considered to be the most successful World 's Fair of the 20th century with the most attendees to that date and 62 nations participating . It also set the single @-@ day attendance record for a world 's fair , with 569 @,@ 500 visitors on its third day . 
 Expo 67 was Canada 's main celebration during its centennial year . The fair had been intended to be held in Moscow , to help the Soviet Union celebrate the Russian Revolution 's 50th anniversary ; however , for various reasons , the Soviets decided to cancel , and Canada was awarded it in late 1962 . 
 The project was not well supported in Canada at first . It took the determination of Montreal 's mayor , Jean Drapeau , and a new team of managers to guide it past political , physical and temporal hurdles . Defying a computer analysis that said it could not be done , the fair opened on time . 
 After Expo 67 ended in October 1967 , the site and most of the pavilions continued on as an exhibition called Man and His World , open during the summer months from 1968 until 1984 . By that time , most of the buildings — which had not been designed to last beyond the original exhibition — had deteriorated and were dismantled . Today , the islands that hosted the world exhibition are mainly used as parkland and for recreational use , with only a few remaining structures from Expo 67 to show that the event was held there . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The idea of hosting the 1967 World Exhibition dates back to 1956 , but it was in 1958 that Conservative Senator Mark <unk> suggested during his speech at the Brussels Exhibition that Canada should host a World Exhibition to celebrate its centennial . The exposition was offered first to Toronto but politicians there rejected the idea . However , Montreal 's mayor , Sarto Fournier , backed the proposal , allowing Canada to make a bid to the Bureau International des Expositions ( BIE ) . At the BIE 's May 5 , 1960 meeting in Paris , Moscow was awarded the fair after five rounds of voting that eliminated Austria 's and then Canada 's bids . In April 1962 , the Soviets scrapped plans to host the fair because of financial constraints and security concerns . Montreal 's new mayor , Jean Drapeau , lobbied the Canadian government to try again for the fair , which they did . On November 13 , 1962 , the BIE changed the location of the World Exhibition to Canada , and Expo 67 went on to become the fourth @-@ best attended BIE @-@ sanctioned world expositions , after Shanghai , Osaka , and Paris . 
 Several sites were proposed as the main Expo grounds . One location that was considered was Mount Royal Park , to the north of the downtown core . But it was Drapeau 's idea to create new islands in the St. Lawrence river , and to enlarge the existing Saint Helen 's Island . The choice overcame opposition from Montreal 's surrounding municipalities , and also prevented land speculation . 
 = = = Key people = = = 
 Expo did not get off to a smooth start ; in 1963 , many top organizing committee officials resigned . The main reason for the resignations was Mayor Drapeau 's choice of the site on new islands to be created around the existing St. Helen 's Island and also that a computer program predicted that the event could not possibly be constructed in time . Another more likely reason for the mass resignations was that on April 22 , 1963 , the federal Liberal government of Prime Minister Lester Pearson took power . This meant that former Prime Minister John Diefenbaker 's Progressive Conservative government appointees to the board of directors of the Canadian Corporation for the 1967 World Exhibition were likely forced to resign . 
 Canadian diplomat Pierre Dupuy was named Commissioner General , after Diefenbaker appointee Paul <unk> resigned from the post in 1963 . One of the main responsibilities of the Commissioner General was to attract other nations to build pavilions at Expo . Dupuy would spend most of 1964 and 1965 soliciting 125 countries , spending more time abroad than in Canada . Dupuy 's ' right @-@ hand ' man was Robert Fletcher Shaw , the deputy commissioner general and vice @-@ president of the corporation . He also replaced a Diefenbaker appointee , C.F. Carsley , Deputy Commissioner General . Shaw was a professional engineer and builder , and is widely credited for the total building of the Exhibition . Dupuy hired Andrew <unk> as the general manager . The management group became known as Les <unk> - the tough guys - and they were in charge of creating , building and managing Expo . Les <unk> consisted of : Jean @-@ Claude Delorme , Legal Counsel and Secretary of the Corporation ; Dale <unk> , Director of Finances ; Colonel Edward Churchill , Director of Installations ; Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien , Director of Operations , dubbed " The Mayor of Expo " ; Pierre de <unk> , Director of Exhibitors ; and Yves Jasmin , Director of Information , Advertising and Public Relations . To this group the chief architect Édouard <unk> was added . All ten were honoured by the Canadian government as recipients of the Order of Canada , Companions for Dupuy and Shaw , Officers for the others . 
 Jasmin wrote a book , in French , La petite histoire d <unk> 67 , about his 45 @-@ month experience at Expo and created the Expo 67 Foundation ( available on the web site under that name ) to commemorate the event for future generations . 
 As historian Pierre Berton put it , the cooperation between Canada 's French- and English @-@ speaking communities " was the secret of Expo 's success — ' the Québécois flair , the English @-@ Canadian pragmatism . ' " However , Berton also points out that this is an over @-@ simplification of national stereotypes . Arguably Expo did , for a short period anyway , bridge the ' Two <unk> 
 = = = Montebello conference produces theme = = = 
 In May 1963 , a group of prominent Canadian thinkers — including Alan Jarvis , director of the National Gallery of Canada ; novelists Hugh MacLennan and Gabrielle Roy ; J. Tuzo Wilson , geophysicist ; and Claude Robillard , town planner — met for three days at the <unk> Club in Montebello , Quebec . The theme , " Man and His World " , was based on the 1939 book entitled Terre des Hommes ( translated as Wind , Sand and Stars ) by Antoine de Saint @-@ Exupéry . In Roy 's introduction to the Expo 67 corporation 's book , entitled Terre des Hommes / Man and His World , she elucidates the theme : 
 In Terre des Hommes , his haunting book , so filled with dreams and hopes for the future , Antoine de Saint @-@ Exupéry writes of how deeply moved he was when , flying for the first time by night alone over Argentina , he happened to notice a few flickering lights scattered below him across an almost empty plain . They " twinkled here and there , alone like stars .... " In truth , being made aware of our own solitude can give us insight into the solitude of others . It can even cause us to gravitate towards one another as if to lessen our distress . Without this inevitable solitude , would there be any fusion at all , any tenderness between human beings . Moved as he was by a heightened awareness of the solitude of all creation and by the human need for solidarity , Saint @-@ Exupéry found a phrase to express his anguish and his hope that was as simple as it was rich in meaning ; and because that phrase was chosen many years later to be the governing idea of Expo 67 , a group of people from all walks of life was invited by the Corporation to reflect upon it and to see how it could be given tangible form . 
 The organizers also created seventeen theme elements for Man and his World : 
 Du Pont Auditorium of Canada : The philosophy and scientific content of theme exhibits were presented and emphasized in this 372 seat hall . 
 Habitat 67 
 Labyrinth 
 Man and his Health 
 Man in the Community 
 Man the Explorer : Man , his Planet and Space ; Man and Life ; Man and the Oceans ; Man and the Polar Regions 
 Man the Creator : The Gallery of Fine Arts ; Contemporary Sculpture ; Industrial Design ; Photography . 
 Man the Producer : Resources for Man ; Man in Control ; Progress . 
 Man the Provider 
 = = = Construction begins = = = 
 Construction started on August 13 , 1963 , with an elaborate ceremony hosted by Mayor Drapeau on barges anchored in the St. Lawrence River . <unk> , construction began when Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson pulled a lever that signalled a front @-@ end loader to dump the first batch of fill to enlarge Saint Helen 's Island , and Quebec premier Jean Lesage spread the fill with a bulldozer . The 25 million tons of fill needed to construct the islands was coming from the Montreal Metro 's excavations , a public works project that was already under construction before Expo was awarded to Montreal . Expo 's initial construction period mainly centred on enlarging Saint Helen 's Island , creating the artificial island of Notre Dame Island and lengthening and enlarging the Mackay Pier which became the Cité du Havre . While construction continued , the land rising out of Montreal harbour was not owned by the Expo Corporation yet . After the final mounds of earth completed the islands , the grounds that would hold the fair were officially transferred from the City of Montreal to the corporation on June 20 , 1964 . This gave Colonel Churchill only 1042 days to have everything built and functioning for opening day . To get Expo built in time , Churchill used the then new project management tool known as the critical path method ( CPM ) . On April 28 , 1967 , opening day , everything was ready , with one exception : Habitat 67 , which was then displayed as a work in progress . 
 Building and enlarging the islands , along with the new Concorde Bridge built to connect them with the site @-@ specific mass transit system known as the Montreal Expo Express , plus a boat pier , cost more than the Saint Lawrence Seaway project did only five years earlier : this was even before any buildings or infrastructure were constructed . With the initial phase of construction completed , it is easy to see why the budget for the exhibition was going to be larger than anyone expected . In the fall of 1963 , Expo 's general manager , Andrew <unk> , presented the master plan and the preliminary budget of $ 167 million for construction : it would balloon to over $ 439 million by 1967 . The plan and budget narrowly passed a vote in Pearson 's federal cabinet , passing by one vote , and then it was officially submitted on December 23 , 1963 . 
 = = = Logo = = = 
 The logo was designed by Montreal artist Julien Hébert . The basic unit of the logo is an ancient symbol of man . Two of the symbols ( pictograms of " man " ) are linked as to represent friendship . The icon was repeated in a circular arrangement to represent " friendship around the world " . The logotype is lower @-@ case Optima font . It did not enjoy unanimous support from federal politicians , as some of them tried to kill it with a motion in the Canadian House of Commons . 
 = = = Theme songs = = = 
 The official Expo 67 theme song was composed by Stéphane <unk> and was titled : " Hey Friend , Say Friend / Un Jour , Un Jour " . Complaints were made about the suitability of the song , as its lyrics mentioned neither Montreal nor Expo 67 . The song was selected from an international competition with over 2 @,@ 200 entries from 35 countries . 
 However , the song that most Canadians associate with Expo was written by Bobby <unk> , a veteran commercial jingle writer who composed the popular Centennial tune " Ca @-@ na @-@ da " . <unk> earned the name the " Pied Piper of Canada " . 
 The theme song " Something to Sing About " , used for the Canadian pavilion , had been written for a 1963 television special . The Ontario pavilion also had its own theme song : " A Place to Stand , A Place to Grow " , which has evolved to become an unofficial theme song for the province . 
 = = = Expo opens = = = 
 Official opening ceremonies were held on Thursday afternoon , April 27 , 1967 . The ceremonies were an invitation @-@ only event , held at Place des Nations . Canada 's Governor General , Roland Michener , proclaimed the exhibition open after the Expo flame was ignited by Prime Minister Pearson . On hand were over 7 @,@ 000 media and invited guests including 53 heads of state . Over 1 @,@ 000 reporters covered the event , broadcast in NTSC Colour , live via satellite , to a worldwide audience of over 700 million viewers and listeners . 
 Expo 67 opened to the public on the morning of Friday , April 28 , 1967 , with a space age @-@ style countdown . A capacity crowd at Place d 'Accueil participated in the atomic clock @-@ controlled countdown that ended when the exhibition opened precisely at 9 : 30 a.m. EST . An estimated crowd of between 310 @,@ 000 and 335 @,@ 000 visitors showed up for opening day , as opposed to the expected crowd of 200 @,@ 000 . The first person through the Expo gates at Place d 'Accueil was Al Carter , a 41 @-@ year @-@ old jazz drummer from Chicago , who was recognized for his accomplishment by Expo 67 's director of operations Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien . Beaubien presented Carter with a gold watch for his feat . 
 On opening day , there was considerable comment on the uniform of the hostesses from the UK Pavilion . The dresses had been designed to the then @-@ new miniskirt style , popularized a year earlier by Mary Quant . 
 In conjunction with the opening of Expo 67 , the Canadian Post Office Department issued a 5 ¢ stamp commemorating the fair , designed by Harvey Thomas Prosser . 
 = = = Entertainment , Ed Sullivan Show , and VIPs = = = 
 The World Festival of Art and Entertainment at Expo 67 featured art galleries , opera , ballet and theatre companies , orchestras , jazz groups , famous Canadian pop musicians and other cultural attractions . Many pavilions had music and performance stages , where visitors could find free concerts and shows . Most of the featured entertainment took place in the following venues : Place des Arts , Expo Theatre , Place des Nations , La Ronde , and Automotive Stadium . 
 The La Ronde amusement park was always intended to be a lasting legacy of the fair . Most of its rides and booths were permanent . When the Expo fairgrounds closed nightly , at around 10 : 00 p.m. , visitors could still visit La Ronde , which closed at 2 : 30 a.m. 
 In addition , The Ed Sullivan Show was broadcast live on May 7 and May 21 from Expo 67 . Stars on the shows included America 's The Supremes , Britain 's Petula Clark and Australia 's The Seekers . 
 Another attraction was the Canadian Armed Forces Tattoo 1967 at the <unk> in Montreal . 
 The fair was visited by many of the most notable people of the day , including Canada 's monarch , Queen Elizabeth II , Lyndon B. Johnson , Princess Grace of Monaco , Jacqueline Kennedy , Robert F. Kennedy , Ethiopia 's emperor Haile Selassie , Charles de Gaulle , Bing Crosby , Harry Belafonte , Maurice Chevalier , Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and Marlene Dietrich . Musicians like Thelonious Monk , Grateful Dead , Tiny Tim , The Tokens and Jefferson Airplane entertained the crowds . 
 = = = Problems = = = 
 Despite its successes , there were problems : Front de libération du Québec militants had threatened to disrupt the exhibition , but were inactive during this period . Vietnam war protesters picketed during the opening day , April 28 . American President Lyndon B. Johnson 's visit became a focus of war protesters . Threats that the Cuba pavilion would be destroyed by anti @-@ Castro forces were not carried out . In June , the Arab @-@ Israeli conflict in the Middle East flared up again in the Six Day War , which resulted in Kuwait pulling out of the fair in protest to the way Western nations dealt with the war . The president of France , Charles De Gaulle , caused an international incident on July 24 when he addressed thousands at Montreal City Hall by yelling out the now famous words " Vive Montréal ... Vive le Québec ... Vive le Québec Libre ! " 
 In September , the most serious problem turned out to be a 30 @-@ day transit strike . By the end of July , estimates predicted that Expo would exceed 60 million visitors , but the strike cut deeply into attendance and revenue figures , just as the fair was cruising to its conclusion . Another major problem , beyond the control of Expo 's management , was guest accommodation and lodging . <unk> was created to direct visitors to accommodations in the Montreal area , which usually meant that visitors would stay at the homes of people they were unfamiliar with , rather than traditional hotels or motels . The Montreal populace opened their homes to thousands of guests . Unfortunately for some visitors , they were sometimes sent to less than respectable establishments where operators took full advantage of the tourist trade . Management of <unk> was refused to Expo and was managed by a Quebec provincial authority . Still , Expo would get most of the blame for directing visitors to these establishments . But overall , a visit to Expo from outside Montreal was still seen as a bargain . 
 = = = Expo ends = = = 
 Expo 67 closed on Sunday afternoon , October 29 , 1967 . The fair had been scheduled to close two days earlier , however a two @-@ day extension granted by the International Exhibitions Bureau allowed it to continue over the weekend . On the final day 221 @,@ 554 visitors added to the more than 50 million ( 50 @,@ 306 @,@ 648 ) that attended Expo 67 at a time when Canada 's population was only 20 million , setting a per @-@ capita record for World Exhibition attendance that still stands . Starting at 2 : 00 p.m. , Expo Commissioner General Pierre Dupuy officiated over the medal ceremony , in which participating nations and organizations received gold and silver medallions , and over the ceremony in which national flags were lowered in the reverse order to which they had been raised , with Canada 's flag lowered first and Nigeria 's lowered last . After Prime Minister Pearson doused the Expo flame , Governor General Michener closed Expo at Place des Nations with the mournful spontaneous farewell : " It is with great regret that I declare that the Universal and International Exhibition of 1967 has come to an official end . " All rides and the <unk> were shut down by 3 : 50 p.m. , and the Expo grounds closed at 4 : 00 p.m. , with the last Expo Express train leaving for Place d 'Accueil at that time . A fireworks display , that went on for an hour , was Expo 's concluding event . 
 Expo performed better financially than expected . Expo was intended to have a deficit , shared between the federal , provincial and municipal levels of government . Significantly better @-@ than @-@ expected attendance revenue reduced the debt to well below the original estimates . The final financial statistics , in 1967 Canadian dollars , were : revenues of $ 221 @,@ 239 @,@ 872 , costs of $ 431 @,@ 904 @,@ 683 , and a deficit of $ 210 @,@ 664 @,@ 811 . 
 = = Pavilions = = 
 Expo 67 featured 90 pavilions representing Man and His World themes , nations , corporations , and industries including the U.S. pavilion , a geodesic dome designed by Buckminster Fuller . Expo 67 also featured the Habitat 67 modular housing complex designed by architect Moshe Safdie , which was later purchased by private individuals and is still occupied . 
 The most popular pavilion was the Soviet Union 's exhibit . It attracted about 13 million visitors . Rounding out the top five pavilions , in terms of attendance were : the Canadian Pavilion ( 11 million visitors ) , the United States ( 9 million ) , France ( 8 @.@ 5 million ) , and Czechoslovakia ( 8 million ) . 
 The participating countries were 
 Countries conspicuously absent were Spain , South Africa , the People 's Republic of China , and many South American countries . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Man and His World ( 1968 @-@ 1984 ) = = = 
 After 1967 , the exposition struggled for several summer seasons as a standing collection of international pavilions known as " Man and His World " . However , as attendance declined , the physical condition of the site deteriorated , and less and less of it was open to the public . After the 1971 season , the entire Notre Dame Island site closed and three years later completely rebuilt around the new rowing and canoe sprint ( then flatwater canoeing ) basin for Montreal 's 1976 Summer Olympics . Space for the basin , the boathouses , the changing rooms and other buildings was obtained by demolishing many of the former pavilions and cutting in half the area taken by the artificial lake and the canals . 
 In 1976 , a fire destroyed the acrylic outer skin of Buckminster Fuller 's dome , and the previous year the Ontario pavilion was gutted by a major fire . With the site falling into disrepair , and several pavilions left abandoned and vandalized , it began to resemble ruins of a futuristic city . 
 In 1980 the Notre Dame Island site was reopened ( primarily for the <unk> ) making both islands simultaneously accessible again , albeit only for a brief time . Minor thematic exhibitions were held at the Atlantic pavilion and Quebec pavilion ( and continued even several years beyond ) . After the 1981 season , the Saint Helen 's Island site permanently closed , shutting out the majority of attractions . Man and His World was able to continue in a limited fashion with the small number of pavilions left standing on Notre Dame Island . However , the few remaining original exhibits closed permanently in 1984 . 
 = = = Park and surviving relics = = = 
 After the Man and His World summer exhibitions were discontinued , with most pavilions and remnants demolished between 1985 and 1986 , the former site for Expo 67 on Saint Helen 's Island and Notre Dame Island was incorporated into a municipal park run by the city of Montreal . In 2000 , the park was renamed from Parc des Îles to Parc Jean @-@ Drapeau , after Mayor Jean Drapeau , who had brought the exhibition to Montreal . In 2006 , the corporation that runs the park also changed its name from the Société du parc des Îles to the Société du parc Jean @-@ Drapeau . Two prominent buildings remain in use on the former Expo grounds : the American pavilion 's metal @-@ lattice skeleton from its Buckminster Fuller dome , now enclosing an environmental sciences museum called the Montreal <unk> ; and Habitat 67 , now a condominium residence . Also , the French and Quebec pavilions now form the Montreal Casino . La <unk> Hall is part of the surviving structural remains of the Canadian pavilion . It is now a special events hall with dining facilities available , while another part of the pavilion serves as the administration building of Parc Jean @-@ Drapeau ( <unk> 's distinctive inverted pyramid and much of the rest of the Canadian pavilion were dismantled during the 1970s ) . 
 Place des Nations , where the opening and closing ceremonies were held , remains however in an abandoned and deteriorating state . The Jamaican , Tunisian and Korean pavilion ( roof only ) and the CIBC banking centre also survive . In <unk> du Havre the Expo Theatre , Administration and Fine Arts buildings remain . Other remaining structures include sculptures , lampposts and landscaping . The Montreal Metro subway station Berri <unk> still has a " Man and His World " logo and welcome sign above the pedestrian tunnel entrance to the yellow line . La Ronde survives , and since 2001 it has been leased to the New York amusement park company Six Flags . The Alcan Aquarium built for the Expo remained in operation for a number of decades until its closure in 1991 . The Expo 67 parking lot was converted into Victoria STOLport , an experimental short @-@ take off airport for a brief time in the 1970s . 
 Another attraction on today 's Notre Dame Island site is the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve race track that is used for the Canadian Grand Prix . The Olympic basin is used by many local rowing clubs . A beach was built on the shores of the remaining artificial lake . There are many acres of parkland and cycle paths on both Saint Helen 's Island and the western tip of Notre Dame Island . The site has been used for a number of events such as a BIE @-@ sponsored international botanical festival , Les <unk> . The young trees and shrubs planted for Expo 67 are now mature . The plants introduced during the botanical events have flourished also . 
 = = = Expo 's lasting effects = = = 
 In a political and cultural context , Expo 67 was seen as a landmark moment in Canadian history . In 1968 , as a salute to the cultural impact the exhibition had on the city , Montreal 's Major League baseball team , the Expos ( now the Washington Nationals ) , was named after the event . 1967 was also the year that invited Expo guest Charles De Gaulle , on July 24 , addressed thousands at Montreal City Hall by yelling out the now famous words : " Vive Montréal ... Vive le Québec ... Vive le Québec Libre ! " ( See Vive le Québec libre speech ) . De Gaulle was rebutted in Ottawa by Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson : " Canadians do not need to be liberated , Canada will remain united and will reject any effort to destroy her unity . " In the years that followed , the tensions between the English- and French @-@ speaking communities would continue . As an early 21st @-@ century homage to the fair , satirists Bowser and Blue wrote a full @-@ length musical set at Expo 67 called The Paris of America , which ran for six sold @-@ out weeks at Centaur Theatre in Montreal in April and May 2003 . 
 Expo 67 was one of the most successful World Exhibitions , and is still regarded fondly by Canadians . In Montreal , 1967 is often referred to as " the last good year " before economic decline , Quebec <unk> ( seen as negative from a federalist viewpoint ) , deteriorating infrastructure and political apathy became common . In this way , it has much in common with the 1964 @-@ 65 New York World 's Fair . In 2007 , a new group , Expo 17 , was looking to bring a smaller @-@ scale — BIE sanctioned — exposition to Montreal for Expo 67 's 50th anniversary and Canada 's sesquicentennial in 2017 . Expo 17 hoped a new world 's fair would regenerate the spirit of Canada 's landmark centennial project . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 • An episode of the 1970s television series Battlestar Galactica , " Greetings from Earth Part 2 " , was filmed at the Expo site in 1979 . The Expo structures were used to represent a city on an alien world where the people had all been killed by a long @-@ ago war . 
 • The 1979 film Quintet , was shot entirely on the site of Expo during winter months , using abandoned pavilions and other ruins to portray a post @-@ apocalyptic landscape . 
 = = = Multimedia = = = 
 CBC Archives A look at the transit labour strike ( audio ) 
 CBC Digital Archives - Expo 67 : Montreal Welcomes the World 
 Expo 67 - A Virtual Experience , from the website of Library and Archives Canada 
 Historica Minutes TV Commercial Canadian Heritage 
 Impressions of Expo 67 , National Film Board of Canada 
 = = = Other websites = = = 
 The Expo 67 Foundation 
 Expo 67 in Montreal 's extensive photo collection about the fair 
 Photos of 140 pavilions at Expo 67 
 Architecture at Expo 67 
 Everything you want to know about the Expo 67 
 The Films of Expo 67 , from Time magazine 
 Canadian Film Encyclopedia : Films at Expo 67 
 Expo 67 at <unk> 
 Australia at Expo 67 Montreal 
 Expo 67 in Montreal photo collection and links 
 The Expo 67 miscellany collection at Hagley Museum and Library includes a variety of publications and ephemera associated with the 1967 International and Universal Exposition . 
 Expo ' 67 records , 1967 , held by the Billy Rose Theatre Division , New York Public Library for the Performing Arts 
 = British Aerospace Sea Harrier = 
 The British Aerospace Sea Harrier is a naval short take @-@ off and vertical landing / vertical take @-@ off and landing jet fighter , reconnaissance and attack aircraft ; the second member of the Harrier Jump Jet family developed . It first entered service with the Royal Navy in April 1980 as the Sea Harrier FRS1 and became informally known as the " Shar " . Unusual in an era in which most naval and land @-@ based air superiority fighters were large and supersonic , the principal role of the subsonic Sea Harrier was to provide air defence of Royal Navy aircraft carriers . 
 The Sea Harrier served in the Falklands War , both of the Gulf Wars , and the Balkans conflicts ; on all occasions it mainly operated from aircraft carriers positioned within the conflict zone . Its usage in the Falklands War was its most high profile and important success , where it was the only fixed @-@ wing fighter available to protect the British Task Force . The Sea Harriers shot down 20 enemy aircraft during the conflict with one lost to enemy ground fire . They were also used to launch ground attacks in the same manner as the Harriers operated by the Royal Air Force . 
 The Sea Harrier was marketed for sales abroad , but by 1983 India was the only operator other than Britain after sales to Argentina and Australia were unsuccessful . A second , updated version for the Royal Navy was made in 1993 as the Sea Harrier FA2 , improving its air @-@ to @-@ air abilities and weapons <unk> , along with a more powerful engine ; this version continued manufacture until 1998 . The aircraft was withdrawn from service early by the Royal Navy in 2006 . The Sea Harrier remained in service for another decade with the Indian Navy until its retirement in 2016 thus ending the career of the historic British jet . 
 = = Development = = 
 In the post @-@ war era , the Royal Navy began contracting in parallel with the break @-@ up of the British Empire overseas and the emergence of the Commonwealth of Nations , reducing the need for a larger navy . By 1960 , the last battleship , HMS Vanguard , was retired from the Navy , having been in service for less than fifteen years . Perhaps the biggest sign of the new trend towards naval austerity came in 1966 , when the planned CVA @-@ 01 class of large aircraft carriers destined for the Royal Navy was cancelled . During this time , requirements within the Royal Navy began to form for a vertical and / or short take @-@ off and landing ( V / STOL ) carrier @-@ based interceptor to replace the de Havilland Sea Vixen . Afterward , the first V / STOL tests on a ship began with a Hawker Siddeley P.1127 landing on HMS Ark Royal in 1963 . 
 A second concept for the future of naval aviation emerged in the early 1970s as the first of a new class of " through deck cruisers " was planned . These were very carefully and politically designated as cruisers to deliberately avoid the term " aircraft carrier " , in order to increase the chances of funding from a hostile political climate against expensive capital ships , they were considerably smaller than the previously sought CVA @-@ 01 . These ships were ordered as the Invincible class in 1973 , and are now popularly recognised as aircraft carriers . Almost immediately upon their construction , a ski @-@ jump was added to the end of the 170 @-@ metre deck , enabling the carriers to effectively operate a small number of V / STOL jets . The Royal Air Force 's Hawker Siddeley Harrier GR1s had entered service in April 1969 . A navalised variant of the Harrier was developed by Hawker Siddeley to serve on the upcoming ships , this became the Sea Harrier . In 1975 , the Royal Navy ordered 24 Sea Harrier <unk> ( standing for ' Fighter , Reconnaissance , Strike ' ) aircraft , the first of which entered service in 1978 . During this time Hawker Siddeley became part of British Aerospace through nationalisation in 1977 . By the time the prototype Sea Harrier was flown at Dunsfold on 20 August 1978 the order had been increased to 34 . The Sea Harrier was declared operational in 1981 on board the first Invincible class ship HMS Invincible , and further aircraft joined the ageing HMS Hermes aircraft carrier later that year . 
 Following their key role in the 1982 Falklands War , several lessons were learned from the aircraft 's performance , which led to approval for an upgrade of the fleet to <unk> ( later known as FA2 ) standard to be given in 1984 . The first flight of the prototype took place in September 1988 and a contract was signed for 29 upgraded aircraft in December that year . In 1990 , the Navy ordered 18 new @-@ build FA2s , at a unit cost of around £ 12 million , four further upgraded aircraft were ordered in 1994 . The first aircraft was delivered on 2 April 1993 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Sea Harrier is a subsonic aircraft designed to fill strike , reconnaissance and fighter roles . It features a single Rolls @-@ Royce Pegasus turbofan engine with two intakes and four vectorable nozzles . It has two landing gear on the fuselage and two outrigger landing gear on the wings . The Sea Harrier is equipped with four wing and three fuselage pylons for carrying weapons and external fuel tanks . Use of the ski jump allowed the aircraft to take off from a short flight deck with a heavier loadout than otherwise possible , although it can also take off like a conventional loaded fighter without thrust vectoring from a normal airport runway . 
 The Sea Harrier was largely based on the Harrier GR3 , but was modified to have a raised cockpit with a " bubble " canopy for greater visibility , and an extended forward fuselage to accommodate the Ferranti Blue Fox radar . Parts were changed to use corrosion resistant alloys or coatings were added to protect against the marine environment . After the Falklands War , the Sea Harrier was fitted with the new anti @-@ ship Sea Eagle missile . 
 The Sea Harrier FA2 featured the Blue Vixen radar , which was described as one of the most advanced pulse doppler radar systems in the world ; the Blue Fox radar was seen by some critics as having comparatively low performance for what was available at the time of procurement . The Blue Vixen formed the basis for development of the Eurofighter Typhoon 's CAPTOR radar . The Sea Harrier FA2 also carried the AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM missile , the first UK aircraft to be provided with this capability . An upgraded model of the Pegasus engine , the Pegasus Mk 106 , was used in the Sea Harrier FA2 ; in response to the threat of radar @-@ based anti aircraft weapons electronic countermeasures were added . Other improvements included an increase to the air @-@ to @-@ air weapons load , look @-@ down radar , increased range , and improved cockpit displays . 
 The cockpit in the Sea Harrier includes a conventional centre stick arrangement and left @-@ hand throttle . In addition to normal flight controls , the Harrier has a lever for controlling the direction of the four vectorable nozzles . The nozzles point rearward with the lever in the forward position for horizontal flight . With the lever back , the nozzles point downward for vertical takeoff or landing . The usefulness of the vertical landing capability of the Sea Harrier was demonstrated in an incident on 6 June 1983 , when Sub Lieutenant Ian Watson lost contact with the aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious and had to land Sea Harrier <unk> on the foredeck of the Spanish cargo ship <unk> . 
 In 2005 , although already timetabled to be retired , a Sea Harrier was modified with an ' <unk> ' system to allow the fighter to perform a safe vertical landing without any pilot interaction . Despite the pitching of a ship posing a natural problem , the system was designed to be aware of such data , and successfully performed a landing at sea in May 2005 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Royal Navy = = = 
 = = = = Entry into service = = = = 
 The first three Sea Harriers were a development batch and were used for clearance trials . The first production aircraft was delivered to RNAS Yeovilton in 1979 to form an Intensive Flying Trials Unit ( also known as <unk> Naval Air Squadron ) . In March 1980 the Intensive Flying Trials Unit became 899 Naval Air Squadron and would act as the <unk> headquarters unit for the type . The first operational squadron 800 Naval Air Squadron was also formed in March 1980 initially to operate from HMS Invincible before it transferred to HMS Hermes . In January 1981 , a second operation squadron 801 Naval Air Squadron was formed to operate from HMS Invincible . 
 = = = = Falklands War = = = = 
 Sea Harriers took part in the Falklands War of 1982 , flying from the aircraft carriers HMS Invincible and HMS Hermes . The Sea Harriers performed the primary air defence role with a secondary role of ground attack ; the RAF Harrier GR3 provided the main ground attack force . A total of 28 Sea Harriers and 14 Harrier <unk> were deployed in the theatre . The Sea Harrier squadrons shot down 20 Argentine aircraft in air @-@ to @-@ air combat with no air @-@ to @-@ air losses , although two Sea Harriers were lost to ground fire and four to accidents . Out of the total Argentine air losses , 28 % were shot down by Harriers . 
 A number of factors contributed to the failure of the Argentinian fighters to shoot down a Sea Harrier . Although the Mirage III and Dagger jets were faster , the Sea Harrier was considerably more manoeuvrable . Moreover , the Harrier employed the latest AIM @-@ 9L Sidewinder missiles and the Blue Fox radar . Contrary to contemporary reports that " <unk> " proved decisive in dogfights , the maneuver was not used by RN pilots in the Falklands as it was only used in emergencies against enemies unfamiliar with the aircraft . The British pilots had superior air @-@ combat training , one manifestation of which was that they thought they noticed Argentinian pilots occasionally releasing weapons outside of their operating parameters . This is now thought to have been Mirages releasing external fuel tanks rather than weapons , and turning away from conflict with the Sea Harrier . This later reduced their capability to fight an effective campaign against the Sea Harrier due to reduced range and lack of external fuel tanks . 
 British aircraft received fighter control from warships in San Carlos Water , although its effectiveness was limited by their being stationed close to the islands , which severely limited the effectiveness of their radar . The differences in tactics and training between 800 Squadron and 801 Squadron has been a point of criticism , suggesting that the losses of several ships were preventable had Sea Harriers from Hermes been used more effectively . 
 Both sides ' aircraft were operating in adverse conditions . Argentine aircraft were forced to operate from the mainland because airfields on the Falklands were only suited for propellor @-@ driven transports . In addition , fears partly aroused by the bombing of Port Stanley airport by a British Vulcan bomber added to the Argentinians ' decision to operate them from afar . As most Argentine aircraft lacked in @-@ flight refuelling capability , they were forced to operate at the limit of their range . The Sea Harriers also had limited fuel reserves due to the tactical decision to station the British carriers out of Exocet missile range and the dispersal of the fleet . The result was that an Argentine aircraft could only allow five minutes over the islands to search and attack an objective , while a Sea Harrier could stay near to 30 minutes waiting in the Argentine approach corridors and provide Combat Air Patrol coverage for up to an hour . 
 The Sea Harriers were outnumbered by the available Argentinian aircraft , and were on occasion <unk> away by the activities of the <unk> Fénix or civilian jet aircraft used by the Argentine Air Force . They had to operate without a fleet early warning system such as AWACS that would have been available to a full NATO fleet in which the Royal Navy had expected to operate , which was a significant weakness in the operational environment . However , it is now known that Chile did provide early radar warning to the Task Force . The result was that the Sea Harriers could not establish complete air superiority and prevent Argentine attacks during day or night , nor could they completely stop the daily C @-@ 130 Hercules transports ' night flights to the islands . A total of six Sea Harriers were lost during the war to either enemy fire , accidents or mechanical failure . The total aggregate loss rate for both the Harriers and Sea Harriers on strike operations was 2 @.@ 3 % . 
 = = = = Operations in the 1990s = = = = 
 The Sea Harrier saw action in war again when it was deployed in the 1992 – 1995 conflict in Bosnia , part of the Yugoslav Wars . It launched raids on Serb forces and provided air @-@ support for the international taskforce units conducting Operations Deny Flight and Deliberate Force against the Army of Republika Srpska . On 16 April 1994 , a Sea Harrier of the 801 Naval Air Squadron , operating from the aircraft carrier HMS Ark Royal , was brought down by a Igla @-@ 1 surface @-@ to @-@ air missile fired by the Army of Republika Srpska while attempting to bomb two Bosnian Serb tanks . The pilot , Lieutenant Nick Richardson , ejected and landed in territory controlled by friendly Bosnian Muslims . 
 It was used again in the 1999 NATO campaign against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in Operation Allied Force , Sea Harriers which operated from HMS Invincible frequently patrolled the airspace to keep Yugoslavian MiGs on the ground . They were also deployed to Sierra Leone on board HMS Illustrious in 2000 , which was itself part of a Royal Navy convoy to supply and reinforce British intervention forces in the region . 
 = = = = Retirement = = = = 
 The Sea Harrier was withdrawn from service in 2006 and the last remaining aircraft from 801 Naval Air Squadron were decommissioned on 29 March 2006 . The plans for retirement were announced in 2002 by the Ministry of Defence . The aircraft 's replacement , the F @-@ 35 Lightning II , was originally due in 2012 , the MoD arguing that significant expenditure would be required to upgrade the fleet for only six years of service . By March 2010 , the F @-@ 35 's introduction had been pushed back to 2016 at the earliest , with the price doubled . The decision to retire the Sea Harrier early has been criticised by some officers within the military . 
 Both versions of Harrier experienced reduced engine performance ( Pegasus Mk 106 in FA2 – Mk 105 in GR7 ) in the higher ambient temperatures of the Middle East , which restricted the weight of payload that the Harrier could return to the carrier in ' vertical ' recoveries . This was due to the safety factors associated with aircraft " land @-@ on " weights . The option to install higher @-@ rated Pegasus engines would not have been as straightforward as on the Harrier GR7 upgrade and would have likely been an expensive and slow process . Furthermore , the Sea Harriers were subject to a generally more hostile environment than land @-@ based Harriers , with corrosive salt spray a particular problem . A number of aircraft were retained by the School of Flight Deck Operations at RNAS Culdrose . 
 The Royal Navy 's Fleet Air Arm would continue to share the other component of Joint Force Harrier . Harrier GR7 and the upgraded Harrier <unk> were transferred to Royal Navy squadrons in 2006 , but were retired prematurely a few years later due to budget cuts . The UK plans to purchase the STOVL F @-@ 35B to be operated from the Royal Navy 's Future Queen Elizabeth @-@ class aircraft carrier . Although withdrawn from active Royal Navy service , Sea Harriers are used to train naval aircraft handlers at the Royal Navy School of Flight Deck Operations . 
 = = = Indian Navy = = = 
 In 1977 , the Indian government approved of plans to acquire the Sea Harrier for the Indian Navy ; prior to this , rumours reportedly were circulating of a potential Indian purchase of the Soviet V / STOL @-@ capable Yak @-@ 36 . The BAE Sea Hawk was phased out from the Indian Navy in 1978 , in preparation for the purchase of Sea Harriers . In November 1979 , India placed its first order for six Sea Harrier FRS Mk 51 fighters and two T Mk 60 Trainers ; the first three Sea Harriers arrived at Dabolim Airport on 16 December 1983 , and were inducted the same year . Ten more Sea Harriers were purchased in November 1985 ; eventually a total of 30 Harriers were procured , 25 for operational use and the remainder as dual @-@ seat trainer aircraft . Until the 1990s , significant portions of pilot training was carried out in Britain due to limited aircraft availability . 
 The introduction of the Sea Harrier allowed for the retirement of India 's previous carrier fighter aircraft , the Hawker Sea Hawk , as well as for the Navy 's aircraft carrier , INS Vikrant ( ex @-@ HMS Hercules ) , to be extensively modernised between 1987 and 1989 . India has operated Sea Harriers from both the aircraft carriers INS Vikrant and INS <unk> ( ex @-@ HMS Hermes ) . The Sea Harrier allowed several modern missiles to be introduced into naval operations , such as the British anti @-@ ship Sea Eagle missile , and the French Matra Magic missile for air @-@ to @-@ air combat . Other ordnance has included 68 mm rockets , runway @-@ denial bombs , cluster bombs , and podded 30 mm cannons . 
 There have been a significant number of accidents involving the Sea Harrier ; this accident rate has caused approximately half the fleet to be lost with only 11 fighters remaining in service . Following a crash in August 2009 , all Sea Harriers were temporarily grounded for inspection . Since the beginning of operational service in the Indian Navy , seven pilots have died in 17 crashes involving the Sea Harrier , usually during routine sorties . 
 In 2006 , the Indian Navy expressed interest in acquiring up to eight of the Royal Navy 's recently retired Sea Harrier FA2s in order to maintain their operational Sea Harrier fleet , Neither the Sea Harrier FA2 's Blue Vixen radar , the radar warning receiver or AMRAAM capability was proposed to be included ; certain US software would be also be uninstalled prior to shipment . By October 2006 , reports emerged that the deal had not materialised due to the cost of airframe refurbishment . 
 In 2006 , the Indian Navy was in the process of upgrading up to 15 Sea Harriers in collaboration with Israel by installing the Elta EL / M @-@ 2032 radar and the Rafael ' Derby ' medium @-@ range air @-@ to @-@ air BVR missile . This will enable the Sea Harrier to remain in Indian service until beyond 2012 , and also see limited service off the new carriers it will acquire by that time frame . By 2009 , crashes had reduced India 's fleet to 12 ( from original 30 ) . India plans to introduce larger aircraft carriers that can operate Russian MiG @-@ 29K carrier fighters from their flight decks to replace the Sea Harrier . 
 The Sea Harriers operated from INS <unk> for the last time on 6 March 2016 . On 11 May 2016 , a ceremony was held at INS Hansa , Dabolim , Goa to commemorate the phasing out of Sea Harriers from INAS 300 ( " White Tigers " ) . Sea Harriers and MiG 29Ks performed an air display at the ceremony , marking the final flight of the Sea Harriers in the Indian Navy . INAS 300 subsequently inducted MiG 29K / <unk> fighters to replace the retired Sea Harrier fleet . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Sea Harrier <unk> 
 57 <unk> were delivered between 1978 and 1988 ; most survivors converted to Sea Harrier FA2 specifications from 1988 . 
 Sea Harrier <unk> 
 Single @-@ seat fighter , reconnaissance and attack aircraft made for the Indian Navy , similar to the British FRS1 . Unlike the FRS1 Sea Harrier , it is fitted with Matra R550 Magic air @-@ to @-@ air missiles . These aircraft were later upgraded with the Elta EL / M @-@ 2032 radar and the Rafael Derby <unk> missiles . 
 Sea Harrier F ( A ) .2 
 Upgrade of FRS1 fleet in 1988 , featuring the Blue Vixen Pulse @-@ Doppler radar and the AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM missile . 
 = = Operators = = 
 India 
 Indian Navy 
 Indian Naval Air Arm ( 1983 @-@ 2016 ) 
 United Kingdom 
 Royal Navy 
 Fleet Air Arm ( 1978 – 2006 ) 
 = = Survivors = = 
 A number of surviving Sea Harrier airframes are held by museums and private owners , and some others are at the Royal Navy School of Flight Deck Operations at RNAS Culdrose . The following is an incomplete list of some of the surviving aircraft . 
 India 
 One BAe Sea Harrier FRS 51 ( IN @-@ 621 ) preserved at the Naval Aviation Museum ( India ) in Goa , India . 
 United Kingdom 
 Nine Sea Harrier FA2s - <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> - are still used by the School of Flight Deck Operations at RNAS Culdrose , as of November 2012 
 Four Sea Harriers <unk> , <unk> and <unk> are stored at RNAS Culdrose , as of 2012 . 
 Sea Harrier FA2 <unk> is exhibited at the Midland Air Museum , Coventry . 
 Two Sea Harriers , an FRS1 <unk> / 001 / N and an FA2 ( <unk> ) are also on public display at the Fleet Air Arm Museum at Yeovilton . 
 Sea Harrier FA2 <unk> moved to Cosford <unk> in April 2014 
 Sea Harrier FRS1 / FA2 <unk> is preserved at the Newark Air Museum 
 Sea Harrier FRS1 / FA2 <unk> is restored and on public display at Boscombe Down Aviation Collection 
 Sea Harrier FA2 <unk> is displayed at the Tangmere Military Aviation Museum 
 Sea Harrier FA2 <unk> is preserved by a private owner near Shoreham Airport . 
 Sea Harrier T.8 <unk> was written off in an accident at Yeovilton on 16 November 2000 but was later restored to non @-@ airworthy condition by Everett Aero in Suffolk and is now believed to be privately owned in the Manchester area . 
 United States 
 Sea Harrier FA2 serial number <unk> , Hawker @-@ Siddeley build number <unk> Nalls Aviation St Mary 's County , Maryland . The former Royal Navy Sea Harrier FA2 was purchased in 2006 by Art Nalls , who spent the next two years restoring it to flying condition . In December 2007 , it was damaged in a hard landing , while undergoing testing at Naval Air Station Patuxent River and had to be repaired . The aircraft made its first public appearance at an air show in Culpeper , Virginia in October 2008 . The aircraft is the only privately owned , civilian @-@ flown Harrier in the world . Nalls recently purchased Sea Harrier T.8 <unk> . 
 = = Specifications ( Sea Harrier FA2 ) = = 
 Data from Wilson , Bull , Donald <unk> 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 46 ft 6 in ( 14 @.@ 2 m ) 
 Wingspan : 25 ft 3 in ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) 
 Height : 12 ft 2 in ( 3 @.@ 71 m ) 
 Wing area : 201 @.@ 1 ft ² ( 18 @.@ 68 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 14 @,@ 052 lb ( 6 @,@ 374 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 26 @,@ 200 lb ( 11 @,@ 900 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Rolls @-@ Royce Pegasus turbofan , 21 @,@ 500 lbf ( 95 @.@ 64 kN ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 635 knots ( 735 mph , 1 @,@ 182 km / h ) 
 Combat radius : 540 nmi ( 620 mi , 1 @,@ 000 km ) 
 Ferry range : 1 @,@ 740 nmi ( 2 @,@ 000 mi , 3 @,@ 600 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 51 @,@ 000 ft ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) 
 Rate of climb : 50 @,@ 000 ft / min ( 250 m / s ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 2 × 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 18 in ) ADEN cannon pods under the fuselage , with 130 rounds each 
 Hardpoints : 4 × under @-@ wing pylon stations , and 1 fuselage pylon on centerline plus 2 attach points for gun pods with a total capability of 8 @,@ 000 lb ( 3 @,@ 630 kg ) of payload . 
 Rockets : 4 × Matra rocket pods with 18 SNEB 68 mm rockets each 
 Missiles : Air @-@ to @-@ air missiles : 
 AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder 
 AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM 
 R550 Magic ( Sea Harrier <unk> ) 
 Air @-@ to @-@ surface missile : 
 ALARM anti @-@ radiation missile ( ARM ) 
 Martel missile ARM 
 Anti @-@ ship missiles : 
 Sea Eagle 
 Bombs : A variety of unguided iron bombs ( including 3 kg and 14 kg practice bombs ) . 
 Others : 
 reconnaissance pods or 
 2 × auxiliary drop tanks for ferry flight or extended range / loitering time 
 Avionics 
 Ferranti Blue Vixen all @-@ weather airborne radar 
 BAE Systems <unk> Tactical Air Navigation System 
 Thales <unk> Microwave Airborne Digital Guidance Equipment 
 Allied Signal AN / APX @-@ 100 <unk> IFF 
 = = Notable appearances in media = = 
 The Harrier 's unique characteristics have led to it being featured a number of films and video games . 
 = Pied currawong = 
 The pied currawong ( Strepera graculina ) is a medium @-@ sized black passerine bird native to eastern Australia and Lord Howe Island . One of three currawong species in the genus Strepera , it is closely related to the butcherbirds and Australian magpie of the family Artamidae . Six subspecies are recognised . It is a robust <unk> bird averaging around 48 cm ( 19 in ) in length , black or sooty grey @-@ black in plumage with white undertail and wing patches , yellow irises , and a heavy bill . The male and female are similar in appearance . Known for its melodious calls , the species ' name currawong is believed to be of indigenous origin . 
 Within its range , the pied currawong is generally sedentary , although populations at higher altitudes relocate to lower areas during the cooler months . It is omnivorous , with a diet that includes a wide variety of berries and seeds , invertebrates , bird eggs and juvenile birds . It is a predator which has adapted well to urbanization and can be found in parks and gardens as well as rural woodland . The habitat includes all kinds of forested areas , although mature forests are preferred for breeding . Roosting , nesting and the bulk of foraging take place in trees , in contrast with the ground @-@ foraging behaviour of its relative , the Australian magpie . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The pied currawong was first described by English ornithologist George Shaw in 1790 as <unk> strepera , although Strepera was adopted as a generic name . Its binomial names were derived from the Latin strepera , meaning " noisy " , and graculina for resembling a jackdaw . Pied crow @-@ shrike is an old vernacular name from colonial days , and the term " pied " refers to two or more colors in blotches . Other common names include pied <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , mutton @-@ bird , Otway forester , and pied afternoon @-@ tea bird . The onomatopoeic term currawong itself is derived from the bird 's call . However , the exact origin of the term is unclear ; the most likely antecedent is the word <unk> from the indigenous <unk> language from the Brisbane region , although the Darug word <unk> from the Sydney basin is a possibility . <unk> as well as <unk> and <unk> are names from the Tharawal people of the Illawarra region . 
 Its closest relative is the black currawong ( S. fuliginosa ) of Tasmania , which has sometimes been considered a subspecies . Together with the larger grey currawong ( S. versicolor ) , they form the genus Strepera . Although crow @-@ like in appearance and habits , currawongs are only distantly related to true crows , and instead belong to the family Artamidae , together with the closely related Australian magpie and the butcherbirds . The affinities of all three genera were recognised early on and they were placed in the family Cracticidae in 1914 by ornithologist John Albert Leach after he had studied their musculature . Ornithologists Charles Sibley and Jon Ahlquist recognised the close relationship between woodswallows and butcherbirds in 1985 , and combined them into a Cracticini clade , which became the family Artamidae . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Six subspecies are currently recognised , characterised principally by differences in size and plumage . There is a steady change to the birds ' morphology and size the further south they are encountered , with lighter and more greyish plumage , larger body size , and a shorter bill . Southerly populations also show more white plumage in the tail , with less whiteness on the wing . 
 S. g. graculina is the nominate form , found from the Sydney region north to the Burdekin River in northern Queensland . 
 S. g. ashbyi , ( critically endangered ) , the western Victorian pied currawong , was described by Australian amateur ornithologist Gregory Mathews in 1913 . It is threatened by hybridization with the neighbouring subspecies nebulosa whose range is expanding westwards . A 2000 estimate placed the number of breeding birds at around 250 . It resembles subspecies nebulosa , with sooty plumage , a long tail and a short bill . There is some doubt over whether ashbyi , which is little known , is a distinct subspecies or a colour morph of nebulosa . It is thought to have evolved after the two populations became separated by basalt plains in western Victoria , with the return of trees after the abandonment of regular Aboriginal burning in the late 18th century contributing to the remixing of populations . Hybrid forms have been identified in the Grampians and Yarra Valley . 
 S. g. <unk> , ( vulnerable ) the Lord Howe currawong was described by English naturalist Richard Bowdler Sharpe in 1877 . It appears to have adapted well to human habitation on Lord Howe Island , though the population is small overall , somewhere around 70 – 80 birds . Although regarded as a subspecies , it has yet to be studied with molecular DNA techniques , which may lead to it being reclassified as a separate species . 
 S. g. magnirostris is found on the Cape York Peninsula to the Normanby River in northern Queensland . First described by Henry Lake White in 1923 , it has a longer and heavier bill and shorter tail than the nominate subspecies . It has been little studied to date . 
 S. g. <unk> is found on the Atherton Tableland in northeastern Queensland . First described by Gregory Mathews in 1912 , it is combined with magnirostris by some authors . Little researched , it appears to be smaller than other subspecies . 
 S. g. nebulosa , found in southeastern New South Wales , the Australian Capital Territory and central Victoria , is very similar to the nominate subspecies but has a shorter bill , longer tail and larger wing . Its upperparts are sooty black , a little paler than the nominate subspecies , and underparts sooty black to slate @-@ grey . The white patch on the primary flight feathers is also smaller . It was first defined in 1999 by ornithologists and bird taxonomists Richard Schodde and Ian Mason . There is a hybrid zone with subspecies graculina in southern and central New South Wales , from Eden north to the Illawarra region and stretching northwest to the Blue Mountains . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pied currawong is generally a black bird with white in the wing , undertail coverts , the base of the tail and most visibly , the tip of the tail . It has yellow eyes . Adult birds are 44 – 50 cm ( 17 – 20 in ) in length , with an average of around 48 cm ( 19 in ) ; the wingspan varies from 56 to 77 cm ( 22 to 30 in ) , averaging around 69 cm ( 27 in ) . Adult males average around 320 g ( 11 oz ) , females 280 g ( 10 oz ) . The wings are long and broad . The long and heavy bill is about one and a half times as long as the head and is hooked at the end . Juvenile birds have similar markings to adults but have softer and brownish plumage overall , although the white band on the tail is narrower . The upperparts are darker brown with scallops and streaks over the head and neck , and the underparts lighter brown . The eyes are dark brown and the bill dark with a yellow tip . The gape is a prominent yellow . Older birds grow darker until adult plumage is achieved , but juvenile tail markings only change to adult late in development . Birds appear to moult once a year in late summer after breeding . The pied currawong can live for over 20 years in the wild . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Pied currawongs are vocal birds , calling when in flight and at all times of the day . They are more noisy early in the morning and in the evening before roosting , as well as before rain . The loud distinctive call has been translated as Kadow @-@ <unk> or <unk> @-@ wong . Birds also have a loud , high @-@ pitched whistle , transcribed as <unk> . The endemic Lord Howe Island subspecies has a distinct , more melodious call . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The smaller white @-@ winged chough has similar plumage but has red eyes and is found mainly on the ground . Australian crow and raven species have white eyes and lack the white rump , and the similar @-@ sized Australian magpie has red eyes and prominent black and white plumage . The larger grey currawong is readily distinguished by its lighter grey overall plumage and lack of white feathers at the base of the tail . In northwestern Victoria , the black @-@ winged currawong ( subspecies melanoptera of the grey ) does have a darker plumage than other grey subspecies , but its wings lack the white primaries of the pied currawong . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The pied currawong is common in both wet and dry sclerophyll forests , rural and semi @-@ urban environments throughout eastern Australia , from Cape York Peninsula to western Victoria and Lord Howe Island , where it occurs as an endemic subspecies . In general , the pied currawong is sedentary , although some populations from higher altitudes move to areas of lower elevation in winter . However , evidence for the extent of migration is conflicting , and the species ' movements have been little studied to date . It has adapted well to European presence , and has become more common in many areas of eastern Australia , with surveys in <unk> , Queensland , Barham , New South Wales , Geelong , Victoria , as well as the Northern Tablelands and South West Slopes regions in New South Wales , all showing an increase in population . This increase has been most marked , however , in Sydney and Canberra since the 1940s and 1960s respectively . In both cities , the species had previously been a winter resident only , but now remains year @-@ round and breeds there . They are a dominant species and common inhabitant of Sydney gardens . More recently still , a survey of the population of pied currawongs in southeastern Queensland between 1980 and 2000 had found the species had become more numerous there , including suburban Brisbane . One 1992 survey reported the total number of pied currawongs in Australia had doubled from 3 million birds in the 1960s to 6 million in the early 1990s . 
 The pied currawong is able to cross bodies of water of some size , as it has been recorded from <unk> Island , which lies 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) off the coast of Wilsons Promontory in Victoria , as well as some offshore islands in Queensland . It has disappeared from Tryon , North West , <unk> and Heron Islands in the Capricorn Group on the Great Barrier Reef . The presence of the Lord Howe subspecies is possibly the result of a chance landing there . 
 The pied currawong 's impact on smaller birds that are vulnerable to nest predation is controversial : several studies have suggested that the species has become a serious problem , but the truth of this widely held perception was queried in a 2001 review of the published literature on their foraging habits by Bayly and Blumstein of Macquarie University , who observed that common introduced birds were more affected than native birds . However , predation by pied currawongs has been a factor in the decline of Gould 's petrel at a colony on Cabbage Tree Island , near Port Stephens in New South Wales ; currawongs have been reported preying on adult seabirds . Their removal from the islands halted a decline of the threatened petrels . Furthermore , a University of New England study published in 2006 reported that the breeding success rates for the eastern yellow robin ( Eopsaltria australis ) and scarlet robin ( Petroica boodang ) on the New England Tablelands were improved after nests were protected and currawongs culled , and some yellow robins even re @-@ colonised an area where they had become locally extinct . The presence of pied currawongs in Sydney gardens is negatively correlated with the presence of silvereyes ( Zosterops lateralis ) . 
 The species has been implicated in the spread of weeds by consuming and dispersing fruit and seed . In the first half of the twentieth century , pied currawongs were shot as they were considered pests of corn and strawberry crops , as well as assisting in the spread of the prickly pear . They were also shot on Lord Howe Island for attacking chickens . However , they are seen as beneficial in forestry as they consume phasmids , and also in agriculture for eating cocoons of the codling moth . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Pied currawongs are generally tree @-@ dwelling , hunting and foraging some metres above the ground , and thus able to share territory with the ground @-@ foraging Australian magpie . Birds roost in forested areas or large trees at night , disperse to forage in the early morning and return in the late afternoon . Although often solitary or encountered in small groups , the species may form larger flocks of fifty or more birds in autumn and winter . On the ground , a pied currawong hops or struts . 
 During the breeding season , pied currawongs will pair up and become territorial , defending both nesting and feeding areas . A 1994 study in Sydney 's leafy northern suburbs measured an average distance of 250 m ( 820 ft ) between nests , while another in Canberra in 1990 had three pairs in a 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) segment of pine @-@ tree lined street . Territories have been measured around 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 7 ha in Sydney and Wollongong , although these were restricted to nesting areas and did not include a larger feeding territory , and 7 @.@ 9 ha in Canberra . Pied currawongs vigorously drive off threats such as ravens , and engage in bill @-@ snapping , dive @-@ bombing and aerial pursuit . They adopt a specific threat display against other currawongs by lowering the head so the head and body are parallel to the ground and pointing the beak out forward , often directly at the intruder . The male predominates in threat displays and territorial defence , and guards the female closely as she builds the nest . 
 Flocks of birds appear to engage in play ; one routine involves a bird perching atop a tall tree , pole or spire , and others swooping , tumbling or diving and attempting to dislodge it . A successful challenger is then challenged in its turn by other birds in the flock . 
 The pied currawong bathes by wading into water up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) deep , squatting down , ducking its head under , and shaking its wings . It preens its plumage afterwards , sometimes applying mud or soil first . The species has also been observed anting . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The pied currawong is an omnivorous and opportunistic feeder , eating fruit and berries as well as preying on many invertebrates , and smaller vertebrates , mostly juvenile birds and bird eggs . <unk> will hunt in trees , snatching birds and eggs from nests , as well as insects and berries from trees . They also hunt in the air and on the ground . Insects predominate in the diet during summer months , and fruit during the winter . They will often scavenge , eating scraps and rubbish and can be quite bold when seeking food from people , lingering around picnic areas and bird @-@ feeding trays . Beetles and ants are the most common types of insects consumed . Pied currawongs have been recorded taking mice , as well as chickens and turkeys from farms . The pied currawong consumes fruit , including a wide variety of figs , such as the Moreton Bay ( Ficus macrophylla ) , Port Jackson ( F. rubiginosa ) , Banyan ( F. virens ) and Strangler fig ( F. <unk> ) , as well as <unk> ( Syzygium species ) , white cedar ( Melia <unk> ) , plum pine ( Podocarpus elatus ) , and <unk> ( Persoonia species ) . Other fruit is also sought after , and currawongs have been known to raid orchards , eating apples , pears , strawberries , grapes , stone fruit , citrus , and corn . Pied currawongs have been responsible for the spread of the invasive ornamental Asparagus aethiopicus ( often called A. densiflorus ) in the Sydney area , the weedy privet species <unk> lucidum and L. <unk> , and <unk> species Pyracantha angustifolia and P. <unk> around Armidale . 
 Birds forage singly or in pairs in summer , and more often in larger flocks in autumn and winter , during which time they are more likely to loiter around people and urban areas . They occasionally associate with Australian magpies ( Cracticus tibicen ) or common starlings ( Sturnus vulgaris ) when foraging . Birds have also been encountered with grey currawongs ( S. versicolor ) and satin <unk> ( <unk> violaceus ) . The species has been reported stealing food from other birds such as the Australian hobby ( Falco longipennis ) , collared sparrowhawk ( Accipiter <unk> ) , and sulphur @-@ crested cockatoo ( Cacatua <unk> ) . Pied currawongs will also harass each other . A 2007 study conducted by researchers from the Australian National University showed that white @-@ browed <unk> ( <unk> frontalis ) nestlings became silent when they heard the recorded sound of a pied currawong walking through leaf litter . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Although found in many types of woodland , the pied currawong prefers to breed in mature forests . It builds a nest of thin sticks lined with grass and bark high in trees in spring ; generally eucalypts are chosen and never isolated ones . It produces a clutch of three eggs ; they are a light pinkish @-@ brown colour ( likened by one author to that of silly putty ) with splotches of darker pink @-@ brown and lavender . <unk> oval in shape , they measure about 30 mm × 42 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in × 1 @.@ 7 in ) . The female broods alone . The incubation period is not well known , due to the difficulty of observing nests , but observations indicate around 30 days from laying to hatching . Like all passerines , the chicks are born naked , and blind ( altricial ) , and remain in the nest for an extended period ( nidicolous ) They quickly grow a layer of ashy @-@ grey down . Both parents feed the young , although the male does not begin to feed them directly until a few days after birth . 
 The channel @-@ billed cuckoo ( Scythrops novaehollandiae ) parasitizes pied currawong nests , laying eggs which are then raised by the unsuspecting foster parents . The eggs closely resemble those of the currawong hosts . Pied currawongs have been known to desert nests once cuckoos have visited , abandoning the existing currawong young , which die , and a channel @-@ billed cuckoo has been recorded decapitating a currawong nestling . The brown goshawk ( Accipiter fasciatus ) and lace monitor ( Varanus varius ) have also been recorded taking nestlings . 
 = Love in This Club = 
 " Love in This Club " is a song by American R & B singer Usher . Featuring rapper Young Jeezy , it was released on February 22 , 2008 as the lead single from Usher 's fifth studio album , Here I Stand . The song was written by Usher , Polow da Don , Young Jeezy , Darnell Dalton , Ryon Lovett , Lamar Taylor and Keith Thomas , and produced by da Don with a Las Vegas @-@ inspired synth @-@ driven beat . Its lyrics refer to seducing someone in a nightclub . The song was originally leaked by da Don prior to its release . 
 " Love in This Club " received mixed reviews from critics , who praised the song 's production , but criticized it for its slow tempo and lack of originality . The song topped the Billboard Hot 100 as well as the New Zealand Singles Chart , while appearing on multiple other record charts . The accompanying music video , which received a nomination at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards , features cameo appearances from several musicians . In the video , R & B singer Keri Hilson plays Usher 's love interest in a club . Usher performed the song at the 2008 BET Awards , as well as on several television programs . A remix of the song , titled " Love in This Club Part II " , features Beyoncé and Lil Wayne . 
 = = Background = = 
 Atlanta @-@ based music producer Polow da Don was inspired to create a beat during his weekend stay in Las Vegas for the MTV Video Music Awards . He said of the song , " If you listen to the beat , the synths and everything has a [ Las ] Vegas feel to it . Making love in the club , people in [ Las ] Vegas are kinda wild . " He also noted its Euro influences . When he finished working on the material , da Don felt it fit for Usher , hoping that it would keep female listeners interested in Usher 's music , as his popularity had declined among women since his marriage to stylist Tameka Foster in July 2007 . Da Don and Usher wrote the track with rapper Young Jeezy , Darnell Dalton , Ryon Lovett , Lamar Taylor and Keith Thomas , and it was recorded at Zac Recording , Atlanta and <unk> Studios , Alpharetta . 
 It was not originally planned for Young Jeezy to appear on the track . After hearing " Love in This Club " , he wanted to contribute to it . Da Don was skeptical , but recorded Young Jeezy 's verse . He played the new version to Usher who , enjoying the new version , allowed the verse to stay . Usher has since called Young Jeezy " one of the greatest rappers of our generation " . According to Alabama rapper Gucci Mane , it was initially intended that he feature on the track , rather than Young Jeezy . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Love in This Club " is a mid @-@ tempo R & B slow jam , with a brass bassline , and shuddering synth @-@ driven beats that have been called " space age " and " sex @-@ drenched " by critics . It contains hip @-@ hop influences . Rap @-@ Up likened the song to Lil Jon 's song , " Lovers and Friends " , on which Usher appeared , while Fraser McAlpine of BBC Radio 1 wrote that it features vague similarities to " No Woman , No Cry " by Bob Marley . According to the sheet music published by Hal Leonard Corporation at Musicnotes.com , the song is written in common time with a tempo of 70 beats per minute and follows the chord progression of C major – E minor – A minor – F major . 
 About.com 's Mark Edward Nero wrote that " on the song , Usher talks about a lust so immediate , so powerful , that it makes him want to get down [ and have sex ] right then and there " . The song 's chorus consists of the hook , " I wanna make love in this club " . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly called the lyrics of the song " libidinous " . 
 = = Release and critical reception = = 
 Early in 2008 , several songs for Usher 's fifth studio album leaked into the Internet , including " Love in This Club " . Usher called the incident an " internal conspiracy " because it was unofficially released beyond his awareness . This also happened to the lead single " Yeah ! " off his 2004 album Confessions , which was intentionally leaked by its producer , Lil Jon , in 2003 . Polow da Don later told that he had leaked " Love in This Club " , echoing Lil John 's actions . He felt the song would be a hit , but that " it was so much back @-@ and @-@ forth between Usher and his record label " and he was tired of waiting on " label politics " . The song was released for sale on February 22 , 2008 . 
 The production of " Love in This Club " was praised by the Los Angeles Times , as was Usher 's vocal effort . Andy Kellman of Allmusic and Jonathan <unk> of <unk> noted the song as a standout from Here I Stand . Blender rated the song two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , calling it too safe and lethargic . Digital Spy 's Nick Levine enjoyed the song , but noted its lack of originality . Jim Farber from Daily News was not impressed , writing " ' Love in This Club ' doesn 't sound like a club anthem at all . It 's too slow and quiet , and ... its <unk> synth hook sounds like a planed @-@ down version of a Justin Timberlake hit . " 
 Young Jeezy 's addition received clashing responses from reviewers . Billboard 's Sophie <unk> was not impressed with the verse , but called the song " a catchy tune " . Bill Lamb of About.com praised the rapper 's effort , but expected better from Usher after a four @-@ year break since Confessions , writing that he is " retread [ ing ] territory familiar to fans of Akon and T @-@ Pain " , awarding the song two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars . BBC Radio 1 's Fraser McAlpine rated the song four stars out of five , but called Young Jeezy 's rap " growling " and " wheezy " . 
 This single ranked at number one on the " 10 Best Singles of 2008 " list by American magazine Entertainment Weekly , while Time 's Josh Tyrangiel placed it at number eight on its 2008 " Songs of Summer " list . MTV News listed the song as the fifth @-@ best R & B tune of the year , and it won the Ozone Award for Best Rap / R & B Collaboration . On " The 50 Sexiest Songs of All Time " , compiled by Billboard in 2010 , " Love in Thus Club " placed at number twenty @-@ seven . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Love in This Club " debuted at number eighty @-@ three on the Billboard Hot 100 , on the issue dated March 1 , 2008 . The next week it moved to number fifty @-@ one , due to high airplay . The song continued to receive many spins , and in its third week it reached the top of the Hot 100 , gaining the ' Airplay Gainer ' honor the same week . Replacing " Low " by Flo Rida and T @-@ Pain , " Love in This Club " also sold 198 @,@ 000 downloads in that week . On April 5 , 2008 , the song was again named the ' Airplay Gainer ' , however it was shifted from the number @-@ one spot by Leona Lewis ' " Bleeding Love " , having spent three weeks atop the chart . It fell off on June 7 , having spent twelve weeks on the chart . On the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , the song first appeared on February 23 , 2008 at number fifty @-@ one making it the highest debut of the week . On April 12 it replaced Keyshia Cole 's " I Remember " at number one . After four weeks " Love in This Club " was moved from the top spot by Lil Wayne 's " Lollipop " . The song also reached number four on the Pop 100 , and has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . On the year @-@ end charts for 2008 , it was ranked number eight on the Hot 100 , number fifteen on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs and number thirteen on the Pop 100 . It was also ranked number eighty @-@ five on the 2000s ' Hot 100 list , and number ninety @-@ nine on the decade @-@ end Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . As of August 1 , 2010 , " Love in This Club " has sold 2 @,@ 453 @,@ 000 units , according to Nielsen Soundscan . 
 Internationally , the song reached the top ten of numerous singles charts . It reached number six on the Canadian Hot 100 , number four on the UK Singles Chart , number eight on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart , number three on the Irish Singles Chart , and number five on the Japan Hot 100 , and was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) and gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . Having been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand , it also topped the New Zealand Singles Chart , replacing " No Air " by Jordin Sparks and Chris Brown on May 5 , 2008 . After one week it was removed by Brown 's " Forever " , and was certified platinum on June 1 , 2008 . The single also found chart success in Europe , reaching number three on the European Hot 100 Singles . In individual countries , " Love in This Club " attained top @-@ ten places in Flanders , France , Germany , Norway , Slovakia , Sweden and Switzerland . It also appeared on the singles charts of Austria , Wallonia , Czech Republic , Denmark , Finland , Hungary , and the Netherlands . In 2008 , " Love in This Club " sold 5 @.@ 6 million digital downloads worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 In February 2008 Usher said that the song 's music video would be shot " very soon " . Directed by the Brothers Strause , it features cameo appearances from Keri Hilson , Kanye West , Diddy , Nelly , Rick Ross and Robin Thicke . Hilson plays Usher 's love interest in the video . Usher 's then @-@ wife , Tameka Foster , worked as the stylist on the video set . It was alleged that Foster was upset with Hilson playing the love interest in the video , and , according to a person on the set , " Tameka dressed Keri very badly – she looked like an extra . " However , Usher 's manager , Benny Medina , reported that " Keri could not have been happier with Tameka 's choices in the styling " . 
 The music video starts with Usher waking up inside an empty nightclub . He calls out to see if anyone is there and sees Hilson , whom he follows into a room full of people dancing as a disc jockey starts playing music . Usher chases Hilson around the club , who at times mysteriously vanishes . The two dance intimately throughout the video at the club 's bar , dance floor and lounge . Its choreography was likened to Janet Jackson 's " Rhythm Nation " routine . The video concludes with the club burning down and Usher waking up in a valley . The storyline is continued in the " Moving Mountains " clip . During the video Usher is shown using a Sony Ericsson <unk> Walkman , as part of Usher 's endorsement of the company . 
 The music video premiered on MTV on April 7 , 2008 , and was the fourteenth @-@ most streamed video on MTV.com in 2008 , and was nominated as the Best Male Video at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards . However , it lost to Chris Brown 's " With You " video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Usher sang " Love in This Club " with Young Jeezy at reality television show The Hills ' third season finale on May 12 , and again , by himself , at the finale of the sixth season of Dancing with the Stars on May 20 , 2008 . On June 23 , 2008 , at the opening of the 2008 BET Awards , Usher performed the song . Usher also appeared on television shows The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and Good Morning America , where he performed the song . 
 = = Remix = = 
 A remix , " Love in This Club Part II " , was released as the second single from Here I Stand in April 2008 . Featuring vocals from R & B singer Beyoncé and rapper Lil Wayne , the sequel samples The Stylistics ' " You Are Everything " , and has a slower tempo than the original . It appeared on the Billboard Hot 100 , the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , the Canadian Hot 100 and the ARIA Singles Chart . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Source : 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 The track was covered live by Welsh band The Automatic and was released on the 2008 compilation Radio 1 's Live Lounge – Volume 3 . 
 German group The Baseballs covered the song for their debut album Strike ! in 2009 . 
 The track was also covered by American pop punk band , The Summer Set , on their second EP , Meet Me on the Left Coast . It was released in 2008 and titled ' <unk> ' . 
 = Banagher = 
 Banagher ( <unk> na <unk> in Irish ) is a town in Republic of Ireland , located in the midlands on the western edge of County Offaly in the province of Leinster , on the banks of the River Shannon . The name Banagher comes from its Irish name , which translates to English as " the place of the pointed rocks on the Shannon " . Banagher was a town of 3 @,@ 000 people at the height of its economic growth in the mid @-@ 19th century . The current population is just over half of that figure , at about 1 @,@ 600 . Banagher has an important strategic position on the River Shannon , and was long one of the few crossing points between the provinces of Leinster and Connacht . It thus became a natural focus for many great historical buildings , including a 19th @-@ century Martello Tower and a number of important castles around the town , which were built in the 14th and 15th centuries . 
 The town used to be the focus of thriving river business and was an important stop on the Dublin to Limerick navigation . It supported a number of large industries , most notably a maltings and distillery , which are now defunct . Tourism has supplanted this to a certain extent with a modern marina providing support for river cruisers and watersports facilities and the town is an important angling centre , with particular attraction for pike anglers . Banagher is the centre of the Shannon Callows , grassy meadows which flood in winter and provide living space for myriads of waterfowl . 
 A number of notable literary figures have stayed at Banagher , including Anthony Trollope , who used the town as an inspiration for his first novel The Macdermots of Ballycloran and Charlotte Brontë who married a curate who was raised in Banagher . The town is the source of the well @-@ known phrase : " Well , that beats Banagher ! " 
 = = Governance and administrative units = = 
 Banagher lies in the local council area of Offaly County Council . Local authorities have responsibility for such matters as planning , local roads , sanitation , and libraries . The Council is an elected body of 21 members with councillors elected from four electoral areas in the county . Banagher lies in the Birr electoral area , which can return 5 members to the council . 
 The town lies in the Barony of <unk> ( <unk> an <unk> ) and was in the poor law union of Birr . Divided by the road to Birr from <unk> , its eastern part lies in the townland of <unk> and <unk> and its western part in the townland of Banagher or <unk> . 
 Banagher is in the Roman Catholic parish of Gallen and Rynagh ( Reynagh ) which lies in the diocese of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise . The diocese is in the Archdiocese of Armagh in the ecclesiastical province of Armagh . It is in the Church of Ireland parish group of Clonfert Cathedral which is in the Diocese of Limerick and Killaloe , part of the ecclesiastical province of Dublin . 
 = = History = = 
 It is thought that St. Rynagh ( also Reynagh , <unk> ) , who founded Banagher and after whom the parish is named , was a sister of St. Finnian of Clonard . According to research , they came from a place near New Ross in County Wexford . It is known that contact was maintained between Rynagh 's Wexford home and her foundation at Banagher ; and her mother came to live there . It is recorded that Reynagh 's mother , <unk> , or <unk> , became Abbess of the Banagher convent . The death of St. Finnian is assigned to 563 , but there does not seem to be any authoritative statement as to the date of St. Rynagh 's death , although according to St. Rynagh 's Parish Church in Banagher , St. Rynagh died about 610 . The place of her burial is uncertain but it is likely to have been in either Banagher or <unk> near Gort , the monastery founded by her son , St. Colman . 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The settlement that grew to become Banagher , originated at a ford on the east bank of the River Shannon . The river banks and surrounding countryside were flood @-@ free all year round . Travellers intending to cross the Shannon converged on this point along tracks which were the forerunners of the modern roads , and a community grew at this crossing point . 
 Many of the early travellers were pilgrims . North @-@ west of Banagher , on the Connacht side of the river , was the monastic establishment of Clonfert , with the more famous Clonmacnoise a short distance further north . Not far to the south @-@ west on the same side was another monastic foundation , at Meelick . At Meelick , the three provinces , Leinster , Munster and Connacht meet and just south of Banagher in the direction of Birr , the four dioceses of Clonmacnoise , Meath , Killaloe and Clonfert meet . 
 = = = Military history = = = 
 At Banagher , there are ridges on both sides of the river and roads were built along these many centuries ago . The first bridge was built over the Shannon at that point as early as 1049 . It was a place of great strategic importance because the Shannon and its lowlands provided a natural barrier between Connacht and Leinster . An army that wanted to cross the river had few choices ; apart from Banagher , the only other suitable places were Athlone , <unk> and Portumna . 
 The importance of Banagher as a military position on the Shannon and on the highway from Leinster and Munster to Connacht was early appreciated by the English , whose forces seized it about the middle of the 16th century , coming up the river to do so . They constructed some fortifications which they called Fort Frankford ( later Fort Falkland ) and held the place in spite of the fact that the part of Offaly for some miles around Banagher was in the hands of the MacCoghlan clan . The <unk> , aided by boundaries of bog and river , held their territories against all comers for about 500 years , even maintaining a footing by open defiance well into the 17th century . Garry Castle , <unk> Castle , and <unk> Castle are remains of MacCoghlan strongholds . Sometime after 1554 , when Queen Mary married Philip II of Spain , Offaly County was named King 's County in honour of Philip , but it is doubtful if the royal jurisdiction extended to any of the MacCoghlan areas except Banagher . Ultimately , the <unk> were overthrown and their lands were planted by order of James I issued in 1621 . 
 The town was incorporated by charter of Charles I on 16 September 1628 . The corporation was allowed to elect two members to Parliament and hold two fairs per year , amongst other wide @-@ ranging powers . 
 In 1628 , a permanent military garrison was established which continued with slight interruptions until 1863 . The defences were further strengthened and it was officially named Fort Falkland , after Henry Cary , 1st Viscount Falkland who was Lord Deputy of Ireland from 1622 – 29 . The forces of the Confederate Catholics took Banagher in 1642 , but it was retaken by the Cromwellian Army in 1650 , under the command of Henry Ireton , Cromwell 's son @-@ in @-@ law . By 1652 the Cromwellian conquest was completed and the transplantation of the Catholic land holders to Connacht began in 1654 . The lands from which they were expelled were divided among the adventurers and the soldiers of Cromwell 's army . 
 During the Williamite Wars of 1690 – 1691 , the garrison espoused the cause of James II in contrast with that of Birr , which took the side of William . A stone bridge across the Shannon was erected in 1685 , and a Williamite army advancing from Birr in 1690 attempted to break it down but abandoned the attempt as too risky in consequence of the presence of Sarsfield 's Army on the Connacht side . A broken arch of this bridge is still to be seen on that side a few yards below the present bridge of seven arches , which was erected by the Commissioners for the Improvement of Navigation of the Shannon in 1841 – 1843 . The square tower on the lower side of the bridge at the Galway end was erected to protect the old bridge , as was the Salt Battery , with emplacements for four cannons facing west and north , a few hundred yards from town along the Crank Road . 
 The Irish garrison remained in Banagher without further molestation until the Battle of Aughrim , after which Banagher was evacuated . The English re @-@ occupied the town , where they remained until the middle of the 19th century , when Banagher ceased to be a garrison town . 
 = = = Economic growth = = = 
 In the 17th century , Banagher was the centre of a flourishing woollen trade . In 1699 , the impost placed on the export of woollen goods to England practically killed the woollen trade . At the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War in 1775 , an embargo placed on the export of foodstuffs to the American Colonies dealt another blow to the trade of Banagher . In 1780 , the British Parliament withdrew all these restrictions and Banagher 's economy began to improve rapidly . 
 From 1800 to 1847 , Banagher enjoyed a period of prosperity unequalled in its history . Corn growing had long been one of the chief agricultural activities of the district and the opening of the Grand Canal at the end of the 18th century gave easy access to Dublin and Limerick and brought cheap and efficient water transport to the district . Banagher became the outlet for the grain raised in a wide area round the town , and the Banagher corn market on Fridays was one of the largest of its kind in Ireland . 
 The canal arrived at Shannon Harbour in 1804 , and the water transport facilities stimulated the growth of existing industries and encouraged the establishment of new ones . Neat two and three @-@ storey houses were built on each side of the road in Banagher to provide shops and dwellings for the merchants and other people who came to live there for the canal business . In 1834 , there was a distillery , a brewery , two <unk> , a malthouse and corn mills in full operation in the town . Several craftsmen carried on industries in smaller workshops and in their homes . With the increase in trade and manufactures went a corresponding increase in population . In 1800 , the population was estimated at 1500 ; in 1841 , it was 2836 , and in 1846 , it was estimated at 3000 . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Contrasted with the flourishing state of trade in the first half of the 19th century is the rapid and sustained decline during the second half . In the period of 40 years from 1841 to 1881 , the population fell from 2836 to 1192 , a loss of over 57 % . By the end of the century , all that remained of the major industries of the town was the malthouse of F.A. Waller & Co . , while all smaller industries had vanished completely . 
 Various causes contributed to this decline . The abolition of the Corn Laws in 1846 allowed the free importation of grain into these islands . Unable to compete with foreigners , the Irish farmer turned his land to pasture and grew only sufficient grain for his own use . The Banagher corn trade rapidly declined , and would have completely vanished were it not that barley growing was kept alive by Waller 's malthouse . The clearances in East Galway in the years immediately succeeding the Great Irish Famine adversely affected the trade of the town while the smaller industries were unable to compete against the highly organised industries of Britain . 
 The opening of Banagher Railway station in 1884 , as the terminus of the 29 km ( 18 mi ) Clara to Banagher branch of the Great Southern & Western Railway Company , brought some improvement , with a number of passenger and goods trains every day . However , the fuel crisis of 1947 caused passenger services to be withdrawn from the line and it closed altogether in 1963 . Although the site of the station is now covered by the marina , the trackway can still be seen , minus the track , at the gateway at the eastern corner of the marina . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Banagher is situated in north @-@ west County Offaly on the east bank of the River Shannon . It is 106 km ( 66 mi ) south west of Dublin , 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) south east of <unk> , 27 km ( 17 mi ) south of Athlone and 85 km ( 53 mi ) north east of Limerick . It provides a crossing point between Offaly in Leinster and Galway in Connacht . Although Banagher is located in the flood @-@ plain of the River Shannon , the town itself was developed on high ground and remains virtually flood @-@ free all year round . North of Lough Derg , the River Shannon has a very shallow gradient and regularly floods parts of the surrounding countryside . The resultant wet grassland area , known as the Shannon Callows , is an internationally recognised wild bird and wildlife habitat and is classified as a Special Area of Conservation . 
 The country on either side of the Shannon in the Offaly @-@ Galway area has been described as " reminiscent of the Fens , cut off and intersected by waterways , by the wide meandering Shannon itself , by its tributaries , the Suck , the Brosna and the Little Brosna and by the Grand Canal ; traversed by a maze of narrow roads . " 
 The travel writer and biographer , James Pope @-@ Hennessy , described the River Shannon at Banagher in September in his biography of Anthony Trollope : " The month of September in Banagher , and all along the Shannon banks , is visually a glorious one , with golden autumn mornings , the low sun making long shadows of the houses in the street . At dusk the whole river reflects the varied sunsets as the days draw in – effects of palest pink , for instance , striped by cloudy lines of green , or an horizon aflame with scarlet and orange light . " 
 The Slieve Bloom Mountains lie to the south of Banagher and the town is surrounded by the great bogs of the midlands , particularly to the east and west . The River Brosna is a major tributary of the River Shannon and meets the Shannon at Shannon Harbour , three kilometres north of Banagher . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Banagher has a temperate climate . Average daily high temperatures are 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) in July and 8 ° C ( 46 ° F ) in January . Precipitation , at an average of 804 mm per annum , is similar to that in much of the midlands and east of Ireland , and is significantly less than the precipitation on the west coast , which averages between 1000 mm and 1250 mm per annum . 
 = = = Wildlife = = = 
 In autumn and winter , the extensive flood plain of the Shannon Callows supports a large number of waders , swans , wildfowl and other bird life . The most obvious of all Shannon birds is the mute swan . Also seen are the coot , moorhen and little grebe ( or <unk> ) . The kingfisher is widespread as are the meadow pipit and pied wagtail . The area has one of the largest concentrations of breeding waders in Ireland including lapwing , redshank , sandpiper and godwit . 
 The corncrake can be seen at the bridge of Banagher in the summer . Once a common summer visitor to Ireland , <unk> have suffered drastic population declines over the last few decades and are threatened with global extinction . Conservation efforts have focused on changing harvesting times to avoid the nesting season , May to August . The hay meadows of the <unk> support large numbers of these birds – one of the few places in the world where this globally threatened species is still common . 
 In winter , the resident bird population is increased by visitors from north @-@ east Europe , in particular the <unk> and Greenland white @-@ fronted goose . Riverside mammals are seen frequently and otters , mink and fox are common . Trout and salmon are less common in the Shannon than they once were , however pike is still plentiful and attracts many anglers . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Banagher was extensively planted by the English , particularly during the periods 1621 – 1642 and 1650 – 1690 . The plantations had a profound impact on Ireland in several ways . The first was the destruction of the native ruling classes and their replacement with the Protestant Ascendancy , of British @-@ origin ( mostly English ) Protestant landowners . Their position was buttressed by the Penal Laws , which denied political and land @-@ owning rights to Roman Catholics . The dominance of this class in Irish life persisted until the late 18th century , and it voted for the Act of Union with Britain in 1800 . As a result , by the early 20th century , Banagher had a mix of Irish of native descent and Irish of English descent and supported two churches , one Catholic and one Protestant , both of which still exist . 
 During the late 1960s to the early 1980s , a number of German , Dutch and Swiss settlers were attracted to Banagher , mainly because of its proximity to the River Shannon and associated lifestyle . A number of these are still resident in Banagher . As with the majority of towns and cities in Ireland , Banagher has seen an influx of foreign nationals , mostly of Eastern European origin , in recent years and these now make up just over 10 % of the population . 
 According to the 2011 Census , Banagher has a population of 1 @,@ 653 with 801 male and 852 female residents . This marks a 1 @.@ 0 % increase in population on the 2006 Census . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The demise of the once thriving canal and maltings businesses brought about a serious decline in Banagher 's fortunes , including a significant population decrease . However , a number of businesses kept many people in the locality employed during lean times . The most notable of these was Bord na Móna , a semi @-@ state company founded in 1946 to manage the harvesting of peat from Ireland 's bogs , the most extensive of which are located in the midlands . However , the advancement of mechanised harvesting , the exhaustion of the bogs and the closure of a number of peat @-@ fired power stations , means that this is no longer a significant employer in the region . Green Isle Foods had a facility just outside Banagher and provided good employment during the 1970s and 1980s . It was taken out of production some years ago and is now used as a storage facility only . The largest industry in Banagher these days is Banagher <unk> Concrete Limited , a company specialising in precast concrete structures . The company employs approximately 50 people and was one of the largest concrete firms in the country , employing over 400 people at its peak in 2008 . It has supplied components for many major projects , including the Aviva Stadium , Croke Park , Channel Tunnel , the Dublin Port Tunnel , Thomond Park and the Limerick Tunnel . Other notable employers include Banagher Sawmills and the cruise liner businesses located at the marina . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Banagher is an important crossing point on the River Shannon and consequently experiences a large volume of through traffic . Two regional roads meet in Banagher ; the <unk> , which links the <unk> and N65 national primary roads and is known as Harbour Street in Banagher and the <unk> which links Birr with Banagher and is known as Main Street in Banagher . Harbour Street leads to the road to Shannon Harbour and Main Street begins at the hill at the southern entrance to the town and leads down to the bridge crossing the Shannon . 
 A railway station opened in Banagher in 1884 as the terminus for the Clara to Banagher line of the Great Southern & Western Railway Company . It operated both a passenger and goods service until 1947 , when the passenger service was withdrawn . The station closed completely in 1963 . 
 Banagher was once a main centre for river transportation on the Shannon system . River transportation fell into decline with the advent of rail and road transportation improvements . Banagher is still a major centre for river cruisers , with a number of hire companies operating from an extensive and modern marina . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Banagher Fair = = = 
 As part of the charter of incorporation of 1628 , the corporation was given powers to : " hold two fairs , one on the Feast of St. Philip and Jacob , the other on the Feast of St. Simon and Jude , each to continue for two days . " These feast days equated to 1 May and 28 October . However , a fair was already in existence in Banagher since 1612 and was held in September . These three fairs were certainly still in existence in the mid @-@ 1830s , as they were described in a government @-@ commissioned report in 1835 . 
 The fairs established by the first corporation continued to gain in size and importance during the 18th century and the early part of the 19th century . In 1826 , the enormous number of 43 @,@ 000 sheep was offered for sale at the September fair , with three @-@ quarters of that number being sold . Pigot 's Directory of 1824 described the workings of the fair : " ... and there are three fairs ; the principal one commences on the 15 September and continues for four days , the first for sheep , the second for horned cattle , the third for horses , and the last day is the country fair for linen , woollens and other merchandise . " 
 It seems that the fair held in September was the main fair and is the one that has survived to the present . Pope Hennessy described the granting of the charter by Charles I which " empowered them to hold the famous Banagher Great Fair , at which everything from cattle and sheep to boots and basket chairs was on sale . This Fair , the greatest in all the Irish Midlands , began on September 15 and lasted four days . The line of horses tethered on each side of Banagher Main Street stretched from the Shannon river bridge to the crossroads two and a half miles outside the town known as Tailor 's Cross . " 
 The fair had achieved an international reputation by the early 20th century and a local newspaper report of 1909 states " The Banagher Great Fair was a huge success and among those present were Senor <unk> of Milan to make purchase on behalf of the Italian Government , while Mr. <unk> bought for the Russian Government . " The report also stated that " Eighty @-@ nine wagons of horses were entrained at Banagher Railway Station ... this representing in round numbers about 500 horses . " 
 = = = Architecture , buildings and structures = = = 
 = = = = Banagher Bridge = = = = 
 The first bridge that is known to have been built at this point was erected as a " spacious stone bridge of 18 arches " by Ruaidrí Ua Conchobair ( Anglicised Roderic O 'Connor ) , the King of Connacht , around 1049 . However , medieval sources tell of a " bridge of 27 arches of divers ( e ) architectural form , each different from its fellow " , which stood here for over 500 years . A stone bridge of 17 arches was certainly constructed in 1685 and this was detailed in profile drawings by Thomas Rhodes in 1833 . The bridge of 1685 featured prominently in the Williamite War in Ireland of the 17th century and was used by Patrick Sarsfield to retreat to Connacht after his ambush of a Williamite convoy at <unk> in Co . Limerick during the Siege of Limerick . Because of its affording Sarsfield and his army a method of advance and retreat , the old bridge was often referred to as Sarsfield 's Bridge . This bridge was blown up in 1843 by gunpowder by a section of the Corps of Royal Engineers . The abutment of this bridge can still be seen adjacent to Cromwell 's Castle on the Connacht side of the river . 
 The present bridge of seven arches was erected by the Commissioners for the Improvement of Navigation of the Shannon in 1841 – 1843 . The engineer was Thomas Rhodes , one of the commissioners of the Shannon Navigation , whose name can be seen on many of the bridges over the Shannon and on surviving lock mechanisms , notably at Victoria and Athlone locks . This bridge was reconstructed and widened jointly by Offaly County Council and Galway County Council in 1971 . Their work included replacing massive stone parapets on either side of the bridge with aluminium railings , and the removal of a swivel arch which had allowed passage for masted boats . 
 A heritage review of the bridges of County Offaly in 2005 described Banagher Bridge as of national heritage significance , of high architectural merit and demonstrative of mid @-@ 19th century construction work by a government body . It states " This is the only six @-@ arch masonry span in the county . It is an interesting contrast with the 1750s bridge at <unk> . Although both are approximately the same length , Banagher Bridge achieves the crossing with fewer spans ( six as opposed to 16 ) . It also has the longest masonry arch spans of all the county 's bridges , averaging 17 @.@ 88 m " . 
 All of the castellations around and near the bridge were built to protect it , including Cromwell 's Castle , The Salt Battery ( Fort Eliza ) , Fort Falkland and the Martello Tower . However , the guns mounted on these forts could be used to destroy the bridge if necessary , as well as to bombard attacking forces on the river . 
 A narrow quay passes under the old swivel section of the bridge from Waller 's Quay to the marina . A well @-@ worn handrail offers the pedestrian some protection against a slip into the river . This rail has been known as the Duke 's Rail since in 1897 the then Duke of York , later to become George V , paid a state visit to Ireland . The royal party travelled up @-@ river from Portumna on the steamship Countess of Mayo . Disembarking at Waller 's Quay , the Duke was received by Lord Rosse , the Lord Lieutenant of King 's County . The party had to traverse the narrow quay under the bridge to get to Banagher Railway Station , and undoubtedly made good use of the Duke 's Rail . The stretch of the Shannon from Portumna to Banagher was known for some time after as the Duke of York 's Route . 
 = = = = Barracks = = = = 
 This former constabulary barracks was built around 1800 . Irregular in plan and now in ruins , it comprises a partially roughcast rendered rubble limestone enclosing wall with a cut stone segmental @-@ headed entrance to the east and is situated to the south of the River Shannon , adjacent to the bridge . Remains of structures within the enclosure include a barrel @-@ vaulted powder magazine built around 1806 , with a gun platform above . These walls are thought to be the perimeter walls of Fort Falkland from 1642 . According to Pigot 's Directory of 1824 , the barracks housed two companies of foot , had apartments for three officers , a bomb and waterproof magazine and an artillery battery mounting three 12 @-@ pound guns . The Directory also states that the barracks was formerly a nunnery ( possibly that of Saint Rynagh , which would have been founded around 580 ) and communicated with Saint Rynagh 's Old Abbey by a subterranean passage of some 400 yards . Although the British garrison had left the town in 1863 , the barracks was looted and burned shortly after the signing of the Anglo @-@ Irish Treaty of 1921 – 22 . 
 = = = = Bow @-@ fronted Georgian houses = = = = 
 Banagher has two bow @-@ fronted Georgian buildings dating from the mid @-@ to @-@ late 18th century and both are listed as protected structures . One is a detached seven @-@ bay , two @-@ storey building , called Crank House , due to its location on the corner of Main Street and Crank Road . It was restored in the early 1990s by the Offaly West Enterprise Co @-@ operative Society and opened in 1992 . It now houses an exhibition hall , tourist office , retail and enterprise units and a hostel . It was formerly used as the headquarters for <unk> , an NGO dedicated to planting native trees and protecting Ireland 's woodlands . It is now used by the West Offaly Partnership as a Community Enterprise Centre . 
 The second of these buildings is a terraced , three @-@ bay , three @-@ storey house with an adjoining four @-@ bay , two @-@ storey coach house , which still has its original limestone carriage arch . It has been used as a hotel since the early 19th century and was home to Anthony Trollope during his stay in Banagher in the 1840s . It has a prominent location next to the marina and close to the bridge . Long called The Shannon Hotel , the name was changed to The Royal Shannon in the 1990s . It has ceased to trade as a hotel and is now falling into neglect . 
 = = = = Charlotte 's Way = = = = 
 Charlotte 's Way , formerly known as Hill House , is located in a prominent setting close to Saint Paul 's Church of Ireland church . This house was once the home of Charlotte Brontë 's husband , Mr. Nicholls , who returned to Banagher after Charlotte 's death . Nicholls remarried and lived at Hill House until his death in 1906 . The house was sold to a Major Bell in 1919 . He died in 1944 and his wife inherited the property . Florence Bell died in 1959 . This connection to Brontë , one of the most renowned writers of the 19th century , is revealed in its present name , giving the house cultural interest . It is a detached three @-@ bay two @-@ storey house , built in 1753 , with a gabled central bay to the façade with modern porch and single @-@ bay two @-@ storey wing to the south and two @-@ bay two @-@ storey wing to the north . It is now used as a bed and breakfast and visitors can enjoy its restored appearance and sense the history of a place connected in a curious way with the Brontë family . 
 = = = = Cromwell 's Castle = = = = 
 The structure that stands on what is known locally as the Canal Bank , called Cromwell 's Castle , primarily derives its current form from the Napoleonic Wars . Similar to the Martello Tower that stands opposite it , on the same bank of the river , Cromwell 's Castle was largely reconstructed as a defensive position to repel any invading fleet coming upstream towards Banagher . The English had established a number of forts on the Leinster bank of the river , including Fort Frankford and , later , Fort Falkland ( see Military History ) . The garrison at Fort Falkland was overrun by the forces of the Confederate Catholics in 1642 but was recaptured by Cromwell 's army in 1650 . The <unk> established a new fortification on the Connacht bank of the river leading up to the plantation of Connacht in 1654 . The castle was modified in 1817 to enable it to mount artillery with a platform for a 24 @-@ pound traversing gun constructed on its roof . Its interior became a powder magazine and housed a garrison of 20 soldiers . 
 Having fallen somewhat into disrepair , the structure came under the care of the Banagher Branch of the Offaly Historical Society in the 1980s and considerable restoration work has been undertaken since then . The Canal Bank on which it stands , is the property of the people of Banagher and is held in trust as a public amenity . Considerable works around the castle have also taken place and the castle , park and riverside walk are open to the public . 
 = = = = Cuba Court = = = = 
 Cuba Court , also known as Cuba House , was a house dating from the 1730s and may have been constructed by one George Frazer , a former Governor of Cuba and perhaps to a design of Sir Edward Lovett Pearce , who designed the Irish Houses of Parliament in Dublin . It is certainly known to have been constructed with money from the sugar plantations in Cuba . In his biography of Anthony Trollope , James Pope @-@ Hennessy describes Cuba Court as " a fine example of an Irish country @-@ house of the mid @-@ eighteenth century in the manner of the Dublin architect , Pierce ( sic ) . The building contained ... two circular rooms ... and an avenue of lime trees led to the front door . " The Belfast writer , Maurice Craig , in his 1976 book Classic Irish Houses of the Middle Size , describes Cuba Court as " perhaps the most splendidly masculine house in the whole country . " Towards the end of the 18th century , Cuba Court was the home of Denis Bowes Daly , who was a prominent member of the local ascendancy . Prior to his death in 1821 he had leased Cuba Court to the Army Medical Board on a 61 @-@ year lease . The building was little used as a hospital and the Medical Board was quite happy to give it up to the Commissioners of Education for the purpose of the Royal School , which had eventually been established as a result of the Royal Charter of 1621 . 
 Charlotte Brontë spent her honeymoon at Cuba Court in 1854 following her marriage to Arthur Bell Nicholls ( See Charlotte Brontë ) . She noted of Cuba Court : " It is very large and looks externally like a gentleman 's country seat – within most of the rooms are lofty and spacious , and some – the drawing room and dining room are handsomely and <unk> furnished . The passages look desolate and bare – our bedroom , a great room of the ground floor , would have looked gloomy when we were shown into it but for the turf fire that was burning in the wide old chimney . " 
 During the 1820s , the Royal School at Cuba Court was attended by Sir William Wilde , who later married the poet Jane Francesca Agnes <unk> . The couple had two sons : Willie and Oscar Wilde , and a daughter , Isola Francesca , who died in childhood . Another pupil at the school was William Bulfin , the journalist and writer associated with Argentina through his work Tales of the Pampas , who attended in the 1870s . His son , Eamon Bulfin was one of the main participants in the 1916 Easter Rising in Dublin and was sentenced to death , but this was commuted to deportation to Argentina where he had been born . 
 Due to the Irish policy on rates at the time , the house was unroofed in 1946 and this hastened its demise . Pope Hennessy described Cuba Court in 1971 : " Like so many of Ireland 's great houses , Cuba Court is now being slowly but deliberately demolished . The lime trees have long since been hacked down . " In spite of this , it was described as " a superb ruin that could tell the history of Ascendancy Ireland " , as late as 1979 . It was eventually acquired by a local businessman and demolished in the 1980s . Craig describes the loss of Cuba Court as " particularly to be lamented " . A development of four houses was built on the site at Cuba Avenue in 2003 . An archaeological survey revealed nothing of significance . 
 = = = = Fort Eliza = = = = 
 Fort Eliza , also known as The Salt Battery , is a freestanding five @-@ sided four @-@ gun battery , constructed around 1812 , and standing on the east side of the River Shannon . Three sides face the river and were formed of broad parapets . The other two sides meet at the rear salient angle at a guardhouse , which is now ruined . The battery is surrounded by a dry moat , with the entrance originally across a drawbridge close to the guardhouse . At the centre of the enclosure was the brick @-@ vaulted powder magazine . This fort , combined with Cromwell 's Castle , the Martello tower and Fort Falkland would have protected both the town and the river crossing from all angles . 
 = = = = Martello Tower = = = = 
 Martello towers ( or simply <unk> ) are small defensive forts built in several countries of the British Empire during the 19th century , from the time of the Napoleonic Wars onwards . They stand up to 40 feet ( 12 m ) high ( with two floors ) and typically had a garrison of one officer and 15 – 25 men . Their round structure and thick walls of solid masonry made them resistant to cannon fire , while their height made them an ideal platform for a single heavy artillery piece , mounted on the flat roof and able to traverse a 360 ° arc . Fear of an invasion by Napoleon Bonaparte reached panic proportions amongst the authorities in Ireland and England in 1804 and the first towers were built in Ireland that year . 
 In case an invasion fleet tried to sail up the River Shannon , two towers were built on the middle reaches of the river to defend its crossing points . One of these was located at Meelick and the other at Banagher . The tower at Banagher is located on the west ( Galway ) bank of the river and measures 36 feet ( 11 m ) in diameter and height . The tower was described in 1970 as having " ... no corbels , a ridge around the top , much vegetation growing around it , and its general condition is fair . " 
 = = = = Memorials and sculptures = = = = 
 A memorial in the form of a stone Celtic Cross is situated at the eastern side of the town . It is known as the Barnes & McCormack Memorial and dedicated to two local men who were executed in Birmingham in 1940 for their involvement in the Coventry Explosion of 1939 in which five people died . The executions caused a public outcry in Britain and internationally as the men had admitted to constructing the bomb , which was intended to be used to destroy a power station , but claimed not to be involved in planting it . The cross was erected in 1963 by The Barnes & McCormack Memorial Committee in association with The National Graves Committee and bears an inscription in both Irish and English : " In commemoration of Staff Captain James McCormack and Company Captain Peter Barnes , Irish Republican Army , who for love of country , were executed by the British Government at Winson Green Prison , Birmingham on the 7th February 1940 . " The monument was sculpted by Desmond <unk> of Dublin and features images of the two men , a female head representing Ireland and symbols of the four provinces . 
 In December 2011 the Zimbabwean artist , <unk> <unk> , a sculptor who specialises in wood carving , created a sculpture from a tree stump , entitled The Musician , which is dedicated to the musician Johnny McEvoy , who was born in Banagher in 1945 . The sculpture is located on the main road , at the gate of the marina . 
 = = = Places of worship = = = 
 Arising from its history as a plantation garrison town , Banagher has active Catholic and Church of Ireland communities . The lane between Market Square and <unk> Lane ( formerly Queen Street ) is called Church Lane and it is here that the first church in Banagher was sited . The 6th @-@ century abbey of St. Rynagh is now in ruins . This church later became the Church of the Blessed Mary in the 16th century , and was also known as the Church of Banagher . According to tradition , the Cross of Banagher once stood next to a crystal spring in the Market Square . The surviving sandstone shaft of the cross was found in the churchyard by a Birr antiquarian named Thomas Cooke in the 1840s and was in reasonable condition then as he described it in great detail in an article in the Transactions of the Kilkenny Archaeological Society in 1853 . The stone that he found appears to have been part of a sepulchral or commemorative cross , set up at Banagher well to record the death of Bishop William O 'Duffy , who was killed by a fall from his horse in 1297 . Cooke had become so perturbed by the deterioration of the stone by 1852 that he had it removed to his residence in Birr . It is now housed in the National Museum of Ireland in Dublin . 
 The Church of Ireland community had worshipped at the old church , which was in a ruinous state by 1829 when the new St. Paul 's Church was built at the top of the hill , overlooking the town . The new Catholic church of St. Rynagh 's had been constructed some three years earlier and on land given by the Armstrongs , the most influential and wealthiest Protestant family in the area , who consistently and energetically advocated Catholic Emancipation and repeal of the Penal Laws . This situation demonstrated the friendly relations that existed between the two communities in Banagher during those difficult times for Catholics in Ireland . 
 St. Rynagh 's Church houses a work by the well @-@ known German sculptor , Imogen Stuart , called The Madonna and Child , a mandorla carved in 1974 . The most outstanding feature of St. Paul 's Church is the Window of the Resurrection , a stained @-@ glass window commemorating the Bell family that was originally intended for <unk> Abbey in London . 
 = = = Literature and the arts = = = 
 Banagher has a thriving poetry scene and an annual poetry festival called Readings from the <unk> takes place in local bars . The town was one of the settings for the series Pure Mule , as featured on RTÉ television . The mini @-@ series was an RTÉ production and shot in 2005 in Banagher , Birr and <unk> . The series was favourably received by the critics , although some locals maintain that it portrays Midlanders in a bad light . The series won four IFTA awards in 2005 . 
 Johnny McEvoy is a well known singer and songwriter of the country and Irish genre who was born in Banagher in 1945 . He has had a number of chart hits since the 1960s and has toured extensively , both in Ireland and abroad . 
 The internationally renowned folk @-@ singer Roger Whittaker took up residence in Banagher for about 10 years until 2006 . During the time he purchased and renovated <unk> House . 
 Mark Boylan is a singer / songwriter from Banagher . He was born in 1997 and first came to prominence when he wrote the theme song for the 2011 Cheltenham horse racing festival in England . The song is entitled The Festival and it received over 40 @,@ 000 views on YouTube . Boylan went on to write a song for one of the biggest horse races in the world , The Breeders ' Cup . He performed the song at the event which took place at Churchill Downs in Louisville , Kentucky on 4 November 2011 . The proceeds of the song went to the Permanently Disabled Jockeys Fund ( <unk> ) and the song was made available through the iTunes medium . 
 In the past Banagher was noted for a number of crafts , including pottery and a popular pottery company , called <unk> Pottery , was established at the West End by Valerie Landon in the early 1950s . It closed down in the 1980s . The town has also had a number of well @-@ known writers staying for varying periods of time . 
 = = = = Anthony Trollope = = = = 
 Banagher 's greatest literary association is probably with Anthony Trollope , who became one of the most successful , prolific and respected English novelists of the Victorian era . Trollope had been employed by the General Post Office in 1835 and was sent to Ireland in September 1841 at the age of 26 . Trollope had had an unhappy life up to that point and remarked in his autobiography : " This was the first good fortune of my life . " After landing in Dublin on 15 September , he travelled by canal @-@ boat to Shannon Harbour and then on to Banagher , arriving on 16 September , which coincided with the second day of the annual Great Fair . Although very much smaller than the town of Birr , which is only eight miles away , Banagher had been chosen as the base of a Postal <unk> , probably because its position on the Shannon offered easy access by can boat to Dublin and Limerick . 
 Trollope established himself at The Shannon Hotel , a long bow @-@ fronted Georgian building , which was over 100 years old at that time . The hotel , which still exists , is located at the bottom of the town , a mere one hundred yards from the river . The post office where Trollope worked was at the top of the town , which is only a matter of minutes on foot . Next to the post office was a two @-@ roomed bungalow which was used by the Postal Surveyor and his new deputy as their working headquarters . This building is often erroneously considered to have been the residence of Trollope himself . 
 Although Trollope 's initial knowledge of Ireland was limited , he soon discovered that the Irish were good @-@ humoured and clever – " ... the working classes very much more intelligent than those in England . They were not , as they were reputed to be , <unk> , but were economical , hospitable and kind . " Their chief defects , he judged , were that they could switch to being very perverse and very irrational , and that they were " but little bound by the love of truth . " 
 Trollope remained stationed at Banagher until late 1844 when he was transferred to Clonmel . It was while in Banagher that Trollope began to write his first novel , The Macdermots of Ballycloran . He had begun to contemplate this novel whilst walking outside <unk> in County Leitrim where the ruins of Ballycloran House stood into the 1840s and were still there in the 1970s . Trollope had been up in Leitrim inspecting the accounts of an errant postmaster . He thought the ruins of Ballycloran " one of the most melancholy spots I had ever visited " and he later described it in the first chapter of his novel . Although , his first novel was initially unsuccessful , Trollope was undeterred and in all , went on to write forty @-@ seven novels , as well as dozens of short stories and a few books on travel . He returned to England in 1856 and by the mid @-@ 1860s had reached a fairly senior position within the Post Office hierarchy . Postal history credits him with introducing the pillar box ( the ubiquitous bright red mail @-@ box ) to Britain . Anthony Trollope died in London in 1882 and is buried at Kensal Green Cemetery . 
 = = = = Charlotte Brontë = = = = 
 Charlotte Brontë had a brief association with Banagher in the mid @-@ 1850s when she married one Arthur Bell Nicholls , her father 's curate . Nicholls was born of Scottish parents in County Antrim in 1818 . He was orphaned early and subsequently brought up by his uncle , Alan Bell , in Banagher . Alan Bell was headmaster at the Royal School at Cuba Court at that time . The couple honeymooned in Ireland and stayed at Cuba Court for a period in June 1854 . According to Pope Hennessy , Mrs. Nicholls disliked both Banagher and its inhabitants , although she greatly admired the surrounding countryside . 
 If Bell Nicholls was a poor unknown curate in England – in Banagher he was a member of a respectable family . In a letter quoted by Elizabeth Gaskell in her book The Life of Charlotte Brontë , Charlotte wrote : " My dear husband , too , appears in a new light in his own country . More than once I have had deep pleasure in hearing his praises on all sides . Some of the old servants and followers of the family tell me I am a most fortunate person ; for that I have got one of the best gentlemen in the country .... I trust I feel thankful to God for having enabled me to make what seems a right choice ; and I pray to be enabled to repay as I ought the affectionate devotion of a truthful , honourable man . " 
 In January 1855 , Brontë discovered she was pregnant . It was accompanied by severe illness and she died on 31 March 1855 , officially from tuberculosis . Mr. Nicholls remained with Brontë 's father for a further six years before returning to Banagher in 1861 , taking with him his wife 's portrait , her wedding dress ( of which a copy has been made ) , some of Charlotte 's letters and other mementoes . Forty years later , when the critic Clement Shorter prepared to write Charlotte Brontë and Her Circle , he found at Banagher among other relics , two diaries of Emily and Anne , in a tin box , and some of Charlotte 's minute childhood writings wrapped in newspaper at the bottom of a drawer . 
 = = = = James Pope Hennessy = = = = 
 James Pope @-@ Hennessy came to Banagher in 1970 to write his biography of Anthony Trollope . Pope Hennessy had published his first book , London Fabric in 1939 , for which he was awarded the Hawthornden Prize and was a well @-@ established biographer and travel writer by the time he arrived in Banagher . Among his more notable works were a biography of Queen Mary for which he was rewarded by being created a Commander of the Royal Victorian Order in 1960 , <unk> ( 1964 ) a biography of his grandfather , the Irish colonial governor John Pope Hennessy and Sins of the Fathers ( 1967 ) , an account of the Atlantic slave traffickers . 
 Like Trollope before him , Pope Hennessy took rooms at The Shannon Hotel , near the river and set about trying to capture the essence of the town which had inspired Trollope 's first novel , The Macdermots of Ballycloran . He proved to be a very popular figure in the town , evidenced by the fact that he was asked to adjudicate at a local beauty pageant and the horse fair . Pope Hennessy gives particular mention to the Corcoran family , the proprietors of The Shannon Hotel in the 1960s and 1970s , for their help in the production of his work . They sold the hotel in 1977 . 
 Pope Hennessy stayed in Banagher from March 1970 to April 1971 and largely completed his study of Trollope during this time . The finished biography , Anthony Trollope , won the Whitbread Award for Biography in 1972 and is largely regarded as Pope Hennessy 's finest work since Queen Mary . Pope Hennessy grew very fond of Banagher and returned to stay at The Shannon Hotel a number of times before his premature death in 1974 . This is illustrated by his description of Banagher in Anthony Trollope : " ... in Trollope 's words , Banagher then seemed ' little more than a village ' . It retains a quality of friendly village life to this day and can have changed little since Trollope 's time , save that its population has declined to eleven hundred . " 
 = = = = Sir Jonah Barrington = = = = 
 Sir Jonah Barrington was born in 1760 near <unk> in the Queen 's County ( Co . Laois ) . He was first elected to Parliament as a member for Tuam in 1790 . He lost this seat in 1798 and was elected as a member for Banagher in 1799 . He voted against the Act of Union in 1801 and as a result he was deprived of his £ 1 @,@ 000 a year sinecure in the Customs House and this also stopped his further advancement . In 1809 he published , in five parts , the first volume of the Historic Memoirs of Ireland . It is thought that he was induced to delay the second volume – the English government shrinking from the exposure of their conduct in carrying the Act of Union , and it was understood that to purchase his silence he was permitted to reside in France from about 1815 . 
 In 1827 , he published two volumes of Personal Sketches of His Own Times . In 1830 , by an address from both Houses of Parliament , he was removed from the Bench , in consequence of well @-@ proven misappropriation of public moneys . The third volume of Personal Sketches appeared in 1833 as did the delayed volume of his Historic Memoirs . This book was subsequently reproduced in a cheaper form as The Rise and Fall of the Irish Nation . His works are interesting , racy , and valuable – although his statements of fact cannot always be depended on – containing much of personal incident , related in a fascinating style . He died at Versailles on 8 April 1834 . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The town of Banagher is most likely the source of a phrase that is widely known in many English speaking countries in the world . " That beats Banagher ! " is a common reaction to something extraordinary or to describe something that surpasses everything . The most commonly proposed explanation is that Banagher was entitled to send two members to Parliament following its charter of incorporation in 1628 . It was known as an infamous pocket borough where the members were representative of the landed class , or indeed nominated by the local lord , without a vote taking place at all . When a member of the house spoke of a family ( or rotten ) borough , it was not unusual for someone to reply " Well , that beats Banagher ! " 
 An alternative explanation is suggested , whereby there was an Irish minstrel called <unk> , who was famous for telling wonderful stories ; and a line from W.B. Yeats gives this theory some credence : " ' Well ' , says he , ' to gratify them I will . So just a morsel . But Jack , this beats <unk> . ' " There is also an entry in Captain Francis Grose 's Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue of 1785 which says : " He beats <unk> ; an Irish saying of one who tells wonderful stories . Perhaps <unk> was a minstrel famous for dealing in the marvellous " . 
 There are numerous uses of the phrase in literature , including Trollope 's The Kelly 's and the O <unk> ( 1848 ) , p . 221 ; James Joyce 's Finnegan 's Wake ( 1939 ) , p . 87 @.@ 31 ; James Plunkett 's Farewell Companions ( 1977 ) , p . 293 and Edna O 'Brien 's Down by the River ( 1996 ) , p . 1 . 
 The phrase has a riposte : " And Banagher beats the Devil ! " . The origins of this are more difficult to trace but it does feature in a work by the Irish writer Brian Oswald Donn @-@ Byrne , Messer Marco Polo ( 1925 ) , p . 25 , and it is in common usage in Ireland . Trollope asserted on his arrival in Ireland , " I was to live at a place called Banagher on the Shannon which I had heard of because of its having once been conquered , though it had heretofore conquered everything , including the Devil " . Interestingly , a John O 'Donovan , in an Ordnance Survey letter for King 's County in 1838 , attempts to trace the origins of the name Banagher . He states : " Of all the words which enter into Irish nomenclature <unk> seems the most difficult of explanation " and goes on to say " This name ' beats the Devil . ' " <unk> Kenny in his 2003 book Marathon Marriage uses a story of the devil losing a game of cards to a blacksmith named Banagher at the Black Stile at Garry Castle on the road between Banagher and Birr , as an explanation for the phrase . 
 = = Education = = 
 St. Rynagh 's National School ( NS ) caters for children between the ages of 4 and 12 and accommodates approximately 200 students . Secondary education is provided by Banagher College ( Coláiste na <unk> ) , a multi denominational school under the responsibility of Laois and Offaly Education and Training Board . Banagher College is an amalgamation of La Sainte Union Secondary School and St. Rynagh 's Community College . La Sainte Union is a voluntary Catholic School run by the Sisters of La Sainte @-@ Union des <unk> @-@ <unk> , a congregation founded in France in 1826 by Abbé Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> to promote Christian education . The school was their first in Ireland and opened its doors in 1863 in a house on Main Street when the Abbé arrived with Mother <unk> Badger and three sisters of the order . 
 St Rynagh 's CC , originally known as Banagher Vocational School , opened in 1953 with 40 students enrolling under the guidance of the first principal , Ms. Elsie Naughton . Amalgamation discussions began in 1999 and by November 2005 it was agreed that a new school be constructed on the La Sainte Union site . The school accommodates approximately 500 students . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Banagher is most associated with the game of hurling and is home to St. Rynagh 's GAA Club . The club was founded in 1961 and represents the parishes of Banagher and <unk> , with hurling played at Banagher and football at <unk> . St. Rynagh 's has won 16 Offaly Senior Hurling Championships ( Sean Robins Cup ) and dominated senior hurling in the county from the mid @-@ 1960s to the early 1990s . Outside of the county , St. Rynagh 's were the inaugural winners of the Leinster Senior Club Hurling Championship , in 1971 and have won the title on a further three occasions , 1973 , 1983 and 1994 . The club also contested the first All @-@ Ireland Senior Club Hurling Championship final in 1971 , losing to <unk> from County Tipperary . Three St. Rynagh 's players have captained the Offaly hurling team to All @-@ Ireland success , Padraig Horan in 1981 , Martin <unk> in 1994 and Hubert Rigney in 1998 . A number of St. Rynagh 's players have also won All Stars – Martin <unk> ( 3 ) , Aidan Fogarty ( 2 ) , Damien Martin , Padraig Horan , Hubert Rigney and Michael <unk> . Damien Martin was the goalkeeper on the first All Stars team in 1971 , effectively making him the first ever GAA All Star . 
 Banagher schools have won the All @-@ Ireland Vocational Schools Championship on seven occasions . Banagher College were the most recent winners of the senior championship in 2010 , with Banagher having won on three previous occasions , in 1985 , 1986 and 1989 . Banagher also won a junior championship in 1984 and St. Rynagh 's Banagher won a junior championship in 2004 . 
 In 1910 , Banagher won the Offaly Senior Football Championship title , playing as Banagher . 
 Soccer is popular in Banagher and the Banagher United club fields teams in the Midlands Senior and Junior Leagues . 
 A Billiards and Snooker Hall is located between The Shannon Hotel and the Marina and has an active membership . There is a Pitch & Putt course located adjacent to Cromwell 's Castle on the Canal Bank and part of the river on this bank has been enclosed to form a swimming pool . There is also an active Sub Aqua Club in the town . 
 = Guitar Hero : Van Halen = 
 Guitar Hero : Van Halen is the third and final band @-@ specific music rhythm game in the Guitar Hero series . As with the previous games Guitar Hero : Aerosmith and Guitar Hero : Metallica , the game features 25 songs from Van Halen along with 19 additional songs from selected artists that have been inspired by the group . The game was released in retail for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and Wii systems on December 22 , 2009 , in North America , and in February 2010 for PAL regions . However , as part of a promotion with Guitar Hero 5 , the game was shipped to Guitar Hero 5 purchasers in North America prior to its retail release . The game was developed by Neversoft with Underground Development assisting Neversoft on developing the Xbox 360 port and published by Activision . 
 The game has received mostly negative reviews from critics , most of which consider the game 's quality to be greatly inferior to its predecessor , Guitar Hero : Metallica and other games of the series . The reviewers criticized the lack of former Van Halen members , Sammy Hagar , Michael Anthony and Gary Cherone , the limited tracks selected from Van Halen 's discography , the selection of other tracks included in the game , and the general lack of features introduced in the previous band @-@ centric games and Guitar Hero 5 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Guitar Hero : Van Halen is similar to the preceding band @-@ centric game , Guitar Hero : Metallica , featuring support for four players in a single band on lead and bass guitar , drums , and vocals . The game is based off the engine originating from Guitar Hero World Tour , and thus does not feature the additions that are present in Guitar Hero 5 , such as drop @-@ in / drop @-@ out play . 
 Only the current members of the band — Eddie Van Halen , David Lee Roth , Alex Van Halen and Wolfgang Van Halen — are playable avatars in the game for the Van Halen songs ; former band members Sammy Hagar , Gary Cherone and Michael Anthony are not included . The band appear as they did in 2009 but , by completing challenges in the game , players can unlock their older appearances from the " spandex era [ … ] with the big hair and tight pants " . Despite not being alive during this period of the band 's history , Wolfgang Van Halen 's avatar has a retro outfit copied from the dice @-@ shirt @-@ and @-@ patchwork @-@ jeans getup worn by his father in the video for " Panama " . 
 A demo of the game was released to Xbox Live on December 9 , 2009 , featuring two Van Halen songs , " Eruption " and " Panama " , along with Weezer 's " Dope Nose " and Killswitch Engage 's " The End of Heartache " . 
 = = Development = = 
 While the game was formally announced by Activision on May 7 , 2009 , several sources reported a month earlier that Van Halen was in development . USK , the German software ratings board , posted a content rating for a Van Halen @-@ based game in the series . GameStop temporarily listed the game for pre @-@ order during the month of April . A list of Xbox 360 Achievements was posted to the Internet in early May . 
 Throughout September 2009 , people who purchased or preordered Guitar Hero 5 in the US were given a code which they could redeem to receive a free copy of Guitar Hero : Van Halen prior to its retail release . These copies began arriving to customers in early October for PlayStation 2 , Xbox 360 , and Wii players , while the PlayStation 3 version was delayed due to a printing error . The game came in a cardboard sleeve with cover art indicating that it was for promotional use . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Like the other band @-@ centric Guitar Hero games , Guitar Hero : Van Halen includes 25 songs from the band Van Halen , including 3 guitar solos by Eddie Van Halen , in addition to 19 guest acts . The Van Halen songs in the game are taken during the time when David Lee Roth was in the band , and do not include any works during the period that Sammy Hagar and Gary Cherone were band members ; Activision 's head of music licensing , Tim Riley , notes that the lack of such material was not due to any demands or requests made by David Lee Roth . Riley also stated that most of the guest acts were selected by Wolfgang Van Halen , at the suggestion of Roth . The following songs are included in the game : 
