 = = = = Attractions = = = = 
 All rides and attractions require an extra fee . 
 = = = Soak City = = = 
 Opened in 1988 , Soak City is Cedar Point 's water park . It is adjacent to Cedar Point and requires separate admission . Guests must get their hands stamped to re @-@ enter Cedar Point . 
 = = Live entertainment = = 
 = = = Venues = = = 
 The Extreme Sports Stadium is a stunt stadium situated between WindSeeker and Wicked Twister . It was known as the Oceana Stadium from 1980 – 1998 and The Aquatic Stadium from 1999 – 2007 . 
 The Celebration Plaza Stage is in Celebration Plaza in front of the Iron Dragon . It was built for the 2012 season as part of Luminosity – Ignite the Night ! and replaced a giant screen used for Hot Summer Lights . 
 The Red Garter Saloon is a stage located on the Frontier Trail . 
 The Palace Theater is next to the Last Chance Saloon in Frontiertown . 
 The Camp Snoopy Theatre is a small stage in Camp Snoopy . 
 The Jack Aldrich Theatre formerly called the Centennial Theatre is a stage located between Midway Carousel and the Skyride . 
 = = = Shows = = = 
 All shows are about 25 minutes . 
 Rockin ’ Country is a country music and dancing show begun in 2014 in the Red Garter Saloon . 
 All Wheels Extreme is a stunt show in the Extreme Sports Stadium . It features bikers and gymnasts who flip , dive and perform stunts . It was introduced in 2008 . 
 Bandstand USA is a musical medley of tributes featuring a handful of Motown classics . NEW for 2015 ! 
 Beach Band is brass and percussion band that travels around the park playing pop , rock and other genres . 
 Charlie Brown 's <unk> Frolics takes place in the Camp Snoopy Theatre . 
 Snoopy Unleashed is an ice @-@ skating show begun in 2014 in the Good Time Theatre . 
 Jamming DJ 's are DJ 's who take requests from people waiting in line for the Millennium Force daily and for the Raptor on weekends during the summer . 
 Luminosity – Ignite the Night ! is a dance , fireworks , and pyrotechnics show performed nightly that began in 2012 on the Celebration Plaza stage . 
 On Broadway , Showstoppers from the New York Stage a show based on Broadway and takes place in the Jack Aldrich Theatre . 
 Peanuts ' Celebration at the Point ' is a Peanuts show performed at 5 pm daily on the Celebration Plaza stage . 
 Snoopy 's Sing @-@ A @-@ Long is a singing and dancing show in the Camp Snoopy Theatre . 
 Toes in the Sand Band is a band that plays outside of the Hotel Breakers on the beach . NEW for 2015 ! 
 Lusty Lil ’ s Revue is a show in the Palace Theater that debuted in 2014 . 
 = = Fast Lane = = 
 Fast Lane , introduced at Cedar Point in 2012 , is a secondary queue system that offers shorter wait times on the park 's most popular rides . In addition to the standard admission charge , visitors can bypass the standard wait line by purchasing a wrist band that grants access to the Fast Lane queue . A limited number of wrist bands are sold each day . The two options available for purchase are " Fast Lane " and " Fast Lane Plus " . The standard Fast Lane offers access to 24 attractions , while Fast Lane Plus covers the same rides and adds Top Thrill Dragster , GateKeeper , Maverick , and Valravn . 
 Beginning in the 2014 season , Cedar Point offers a Halloween @-@ themed version of Fast Lane called Fright Lane with Skeleton Key , available during HalloWeekends . In addition to Fast Lane access , this version provides priority access to haunted attractions within the park . It also includes a key that provides access to a secret room in each haunted attraction . 
 = = Awards / rankings = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Cedar Point won the Golden Ticket Award from Amusement Today for " Best Amusement Park in the World " for 16 consecutive years from 1997 @-@ 2013 . The park has also placed in categories for " <unk> Park Staff " ( 2002 , 2004 - 2006 ) , " <unk> Park " ( 2004 , 2005 ) , " Best Capacity " ( 1998 - 2002 ) , " Best Kid 's Area " ( 2004 , 2013 ) , " Best Outdoor Night Production " ( 2004 - 2007 ) , " Best Shows " ( 2004 , 2005 ) , " Best Games Area " ( 2002 ) , " Best Souvenirs " ( 2002 ) , and " Best Halloween Event " ( 2005 - 2008 , 2013 , 2014 ) . The park also won the Golden Ticket Award for " Best New Ride of 2007 " with the roller coaster Maverick . Cedar Point has also won several IAAPA awards , including the Applause Award in 1996 . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 Cedar Point 's roller coasters are commonly ranked high in the Golden Ticket Awards . In the 2013 rankings , GateKeeper debuted at 28th , making it the first time ever that the park had six steel roller coasters in the top 50 . The following steel and wooden coasters were ranked by Amusement Today in 2015 : 
 = = = = Steel = = = = 
 Millennium Force : 1st 
 Top Thrill Dragster : 13th 
 Magnum XL @-@ 200 : 15th ( tie ) 
 Maverick : 22nd ( tie ) 
 = = = = Wood = = = = 
 Blue Streak : 35th ( tie ) 
 = = = Attendance = = = 
 The park was the 15th most visited amusement park in North America in 2015 . It was also the most visited seasonal amusement park in the United States with an estimated 3 @.@ 51 million visitors . 
 In 1960 , the park 's attendance reached 1 million for the first time . Just five years later , the attendance reached 2 million . In 1975 , attendance reached 3 million for the first time . Cedar Point 's attendance peaked in 1994 , with 3 @.@ 6 million visitors . 
 = = Resorts = = 
 Cedar Point owns and operates six resorts located either on park grounds or less than a mile away . Most of the resorts are within walking distance of the Cedar Point Beach . All facilities are non @-@ smoking , and all Cedar Point Resort guests can enter the park one hour before it opens to the general public . Rides that operate during this early @-@ entry session are : Valravn , Millennium Force , Maverick , GateKeeper , Tiki Twirl , Cadillac Cars , Dodgem , Cedar Downs , Midway Carousel , and Kiddie Kingdom . 
 On December 2 , 2012 , Cedar Point announced that it would invest $ 60 million in its hotel resorts over three years , starting in the 2013 – 2014 offseason . No additional rooms were added to any of the hotels . 
 = = = On @-@ site resorts , marina , and campgrounds = = = 
 Hotel Breakers , the oldest resort at Cedar Point , was built in 1905 . The hotel has 650 rooms and suites and is the closest resort to Cedar Point and Soak City . In 1997 , Hotel Breakers was renovated and expanded , doubling its size . Hotel Breakers has standard hotel rooms , suites with views of Lake Erie , Snoopy @-@ themed rooms and Wi @-@ Fi in the lobby , rotunda and conference center . It has two pools , beach access , a conference center , and five restaurants including T.G.I. Friday 's and Perkins Restaurant and Bakery . 
 Sandcastle Suites is a hotel at the northernmost part of the peninsula that contains 187 suites . It has Wi @-@ Fi in the lobby and guest suites , an outdoor heated pool and whirlpool , beach access , tennis courts , a shuttle to both Cedar Point and Soak City , and two restaurants ‒ the Breakwater Cafe and the Sand Bar . 
 Lighthouse Point contains 64 cottages and 40 cabins and is located along the west bank of the peninsula . The centerpiece of Lighthouse Point is the Cedar Point Lighthouse , which was built in 1862 and is the oldest existing structure on the peninsula . It has an outdoor pool and outdoor whirlpool spa , a shuffleboard court , a game room , and shuttle service . 
 Camper Village is the only place at Cedar Point where it is possible to hook up an RV to water and electricity . Camper Village sites range from deluxe sites with electricity , water , sewer and cable to 112 electric @-@ only sites . The Camper Village has the Camper Village Store , an outdoor pool , a shuffleboard court , a game room , a shuttle service on Cedar Point Peninsula , a dump station and laundry facilities . 
 The Cedar Point Marina is located on the Sandusky Bay side of the peninsula , directly adjacent to the Amusement Park . The marina is one of 2 operated by Cedar Point . It is also one of the largest on Lake Erie with docks , able to accommodate vessels up to 100 ft , for both seasonal and transient boaters . The Marina has fuel docks with holding tank <unk> , a small marina store , dedicated restroom and shower facilities , laundry facilities , and a marina only pool . There are 2 restaurants located at the marina , Famous Daves Bar @-@ B @-@ Que , and Bay Harbor Inn ( an upscale seafood restaurant ) . Seasonal dockers receive various perks with their docks including 2 Platinum Season Passes , a visitors parking pass , and various extra discounts . Seasonal and transient boaters can access the park through the Marina Gate and also receive the same perks as at the other resorts including early entry and discount tickets . The marina is the base for the <unk> affiliated Point Yacht Club , and home port for most of the members . The marina season roughly parallels the parks operating season and is open from early May through late October / Early November . 
 = = = Off @-@ site Cedar Point @-@ owned resorts = = = 
 Castaway Bay is an indoor waterpark resort opened by Cedar Fair in November 2004 . It has over 38 @,@ 000 feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) of water slides , shops , and a wave pool . There are 237 guest rooms and luxury suites . Castaway Bay has five restaurants , including a Quaker Steak and Lube . Castaway Bay is also the location of Castaway Bay Marina the second marina owned by Cedar Point . It is smaller than the Cedar point Marina and located on Pipe Creek a tributary of the Sandusky Bay . The marina mainly hosts seasonal dockers but can also accommodate transient boaters . Boaters at Castaway Bay Marina receive the same benefits as those at the Cedar Point Marina . 
 Breakers Express , a sister resort to the Hotel Breakers , is located one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Cedar Point and is the closest hotel to the peninsula . It opened in 2000 and includes 350 guest rooms . Breakers Express has an outdoor heated pool , outdoor whirlpool spa , game room , and Wi @-@ Fi in guest rooms . 
 = = National Register of Historic Places = = 
 Cedar Point features several historic buildings on the peninsula . Many of the buildings and structures on the peninsula are from the late 1800s or early 1900s . The oldest structure on the peninsula is the Cedar Point Light . It is a restored lighthouse that was built in 1862 and was added to the National Register of Historic Places on July 19 , 1984 . Located along the main midway is the Coliseum . The Coliseum was built in 1906 with the newly expanded Midway . It has a ballroom known for holding several dances that helped Cedar Point out of The Depression . It was added to the NRHP on October 2 , 1982 . Another building that is listed on the NRHP is the U.S. Coast Guard Building located along Perimeter Road that stretches around the peninsula . 
 All three of Cedar Point 's carousels are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The Midway Carousel , otherwise known as the Daniel C. Muller Carousel , is located at the front of the park . It opened in 1912 and was brought to Cedar Point in 1946 . A Sandusky family purchased the ride and operated it at the park . It became property of Cedar Point in 1963 . It is Cedar Point 's oldest operating ride and was added to the NRHP on October 20 , 1982 . The second carousel at the park is the Cedar Downs Racing Derby , also known as the Great American Racing Derby . It originally opened at Euclid Beach Park in 1921 and was transported to Cedar Point for the 1967 season . It is only one of two racing carousels still operating in the United States , and was added to the NRHP on November 8 , 1990 . The third carousel is the Kiddy Kingdom Carousel , located in Kiddy Kingdom . It is also known as William H. Dentzel 1924 Carousel and opened at Cedar Point in 1968 . It was added to the NRHP on November 8 , 1990 . 
 Cedar Point used to have a fourth carousel located in Frontiertown , next to the Wave Swinger . It was known as the Frontier Carousel or William H. Dentzel 1921 Carousel . It opened at Cedar Point in 1972 when it was bought from a family in Lansing , Michigan . It was listed on the NRHP on November 8 , 1990 . After the 1994 season , the carousel closed and was moved to Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom , where it operates under the name Antique Carousel . Its building is currently used for the HalloWeekends attraction , Eternity Infirmary . 
 = = = Former = = = 
 Cedar Point 's oldest hotel is the Hotel Breakers . It opened in 1905 during the " golden age " of resort hotels . It was added to the NRHP on March 9 , 1987 . After several major alterations , most notably the Breakers Tower in 1998 , the National Park Service removed the Hotel Breakers from the NRHP on August 7 , 2001 . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Cedar Point has had a cultural influence on American society as evidenced in many forms of media such as books , television , and film . In the 1940 biographical film Knute Rockne , All American documenting the life of famous Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne , Cedar Point is featured at a pivotal point in the story . In 1913 , Knute works as a lifeguard on a beach at Cedar Point , where he and his college roommate Gus Dorais worked on the forward pass . The concept , which was first used in a scrimmage game at Cedar Point , would revolutionize the sport and the film would later be preserved in the Library of Congress National Film Registry . In 2004 , an independently @-@ produced film , Close Encounters of the Fourth Kind : Infestation From Mars , was shot at several historic locations around Sandusky including Cedar Point . Dick Kinzel , CEO of Cedar Point at the time , had a brief speaking role in the film . 
 In the 2006 book " The Warrior Heir " by <unk> Williams Chima , the main characters take a field trip to Cedar Point with their high school class . In a 2010 episode of Bert the Conqueror on the Travel Channel , Bert takes the " Foursome <unk> " roller @-@ coaster challenge in which he rides the four fastest and tallest coasters in the park in under an hour . A 2012 episode of Travel Channel 's Off Limits takes a look at off @-@ season maintenance at the park and features the host , Don Wildman , working with the maintenance crew on Mean Streak and Millennium Force . In 2012 , the " Extreme Heights " and " Speed Demons " episodes of Insane Coaster Wars on the Travel Channel feature Cedar Point coasters Millennium Force and Top Thrill Dragster , respectively . Commentary for the series was primarily filmed at Cedar Point . 
 = Cleaning symbiosis = 
 Cleaning symbiosis is a mutually beneficial association ( symbiosis ) between two species , where one ( the cleaner ) removes and eats parasites and other materials from the surface of the other ( the client ) . Cleaning symbiosis is well @-@ known among marine fish , where some small species of cleaner fish , notably wrasses but also species in other genera , are specialised to feed almost exclusively by cleaning larger fish and other marine animals . Other cleaning symbioses exist between birds and mammals , and in other groups . 
 Cleaning behaviour was first described by the Greek historian Herodotus in about 420 BC , though his example ( birds serving crocodiles ) appears to occur only rarely . 
 The role of cleaning symbioses has been debated by biologists for over thirty years . Some believe that cleaning represents selfless co @-@ operation , essentially pure mutualism . Others such as Robert Trivers hold that it illustrates mutual selfishness , reciprocal altruism . Others again believe that cleaning behaviour is simply one @-@ sided exploitation , a form of parasitism . 
 Cheating , where either a cleaner sometimes harms its client , or a predatory species mimics a cleaner , also occurs . Predatory cheating is analogous to Batesian mimicry , as where a harmless hoverfly mimics a stinging wasp , though with the tables turned . Some genuine cleaner fish , such as gobies and wrasse , have the same colours and patterns , in an example of convergent evolution . Mutual resemblance among cleaner fish is analogous to Mullerian mimicry , as where stinging bees and wasps mimic each other . 
 = = History = = 
 In his Histories ( book II ) , the ancient Greek historian Herodotus wrote : 
 As [ the crocodile ] lives chiefly in the river , it has the inside of its mouth constantly covered with leeches ; hence it happens that , while all the other birds and beasts avoid it , with the trochilus it lives at peace , since it owes much to that bird : for the crocodile , when he leaves the water and comes out upon the land , is in the habit of lying with his mouth wide open , facing the western breeze : at such times the trochilus goes into his mouth and devours the leeches . This benefits the crocodile , who is pleased , and takes care not to hurt the trochilus . 
 Herodotus thus claimed ( circa 440 BC ) that Nile crocodiles had what would now be called a cleaning symbiosis with the bird he called the trochilus , possibly a sandpiper ; but while he was right about the existence of cleaning symbioses , there is little evidence for it in crocodiles . In 1906 Henry <unk> quoted John Mason Cook , son of travel agent Thomas Cook , as reporting from Egypt that he had seen some spur @-@ winged plovers approach a crocodile , which opened its jaws for them : 
 Mr. J. M. Cook , of the celebrated tourist agency , when in Egypt in 1876 , " watched one of these birds , and saw it deliberately go up to a crocodile , apparently asleep , which opened its jaws . The bird hopped in , and the crocodile closed its <unk> in what appeared to be a very short time , probably not more than a minute or two , the crocodile opened its jaws , and we saw the bird go down to the water 's edge . " There were several of these birds about , and Mr. Cook shot two of them , which Dr. Sclater identified as Spur @-@ winged Plovers ; so that the question as to what bird enters the mouth of the crocodile is now set at rest . 
 MacFarland and Reeder , reviewing the evidence , found that 
 Extensive observations of Nile crocodiles in regular or occasional association with various species of potential cleaners ( e.g. plovers , sandpipers , water <unk> ) ... have resulted in only a few reports of sandpipers removing leeches from the mouth and gular scutes and snapping at insects along the reptile 's body . 
 = = A disputed relationship = = 
 Cleaning symbiosis is a relationship between a pair of animals of different species , involving the removal and subsequent ingestion of ectoparasites , diseased and injured tissue , and unwanted food items from the surface of the host organism ( the client ) by the cleaning organism ( the cleaner ) . Its status has been debated by biologists , with viewpoints ranging from pure mutualism through to a form of exploitative parasitism by the cleaner . 
 Marine biologist Alexandra Grutter explains : 
 Cleaning associations involve cleaner organisms that remove ectoparasites and other material , such as mucus , scales and skin , from the body surfaces of other apparently co @-@ operating animals . The latter are often referred to as hosts , customers , or clients . Cleaning behaviour is one of the most highly developed inter @-@ specific communication systems known , with clients striking elaborate postures which have generally been assumed to make ectoparasites more accessible to cleaners . 
 = = = <unk> co @-@ operation = = = 
 Grutter and her colleague Robert Poulin , reviewing over thirty years of debate by biologists on cleaning symbioses , argue that " Cleaning symbioses may not be mutualistic associations but rather one @-@ sided exploitation " . They quote , for example , C. Limbaugh as writing in 1961 : " From the standpoint of the philosopher of biology , the extent of cleaning behavior in the ocean emphasizes the role of co @-@ operation in nature as opposed to the tooth @-@ and @-@ claw struggle for existence " . 
 = = = Mutual selfishness = = = 
 In 1971 , mathematical biologist Robert Trivers wrote more carefully " Cleaner organisms and their hosts meet the preconditions for the evolution of reciprocally altruistic behavior . The host 's altruism is to be explained as benefiting him because of the advantage of being able quickly and repeatedly to return to the same cleaner " ( i.e. mutual selfishness ) . 
 = = = One @-@ sided exploitation = = = 
 By 1987 G. S. Losey wrote less optimistically " Cleaners are nothing but very clever behavioral parasites ... that have taken advantage of the rewarding aspects of tactile stimulation , found in nearly all vertebrates . " Poulin and Grutter remark that " Over the last few decades , ... the opinion of scientists regarding cleaning symbioses has changed , from selfless cooperation , to a mutually beneficial interaction , and finally to a one @-@ sided exploitation . " 
 = = Biological range = = 
 Cleaning symbiosis is known from several groups of animals both in the sea and on land ( see table ) . Cleaners include fish , shrimps and birds ; clients include a much wider range of fish , marine reptiles including turtles and iguanas , octopus , whales , and terrestrial mammals . Cleaning symbioses with reptile clients include fish cleaning the teeth of American crocodiles ( Crocodylus acutus ) , geckos eating mosquitoes on Aldabra giant tortoises ( Geochelone gigantea ) and scarlet crabs ( <unk> <unk> ) , and three species of Galapagos finches removing ticks from marine iguanas ( <unk> cristatus ) . 
 The best known cleaning symbioses are among marine fishes , where several species of small fish , notably of wrasse , are specialised in colour , pattern and behaviour as cleaners , providing a cleaning and ectoparasite removal service to larger , often predatory fish . Cleaner species , as shown in the table , vary widely in their degree of dependence on their clients . Some are essentially pure obligate symbionts like the cleaner wrasse ; some are opportunistic or facultative symbionts , like the orange <unk> or some cleaner shrimps ; and some , like the oxpeckers , combine a little eating of parasites ( beneficial to client ) with taking of blood ( harmful to client ) , their favoured food . 
 = = Mimicry among cleaner fish = = 
 = = = Mutual mimicry among cleaner fish = = = 
 Many cleaner fish in different families , such as the Caribbean neon goby ( Elacatinus <unk> ) and the cleaner wrasse ( Labroides dimidiatus ) , share the distinctive combination of a long narrow body , a longitudinal stripe , a blue colour , and small size . " Convergent signalling among cleaners , using size , stripes and colour , should facilitate their recognition by fish clients . " This is analogous to Mullerian mimicry where genuinely aposematic species ( such as wasps ) mimic each other 's warning colours . 
 = = = Aggressive mimicry of blennies to cleaner fish = = = 
 The sabre @-@ toothed blenny ( <unk> taeniatus ) is a predatory blenny , an aggressive mimic which accurately resembles the bluestreak cleaner wrasse , not only in colour and pattern , but also in the ritualised dance the cleaner wrasse makes when potential client fish swim nearby . However , instead of providing the cleaning service that it signals , it bites off pieces of healthy skin , scales and mucus from the host and then swims rapidly away to safety . 
 The effect of aggressive mimicry in a cleaning symbiosis is analogous to Batesian mimicry , where a harmless " edible mimetic species copies the warning signal of a noxious , aposematic model species , thereby gaining protection from predators " . As in Batesian mimicry , the rate of successful attacks on cleaning clients by the <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , which like the sabre @-@ toothed blenny mimic the bluestreak cleaner wrasse ( Labroides dimidiatus ) , is frequency @-@ dependent , meaning that the mimicry is more effective when the cheating <unk> is rare compared to the cleaner wrasse . The difference , however , is that the aggressive mimic is inserting itself into a co @-@ operative relationship ( between cleaner and client ) , whereas " Batesian mimics insert themselves into an antagonistic predator – prey interaction ( where the models are the unpalatable prey ) . " 
 = Red Blooded Woman = 
 " Red Blooded Woman " is a song by Australian recording artist Kylie Minogue , taken from her ninth studio album Body Language ( 2003 ) . Written by Johnny Douglas and Karen Poole and produced by the former , it is a hip hop , R & B and synthpop track . It contains a vocoded " Boy ! Boy ! " hook and backing vocals from a choir . It was released globally by Parlophone as the second single from the album on 1 March 2004 . 
 The song was well received by music critics , many of whom praised its production and compared it to the work of American music artists Justin Timberlake and Timbaland . Commercially , the single fared well in Minogue 's main markets , Australia and the United Kingdom , as it debuted inside the top five of the singles chart in both countries . It also peaked inside the top ten in countries including Denmark and Italy and the top twenty in Germany and New Zealand . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for completing sales of 7 @,@ 500 units . 
 A music video for " Red Blooded Woman " was directed by Jake Nava and features Minogue seductively dancing to the track in various locations such as a traffic jam and in front of a truck . Minogue performed it live at the one @-@ off concert show Money Can 't Buy and at TV shows like the Late Show with David Letterman and Top of the Pops . It has also been performing during three of Minogue 's concert tours – Showgirl : The Greatest Hits Tour , Showgirl : The Homecoming Tour , and For You , For Me tour . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Following the global success of her eighth studio album Fever , Minogue began working on her ninth studio album Body Language . Aiming to create a dance @-@ pop album inspired by electronic music from the 1980s , Minogue enlisted collaborators such as Johnny Douglas ( who had previously worked with her on Light Years ) and Karen Poole . The duo wrote " Red Blooded Woman " together , while Douglas also handled the production of the song . It was selected as the second single from Body Language and was released globally on 1 March 2004 . In the United Kingdom , it was released on 10 March 2004 . 
 " Red Blooded Woman " is a hip hop and synthpop track , the former being a genre Minogue newly experimented with on the album . It features a vocoded " Boy ! Boy ! " hook and " candy @-@ coated la la la 's " which are repeated during the bridge . A choir of men also provide backing vocals in a " ghostly " manner , according to Slant Magazine editor Sal Cinquemani . Similar to numerous songs from the album , " Red Blooded Woman " contains a reference to music from the 1980s : its line " You got me spinning round , round , round , round like a record " alludes to British band Dead or Alive 's 1985 song " You Spin Me Round ( Like a Record ) " . Remixes by English electronica artists Narcotic Thrust and Whitey were included on the 12 @-@ inch picture single . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Billboard critic Keith <unk> singled out the song as a highlight from the album and called it " a cousin of Justin Timberlake 's ' Cry Me a River ' . " Writing for NME , John Robinson found " Red Blooded Woman " to be better than " Slow " , the lead single from the album , and called it " excellent cutting edge pop in a great single by the Justin Timberlake or Sugababes way . " Adrien Begrand from PopMatters favoured its " almost garage @-@ like beat " and appreciated the lyric " You 'll never get to Heaven if you 're scared of getting high . " Like Shawhan , Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine too compared the production of the song to that of Timbaland . The " Boy ! Boy " hook of the song and its synthpop style were praised by Spin magazine , who felt that they " demonstrate that even in the 21st century , Kylie wears the 1980s well . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Red Blooded Woman " debuted and peaked at number four on the ARIA Singles Chart in Australia . The following week , it dropped out of the top ten to number eleven . The single had a short run on the chart , lasting for five weeks in total . In New Zealand , it entered the singles chart at number 34 and later peaked at number 19 . It charted for 12 weeks and received a gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for completing sales of 7 @,@ 500 units . 
 In Europe , the song reached the top twenty in numerous countries . In both Denmark and Italy , " Red Blooded Woman " peaked at number ten and appeared in the top twenty for three weeks . In Germany , the song peaked at number 16 and charted for a total of 10 weeks . It debuted at number eight on the Spanish Singles Chart and fell one place to number nine the next week . It appeared on the chart for a short period of time of four weeks . In Switzerland , " Red Blooded Woman " peaked higher than its preceding single " Slow " , reaching number 15 on the Schweizer Hitparade . " Red Blooded Woman " entered the UK Singles Chart at number five , becoming Minogue 's 26th top @-@ ten hit in the country . It was a moderate success , charting for nine weeks inside the top 40 of the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Red Blooded Woman " was directed by Jake Nava , an English film director who had previously worked with artists like Beyoncé and Kelis . It was filmed in Los Angeles , California , in December 2003 . It begins with a scene of a congested traffic jam in which Minogue is caught . She is shown seated in her car singing to the song in a sensual manner , with the camera repeatedly focusing on her eyes and lips . Her outfit is composed of a black and white singlet , a satin waist <unk> , jeans with chain fringes , and a black sheepskin shrug ( this outfit was donated by Minogue to the Arts Centre Melbourne and is displayed in the Kylie Minogue Collection ) . A few seconds later , she gets down from her vehicle and playfully makes her way to a tank . Climbing up on its ladder , Minogue dances seductively to the chorus of the song . She then resumes walking on the street and is accompanied by two <unk> puppies who escape from a nearby car . After entering into the backseat of another car , Minogue begins unwrapping a red dress and proceeds to change into it as she is watched by various onlookers . As the second chorus starts , Minogue is seen dancing with a group of backup dancers at a different location . Her attire consists of a fluorine yellow bustier worn underneath a pastel pink dress designed by French fashion house Balenciaga . The scene changes back to the street , where Minogue is shown entering a truck . She dims the lights and then dances in a different outfit , consisting of a black bikini , red leggings , and laced gloves . However , she exits the truck in the same red outfit she donned earlier . The rest of the video rapidly intersperses scenes of Minogue dancing inside and in front of the truck , on a car , with the backup dancers , and near a gang of motorcyclists . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 A one @-@ off concert show , Money Can 't Buy , was held at entertainment venue Hammersmith Apollo , London , on 15 November 2003 to promote Body Language . " Red Blooded Woman " was included on the set list of the concert and was performed during the first act " Paris by Night . " On 20 February 2004 , she appeared on British music chart television programme Top of the Pops to perform the song . Minogue later performed " Red Blooded Woman " at German music awards , ECHO Awards , on 6 March 2004 . 
 " Red Blooded Woman " was included on the set list of Minogue 's Showgirl : The Greatest Hits Tour in 2005 . Minogue was unable to complete the tour as she was diagnosed with early breast cancer and had to cancel the Australian leg of the tour . After undergoing treatment and recovery , she resumed the concert tour in the form of Showgirl : The Homecoming Tour in 2007 , and " Red Blooded Woman " was again added to the set list . In 2009 , she performed the song during concert shows of the For You , For Me tour , which was her first tour of North America . The performances of the song during all three of the tours contained an excerpt from " Where the Wild Roses Grow " and were preceded by a segment showing numerous male backup dancers showering . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Charts and certification = = 
 = HMAS Australia ( 1911 ) = 
 HMAS Australia was one of three Indefatigable @-@ class battlecruisers built for the defence of the British Empire . Ordered by the Australian government in 1909 , she was launched in 1911 , and commissioned as flagship of the fledgling Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) in 1913 . Australia was the only capital ship ever to serve in the RAN . 
 At the start of World War I , Australia was tasked with finding and destroying the German East Asia Squadron , which was prompted to withdraw from the Pacific by the battlecruiser 's presence . Repeated diversions to support the capture of German colonies in New Guinea and Samoa , as well as an overcautious Admiralty , prevented the battlecruiser from engaging the German squadron before the latter 's destruction . Australia was then assigned to North Sea operations , which consisted primarily of patrols and exercises , until the end of the war . During this time , Australia was involved in early attempts at naval aviation , and 11 of her personnel participated in the Zeebrugge Raid . The battlecruiser was not at the Battle of Jutland , as she was undergoing repairs following a collision with sister ship HMS New Zealand . Australia only ever fired in anger twice : at a German merchant vessel in January 1915 , and at a suspected submarine contact in December 1917 . 
 On her return to Australian waters , several sailors aboard the warship mutinied after a request for an extra day 's leave in Fremantle was denied , although other issues played a part in the mutiny , including minimal leave during the war , problems with pay , and the perception that Royal Navy personnel were more likely to receive promotions than Australian sailors . Post @-@ war budget cuts saw Australia 's role downgraded to a training ship before she was placed in reserve in 1921 . The disarmament provisions of the Washington Naval Treaty required the destruction of Australia as part of the British Empire 's commitment , and she was scuttled off Sydney Heads in 1924 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Indefatigable class of battlecruisers were based heavily on the preceding Invincible class . The main difference was that the Indefatigable 's design was enlarged to give the ships ' two wing turrets a wider arc of fire . As a result , the Indefatigable class was not a significant improvement on the Invincible design ; the ships were smaller and not as well protected as the contemporary German battlecruiser SMS Von der Tann and subsequent German designs . While Von der Tann 's characteristics were not known when the lead ship of the class , HMS Indefatigable , was laid down in February 1909 , the Royal Navy obtained accurate information on the German ship before work began on Australia and her sister ship HMS New Zealand . 
 Australia had an overall length of 590 feet ( 179 @.@ 8 m ) , a beam of 80 feet ( 24 @.@ 4 m ) , and a maximum draught of 30 feet 4 inches ( 9 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced 18 @,@ 500 long tons ( 18 @,@ 797 t ) at load and 22 @,@ 130 long tons ( 22 @,@ 485 t ) at deep load . The Parsons direct @-@ drive steam turbines were designed to produce 44 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 32 @,@ 811 kW ) , which would propel the ship at 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . However , during trials in 1913 , Australia 's turbines provided 55 @,@ 000 shp ( 41 @,@ 013 kW ) , allowing her to reach 26 @.@ 89 knots ( 49 @.@ 80 km / h ; 30 @.@ 94 mph ) . Australia carried approximately 3 @,@ 200 long tons ( 3 @,@ 251 t ) of coal , and an additional 850 long tons ( 864 t ) of fuel oil ; this was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . 
 Australia carried eight BL 12 @-@ inch Mark X guns in four BVIII * twin turrets ; the largest guns fitted to any Australian warship . Two turrets were mounted fore and aft on the centreline , identified as ' A ' and ' X ' respectively . The other two were wing turrets mounted amidships and staggered diagonally : ' P ' was forward and to port of the centre funnel , while ' Q ' was situated starboard and aft . Each wing turret had some limited ability to fire to the opposite side . Her secondary armament consisted of sixteen BL 4 @-@ inch Mark VII guns positioned in the superstructure . She mounted two submerged tubes for 18 @-@ inch torpedoes , one on each side aft of ' X ' barbette , and 12 torpedoes were carried . 
 Australia 's ' A ' turret was fitted with a 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) rangefinder at the rear of the turret roof . It was also equipped to control the entire main armament , in case normal fire control positions were knocked out or rendered incommunicado . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 Australia received a single QF 3 @-@ inch 20 cwt ( 76 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) gun on a high @-@ angle Mark II mount that was added in March 1915 . This had a maximum depression of 10 ° and a maximum elevation of 90 ° . It fired a 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ( 760 m / s ) at a rate of fire of 12 – 14 rounds per minute . It had a maximum effective ceiling of 23 @,@ 500 ft ( 7 @,@ 200 m ) . It was provided with 500 rounds . The 4 @-@ inch guns were enclosed in casemates and given blast shields during a refit in November 1915 to better protect the gun crews from weather and enemy action , and two aft guns were removed at the same time . An additional 4 @-@ inch gun was fitted in during 1917 as an AA gun . It was mounted on a Mark II high @-@ angle mounting with a maximum elevation of 60 ° . It had a reduced propellant charge with a muzzle velocity of only 2 @,@ 864 ft / s ( 873 m / s ) ; 100 rounds were carried for it . 
 Australia received a fire @-@ control director sometime between mid @-@ 1915 and May 1916 ; this centralised fire control under the director officer , who now fired the guns . The turret crewmen merely had to follow pointers transmitted from the director to align their guns on the target . This greatly increased accuracy , as it was easier to spot the fall of shells and eliminated the problem of the ship 's roll dispersing the shells when each turret fired independently . Australia was also fitted with an additional inch of armour around the midships turrets following the Battle of Jutland . 
 By 1918 , Australia carried a Sopwith Pup and a Sopwith 1 ½ Strutter on platforms fitted to the top of ' P ' and ' Q ' turrets . The first flying off by a 1 ½ Strutter was from Australia 's ' Q ' turret on 4 April 1918 . Each platform had a canvas hangar to protect the aircraft during inclement weather . At the end of World War I , Australia was described as " the least obsolescent of her class " . 
 After the war , both anti @-@ aircraft guns were replaced by a pair of QF 4 @-@ inch Mark V guns on manually operated high @-@ angle mounts in January 1920 . Their elevation limits were − 5 ° to 80 ° . The guns fired a 31 @-@ pound ( 14 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 387 ft / s ( 728 m / s ) at a rate of fire of 10 – 15 rounds per minute . They had a maximum effective ceiling of 28 @,@ 750 ft ( 8 @,@ 760 m ) . 
 = = Acquisition and construction = = 
 At the start of the 20th century , the British Admiralty maintained that naval defence of the British Empire , including the Dominions , should be unified under the Royal Navy . Attitudes on this matter softened during the first decade , and at the 1909 Imperial Conference , the Admiralty proposed the creation of ' Fleet Units ' : forces consisting of a battlecruiser , three light cruisers , six destroyers , and three submarines . Although some were to be operated by the Royal Navy at distant bases , particularly in the Far East , the Dominions were encouraged to purchase fleet units to serve as the core of new national navies : Australia and Canada were both encouraged to do so at earliest opportunity , New Zealand was asked to partially subsidise a fleet unit for the China Station , and there were plans for South Africa to fund one at a future point . Each fleet unit was designed as a " navy in miniature " , and would operate under the control of the purchasing Dominion during peacetime . In the event of widespread conflict , the fleet units would come under Admiralty control , and would be merged to form larger fleets for regional defence . Australia was the only Dominion to purchase a full fleet unit , and while the New Zealand @-@ funded battlecruiser was donated to the Royal Navy outright , no other nation purchased ships under the fleet unit plan . 
 On 9 December 1909 , a cable was sent by Governor @-@ General Lord Dudley to the Secretary of State for the Colonies , The Earl of Crewe , requesting that construction of three Town class cruisers and an Indefatigable @-@ class battlecruiser start at earliest opportunity . It is unclear why this design was selected , given that it was known to be inferior to the battlecruisers entering service with the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) . Historian John Roberts has suggested that the request may have been attributable to the Royal Navy 's practice of using small battleships and large cruisers as flagships of stations far from Britain , or it might have reflected the preferences of the First Sea Lord and Admiral of the Fleet John Fisher , preferences not widely shared . 
 The Australian Government decided on the name Australia , as this would avoid claims of favouritism or association with a particular state . The ship 's badge depicted the Federation Star overlaid by a naval crown , and her motto was " Endeavour " , reflecting both an idealisation of Australians ' national spirit and attitude , and a connection to James Cook and HM Bark Endeavour . On 6 May 1910 , George Reid , Australia 's high commissioner to the United Kingdom , sent a telegram cable to the Australian Government suggesting that the ship be named after the newly crowned King George V , but this was rebuffed . 
 Bids for construction were forwarded to the Australian Government by Reid on 7 March 1910 , and Prime Minister Alfred Deakin approved the submission by John Brown & Company to construct the hull and machinery , with separate contracts awarded to Armstrong and Vickers for the battlecruiser 's armament . The total cost of construction was set at £ 2 million . Contracts were signed between the Admiralty and the builders to avoid the problems of distant supervision by the Australian Government , and a close watch on proceedings was maintained by Reid and Captain Francis Haworth @-@ Booth , the Australian Naval Representative in London . 
 Australia 's keel was laid at John Brown & Company 's Clydebank yard on 23 June 1910 , and was assigned the yard number 402 . The ship was launched by Lady Reid on 25 October 1911 , in a ceremony which received extensive media coverage . Australia 's design was altered during construction to incorporate improvements in technology , including the newly developed nickel @-@ steel armour plate . While it was intended that the entire ship be fitted with the new armour , manufacturing problems meant that older armour had to be used in some sections : the delay in sourcing the older armour plates set construction back half a year . Despite this , John Brown & Company delivered the ship £ 295 @,@ 000 under budget . 
 During construction , First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill attempted to arrange for Australia to remain in British waters on completion . Although the claim was made on strategic grounds , the reasoning behind it was so the Australian @-@ funded ship could replace one to be purchased with British defence funds . This plan was successfully resisted by Admiral George King @-@ Hall , then Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Royal Navy 's Australia Squadron . 
 Australia sailed for Devonport , Devon in mid @-@ February 1913 to begin her acceptance trials . Testing of the guns , torpedoes , and machinery was successful , but it was discovered that two hull plates had been damaged during the launch , requiring the battlecruiser to dock for repairs . Australia was commissioned into the RAN at Portsmouth on 21 June 1913 . Two days later , Rear Admiral George Patey , the first Rear Admiral Commanding Australian Fleet , raised his flag aboard Australia . 
 At launch , the standard ship 's company was 820 , over half of which were Royal Navy personnel ; the other half was made up of Australian @-@ born RAN personnel , or Britons transferring from the Royal Navy to the RAN . Accommodation areas were crowded , with each man having only 14 inches ( 36 cm ) of space to sling his hammock when Australia was fully manned . Moreover , the ventilation system was designed for conditions in Europe , and was inadequate for the climate in and around Australia . On delivery , Australia was the largest warship in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Voyage to Australia = = = 
 Following her commissioning , Australia hosted several official events . On 30 June , King George V and Edward , Prince of Wales , visited Australia to farewell the ship . During this visit , King George knighted Patey on the ship 's quarterdeck — the first time a naval officer was knighted aboard a warship since Francis Drake . On 1 July , Patey hosted a luncheon which was attended by imperial dignitaries , including Reid , the Agents @-@ General of the Australian states , First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill , Secretary of State for the Colonies Lewis Harcourt , and the High Commissioners of other British Dominions . That afternoon , 600 Australian expatriates were invited to a ceremonial farewelling , and were entertained by shows and fireworks . Journalists and cinematographers were allowed aboard to report on Australia prior to her departure , and an official reporter was embarked for the voyage to Australia : his role was to promote the ship as a symbol of the bond between Australia and the United Kingdom . 
 Australia was escorted by the light cruiser HMAS Sydney during the voyage to Australia . On 25 July , the two ships left England for South Africa : the visit was part of an agreement between the Prime Ministers of Australia and South Africa to promote the link between the two nations , along with the nations ' links to the rest of the British Empire . The two ships were anchored in Table Bay from 18 to 26 August , during which the ships ' companies participated in parades and receptions , while tens of thousands of people came to observe the ships . The two ships also visited Simon 's Town , while Australia additionally called into Durban . No other major ports were visited on the voyage , and the warships were instructed to avoid all major Australian ports . 
 Australia and Sydney reached Jervis Bay on 2 October , where they rendezvoused with the rest of the RAN fleet ( the cruisers Encounter and Melbourne , and the destroyers Parramatta , Warrego , and Yarra ) . The seven warships prepared for a formal fleet entry into Sydney Harbour . On 4 October , Australia led the fleet into Sydney Harbour , where responsibility for Australian naval defence was passed from the Royal Navy 's Australia Squadron , commanded by King @-@ Hall aboard HMS Cambrian , to the RAN , commanded by Patey aboard Australia . 
 = = = Early service = = = 
 In her first year of service , Australia visited as many major Australian ports as possible , to expose the new navy to the widest possible audience and induce feelings of nationhood : naval historian David Stevens claims that these visits did more to break down state rivalries and promote the unity of Australia as a federated commonwealth than any other event . During late 1913 , footage for the film Sea Dogs of Australia was filmed aboard the battlecruiser ; the film was withdrawn almost immediately after first screening in August 1914 because of security concerns . 
 During July 1914 , Australia and other units of the RAN fleet were on a training cruise in Queensland waters . On 27 July , the Australian Commonwealth Naval Board learned through press telegrams that the British Admiralty thought that there would be imminent and widespread war in Europe following the July Crisis , and had begun to position its fleets as a precaution . Three days later , the Board learned that the official warning telegram had been sent : at 22 : 30 , Australia was recalled to Sydney to take on coal and stores . 
 On 3 August , the RAN was placed under Admiralty control . Orders for RAN warships were prepared over the next few days : Australia was assigned to the concentration of British naval power on the China Station , but was allowed to seek out and destroy any armoured warships ( particularly those of the German East Asia Squadron ) in the Australian Station before doing so . Vice Admiral Maximilian von Spee , commander of the German squadron , was aware of Australia 's presence in the region and her superiority to his entire force ; the German admiral 's plan was to harass British shipping and colonies in the Pacific until the presence of Australia and the China Squadron forced his fleet to relocate to other seas . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 = = = = Securing local waters = = = = 
 The British Empire declared war on Germany on 5 August , and the RAN swung into action . Australia had departed Sydney the night before , and was heading north to rendezvous with other RAN vessels south of German New Guinea . The German colonial capital of Rabaul was considered a likely base of operations for von Spee , and Patey put together a plan to clear the harbour . Australia 's role was to hang back : if the armoured cruisers SMS Scharnhorst and SMS Gneisenau were present , the other RAN vessels would lure them into range of the battlecruiser . The night @-@ time operation was executed on 11 August , and no German ships were found in the harbour . Over the next two days , Australia and the other ships unsuccessfully searched the nearby bays and coastline for the German ships and any wireless stations , before returning to Port Moresby to refuel . 
 In late August , Australia and Melbourne escorted a New Zealand occupation force to German Samoa . Patey believed that the German fleet was likely to be in the eastern Pacific , and Samoa would be a logical move . Providing protection for the New Zealand troopships was a beneficial coincidence , although the timing could have been better , as an Australian expedition to occupy German New Guinea departed from Sydney a few days after the New Zealand force left home waters — Australia was expected to support both , but Patey only learned of the expeditions after they had commenced their journeys . The battlecruiser left Port Moresby on 17 August and was met by Melbourne en route on 20 August . The next day , they reached Nouméa and the New Zealand occupation force , consisting of the troopships Moeraki and <unk> , the French cruiser Montcalm , and three Pelorus @-@ class cruisers . The grounding of <unk> delayed the expedition 's departure until 23 August ; the ships reached Suva , Fiji on 26 August , and arrived off Apia early in the morning of 30 August . The city surrendered without a fight , freeing Australia and Melbourne to depart at noon on 31 August to meet the Australian force bound for Rabaul . 
 The Australian invasion force had mustered off the Louisiade Archipelago by 9 September ; the assembled ships included Australia , the cruisers Sydney , and Encounter , the destroyers Parramatta , Warrego , and Yarra , the submarines AE1 and AE2 , the auxiliary cruiser HMAS Berrima , the storeship SS Aorangi , three colliers and an oiler . The force sailed north , and at 06 : 00 on 11 September , Australia deployed two picket boats to secure Karavia Bay for the expeditionary force 's transports and supply ships . Later that day , Australia captured the German steamer Sumatra off Cape <unk> . After this , the battlecruiser stood off , in case she was required to shell one of the two wireless stations the occupation force was attempting to capture . The German colony was captured , and on 15 September , Australia departed for Sydney . 
 = = = = Pursuit of von Spee = = = = 
 The presence of Australia around the former German colonies , combined with the likelihood of Japan declaring war on Germany , prompted von Spee to withdraw his ships from the region . On 13 August , the East Asia Squadron — with the exception of SMS Emden , which was sent to prey on British shipping in the Indian Ocean — had begun to move eastwards . After appearing off Samoa on 14 September , then attacking Tahiti eight days later , von Spee led his force to South America , and from there planned to sail for the Atlantic . Patey was ordered on 17 September to head back north with Australia and Sydney to protect the Australian expeditionary force . On 1 October , Australia , Sydney , Montcalm , and Encounter headed north from Rabaul to find the German ships , but turned around to return at midnight , after receiving an Admiralty message about the Tahiti attack . Although Patey suspected that the Germans were heading for South America and wanted to follow with Australia , the Admiralty was unsure that the intelligence was accurate , and tasked the battlecruiser with patrolling around Fiji in case they returned . Australia reached Suva on 12 October , and spent the next four weeks patrolling the waters around Fiji , Samoa , and New Caledonia : despite Patey 's desires to range out further , Admiralty orders kept him chained to Suva until early November . 
 As Patey predicted , von Spee had continued east , and it was not until his force inflicted the first defeat on the Royal Navy in 100 years at the Battle of Coronel that Australia was allowed to pursue . Departing on 8 November , the battlecruiser replenished coal from a pre @-@ positioned collier on 14 November , and reached Chamela Bay ( near Manzanillo , Mexico ) 12 days later . Patey was made commander of a multinational squadron tasked with preventing the German squadron from sailing north to Canadian waters , or following them if they attempted to enter the Atlantic via the Panama Canal or around Cape Horn . Patey 's ships included Australia , the British light cruiser HMS Newcastle and the Japanese cruisers Izumo , Asama , and the ex @-@ Russian battleship Hizen . The ships made for the Galapagos Islands , which were searched from 4 to 6 December . After finding no trace of von Spee 's force , the Admiralty ordered Patey to investigate the South American coast from Perlas Island down to the Gulf of Guayaquil . The German squadron had sailed for the Atlantic via Cape Horn , and was defeated by a British fleet after attempting to raid the Falkland Islands on 8 December . Patey 's squadron learned of this 10 December , while off the Gulf of Panama ; Australia 's personnel were disappointed that they did not have the chance to take on Scharnhorst and Gneisenau . Nevertheless , the battlecruiser 's presence in the Pacific during 1914 had provided an important counter to the German armoured cruisers , and enabled the RAN to participate in the Admiralty 's global strategy . Moreover , it is unlikely that the attack on Rabaul would have gone ahead had Australia not been available to protect the landing force . 
 = = = = North Sea operations = = = = 
 As the threat of a German naval attack had been removed by the destruction of the East Asia Squadron , Australia was free for deployment elsewhere . Initially , the battlecruiser was to serve as flagship of the West Indies Squadron , with the task of pursuing and destroying any German vessels that evaded North Sea blockades . Australia was ordered to sail to Jamaica via the Panama Canal , but as it was closed to heavy shipping , she was forced to sail down the coast of South America and pass through the Strait of Magellan during 31 December 1914 and 1 January 1915 — Australia is the only ship of the RAN to cross from the Pacific to the Atlantic by sailing under South America . During the crossing , one of the warship 's propellers was damaged , and she had to limp to the Falkland Islands at half speed . Temporary repairs were made , and Australia departed on 5 January . A vessel well clear of the usual shipping routes was spotted on the afternoon of the next day , and the battlecruiser attempted to pursue , but was hampered by the damaged propeller . Unable to close the gap before sunset , a warning shot was fired from ' A ' turret , which caused the ship — the former German passenger liner , now naval auxiliary Eleonora Woermann — to stop and be captured . As Australia could not spare enough personnel to secure and operate the merchant ship , and Eleonora Woermann was too slow to keep pace with the battlecruiser , the German crew were taken aboard and the ship was sunk . 
 Following the Battle of Dogger Bank , the Admiralty saw the need for dedicated battlecruiser squadrons in British waters , and earmarked Australia to lead one of them . On 11 January , while en route to Jamaica , Australia was diverted to Gibraltar . Reaching there on 20 January , the battlecruiser was ordered to proceed to Plymouth , where she arrived on 28 January and paid off for a short refit . The docking was completed on 12 February , and Australia reached Rosyth on 17 February after sailing through a gale . She was made flagship of the 2nd Battlecruiser Squadron ( 2nd BCS ) of the Battlecruiser Fleet , part of the British Grand Fleet , on 22 February . Vice Admiral Patey was appointed to command this squadron . In early March , to avoid a conflict of seniority between Patey and the leader of the Battlecruiser Fleet , Vice Admiral David Beatty , Patey was reassigned to the West Indies , and Rear Admiral William Pakenham raised his flag aboard Australia . British and Allied ships deployed to the North Sea were tasked with protecting the British Isles from German naval attack , and keeping the German High Seas Fleet penned in European waters through a distant blockade while trying to lure them into a decisive battle . During her time with the 2nd BCS , Australia 's operations primarily consisted of training exercises ( either in isolation or with other ships ) , patrols of the North Sea area in response to actual or perceived German movements , and some escort work . These duties were so monotonous , one sailor was driven insane . 
 Australia joined the Grand Fleet in a sortie on 29 March , in response to intelligence that the German fleet was leaving port as the precursor to a major operation . By the next night , the German ships had withdrawn , and Australia returned to Rosyth . On 11 April , the British fleet was again deployed on the intelligence that a German force was planning an operation . The Germans intended to lay mines at the Swarte Bank , but after a scouting Zeppelin located a British light cruiser squadron , they began to prepare for what they thought was a British attack . Heavy fog and the need to refuel caused Australia and the British vessels to return to port on 17 August , and although they were redeployed that night , they were unable to stop two German light cruisers from laying the minefield . From 26 to 28 January 1916 , the 2nd BCS was positioned off the Skagerrak while the 1st Light Cruiser Squadron swept the strait in an unsuccessful search of a possible minelayer . 
 On the morning of 21 April , Australia and her sister ships sailed again for the Skagerrak , this time to support efforts to disrupt the transport of Swedish ore to Germany . The planned destroyer sweep of the Kattegat was cancelled when word came that the High Seas Fleet was mobilising for an operation of their own ( later learned to be timed to coincide with the Irish Easter Rising ) , and the British ships were ordered to a rendezvous point in the middle of the North Sea , while the rest of the Grand Fleet made for the south @-@ eastern end of the Long Forties . On the afternoon of 22 April , the Battlecruiser Fleet was patrolling to the north @-@ west of Horn Reefs when heavy fog came down . The ships were zigzagging to avoid submarine attack , which , combined with the weather conditions , caused Australia to collide with sister ship HMS New Zealand twice in three minutes . Procedural errors were found to be the cause of the collisions , which saw Australia ( the more heavily damaged of the two ships ) docked for six weeks of repairs between April and June 1916 . Initial inspections of the damage were made in a floating dock on the River Tyne , but the nature of the damage required a diversion to Devonport , Devon for the actual repair work . The repairs were completed more quickly than expected , and Australia rejoined the 2nd BCS Squadron at Rosyth on 9 June , having missed the Battle of Jutland . 
 On the evening of 18 August , the Grand Fleet put to sea in response to a message deciphered by Room 40 , which indicated that the High Seas Fleet , minus II Squadron , would be leaving harbour that night . The German objective was to bombard Sunderland on 19 August , with extensive reconnaissance provided by airships and submarines . The Grand Fleet sailed with 29 dreadnought battleships and 6 battlecruisers . Throughout the next day , Jellicoe and Scheer received conflicting intelligence , with the result that having reached its rendezvous in the North Sea , the Grand Fleet steered north in the erroneous belief that it had entered a minefield before turning south again . Scheer steered south @-@ eastward to pursue a lone British battle squadron sighted by an airship , which was in fact the Harwich Force under Commodore Tyrwhitt . Having realised their mistake , the Germans changed course for home . The only contact came in the evening when Tyrwhitt sighted the High Seas Fleet but was unable to achieve an advantageous attack position before dark , and broke off . Both the British and German fleets returned home , with two British cruisers sunk by submarines and a German dreadnought battleship damaged by a torpedo . 
 The year 1917 saw a continuation of the battlecruiser 's routine of exercises and patrols into the North Sea , with few incidents . During this year Australia 's activities were limited to training voyages between Rosyth and Scapa Flow and occasional patrols to the north @-@ east of Britain in search of German raiders . In May , while preparing the warship for action stations , a 12 @-@ inch shell became jammed in the shell hoist when its fuze became hooked onto a projection . After the magazines were evacuated , Lieutenant @-@ Commander F. C. Darley climbed down the hoist and successfully removed the fuze . On 26 June , King George V visited the ship . On 12 December , Australia was involved in a second collision , this time with the battlecruiser HMS Repulse . Following this accident , she underwent three weeks of repairs from December 1917 until January 1918 . During the repair period , Australia became the first RAN ship to launch an aircraft , when a Sopwith Pup took off from her quarterdeck on 18 December . On 30 December , Australia shelled a suspected submarine contact , the only time during her deployment with the 2nd BCS that she fired on the enemy . 
 In February 1918 , the call went out for volunteers to participate in a special mission to close the port of Zeebrugge using blockships . Although many aboard Australia volunteered their services in an attempt to escape the drudgery of North Sea patrols , only 11 personnel — 10 sailors and an engineering lieutenant — were selected for the raid , which occurred on 23 April . The lieutenant was posted to the engine room of the requisitioned ferry HMS Iris II , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal ( DSM ) for his efforts . The other Australians were assigned to the boiler rooms of the blockship Thetis , or as part of a storming party along the mole . All ten sailors survived — Australia was the only ship to have no casualties from the raid — and three were awarded the DSM , while another three were mentioned in dispatches . One of the sailors was listed in the ballot to receive a Victoria Cross , but he did not receive the award . 
 During 1918 , Australia and the Grand Fleet 's other capital ships on occasion escorted convoys travelling between Britain and Norway . The 2nd BCS spent the period from 8 to 21 February covering these convoys in company with battleships and destroyers , and put to sea on 6 March in company with the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron to support minelayers . From 8 March on , the battlecruiser tested the capabilities of aircraft launched from platforms mounted over ' P ' and ' Q ' turrets . Australia , along with the rest of the Grand Fleet , sortied on the afternoon of 23 March 1918 after radio transmissions had revealed that the High Seas Fleet was at sea after a failed attempt to intercept the regular British convoy to Norway . However , the Germans were too far ahead of the British and escaped without firing a shot . The 2nd BCS sailed again on 25 April to support minelayers , then cover one of the Scandinavian convoys the next day . Following the successful launch of a fully laden Sopwith 1 ½ Strutter scout plane on 14 May , Australia started carrying two aircraft — a Strutter for reconnaissance , and a Sopwith Camel fighter — and operated them until the end of the war . The 2nd BCS again supported minelayers in the North Sea between 25 – 26 June and 29 – 30 July . During September and October , Australia and the 2nd BCS supervised and protected minelaying operations north of Orkney . 
 = = = = War 's end = = = = 
 When the armistice with Germany was signed on 11 November 1918 to end World War I , one of the conditions was that the German High Seas Fleet was to be interred at Scapa Flow . The German fleet crossed the North Sea , and on 21 November , the British Grand Fleet sailed out to meet it ; Australia led the port division of the fleet . Australia then escorted the battlecruiser SMS Hindenburg to Scapa Flow , and was assigned as the German vessel 's guardship . Australia subsequently formed part of the force which guarded the High Seas Fleet during late 1918 and early 1919 , and spent much of her time either at anchor at Scapa Flow , or conducting patrols in the North Sea . This monotonous duty contributed to low morale among some sections of the ship 's crew . 
 After being formally farewelled by the Prince of Wales and First Sea Lord Rosslyn Wemyss on 22 April 1919 , Australia departed from Portsmouth for home the next day . She sailed in company with HMAS Brisbane for the first part of the voyage , but the light cruiser later had to detach to tow the submarine J5 . Australia arrived in Fremantle on 28 May 1919 , the first time the ship had seen home waters in four and a half years . Despite returning home , the battlecruiser remained under Admiralty control until 1 August 1919 . 
 Australia was not awarded any official battle honours , although personnel aboard the battlecruiser and her successor claimed the operations in the Pacific , the North Sea patrol duties , and the battlecruiser 's presence at the surrender of the German High Seas Fleet as unofficial honours . Following a reorganisation of RAN battle honours in 2010 , the honours " Rabaul 1914 " and " North Sea 1915 – 18 " were retroactively awarded on 1 March 2010 . 
 = = = Mutiny = = = 
 Australia 's ship 's company had consistently suffered from low morale since the battlecruiser entered service , and the proportion of Australia 's sailors who were placed on disciplinary charges during World War I was among the highest in the RAN . Many of the Australian sailors were chafing under the severity of naval discipline and what they saw as excessive punishment for minor breaches ; one example was of a sailor who was charged with desertion , imprisoned for three months , and lost all pay for staying out too late on Armistice Day . Factors which contributed to low morale and poor discipline included frustration at not participating in the Battle of Jutland , high rates of illness , limited opportunities for leave , delays or complete lack of deferred pay , and poor @-@ quality food . The continuation of strict wartime routines and discipline after the armistice frustrated the ship 's crew . There was also the perception that Australia 's British personnel were being promoted faster than their Australian counterparts and were dominating leadership positions . The battlecruiser 's arrival in Fremantle on 28 May was met with extensive hospitality , which was reciprocated where possible by the sailors with invitations and tours of their vessel . There were opportunities for shore leave , but these were limited as Australia was only in port for three days , and had to sail early on 1 June for Melbourne . 
 Representatives of the ship 's company approached Captain Claude Cumberlege to ask for a one @-@ day delay on departure ; this would allow the sailors to have a full weekend of leave , give Perth @-@ born personnel the chance to visit their families , and give personnel another chance to invite people aboard . Cumberlege replied that as Australia had a tight schedule of " welcome home " port visits , such delays could not even be considered . The next morning , at around 10 : 30 , between 80 and 100 sailors gathered in front of ' P ' turret , some in working uniform , others who had just returned from shore leave still in <unk> rig . Cumberlege sent the executive officer to find out why the men had assembled , and on learning that they were repeating the previous day 's request for a delay in departure , went down to address them . In a strict , legalistic tone , he informed the sailors that delaying Australia 's departure was impossible , and ordered them to disperse . The group obeyed this order , although some were vocal in their displeasure . Shortly after , Australia was ready to depart , but when the order to release the mooring lines and get underway was given , Cumberlege was informed that the stokers had abandoned the boiler rooms . After the assembly on deck , some sailors had masked themselves with black handkerchiefs , and encouraged or intimidated the stokers on duty into leaving their posts , leaving the navy 's flagship stranded at the buoy , in full view of dignitaries and crowds lining the nearby wharf . The senior non @-@ commissioned officers , along with sailors drafted from other departments , were sent to the boiler room to get Australia moving , and departure from Fremantle was only delayed by an hour . 
 Australian naval historians David Stevens and Tom Frame disagree on what happens next . Stevens states that Cumberledge assembled the ship 's company in the early afternoon , read the Articles of War , lectured them on the seriousness of refusing duty , then ordered the stokers to go to their stations , which they did meekly . Frame claims that the stokers returned to duty freely once the battlecruiser was underway , before Cumberledge cleared lower deck and spoke to the sailors . After addressing the sailors , Cumberledge gathered the ship 's senior officers for an inquiry . Five men , including the Victoria Cross nominee from the Zeebrugge raid , were charged with inciting a mutiny and arrested pending a court @-@ martial , which was held aboard HMAS Encounter on 20 June , after Australia arrived in Sydney . The ruling was that the five men had " joined a mutiny , not accompanied by violence " , and they were sentenced to imprisonment in Goulburn Gaol : two for a year , one for eighteen months , and two for two years with hard labour . A number of other sailors were charged with participating in a mutiny , but again , Stevens and Frame disagree on details : the former claims 7 men were successfully charged , while the latter says 32 sailors were subsequently acquitted of mutiny , but then successfully charged with refusing duty . Both authors agree that these men were tried by the captain while Australia was still at sea , and punished with 90 days each in cells . 
 Following the court @-@ martial of the five ringleaders , there was debate among the public , in the media , and within government over the sentences ; while most agreed that a mutiny had occurred , there were differences in opinion on the leniency or severity of the punishments imposed . Public sympathy was with the sailors , and several politicians pressured the government and the Admiralty to pardon the men . The Admiralty thought the sentences were fair , but on 10 September announced that they would be halved on consideration of the sailors ' youth . Despite this , controversy continued until 21 November : after the Australian government appealed directly to the Admiralty , it was agreed that the sailors would be released on 20 December . However , the government had angered the Naval Board in appealing to the Admiralty without consulting the Board first . The First Naval Member , Rear Admiral Percy Grant and Commander of the Fleet , Commodore John Dumaresq , submitted their resignations in protest , as they felt the show of clemency would lead to a breakdown in discipline , and that if the government continued to communicate with the Admiralty without consulting the Board , it would undermine the Board 's authority . The two officers were later convinced to withdraw their resignations after receiving assurances that Board would be consulted before all future government communications to Britain regarding the RAN , and that notices would be posted in all ships explaining that the sentences were correct , but the onset of peace had led to clemency in this particular case . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 In May 1920 , Australia participated in celebrations and naval activities associated with the visit of the Prince of Wales . From July to November 1920 , an Avro 504 floatplane of the Australian Air Corps was embarked aboard Australia as part of a series of trials intended to cumulate in the creation of a naval aviation branch . The aircraft was stored on the quarterdeck next to ' Q ' turret , and was deployed and recovered by derrick . Inter @-@ service rivalry and the ship 's reduction to non @-@ seagoing status in September prevented further operations . 
 Following the demise of German naval power in the Pacific the fleet unit concept was no longer seen as being relevant , and Australia did not have a clear role . As a result , post @-@ war budget cuts prompted the RAN to take the battlecruiser out of active service , as the large share of resources and manpower consumed by Australia could be better used elsewhere in the RAN . In August 1920 the battlecruiser was rated by the Naval Board as 11th out of the RAN 's 12 priorities . Accordingly , the ship 's company was reduced later that year and she was assigned to Flinders Naval Depot as a gunnery and torpedo training ship . In the event of a major conflict , Australia was to serve in a role akin to coastal artillery . She was not considered to have been placed in reserve at this time , however , as it was not possible for the RAN to provide a trained complement at short notice . 
 = = Decommissioning and fate = = 
 Australia returned to Sydney in November 1921 , and was paid off into reserve in December . By this time battlecruisers built before the Battle of Jutland were considered obsolete , and there is no record of the Admiralty suggesting that Australia purchase a replacement . Moreover , it is unlikely that the Australian Government would have agreed to such a suggestion given the prevailing political and financial conditions . As the Admiralty had decided to phase out 12 @-@ inch guns and had stopped the manufacture of shells for these weapons shortly after the war , it would have been necessary to replace Australia 's main armament once the Navy 's stock of shells reached their expiry date given that it was not possible to produce replacement shells in Australia . This was also not financially feasible for the government , particularly given the RAN 's lack of interest in retaining the ship . 
 The 1922 Washington Naval Treaty was a mutual naval arms limitation and disarmament treaty between the five major naval powers of the time : the United Kingdom , the United States of America , Japan , Italy , and France . One of the main aspects of the treaty was the limitation on the number and size of capital ships each nation possessed ; as the RAN was counted as part of the Royal Navy for the purposes of the treaty , Australia was one of the battlecruisers nominated for disposal to meet the British limit . The battlecruiser had to be made unusable for warlike activities within six months of the treaty 's ratification , then disposed of by scuttling , as Australia did not have the facilities to break her up for scrap , and the British share of target ships was taken up by Royal Navy vessels . This was the only time the Australian military has been affected by a disarmament treaty until the 1997 Ottawa Treaty banning the use of anti @-@ personnel mines . 
 Some equipment had been removed when Australia was decommissioned for use in other ships , but after the November 1923 decision by the Cabinet confirming the scuttling , RAN personnel and private contractors began to remove piping and other small fittings . Between November 1923 and January 1924 , £ 68 @,@ 000 of equipment was reclaimed ; over half was donated to tertiary education centres ( some of which was still in use in the 1970s ) , while the rest was either marked for use in future warships , or sold as souvenirs . Some consideration was given to reusing Australia 's 12 @-@ inch guns in coastal fortifications , but this did not occur as ammunition for these weapons was no longer being manufactured by the British , and the cost of building suitable structures was excessive . It was instead decided to sink the gun turrets and spare barrels with the rest of the ship . There was also a proposal to remove Australia 's conning tower and install it on the Sydney Harbour foreshore ; although this did not go ahead , the idea was later used when the foremast of HMAS Sydney was erected as a monument at Bradleys Head . The ship 's outer port propeller is on display at the Australian War Memorial , while other artefacts are in the collections of the War Memorial , the Australian National Maritime Museum , and the Royal Australian Navy Heritage Centre . 
 The scuttling was originally scheduled for Anzac Day ( 25 April ) 1924 , but was brought forward to 12 April , so the visiting British Special Service Squadron could participate . On the day of the sinking , Australia was towed out to a point 25 nautical miles ( 46 km ; 29 mi ) north east of Sydney Heads . Under the terms of the Washington Treaty , the battlecruiser needed to be sunk in water that was deep enough to make it infeasible to refloat her at a future date . The former flagship was escorted by the Australian warships Melbourne , Brisbane , Adelaide , Anzac , and Stalwart , the ships of the Special Service Squadron , and several civilian ferries carrying passengers . Many personnel volunteered to be part of the scuttling party , but only those who had served aboard her were selected . At 14 : 30 , the scuttling party set the charges , opened all seacocks , and cleared the ship . Explosive charges blew a hole in the hull a few minutes later , but it took 20 minutes for the intake of water to bring holes cut in the battlecruiser 's upper flanks to the waterline . The angle of list increased significantly , causing the three spare 12 @-@ inch barrels lashed to the deck to break free and roll overboard , before Australia inverted completely and began to sink stern @-@ first . Australia submerged completely at 14 : 51 ; a Royal Australian Air Force aircraft dropped a wreath where the warship had sunk , while Brisbane fired a rolling 21 @-@ gun salute . The wreck was gazetted as being at 33 ° 53 ′ 25 ″ S 151 ° 46 ′ 5 ″ E , 270 metres ( 890 ft ) below . However , there were discrepancies with other sources , and the exact location of Australia was unknown . 
 There are two schools of thought surrounding the decision to scuttle the battlecruiser . The first is that sinking Australia was a major blow to the nation 's ability to defend herself . Following the battlecruiser 's scuttling , the most powerful warships in the RAN were four old light cruisers . The battlecruiser had served as a deterrent to German naval action against Australia during the war , and with growing tensions between Japan and the United States of America , that deterrence may have been required if the nations became openly hostile towards each other or towards Australia . The opposing argument is that , while an emotive and symbolic loss , the ship was obsolete , and would have been a drain on resources . Operating and maintaining the warship was beyond the capabilities of the RAN 's post @-@ war budgets , necessitating the ship 's reduction in status in 1920 and assignment to reserve in 1921 . Ammunition and replacement barrels for the main guns were no longer manufactured . To remain effective , Australia required major modernisation ( including new propulsion machinery , increased armour and armament , and new fire control systems ) at a cost equivalent to a new County @-@ class cruiser . 
 In 1990 , a large , unknown shipwreck was encountered by the Fugro Seafloor Surveys vessel MV Moana Wave 1 while surveying the path of the Pacific Rim West Submarine Telecommunications Cable . One of the survey ship 's crew theorised that the wreck , located at 33 ° 51 ′ 54 @.@ 21 ″ S 151 ° 44 ′ 25 @.@ 11 ″ E in 390 metres ( 1 @,@ 280 ft ) of water , was Australia , but Fugro kept the information to themselves until 2002 , when the company 's Australian branch mentioned the discovery during a conference . This piqued the interest of a member of the New South Wales Heritage Office , who requested copies of the company 's data . The size and location of the ship pointed towards it being Australia , but the depth meant verification through inspection could only be achieved with a remote operated vehicle ( ROV ) . The RAN was approached in 2007 for assistance , but although they supported the project , the RAN did not have the equipment to assist . In March 2007 , the United States Navy loaned the deep @-@ sea ROV CURV @-@ 21 to the Australian Government , to locate and recover a Black Hawk helicopter which crashed during the Australian response to the 2006 Fijian coup d 'état . While en route back to Australia , the ROV , carried aboard Defence Maritime Services vessel Seahorse Standard , was directed to Fugro 's coordinates at the request of the NSW Heritage Office to verify and inspect the wreck . Video footage captured by the ROV allowed the NSW Heritage Office to confirm that the wreck was Australia by matching features like the superstructure and masts to historical photographs . Although initially sinking stern @-@ first , the battlecruiser levelled out as she sank , with the aft mast the first to strike the bottom . After hitting the seabed , Australia slid about 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) to her final resting place . The wreck site is protected under the federal Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976 . 
 = 55 Cancri e = 
 55 Cancri e ( abbreviated 55 Cnc e ) , also named Janssen , is an exoplanet closely orbiting its Sun @-@ like host star 55 Cancri A. The mass of the exoplanet is about 8 @.@ 63 Earth masses and its diameter is about twice that of the Earth , thus classifying it as the first super @-@ Earth discovered around a main sequence star , predating Gliese 876 d by a year . It takes fewer than 18 hours to complete an orbit and is the innermost known planet in its planetary system . 55 Cancri e was discovered on 30 August 2004 . However , until the 2010 observations and recalculations , this planet had been thought to take about 2 @.@ 8 days to orbit the star . In October 2012 , it was announced that 55 Cancri e could be a carbon planet . 
 In July 2014 the International Astronomical Union launched a process for giving proper names to certain exoplanets and their host stars . The process involved public nomination and voting for the new names . In December 2015 , the IAU announced the winning name was Janssen for this planet . The winning name was submitted by the Royal Netherlands Association for Meteorology and Astronomy of the Netherlands . It honors the spectacle maker and telescope pioneer Zacharias Janssen . 
 In February 2016 , it was announced that NASA 's Hubble Space Telescope had detected hydrogen and helium ( and suggestions of hydrogen cyanide ) , but no water vapor , in the atmosphere of 55 Cancri e , the first time the atmosphere of a super @-@ earth exoplanet was analyzed successfully . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Like the majority of extrasolar planets found prior to the Kepler mission , 55 Cancri e was discovered by detecting variations in its star 's radial velocity . This was achieved by making sensitive measurements of the Doppler shift of the spectrum of 55 Cancri A. At the time of its discovery , three other planets were known orbiting the star . After accounting for these planets , a signal at around 2 @.@ 8 days remained , which could be explained by a planet of at least 14 @.@ 2 Earth masses in a very close orbit . The same measurements were used to confirm the existence of the uncertain planet 55 Cancri c . 
 55 Cancri e was one of the first extrasolar planets with a mass comparable to that of Neptune to be discovered . It was announced at the same time as another " hot Neptune " orbiting the red dwarf star Gliese 436 named Gliese 436 b . 
 = = = Planet challenged = = = 
 In 2005 the existence of planet e was questioned by Jack Wisdom in a reanalysis of the data : according to him , instead of the 2 @.@ 8 @-@ day planet there is a planet with a mass similar to that of Neptune in a 261 @-@ day orbit around 55 Cancri A. In 2007 , Debra Fischer and colleagues at San Francisco State University published a new analysis indicating that both planets existed ; the planet in the 260 @-@ day orbit was accordingly designated 55 Cancri f . 
 = = = Transit = = = 
 The planet 's transit of its primary was announced on 27 April 2011 , based on two weeks of nearly continuous photometric monitoring with the MOST space telescope . The transits occur with the period ( 0 @.@ 74 days ) and phase that had been predicted by Dawson & <unk> . This is one of the few planetary transits to be confirmed around a well @-@ known star , and allowed investigations into the planet 's composition . 
 = = Orbit and mass = = 
 The radial velocity method used to detect 55 Cancri e obtains the minimum mass of 7 @.@ 8 times that of Earth , or 48 % of the mass of Neptune . The transit shows that its inclination is about 83 @.@ 4 ± 1 @.@ 7 , so the real mass is close to the minimum . 55 Cancri e is also coplanar with b . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 55 Cancri e receives more radiation than Gliese 436 b . The side of the planet facing its star has temperatures more than 2 @,@ 000 kelvin ( approximately 1 @,@ 700 degrees Celsius or 3 @,@ 100 Fahrenheit ) , hot enough to melt metal . 
 It was initially unknown whether 55 Cancri e was a small gas giant like Neptune or a large rocky terrestrial planet . In 2011 , a transit of the planet was confirmed , allowing scientists to calculate its density . At first it was suspected to be a water planet . As initial observations showed no hydrogen in its Lyman @-@ alpha signature during transit , Ehrenreich speculated that its volatile materials might be carbon dioxide instead of water or hydrogen . 
 An alternative possibility is that 55 Cancri e is a solid planet made of carbon @-@ rich material rather than the oxygen @-@ rich material that makes up the terrestrial planets in our solar system . In this case , roughly a third of the planet 's mass would be carbon , much of which may be in the form of diamond as a result of the temperatures and pressures in the planet 's interior . Further observations are necessary to confirm the nature of the planet . 
 In February 2016 , it was announced that NASA 's Hubble Space Telescope had detected hydrogen and helium ( and suggestions of hydrogen cyanide ) , but no water vapor , in the atmosphere of 55 Cancri e , the first time the atmosphere of a super @-@ earth exoplanet was analyzed successfully . 
 = = = Volcanism = = = 
 Large surface temperature variations on 55 Cancri e have been attributed to possible volcanic activity releasing large clouds of dust which blanket the planet and block thermal emissions . 
 = Boletus curtisii = 
 Boletus curtisii is a species of fungus in the Boletaceae family . It produces small- to medium @-@ sized fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) with a convex cap up to 9 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 7 in ) wide atop a slender stem that can reach a length of 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) . In young specimens , the cap and stem are bright golden yellow , although the color dulls to brownish when old . Both the stem and cap are slimy or sticky when young . On the underside of the cap are small circular to angular pores . The mushroom is edible , but not appealing . It is found in eastern and southern North America , where it grows in a mycorrhizal association with hardwood and conifer trees . Once classified as a species of Pulveroboletus , the yellow color of B. curtisii is a result of pigments chemically distinct from those responsible for the yellow coloring of Pulveroboletus . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described scientifically by English mycologist Miles Joseph Berkeley in 1853 . The specific epithet curtisii honors Moses Ashley Curtis , who collected the type material from South Carolina . 
 American mycologist William Murrill called it Ceriomyces curtisii in 1909 , but Ceriomyces ( as defined by Murrill in 1909 ) has since been subsumed into Boletus . In his 1947 monograph on boletes of Florida , Rolf Singer transferred the species to the genus Pulveroboletus , and made it the type of his newly described section <unk> , which featured species with a glutinous or sticky stem , and a leather @-@ colored to brownish hymenophore . Species in Pulveroboletus are characterized by the presence of pigments based on the chemical structure of pulvinic acid , a yellow @-@ orange compound found in some species of Boletales . The pigments responsible for the color of B. curtisii are , however , entirely different from the pulvinic acid compounds found in Pulveroboletus species , which invalidates the <unk> rational for generic placement in Pulveroboletus . Otto Kuntze once placed the species in Suillus , but it lacks the partial veil and glandular dots associated with that genus . William Chambers Coker and Alma Beers considered Charles Horton Peck 's Boletus <unk> ( described from New York in 1895 ) as well as Henry Curtis Beardslee 's 1915 B. carolinensis to be the same species as B. curtisii . Coker and Beer 's suggested synonymy , however , is not recognized by the taxonomical authorities MycoBank or Index Fungorum . 
 Wally Snell once considered Boletus carolinensis to be the <unk> species as B. curtisii . He claimed that the former species was then considered distinct from the latter by virtue of an even , instead of reticulate ( netlike ) stem , although they were otherwise quite similar in appearance and spore size and shape . Snell explained that although neither the English nor the Latin text of Berkeley 's original description mentioned a reticulated stem , a later ( 1872 ) description by Berkeley characterized the stem as <unk> . Snell thought that this might have been an error in transcription , or an error in the species account , as herbarium specimens that he had examined lacked this feature . He changed his mind a couple of years later , when he found a small amount of reticulation in material collected by Peck . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is 3 – 9 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 7 in ) wide , and initially obtuse to convex in shape before becoming broadly convex to nearly flat when mature . The cap margin has a narrow band of sterile tissue that in young fruit bodies is curved inwards . The cap surface is somewhat sticky when fresh , smooth , and bright yellow to orange @-@ yellow , sometimes with brownish tints or whitish areas in age . The whitish flesh does not change color when exposed to air , and has no distinctive odor or taste . On the underside of the cap , the pore surface is initially whitish to buff or pale yellow , but becomes duller and darker at maturity , often depressed near the stem in age . Unlike some other boletes , B. curtisii does not turn blue when bruised or injured . The pores are circular to angular , and there are 2 – 3 per mm ; the tubes are 6 – 12 mm deep . Young fruit bodies usually have droplets of golden yellow liquid on the pore surface ( sometimes abundantly so ) , although this is rarely observed in older specimens . 
 The stem is 6 – 12 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) long , 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) thick , and roughly equal in width throughout . Its surface is sticky and glutinous when fresh , somewhat scurfy near the apex ( covered with loose scales ) but smooth below . It is pale yellow to yellow down to the base , which is sheathed with a cottony white mycelium . The stem can be either solid or hollow . The mushroom lacks a partial veil and a ring . The spore print is olive @-@ brown . The mushroom is edible , but not appealing . 
 Spores are 9 @.@ 5 – 17 by 4 – 6 μm , ellipsoid to somewhat ventricose ( inflated on one side ) , smooth , and yellowish . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored , measuring 25 – 32 by 6 – 10 @.@ 8 μm . The cystidia lining the inside of the tubes are shaped like setae ( i.e. , thick walled and thorn @-@ like ) and have dimensions of 43 – 86 by 6 @.@ 5 – 11 μm . All hyphae lack clamp connections . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 <unk> <unk> is somewhat similar in appearance , but is distinguished by a more orange to orange @-@ yellow color , a lack of sliminess , and a distinctly reticulated stalk . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of B. curtisii grow singly , scattered , or in small groups on the ground in coniferous or mixed woods , often with pines . Fruit bodies generally appear from August to November . The geographical distribution of the fungus is limited to eastern and southern North America . In the United States , it occurs from New England south to Florida , and west to Texas . The species was newly reported from Mexico in 2001 . 
 = = Pigments = = 
 The fruit bodies of Boletus curtisii contain a unique series of derivatives of the molecule canthin @-@ 6 @-@ one . Before this discovery , canthin @-@ 6 @-@ one alkaloids were only known from higher plants . Among the canthin @-@ 6 @-@ one derivatives are the pigments that give the mushroom its bright yellow color , including two optically active <unk> named <unk> and 9 @-@ <unk> . Spraying a fruit body with methanol causes the pigments to dissolve and makes the color wash away — a phenomenon unknown in other bolete mushrooms . Additionally , spraying fruit bodies with acetone results in a green @-@ yellow fluorescence visible in daylight . 
 = The New Cup = 
 " The New Cup " is the second episode of the second season of the HBO comedy series Flight of the Conchords , and the series ' fourteenth episode overall . This episode first aired in the United States on January 25 , 2009 . The episode was directed by James Bobin and written by Duncan <unk> . In this episode , Bret and Jemaine 's fortunes unravel after Bret buys a new teacup . With emergency band funds unavailable , Jemaine takes desperate measures in hopes of supplementing their income . 
 " The New Cup " received largely positive reviews from critics , with many noting that both the episode 's plot and songs were particularly strong . According to Nielsen Media Research , on its initial broadcast , " The New Cup " was watched by over 500 @,@ 000 people . Two songs from the episode , " Sugalumps " and " You Don 't Have to be a Prostitute " , received positive critical acclaim and were later included on the band 's second album I Told You I Was Freaky . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bret buys a new cup for $ 2 @.@ 79 so that he and Jemaine no longer have to share one cup . A month later , they find out that their check for the phone bill bounced because their account was short $ 2 @.@ 79 . The phone company charges them a $ 30 overdraft fee , causing the cheque for their gas bill to bounce , and both services are scheduled to be cut off . Immediately after finding this out , their power goes off . Bret ends up selling his guitar to pay the bills , and he performs on stage with Jemaine while playing air guitar and making guitar sounds . Murray writes up his negative opinion of the show in the New Zealand consulate newsletter , giving them " two stars out of 100 " . When Bret asks Murray for some of the emergency band fund , Murray tells him that he invested the money with a Nigerian man named Nigel <unk> who contacted him over the internet . Nigel promised Murray his money back with " a thousand percent interest " and " a share of his family fortunes " . Jemaine and Bret are certain that this is merely a scam . 
 Later on , Bret and Jemaine are confronted by Mel . When she learns they 're having money troubles , she offers to pay them for a massage . Both Bret and Jemaine awkwardly try to give her a minimal contact massage while her husband , Doug , is nearby watching . Jemaine later suggests to Bret that they become male prostitutes , similar to the film Pretty Woman . They then launch into a parody of " My Humps " by The Black Eyed Peas called " Sugalumps " . Trying their idea out , Jemaine approaches women on the street and asks them if they want to pay money to have sex with Bret , who is standing across the street . They then switch roles , but are unable to drum up any business . At night , their apartment is still without power and Jemaine ends up selling his bass guitar . This results in them playing a gig with both members on air guitar performing " Robots " . 
 Jemaine , meanwhile , calls up an old girlfriend and leaves a message on her answering machine asking her if she wants to pay him for the sex they previously had during their relationship . He later ends up meeting his landlord , Eugene , who found his posting for a male prostitute service on the apartment 's bulletin board . Eugene advises him to go to a fancy hotel and try his luck . At a band meeting , Murray introduces Nigel <unk> , whose investment offer has turned out to be legitimate and not a scam , and results in Murray earning more than enough money for the Conchords to pay their bills and buy back their guitars . Jemaine is noticeably absent and Bret tells Murray that he is out trying to prostitute himself . Both Murray and Nigel tell Bret to go and stop him . On his way , Bret sings a song called " You Don 't Have to be A Prostitute " , similar to The Police 's " Roxanne " . 
 He finds Jemaine in a hotel room about to have sex with a " pretty woman " . He starts telling Jemaine that he doesn 't need to do this any more but is interrupted by a knock on the door . Bret explains that he called the police to come and save Jemaine . When they enter , they ask Jemaine and Bret if they are prostitutes , to which Jemaine replies " Yes " and Bret replies " No , no . I 'm just the guy that wears the big condom " . They are both put in jail . Murray comes to bail them out , telling them that he had to spend all of their newly acquired investment return on bail . In the closing scene , a desk @-@ fan knocks over the new cup , causing it to smash on the floor . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The New Cup " was written by writer Duncan <unk> , his second writing credit for the series after season one 's " New Fans . " The episode was directed by series co @-@ creator James Bobin . The episode makes several noticeable references to the film Midnight Cowboy . In the scene wherein Jemaine and Bret ask women if they want to pay money to have sex with them , Bret quotes Enrico " <unk> " Rizzo 's ( Dustin Hoffman ) line " I 'm walking here , I 'm walking . " Earlier in the episode , Jemaine suggested that Bret should wear a cowboy hat to be more attractive to women . In the video for " You Don 't Have to be A Prostitute " , Jemaine wears a leather cowboy waistcoat and cowboy shows , and wears a cowboy hat during the credits . 
 Further cultural references are made throughout the episode . During the band meeting scene , Murray asks the duo if they can think of " any successful musicians with no instruments ? " Bret and Jemaine name off The Mormon Tabernacle Choir , Boyz II Men , Bobby McFerrin , and Luciano Pavarotti before Murray tells them that " there are none . " Near the end of the episode , Murray tells Bret and <unk> about a Nigerian man who is seeking money via email . This is a play on the actual Advance @-@ fee fraud that swept the internet in the latter part of the 20th century . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The first song featured in the episode is " Sugalumps . " This song is a parody of The Black Eyed Peas ' hit " My Humps " which The Yale Herald wrote was based around the premise that " balls are significantly more hilarious than boobs " . In addition , the song was later described as a " New Zealanders version of " Kelis 's " Milkshake . " Bret briefly appears as The Prince of Parties , a reference to a song from the season one episode " New Fans . " Dave sings his portion of the rap in a style very similar to the opening theme of the TV series The Fresh Prince of Bel @-@ Air . The second song featured in the episode is " You Don 't Have to Be a Prostitute . " In an A.V. Club interview , Jemaine explained that the song was inspired by The Police 's hit single " Roxanne " . However , the duo wished to make a " judgmental " version that " makes a lot of assumptions about the profession . Singing a song about prostitution , like ' I 'll stop you from being a prostitute with this song ' " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The New Cup " debuted on HBO on January 25 , 2009 . The episode received over 500 @,@ 000 viewers . This made the episode the third highest rated premium cable episode on Sunday , coming in after an episode of United States of Tara and ranking before an episode of The L Word . 
 Critical reception to the episode was largely positive . The A.V. Club reviewer Genevieve Koski awarded the episode an A- rating and , while noting that the episode was a " rehash " of the season one episode " Bret Gives Up the Dream , wrote , " after getting off to a somewhat shaky start with last week ’ s season premiere , Flight Of The Conchords seems to be settling back into its groove this week , with a couple of memorable songs to match a memorable plot . " IGN reviewer Matt Fowler gave it an 8 @.@ 4 out of 10 rating and noted that Flight of the Conchords is at its best when " the antics remain tightly between [ Bret and Jemaine ] , and this episode sticks with that , " noting that the episode " winds up being rather great . " Noted television critic Alan Sepinwall wrote , " Taken on its own , though , this [ episode ] was perfection , as both comedy and as musical . " Furthermore , he called the episode " magnificently constructed " . 
 Many reviews complimented the episode 's songs . Huffington Post reviewer Mike Moody noted that both the dry humor in the episode and its songs were humorous , writing , " I usually find myself heading to the kitchen when the songs come on -- but I usually glance back at the TV to see if Jemaine is making a funny face – and I rush back to the couch once the last note drops . But I can 't wait to download tonight 's Police @-@ inspired [ ' You Don 't Have to be a Prostitute ' ] jam . " The Guardian named " Sugalumps " one of the top five best season two Flight of the Conchords songs . 
 = Ken Anderson ( wrestler ) = 
 Kenneth " Ken " Anderson ( born March 6 , 1976 ) is an American professional wrestler and actor . He is best known for his time under the ring names Mr. Kennedy and occasionally Ken Kennedy during his time with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) between 2005 and 2009 , and in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) , where he performed under the ring name Mr. Anderson from 2010 to 2016 , and he has become a two @-@ time TNA World Heavyweight Champion in addition to being a member of Immortal and the former vice @-@ president of Aces & Eights . 
 Before working for WWE , Anderson wrestled for numerous promotions , winning various singles and tag team championships . Upon signing with WWE , Anderson was assigned to the company 's developmental territory Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) in Louisville , Kentucky in 2005 . 
 After signing with WWE , Anderson made his debut on the SmackDown ! roster in August 2005 . In September 2006 , he captured his first and only title with the company , the United States Championship , and would hold on to it for a month . The following year at WrestleMania 23 , Anderson won the annual Money in the Bank ladder match , a contract , which guarantees a match for one of WWE 's then three world level championships . He was released from his WWE contract on May 29 , 2009 . He returned to the independent circuit before signing a contract with TNA in 2010 , which he was fired from TNA in 2016 and would return to the independent circuit for a second time . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Anderson , the son of James Alan Holmes and Sheryl Anderson , has one sister , Jennifer Holmes . His father died on April 13 , 2006 from cancer . 
 Anderson graduated from Washington High School in Two Rivers , Wisconsin . During his time there , Anderson excelled at swimming and track & field . He also announced school basketball games and did a radio assignment in his Mass Media class . When doing this , a friend suggested to Anderson to repeat the surnames to make it funnier . That element was eventually used again in his wrestling character when encouraged by Paul Heyman . 
 Before starting a wrestling career , Anderson worked as a security officer at Point Beach Nuclear Power Plant and as a personal trainer . He also served in the United States Army . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 After training under All @-@ Star Championship Wrestling alumni Eric Hammers and Mike " Mercury " Krause , Anderson was invited to perform on a trial basis on the World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment 's secondary television programs , <unk> , Velocity , and Sunday Night Heat , as a jobber several times from 2001 to 2004 . In 2003 , Anderson , alongside CM Punk , also appeared in a segment that aired on WWE 's SmackDown ! program shortly after WrestleMania XIX , as a fan attempting to waylay WWE Champion Brock Lesnar . 
 Anderson also made some appearances on NWA Total Nonstop Action 's secondary television program , Xplosion . The owner of the Total Nonstop Action promotion , Jeff Jarrett , approached him for a contract , but communications broke down . Anderson competed in the 2002 and 2003 Ted Petty Invitational tournaments ( the first one then known as the Sweet Science Sixteen tournament ) but did not advance past the first round in either of them . After he had wrestled for over six years , World Wrestling Entertainment signed Anderson to a developmental contract in February 2005 . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2005 ) = = = = 
 Upon signing with WWE in February 2005 , Anderson was sent to the Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) developmental territory , where he would remain for 6 months . When he arrived , Jim Cornette was in charge of the organization and , according to Anderson , didn 't see potential in his abilities and declined to feature him as more than an occasional bit @-@ player on OVW 's programming . When Cornette departed , his replacement , Paul Heyman , showed immediate interest in Anderson , comparing his qualities to The Rock and Steve Austin . Five weeks later , Anderson was called up to WWE 's main roster to work on Velocity , and he credits Heyman with helping him develop the character he would achieve success with . Before his first SmackDown ! match , a victory over Funaki , he showed himself to be a cocky and arrogant wrestler with not only his mannerisms by taking a microphone and performing his own ring announcement . He referred to himself as " Mr. Anderson " for this match . A few weeks later , to avoid comparisons with the more famous Anderson family ( as well as former Cincinnati Bengals quarterback Ken Anderson ) , he changed his name to " Ken Kennedy " , or " Mr. Kennedy " . This idea was initially suggested by Paul Heyman and was chosen as his name because it is the middle name of WWE Chairman Vince McMahon . 
 = = = = United States Champion ( 2005 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 Kennedy defeated Funaki once again in his SmackDown ! debut on August 25 , 2005 . Kennedy also created an ongoing mini @-@ feud with SmackDown ! ring announcer Tony Chimel , based on Kennedy believing that Chimel 's announcing was not done well enough or with sufficient respect , and therefore performing his own introductions or forcing Chimel to introduce him again . Kennedy 's self @-@ ring introductions before the match became one of his trademarks . While working on both Velocity and SmackDown ! , he was also still working in OVW . Kennedy made his pay @-@ per @-@ view debut at SmackDown ! ' s No Mercy , defeating Hardcore Holly and injuring Holly 's ribs during the match . 
 On the November 11 episode of SmackDown ! , Kennedy faced Eddie Guerrero to compete for a spot on SmackDown ! ' s Survivor Series team . He lost the match when Guerrero tossed him a steel chair and played possum , a move which Guerrero had made famous . The groggy referee turned around and saw Guerrero on the ground with Kennedy holding the chair , and consequently disqualified Kennedy , awarding the place on Team SmackDown ! to Guerrero . This was Kennedy 's first loss . In retaliation , Kennedy struck Guerrero over the head with the chair after the match . This was Guerrero 's final televised match , as he died on November 13 in his hotel room in Minneapolis , Minnesota . In interviews about the incident , Kennedy has stated that he considers this an " unfortunate honor " . 
 In December 2005 , Kennedy participated in WWE 's overseas tour . On the second day in Italy , Kennedy suffered a serious latissimus dorsi tear . Even after surgery in December , Kennedy was still forced out of the ring for nearly six months while he rehabilitated the legitimate injury . He continued to make appearances on SmackDown ! and Velocity throughout January and February and even made an appearance on the January 11 episode of WWE Byte This ! with Todd Grisham to maintain visibility . 
 At the OVW tapings on May 10 , Kennedy returned to in @-@ ring action facing the Heavyweight Champion , CM Punk , in a title match that Kennedy was unable to win . Kennedy made his return to SmackDown ! on the June 9 episode with a victory over Scotty 2 Hotty after using the Kenton Bomb . On the July 14 episode of SmackDown ! , Matt Hardy used a roll @-@ up to defeat Kennedy , ending Kennedy 's streak of never being defeated by pin or submission . On the July 21 episode of SmackDown ! , Batista put out an open challenge to find an opponent for The Great American Bash , as his original opponent , Mark Henry , had been injured . Kennedy accepted the challenge and won the match by disqualification , however , he suffered a severe injury during the match after being thrown headfirst into the steel steps , resulting in an exposed cranium laceration which required twenty stitches to close . He then entered into a short feud with Batista , defeating him by countout in their second match , but losing via pinfall in the third . Kennedy helped The McMahons ( Vince and Shane ) in their feud with D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) , appearing at both SummerSlam and the August 28 episode of Raw to attack DX . 
 On the September 1 episode of SmackDown ! , Kennedy defeated Finlay and Bobby Lashley in a Triple Threat match to win the WWE United States Championship , his first and only Championship reign in WWE . On the September 8 episode of SmackDown ! , Kennedy announced that he wanted to move over to Raw , as SmackDown ! did not interest him anymore because he had already defeated every top performer on the roster . This led to SmackDown ! General Manager Theodore Long making a match between Kennedy and The Undertaker , who Kennedy had never faced , to be held at No Mercy . Kennedy won the match by disqualification . On the October 13 episode of SmackDown ! , Kennedy , now with a win over The Undertaker , again stated his desire to move to the Raw brand . However , Long put him against an opponent who he had never faced — this time Chris Benoit — with Kennedy 's title on the line . Long said that , if Kennedy were to defeat Benoit , he would be given his release and be allowed to go to Raw . Ultimately , Kennedy lost the match and the United States Championship to Benoit after submitting to the Crippler Crossface following a distraction by The Undertaker , which also marked Kennedy 's first loss via submission . 
 In November 2006 , Kennedy joined forces with Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) in matches against The Brothers of Destruction ( Undertaker and Kane ) in various combinations . On a November episode of SmackDown ! , Kennedy and MVP lost to the Brothers of Destruction three times . After first getting counted out , Theodore Long restarted the match with no countouts . When they disqualified themselves following a low blow by Kennedy , Long restarted the match again with no countouts and no disqualifications . Kennedy and MVP continued to feud with the brothers , with MVP feuding with Kane while Kennedy challenged the Undertaker to a match at Survivor Series , which was later announced as a First Blood match . Kennedy won the match after MVP turned on him and aimed for his head with a steel chair , but missed and hit the Undertaker instead , leaving him bleeding . After the match , the Undertaker attacked Kennedy , forcing him to bleed . At Armageddon , Kennedy and the Undertaker met in a final match ; they were scheduled in a Last Ride match . In the match , the Undertaker defeated Kennedy . 
 After a brief hiatus , Kennedy returned to SmackDown ! on January 5 and defeated Chris Benoit in a " Beat the Clock " match , with the overall prize being a shot at Batista 's World Heavyweight Championship at the Royal Rumble . After he prevented The Undertaker from beating his time , Kennedy 's time of 5 : 07 ended up being the fastest . At the Royal Rumble , he lost the match , as well as a subsequent rematch . From there , Kennedy began a short feud with ECW World Champion Bobby Lashley , leading to a match at No Way Out for the title which Kennedy won by disqualification . Kennedy challenged Lashley unsuccessfully on ECW and SmackDown ! as well . 
 = = = = Mr. Money in the Bank ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 Kennedy earned a spot in the 2007 Money in the Bank ladder match by defeating Sabu in an Extreme Rules match in a February episode of ECW on Sci Fi . At WrestleMania 23 , Kennedy won the Money in the Bank ladder match , giving him the right to challenge any World Champion in WWE at any date up until WrestleMania XXIV . Kennedy announced on the April 30 episode of Raw that he would be cashing in his Money in the Bank championship opportunity at WrestleMania 24 . On the May 7 episode of Raw , Kennedy , however , lost his Money in the Bank opportunity to Edge , losing mere moments after a blow to the head from a monitor before the match began . Because of the injury Kennedy sustained during his match with Edge , it was revealed that his right triceps muscle tore off the bone and he would be out for a minimum of five to seven months . The injury , however , was not as serious , as the triceps tendon did not tear off the bone but was , in fact , a massive hematoma . 
 On the June 11 episode of Raw , Kennedy was drafted from SmackDown ! to Raw as part of the WWE Draft . On the August 20 episode of Raw , Carlito hosted the interview segment Carlito 's Cabana . During the segment Carlito challenged his special guest , Umaga for his Intercontinental Championship at SummerSlam , and Kennedy also demanded a shot at the title . Raw General Manager William Regal , scheduled a match between Kennedy and Carlito , in which the winner would receive an opportunity to face off against Umaga at SummerSlam . After the match ended in a draw , Regal booked a Triple Threat match at SummerSlam between the three men for the Intercontinental Championship ; at the event , Umaga retained the title . On the September 10 episode of Raw , Mr. McMahon revealed that Kennedy had , in storyline , been suspended for " impersonating a McMahon " . This angle was written because Kennedy being named one of the eleven superstars implicated in a steroid scandal and therefore suspended for thirty days in accordance with WWE 's Wellness Policy . 
 After his suspension , Kennedy returned to television on the October 1 episode of Raw , facing John Cena in the main event . At No Mercy in October , Kennedy took part of a six @-@ man tag team match alongside then World Tag Team Champions Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch defeating then @-@ Intercontinental Champion Jeff Hardy and Paul London and Brian Kendrick . For several weeks , Kennedy began a feud with Jeff Hardy , which consisted of the two facing off in a singles match and numerous tag team matches , most of which Hardy won . At Cyber Sunday , Kennedy and Hardy were two of the eligible wrestlers that could earn a WWE Championship match for that evening , pending the fan 's votes . Neither man won the opportunity , as Shawn Michaels won the vote and earned a shot at the title . Although neither won the title shot , Kennedy defeated Hardy in a scheduled match made by William Regal . 
 Kennedy next entered a feud with Shawn Michaels on the night after Survivor Series . Kennedy claimed that it was time for Michaels to move on and let the younger , talented superstars climb the ladder to success . At Armageddon , Michaels defeated Kennedy after he was able to hit Kennedy with Sweet Chin Music . On the December 31 episode of Raw , Kennedy and Michaels had a rematch where Kennedy pinned Michaels following his new finishing move , the Mic Check . In subsequent rematches , the two traded wins over each other . At the Royal Rumble , Kennedy eliminated Michaels from the Royal Rumble match , ending the rivalry between the two . 
 After several months of minor feuds and short storylines , Kennedy was not seen for weeks after WrestleMania XXIV , because he was filming a role for the new film Behind Enemy Lines : Colombia . Kennedy returned to Raw on April 28 , as he confronted and brawled with General Manager and newly crowned King of the Ring William Regal , turning into a face character in the process . On the May 18 episode of Raw , Kennedy defeated Regal in a " Loser Gets Fired match " , thereby opening up the General Manager spot on the Raw brand . 
 = = = = Brand switches and departure ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 During the sixth annual WWE Draft on June 23 , 2008 on Raw , Kennedy was drafted from Raw back to the SmackDown brand . On August 4 , he dislocated his shoulder in a match against Shelton Benjamin at a house show , sidelining him from active competition . Kennedy made his return to WWE television , in a non @-@ wrestling capacity , on the November 24 episode of Raw , while promoting his film Behind Enemy Lines : Colombia , and also made an appearance on SmackDown on the November 28 episode . 
 On April 15 , 2009 , Mr. Kennedy returned to the Raw brand as Raw 's first pick of the 2009 Supplemental Draft . On May 7 , Kennedy returned to in @-@ ring action at Florida Championship Wrestling , WWE 's developmental territory , to gain match fitness before returning to Raw . On the May 11 , 2009 episode of Raw , WWE aired a video package to promote Kennedy 's return . He made his official Raw return on May 25 , competing in a 10 @-@ man tag team match , which his team won . 
 Kennedy was released from his WWE contract on May 29 , 2009 , just four days after his return . In a March 2010 interview with <unk> , Ken Anderson explained his release with fellow wrestler Randy Orton complaining to WWE management that Anderson was reckless in the ring , citing a botched backdrop that caused Orton to land on his head and neck instead of on his back . Orton argued that this could potentially end his career . According to Anderson , Randy Orton also persuaded his friend and fellow wrestler John Cena to complain to Vince McMahon about Anderson 's in ring performance , which prompted McMahon to release Kennedy from his contract . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = 
 In an interview with Pro Wrestling Report on 540 ESPN Radio in Milwaukee , Anderson expressed an interest in joining TNA . Anderson appeared at World Wrestling Council 's 2009 Anniversary , where he wrestled , and lost to , former WWE affiliate Eddie Fatu . On Friday October 2 , he won the <unk> Heavyweight Championship in the Nu @-@ Wrestling Evolution promotion , when he defeated Chuck Palumbo and Tiny Iron in Malta . On November 1 , 2009 , Anderson defeated <unk> to become the CRW Heavyweight Champion , before the title was vacated . He then competed at the Hulkamania : Let The Battle Begin tour of Australia , again working with Fatu in what would be Fatu 's final matches before his unexpected death on December 4 , 2009 . Anderson wrestled against Armando Estrada in his retirement match at Great Lakes Championship Wrestling 's Blizzard Brawl 5 . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling = = = 
 = = = = Feud with Kurt Angle ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 In January 2010 , Anderson signed a one @-@ year deal with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . He would make his debut to the company at the Genesis pay @-@ per @-@ view on January 17 , 2010 , working under the ring name Mr. Anderson . As a mystery opponent , he wrestled Abyss , whom he pinned after using brass knuckles , establishing himself as a heel in the process . Anderson made his Impact ! debut on January 21 , 2010 . He would deliver a promo explaining why he came to TNA and disparaging Abyss before he was attacked by Abyss . 
 At Against All Odds , Anderson defeated Kurt Angle and Abyss to advance to the finals of the 8 Card Stud Tournament , where he lost to D 'Angelo Dinero . On the following edition of Impact ! , Angle , whom Anderson had defeated by using his dog tags against him , promised to make him suffer for disrespecting U.S. soldiers , which led to Anderson coming out and laying him out by hitting him with a mic , effectively starting a feud between the two . At Destination X , Angle defeated Anderson by submission in a rematch . Anderson and Angle were booked in a rubber match inside a steel cage at Lockdown . On the April 5 edition of Impact ! , Anderson defeated Angle in a ladder match to win possession of the key to the cage door . At Lockdown , Angle defeated Anderson in a steel cage match . At Sacrifice , Anderson was defeated by Jeff Hardy . After the match , Anderson offered to shake Hardy 's hand , but the offer was declined . On the following edition of Impact ! , Anderson helped Hardy defeat Sting in the main event of the show . After the match , both Anderson and Hardy were attacked by Sting . This would turn Anderson face as a result of this . 
 At Slammiversary VIII , Anderson and Hardy , the team now known as the Enigmatic Assholes , defeated Beer Money , Inc . ( Robert Roode and James Storm ) in a tag team match . At Victory Road , Anderson and Hardy attempted to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship from Rob Van Dam in a four @-@ way match , also involving Abyss , but were unsuccessful . On the following edition of Impact ! , Anderson saved former rival D 'Angelo Dinero from Matt Morgan . On the July 22 edition of Impact ! , Anderson defeated Morgan , but was after the match assaulted and bloodied by him . On the August 19 edition of Impact ! , the TNA World Heavyweight Championship was vacated and Anderson was entered into an eight @-@ man tournament for the title , defeating Jay Lethal in his first round match . At the semifinals at No Surrender , Anderson defeated D 'Angelo Dinero to advance to the finals at Bound for Glory . On September 21 , TNA President Dixie Carter announced that Anderson had signed a new long term contract with the company . 
 = = = = TNA World Heavyweight Champion and Immortal ( 2011 – 2012 ) = = = = 
 At Bound for Glory , Anderson failed in his attempt to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship when Jeff Hardy , with Hulk Hogan , and Eric Bischoff 's assistance , pinned him in a three @-@ way match ( which also included Kurt Angle ) to win the title , ending his partnership with Hardy in the process . On the October 21 edition of Impact ! , Anderson was given an opportunity to earn a shot at Hardy and the TNA World Heavyweight Championship at Turning Point ; all he had to do was survive an Ultimate X match with Fortune member Kazarian . Kazarian managed to win the match , following interference from his stable mates , but Anderson persevered and thus earned himself a World Heavyweight title shot against Hardy , who attacked him after the match . However , during the attack , Anderson suffered a legitimate concussion , which would sideline him for a few weeks and prevented him from taking part in the title match . 
 The vacant spot in the title match ended up going to Matt Morgan , who turned face during Anderson 's time away from TNA , standing up for him against Hardy 's , Hogan 's , and Bischoff 's group Immortal as an advocate for the effects of concussions . Anderson returned on the December 2 edition of Impact ! , chasing Hardy and Fortune out of the ring , before being announced as the special guest referee for the World Heavyweight title match between Hardy and Morgan at Final Resolution . Anderson was bloodied and taken out of the match by Eric Bischoff , who managed to help Hardy retain the title , after a three count made by a replacement referee . On January 9 , 2011 , at Genesis , Anderson defeated Matt Morgan in a number one contender 's match . Immediately afterwards , Eric Bischoff came out , and announced that Anderson would get his title match against Jeff Hardy straight away . After interference from Morgan , Mick Foley , Matt Hardy , Rob Van Dam , and Bischoff , Anderson defeated Hardy to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship for the first time . On the February 3 edition of Impact ! , Anderson defeated Hardy in a rematch for the title , after Fortune turned on Immortal as they were interfering in the match . On February 13 at Against All Odds , Anderson lost the TNA World Heavyweight Championship back to Hardy in a ladder match . On the February 24 edition of Impact ! , Anderson defeated Kurt Angle and Rob Van Dam in a three – way match to earn a rematch for the World Heavyweight Championship . Anderson was looking to get his title match on the following edition of Impact ! , but it was instead given to the returning Sting , who defeated Hardy to become the new TNA World Heavyweight Champion . On the March 10 edition of Impact ! , Anderson attacked Sting backstage , after claiming that he had been screwed out of his title match . In the main event of the evening , Anderson teamed with rival Jeff Hardy in a tag team match against Rob Van Dam and Sting . During the match , Anderson took on more of a role as a tweener by turning on Hardy , before being pinned by Van Dam , following an attack from Sting . On March 13 at Victory Road , Anderson wrestled Rob Van Dam to a double countout in another number one contender 's match . On the April 7 edition of Impact ! , Anderson feigned joining Immortal , before turning on them and announcing his intention of going after Hulk Hogan next . On April 17 at Lockdown , Anderson failed in his attempt to regain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship from Sting in a three – way steel cage match , which also included Rob Van Dam . On the May 12 edition of Impact ! , Anderson defeated 24 other men in a battle royal to earn a shot at the TNA World Heavyweight Championship at Slammiversary IX . In the weeks leading to Slammiversary , Anderson tried to get under Sting 's skin by dressing up like he did in the early ' 90 's during his " surfer " gimmick , attacking Disco Inferno during his own " Scorpion <unk> " interview segment , and wrestling Eric Young , who was dressed as The Great Muta . 
 On June 12 at Slammiversary IX , Anderson defeated Sting after interference from Eric Bischoff , a low blow , and a Mic Check to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship for the second time , turning heel in the process once again . On June 18 , Anderson represented TNA at Mexican promotion Asistencia Asesoría y Administración 's ( AAA ) Triplemanía XIX pay @-@ per @-@ view , where he and Abyss unsuccessfully challenged Extreme Tiger and Jack Evans for the AAA World Tag Team Championship in a steel cage match . At the tapings of the July 7 edition of Impact Wrestling , Immortal forced Anderson to choose whether he was with them or against them . In the main event of the evening , Anderson turned on Kurt Angle and joined Immortal . On July 11 at the tapings of the July 14 edition of Impact Wrestling , Anderson lost the TNA World Heavyweight Championship back to Sting . On the July 28 edition of Impact Wrestling , Anderson faced Kurt Angle in a steel cage match , but was defeated following a distraction from fellow Immortal member Bully Ray . The tension between the two stablemates eventually led to a match on August 7 at Hardcore Justice , where Ray defeated Anderson with a low blow . On the following edition of Impact Wrestling , the rest of Immortal turned on Anderson and kicked him out of the group . Anderson returned on the August 25 edition of Impact Wrestling , attacking his former stablemates . On the September 8 edition of Impact Wrestling , Anderson challenged Kurt Angle for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , but the match ended in a disqualification following interference from Immortal . On September 11 at No Surrender , Anderson again failed to capture the title in a three @-@ way match , which also included Sting . Anderson and Bully Ray settled their grudge on October 16 at Bound for Glory , where Anderson won a Falls Count Anywhere match . On November 13 at Turning Point , Anderson and Abyss defeated Ray and Scott Steiner in a tag team match , ending his year long storyline with Immortal . 
 = = = = Aces & Eights ( 2012 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 After a four @-@ month absence , Anderson returned to TNA on the March 8 , 2012 , episode of Impact Wrestling , aligning himself with A.J. Styles in his feud with Christopher Daniels and Kazarian . The following week , Anderson defeated Daniels in his return match . On March 18 at Victory Road , Anderson and Styles defeated Daniels and Kazarian in a tag team match . The rivalry continued on April 15 at Lockdown , where the two duos were on opposing teams in the annual Lethal Lockdown match . Anderson 's and Styles ' team , led by Garett Bischoff , ended up defeating Daniels ' and Kazarian 's team , led by Eric Bischoff . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Anderson and Jeff Hardy were defeated by Rob Van Dam in a three @-@ way number one contender 's match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . During the first " Open Fight Night " the following week , Anderson teamed up with Hardy to unsuccessfully challenge Magnus and Samoa Joe for the TNA World Tag Team Championship . On May 13 at Sacrifice , Anderson defeated Hardy in a singles match . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Hardy defeated Anderson in a rematch . On June 10 at Slammiversary , Anderson defeated Hardy and Rob Van Dam in a three @-@ way match to become the number one contender to the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Anderson unsuccessfully challenged Bobby Roode for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . As a result , he was entered into the 2012 Bound for Glory Series to try to earn another shot at the title . Anderson 's participation in the tournament ended on the August 23 episode of Impact Wrestling . Despite a win over Bully Ray , he finished outside a spot in the semifinals of the tournament . On the September 27 episode of Impact Wrestling , Anderson received a shot at the vacant TNA Television Championship , but was defeated by Samoa Joe after being choked out with the Coquina Clutch . 
 After not being seen for several weeks , Anderson returned to Impact Wrestling on December 27 , where he was offered a position in the villainous Aces & Eights stable . The following week , Anderson accepted Aces & Eights offer , turning heel again in the process . On the January 10 episode of Impact Wrestling , Anderson explained his joining by noting how nobody helped him when he was attacked by the Aces & Eights back in October . Anderson wrestled his return match on three days later at Genesis , defeating Samoa Joe after interference from Aces & Eights member Mike Knox . On March 10 at Lockdown , Aces & Eights , consisting of Anderson , Devon , DOC , Garett Bischoff , and Mike Knox were defeated by Team TNA , consisting of Eric Young , James Storm , Magnus , Samoa Joe , and Sting in a Lethal Lockdown match . On June 2 at Slammiversary XI , Anderson , Garett Bischoff , and Wes Brisco were defeated by Jeff Hardy , Magnus , and Samoa Joe in a six @-@ man tag team match . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Anderson began campaigning to be the new Vice President of the Aces & Eights . The following week , Anderson defeated his fellow Aces & Eights stablemates in a battle royal to qualify for the 2013 Bound for Glory Series . Anderson went on to defeat Joseph Park in his first BFG series match via pinfall on the June 20 episode of Impact Wrestling , to earn seven points in the tournament . On the July 11 episode of Impact Wrestling , Anderson was voted over DOC by his fellow Aces & Eights members to become the Vice President of the stable . 
 In August , tension began to be teased between Anderson and Aces & Eights President Bully Ray , with Anderson disagreeing with Ray 's decisions . Anderson 's participation in the Bound for Glory series ended on the September 5 episode of Impact Wrestling , when he was eliminated from a twenty @-@ point battle royal by Samoa Joe . Later that night , Anderson turned face after he cost Bully Ray his no disqualification match with Sting , attacked him afterwards , and announced himself as his World Heavyweight Championship opponent at No Surrender . The following week , Anderson unsuccessfully challenged Ray for the World Heavyweight Championship in a Last Man Standing match . Afterwards , as Anderson was being stretchered away , Ray attacked him and <unk> him onto the stage . He was removed from TNA to negotiate a new contract , though , on September 23 , 2013 , his profile was removed . On the October 24th edition of Impact Wrestling , Anderson returned and saved A.J. Styles from an attack from Bully Ray . On the November 7 edition of Impact , Anderson was attacked by Aces and Eights after being led to believe the group had disbanded . On the November 14 Impact tapings , Anderson received a match against Bully for the Impact Wrestling : Turning Point episode with the <unk> that if Ray loses , the Aces are gone , but if Anderson loses , he must leave . At Turning Point on November 21 , Anderson successfully defeated Bully Ray after an overshot with a hammer from Brooke , thus forcing Aces and Eights to disband . 
 = = = = Final feuds and departure ( 2014 – 2016 ) = = = = 
 On February 20 , 2014 , Anderson and Christy Hemme were attacked backstage by Samuel Shaw during an interview , starting a feud . On February 27 Impact Wrestling , Shaw would confront Hemme in an attempt to explain himself . After failing and being interrupted by Anderson , Shaw would solidify himself as a heel after using Hemme as a shield to fend off Mr. Anderson who was attempting to exact revenge for the previous week . Shaw would use his kata gatame finishing move to choke out Anderson . On the March 6th edition of Impact Wrestling , Samuel Shaw faced off against Eric Young with Anderson replacing Hemme as the ring announcer for the match . Anderson 's presence at ringside ultimately cost Shaw the match as he would be disqualified due to Anderson 's distraction . After the match , Shaw would choke out Anderson like last week then claim he was " going to claim what was rightfully his , " heading for the backstage area where Hemme had been watching via a ring monitor . At Lockdown on March 9 , Shaw defeated Anderson after escaping the cage following the use of Christy Hemme as a distraction by pulling Hemme through the camera cut @-@ out of the steel cage , Anderson successfully rescued Hemme but was caught in Shaw 's kata gatame . The previously unconscious referee only saw Samuel Shaw escape the cage thus declaring him the winner . Shaw lost a rematch against Anderson on the following Impact Wrestling , bringing a mannequin dressed as Christy Hemme to the ring . On April 3 episode of Impact Wrestling , Shaw defeated Anderson in a <unk> match after rendering him unconscious following two kata gatame attempts . On TNA Sacrifice , Anderson defeated Shaw in a Committed match , whereby he put Shaw into a van heading for a psychiatric facility for intervention . 
 On May 1 , 2014 , Anderson attacked James Storm after Storm lost to Willow . On May 22 , Anderson challenged Storm to a drinking contest , then went on to attack him outside the bar . On June 5 episode of Impact , Anderson impersonated Storm , with Storm 's retro entrance music , then attacked Storm after he refused to grant him a match . After Anderson lost the brawl , the match was set at Slammiversary . Following Slammiversary , Anderson formed a tag team with Gunner but tensions already rose between them because of Gunner 's relationship to Samuel Shaw , whom Gunner had been helping through psychiatric counselling . Anderson and Gunner would continue to team together with Shaw at their side who would try to help them in their matches but Anderson refused because of his lack of trust . On the August 14th edition of Impact , Anderson and Shaw finally came to punches during a match between Anderson and Gunner . On September 17 , 2014 , Mr. Anderson came to the aid of fellow former Army Sergeant and amputee wrestler Chris Melendez on his debut from a post @-@ match attack by Kenny King . On November 20 , 2014 tapings , Mr. Anderson came to the aid Chris Melendez again from a post @-@ match attack , this time by MVP . 
 Anderson returned to TNA on the February 20 episode of Impact Wrestling , confronting Ethan Carter III and Tyrus for what they were doing to Rockstar Spud and <unk> , then attacking Tyrus and giving Tyrus a haircut . Several months after this , he started a feud against Bram . During October and November ( taped in July ) , Anderson participated in the TNA World Title Series for the vacant TNA World Heavyweight Championship . However , When he ended fourth of his block by failing to defeat against Ethan Carter III , Bobby Lashley and Austin <unk> he failed to advance into the finals of the tournament . 
 At an Insane Championship Wrestling show in March , Anderson revealed that he was no longer under contract with TNA during an in @-@ ring promo . It was later reported that Anderson was fired from TNA for failing an on @-@ the @-@ spot drug test at a recent Impact Wrestling taping . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Anderson appeared in a feature film Fighting The Still Life , directed by Matt Burns , who wrestled under the name Sick Nick Mondo . In late March 2008 , Anderson began shooting a role for an action film in Puerto Rico . The film , titled Behind Enemy Lines : Colombia , was released direct @-@ to @-@ DVD / Blu @-@ ray Disc on January 6 , 2009 to the sequel of the original 2001 film , Behind Enemy Lines . Anderson booked the role through WWE . 
 On July 24 , 2007 , Anderson appeared on Tom Green Live ! in character . He also appeared on Slime Across the UK & Ireland in character on August 15 . During the week of November 5 , he appeared as Mr. Kennedy on five episodes of Family Feud with several other WWE superstars . 
 Anderson , along with Mickie James and Josh Mathews , represented WWE at the 2008 Republican National Convention in an effort to persuade fans to register to vote in the 2008 US Presidential election . 
 During the Pittsburgh Penguins ' 2009 Stanley Cup championship run , when National Hockey League winger Tyler Kennedy scored a goal , the Mellon Arena public address team would announce his family name twice , and the local crowd would chant it in a way reminiscent of Anderson 's wrestling persona . 
 After his departure from WWE , Anderson created a video blog on YouTube about his life during his 90 @-@ day " No <unk> " clause . 
 In November 2010 , Anderson was again a contestant on Family Feud , this time as Mr. Anderson , teaming with Jay Lethal , Matt Morgan , Mick Foley and Rob Van Dam against Angelina Love , Christy Hemme , Lacey Von Erich , Tara and Velvet Sky . 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 Behind Enemy Lines : Colombia ( 2009 ) – as Master Chief Petty Officer Carter Holt 
 Dogs Lie ( 2011 ) – as Yuri 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On August 18 , 2007 , Anderson gave an interview in which he admitted to using steroids when he was performing on the independent wrestling scene , stating that he had quit using them in November 2005 to comply with WWE 's Talent Wellness Program , implying that his job in the promotion was worth more than extra muscle mass . Twelve days later , on August 30 , his statements were shown to be incorrect when he , along with nine other WWE wrestlers , were named in a Sports Illustrated article as having received performance @-@ enhancing drugs in direct non @-@ compliance with the WWE Talent Wellness Program . Anderson received anastrozole , somatropin , and testosterone between October 2006 and February 2007 . He later claimed that the steroids were for a legitimate medical reason , saying that they were from when he tore his latissimus dorsi muscle in 2005 . . 
 Anderson was previously in a relationship with fellow professional wrestler Jessica <unk> . He married girlfriend Shawn <unk> on January 9 , 2008 . They have a son named Pearce and a daughter named Prescott , twins born on January 13 , 2014 . 
 Anderson has a red and black tattoo on his upper back , which took nearly eight hours to complete . He also has a clown tattoo on his biceps , which he got at age 19 because he was voted " class clown " in high school , but says it did not turn out the way he wanted it to and that he plans to get it replaced with another clown that more closely matches what he originally requested . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Green Bay Plunge / Lambeau Leap ( Diving rolling fireman 's carry slam ) – 2005 – 2008 , 2014 – present 
 Kenton Bomb ( WWE / Independent circuit ) Senton bomb ( TNA ) – 2006 – 2007 , 2010 – present 
 Mic Check ( Leg hook Reverse STO ) – 2007 – present 
 Signature moves 
 Arm trap swinging neckbreaker 
 <unk> 
 Feint roundhouse kick transitioned into an enzuigiri 
 Knee lift 
 Rolling fireman 's carry slam 
 Turnbuckle powerbomb 
 Nicknames 
 " Kamikaze " 
 " The Head Asshole in Charge " 
 " Mr. Money in the Bank " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Pour Some Sugar on Me " by Def Leppard ( Independent circuit ) 
 " Turn Up the Trouble " by Ted Nigro and Jim Johnston ( WWE ; September 1 , 2005 – February 25 , 2008 ) 
 " Turn Up the Trouble " ( Remix ) by Airbourne ( WWE ; March 3 , 2008 – May 25 , 2009 ) 
 " Feedback " by Dale Oliver ( TNA ; January 10 , 2010 – January 3 , 2013 , September 12 , 2013 – January 6 , 2016 ) 
 " Immortals " by Dale Oliver ( TNA ; July 7 , 2011 – July 28 , 2011 ; used as a member of Immortal ) 
 " Deadman 's Hand " ( Instrumental ) by Dale Oliver ( TNA ; January 3 , 2013 – September 12 , 2013 ; used as a member of Aces & Eights ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 All @-@ Star Championship Wrestling 
 ACW Heavyweight Championship ( 3 times ) 
 ACW Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) – with Mike Mercury ( 1 ) , Eric Hammers ( 1 ) , and Adrian Serrano ( 1 ) 
 ACW Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 ACW Hall of Fame ( Class of 2009 ) 
 Great Lakes Championship Wrestling 
 <unk> Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Mid American Wrestling 
 MAW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA Midwest 
 NWA Midwest Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Nu @-@ Wrestling Evolution / New Wrestling Entertainment 
 <unk> World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 7 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the year in the PWI 500 in 2011 
 Pro Wrestling Pride 
 <unk> Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling 
 TNA World Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 Ultimate Pro Championship Wrestling 
 <unk> Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Big Daddy Loker 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE United States Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Money in the Bank ( 2007 ) 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Best Gimmick ( 2005 ) 
 Worst Gimmick ( 2013 ) Aces & Eights 
 Xtreme Intense Championship Wrestling 
 XICW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Joey Padgett 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Fantastic Adventures = 
 Fantastic Adventures was an American pulp fantasy and science fiction magazine , published from 1939 to 1953 by Ziff @-@ Davis . It was initially edited by Ray Palmer , who was also the editor of Amazing Stories , Ziff @-@ Davis 's other science fiction title . The first nine issues were in bedsheet format , but in June 1940 it switched to a standard pulp size . It was almost cancelled at the end of 1940 , but the October 1940 issue had unexpectedly good sales , helped by a strong cover by J. Allen St. John for Robert Moore Williams ' Jongor of Lost Land . By May 1941 the magazine was on a regular monthly schedule . Historians of science fiction consider that Palmer was unable to maintain a consistently high standard of fiction , but Fantastic Adventures soon developed a reputation for light @-@ hearted and whimsical stories . Much of the material was written by a small group of writers under both their own names and house names . The cover art , like those of many other pulps of the era , focused on beautiful women in melodramatic action scenes . One regular cover artist was H.W. McCauley , whose glamorous " <unk> " covers were popular with the readers , though the emphasis on depictions of attractive and often partly clothed women did draw some objections from readers . 
 In 1949 Palmer left Ziff @-@ Davis and was replaced by Howard Browne , who was knowledgeable and enthusiastic about fantasy fiction . Browne briefly managed to improve the quality of the fiction in Fantastic Adventures , and the period around 1951 has been described as the magazine 's heyday . Browne lost interest when his plan to take Amazing Stories upmarket collapsed , however , and the magazine fell back into predictability . In 1952 , Ziff @-@ Davis launched another fantasy magazine , titled Fantastic , in a digest format ; it was successful , and within a few months the decision was taken to end Fantastic Adventures in favor of Fantastic . The March 1953 issue of Fantastic Adventures was the last . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Although science fiction ( sf ) had been published before the 1920s , it did not begin to coalesce into a separately marketed genre until the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . By the end of the 1930s the field was undergoing its first boom . Gernsback lost control of Amazing Stories in 1929 ; it was sold to Teck Publications , and then in 1938 it was acquired by Ziff @-@ Davis . The following year Ziff @-@ Davis launched Fantastic Adventures as a companion to Amazing ; the first issue was dated May 1939 , and the editor of Amazing , Ray Palmer , took on responsibility for the new magazine as well . 
 Fantastic Adventures was initially published in bedsheet format , the same size as the early sf magazines such as Amazing , perhaps in order to attract fans who were nostalgic for the larger format . It started as a bimonthly , but in January 1940 began a monthly schedule . Sales were weaker than for Amazing , however , and with the June issue the schedule reverted to bimonthly again . The size was also reduced to a standard pulp format , since that was cheaper to produce . Sales did not improve , and Ziff @-@ Davis planned to make the October issue the last one . That issue carried Robert Moore Williams ' Jongor of Lost Land , and had an attractive cover by J. Allen St. John ; the combination proved to be so popular that October sales were twice the August figures . This convinced Ziff @-@ Davis that the magazine was viable , and it was restarted in January 1941 — as a bimonthly at first , but switching to monthly again in May of that year . 
 Howard Browne took over as editor of both Amazing Stories and Fantastic Adventures in 1950 . Browne preferred fantasy to science fiction , and enjoyed editing Fantastic Adventures , but when his plans for taking Amazing upmarket were derailed by the Korean War , he lost interest in both magazines for a while . He let William Hamling take responsibility for both titles , and the quality declined . At the end of 1950 Ziff @-@ Davis moved its offices from Chicago to New York ; Browne relocated to New York , but Hamling decided to stay in Chicago , so Browne became more involved once again , and sf historians such as Brian Stableford and Mike Ashley consider the result to have been a definite improvement in quality . Browne 's interest in fantasy led him to start a new digest @-@ sized magazine Fantastic in the summer of 1952 ; it was an immediate success , and led Ziff @-@ Davis to convert Amazing Stories to digest format as well . The move away from the pulp format to digests was well under way in the early 1950s , and with Fantastic 's success there was little reason to keep Fantastic Adventures going . It was merged with Fantastic ; the last issue was dated March 1953 , and the May – June issue of Fantastic added a mention of Fantastic Adventures to the masthead , though this disappeared with the following issue . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 = = = Palmer = = = 
 Palmer 's goal for Fantastic Adventures was to create a magazine which published fantasy fiction but was the literary equal of the quality magazines — the " slicks " , such as The Saturday Evening Post . Although mixing science fiction with fantasy was not popular with sf fans of the era , Palmer consciously promoted the magazine as containing the best of both worlds : the slogan on the cover read " The Best in Science Fiction " , but Palmer also wrote blurbs in Amazing Stories for Fantastic Adventures in which he extolled the value to a reader of getting both genres in a single magazine . Fantastic Adventures ' competition included Unknown , which had been launched just a couple of months earlier , in March 1939 , and Weird Tales , which was first published in 1923 ; but instead of attempting to emulate either one , Fantastic Adventures focused on adventure stories in the style of Edgar Rice Burroughs . Palmer probably acquired some fantasy @-@ oriented material that had been submitted to Amazing Stories , which gave him an immediate stream of submissions to work with . However , according to Ashley the first issue was quite weak : the cover story was " The Invisible <unk> " by Eando Binder , and other contributors included Harl Vincent , Ross Rocklynne and A. Hyatt Verrill . Features included a quiz , an author profile , and a comic strip , titled " Ray Holmes , Scientific Detective " ; the reader was supposed to solve the mystery based on the clues given in the strip . It was a failure and disappeared after the first issue . The back cover , " The Man from Mars " , by Frank R. Paul , was more successful , and illustrated back covers became a regular feature of the magazine . 
 The next issue contained " The Scientists ' Revolt " , by Edgar Rice Burroughs , a name guaranteed to help sales . Ashley comments that the story was unimpressive ; it had been written as a palace intrigue set in contemporary Europe , but Burroughs had been unable to find a buyer . Palmer eventually acquired it , and rewrote it , setting it in the future . Despite the weakness of the lead story , the second issue was a marked improvement over the first , with well @-@ received stories by Nelson S. Bond and John Russell Fearn ( as " Thornton Ayre " ) . Burroughs returned to Fantastic Adventures in 1941 , with a series of novelettes in his Carson of Venus series ; there were four in all between March 1941 and March 1942 , each with cover art by J. Allen St. John , and the result was a significant boost to Fantastic Adventures ' circulation . 
 A majority of the stories in Fantastic Adventures came from a small group of writers who often wrote under house names . The main members of the group were William P. McGivern , David Wright O 'Brien , Don Wilcox , Chester S. Geier , Rog Phillips , Leroy Yerxa , Robert Moore Williams , Robert Bloch and Berkeley Livingston . Most of this material was of little lasting value , in Ashley 's opinion , but Palmer was often able to get good stories from outside this group : August Derleth sold several stories to Palmer , for example . Ray Bradbury also sold a story to Fantastic Adventures — " Tomorrow and Tomorrow " , which appeared in 1947 , was his only appearance in the magazine , but Ashley regards it as " among the best stories [ Fantastic Adventures ] published in the 1940s " . An early contributor was Nelson S. Bond , whose story " The Judging of the Priestess " appeared in the April 1940 issue . This was the second in a highly regarded series of three stories about a priestess in the future , after civilization has collapsed ; the first and third in the series appeared in Amazing Stories and Astounding Stories respectively . Bond also wrote a humorous short story called " The Amazing Invention of Wilberforce Weems " , which appeared in the September 1939 issue and described the consequences of a potion that allowed the instant absorption of knowledge from any book . Palmer encouraged his stable of writers to follow up with more whimsical ideas , and the resulting offbeat stories gave Fantastic Adventures a reputation for light @-@ hearted and entertaining fantasy . These stories often had absurd names ; early examples include " The Quandary of <unk> <unk> " , " Sidney , the <unk> Robot " ( both by McGivern ) , and " The Weird Doom of Floyd <unk> " , by Robert Bloch — one of his series of stories about Lefty Feep , almost all of which appeared in Fantastic Adventures between 1942 and 1945 . Robert Moore Williams contributed two sequels to his successful Jongor of Lost Land : The Return of Jongor appeared in 1944 , and Jongor Fights Back in 1951 . 
 Palmer enjoyed hoaxes , such as printing a photograph of a writer when in fact the name in question was a pseudonym . In the February 1944 issue of Fantastic Adventures he printed a letter in which the writer claimed to be a time @-@ traveling scientist born in 1970 , whose time machine was inspired by a story in the magazine . Palmer pretended to take it seriously , and printed an appeal to readers to find the scientist . Palmer 's most successful hoax was the " Shaver Mystery " , a series of stories in which the author , Richard Shaver , explained all the wrecks and accidents on Earth as the result of interference by ancient machinery hidden underground . The series was enormously popular ; all the Shaver Mystery stories were published in Fantastic Adventures ' companion magazine , Amazing Stories ( which led Ashley to describe Fantastic Adventures as a " haven " from the Shaver stories ) but Shaver did also publish some competent fantasies in Fantastic Adventures . The increased circulation enabled both Amazing and Fantastic Adventures to return to monthly publication in the late 1940s . 
 = = = Browne = = = 
 When Browne took over at the start of 1950 , William Hamling was doing most of the editorial work . Browne did not fully take control of the magazine until the end of the year , when Hamling and Palmer both left Ziff @-@ Davis ; the quality of the fiction promptly improved at that point , and the first year or two of Browne 's tenure are regarded as the high point of Fantastic Adventures ' run . Theodore Sturgeon 's novel The Dreaming Jewels appeared in February 1950 , and Lester del Rey , William Tenn and Walter M. Miller all published notable material . In April 1950 , Mack Reynolds ' first story , " Isolationist " , appeared in Fantastic Adventures . Reynolds became more strongly associated with Astounding Science Fiction than with the Ziff @-@ Davis magazines , but some of the radical political themes of his later work are evident in " Isolationist " . The story describes helpful alien visitors abandoning Earth to atomic war because of the hostility of the first Earthman they encounter . John Jakes also debuted in Fantastic Adventures that year , with " The Dreaming Trees " , in November 1950 . 
 Overall the quality was low , but according to sf historian Brian Stableford , " sf writers given carte blanche to write pure fantasy for [ Fantastic Adventures ] did often produce readable fiction with a distinctive whimsical and ironic flavour " . Critic John Clute 's assessment was that it was inconsistent , " but there were some terrific tales in it . Not enough , but some . " Notable stories from the post @-@ war era include Theodore Sturgeon 's " Largo " and Raymond F. Jones ' " The Children 's Room " . The artwork was generally of higher quality than the stories ; Ashley describes Fantastic Adventures as " one of the best @-@ illustrated magazines around " . Regular artists included Virgil Finlay , Henry Sharp , Rod Ruth , and Malcolm Smith . In Palmer 's words , " It has been our experience that covers sell magazines — simply because they attract attention . " For the first year the cover art , while dramatic , was more likely to show an action scene with a male hero than a damsel in distress , but in August 1940 H.W. McCauley 's cover showed a glamorous woman in a sparkling dress . Similar covers followed with increasing frequency , with readers and editors giving the various heroines the name of " <unk> " . Science fiction historian Paul Carter , commenting on the change from action scenes to alluring women on the covers , suggests that " surely the war had something to do with this " . Science fiction art often included spaceships as phallic symbols ; author and critic Brian Aldiss remarked on a Fantastic Adventures cover , from March 1949 , that included a submarine as a phallic symbol instead . Readers ' letters often objected to the attractive women and the implied sexual content , but the stories themselves were quite tame . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The editorial succession at Fantastic Adventures is usually given as follows : 
 Ray Palmer : May 1939 – December 1949 
 Howard Browne : January 1950 – April 1953 
 However , the editorial responsibility did not always reside with the named editor on the masthead . The editor @-@ in @-@ chief was senior to the managing editor , but at some points in the magazine 's history it was the managing editor who was primarily responsible for the magazine . The following table shows who held which title , at which point : 
 Fantastic Adventures was initially bedsheet @-@ sized and had a page count of 96 , which increased to 144 when the publication was reduced to pulp @-@ size in June 1940 . It was initially priced at 20 cents . With the April 1942 issue the price increased to 25 cents , where it remained for the rest of the magazine 's run , and the page count went up again to 240 . From June 1943 to July 1945 there were 208 pages , and the count dropped to 176 with the October 1945 issue ; then to 160 in July 1948 , and only two issues later , in September 1948 , the page count went down to 156 . It dropped again to 144 with the June 1949 issue , but rose to 160 from September 1949 to August 1950 . The September 1950 issue had 148 pages , and all the remaining issues had 130 pages . 
 The magazine began as a bimonthly , but switched to a monthly schedule in January 1940 , though this only lasted six issues . June 1940 was followed by August and October 1940 and January and March 1941 . The May 1941 issue inaugurated another monthly period that lasted until August 1943 , when the schedule switched back to bimonthly until the June 1944 issue . Fantastic then went on a quarterly schedule , beginning with the October 1944 issue ; in October 1945 it became bimonthly again , though there was a gap between February and May 1946 . From September 1947 to the end of the run the magazine was monthly . The volume numeration was regular , with a new volume starting at the beginning of each calendar year ; the result was a variable number of issues in each volume , from a low of four in 1944 to a full 12 when the magazine was monthly , as it was for the last few years of its life . The last issue was volume 15 number 3 . 
 There were two British reprint editions . The first consisted of two numbered and undated issues , which appeared in May and June 1947 from Ziff @-@ Davis in London . This was pulp @-@ sized and 32 pages long ; it contained stories from the wartime U.S. edition . The second series was published by Thorpe & Porter , in Leicester , and consisted of 24 undated issues , all but the first two of which were numbered . These began at 160 pages , and decreased , first to 128 and then to 96 pages . They were released between June 1950 and February 1954 , and were abridged versions of U.S. editions dated from March 1950 to January 1953 , as follows : 
 The contents were initially identical to the U.S. editions , but starting with issue # 13 at least one story was dropped . 
 Starting in 1941 , unsold issues of Fantastic Adventures were rebound , three together , with a new cover , titled Fantastic Adventures Quarterly . There were eight of these quarterly issues between Winter 1941 and Fall 1943 ; they were priced at 25 cents and given a volume numbering from volume 1 number 1 to volume 2 number 4 . Another similar series was started in Summer 1948 , for 50 cents ; there were eleven of these , running from volume 6 number 1 to volume 9 number 1 , finishing with the Spring 1951 issue and omitting Spring 1949 . 
 In 1965 , Sol Cohen acquired both Amazing Stories and Fantastic from Ziff @-@ Davis , along with reprint rights to all the stories that had appeared in the Ziff @-@ Davis science fiction magazines , including Fantastic Adventures . Cohen published multiple reprint titles , and frequently reprinted stories from Fantastic Adventures . In particular , the following issues took their contents mostly or completely from Fantastic Adventures : 
 Fantastic Adventures Yearbook . One issue in the summer of 1970 , no number , dated only with the year . Reprinted six stories from Fantastic Adventures that had originally appeared between 1949 and 1952 . 
 Thrilling Science Fiction . Issues 16 and 20 ( Summer 1970 and Summer 1971 ) . 
 Science Fiction Adventures . January 1974 issue . 
 Science Fantasy . All four issues , from 1970 to 1971 . 
 The Strangest Stories Every Told . One issue , Summer 1970 . 
 Weird Mystery . There were four issues of this magazine between Fall 1970 and Summer 1971 ; the contents were drawn largely from Fantastic Adventures . 
 = Political history of medieval Karnataka = 
 The political history of medieval Karnataka spans the 4th to the 16th centuries , when the empires that evolved in the Karnataka region of India made a lasting impact on the subcontinent . Before this , alien empires held sway over the region , and the nucleus of power was outside modern Karnataka . The medieval era can be broadly divided into several periods : The earliest native kingdoms and imperialism ; the successful domination of the Gangetic plains in northern India and rivalry with the empires of Tamilakam over the Vengi region ; and the domination of the southern Deccan and consolidation against Muslim invasion . The origins of the rise of the Karnataka region as an independent power date back to the fourth @-@ century birth of the Kadamba Dynasty of Banavasi , the earliest of the native rulers to conduct administration in the native language of Kannada in addition to the official Sanskrit . This is the historical starting point in studying the development of the region as an enduring geopolitical entity and of Kannada as an important regional language . 
 In the southern regions of Karnataka , the Western Gangas of Talakad were contemporaries of the Kadambas . The Kadambas and Gangas were followed by the imperial dynasties of the Badami Chalukya Empire , the Rashtrakuta Empire , the Western Chalukya Empire , the Hoysala Empire and the Vijayanagara Empire , all patronising the ancient Indic religions while showing tolerance to the new cultures arriving from the west of the subcontinent . The Muslim invasion of the Deccan resulted in the breaking away of the feudatory Sultanates in the 14th century . The rule of the Bahamani Sultanate of Bidar and the Bijapur Sultanate from the northern Deccan region caused a mingling of the ancient Hindu traditions with the nascent Islamic culture in the region . The hereditary ruling families and clans ably served the large empires and upheld the local culture and traditions . The fall of the Vijayanagara Empire in 1565 brought about a slow disintegration of Kannada @-@ speaking regions into minor kingdoms that struggled to maintain autonomy in an age dominated by foreigners until unification and independence in 1947 . 
 = = Kadambas and Gangas = = 
 Prior to and during the early centuries of the first millennium , large areas of the Karnataka region was ruled by such imperial powers as the Mauryas of <unk> and later the Satavahanas , empires whose centres of power were in the Gangetic plains and Central India respectively . With the weakening of the Satavahanas , the Pallavas of Kanchi took control for a brief duration . In the 4th century , the rise to power of the Kadamba Dynasty of Banavasi identified the Karnataka region as an independent political entity and Kannada as an administrative language from the middle of the 5th century . The Kadambas were natives of the Talagunda region ( in modern Shivamogga district ) as proven by inscriptions . Mayurasharma , a Brahmin native of Talagunda who was humiliated by a Pallava guard , rose in rage against the Pallava control of the Banavasi region and declared his independence in 345 . After many wars , the Pallava king had to accept the sovereignty of the Kadambas and Mayurasharma , the founding king , crowned himself at Banavasi ( in the present day Uttara Kannada district ) . 
 The fact that the Kadambas cultivated marital ties with the imperial Vakatakas and Gupta dynasties attests to their power . <unk> , the most powerful ruler of the dynasty whom inscriptions describe as " ornament of the Kadamba family " and " Sun among the kings of wide spread flame " , gave one daughter in marriage to <unk> <unk> and another to <unk> , grandson of Chandragupta II of the Gupta dynasty . Historians trace their rise to political power through the examination of the contemporaneous Sanskrit writing , <unk> <unk> <unk> by <unk> , which quotes portions of a writing <unk> <unk> by the famous poet Kalidasa . Here Kalidasa describes his visit to the Kadamba kingdom as an ambassador where he was not offered a seat in the court of the Kadamba king and had to sit on the ground . Historians view this act as one of assertion by the Kadambas who considered themselves equal to the imperial Gupta dynasty . 
 Family feuds and conflicts ended the Kadamba rule in the middle of the 6th century when the last Kadamba ruler Krishna Varma II was subdued by Pulakeshin I of the Chalukya feudatory , ending their sovereign rule . The Kadambas would continue to rule parts of Karnataka and Goa for many centuries to come but never again as an independent kingdom . Some historians view the Kadambas as the originators of the Karnataka architectural tradition although there were elements in common with the structures built by the contemporaneous Pallavas of Kanchi . The oldest surviving Kadamba structure is one dating to the late 5th century in <unk> in modern Belgaum district . The most prominent feature of their architectural style , one that remained popular centuries later and was used by the Hoysalas and the Vijayanagar kings , is the Kadamba <unk> ( Kadamba tower ) with a <unk> ( pot ) on top . 
 The Western Ganga Dynasty , contemporaries of the Kadambas , came to power from Kolar but in the late 4th century - early 5th century moved their capital to Talakad in modern Mysore district . They ruled the region historically known as Gangavadi comprising most of the modern southern districts of Karnataka . Acting as a buffer state between the Kannada kingdoms of Karnataka region and the Tamil kingdoms of Tamilakam , the Western Ganga architectural innovations show mixed influences . Their sovereign rule ended around the same time as the Kadambas when they came under the Badami Chalukya control . The Western Gangas continued to rule as a feudatory till the beginning of the eleventh century when they were defeated by the Cholas of Tanjavur . Important figures among the Gangas were King Durvinita and Shivamara II , admired as able warriors and scholars , and minister Chavundaraya who was a builder , a warrior and a writer in Kannada and Sanskrit . The most important architectural contributions of these Gangas are the monuments and basadis of Shravanabelagola , the monolith of Gomateshwara termed as the mightiest achievement in the field of sculpture in ancient Karnataka and the <unk> basadi ( five towers ) at Kambadahalli . Their free standing pillars ( called <unk> and <unk> ) and Hero stones ( virgal ) with sculptural detail are also considered a unique contribution . 
 = = Badami Chalukyas = = 
 The Chalukya dynasty , natives of the Aihole and Badami region in Karnataka , were at first a feudatory of the Kadambas . They encouraged the use of Kannada in addition to the Sanskrit language in their administration . In the middle of the 6th century the Chalukyas came into their own when Pulakeshin I made the hill fortress in Badami his center of power . During the rule of Pulakeshin II a south Indian empire sent expeditions to the north past the Tapti River and Narmada River for the first time and successfully defied Harshavardhana , the King of Northern India ( <unk> ) . The Aihole inscription of Pulakeshin II , written in classical Sanskrit language and old Kannada script dated 634 , proclaims his victories against the Kingdoms of Kadambas , Western Gangas , Alupas of South Canara , Mauryas of Puri , Kingdom of Kosala , Malwa , Lata and <unk> of southern Rajasthan . The inscription describes how King Harsha of Kannauj lost his Harsha ( joyful disposition ) on seeing a large number of his war elephants die in battle against Pulakeshin II . 
 These victories earned him the title <unk> <unk> ( lord of the south ) . Pulakeshin II continued his conquests in the east where he conquered all kingdoms in his way and reached the Bay of Bengal in present @-@ day Orissa . A Chalukya viceroyalty was set up in Gujarat and Vengi ( coastal Andhra ) and princes from the Badami family were dispatched to rule them . Having subdued the Pallavas of Kanchipuram , he accepted tributes from the Pandyas of Madurai , Chola dynasty and Cheras of the Kerala region . Pulakeshin II thus became the master of India , south of the Narmada River . Pulakeshin II is widely regarded as one of the great kings in Indian history . Hiuen @-@ Tsiang , a Chinese traveller visited the court of Pulakeshin II at this time and Persian emperor Khosrau II exchanged ambassadors . However , the continuous wars with Pallavas took a turn for the worse in 642 when the Pallava king Narasimhavarman I avenged his father 's defeat , conquered and plundered the capital of Pulakeshin II who may have died in battle . A century later , Chalukya Vikramaditya II marched victoriously into Kanchipuram , the Pallava capital and occupied it on three occasions , the third time under the leadership of his son and crown prince Kirtivarman II . He thus avenged the earlier humiliation of the Chalukyas by the Pallavas and engraved a Kannada inscription on the victory pillar at the Kailasanatha Temple . He later overran the other traditional kingdoms of Tamil country , the Pandyas , Cholas and <unk> in addition to subduing a Kalabhra ruler . 
 The Kappe Arabhatta record from this period ( 700 ) in tripadi ( three line ) metre is considered the earliest available record in Kannada poetics . The most enduring legacy of the Chalukya dynasty is the architecture and art that they left behind . More than one hundred and fifty monuments attributed to them , built between 450 and 700 , have survived in the Malaprabha basin in Karnataka . The constructions are centred in a relatively small area within the Chalukyan heartland . The structural temples at Pattadakal , a UNESCO World Heritage Site , the cave temples of Badami , the temples at Mahakuta and early experiments in temple building at Aihole are their most celebrated monuments . Two of the famous paintings at Ajanta cave no . 1 , " The Temptation of the Buddha " and " The Persian Embassy " are also credited to them . Further , they influenced the architecture in far off places like Gujarat and Vengi as evidenced in the Nava Brahma temples at <unk> . 
 = = Rashtrakutas = = 
 In the middle of the 8th century the Chalukya rule was ended by their feudatory , the Rashtrakuta family rulers of Berar ( in present @-@ day Amravati district of Maharashtra ) . Sensing an opportunity during a weak period in the Chalukya rule , Dantidurga trounced the great Chalukyan " Karnatabala " ( power of Karnata ) . Having overthrown the Chalukyas , the Rashtrakutas made Manyakheta their capital ( modern Malkhed in Gulbarga district ) . Although the origins of the early Rashtrakuta ruling families in central India and the Deccan in the 6th and 7th centuries is controversial , during the eighth through the tenth centuries they emphasised the importance of the Kannada language in conjunction with Sanskrit in their administration . Rashtrakuta inscriptions are in Kannada and Sanskrit only . They encouraged literature in both languages and thus literature flowered under their rule . 
 The Rashtrakutas quickly became the most powerful Deccan empire , making their initial successful forays into the doab region of Ganges River and Jamuna River during the rule of Dhruva Dharavarsha . The rule of his son Govinda III signaled a new era with Rashtrakuta victories against the Pala Dynasty of Bengal and Gurjara Pratihara of north western India resulting in the capture of Kannauj . The Rashtrakutas held Kannauj intermittently during a period of a tripartite struggle for the resources of the rich Gangetic plains . Because of Govinda III 's victories , historians have compared him to Alexander the Great and Pandava Arjuna of the Hindu epic Mahabharata . The Sanjan inscription states the horses of Govinda III drank the icy water of the Himalayan stream and his war elephants tasted the sacred waters of the Ganges River . Amoghavarsha I , eulogised by contemporary Arab traveller Sulaiman as one among the four great emperors of the world , succeeded Govinda III to the throne and ruled during an important cultural period that produced landmark writings in Kannada and Sanskrit . The benevolent development of Jain religion was a hallmark of his rule . Because of his religious temperament , his interest in the arts and literature and his peace @-@ loving nature , he has been compared to emperor Ashoka . The rule of Indra III in the tenth century enhanced the Rashtrakuta position as an imperial power as they conquered and held Kannauj again . Krishna III followed Indra III to the throne in 939 . A patron of Kannada literature and a powerful warrior , his reign marked the submission of the Paramara of Ujjain in the north and Cholas in the south . 
 An Arabic writing <unk> ( 851 ) called the Rashtrakutas one among the four principle empires of the world . Kitab @-@ ul @-@ <unk> @-@ ul @-@ <unk> ( 912 ) called them the " greatest kings of India " and there were many other contemporaneous books written in their praise . The Rashtrakuta empire at its peak spread from Cape Comorin in the south to Kannauj in the north and from Banaras in the east to Broach ( Bharuch ) in the west . While the Rashtrakutas built many fine monuments in the Deccan , the most extensive and sumptuous of their work is the monolithic Kailasanatha temple at Ellora , the temple being a splendid achievement . In Karnataka their most famous temples are the Kashivishvanatha temple and the Jain Narayana temple at Pattadakal . All of the monuments are designated UNESCO World Heritage Sites . 
 = = Western Chalukyas = = 
 In the late 10th century , the Western Chalukyas , also known as the Kalyani Chalukyas or ' Later ' Chalukyas rose to power by overthrowing the Rashtrakutas under whom they had been serving as feudatories . Manyakheta was their capital early on before they moved it to Kalyani ( modern Basavakalyan ) . Whether the kings of this empire belonged to the same family line as their namesakes , the Badami Chalukyas is still debated . Whatever the Western Chalukya origins , Kannada remained their language of administration and the Kannada and Sanskrit literature of their time was prolific . Tailapa II , a feudatory ruler from Tardavadi ( modern Bijapur district ) , re @-@ established the Chalukya rule by defeating the Rashtrakutas during the reign of Karka II . He timed his rebellion to coincide with the confusion caused by the invading Paramara of Central India to the Rashtrakutas capital in 973 . This era produced prolonged warfare with the Chola dynasty of Tamilakam for control of the resources of the Godavari River @-@ Krishna River doab region in Vengi . Someshvara I , a brave Chalukyan king , successfully curtailed the growth of the Chola Empire to the south of the Tungabhadra River region despite suffering some defeats while maintaining control over his feudatories in the Konkan , Gujarat , Malwa and Kalinga regions . For approximately 100 years , beginning in the early 11th century , the Cholas occupied large areas of South Karnataka region ( Gangavadi ) . 
 In 1076 , the ascent of the most famous king of this Chalukya family , Vikramaditya VI , changed the balance of power in favour of the Chalukyas . His fifty @-@ year reign was an important period in Karnataka 's history and is referred to as the " Chalukya Vikrama era " . His victories over the Cholas in the late 11th and early 12th centuries put an end to the Chola influence in the Vengi region permanently . Some of the well @-@ known contemporaneous feudatory families of the Deccan under Chalukya control were the Hoysalas , the Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri , the Kakatiya dynasty and the Southern Kalachuri . At their peak , the Western Chalukyas ruled a vast empire stretching from the Narmada River in the north to the Kaveri River in the south . Vikramaditya VI is considered one of the most influential kings of Indian history . Important architectural works were created by these Chalukyas , especially in the Tungabhadra river valley , that served as a conceptual link between the building idioms of the early Badami Chalukyas and the later Hoysalas . With the weakening of the Chalukyas in the decades following the death of Vikramaditya VI in 1126 , the feudatories of the Chalukyas gained their independence . 
 The Kalachuris of Karnataka , whose ancestors were immigrants into the southern <unk> from central India , had ruled as a feudatory from <unk> ( modern <unk> in Maharashtra ) . Bijjala II , the most powerful ruler of this dynasty , was a commander ( <unk> ) during the reign of Chalukya Vikramaditya VI . Seizing an opportune moment in the waning power of the Chalukyas , Bijjala II declared independence in 1157 and annexed their capital Kalyani . His rule was cut short by his assassination in 1167 and the ensuing civil war caused by his sons fighting over the throne ended the dynasty as the last Chalukya scion regained control of Kalyani . This victory however , was short @-@ lived as the Chalukyas were eventually driven out by the Seuna Yadavas . 
 = = Hoysalas = = 
 The Hoysalas had become a powerful force even during their rule from Belur in the 11th century as a feudatory of the Chalukyas ( in the south Karnataka region ) . In the early 12th century they successfully fought the Cholas in the south , convincingly defeating them in the battle of Talakad and moved their capital to nearby Halebidu . Historians refer to the founders of the dynasty as natives of Malnad Karnataka , based on the numerous inscriptions calling them Maleparolganda or " Lord of the Male ( hills ) chiefs " ( Malepas ) . With the waning of the Western Chalukya power , the Hoysalas declared their independence in the late twelfth century . 
 During this period of Hoysala control , distinctive Kannada literary metres such as Ragale ( blank verse ) , Sangatya ( meant to be sung to the accompaniment of a musical instrument ) , Shatpadi ( seven line ) etc. became widely accepted . The Hoysalas expanded the Vesara architecture stemming from the Chalukyas , culminating in the Hoysala architectural articulation and style as exemplified in the construction of the Chennakesava Temple at Belur and the Hoysaleswara temple at Halebidu . Both these temples were built in commemoration of the victories of the Hoysala Vishnuvardhana against the Cholas in 1116 . Veera Ballala II , the most effective of the Hoysala rulers , defeated the aggressive Pandya when they invaded the Chola kingdom and assumed the titles " <unk> of the Chola Kingdom " ( <unk> ) , " Emperor of the south " ( Dakshina Chakravarthi ) and " Hoysala emperor " ( Hoysala Chakravarthi ) . The Hoysalas extended their foothold in areas known today as Tamil Nadu around 1225 , making the city of <unk> <unk> near Srirangam a provincial capital . This gave them control over South Indian politics that began a period of Hoysala hegemony in the southern Deccan . 
 In the early 13th century , with the Hoysala power remaining unchallenged , the first of the Muslim incursions into South India began . After over two decades of waging war against a foreign power , the Hoysala ruler at the time , Veera Ballala III , died in the battle of Madurai in 1343 . This resulted in the merger of the sovereign territories of the Hoysala empire with the areas administered by Harihara I , founder of the Vijayanagara Empire , located in the Tungabhadra region in present @-@ day Karnataka . The new kingdom thrived for another two centuries with Vijayanagara as its capital . 
 = = Vijayanagara Empire = = 
 The Vijayanagara Empire quickly rose to imperial status as early as the late 14th century . During the reign of Bukka Raya I , the island of Lanka paid tributes and ambassadors were exchanged with the Ming Dynasty of China . The empire 's most famous rulers were Deva Raya II and the Tuluva king Krishnadevaraya . Deva Raya II ( known as <unk> or hunter of elephants ) ascended the throne in 1424 and was the most effective of the Sangama dynasty rulers . He quelled rebelling feudal lords , the Zamorin of Calicut and the Quilon in the south , and invaded the island of Lanka while becoming overlord of the kings of Burma at Pegu and <unk> . After a brief decline , the empire reached its peak in the early 16th century during the rule of Krishnadevaraya when the Vijayanagara armies were consistently victorious . The empire annexed areas formerly under the Sultanates in the northern Deccan and the territories in the eastern Deccan , including Kalinga , while simultaneously maintaining control over all its subordinates in the south . 
 Many important monuments at Hampi were either completed or commissioned during the reign of Krishnadevaraya . The enduring legacy of this empire is the vast open @-@ air theatre of monuments at the regal capital , Vijayanagara , which is now a UNESCO World Heritage site . Vijayanagara architecture is a vibrant blend of the preceding Chalukya , Hoysala , Pandya and Chola styles . Literature in Telugu , Kannada , Tamil and Sanskrit languages found royal patronage . Telugu attained its height in popularity and reached its peak under Krishnadevaraya . The Kannada Haridasa movement contributed greatly to Carnatic music and fostered a strong Hindu sentiment across South India . With the defeat of the Vijayanagara Empire in the Battle of Talikota in 1565 by the Deccan sultanates , the Karnataka region and South India in general became fragmented and subsumed under the rule of various former feudatories of the empire . A diminished Vijayanagara Empire moved its capital to Penukonda in modern Andhra Pradesh and later to Chandragiri and Vellore before disintegrating . In the south and coastal Karnataka region , the Kingdom of Mysore and the Keladi Nayaka of Shimoga held sway while the northern regions were under the control of the Bijapur Sultanate . The Nayaka kingdom lasted into the 18th century before merging with the Kingdom of Mysore which remained a princely state until Indian independence in 1947 , though they came under the British Raj ( rule ) in 1799 following the defeat and death of the last independent Mysore king , Tipu Sultan . 
 = = Bahmani Sultanate = = 
 The Bahmani Sultanate , a contemporary of the Vijayanagara Empire , was founded in 1347 by Alla @-@ ud @-@ din @-@ Hasan , a breakaway commander of the armies of the northern invaders led by Mohammed @-@ bin @-@ Tughlaq . The capital was Gulbarga but was later moved further north to Bidar in 1430 . The first of the Muslim invasions of the Deccan came in the early decades of the 14th century . At its peak , the Bahamani kingdom extended from the Krishna River in the south to <unk> River in the north , thus covering the regions of northern parts of modern Karnataka , parts of Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh . The most famous of the Bahamani Kings was Firuz Shah ( also known as Taj Ud Din Firuz ) , who ruled from 1397 to 1422 . Militarily , the rule of Firuz Shah had uneven success against the Vijayanagara kings while he was more convincingly successful against the <unk> rulers of Madhya Pradesh and the <unk> <unk> of <unk> , areas that he annexed in 1417 . His last encounter with the Vijayanagara armies in 1417 was disastrous and led to his defeat , ill health and ultimate death in 1422 . 
 Contemporary writers such as Tabataba , in his writings have heaped praise on Firuz Shah . Tabataba wrote of the king as , " [ a ] n impetuous , mighty monarch who patronised learned men , Sheiks and hermits " , while Shirazi described him as " a just , pious and generous king and one without equal " . He has earned the honorific Sultan @-@ i @-@ <unk> for his bravery , tolerant nature and patronage of the fine arts . In the opinion of one historian , Firuz Shah was one of the most notable Sultans to rule in India . Another well @-@ known figure from this kingdom was <unk> <unk> Gavan , the prime minister , who served under several kings and regents . He rose above the kings and princess of the dynasty by virtue of his ministerial , administrative , martial , literary and philanthropic abilities . A Persian by descent and a visitor to Bidar in 1445 , he impressed the ruling Sultan Alla @-@ ud @-@ din II and was chosen to become a minister in his court . As a commander he was able to extend the kingdom from Hubli in the south to Goa in the west and <unk> and <unk> in the east . He soon rose to the position of prime minister ( Vakil @-@ Us @-@ <unk> ) . 
 The <unk> introduced the large @-@ scale use of paper in administration and began the Indo @-@ <unk> architectural style , designed and constructed by Persian architects and artisans , ( also known as Deccani architecture ) with its local influences in Karnataka . The Sultanate monuments of Bidar and Gulbarga are testimony to their interest in architecture . The Bande Nawaz tombs and a Jama Masjid in Gulbarga which exhibits a Spanish influence are well known . In Bidar , their buildings have Persian , Turkish , Arabic and Roman influences ( the <unk> <unk> mosque being an example ) . <unk> Mahal , Gangan Mahal , <unk> Mahal , <unk> Mahal , <unk> Mahal and the <unk> Mahal are some of the palaces built by them that have retained their beauty . The Ahmad Shah Wali tombs are noted for their decor , and the school of learning ( madrasa ) built by Gavan in Bidar ( 1472 ) , with its lecture halls , library , mosque and residential houses are also famous . In the later part of the 15th century , with a growing rift between the local Deccani Muslims and the <unk> Muslims ( foreign ) who occupied influential positions in the kingdom , the execution of Gavan under dubious circumstances in 1481 , and constant wars with the Vijayanagara kings weakened the Bahamani Kingdom eventually bringing about its end in 1527 . 
 = = Bijapur Sultanate = = 
 The Bijapur Sultanate ( or <unk> Kingdom ) emerged towards the end of the 15th century with the weakening of the Bahmani Sultanate . The main sources of information about this kingdom comes from contemporaneous inscriptions and writings in Persian and Kannada , travelogues of European visitors to the Deccan and inscriptions of neighbouring kingdoms . In 1489 , Yusuf <unk> , a Turkic general in the Bahmani army , broke away to found the kingdom from modern Bijapur . Throughout his rule , the Sultanate was at war with the Vijayanagara Empire over the strategic Raichur doab , with the Portuguese over Goa , with the <unk> <unk> of Bidar and later with the erstwhile feudatories of the Vijayanagara Empire who had gained independence after 1565 . The Italian writer <unk> wrote about the founder <unk> and Bijapur , " A powerful and prosperous king " , " the city was encircled by many fortifications and contained beautiful and majestic buildings " . 
 Inter @-@ Sultanate marriages normalised relations and Ali I ( 1557 – 1580 ) joined a confederacy of Sultanates who eventually inflicted a crushing defeat on the Vijayanagara Empire in 1565 . The most notable ruler of the dynasty was Ibrahim II ( 1580 – 1626 ) who ascended the throne as a nine @-@ year @-@ old with <unk> , the king 's aunt acting as the regent . Later when Ibrahim II was defeated by the first of the Moghul incursions into the Deccan , he gave his daughter in marriage to <unk> , a son of Emperor Akbar , but managed to collect tributes from the former feudatories of the Vijayanagara Empire . According to a historian , the rule of Ibrahim II was the high point of the Bijapur Sultanate . A tolerant king inclined to the fine arts , the earliest book on music in Urdu language called Kitab @-@ e @-@ <unk> is ascribed to him . The opening song in the book is an invocation of the Hindu Goddess Saraswati . During the rule of his son Muhammad , Shahji Bhosle from Ahmadnagar joined the Bijapur army and along with commander <unk> Khan conducted many successful campaigns in the southern Deccan collecting tribute from local rulers there . The final end of the diminished Vijayanagara Empire ruling from Vellore came during these campaigns . 
 However , the rise of Maratha Shivaji and constant invasions by the Mughals from the north took its toll on the kingdom , eventually bringing it to an end in the later part of the 17th century . The contributions of the Bijapur Sultanate in the Indo @-@ Saracenic idiom to the architectural landscape of Karnataka is noteworthy . Their most famous monuments are the mausoleums called Ibrahim Rauza and the Gol Gumbaz apart from many other palaces and mosques . The elegance , finish and beauty of <unk> Mahal is claimed by a historian to be equal to anything in Cairo . Their Kali Masjid at Lakshmeshwar is a synthesis of Hindu and Muslim styles . The Ibrahim Rauza built by Ibrahim II is a combination of a mausoleum and a mosque and is called the " Taj Mahal of the Deccan " . The Gol Gumbaz built by Muhammad is the largest dome in India and the second largest pre @-@ modern dome in the world after the Byzantine Hagia Sophia with an impressive " whispering gallery " . Some historians consider this one of the architectural marvels of the world . Persian language was given state patronage while the use of the local languages , Kannada and Marathi was popularised in local affairs . 
 = = Modern era = = 
 The fall of the Vijayanagara Empire in 1565 at the Battle of Talikota started a slow disintegration of the Kannada speaking region into many short @-@ lived <unk> chiefdoms , and the better known Kingdom of Mysore and the kingdom of Keladi Nayakas , which were to later become important centres of Kannada literary production . These kingdoms and the Nayakas ( " chiefs " ) of Tamil country continued to owe nominal support to a diminished Vijayanagara Empire ruling from Penukonda ( 1570 ) and later from Chandragiri ( 1586 ) in modern Andhra Pradesh , followed by a brief period of independence . By the mid @-@ 17th century , large areas in north Karnataka came under the control of the Bijapur Sultanate who waged several wars in a bid to establish a hegemony over the southern Deccan . The defeat of the Bijapur Sultanate at the hands of the Mughals in late 17th century added a new dimension to the prevailing confusion . The constant wars of the local kingdoms with the two new rivals , the Mughals and the Marathas , and among themselves , caused further instability in the region . Major areas of Karnataka came under the rule of the Mughals and the Marathas . Under Hyder Ali and his son Tipu Sultan , the Mysore Kingdom reached its zenith of power but had to face the growing English might who by now had a firm foothold in the subcontinent . After the death of Tipu Sultan in 1799 in the fourth Anglo @-@ Mysore war , the Mysore Kingdom came under the British umbrella . More than a century later , with the dawn of India as an independent nation in 1947 , the unification of Kannada speaking regions as modern Karnataka state brought four centuries of political uncertainty ( and centuries of foreign rule ) to an end . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = New York State Route 179 = 
 New York State Route 179 ( NY 179 ) is a short 4 @.@ 40 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 08 km ) long state highway located south of Buffalo in Erie County , New York , in the United States . It is a four @-@ lane divided road ( albeit with traffic lights ) for most of its length . It is known as Mile Strip Road . A small section between U.S. Route 62 ( US 62 ) and NY 5 in Blasdell , however , is a limited @-@ access highway known as the Mile Strip Expressway . It connects to two major expressways , the New York State Thruway ( Interstate 90 or I @-@ 90 ) and the Southern Expressway ( US 219 ) , by way of interchanges . It serves as a connector road between them and three other major routes , NY 5 , US 62 , and US 20 . Thus it is very busy not only at rush hours , but also after Buffalo Bills ' home football games due to its proximity to Ralph Wilson Stadium . 
 The Mile Strip Expressway was first constructed in the 1960s from NY 5 in Hamburg to US 62 in Blasdell . By 1968 , it received its NY 179 designation . This was extended to the Thruway in the next decade and by 2001 , was extended to its current eastern terminus at US 20 in Orchard Park . Although never constructed as such , the Mile Strip was intended to be a portion of the Belt Expressway , an outer loop for the city of Buffalo . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 179 begins at an interchange with NY 5 ( Lake Shore Road ) near the shores Lake Erie in Woodlawn Beach State Park . NY 179 proceeds eastward through the town of Hamburg as the Mile Strip Expressway , running north as a four @-@ lane boulevard north of a stamping plant , operated by the Ford Motor Company . Just after the stamping plant , NY 179 enters its first interchange , Mile Strip Road , which connects to NY 179 east via a jughandle . Crossing into the town of Blasdell , the expressway crosses over three separate railroad grades consecutively before crossing into downtown Blasdell . In Blasdell , another railroad crosses the freeway after an interchange with Jeffrey Boulevard . A short distance later , NY 179 intersects with US 62 ( South Park Avenue ) , where the expressway ends and NY 179 becomes the four @-@ lane arterial boulevard known as Mile Strip Road . 
 After re @-@ crossing into Hamburg , NY 179 continues eastward as Mile Strip Road , entering a large interchange with the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 exit 56 ) , which connects via trumpet interchange . After bending northeast , the route crosses over the Thruway , becoming a two @-@ lane commercial street , passing north and south of several strip malls until an intersection with County Route 204 ( CR 204 ; McKinley Parkway ) . After CR 204 , NY 179 passes north of McKinley Mall , proceeding eastward as a four @-@ lane divided boulevard past several residences before bending northeast , intersecting with CR 4 ( Abbott Road ) in the town of Orchard Park . 
 After CR 4 , NY 179 proceeds east through Orchard Park as a two @-@ lane boulevard , intersecting the northern terminus of CR 461 ( California Road ) . After crossing under another railroad , NY 179 returns to four @-@ lanes , passing south of several strip malls in Orchard Park . The route soon becomes a divided highway , entering a cloverleaf interchange with US 219 ( the Southern Expressway ) . After the interchange , NY 179 parallels as a four @-@ lane boulevard between several strip malls , soon intersecting with US 20 ( Southwestern Boulevard ) , where NY 179 terminates . CR 460 continues eastward along Mile Strip Road to NY 187 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Mile Strip Expressway , a 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) highway extending from NY 5 to US 62 , was constructed in the mid @-@ 1960s and designated as NY 179 by 1968 . A short continuation of the expressway east of US 62 providing direct access to New York State Thruway exit 56 was opened to traffic as an extension of NY 179 at some point in the late 1970s or early 1980s . The junction between the expressway and Mile Strip Road was initially a four @-@ way intersection , with Mile Strip Road passing east – west through the intersection and NY 179 entering from the south to connect to Thruway exit 56 to the north . 
 The entirety of Mile Strip Road east of US 62 was initially maintained by Erie County as CR 460 . By 2001 , the junction between NY 179 , Mile Strip Road , and the Thruway was reconfigured into its current design and NY 179 was extended east to its current terminus at US 20 . CR 460 was then truncated to US 20 on its western end , transferring maintenance of Mile Strip Road from the Thruway to US 20 to the New York State Department of Transportation . 
 The Mile Strip Expressway was to be part of the Belt Expressway , an outer loop connecting Buffalo and Niagara Falls . This plan was ultimately cancelled . The only two portions of the loop that were constructed are the LaSalle Expressway east of Niagara Falls and the mile @-@ long Mile Strip Expressway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Erie County . 
 = Benjamin Church House ( Bristol , Rhode Island ) = 
 Benjamin Church House ( also known as Benjamin Church Home for the Aged ) is a Colonial Revival house at 1014 Hope Street in Bristol , Rhode Island , U.S.A. It opened in 1909 as the " Benjamin Church Home for Aged Men " as stipulated by Benjamin Church 's will . Beginning in 1934 , during the Great Depression , it admitted women . The house was closed in 1968 and became a National Register of Historic Places listing in 1971 . The non @-@ profit Benjamin Church Senior Center was incorporated in June 1972 and opened on September 1 , 1972 . It continues to operate as a senior center . 
 = = Benjamin Church = = 
 Benjamin Church was born on February 20 , 1842 , to Elizabeth Luther and Samuel Church , a wealthy grain and flour merchant . Benjamin was raised with his 12 siblings on Mount Hope Farm and the old family farm on <unk> . His two brothers built houses in the <unk> Farms Historic District . In 1900 , Benjamin Church drafted a will to provide for the construction of a home for elderly men . It opened in 1909 as the " Benjamin Church Home for Aged Men " . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Benjamin Church House is a two story clapboarded Colonial Revival topped with a hipped roof that has four pedimented dormers . Constructed between 1908 and 1909 from designs by Clarke , Howe & Homer , architects , the building cost $ 21 @,@ 000 . The front of the house faces west towards Hope Street and is 18 by 30 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 by 9 @.@ 1 m ) and has an ell on the rear side that measures 18 by 24 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 by 7 @.@ 3 m ) . The front facade has a symmetrical five bay facade with the main entrance in the center , the door has sidelights and a semi @-@ elliptical fanlight . The front windows are typical 20th @-@ century windows with six @-@ over @-@ one sash and have splayed wooden lintels and those on the first floor have raised center keystones . Projecting out from the hipped roof are two dormers with shingled sides . The front facade has a one @-@ story porch that runs the length of the face with a half @-@ hipped roof . The porch is supported by six Doric columns that frame the bays and has a wooden frieze with a triglyph above each column . The porch has a simple wooden rail that runs the length of the porch and down the front and side steps , the newel posts are capped by small wooden urns . The corners of the main part of the house have wooden quoins . In the southeast corner of the building is an internal porch covered by a quarter @-@ hipped roof . The rear roof is are two pedimented dormers , one on each side of the ell 's roof and the third chimney which rises through the roof of the main building . The house has a stone foundation , which extends to a full story due the sloping land and has a doorway in the rear . The porch is supported by brick piers . 
 The interior of the house is designed around a central hall with a narrow stairway with turned balusters and newel that goes to the third floor . On both sides of the hall are two large front reception rooms , each 14 by 19 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 by 5 @.@ 8 m ) and having 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) tall ceilings . The rear of the south front room is the former dining room that is connected by a pantry to the kitchen in the ell . Two small rooms are located beyond the northern reception room . The second floor maintains the central hall and extends into the ell , but is bisected by a lateral hallway . Each " quadrant " housed two rooms for the residents with additional rooms in the ell and the third floor has four additional bedrooms with the dormer windows . The third floor of the ell was used as attic storage space . At the time of nomination to the National Register of Historic Places , the alterations that had been made to the house were described as " minor and inconspicuous , consisting mainly of alterations to windows and dormers to provide egress to necessary fire @-@ escapes . " The porch is believed to be a part of the original design , but it was noted that if it was a later addition it would likely have been done before 1920 . In 1969 , the clapboarded outbuilding to the southeast was torn down to construct newer housing for the elderly . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Benjamin Church House was ready to open on March 15 , 1909 and served as elderly housing for only aged men . In 1934 , during the Great Depression , the board of trustees decided to admit women to the house . Samuel P. Colt would bequeath $ 25 @,@ 000 to the home upon his death in 1921 . The house was closed from 1968 until 1973 and vandalized during the period , but was also submitted and approved to the National Register of Historic Places . Sometime in 1972 , the National Park Service approved a grant of $ 5 @,@ 000 to refurbish the house . In June 1972 , " [ t ] he Benjamin Church Senior Center was incorporated as a non @-@ profit organization that was housed in [ t ] he Benjamin Church Home " and opened for occupancy on September 1 , 1972 . According to the Benjamin Church Senior Center , the house is used as a senior center and is run by volunteers and board members . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The Benjamin Church House is historically significant as a " very pure example " of the Colonial Revival style by noted local architects Clarke , Howe & Homer . The house also serves as an important asset to the Bristol environment as an elderly home , noted during its vacancy at the time of its nomination . The nomination states " [ i ] t is because of the environmental and architectural importance of this house and its significance in the greater context of the Bristol @-@ Warren historic districts that it is thought to be worthy of National Register status and protection . " It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on September 22 , 1971 . 
 = Alan Shepard = 
 Rear Admiral Alan Bartlett " Al " Shepard Jr . ( November 18 , 1923 – July 21 , 1998 ) was an American naval officer and aviator , test pilot , one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts , and businessman , who in May 1961 made the first manned Mercury flight . Shepard 's craft entered space , but did not to achieve orbit . He became the second person , and the first American , to travel into space , and the first person to manually control the orientation of his spacecraft . 
 Ten years later , at age 47 and the oldest astronaut in the program , Shepard commanded the Apollo 14 mission ( 1971 ) , piloting the lander Antares to the most accurate landing of the Apollo missions . He became the fifth and oldest person to walk on the Moon , and the only one of the Mercury Seven to do so . During the mission , he hit two golf balls on the lunar surface . 
 These were his only two space flights , as his flight status was interrupted for five years during the Mercury and Gemini programs by Ménière 's disease , an inner @-@ ear disease that was surgically corrected before his Moon flight . Shepard served as Chief of the Astronaut Office from November 1963 to July 1969 ( the approximate period of his grounding ) , and from June 1971 to August 1 , 1974 ( from his last flight to his retirement ) . He was promoted to rear admiral on August 25 , 1971 , the first astronaut to reach that rank . He retired from the United States Navy and NASA in 1974 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. was born on November 18 , 1923 , in Derry , New Hampshire , the oldest of two children of Alan B. Shepard Sr. and Pauline <unk> Shepard ( née Emerson ) . He was one of many famous descendants of Mayflower passenger Richard Warren . Alan B. Shepard Sr. , known as Bart , worked in the Derry National Bank , owned by Shepard 's grandfather . He joined the National Guard in 1915 and served in France with the American Expeditionary Force during World War I. He remained in the National Guard between the wars , and was recalled to active duty during World War II , rising to the rank of lieutenant colonel . Shepard had a younger sister , Pauline , who was known as Polly . 
 Shepard initially attended Adams School . He skipped the sixth grade , proceeding to middle school at Oak Street School in Derry , where he skipped the eighth grade as well . He completed years 9 to 12 at the Pinkerton Academy , a private school in Derry that his father had attended . He was fascinated by flight , and created a model airplane club at the Academy , and his Christmas present in 1938 was a flight in a Douglas DC @-@ 3 . The following year he began cycling out to Manchester Airport , where he would do odd jobs in exchange for the occasional ride in an airplane or informal flying lesson . 
 With World War II approaching , Shepard 's father wanted him to join the Army , but Shepard chose the Navy instead . In 1940 , he easily passed the entrance exam to the United States Naval Academy at Anapolis , but at sixteen was too young to enter that year . Instead , the Navy sent him to the Admiral Farragut Academy , a prep school for the Naval Academy , from which he graduated with the class of 1941 . Tests administered at Farragut indicated an IQ of 145 . 
 At Annapolis , Shepard enjoyed aquatic sports . He was a keen and competitive sailor , winning a number of races , including a regatta held by the Annapolis Yacht Club . He learned to sail all the different types of boats the Academy owned , up to and including the USS Freedom , a 90 @-@ foot ( 27 m ) schooner . He also participated in swimming , and row with the eight . During his Christmas break in 1942 , he went to Principia College to be with his sister , who was unable to go home due to wartime travel restrictions . There he met Louise Brewer , whose parents were pensioners on the du Pont family estate , and , like <unk> Shepard , were devout Christian Scientists . Due to the war , the usual four @-@ year course at Annapolis was cut short by a year , and he graduated and was commissioned as an Ensign on June 6 , 1944 , ranked 463rd in his class of 915 . The following month he became secretly engaged to Louise Brewer . 
 = = Navy service = = 
 After a month of classroom instruction in aviation , Shepard was posted to a destroyer , USS Cogswell , it being the US Navy 's policy that aviation candidates should first have some service at sea . At the time it was deployed on active service in the Pacific Ocean . Shepard joined it when it returned to the naval base at Ulithi on 30 October . After just two days at sea Cogswell helped rescue 172 sailors from the cruiser USS Reno , which had been torpedoed by a Japanese submarine , then escorted the crippled ship back to Ulithi . The ship was buffeted by Typhoon Cobra in December 1944 , a storm in which three other destroyers went down , and battled kamikazes in the invasion of Lingayen Gulf in January 1945 . 
 Cogswell returned to the United States for an overhaul in February 1945 , and Shepard was given three weeks ' leave . He and Louise decided to marry before he had to return . They were married on March 3 , 1945 , in St. Stephen 's Lutheran Church in Wilmington , Delaware . His father , Bart , served as his best man . They had only a brief time together before Shepard rejoined Cogswell at the Long Beach Navy Yard on April 5 , 1945 . After the war , they had two children , both daughters : Laura , born in 1947 , and Julie , born in 1951 . Following the death of Louise 's sister in 1956 , they raised her niece , Judith , whom they renamed Alice to avoid confusion with Julie , as their own , although they never adopted her . They eventually had six grandchildren . 
 On Shepard 's second cruise with Cogswell he was appointed a gunnery officer , responsible for the 20 mm and 40 mm antiaircraft guns on the ship 's bow . They engaged kamikazes in the Battle of Okinawa , where the ship served in the dangerous role of a radar picket . The job of the radar pickets was to warn the fleet of incoming kamikazes ; but because they were often the first ships sighted by incoming Japanese aircraft , they were also the most likely ships to be attacked . Cogswell performed this duty from 27 May 1945 until 26 June , when it rejoined Task Force 38 . The ship also participated in the Allied naval bombardments of Japan , and was present in Tokyo Bay for the Surrender of Japan in September 1945 . Shepard returned to the United States later that month . 
 In November 1945 , Shepard arrived at Naval Air Station Corpus Christi in Texas , where he commenced basic flight training on January 7 , 1946 . He was an average student , and for a time faced being " <unk> " ( dropped ) from flight training and reassigned to the surface navy . To make up for this he took private lessons at a local civilian flying school — something the Navy frowned on — earning a civil pilot 's license . His flying skills gradually improved , and by early 1947 his instructors rated him above average . He was sent to Naval Air Station Pensacola in Florida for advanced training . His final test was six perfect landings on the carrier USS Saipan . The following day he received his Naval Aviator wings , which his proud father pinned on his chest . 
 Shepard was assigned to Fighter Squadron 42 ( VF @-@ 42 ) , flying the F4U Corsair . The squadron was nominally based on the aircraft carrier USS Franklin D. Roosevelt , but it was being overhauled at the time Shepard arrived , and in the meantime the squadron was based at Naval Air Station Norfolk in Virginia . He departed on his first cruise , of the Caribbean , with it in 1948 . Most of the aviators were , like Shepard , on their first assignment . Those that were not were given the opportunity to qualify for night landings on a carrier , a dangerous maneuver , especially in a Corsair , which had to bank sharply on approach . Shepard managed to persuade his squadron commander to allow him to qualify as well . After briefly returning to Norfolk , the carrier set out on a nine @-@ month tour of the Mediterranean Sea . He earned a reputation for carousing and chasing women . He also instituted a ritual of , whenever he could , calling Louise at 17 : 00 ( her time ) . 
 Normally sea duty alternated with periods of duty ashore . In 1950 , Shepard was selected to attend the United States Naval Test Pilot School at Naval Air Station Patuxent River in Maryland . After graduation , he participated in flight test work , which included high @-@ altitude tests to obtain data on light at different altitudes and on a variety of air masses over the American continent ; test and development experiments of the Navy 's in @-@ flight refueling system ; carrier suitability trials of the F2H Banshee ; and Navy trials of the first angled carrier deck . He narrowly avoided being court @-@ martialed by the station commander , Rear Admiral Alfred M. Pride after looping the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and making low passes over the beach at Ocean City , Maryland , and the base ; but Shepard 's superiors , John Hyland and Robert M. Elder , interceded on his behalf . 
 Fighter Squadron 193 ( VF @-@ 193 ) , based at Naval Air Station Moffett Field , California , was a night fighter unit flying F2H Banshee jets . The squadron was part of James D. " Jig Dog " Ramage 's Air Group 19 . Naval aviators with experience in jet aircraft were still relatively rare , and Ramage specifically requested Shepard 's assignment on the advice of Elder , who commanded VF @-@ 193 's sister squadron , VF @-@ 191 . Ramage made Shepard his own wingman , a decision that would save his life in 1954 , when Ramage 's oxygen system failed , and Shepard talked him through a landing . As operations officer of this squadron , Shepard 's most important job was imparting his knowledge of flying jets to his fellow aviators to keep them alive . He made two tours to the western Pacific on board the aircraft carrier USS Oriskany . It set out a combat tour off Korea in 1953 , during the Korean War , but the Korean Armistice Agreement ended the fighting in July 1953 , and Shepard did not see combat . 
 Shepard returned to Patuxent for a second tour of duty and engaged in flight testing the F3H Demon , <unk> Crusader , <unk> <unk> and <unk> Tiger . At one point he was forced to bail out of a Vought <unk> Cutlass . In 1957 , he was project test pilot on the <unk> <unk> . Shepard did not like the plane , and his unfavorable report killed the project . His last five months at Patuxent were spent as an instructor in the Test Pilot School . He then attended the Naval War College at Newport , Rhode Island , and , upon graduating in 1957 , was assigned to the staff of the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Atlantic Fleet , as Aircraft Readiness Officer . By this time he had logged more than 3 @,@ 600 hours of flying time , including 1 @,@ 700 hours in jets . 
 = = NASA career = = 
 = = = Mercury Seven = = = 
 In 1959 , the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) received permission from President Dwight D. Eisenhower to recruit its first astronauts from the ranks of military test pilots . The service records of 508 graduates of test pilot schools were obtained from the Department of Defense . From these , 110 were found that matched the minimum standards . These included being less than 40 years old , with a bachelor 's degree or equivalent , and no taller than 5 feet 11 inches ( 1 @.@ 80 m ) . While there was flexibility with some requirements , the height requirement was firm , owing to the size of the Project Mercury spacecraft . The 110 were then split into three groups , with the most promising candidates in the first group . 
 The first group of 35 , which included Shepard , assembled at the Pentagon on February 2 , 1959 . The Navy and Marine Corps officers were welcomed by the Chief of Naval Operations , Admiral Arleigh Burke , while the United States Air Force officers were addressed by the Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force , General Thomas D. White . Both pledged their support to the Space Program , and promised that the careers of volunteers would not be adversely affected . NASA officials then briefed them on Project Mercury . They conceded that it would be a hazardous undertaking , but emphasised that it was of great national importance . That evening , Shepard discussed the day 's events with fellow naval aviators Jim Lovell , Pete Conrad and Wally Schirra . All were concerned about their careers , but decided to volunteer . 
 The briefing process was repeated with a second group of 34 candidates a week later . Of the 69 , six were found to be over the height limit , 15 were eliminated for other reasons , and 16 declined . This left NASA with 32 candidates . Since this was more than expected , it was decided not only to not bother with the remaining candidates , but to select six astronauts instead of the twelve originally planned . Then came a grueling series of physical and psychological tests at the Lovelace Clinic and the Wright Aerospace Medical Laboratory . Only one candidate , Lovell , was eliminated on medical grounds at this stage , and the diagnosis was later found to be in error . 
 Shepard was informed of his selection on April 1 , 1959 . Two days later he headed up to Boston with Louise for the wedding of his cousin Alice , and was able to break the news to his parents and sister . The identities of the seven were made public at a press conference at Dolley Madison House in Washington , DC , on April 9 , 1959 : Scott Carpenter , Gordon Cooper , John Glenn , Gus Grissom , Wally Schirra , Alan Shepard , and Deke Slayton . The enormity of the challenge ahead of them was made clear a few weeks later , on the night of May 18 , 1959 , when the seven astronauts gathered at Cape Canaveral to watch their first rocket launch , of an SM @-@ <unk> Atlas similar to the one that was to carry them into orbit . A few minutes after lift off , it spectacularly exploded , lighting up the night sky . The astronauts were stunned . Shepard turned to Glenn and said : " Well , I 'm glad they got that out of the way . " 
 = = = Freedom 7 = = = 
 Faced with intense competition from the other astronauts , particularly John Glenn , Shepard quit smoking , and adopted Glenn 's habit of taking a morning jog , although he did not go so far as to give up the cocktails or the philandering . On January 19 , 1961 , Robert R. Gilruth , the director of NASA 's Space Task Group , informed the seven astronauts that Shepard had been chosen for the first American manned mission into space . Shepard later recalled Louise 's response when he told her that she had her arms around the man who would be the first man in space : " Who let a Russian in here ? " During training he flew 120 simulated flights . Although his flight was originally scheduled for April 26 , 1960 , delays by unplanned preparatory work meant that this was postponed several times , initially to December 5 , 1960 , then mid @-@ January 1961 , March 6 , 1961 , April 25 , 1961 , May 2 , 1961 , and finally to May 5 , 1961 . On April 12 , 1961 , Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin had become the first person in space , and the first to orbit the Earth . When reporters rang Shorty Powers for a comment at 4am , he memorably replied : " We 're all asleep down here " . 
 On May 5 , 1961 , Shepard piloted the Mercury @-@ Redstone 3 mission and became the second person , and the first American , to travel into space . He named his spacecraft , Mercury Spacecraft 7 , Freedom 7 . It was launched by a Redstone rocket , and unlike Gagarin 's 108 @-@ minute orbital flight in a Vostok spacecraft three times the size of a Mercury capsule , Shepard stayed on a ballistic trajectory for a 15 @-@ minute sub @-@ orbital flight , which carried him to an altitude of 116 statute miles ( 187 km ) and to a splashdown point 302 statute miles ( 486 km ) down the Atlantic Missile Range . Shortly before the launch , Shepard said to himself : " Don 't mess up , Shepard ... " Unlike Gagarin , whose flight was strictly automatic , Shepard had some control of Freedom 7 , spacecraft attitude in particular . Shepard 's launch was seen live on television by millions . According to Gene Kranz in his book Failure Is Not an Option , " When reporters asked Shepard what he thought about as he sat atop the Redstone rocket , waiting for liftoff , he had replied , ' The fact that every part of this ship was built by the lowest <unk> 
 After a dramatic Atlantic Ocean recovery , Commander Shepard observed , " ... didn 't really feel the flight was a success until the recovery had been successfully completed . It 's not the fall that hurts ; it 's the sudden stop . " Splashdown occurred with an impact comparable to landing a jet aircraft on an aircraft carrier . A recovery helicopter arrived after a few minutes , and the capsule was lifted partly out of the water to allow Shepard to leave by the main hatch . He squeezed out of the door and into a sling hoist , and was pulled into the helicopter , which flew both the astronaut and spacecraft to the aircraft carrier USS Lake Champlain . The whole recovery process took just eleven minutes . Shepard was celebrated as a national hero , honored with ticker @-@ tape parades in Washington , New York and Los Angeles , and received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President John F. Kennedy . He was also awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 Shepard served as capsule communicator ( CAPCOM ) for Glenn 's Mercury @-@ Atlas 6 orbital flight , which he had also been considered for , and Carpenter 's Mercury @-@ Atlas 7 . He was the backup pilot for Cooper for the Mercury @-@ Atlas 9 mission , nearly replacing Cooper after Cooper flew low over the NASA administration building at Cape Canaveral in an F @-@ 106 . In the final stages of Project Mercury , Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury @-@ Atlas 10 ( MA @-@ 10 ) , which was planned as a three @-@ day mission . He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft , but on June 12 , 1963 , NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced that Mercury had accomplished all its goals , and no more missions would be flown . Shepard went as far as making a personal appeal to President Kennedy , but to no avail . 
 = = = Project Gemini : Chief astronaut = = = 
 After the Mercury @-@ Atlas 10 mission was cancelled , Shepard was designated as the Command Pilot of the first manned Project Gemini mission , with Thomas P. Stafford chosen as his Pilot . In late 1963 , Shepard began to experience episodes of extreme dizziness and nausea , accompanied by a loud , clanging noise in the left ear . He tried to keep it secret , fearing that he would lose his flight status , but was aware that if an episode occurred in the air or in space it could be fatal . Following an episode during a lecture in Houston , where he had recently moved from Virginia Beach , Virginia , Shepard was forced to confess his ailment to Slayton , who was now Director Flight Operations , and seek help from NASA 's doctors . 
 The doctors diagnosed Ménière 's disease , a condition in which fluid pressure builds up in the inner ear . This syndrome causes the semicircular canals and motion detectors to become extremely sensitive , resulting in disorientation , dizziness , and nausea . There was no known cure , but in about 20 percent of cases the condition went away by itself . They prescribed diuretics in an attempt to drain the fluid from the ear . They also diagnosed glaucoma . An X @-@ ray found a lump on his thyroid , and on January 17 , 1964 , surgeons at Hermann Hospital removed 20 percent of it . The condition caused Shepard to be removed from flight status . Grissom and John Young flew Gemini 3 instead . 
 Shepard was designated Chief of the Astronaut Office , with responsibility for monitoring the coordination , scheduling , and control of all activities involving NASA astronauts . This included monitoring the development and implementation of effective training programs to assure the flight readiness of personnel for crew assignments on manned space flights ; furnishing pilot evaluations applicable to the design , construction , and operations of spacecraft systems and related equipment ; and providing qualitative scientific and engineering observations to facilitate overall mission planning , formulation of feasible operational procedures , and selection and conduct of specific experiments for each flight . He spent much of his time investing in banks and real estate . 
 During this period , his secretary had several head shot photographs taken of Shepard , posed with various expressions on his face . She would post these on the door to his private office , with a sign which said " Mood of the Day . " Visitors could then look at the photo to decide whether it was a good time to talk to him . 
 = = = Apollo program = = = 
 In 1968 , Stafford stopped by Shepard 's office and told him that an <unk> in Los Angeles had developed a cure for Ménière 's disease . Shepard flew to Los Angeles , where he met with Dr. William F. House . House proposed to cut through Shepard 's mastoid bone and make a tiny hole in the saccule . A small tube was inserted through which excess fluid would drain from the <unk> sac . The surgery was conducted in early 1969 at St. Vincent 's Hospital in Los Angeles , where Shepard checked in under the pseudonym of Victor Poulos . 
 The surgery was successful , and Shepard was restored to full flight status on May 7 , 1969 . Shepard and Slayton put Shepard down to command the next available moon mission , which was Apollo 13 in 1970 . Under normal circumstances , this assignment would have gone to Cooper , as the backup commander of Apollo 10 . Cooper was swept aside . Shepard asked for Jim McDivitt as his Lunar Module Pilot . A rookie , Stuart Roosa , was designated the Command Module Pilot . McDivitt baulked at the prospect , arguing that Shepard did not have sufficient Apollo training to command a moon mission . A rookie , Edgar Mitchell was designated the Lunar Module Pilot instead . When Slayton submitted the proposed crew assignments to NASA headquarters , George Mueller turned it down . So Slayton asked Jim Lovell , who had been the backup commander for Apollo 11 , and was slated to command Apollo 14 , if his crew would be willing to fly Apollo 13 instead . He agreed to do so , and Shepard 's inexperienced crew was assigned to Apollo 14 instead . Neither Cooper nor McDivitt ever flew in space again . 
 Shepard made his second space flight as Commander of Apollo 14 from January 31 to February 9 , 1971 , America 's third successful lunar landing mission . Shepard piloted the Lunar Module Antares to the most accurate landing of the entire Apollo program . He became the fifth and , at 47 , the oldest man to walk on the moon . This was the first mission to successfully broadcast color television pictures from the surface of the Moon , using a vidicon @-@ tube camera . ( The color camera on Apollo 12 provided a few brief moments of color telecasting before it was inadvertently pointed at the Sun , ending its usefulness . ) While on the Moon , Shepard used a Wilson six @-@ iron head attached to a lunar sample scoop handle to drive golf balls . Despite thick gloves and a stiff spacesuit , which forced him to swing the club with one hand , Shepard struck two golf balls ; driving the second , as he jokingly put it , " miles and miles and miles " . 
 For this mission Shepard was awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal and the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . His citation read : 
 The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Navy Distinguished Service Medal to Captain Alan Bartlett Shepard , Jr . ( NSN : 0 @-@ <unk> ) , United States Navy , for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished service in a position of great responsibility to the Government of the United States , as Spacecraft Commander for the Apollo 14 flight to the Fra @-@ Mauro area of the moon during the period 31 January 1971 to 9 February 1971 . Responsible for the on @-@ board control of the spacecraft command module Kittyhawk and the lunar module Antares in the gathering of scientific data involving complex and difficult instrumentation positing and sample gathering , including a hazardous two @-@ mile traverse of the lunar surface , Captain Shepard , by his brilliant performance , contributed essentially to the success of this vital scientific moon mission . As a result of his skillful leadership , professional competence and dedication , the Apollo 14 mission , with its numerous tasks and vital scientific experiments , was accomplished in an outstanding manner , enabling scientists to determine more precisely the moon 's original formation and further forecast man 's proper role in the exploration of his Universe . By his courageous and determined devotion to duty , Captain Shepard rendered valuable and distinguished service and contributed greatly to the success of the United States Space Program , thereby upholding the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 Following Apollo 14 , Shepard returned to his position as Chief of the Astronaut Office in June 1971 . He was appointed by President Richard Nixon in July 1971 as a delegate to the 26th United Nations General Assembly , serving from September to December 1971 . He was promoted to Rear Admiral by Nixon on August 26 , 1971 , the first astronaut to reach this rank , although McDivitt had previously been promoted to brigadier general in the Air Force . He retired from both NASA and the Navy on July 31 , 1974 . 
 = = Later years = = 
 After Shepard left NASA , he served on the boards of many corporations . He also served as president of his umbrella company for several business enterprises , Seven Fourteen Enterprises , Inc . ( named for his two flights , Freedom 7 and Apollo 14 ) . He was a member of many organizations . He was a fellow of the American Astronautical Society and the Society of Experimental Test Pilots ; member of the Rotary , the Kiwanis , the Mayflower Society , the Order of the Cincinnati , and the American Fighter Aces ; honorary member , Board of Directors for the Houston School for Deaf Children , Director , National Space Institute , and Director , Los Angeles Ear Research Institute . 
 In 1984 , he and the other surviving Mercury astronauts , along with Betty Grissom , the widow of astronaut Gus Grissom , founded the Mercury Seven Foundation to raise money for scholarships for science and engineering students in college . In 1995 , the organization was renamed the Astronaut Scholarship Foundation . Shepard was elected president and chairman of the foundation , posts he held until October 1997 , when he turned over both positions to former astronaut Jim Lovell . 
 In 1994 , he published a book with two journalists , Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict , called Moon Shot : The Inside Story of America 's Race to the Moon . Fellow Mercury astronaut Deke Slayton is also named as an author . The book generated some controversy for use of a staged photo purportedly showing Shepard hitting a golf ball on the Moon . The book was also turned into a TV miniseries in 1994 . 
 Shepard was diagnosed with leukemia in 1996 , and died from it in Pebble Beach , California , on July 21 , 1998 , He was the second astronaut who had walked on the Moon to die , Jim Irwin being the first in 1991 . His widow Louise resolved to cremate his remains and scatter the ashes , but she died from a heart attack five weeks later on August 25 , 1998 , at 17 : 00 , the time at which Shepard had always called her . They had been married for 53 years . The family decided to cremate them both , and their ashes scattered together by a Navy helicopter over Stillwater Cove , in front of their Pebble Beach home . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Shepard was awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor by President Jimmy Carter on October 1 , 1978 . He also received the Golden Plate Award for Science and Exploration in 1981 ; the Langley Gold Medal ( highest award of the Smithsonian Institution for Aeronautics and Astronautics ) on May 5 , 1964 ; the John J. Montgomery Award in 1963 ; the Lambert trophy ; the <unk> Iven C. Kincheloe Award ; the Cabot Award ; the Collier Trophy ; and the City of New York Gold Medal for 1971 . He was awarded an Honorary Master of Arts degree from Dartmouth College in 1962 , an Honorary D.Sc. from Miami University in 1971 , and an Honorary Doctorate of Humanities from Franklin Pierce College in 1972 . Shepard was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1977 , the International Space Hall of Fame in 1981 , and the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame on May 11 , 1990 . 
 Many things are named in his honor . The Navy named a supply ship , USNS Alan Shepard ( T @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ) for him in 2006 . The McAuliffe @-@ Shepard Discovery Center in Concord , New Hampshire is named after Shepard and Christa McAuliffe . Interstate 93 in New Hampshire , from the Massachusetts is designated the Alan B. Shepard <unk> and in Hampton , Virginia , a road is named Commander Shepard Boulevard in his honor . His hometown of Derry has the nickname Space Town in honor of his career as an astronaut . Following an act of Congress , the post office in Derry is designated the Alan B. Shepard , Jr . Post Office Building . Alan Shepard Park in Cocoa Beach , Florida , a beach @-@ side park south of Cape Canaveral , is named in his honor . The City of Virginia Beach renamed its convention center , with its integral geodesic dome , the Alan B. Shepard Convention Center . The building was later renamed the Alan B. Shepard Civic Center , and was razed in 1994 . At the time of the Freedom 7 launch , Shepard lived in Virginia Beach . 
 Shepard 's high school alma mater in Derry , Pinkerton Academy , has a building named after him , and the school team name is called the Astros after his career as an astronaut . Alan B. Shepard High School , in Palos Heights , Illinois , which opened in 1976 , was named in his honor . Framed newspapers throughout the school depict various accomplishments and milestones in Shepard 's life . Additionally , an autographed plaque commemorates the dedication of the building . The school newspaper is named Freedom 7 and the yearbook is entitled Odyssey . 
 In a 2010 Space Foundation survey , Shepard was ranked as the ninth most popular space hero ( tied with astronauts Buzz Aldrin and Gus Grissom ) . In 2011 , NASA honored Shepard with an Ambassador of Exploration Award , consisting of a Moon rock encased in Lucite , for his contributions to the U.S. space program . His family members accepted the award on his behalf during a ceremony on April 28 at the U.S. Naval Academy Museum in Annapolis , Maryland , where it is on permanent display . On May 4 , 2011 , the U.S. Postal Service issued a first @-@ class stamp in Shepard 's honor , the first U.S. stamp to depict a specific astronaut . The first day of issue ceremony was held at NASA 's Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex . 
 Each year , the Space Foundation , in partnership with the Astronauts Memorial Foundation and NASA , present the Alan Shepard Technology in Education Award for outstanding contributions by K – 12 educators or district @-@ level administrators to educational technology . The award recognizes excellence in the development and application of technology in the classroom or to the professional development of teachers . The recipient demonstrates exemplary use of technology either to foster lifelong learners or to make the learning process easier . 
 = = In media = = 
 1965 – The character of Alan Tracy in the Thunderbirds was named after him . 
 1983 film The Right Stuff – played by Scott Glenn . 
 1998 HBO miniseries From the Earth to the Moon – played by Ted Levine 
 2001 opening montage , Star Trek : Enterprise 
 2002 film Race to Space , played by Mark Moses 
 2005 BBC TV series Space Race – played by Todd Boyce 
 2007 - 2012 BioWare Video Game Series Mass Effect - main protagonist Commander Shepard is named after him . 
 2015 ABC TV series The Astronaut Wives Club – played by Desmond Harrington . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 Weight : 170 pounds ( 77 kg ) 
 Height : 5 feet 11 inches ( 180 cm ) 
 Hair : Brown 
 Eyes : Blue 
 = Schwingt freudig euch empor , BWV 36 = 
 Schwingt freudig euch empor ( Soar joyfully upwards ) , BWV 36 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Leipzig in 1731 for the first Sunday in Advent , drawing on material from previous congratulatory cantatas , beginning with Schwingt freudig euch empor , BWV <unk> ( 1725 ) . The Gospel for the Sunday was the Entry into Jerusalem , thus the mood of the secular work matched " the people 's jubilant shouts of Hosanna " . In a unique structure in Bach 's cantatas , he interpolated four movements derived from the former works with four stanzas from two important hymns for Advent , to add liturgical focus , three from Luther 's " Nun komm , der Heiden Heiland " and one from Nicolai 's " Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern " . He first performed the cantata in its final form of two parts , eight movements , on 2 December 1731 . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach composed the cantata in 1731 in Leipzig , for the first Sunday of Advent , the beginning of the Lutheran church year . In Leipzig this was the only Sunday in Advent when a cantata was performed , whereas tempus clausum ( quiet time ) was observed on the other three Sundays . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the Epistle to the Romans , " night is advanced , day will come " ( Romans 13 : 11 – 14 ) , and from the Gospel of Matthew , the Entry into Jerusalem ( Matthew 21 : 1 – 9 ) . 
 Bach based parts of the music on a homage cantata of the same name , Schwingt freudig euch empor , BWV <unk> , which he had composed for the birthday of a Leipzig University teacher and first performed in spring 1725 . The text was probably written by Picander , who modified it to a congratulatory cantata for Countess Charlotte Friederike Wilhelmine of Anhalt @-@ Köthen , <unk> freudig in die Luft , BWV 36a , first performed on 30 November 1726 . Another version was a congratulatory cantata for a member of the <unk> family from Leipzig , Die Freude <unk> sich , BWV <unk> , probably in 1735 . 
 Bach transformed the secular music to a cantata for the first Sunday in Advent , first by combining four movements and simply adding a chorale , the final stanza of " Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern " . The librettist of this adaptation , who stayed close to the secular cantata without reference to the readings , is unknown . Klaus Hofmann notes that the jubilant opening matches the Gospel of the entry into Jerusalem " with the people 's jubilant shouts of Hosanna " . The date of the adaptation is not certain , because the version is extant only in a copy by Bach 's student Christoph Nichelmann . 
 Finally in 1731 , Bach reworked the cantata considerably and wrote a new score . He interpolated the arias not with recitatives , but with three stanzas from Luther 's hymn for Advent , " Nun komm , der Heiden Heiland " . This main hymn for the first Sunday in Advent had already opened his cantata for the same occasion in 1714 , Nun komm , der Heiden Heiland , BWV 61 , and he had used it as the base for his chorale cantata Nun komm , der Heiden Heiland , BWV 62 , in 1724 . The hymn stanzas " serve to anchor the cantata to some extent in the Advent story , and to give it liturgical purpose and a clear focus " . John Eliot Gardiner terms it " structurally unusual " . Bach divided the cantata in two parts to be performed before and after the sermon , closing part I with a stanza from Nicolai 's hymn . For context , he replaced stanza 7 , which had closed the whole cantata , by stanza 6 , and closed part II by the final stanza of Luther 's hymn . 
 Bach first performed the cantata on 2 December 1731 , one week after Wachet auf , ruft uns die Stimme , BWV 140 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 The cantata is scored for four soloists — soprano , alto , tenor and bass — a four @-@ part choir , two oboes d 'amore , two violins , viola and basso continuo . It is structured in two parts of four movements each . Its interpolation of chorus and arias with chorales is unique in Bach 's cantatas . 
 Part I 
 Chorus : Schwingt freudig euch empor 
 Choral ( soprano , alto ) : Nun komm , der Heiden Heiland 
 Aria ( tenor ) : Die Liebe <unk> mit <unk> <unk> 
 Chorale : <unk> die Saiten in <unk> 
 Part II 
 Aria ( bass ) : Willkommen , <unk> Schatz ! 
 Chorale ( tenor ) : Der du bist dem Vater gleich 
 Aria ( soprano ) : Auch mit <unk> , <unk> Stimmen 
 Chorale : Lob sei Gott dem Vater ton 
 = = Music = = 
 The cantata is unique in Bach 's church cantatas in its structure of arias combined with chorale instead of recitatives . Performed one week after Wachet auf , ruft uns die Stimme , BWV 140 , it shows Bach 's emphasis on the chorale even beyond his second cycle of chorale cantatas , begun in 1724 . 
 The opening chorus is opened by a ritornello , dominated by two contrasting motifs : the strings play a short rising figure in triplets , the oboes d 'amore play an expansive melody . As in the secular model , the movement is in two similar parts , each consisting of two contrasting sections , " Schwingt freudig euch empor zu den <unk> <unk> " ( Soar joyfully upwards to the exalted stars ) and " Doch <unk> ein ! " ( Yet stop ! ) . The bass voice , the lowest register , enters first , followed by the tenors , altos , and sopranos . This ascending sequence also reflects the text : " soaring aloft " , literally " swinging upward " . 
 Gardiner , who conducted the three cantatas for the first Sunday in Advent during the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage with the Monteverdi Choir in 2000 , described the movement as a " spiritual madrigal – capricious , light @-@ textured and deeply satisfying once all its virtuosic technical demands have been met : those tricky runs , divisions and chromatic intervals in all voices , and the chains of triplet figuration in the unison oboes d 'amore and first violins " . He compares the figures on " <unk> ein ! " ( stop ) in the middle section to " <unk> ? " ( where ) in the aria " <unk> , <unk> " in Bach 's St John Passion . 
 All three settings of the stanzas from Luther 's chorale are different , beginning with a duet for soprano and alto for the first stanza . The voices are doubled by the oboes d 'amore and render the text in sections of different length , with sixteen measures for the final " Gott <unk> Geburt ihm <unk> " ( that God had ordained such a birth for Him ) . Alfred Dürr notes the expressiveness of the music , especially in leaps of sixths on the urgent request " nun komm " ( now come ) , syncopated rhythm on " des sich <unk> alle Welt " ( over whom the whole world marvels ) , and daring chromatic on the final line . The tenor aria reflects " Die Liebe <unk> mit <unk> <unk> " ( Love approaches with gentle steps ) with oboe d 'amore as obbligato instrument , " the traditional musical symbol of love " , alluding to the concept of Jesus as the bride @-@ groom and the Soul as the bride , which is also the base for Nicolai 's hymn that closes part I in a " rousing four @-@ part harmonisation " . 
 The bass aria beginning part II , " Willkommen , <unk> Schatz ! " ( Welcome , worthy treasure ! ) shows " echoes of the first movement " and avoids a regular da capo structure . The bass voice is the vox Christi , addressing the bride . The welcoming gesture from the secular cantata seems appropriate for the expressed sentiment . The next hymn stanza , " Der du bist dem Vater gleich " ( You who are like the Father ) , the sixth stanza from Luther 's hymn " dealing with the sins of the flesh and Christ 's mission to redeem humankind " , is marked " molt ' allegro " . The tenor sings the chorale melody unadorned as a cantus firmus , but the oboes d 'amore play with " the urgent surging of semi @-@ quaver activity " . Dürr sees the expression of " Kampf und Sieg des <unk> " ( fight and victory of the Son of God ) over " das <unk> Fleisch " ( weak / sick flesh ) of man . Gardiner compares it to a trio sonata movement . He terms the last aria " a <unk> of pure enchantment " and compares it to the " echo aria " from part IV of Bach 's Christmas Oratorio . The text " Auch mit <unk> , <unk> Stimmen " ( Also with muted , weak voices ) is illustrated by a muted ( con sordino ) solo violin . The closing choral , the final stanza of Luther 's hymn , " Lob sei Gott dem Vater ton " ( Praise be to God , the Father ) is a four @-@ part setting . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 A list of recordings is provided by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . The type of choir and orchestra is roughly shown as a large group by red background , and as an ensemble with period instruments in historically informed performance or a choir of one voice per part ( OVPP ) by green background . 
 = Hi @-@ 5 ( Australian band ) = 
 Hi @-@ 5 are an Australian children 's musical group formed in 1998 , which is associated with the children 's television series of the same name . As of May 2016 , the members are <unk> Zheng , Mary Lascaris , Tanika Anderson , <unk> Dearing and Chris White . The group is aimed at preschoolers , composed of five performers who entertain and educate children through music , movement and play . Hi @-@ 5 was created by Helena Harris and Posie Graeme @-@ Evans , initially a television series for the Nine Network , which premiered in 1999 . The cast of the show became a recognised musical group for children . 
 The original members were Kellie Crawford , Kathleen de Leon Jones , Nathan Foley , Tim Harding and Charli Robinson . Four of their albums reached the top 10 on the ARIA Albums Chart , It 's a Party ( No. 4 , July 2000 ) , Boom Boom Beat ( No. 3 , August 2001 ) , It 's a Hi @-@ 5 Christmas ( No. 4 , December 2001 ) and Hi @-@ 5 Hits ( No. 10 , July 2003 ) . This line @-@ up had been completely phased out by the end of 2008 , following de Leon Jones , who left on maternity leave in 2006 . The membership has since changed several times . The brand has produced numerous television series , music albums , worldwide tours and merchandise . The appeal of the group overseas has led to international versions . The television series features puppet characters Chatterbox and Jup Jup , who are popular associates of the group and are included in the live stage shows . 
 Hi @-@ 5 were one of Australia 's highest paid entertainment entities , placing in the Business Review Weekly 's annual list several times , earning an estimated A $ 18million in 2009 . The members of Hi @-@ 5 are employees of the brand and do not hold equity . Their albums have been certified by ARIA as double platinum ( It 's a Party ) , platinum ( Jump and Jive with Hi @-@ 5 , Boom Boom Beat , It 's a Hi @-@ 5 Christmas ) and gold ( Celebrate ) . By 2004 the original group line @-@ up had received five consecutive Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) Music Awards in the same category , Best Children 's Album , a then @-@ record . By that time they had also received three Logie Television Awards for Most Outstanding Children 's Program . Foley stated that Hi @-@ 5 set a benchmark for a new style of non @-@ traditional children 's entertainment . Hi @-@ 5 broke into the South East Asian market after the brand was sold by the Nine Network in 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Hi @-@ 5 were formed in 1998 in Sydney , Australia as a children 's musical group . Television producer Helena Harris , who worked on Bananas in Pyjamas , co @-@ created Hi @-@ 5 as a concept for a new television show . She and co @-@ producer Posie Graeme @-@ Evans ( The Miraculous <unk> , Mirror , Mirror ) developed the series as a contemporary form of preschool entertainment , incorporating educational trends with an appeal for all ages . Hi @-@ 5 includes music and movement to capture the attention of children . Featuring five young performers , the cast are intended to act as older siblings of viewers , rather than adults teaching children . The name of the group was derived from the high five gesture . 
 Harris stated that her inspiration for Hi @-@ 5 came partly from living in England , where she realised that children are the same around the world , and decided the show would appeal universally , with accessible themes such as family and animals . The show is kept contemporary so that these themes relate to the current world of children , with the producers keeping in touch with the audience . Another inspiration for Harris was watching pop group , the Spice Girls , whom she believed were dancing moves of a standard which preschoolers could replicate . The creators saw the need for " life @-@ affirming " television for rapidly maturing preschoolers , and found that most children learned from shows which incorporated movement and song . 
 After auditions for the group ( narrowing down " about 300 " people to only five ) , the television pilot for Hi @-@ 5 was produced in mid 1998 , with the original cast consisting of Kellie Crawford ( née Hoggart ) , Kathleen de Leon Jones , Nathan Foley , Tim Harding and Charli Robinson , who were aged between 18 and 24 at the time of filming . After being commission and filmed , the series first aired in April 1999 . The corresponding debut album , Jump and Jive with Hi @-@ 5 , was released in September by Sony Music and reached No. 33 on the ARIA Albums Chart . The group toured around Sydney in their first year . 
 Harris stated that the energy of the group was fast paced and that physical interaction was encouraged . This replicates the style and energy of a music video , which children seem to enjoy . The educational theories of the group were disguised with music and entertainment , and that multiple layers catering for a wide range of ages in the audience , while being primarily aimed at those aged 2 – 8 . She explained that Hi @-@ 5 was primarily a television series , but the music itself had the ability to stand alone . Harris expected that the series would initially become formatted into international versions , however the original cast was so strong that the Australian series was sold overseas instead . 
 = = = Early success = = = 
 Hi @-@ 5 had initial success within their first year , winning the 2000 Logie Award for Most Outstanding Children 's Program , and ARIA Award for Best Children 's Album for Jump and Jive with Hi @-@ 5 . Hi @-@ 5 continued to film one television series and record one music album each year . Throughout the early years , the album releases received album accreditations ; Celebrate was certified as gold , while Jump and Jive with Hi @-@ 5 , Boom Boom Beat and It 's a Hi @-@ 5 Christmas went platinum , and It 's a Party received double platinum status . Four of their albums reached the top 10 on the ARIA Albums Chart , It 's a Party ( No. 4 , July 2000 ) , Boom Boom Beat ( No. 3 , August 2001 ) , It 's a Hi @-@ 5 Christmas ( No. 4 , December 2001 ) and Hi @-@ 5 Hits ( No. 10 , July 2003 ) . Hi @-@ 5 also toured nationally every year , with sell @-@ out national tours of their early stage shows , in venues such as the Sydney Opera House . Hi @-@ 5 won the 2002 Helpmann Award for " Best Children 's Stage Show " for their production Hi @-@ 5 Alive . In 2001 and occasions earlier , the cast stated that they never expected Hi @-@ 5 to become such a huge success . Robinson explained it wasn 't until they went on tour that they realised . Crawford described the group as " a pop group for kids " . 
 In 2002 , it was revealed that Crawford and Foley were in a personal relationship . The couple were engaged in 2005 , however called off the wedding plans in late 2006 . 
 Hi @-@ 5 had a successful premiere in the UK in early 2003 , which led the group to tour in 2004 with the award winning Hi @-@ 5 Alive show , later returning in 2005 and 2006 . New Zealand and Singapore were also frequent touring destinations . In 2005 , Hi @-@ 5 performed in arena venues around Australia , in order to " maximise the crowds " . By the end of the 2005 , Hi @-@ 5 had performed to a total audience of over one and a half million people around the world . 
 Group members expressed just how demanding their role in the group had been , describing the job as " hard work " and " a tough gig " , with touring for nine months of every year and filming the television series for most of the remainder , creating little time in their lives for anything else . Members also saw importance of being " career driven " and in portraying a positive image of themselves to the public in their personal lives , being " always on " . However , the cast insisted that the stressful work was well worth it to see a smile on a child 's face , and described the bond between the members as " like family " . In 2005 Harding stated the lifestyle was " quite hard in the beginning . " In October 2015 Robinson stated she had tried to leave the group " after eight years " but was convinced by producers to stay . She expressed that the following years she spent with the group were her favourite , and that she was proud of her decision to continue . 
 = = = Replacement of original members = = = 
 The original Hi @-@ 5 cast were together for eight series . In early 2006 , de Leon Jones announced she was pregnant , and would take maternity leave from April onwards . Sun Park was introduced as her temporary replacement , while de Leon Jones had her first child in July . Park was part of the television series filming in 2006 , and also toured with the group across Australia and New Zealand over 2006 and 2007 . In July 2006 de Leon Jones stated that she was intent on returning to Hi @-@ 5 . However , in July 2007 , de Leon Jones made the decision to permanently leave the group to focus on being a mother . Park took her place as a permanent member with the group . Harris stated that by 2007 , " Hi @-@ 5 [ was ] still evolving and maintaining its relevance and freshness " . 
 Harding was involved in a serious motorcycle accident in June 2007 , which left him unable to keep up with the high energy of Hi @-@ 5 . Just a few days prior to this , Stevie Nicholson was hired as an understudy , and put straight into work as a temporary replacement for Harding . The group begun rehearsals for the Hi @-@ 5 Circus <unk> tour in August , the first time the group would take on such a physically demanding show , with the theme of circus incorporating tricks such as trapeze , tightrope walking and gymnastics . Nicholson debuted on tour with the Circus in August . Harding announced his permanent departure in November after recovering from injuries . Of his time with the group , Harding said , " I 've had an incredible journey with Hi @-@ 5 , one I will always cherish " . Nicholson took his place as a permanent member . Harris stated " it 's like [ he ] was born to this job . " 
 In February 2008 , Robinson ( by then Delaney ) announced that she would be leaving the group . Robinson revealed she wanted to prove herself as an actress for an adult audience , stating , " I kind of need to de @-@ Hi @-@ 5 myself ... I have been this character for the past ten years . " She was proud of her " ten truly wonderful years " , and would help find a replacement member . After leaving she went on to find success presenting in the Australian media industry . In April , Casey Burgess was announced as Robinson 's replacement , and began touring with the group " . 
 The Hi @-@ 5 brand was purchased by the Nine Network , along with production company Southern Star , in March 2008 . The change of production company saw Harris and Graeme @-@ Evans end their involvement with the group , which was placed under the direction of Martin <unk> and Cathy Payne , also Nine and Southern Star executives . 
 It was announced in October that Crawford would be leaving the group at the end of the year to explore other options . On her ten years with the group , she said , " I would 've always taken this opportunity if I was given it again . It 's taken me all over the world " . A month later , last remaining original member Foley also announced his departure . He expressed interest in focusing on his adult music career . He stated , " I 'll always love Hi @-@ 5 and I 'm very proud to be one of the original cast members , but after 10 years in the group its time for me to move on and explore other opportunities " . 
 In December News.com.au 's Confidential reporter alleged that Hi @-@ 5 's production company had asked Crawford and Foley to leave , and that the company were " opting to recruit younger , cheaper performers . " The pair remained silent in response to these reports . Later in December , Park also announced she would be leaving the group , expressing she expected to only be a temporary replacement . Park denied the industry rumours , saying that there had been no pressure for any of them to resign . The departing members finished the Australian Playtime tour together and had their final performance at Carols by Candlelight on Christmas Eve in Melbourne . Of the large cast change , in later years Burgess revealed it had been a difficult transition . " We didn 't know what was coming up for a moment there , " she said , " It was just [ Nicholson ] and I going , ' OK , what 's happening now ? ' " 
 = = = Second generation = = = 
 After auditions for three new members in late 2008 , the new cast began work in January 2009 . Lauren Brant , Fely Irvine and Tim Maddren were announced to be joining Nicholson and Burgess , forming the line @-@ up known as the " new generation " . Burgess said , " It 's a new generation for a new generation . To be honest , it doesn 't really matter who 's up there in pigtails singing and dancing , kids just love Hi @-@ 5 . " Hi @-@ 5 toured Australia in early 2010 , establishing a connection with more regional locations throughout the country . The group also celebrated the 500th episode of the television series in 2010 , and in 2011 recognised the group 's rich musical history by reintroducing classic songs to a new generation of fans . 
 Irvine 's final performance as part of Hi @-@ 5 was at Carols by Candlelight on Christmas Eve 2011 . She stated , " My time with Hi @-@ 5 has been a magical chapter of my life " , while a network representative said she was leaving to explore " other career options " . Her replacement <unk> Zheng joined the group in January 2012 . Maddren described Zheng as having a great energy and being a " perfect fit " . 
 In June 2012 the Nine Network announced that the Hi @-@ 5 brand has been sold in its entirety to Asian equity group , Asiasons , following Nine 's ongoing financial difficulties . The Malaysian @-@ based company ’ s managing director Datuk Jared Lim revealed that they planned to expand the brand throughout South East Asia , but expressed that Hi @-@ 5 's presence in Australia would remain intact . The Hi @-@ 5 Holiday stage show was brought to Singapore , Malaysia and the Philippines , with the brand focusing on reestablishing an Asian touring presence . 
 On Christmas Eve 2012 , Burgess and Maddren announced that they would be leaving the group . Maddren had secured a new job with the Australian version of The Addams Family musical , and stated that he felt it was time to fulfil other dreams of his , and to allow another person to fulfil their dream in Hi @-@ 5 . Burgess had decided to explore other options and expand her solo music career . She stated , " It has been an amazing five years and I am so thankful to all of [ the fans ] for being amazing supporters " . Carols by Candlelight was one of the pair 's final performances , followed by rescheduled shows in the Philippines in January 2013 . 
 = = = Third generation = = = 
 New members Mary Lascaris and Ainsley Melham were announced in January 2013 , joining Nicholson , Brant and Zheng . The auditions held in late 2012 were filmed and turned into a documentary style cinematic release , Some Kind of Wonderful , which premiered exclusively through Hoyts Cinemas in Australia from March . This line @-@ up were branded as a " new generation " of the group by press . Of the film , Nicholson said , " I 'm proud of how diligent we were about finding wholesome new talent , people with a great energy and who are genuinely lovely people . " The television series was revamped as Hi @-@ 5 House , and filmed in Singapore , premiering on pay @-@ TV channel Nick Jr. in Australia in November 2013 . 
 Brant 's final performances were in July 2014 for the Australian House Hits tour , in which the cast wore costumes she designed under her new fashion label , <unk> . Brant stated she had " the most amazing journey " . She was replaced by Tanika Anderson , who had already worked with the group as an understudy and puppeteer from October 2013 , describing the role as her " dream job " . Anderson featured in the second series of Hi @-@ 5 House , which aired in 2014 and celebrated fifteen years of Hi @-@ 5 on Australian television . The House Hits tour was taken internationally throughout 2014 and early 2015 , with an increase in touring locations . The group premiered in the Middle East with a Dubai tour , and returned to Bangkok for the first time in ten years . A sold out run in the Philippines saw the group return for an encore season in 2015 . 
 By 2015 , Hi @-@ 5 's ongoing success led to the group being described as an " institution " . The cast have noted that some of their current audience now included parents who watched Hi @-@ 5 as children , and also stated that the group members themselves grew up with the original Hi @-@ 5 . In 2015 former member Robinson , then radio presenter , described the extended Hi @-@ 5 cast as " alumni " which she enjoyed being a part of , using her job to stay in contact with the current cast . She described it as " always being part of the same Hi @-@ 5 family " . The Hi @-@ 5 House television series won an Asian Television Award for Best Preschool Program in 2015 , and premiered worldwide on online television streaming service Netflix on 25 March 2016 . 
 In August 2015 Nicholson announced he would depart at the end of the year , to further his performing career and authoring a series of children 's books , <unk> . Of his time , he stated , " it has been an absolute whirlwind journey " , and expressed that he had learned more from children than he had been able to teach . Nicholson had his final performance with the group on the House of Dreams farewell tour in December . The tour received positive reviews , described as a " children 's masterpiece in entertainment – slick , funny , and amazingly well @-@ choreographed and performed " . New member <unk> Dearing was introduced in January 2016 with the <unk> tour throughout regional New South Wales . 
 Melham was cast in an Australian musical production of Xanadu in January 2016 , and announced he would be leaving Hi @-@ 5 , after already performing his final shows with the group on the <unk> tour . He stated that he felt it was time to transition back into his theatre roots after " an incredible experience " with Hi @-@ 5 . Melham was replaced by Gabe Brown , who was introduced on tour in February . Brown was replaced by Chris White in May , who served as an acting member for the group 's international tours . Hi @-@ 5 are set to return to New Zealand in October for the first time since 2008 , performing the House Hits show . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Hi @-@ 5 has a distinguishable pop music sound , being described as " a pop group for kids " by Crawford in 2001 and Foley in 2004 . Chris Harriott is the primary composer of the group 's music , having written thousands of Hi @-@ 5 songs ( including feature songs of the week and shorter <unk> ) thus creating a sense of musical consistency for the group . Graeme @-@ Evans and Harriott had worked together when he scored the theme for the teen drama series , Mirror , Mirror ( 1995 ) . He had previously worked with Harris as a composer on Bananas in Pyjamas ; and had individually worked in Australian theatre . He was originally approached by the creators with the task of writing top ten songs for an age range of 2 – 6 . Harriott , a father himself , has been described as " in tune " with the children of today and praised by Harris as " prolific " in his writing . She cited his music as one of the reasons for Hi @-@ 5 's success , writing music which was " easy to dance to and easy to sing along to " . Harris also stated that of the group , the music itself has the ability to stand alone , describing them as " a part of Australia 's music history . " Harriott has worked with a group of regular lyricists , including Chris Phillips , Leone Carey and Lisa Hoppe , who contributed to successful material . 
 Foley has praised the group 's musical style on several occasions . He described the concept as innovative , as the music " is not nursery rhyme , it actually has a top 40 essence to it but the lyrics are for kids . " He suggested this musical appeal for all ages as a reason for the group having a large teenage and adult fanbase . He cited the Wiggles as an influence of Hi @-@ 5 , however he said that the respective groups have different " styles of music " . Hi @-@ 5 has been successful internationally . Foley explained how kids are universal and " love to hear music " , suggesting that the music is part of how international audiences connect to the group . Robinson stated the cast were encouraged to write their own music for the group , which all of the original members did , and by 2015 said she still receives occasional royalty cheques for her work . Original member of the Wiggles , and classical musician , Phillip Wilcher declared that Hi @-@ 5 " successfully explore the essential components that come together to make music " ; he detailed how the educational appeal " seems to happen gently and [ the group ] seem so at one with their audience of young folk ... They also seem to know the subtle difference between childlike and childish " . 
 = = Educational theory = = 
 Hi @-@ 5 , and the related series , were designed by educational experts to appeal to contemporary , " media @-@ literate " children by relating to their world . With the group being described as " for the kids of today " , Hi @-@ 5 has been seen to evolve with the times , updating music and designing new looks and costumes to stay " abreast of the times " . One of the unique features of Hi @-@ 5 is that the cast are presented as older siblings to the children , educating the audience in a fun and entertaining way , through " play based learning " , rather than appearing as adults who are teaching them . The educational aspects of the group 's content are disguised with music and entertainment , with the multiple layers of the show catering to a wide range of ages in the audience , while being primarily aimed at those aged 2 – 8 . Harris stated the group was careful about body @-@ image issues , also believing Hi @-@ 5 helped to influence fashion in young people , and acknowledging it is acceptable to " enjoy the fact there are differences between boys and girls and men and women " . 
 The television series was created by Helena Harris and Posie Graeme @-@ Evans , who based it around an underlying educational structure , primarily based on Howard Gardner 's Theory of multiple intelligences . It is recognised that each child learns in a different way , and each cast member targets a different aspect of learning . Harris observed that most children had a favourite cast member , believing that they generally " respond more favourably to the presenter who models the learning style they prefer " Harris stated that children " enjoy interacting with the presenters " . According to the group ’ s website , Hi @-@ 5 also uses Piaget 's theory of cognitive development , providing a learning experience that promotes individual growth . Lascaris stated , " Hi @-@ 5 teaches every child the crucial fundamentals of child development in a big , colourful , fun way . " 
 Music and movement play a large part integrating the elements of Hi @-@ 5 together , with music reinforcing the central ideas which the group presents , while also being entertaining . Harris intended for the themes promoted to be accessible so that the group would appeal universally , as she believed children were essentially the same around the world . Physical interaction is encouraged , and heavily featured to make the show relatively fast paced , originally to replicate the energy of contemporary music videos . Dancing is featured , with a focus on movements that increase the integration between the left and right sides of the brain . 
 The live Hi @-@ 5 stage shows are designed to be presented as stage spectaculars , as the audiences of children attending the shows are usually experiencing their first theatre event . The group encourage participation with several interactive elements throughout the shows , acknowledging " the louder [ the children ] are , the better " . The children " genuinely engage " with these interactive elements , and even in countries in which English is not the main spoken language , the children will still enjoy themselves . However , the shows for these audiences are adapted to include " more songs , comedy and physical activity " . Executive director Julie Greene stated the television show is designed to be a joined experience that parents should be able to enjoy along with their children , with the stage shows made to appeal to a whole family audience . Nicholson described the experience of a parent being able to dance with their child at a concert as " special " . 
 = = Brand and finances = = 
 The Hi @-@ 5 brand was originally owned by its creators , Harris , and Graeme @-@ Evans , under their joint privately owned production company Kids Like Us . Unlike peer entertainers the Wiggles , the cast of Hi @-@ 5 did not hold equity , but were rather employees of the brand . Because of this , the original cast in early years stated that they had financial difficulties , even though the Hi @-@ 5 brand was earning millions . Crawford stated , " the money system has to go a long way around before it gets to us . " In March 2008 , the Nine Network , along with production company Southern Star , purchased the Hi @-@ 5 brand . The brand became officially known as Hi @-@ 5 Operations Pty Ltd , and was placed under the direction of Martin <unk> and Cathy Payne , also Nine and Southern Star executives . Harris and Graeme @-@ Evans ended their involvement with the company along with the sale . 
 The brand dropped from a net worth of A $ 18million in 2009 to A $ <unk> in 2010 . In June 2012 it was announced that the Nine Network , after their financial difficulties , had sold the Hi @-@ 5 brand to Asian equity group , Asiasons . The Malaysian @-@ based company ’ s managing director Datuk Jared Lim revealed that they planned to expand the brand throughout South East Asia , but expressed that Hi @-@ 5 's presence in Australia would remain intact . Former series producer Julie Greene took on the role as executive creative director and Lim became the brand 's chairman , taking up a personal involvement with the group . The Hi @-@ 5 brand was consolidated under new platform Tremendous Entertainment Group ( <unk> ) in 2014 , following Asiasons privatising and rebranding as Tremendous Asia Partners ( TAP ) . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 The Hi @-@ 5 members took their passion for creating change and ensuring happiness for children worldwide beyond the stage and screen , by joining World Vision Australia as ambassadors in 2009 . The group began their work in the Philippines while on a promotional tour . The group have since gone on volunteer trips to Cambodia in 2012 , and Myanmar in 2015 . The group also became representatives of the Starlight Children 's Foundation in 2009 . Hi @-@ 5 had previously held a history with Starlight , and described it as " a privilege to support a great cause " . Their work includes regular hospital visits and attending and performing at fundraising events . The group has since maintained their relationship with both organisations , still active ambassadors in 2015 . 
 = = = International versions = = = 
 The international appeal of Hi @-@ 5 has led to successful local versions , with all of the groups touring and producing local versions of the television series . In 2002 , an American version of Hi @-@ 5 was created , with the group touring the US and Canada until their final performance in 2007 . A UK group was similarly introduced in 2008 , touring the UK and Ireland over 2009 and 2010 before disbanding . After Hi @-@ 5 's sale in 2012 , there was a return to international versions of the group . In 2014 , a Latin American group was created , being a non @-@ English speaking version . Hi @-@ 5 also experienced success in the Philippines , leading to a local group being introduced in 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Hi @-@ 5 have enjoyed success throughout its history with international tours , charting music albums and awards . The television series currently airs in over 83 countries , and has consistently been the highest rating program on Disney Junior Asia since 2012 . Hi @-@ 5 has a large teenage and adult following , with the pop appeal of the music being one of the reasons leading to a group of dedicated older fans . " . The group became known as one of Australia 's highest paid entertainment entities , listed in the Business Review Weekly 's annual list several times , earning an estimated A $ 18million in 2009 . The group 's performance was described by Sally Murphy of <unk> as " bright , full of music and catchy tunes , " with the original line @-@ up praised by the website 's Magdalena Ball for their " consistent camaraderie , [ and ] varied and well coordinated talent as singers , performers , and dancers . " Ball credited their appeal to the members being positive role models . In 2013 , Child Magazine 's Brooke <unk> commended " the energy and enthusiasm of new and old cast members " , adding that " they all seem to genuinely love what they do " . In 2014 , Jo Abi of blog <unk> praised the group 's diversity . 
 By the end of the 2005 , Hi @-@ 5 had performed to a total audience of over one and a half million people around the world . In 2005 , Hi @-@ 5 performed in arena venues around Australia , in order to " maximise the crowds " . Foley and Robinson stated they " never expected " the group to experience so much success . The group won five <unk> ( Australian DVD and Video Industry Association Awards ) for their releases and consistently received album accreditations from ARIA . Celebrate was accredited as gold , while Jump and Jive with Hi @-@ 5 , Boom Boom Beat and It 's a Hi @-@ 5 Christmas went platinum , and It 's a Party received double platinum status . Four of the original line @-@ up 's albums reached the top 10 on the ARIA Albums Chart , It 's a Party ( No. 4 , July 2000 ) , Boom Boom Beat ( No. 3 , August 2001 ) , It 's a Hi @-@ 5 Christmas ( No. 4 , December 2001 ) and Hi @-@ 5 Hits ( No. 10 , July 2003 ) . 
 Hi @-@ 5 finds success as a leading children 's theatre entity . The stage show Hi @-@ 5 Alive won a Helpmann award for Best Presentation for Children 2002 . A successful sold out tour of the House Hits show in the Philippines in 2014 led to the group returning for an encore run of the tour in 2015 . The House of Dreams stage show in 2015 received praise from The Daily Telegraph , described as a " children 's masterpiece in entertainment – slick , funny , and amazingly well @-@ choreographed and performed ” . 
 In her blog for The Daily Telegraph in 2011 , <unk> Le Marquand criticised Brant 's performance , claiming " for all her sweet enthusiasm , Brant cannot sing a note " . She suggested the line @-@ up at the time were " melodically challenged " . 
 = = Members = = 
 Timeline 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Hi @-@ 5 
 Hi @-@ 5 House 
 = = = Compilation albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Tours = = 
 The band tours annually with stage shows based on the television series . The shows are concert style and feature songs and segments , usually strung together with a narrative . Puppet characters Chatterbox and Jup Jup feature also . Hi @-@ 5 have visited several countries in which they are popular , including Australia , New Zealand , Singapore , United Kingdom , United Arab Emirates , Hong Kong , Vietnam , Malaysia , Indonesia and Philippines . 
 = = = Carols by Candlelight = = = 
 From 2000 to 2012 , Hi @-@ 5 performed annually at Vision Australia 's Carols by Candlelight in Melbourne , which would be broadcast live by the Nine Network on Christmas Eve . The group would perform a short selection of Christmas songs to entertain the younger viewers of the event , and were joined by Santa Claus , played for many years by Terry Gill , and Humphrey B. Bear . An extended show of a similar nature is available on the It 's a Hi @-@ 5 Christmas video release . Several cast members noted the shows as a highlight and over the years it became common for the performance to be the final concert of departing members . 2013 was the first year Hi @-@ 5 were not invited to perform at the Carols , and since then , the group have performed annual Christmas concerts at local Sydney events . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = ARIA Awards = = = 
 The Australian Record Industry Association ( ARIA ) Music Awards are the annual series of awards nights which celebrate the music industry of Australia and have been presented since 1987 . In 2004 Hi @-@ 5 made history , establishing a record for most consecutive awards in the same category , after winning their fifth ARIA for Hi @-@ 5 Holiday . 
 = = = Logie Awards = = = 
 The TV Week Logie Awards are the annual Australian television industry awards . Hi @-@ 5 won a total of three Logie Awards , two for Most Outstanding Children 's Program , and one for Most Outstanding Children 's Preschool Program ( a rare category ) . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 = Richie Farmer = 
 Richard Dwight " Richie " Farmer ( born August 25 , 1969 ) is an American former collegiate basketball player and Republican Party politician from the U.S. state of Kentucky . He served as the Kentucky Agriculture Commissioner from 2004 to 2012 and was the running mate of David L. Williams in the 2011 gubernatorial election . After leaving office , Farmer was investigated for violating state campaign finance laws and misappropriating state resources and was sentenced to 27 months in federal prison along with a concurrent 12 months in state prison . 
 A point guard , Farmer led Clay County High School to the 1987 Kentucky High School Athletic Association ( KHSAA ) State Basketball Championship and , in 1988 , was named Kentucky Mr. Basketball and Kentucky Associated Press Male High School Athlete of the Year after setting a championship game record with 51 points in a losing effort . Although he was popular state @-@ wide and publicly stated his desire to play collegiate basketball for the Kentucky Wildcats , Coach Eddie Sutton was reluctant to offer Farmer a scholarship . After Farmer announced that he would visit other colleges and issued a deadline past which he would no longer consider Kentucky without a scholarship offer , Sutton relented and Farmer joined the University of Kentucky . 
 Kentucky struggled during Farmer 's freshman year , finishing with a 13 – 19 record , and by mid @-@ season , fans were accusing Sutton of unfairly favoring his son , Sean , over Farmer at the point guard position . Sutton resigned in the offseason due to a pay @-@ for @-@ play scandal for which the NCAA banned Kentucky from postseason play for two years . Sutton 's replacement , Rick Pitino , instituted a rigorous conditioning program and fast @-@ paced style of play that improved Farmer 's performance . After spending his junior season as a backup to Sean Woods , Farmer transitioned to shooting guard and became a starter in the middle of his senior year . Again eligible for postseason competition , the Wildcats won the Southeastern Conference tournament and reached the Regional Finals of the 1992 NCAA Tournament , losing in overtime on a last @-@ second shot by Duke 's Christian Laettner in a game regarded by many as the greatest college basketball game ever played . The team 's seniors – Farmer , Woods , John Pelphrey , and Deron Feldhaus – were dubbed " The Unforgettables " , and their jerseys were hung from the rafters of Rupp Arena following the 1991 – 92 season . 
 Farmer parlayed his status as a basketball icon into two terms as Kentucky Agriculture Commissioner from 2004 to 2012 , winning both elections by large margins . In 2011 , Kentucky Senate President David L. Williams tapped Farmer – considered a rising star in the state Republican Party – as his running mate in the gubernatorial election . They were defeated by Democratic Governor Steve Beshear and his running mate Jerry Abramson . During the campaign , media reports alleged that Farmer had misused state funds and property as agriculture commissioner and Farmer 's successor collaborated with the state auditor to investigate the allegations . As a result , the Executive Branch Ethics Commission charged Farmer with 42 ethics violations – the most against an individual in state history . Attorney General Jack Conway also charged Farmer with violating state campaign finance laws , and a federal grand jury followed with five indictments for abuses of power . Farmer initially contested the charges , but later agreed to a plea bargain . On January 14 , 2014 , Farmer was sentenced to 27 months in federal prison and ordered to pay $ 120 @,@ 500 in restitution and $ 65 @,@ 000 in fines . He served almost 20 months in a satellite camp of the United States Penitentiary , Hazelton near Bruceton Mills , West Virginia , before transitioning to a halfway house in Lexington , Kentucky , on December 18 , 2015 . He was released from the halfway house on January 21 , 2016 and is currently residing in Clay County . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Richard Dwight ( " Richie " ) Farmer , Jr. was born on August 25 , 1969 , in Corbin , Kentucky , but grew up in the eastern Kentucky town of Manchester . He was the second of three children born to Richard and Virginia Farmer . Because of his physical maturity – he reportedly began shaving at age 12 and had begun wearing his trademark mustache by his junior year in high school – Farmer was frequently questioned about his age . The 5 ft 11 in ( 1 @.@ 80 m ) left @-@ hander 's vertical leap measured 40 inches ( 100 cm ) in high school . He credited his father , a transportation manager at a local coal mine and a standout point guard at Clay County High School in 1963 , with developing his basketball acumen . 
 As an eighth grader , Farmer played basketball for his grade school basketball team , as well as the freshman , junior varsity , and varsity teams at Clay County High School . He played sparingly during the varsity team 's regular season but received 68 seconds of playing time – scoring 2 points – during the Tigers ' victory over Owensboro High School in the 1984 Kentucky High School Athletic Association ( KHSAA ) State Basketball Championship . He also played football on a team that won the county championship that year . He eventually stopped playing football , but continued to play baseball – as a pitcher and first baseman – in addition to basketball until his senior year of high school . 
 = = High school basketball = = 
 = = = Freshman and sophomore = = = 
 As a freshman , Farmer led his team in scoring during the regular season , averaging 16 @.@ 4 points per game from the shooting guard position . He also led the Tigers in scoring in each of their three games en route to the 13th Region Kentucky High School Athletic Association basketball championship . In the opening round of the 1985 KHSAA state tournament , Farmer scored 14 points on 6 of 16 shooting in a win over Boone County High School . Then , in back @-@ to @-@ back victories against Metcalfe County High School and Doss High School , he led his team with 21 and 20 points , respectively , to help Clay County reach the tournament finals . Farmer scored 10 points in Clay County 's 65 – 64 loss to Hopkinsville High School in the championship game . He was the tournament 's second @-@ highest scorer with 69 points , one behind Hopkinsville 's Lamont Ware , and finished second in the voting for the tournament 's Most Valuable Player , which went to Hopkinsville 's Wendell Quarles . Only Apollo High School 's Rex Chapman received more votes for the all @-@ tournament team . 
 Clay County ranked only behind Owensboro and Scott County High School in the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader 's 1985 – 86 preseason coaches poll . During Clay County 's 22 – 6 regular season , Farmer , who moved to the point guard position , averaged 18 @.@ 6 points , 10 assists , and 8 rebounds per game . The Tigers won the 13th District Title , setting up a matchup with Pulaski County High School in the first round of the <unk> state tournament . Farmer had scored 30 points in Clay County 's regular season matchup with Pulaski County , but his team lost by one point in overtime . In the tournament rematch , Pulaski County held Farmer to 20 points and won 83 – 78 ; Coach Dave Fraley credited a defense centered on stopping Farmer for his team 's victory . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 In the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader 's 1986 – 87 preseason coaches ' poll , Clay County was ranked 14th in the state , and Farmer was named one of the state 's best 25 players . Farmer led his team in scoring at 23 @.@ 9 points per game , and Clay County finished the regular season with a record of 28 – 2 and again won the 13th Region tournament . Farmer scored 19 points and grabbed 5 rebounds in his team 's 90 – 80 victory over Highlands High School in the KHSAA state tournament 's opening round , but his performance was overshadowed by teammate Russell Chadwell 's 43 points . In the quarterfinals , Farmer led the Tigers with 19 points , defeating LaRue County High School 62 – 56 in front of 24 @,@ 041 spectators at Lexington 's Rupp Arena , a record crowd for a high school basketball game . In the first half of Clay County 's semifinal matchup with Madison Central High School , Farmer scored 18 and his younger brother , Russ , added 12 to account for 30 of their team 's 39 first @-@ half points . The Tigers ' 17 @-@ point halftime lead grew to as many as 25 in the second half , and the elder Farmer again led his team with 24 total points in Clay County 's 78 – 58 victory . 
 The win over Madison Central set up a title game between Clay County and Louisville 's Ballard High School . Clay County had only one starter taller than 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) , while Ballard started four players taller than 6 ft 3 in ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) , including star shooting guard Allan Houston . The game featured 24 ties and 15 lead changes ; neither team led by more than four points during regulation . Farmer scored Clay County 's last 9 points in regulation , including consecutive go @-@ ahead baskets at 3 : 19 , 2 : 46 , and 0 : 30 . Ballard 's Leonard Taylor scored on a put @-@ back basket at the buzzer to tie the score at 65 and force overtime . Clay County never trailed in the overtime , and Farmer 's 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) jump shot with 1 : 44 left put the Tigers in the lead for good . The 76 – 73 win was Clay County 's first @-@ ever KHSAA state championship . Farmer played all 35 minutes of the game and led all scorers with 27 points to go with 6 rebounds and 4 assists . He was named to the all @-@ tournament team , selected the tournament 's Most Valuable Player , and given the Ted Sanford Award for citizenship , basketball ability , academic achievement , and sportsmanship . He was also the only underclassman named to the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader 's 1987 All @-@ State First Team . 
 In the summer following his junior year , Farmer was named to the Kentucky Junior All @-@ Star Team , which played exhibition games throughout Europe , including stops in Iceland , the Netherlands , and West Germany . After the European trip , he helped lead Clay County to a 15 – 0 record in Amateur Athletic Union play . It was the first AAU season which recognized the three @-@ point field goal , and Farmer made 53 of his 73 three @-@ point attempts . In July 1987 , the Kentucky Junior All @-@ Stars finished second to a team from South Carolina in the Kentucky Prep All @-@ Star Festival at Memorial Coliseum in Lexington ; Farmer sat out the championship game with a hand injury he suffered in the previous game . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 Clay County was ranked as the top team in the state in the 1987 – 88 preseason coaches ' poll , and Farmer was voted the state 's best prep prospect , garnering twice as many votes as second @-@ place prospect Allan Houston . The Tigers started the year 8 – 0 before suffering their only regular season loss in the first game of the 1987 Beach Ball Classic against Eau Claire High School . In Clay County 's next game in the Classic , Farmer broke the school 's career scoring record , scoring his <unk> point in a 76 – 57 win over Tulsa , Oklahoma 's Nathan Hale High School . Gary Gregory , who had held the record since 1974 , was in attendance at the game . In the tournament 's fifth place game , Farmer scored 33 points and broke the single @-@ game record for assists with 16 , besting Kenny Anderson 's year @-@ old record of 13 . Clay County defeated Simi Valley High School 95 – 91 , and Farmer was selected as the tournament 's Outstanding Player and named to the all @-@ tournament team . 
 In the opening round of the January 1988 Louisville Invitational Tournament ( LIT ) , Farmer scored 40 points on 15 of 30 shooting in a 86 – 82 win over Pleasure Ridge Park High School , pushing Clay County 's record to 16 – 1 and setting up another meeting with Allan Houston 's Ballard team . Farmer scored 39 points – including 14 of his 15 free throws – and grabbed 12 rebounds in Clay County 's 92 – 88 double overtime victory . In the championship game against Bardstown High School , Farmer battled through fatigue and a thigh injury to lead his team in scoring with 24 points in an overtime win . In the three @-@ game tournament , Farmer scored 103 points and played all of his team 's 105 minutes , while committing only 4 turnovers . He was selected to the all @-@ tournament team and named tournament MVP . Already being recruited by Western Kentucky , Alabama , and Notre Dame , Farmer 's performances in the Beach Ball Classic and LIT brought notice from Eastern Kentucky , Wake Forest , Auburn , Louisville , and Kentucky . 
 In the 49th District Championship game , Farmer broke Clay County 's single @-@ game scoring record with 51 points in a 101 – 59 win over Jackson County High School . In the 13th Region tournament opener , Farmer scored 40 points as Clay County defeated Corbin High School 75 – 56 . Clay County went on to defeat Bell County High School 53 – 36 in the semifinals and Knox Central High School 73 – 69 in the finals to once again advance to the KHSAA state tournament . Farmer scored 38 points on 14 of 24 shooting in a victory over Rowan County High School in the tournament 's opening round . Four minutes into the Tigers ' quarterfinal matchup against LaRue County High School , Farmer scored a three @-@ point basket that tied Wallace " Wah Wah " Jones ' record for most points scored by a single player in the KHSAA state tournament ( 223 ) . Farmer went on to break the record , scoring 30 points in a 91 – 54 win . 
 Farmer 's 18 points in the semifinals against Pleasure Ridge Park helped Clay County to a 92 – 90 win and a rematch in the title game against Ballard High School . Farmer set a title game record against Ballard , scoring 51 points on 20 of 32 shooting ( including 9 of 14 from three @-@ point range ) , but Clay County lost 88 – 79 . Ron King set the previous title game record in 1969 with 44 ; only Kelly Coleman 's 69 @-@ point performance in 1956 bested Farmer 's 51 points in a tournament game . He was selected to the all @-@ tournament team , received a <unk> ' Sweet Sixteen Academic Scholarship Award , and was voted the tournament 's MVP . Following the state tournament , Farmer said he was contacted by LSU , Vanderbilt , Virginia , and Indiana in addition to schools who had previously recruited him . 
 For the season , Farmer averaged 27 @.@ 1 points , 6 @.@ 4 rebounds and 8 @.@ 7 assists per game , all career highs . The only player to play in the KHSAA state tournament five times , he finished his career with records for most points scored ( 317 ) and most field goals made ( 127 ) for a career in the tournament . He posted a total of 2 @,@ 793 points in his high school career . He was named Kentucky Mr. Basketball , Kentucky Associated Press Male High School Athlete of the Year , and was the leading vote @-@ getter for the Kentucky All @-@ State Team , appearing on 160 of 167 ballots . The Clay County Judge / Executive renamed a road outside Farmer 's hometown of <unk> " Richie Boulevard " . In a 1989 Lexington Herald @-@ Leader poll of sportswriters and former high school coaches , Farmer was the near @-@ unanimous choice as the best high school player in Kentucky during the 1980s . 
 In May 1988 , Farmer was selected to an AAU all @-@ star team that played an exhibition game in Memorial Coliseum against an all @-@ star team from the Soviet Union . He scored 17 points in a 107 – 93 win . In the first of two matchups with Indiana 's All @-@ Star team , the Kentucky All @-@ Stars lost 102 – 82 ; Farmer had a bad shooting performance , going 5 of 18 from the field , including 2 of 9 from three @-@ point range , for 15 points . In the rematch the following week , Farmer scored 19 points in a 112 – 100 loss . 
 = = = Recruitment = = = 
 Despite Farmer 's prolific scoring , recruiters expressed concern about his small stature and lack of quickness . Even while lauding his skills , Lexington Herald @-@ Leader sportswriter Mike Fields wrote that Farmer had " heavy legs and slow @-@ going style " . Regarding Farmer 's size , Fields noted that , despite playing point guard , Farmer consistently jumped center for Clay County and could jump high enough to execute a two @-@ handed slam dunk . The Herald @-@ Leader 's Billy Reed compared Farmer to Indiana 's Steve Alford , who overcame doubts about his size , speed , and defense to become the Hoosiers ' all @-@ time leading scorer and lead them to an NCAA Championship in 1987 . 
 Kentucky was believed to be Farmer 's school of choice , but coaches remained non @-@ committal about his recruitment . The Wildcats had seven returning guards and small forwards – Rex Chapman , Eric Manuel , Deron Feldhaus , Derrick Miller , John Pelphrey , Johnathon Davis , and Sean Sutton – and two signed recruits at those positions – Sean Woods and Chris Mills . Conversely , four of their five frontcourt players – Winston Bennett , Rob Lock , Cedric Jenkins and Richard Madison – were graduating , and lone frontcourt signee Shawn Kemp had not yet qualified academically . On March 21 , 1988 , Farmer told a Lexington television station that he would no longer consider Kentucky if they did not offer him a scholarship by the weekend . A week later , the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader reported that coach Eddie Sutton extended the offer but that Farmer planned to take official visits to Western Kentucky and Vanderbilt , and would host an in @-@ home visit with LSU coach Dale Brown before deciding whether to accept Sutton 's offer . 
 In April , Farmer played shooting guard for the North team in the Kentucky Derby Festival Classic . He scored 14 points on 5 of 12 shooting and grabbed 3 rebounds , but his team lost to the South team 134 – 125 . Among his teammates in the Classic was Kentucky signee Sean Woods , who told the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader that he and Farmer had become good friends and that he hoped Farmer would choose to play for the Wildcats . The paper also reported that Farmer had narrowed his list of potential college choices to three : Western Kentucky , LSU , and Kentucky . Farmer took an official visit to Western Kentucky the weekend of April 9 , 1988 , but on April 14 , the second day of the April signing period , he held a press conference at his high school gymnasium to announce that he had signed a National Letter of Intent with Kentucky . He told the assembled crowd , " [ Playing for Kentucky has ] been a dream of mine as long as I can remember . Even before kindergarten , I always wanted to play for Kentucky . " 
 = = College basketball = = 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 By the time Farmer arrived at Kentucky , the roster had been decimated . Standout shooting guard Rex Chapman entered the 1988 NBA Draft , ending his collegiate eligibility . Sophomore Eric Manuel was held out of basketball activities pending the outcome of an investigation into his ACT scores . Signees Shawn Kemp and Sean Woods failed to qualify academically , and Chris Mills was under investigation by the NCAA for cash allegedly sent to his father by assistant coach Dwane Casey in violation of the Association 's amateurism rules . A viral illness forced Farmer to miss about a third of the team 's preseason practices . Once he was able to practice , Coach Eddie Sutton related that he lacked the conditioning to finish most practices . The Lexington Herald @-@ Leader 's Jerry Tipton later reported that Farmer had to leave practice half an hour early two days a week to attend his American History class . Sutton also opined that Farmer 's high school competition was inferior to that of Los Angeles native Mills , but Farmer 's high school coach pointed out that , during Farmer 's senior season , 20 of his team 's games were against teams ranked in the top 20 in their respective states . 
 In his first collegiate game , against Duke , Farmer played 7 minutes and air balled his only shot . After an early season loss to Notre Dame in the Big Four Classic dropped the Wildcats ' record to 2 – 3 , Sutton noted that Farmer , Sean Sutton , and LaRon Ellis had all missed practice time with the flu . After managing just 17 points in the Wildcats ' first five games , Farmer scored 10 points in 20 minutes in the team 's sixth game against Northwestern State . With 12 seconds to go in the game and Kentucky trailing 84 – 82 , Farmer was whistled for an intentional foul on Northwestern State 's Roman Banks while trying to draw a charge on an inbounds play . Banks maintained that Farmer had tugged Banks toward him and fallen down , attempting to draw the call , but Farmer and Sutton both denied the alleged chicanery . Banks hit one of two free throws , and Farmer missed a potentially game @-@ tying three @-@ point shot at the buzzer , dropping the Wildcats to 2 – 4 on the season . Farmer followed up with a 15 @-@ point performance in a win against Western Carolina . In the Kentucky Invitational Tournament , where Kentucky lost its opening round game to Bowling Green before winning the third @-@ place game against Marshall , Farmer scored 12 points in each game . 
 Farmer 's sudden increase in scoring prompted complaints from the fan base that Sutton disliked Farmer and was limiting his minutes out of favoritism for his son , Sean . Some fans began to boo when Sutton , the team 's starting point guard , returned to the game to replace Farmer . Farmer maintained that Sutton had treated him fairly , and Sutton cited lack of practice time as the reason for Farmer 's limited playing time ; in early January 1989 , local media reported that Farmer had been limited in practice due to right knee pain . Questions about Farmer 's playing time continued into Southeastern Conference play , even as Farmer 's scoring also dropped off . By late January , Sutton publicly complained about the need for more scoring from the bench , which had produced only 29 points in the team 's previous seven games . Lexington Herald @-@ Leader columnist Billy Reed wrote : " Richie simply isn 't ready to play at this level yet " . 
 Before a January game against Georgia , two @-@ time former governor A. B. " Happy " Chandler presented Farmer with the 1988 Kentucky Sportsman of the Year Award . The youngest person and first high school athlete ever to win the award , Farmer finished ahead of former Kentucky guard Pat Riley , who had just coached the NBA 's Los Angeles Lakers to a second consecutive championship . 
