 By the end of the pandemic , only one major region on Earth had not reported an outbreak : the isolated island of Marajó , in Brazil 's Amazon River Delta . 
 = = = Aspirin poisoning = = = 
 In a 2009 paper published in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases , Karen Starko proposed that aspirin poisoning had contributed substantially to the fatalities . She based this on the reported symptoms in those dying from the flu , as reported in the post mortem reports still available , and also the timing of the big " death spike " in October 1918 which happened right after the Surgeon General of the United States Army , and the Journal of the American Medical Association both recommended very large doses of 8 @.@ 0 @-@ 31 @.@ 2 g of aspirin per day . Starko also suggests that the wave of aspirin poisonings was due to a " perfect storm " of events : Bayer 's patent on aspirin expired , so that many companies rushed in to make a profit and greatly increased the supply ; this coincided with the flu pandemic ; and the symptoms of aspirin poisoning were not known at the time . 
 As an explanation for the universally high mortality rate , this hypothesis was questioned in a letter to the journal published in April 2010 by Andrew <unk> and Daisy <unk> of the University of California , Irvine , and Niall Johnson of the Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care . They questioned this universal applicability given the high mortality rate in countries such as India , where there was little or no access to aspirin at the time . They concluded that " the salicylate [ aspirin ] poisoning hypothesis [ was ] difficult to sustain as the primary explanation for the unusual virulence of the 1918 – 1919 <unk> pandemic " . 
 But they overlooked that inexpensive aspirin had become available in India and other places after October 1918 , when the Bayer patent expired . In responding , Starko pointed to anecdotal evidence of aspirin over @-@ prescription in India and argued that even if aspirin over @-@ prescription had not contributed to the high Indian mortality rate , it could still have been a major factor for other high rates in areas where other exacerbating factors present in India played less of a role . 
 = = = End of the pandemic = = = 
 After the lethal second wave struck in late 1918 , new cases dropped abruptly – almost to nothing after the peak in the second wave . In Philadelphia , for example , 4 @,@ 597 people died in the week ending 16 October , but by 11 November , influenza had almost disappeared from the city . One explanation for the rapid decline of the lethality of the disease is that doctors simply got better at preventing and treating the pneumonia that developed after the victims had contracted the virus , although John Barry stated in his book that researchers have found no evidence to support this . 
 Another theory holds that the 1918 virus mutated extremely rapidly to a less lethal strain . This is a common occurrence with influenza viruses : there is a tendency for pathogenic viruses to become less lethal with time , as the hosts of more dangerous strains tend to die out . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Academic Andrew Price @-@ Smith has made the argument that the virus helped tip the balance of power in the later days of the war towards the Allied cause . He provides data that the viral waves hit the Central Powers before they hit the Allied powers , and that both morbidity and mortality in Germany and Austria were considerably higher than in Britain and France . 
 In the United States , Britain and other countries , despite the relatively high morbidity and mortality rates that resulted from the epidemic in 1918 – 1919 , the Spanish flu began to fade from public awareness over the decades until the arrival of news about bird flu and other pandemics in the 1990s and 2000s . This has led some historians to label the Spanish flu a " forgotten pandemic " . 
 Various theories of why the Spanish flu was " forgotten " include the rapid pace of the pandemic , which killed most of its victims in the United States , for example , within a period of less than nine months , resulting in limited media coverage . The general population was familiar with patterns of pandemic disease in the late 19th and early 20th centuries : typhoid , yellow fever , diphtheria , and cholera all occurred near the same time . These outbreaks probably lessened the significance of the influenza pandemic for the public . In some areas , the flu was not reported on , the only mention being that of advertisements for medicines claiming to cure it . 
 In addition , the outbreak coincided with the deaths and media focus on the First World War . Another explanation involves the age group affected by the disease . The majority of fatalities , from both the war and the epidemic , were among young adults . The deaths caused by the flu may have been overlooked due to the large numbers of deaths of young men in the war or as a result of injuries . When people read the obituaries , they saw the war or postwar deaths and the deaths from the influenza side by side . Particularly in Europe , where the war 's toll was extremely high , the flu may not have had a great , separate , psychological impact , or may have seemed a mere extension of the war 's tragedies . 
 The duration of the pandemic and the war could have also played a role . The disease would usually only affect a certain area for a month before leaving , while the war , which most had initially expected to end quickly , had lasted for four years by the time the pandemic struck . This left little time for the disease to have a significant impact on the economy . 
 One final issue that the 1918 Spanish flu outbreak had on the world was the effects on the global economy . Many businesses in the entertainment and service industries suffered losses in revenue , but the health care industry reported profit gains . 
 Historian Nancy Bristow has argued that the pandemic , when combined with the increasing number of women attending college , contributed to the success of women in the field of nursing . This was due in part to the failure of medical doctors , who were predominantly men , to contain and prevent the illness . Nursing staff , who were predominantly women , felt more inclined to celebrate the success of their patient care and less inclined to identify the spread of the disease with their own work . 
 In Spain , sources from the period explicitly linked the Spanish flu to the cultural figure of Don Juan . The nickname for the flu , the " Naples Soldier , " was adopted from Federico Romero and Guillermo Fernández Shaw 's operetta , The Song of Forgetting ( La canción del olvido ) , the protagonist of which is a stock Don Juan type . Davis has argued the Spanish flu @-@ Don Juan connection served a cognitive function , allowing Spaniards to make sense of their epidemic experience by interpreting it through a familiar template — the Don Juan story . 
 = = Spanish flu research = = 
 The origin of the Spanish flu pandemic , and the relationship between the near @-@ simultaneous outbreaks in humans and swine , have been controversial . One hypothesis is that the virus strain originated at Fort Riley , Kansas , in viruses in poultry and swine which the fort bred for food ; the soldiers were then sent from Fort Riley around the world , where they spread the disease . Similarities between a reconstruction of the virus and avian viruses , combined with the human pandemic preceding the first reports of influenza in swine , led researchers to conclude the influenza virus jumped directly from birds to humans , and swine caught the disease from humans . 
 Others have disagreed , and more recent research has suggested the strain may have originated in a nonhuman , mammalian species . An estimated date for its appearance in mammalian hosts has been put at the period 1882 – 1913 . This ancestor virus diverged about 1913 – 1915 into two clades ( or biological groups ) , which gave rise to the classical swine and human H1N1 influenza lineages . The last common ancestor of human strains dates to between February 1917 and April 1918 . Because pigs are more readily infected with avian influenza viruses than are humans , they were suggested as the original recipients of the virus , passing the virus to humans sometime between 1913 and 1918 . 
 An effort to recreate the 1918 flu strain ( a subtype of avian strain H1N1 ) was a collaboration among the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology , Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory and Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City . The effort resulted in the announcement ( on 5 October 2005 ) that the group had successfully determined the virus 's genetic sequence , using historic tissue samples recovered by pathologist Johan <unk> from a female flu victim buried in the Alaskan permafrost and samples preserved from American soldiers . 
 On 18 January 2007 , <unk> & et al . ( 2007 ) reported that monkeys ( Macaca fascicularis ) infected with the recreated strain exhibited classic symptoms of the 1918 pandemic , and died from a cytokine storm — an overreaction of the immune system . This may explain why the 1918 flu had its surprising effect on younger , healthier people , as a person with a stronger immune system would potentially have a stronger overreaction . 
 On 16 September 2008 , the body of British politician and diplomat Sir Mark Sykes was exhumed to study the RNA of the flu virus in efforts to understand the genetic structure of modern H5N1 bird flu . Sykes had been buried in 1919 in a lead coffin which scientists hoped to have helped preserve the virus . However , the coffin was found to be split because of the weight of soil over it , and the cadaver was badly decomposed . Nonetheless , samples of lung and brain tissue were taken through the split , with the coffin remaining in situ in the grave during this process . 
 In December 2008 , research by Yoshihiro <unk> of the University of Wisconsin linked the presence of three specific genes ( termed PA , PB1 , and PB2 ) and a nucleoprotein derived from 1918 flu samples to the ability of the flu virus to invade the lungs and cause pneumonia . The combination triggered similar symptoms in animal testing . 
 In June 2010 , a team at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine reported the 2009 flu pandemic vaccine provided some cross @-@ protection against the 1918 flu pandemic strain . 
 One of the few things known for certain about the influenza in 1918 and for some years after was that it was , out of the laboratory , exclusively a disease of human beings . 
 In 2013 , AIR 's Research and Modeling Group " characterizes the historic 1918 pandemic and estimates the effects of a similar pandemic occurring today using the AIR Pandemic Flu Model " . In the model , " a modern day " Spanish flu " event would result in additional life insurance losses of between USD 15 @.@ 3 – 27 @.@ 8 billion in the United States alone " with 188 @,@ 000 – 337 @,@ 000 deaths in the United States . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The 2011 film Contagion and the 2013 film World War Z make reference to the pandemic . 
 The television show Resurrection uses the pandemic , in the episode " Afflictions " that aired on November 2 , 2014 , as the explanation for why many of the Returned were getting sick and disappearing . 
 In season four of British drama Upstairs , Downstairs , Hazel Bellamy dies of Spanish flu in 1918 , after her husband James Bellamy survives injuries in the " Great War " ( World War I ) . Her funeral takes place on 11 November , the day the war ends . 
 In season two of British drama Downton Abbey , Lavinia Swire dies of the Spanish flu in April 1919 , after her fiancé Matthew Crawley recovers from injuries and temporary paralysis from the Great War . 
 Twentieth @-@ century fiction includes at least three novels with the flu pandemic as a major theme : Katherine Anne Porter 's Pale Horse , Pale Rider , Thomas Mullen 's The Last Town on Earth , and Thomas Wolfe 's Look Homeward , Angel . 
 In the play 1918 by Horton Foote , the presence and threat of the flu ( and the tragedy it ultimately causes ) is a major element of the plot . The 1979 play was made into a film ( 1918 flu pandemic at the Internet Movie Database ) , released in 1985 , which was subsequently edited for broadcast by PBS as the last part of the miniseries " The Story of A Marriage " . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = The Pale Emperor = 
 The Pale Emperor is the ninth studio album by American rock band Marilyn Manson . It was released on January 15 , 2015 through Marilyn Manson 's Hell , etc. label , and was distributed in the US by Loma Vista Recordings , Canada by Dine Alone Records , Japan by Victor Entertainment and internationally by Cooking Vinyl . The album was released in standard and deluxe editions on CD and 2 × LP vinyl , as well as a box set . The standard version of the album contains ten tracks , while the deluxe edition includes three acoustic versions as bonus tracks . 
 Produced by Manson and newcomer Tyler Bates , who met through their mutual involvement in the TV series Californication , The Pale Emperor eschews the band 's usual industrial rock genre in favor of a more sparse , blues rock @-@ influenced sound . The album also features drummer Gil Sharone , formerly of The Dillinger Escape Plan , and is the first release since his return in 2008 to not feature writing and performance contributions from bassist Twiggy . The album is dedicated to Manson 's mother , who died during production after an eight @-@ year battle with Alzheimer 's disease and dementia . 
 The album was released to generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics , with several writers referring to it as his best album in over a decade , and was ranked by several publications as one of the best albums of 2015 . The album was also a commercial success , debuting at number eight on the Billboard 200 with the band 's highest opening week sales since Eat Me , Drink Me ( 2007 ) . It also topped the national albums chart in Switzerland , as well as Billboard 's Top Hard Rock Albums chart . It went on to peak within the top ten in fifteen other countries . 
 It spawned three official singles , " Third Day of a Seven Day Binge " , " Cupid Carries a Gun " and " Deep Six " , with the latter going on to become the band 's highest @-@ peaking single on Billboard 's Mainstream Rock Chart ; " The Mephistopheles of Los Angeles " and " The Devil Beneath My Feet " have been released as promotional singles . The album is being supported by The Hell Not Hallelujah Tour , which was interspersed by two co @-@ headlining tours , The End Times with The Smashing Pumpkins , and a summer 2016 co @-@ headlining tour with Slipknot . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In April 2013 , it was announced that Manson was to feature in an episode of the sixth season of TV series Californication , while the following month he also confirmed that production had started on the band 's ninth studio album . At Californication 's wrap party , Manson met the series ' score composer , Tyler Bates , and the two discussed a potential collaboration . They held their first writing session in a small rehearsal space , accompanied by former Slayer drummer Dave Lombardo . This session ultimately proved unsuccessful , with the pair failing to write any substantial material . Bates later suggested that they hold further writing sessions at his home studio , which resulted in them composing " Birds of Hell Awaiting " in " one spontaneous exchange " . 
 This was quickly followed by " Third Day of a Seven Day Binge " , with Manson saying that the recording of the album " just became a rhythm . This was something I was excited to do . " This is in stark contrast to the recording of previous albums The High End of Low ( 2009 ) and Born Villain ( 2012 ) , where he was frequently " dragged into the studio at 3am " to record vocals . He later credited this enthusiasm to the collaborative process between him and Bates , saying that he realized after the first performance of " Birds of Hell Awaiting " that " [ I ] just sang it . I didn 't even know where the music was going to go and I just went with it and it was very organic . And then it opened up a whole different part of my mind . " 
 Bates called the recording process " seamless " , attributing this to an unconventional studio environment . Manson , who would be isolated in a vocal booth with no more than three people in the control room at any one time , was free to improvise or develop lyrics and vocal melodies at a high speed . Bates explained that , through his use of Pro Tools , he was able to " manipulate the music in a way that would allow [ Manson ] to just keep working on it without causing [ a delay ] . If he had an idea , he could just throw it down without there being a lot to explain . " The majority of the album was recorded over a three @-@ month period . The band 's manager , Tony Ciulla , only became aware that Manson had been recording new material when he was invited to Bates ' home recording studio , where he was played final cuts of nine of the album 's ten tracks for the first time , with " Cupid Carries a Gun " being the final track recorded for The Pale Emperor . Further overdubbing took place over the following six months , in between Manson 's acting commitments on Sons of Anarchy and Bates scoring the 2014 television series Salem . 
 Gil Sharone , of The Dillinger Escape Plan and Stolen Babies , performed live drums on the album . Sharone was first contacted by Bates about the project three days before he was due to begin a tour with Stolen Babies . Expanding over the album 's embryonic drum programming , he developed and recorded his drum work over a three @-@ day period at Igloo Studios in Burbank , California . On February 1 , Sons of Anarchy creator Kurt Sutter confirmed Manson 's acting involvement in the show . Sutter went on to say that he had written a song with Shooter Jennings , which was to appear in the final season of the show and feature vocals from Manson . He also suggested that Jennings was involved in the recording of The Pale Emperor , although Jennings ' work does not appear on the album . On June 25 , bassist Fred Sablan confirmed that he had left the band on good terms . Long @-@ time band member Twiggy did not take part in the writing and recording process , as he was busy recording his own material . Manson 's Sons of Anarchy co @-@ star Walton Goggins , Jr. appears as a preacher on album track " Slave Only Dreams to Be King " , where he recites two verses from James Allen 's early twentieth @-@ century essay As a Man <unk> . 
 During The Pale Emperor sessions , Manson and Bates recorded a cover of David Bowie 's " <unk> Daydream " for inclusion on the Guardians of the Galaxy OST , a soundtrack which Bates scored . This recording was not utilized in the soundtrack as , according to Manson , Hollywood Records " didn 't want it . " The original album version by Bowie was used instead . On September 3 , Manson confirmed that the new album is " prepared for landing " , indicating that production had been completed . The Pale Emperor is dedicated to Manson 's late mother , Barbara Warner , who died on May 13 , 2014 after an eight @-@ year battle with Alzheimer 's disease and dementia . 
 = = Composition and style = = 
 In a January 2014 interview with Kerrang ! magazine , Manson described the sound of the new album as being " very cinematic " , saying that the " redneck in me comes out in my voice " due to the album 's inclusion of " old blues " influences , while still retaining the " harder elements " of previous work . In a later interview with The Fader , Manson stated that he no longer " dresses [ his ] feelings in characters and extended metaphors " , saying that he instead " lets melody lead " the album . He elaborated that he is " a man of few words on the record . What I hadn 't ever found , till now , is the blues . The blues changed the way that I sang [ on the album ] . And the music has a melody and a language in and of itself " , while lead editor Naomi <unk> went on to compare the album to the work of Interpol and " the retro biker bar rock that soundtracks Sons of Anarchy " . 
 The Pale Emperor is a departure from the band 's usual style , leaning away from the industrial , electronic , and heavy metal @-@ influenced production that appeared on much of the band 's previous work , towards a sparser blues rock , alternative country and hard rock @-@ influenced sound , with Manson citing the music of Muddy Waters , The Rolling Stones , and The Doors as inspiration . Steven Hyden of Grantland expanded on several parallels between The Pale Emperor and the Doors ' 1971 album L.A. Woman , noting how the album " echoes how [ the Doors ] reformulated its juju in the latter part of its career " , likening both Manson and Jim Morrison to " rambling <unk> vamp [ s ] that career darkly between camp and druggy majesty " . He went on to compare Manson 's vocals on " Warship My Wreck " to Morrison 's " debauched howls " , and said that Morrison 's " self @-@ destructive self @-@ aggrandizement " can be found in tracks such as " The Mephistopheles of Los Angeles " and " Third Day of a Seven Day Binge " . 
 The album 's title is inspired by Constantius I – also known as " Constantius the Pale " – who was the first Roman emperor to deny the existence of a God . Manson has said that the meaning of the album 's title can have several interpretations : " complexion or Goth music or ' beyond the pale ' or [ ... ] everything pales in comparison to it " . Lyrically , the album deals with subjects ranging from mortality , war , violence , slavery and religion , as well as containing references to Greek mythology and German folklore , specifically the story of Faust and Mephistopheles . " The Mephistopheles of Los Angeles " was the original title track and , according to Manson , " the album 's heart " . The album makes use of an extended metaphor , in which Manson compares his own career to the life of Faust , explaining to The Philadelphia Inquirer that he " sold [ his ] soul to become a rock star , and [ The Pale Emperor is ] payment in full – with interest , considering the last few bills I didn 't pay , " explaining that he considered The High End of Low and Born Villain to " lack focus " . He elaborated to Classic Rock Magazine : 
 The lyrics for several tracks are intentionally sparse , with Manson explaining that he " [ left ] holes in these stories so [ the album could ] become your story . It becomes more cinematic . For example in the film Rosemary 's Baby , you don 't see the baby but in your mind you do " . The lyrics were all derived from a single notebook , with Manson admitting that the lyrical content of previous work was " often too scattered " , as they were composed of material taken from " about 20 " different notebooks . Vocally , Manson sings in a different key than on any of his previous releases . Manson has claimed that his voice can emit five different tones simultaneously , which mixing engineer Robert Carranza discovered can form a pentagram when imported in to a phrasal analyzer . Bates has said that the vocals on the album are " stripped down " , saying that he considered the vocals on previous records to be " overproduced at times " . 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 The Pale Emperor was announced for release on the band 's official website on November 9 , 2014 . It was released in various formats worldwide from January 15 , 2015 , including standard and deluxe edition CDs ; a heavyweight 180 @-@ gram 2 × LP vinyl album , available in black , white and a limited edition grey marble @-@ effect , the latter of which was exclusive to Hot Topic ; and as a digital download , including " full @-@ bandwidth 24 @-@ bit " AIFF and WAV format files , which were made available on <unk> . The vinyl discs were manufactured at Record Technology , Inc. in Camarillo , California using the pressing plant 's HQ @-@ 180 ™ system . A digital download of the album was packaged with all LP editions . The standard version of the album contains ten tracks , while the deluxe edition adds three acoustic versions as bonus tracks . Editions of the album sold at Walmart stores in North America feature a heavily censored version of " The Devil Beneath My Feet " , and all US versions of the album were manufactured using black polycarbonate discs . The discs were sourced by Brian Schuman of Concord Music directly from the same plant where Sony manufactured their first PlayStation discs , and are identical to the kind used by the company in the early 90s . A heat @-@ sensitive thermal texture was also added to the CD , appearing black when first opened but revealing a white pattern when exposed to the heat from a CD player . 
 The album was also released as a limited edition " Definitive Box " set , which was sold exclusively at Manson 's webstore . Designed by Manson with <unk> Perron and Hassan Rahim , the set included the deluxe CD and white vinyl editions of the album , as well as several exclusive items including : a grey cloth @-@ bound individually numbered collectors box , five lithographs designed by artist Nicholas Cope , a fold @-@ out 24 " poster , album sleeves printed on full @-@ color UV @-@ coated stock and a Pale Emperor T @-@ shirt . A special edition containing a bonus DVD of music videos was released exclusively in Japan on July 29 . 
 = = Promotion and singles = = 
 The album was first previewed almost nine months before it 's official release , when " Cupid Carries a Gun " appeared as the opening theme to the television series Salem from April 27 , 2014 onwards . Following this , a large portion of album track " Killing Strangers " was featured in the Keanu Reeves film John Wick , which was released in cinemas on October 24 . On October 26 , " Third Day of a Seven Day Binge " was premiered on BBC Radio 1 's Rock Show by Daniel P. Carter . Immediately after the broadcast , the song was released for free download on the band 's official website , and was later released as a one @-@ track single via music download services on November 10 . The band performed several new songs live for the first time in October and early November , when they played a handful of concerts around southern California . On Halloween night , the band was joined on stage by Johnny Depp and Ninja from Die <unk> for a performance of " The Beautiful People " at the Roxy Theatre . On December 5 , Manson settled a fifteen @-@ year rift with The Smashing Pumpkins frontman Billy Corgan , by performing " Third Day of a Seven Day Binge " and " Ava Adore " with the band at the Camden Palace Theatre in London . 
 " Deep Six " was released as the album 's official lead single on December 16 . A music video for the song , directed by Bart Hess , was released on to YouTube three days later . The song debuted at number thirty @-@ three on Billboard 's Mainstream Rock Chart on the issue dated December 23 , 2014 , as the " greatest gainer " that week , before eventually rising to number eight on the chart dated March 14 , 2015 , becoming the band 's highest peaking single ever on the chart . In response to the album leaking online , it was released on streaming site Genius eight days ahead of its official release in the US , while " Cupid Carries a Gun " was released as a digital single on January 7 , 2015 . The band began their Hell Not Hallelujah Tour on January 21 , 2015 , and were also confirmed to perform at several music festivals throughout the year , including dates at Soundwave Festival in Australia , Rock am Ring and Rock im Park in Germany , the Download Festival in the UK and Hellfest in France . 
 Manson and his father , Hugh Warner , appeared together in the February issue of Paper magazine . Taken by photographer Terry Richardson , the shoot featured the pair wearing identical make @-@ up and contained an explicit image in which Hugh Warner can be seen fondling his own genitalia . On April 12 , Tyler Bates announced that he had amicably retired from the band 's touring line @-@ up , stating that he helped put the band together with the intention that it could function without him when " pre @-@ existing commitments in the film and television industry would be too demanding to handle responsibly from the road " . Rhythm guitarist Paul Wiley replaced Bates on lead guitar for the duration of the tour . The band also revealed details of a co @-@ headlining tour of the US with The Smashing Pumpkins . The End Times Tour began in Concord on July 7 and featured the return of original Pumpkins drummer Jimmy Chamberlin . 
 A music video for " The Mephistopheles of Los Angeles " , directed by Francesco Carrozzini and featuring a cameo from The Wire and Boardwalk Empire actor Michael K. Williams , was released on May 11 on the band 's official YouTube channel . On June 11 , Manson was honored with a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 2015 Kerrang ! Awards . Two days later , Manson was the keynote speaker at the 2015 Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity . A music video for " Third Day of a Seven Day Binge " was released on July 10 . Manson appeared on a tribute album to Giorgio Moroder curated by Shooter Jennings , contributing vocals to a version of David Bowie 's " Cat People ( Putting Out Fire ) " . <unk> ( For Giorgio ) was released on February 26 , 2016 . Manson has also revealed his intentions of collaborating with Korn frontman Jonathan Davis on " Southern @-@ sounding , acoustic " material in the near future , and also stated that there is a " strong possibility of doing something with Billy Corgan , while we 're out on the road together . " In February 2016 , it was announced that the band would embark on a co @-@ headlining tour with Slipknot . The tour will see the two bands performing dates in 34 American cities throughout the summer of 2016 , with support coming from Of Mice & Men . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Pale Emperor received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from music critics , the album received an average score of 71 , indicating " generally favorable reviews " , based on 19 publications . 
 Dean Brown of The Quietus referred to The Pale Emperor as the band 's best album since Holy Wood , saying that by writing " memorable , mature songs full of devilishly addictive hooks without trying to relive the past , [ the album ] breathes new life into Manson 's career . " Similarly , Corey Deiterman of Houston Press wrote that the album " stands as a triumphant return to the songwriting principles that made him famous in the first place " , before summarizing that Manson 's persona has " finally given way to the superior musician that always lived within . " In a review for Yahoo ! Music , Allan Raible was similarly positive , highlighting the album 's focus on songcraft instead of shock value , while Kerrang ! said that Manson " trades shock @-@ tastic thrills for something even darker . " Fred Thomas of AllMusic noted the album 's inclusion of blues influences , and opined that this shift in musical direction has resulted in The Pale Emperor sounding more sinister than any of the band 's previous albums . J.C. Maçek III of PopMatters praised the scope of musical variety found on the album , with particular acclaim given for its incorporation of alternative country elements . Jeff Miers of The Buffalo News praised the album 's lyrical content , saying that Manson sounds " both inspired and disgusted [ throughout ] , which is usually the tightrope he walks when he 's doing his best work . " In another positive review , Mark Orton of Otago Daily Times compared the album to Mechanical Animals , stating that the music has " definitely supplanted the image " , awarding the album four and a half stars out of five . Drowned in Sound critic Dave Hanratty praised the album 's consistency as focused , saying " damned if the devil didn 't bring his best tunes to this dance . " He also praised Bates ' production , awarding the album a score of eight out of ten . Alec Chillingworth of <unk> wrote that The Pale Emperor is Manson " climbing back to the creative summit he fell from following Holy Wood . He 's never going to top those early albums , but by expanding his palette and finally getting it right , The Pale Emperor reinstates Marilyn Manson as a relevant musical force and an elder statesman of the industrial scene " , awarding the album four stars out of five . 
 Louis Pattison , reviewing for NME , stated that " it 's no classic , but perhaps the surprise here is that Manson 's music can work without the shock shtick " . He also wrote that " the biggest surprise on the new album from the ' God Of Fuck ' is that we see more of the real Manson than before . " Dan Bogosian of Consequence of Sound was more mixed in his assessment , stating : " A lack of ' oomph ' prevents the album from landing a gut punch that would cover all of its flaws . Like an aging boxer , Manson lands jabs and the occasional uppercut , but he never topples his opponent . " Similarly , Daniel Sylvester of Exclaim ! complimented the album 's <unk> , but said that The Pale Emperor is " lazy when it can get away with it . " 
 = = = Year @-@ end lists = = = 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Industry forecasters predicted that The Pale Emperor was on course for a top ten debut on the Billboard 200 , with first week sales of around 42 @,@ 000 units . The album debuted at number eight on the chart with over 51 @,@ 000 copies sold , including 49 @,@ 000 in " pure " album sales , making it the band 's highest opening week figure since Eat Me , Drink Me debuted at the same position with 88 @,@ 000 copies in 2007 . It became the band 's eighth top ten album , and sixth title in a row to reach the region . It also debuted at number six on Billboard 's Top Albums Chart – the current equivalent of the previous sales @-@ based Billboard 200 – as well as number three on Top Rock Albums and number one on the Top Hard Rock Albums charts . On its second week , the album dropped to number twenty @-@ four on the Top Albums Chart , selling an additional 12 @,@ 275 " pure " copies . As of December 2015 , The Pale Emperor has sold more than 136 @,@ 000 " pure " copies in the US . The album also debuted at number four on the Canadian Albums Chart with sales of over 5 @,@ 000 copies on its first week , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 In Eurasia , the album first debuted on the Russian Albums Chart at number ten on the chart dated January 18 , 2015 , based on three days of sale on the Russian iTunes . The album rose to number two the following week , on its first full week of release in the country . The album debuted and peaked at number one on the Swiss Albums Chart , becoming the band 's first since The Golden Age of Grotesque ( 2003 ) to do so . In the United Kingdom , it debuted at number sixteen with sales of 5 @,@ 984 copies , making it the band 's seventh top 20 album . The album peaked at number four on the German Albums Chart , their highest peaking album in the territory since Eat Me , Drink Me . The Pale Emperor became Manson 's fifth top @-@ ten album in France , where it debuted at number five with sales of over 6 @,@ 700 copies , and has gone on to sell over 30 @,@ 000 copies there . In Japan , the album debuted at number twenty @-@ five on the Oricon albums chart with sales of 3 @,@ 610 copies . 
 The album also debuted at number six on the ARIA Albums Chart as the highest new entry that week , and his highest peaking album in the region since The Golden Age of Grotesque . In New Zealand , the album debuted at number five , making it the band 's highest peaking album in the country since Mechanical Animals peaked at number three in 1998 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Marilyn Manson , all music composed by Tyler Bates . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recorded at Abattoir Studios , Studio City , California 
 Drums recorded by Gustavo Borner at Igloo Studios , Burbank , California 
 Mixed by Robert Carranza and Wolfgang Matthes at <unk> , Los Angeles , California 
 Mastering by Brian Lucey at Magic Garden Mastering , Los Angeles , California 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of the deluxe edition of The Pale Emperor . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Battle of <unk> = 
 The Battle of <unk> ( known also as battle of Grado ) on 22 February 1812 was a minor naval action of the Adriatic campaign of the Napoleonic Wars fought between a British and a French ship of the line in the vicinity of the towns of Piran and Grado in Adriatic Sea . The French Rivoli , named for Napoleon 's victory 15 years earlier , had been recently completed at Venice . The French naval authorities intended her to bolster French forces in the Adriatic , following a succession of defeats in the preceding year . 
 To prevent this ship challenging British dominance in the theatre , the Royal Navy ordered a ship of the line from the Mediterranean fleet to intercept and capture Rivoli on her maiden voyage . Captain John Talbot of HMS Victorious arrived off Venice in mid @-@ February and blockaded the port . When Rivoli attempted to escape under cover of fog , Talbot chased her and forced her to surrender in a five @-@ hour battle , Rivoli losing over half her crew wounded or dead . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Treaty of Tilsit in 1807 had resulted in a Russian withdrawal from the Adriatic and the French takeover of the strategic island fortress of Corfu . The Treaty of Schönbrunn with the Austrian Empire in 1809 had further solidified French influence in the area by formalising their control of the Illyrian Provinces on the Eastern shore . To protect these gains , the French and Italian governments had instigated a shipbuilding program in Venice and other Italian ports in an effort to rebuild their Mediterranean fleet and challenge British hegemony . These efforts were hampered by the poverty of the Italian government and the difficulty that the French Navy had in manning and equipping their ships . As a result , the first ship of the line built in the Adriatic under this program was not launched until 1810 and not completed until early 1812 . 
 By the time this ship , Rivoli , was launched , the Royal Navy had achieved dominance over the French in the Adriatic Sea . Not only had the regional commander Bernard Dubourdieu been killed and his squadron destroyed at the Battle of Lissa in March 1811 , but French efforts to supply their scattered garrisons were proving increasingly risky . This was demonstrated by the destruction of a well @-@ armed convoy from Corfu to Trieste at the Action of 29 November 1811 . Rivoli 's launch was therefore seen by the French Navy as an opportunity to reverse these defeats , as the new ship of the line outgunned the British frigates that operated within the Adriatic and would be able to operate in the Adriatic without the threat of attack by the frigate squadron based on Lissa . 
 The Royal Navy was aware of the threat that Rivoli posed to their hegemony and were warned in advance by spies in Venice of the progress of the ship ’ s construction . As Rivoli neared completion , HMS Victorious was dispatched from the Mediterranean Fleet to intercept her should she leave port . Victorious was commanded by John Talbot , a successful and popular officer who had distinguished himself with the capture of the French frigate Ville de Milan in 1805 and his service in the Dardanelles Operation of 1807 . Talbot was accompanied by the 18 @-@ gun brig HMS <unk> under Commander John William Andrew . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Rivoli departed Venice on 21 February 1812 under the command of Commodore Jean @-@ Baptiste Barré , accompanied by five smaller escort ships , the 16 @-@ gun brigs Mercure and Iéna , the 8 @-@ gun brig <unk> and two small gunboats , strung out in an improvised line of battle . Barré hoped to make use of a heavy sea fog that had descended , to break out from Venice and elude pursuit . Victorious had held off from the land during the fog and by the time Talbot was able to observe Venice harbour at 14 : 30 , his opponent had escaped . Searching for Barré , who was sailing to Pula , Talbot spotted one of the French brigs at 15 : 00 and gave chase . 
 The French head @-@ start had enabled Rivoli to gain a substantial distance on the British ship , and so it was not until 02 : 30 on 22 February that Talbot was able to close with her quarry and its escort . Not wishing to be held up by the escort ships protecting Rivoli , Talbot ordered Weasel ahead to engage them while Victorious fought Barré 's flagship directly . At 04 : 15 , Weasel overhauled the rearmost French brig Mercure and opened fire from close range , Mercure replying in kind . Iéna also engaged Weasel but the greater distance between these ships allowed Commander Andrew to focus his attack on Mercure , which fought hard for twenty minutes before being destroyed in a catastrophic explosion , probably caused by a fire in the magazine . Weasel immediately launched her boats to rescue any survivors , but only three were saved . 
 Following the explosion aboard Mercure , Iéna and the other French brigs scattered , briefly pursued by Weasel , who chased Iéna and <unk> but was unable to bring them to a decisive action . The loss of the French escorts allowed Victorious to close with Rivoli unopposed and at 04 : 30 the two large ships began a close range artillery duel . This combat continued unabated for the next three and a half hours , both ships being severely damaged and suffering heavy casualties . Captain Talbot was struck on the head by a flying splinter and had to quit the deck , temporarily blinded , command passing to Lieutenant Thomas Peake . To assist in subduing Rivoli , Peake recalled Weasel to block the French ship 's attempts to escape , Commander Andrew sailing his ship in front of Rivoli and repeatedly raking her . 
 = = Surrender and aftermath = = 
 At 08 : 45 Rivoli , which had been struggling to reach the harbour of Trieste , lost her mizzenmast under fire from both Victorious and Weasel . Nearly at the same moment , two of her 36 @-@ pounder long guns exploded , killing or wounding 60 men , greatly <unk> and demoralising the others , and forcing Barré to transfer gunners from the upper gun deck to man his lower battery . Fifteen minutes later , with his ship unmanageable and battered , Commodore Barré surrendered . Rivoli had suffered over 400 killed and wounded from her crew of over 800 , who had only assembled for the first time a few days before and had never sailed their ship in open water . Losses aboard Victorious were also heavy , with one officer and 25 sailors and marines killed and six officers ( including Captain Talbot ) and 93 men wounded . 
 French losses on Mercure , although unknown exactly , were severe , only three sailors surviving . Weasel , despite being engaged with three different French ships for a considerable time , had not one man killed or wounded during the entire engagement . Rivoli 's scattered escorts were not pursued , British efforts being directed instead at bringing the shattered Rivoli back to port as a prize . As a result , the remaining French ships were able to make their way to friendly ports unopposed . Rivoli was a new and well @-@ built ship and , following immediate repairs at Port St. George , she and Victorious traveled together to Britain . There they were both repaired , Victorious returning to the fleet under Talbot for service against the United States Navy during the War of 1812 , and Rivoli commissioned as HMS Rivoli for service in home waters . 
 The crews of Victorious and Weasel were well rewarded with both promotions and prize money , the junior officers either promoted or advanced and Commander Andrew of Weasel made a post captain . Captain Talbot was rewarded at the end of the war , becoming Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in recognition of his success . Nearly four decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . This was the last significant ship @-@ to @-@ ship action in the Adriatic , and its conclusion allowed British raiders to strike against coastal convoys and shore facilities unopposed , seizing isolated islands and garrisons with the aid of an increasingly nationalistic Illyrian population . 
 = H II region = 
 An H II region is a region of interstellar hydrogen that is ionized . It is typically a large , low @-@ density cloud of partially ionized gas in which star formation has recently taken place . The short @-@ lived blue stars forged in these regions emit copious amounts of ultraviolet light that ionize the surrounding gas . H II regions — sometimes several hundred light @-@ years across — are often associated with giant molecular clouds . The first known H II region was the Orion Nebula , which was examined by telescope in 1610 by Nicolas @-@ Claude Fabri de Peiresc , although its nature was not known . 
 H II regions are named for the large amount of ionised atomic hydrogen they contain , referred to as H II , pronounced H @-@ two by astronomers ( an H I region being neutral atomic hydrogen , and a molecular cloud being molecular hydrogen , H2 . In discussion with non @-@ astronomers there is sometimes confusion with the identical spoken forms of " HII " and " H2 " ) . Such regions have extremely diverse shapes , because the distribution of the stars and gas inside them is irregular . They often appear clumpy and filamentary , sometimes showing bizarre shapes such as the Horsehead Nebula . H II regions may give birth to thousands of stars over a period of several million years . In the end , supernova explosions and strong stellar winds from the most massive stars in the resulting star cluster will disperse the gases of the H II region , leaving behind a cluster of birthed stars such as the Pleiades . 
 H II regions can be seen to considerable distances in the universe , and the study of extragalactic H II regions is important in determining the distance and chemical composition of other galaxies . Spiral and irregular galaxies contain many H II regions , while elliptical galaxies are almost devoid of them . In the spiral galaxies , including the Milky Way , H II regions are concentrated in the spiral arms , while in the irregular galaxies they are distributed chaotically . Some galaxies contain huge H II regions , which may contain tens of thousands of stars . Examples include the 30 Doradus region in the Large Magellanic Cloud and NGC 604 in the Triangulum Galaxy . 
 = = Observations = = 
 A few of the brightest H II regions are visible to the naked eye . However , none seem to have been noticed before the advent of the telescope in the early 17th century . Even Galileo did not notice the Orion Nebula when he first observed the star cluster within it ( previously cataloged as a single star , θ Orionis , by Johann Bayer ) . The French observer Nicolas @-@ Claude Fabri de Peiresc is credited with the discovery of the Orion Nebula in 1610 . Since that early observation large numbers of H II regions have been discovered in the Milky Way and other galaxies . 
 William Herschel observed the Orion Nebula in 1774 , and described it later as " an unformed fiery mist , the chaotic material of future suns " . Confirmation of this hypothesis had to wait another hundred years , when William Huggins together with his wife Mary Huggins turned his spectroscope on various nebulae . Some , such as the Andromeda Nebula , had spectra quite similar to those of stars , but turned out to be galaxies consisting of hundreds of millions of individual stars . Others looked very different . Rather than a strong continuum with absorption lines superimposed , the Orion Nebula and other similar objects showed only a small number of emission lines . In planetary nebulae , the brightest of these spectral lines was at a wavelength of 500 @.@ 7 nanometres , which did not correspond with a line of any known chemical element . At first it was hypothesized that the line might be due to an unknown element , which was named <unk> — a similar idea had led to the discovery of helium through analysis of the Sun 's spectrum in 1868 . However , while helium was isolated on earth soon after its discovery in the spectrum of the sun , <unk> was not . In the early 20th century , Henry Norris Russell proposed that rather than being a new element , the line at 500 @.@ 7 nm was due to a familiar element in unfamiliar conditions . 
 Interstellar matter , considered dense in an astronomical context , is at high vacuum by laboratory standards . Physicists showed in the 1920s that in gas at extremely low density , electrons can populate excited metastable energy levels in atoms and ions , which at higher densities are rapidly de @-@ excited by collisions . Electron transitions from these levels in doubly ionized oxygen give rise to the 500 @.@ 7 nm line . These spectral lines , which can only be seen in very low density gases , are called forbidden lines . Spectroscopic observations thus showed that planetary nebulae consisted largely of extremely rarefied ionised oxygen gas ( <unk> ) . 
 In HII regions , however , the dominant spectral line has a wavelength of 656 @.@ 3 nm . This is the well @-@ known H @-@ alpha line emitted by atomic hydrogen . Specifically , a photon of this wavelength is emitted when the electron of a hydrogen atom changes its excitation state from n = 3 to n = 2 . Such state @-@ changes happen very frequently when an electron is captured by an ionised hydrogen atom ( a proton ) , and the electron cascades down from some higher excitation state to n = 1 . Thus , it was concluded that HII regions consist of a mix of electrons and ionised hydrogen that are constantly recombining into hydrogen atoms . 
 During the 20th century , observations showed that H II regions often contained hot , bright stars . These stars are many times more massive than the Sun , and are the shortest @-@ lived stars , with total lifetimes of only a few million years ( compared to stars like the Sun , which live for several billion years ) . Therefore , it was surmised that H II regions must be regions in which new stars were forming . Over a period of several million years , a cluster of stars will form in an H II region , before radiation pressure from the hot young stars causes the nebula to disperse . The Pleiades are an example of a cluster which has ' boiled away ' the H II region from which it was formed . Only a trace of reflection nebulosity remains . 
 = = Origin and lifetime = = 
 The precursor to an H II region is a giant molecular cloud ( GMC ) . A GMC is a cold ( 10 – 20 K ) and dense cloud consisting mostly of molecular hydrogen . GMCs can exist in a stable state for long periods of time , but shock waves due to supernovae , collisions between clouds , and magnetic interactions can trigger its collapse . When this happens , via a process of collapse and fragmentation of the cloud , stars are born ( see stellar evolution for a lengthier description ) . 
 As stars are born within a GMC , the most massive will reach temperatures hot enough to <unk> the surrounding gas . Soon after the formation of an ionising radiation field , energetic photons create an ionisation front , which sweeps through the surrounding gas at supersonic speeds . At greater and greater distances from the ionising star , the ionisation front slows , while the pressure of the newly ionised gas causes the ionised volume to expand . Eventually , the ionisation front slows to subsonic speeds , and is overtaken by the shock front caused by the expansion of the material ejected from the nebula . The H II region has been born . 
 The lifetime of an H II region is of the order of a few million years . Radiation pressure from the hot young stars will eventually drive most of the gas away . In fact , the whole process tends to be very inefficient , with less than 10 per cent of the gas in the H II region forming into stars before the rest is blown off . Contributing to the loss of gas are the supernova explosions of the most massive stars , which will occur after only 1 – 2 million years . 
 = = Destruction of stellar nurseries = = 
 Stars form in clumps of cool molecular gas that hide the nascent stars . It is only when the radiation pressure from a star drives away its ' cocoon ' that it becomes visible . The hot , blue stars that are powerful enough to ionize significant amounts of hydrogen and form H II regions will do this quickly , and light up the region in which they just formed . The dense regions which contain younger or less massive still forming stars and that have not yet blown away the material from which they are forming are often seen in silhouette against the rest of the ionised nebula . These dark patches are known as Bok globules , after astronomer Bart Bok , who proposed in the 1940s that they might be stellar birthplaces , a hypothesis which was shown to be correct in 1990 . The hot , young stars dissipate these globules , as the radiation from the stars powering the H II region drives the material away . In this sense , the stars which generate H II regions act to destroy stellar nurseries . In doing so , however , one last burst of star formation may be triggered , as radiation pressure and mechanical pressure from supernova may act to squeeze globules , thereby enhancing the density within them . 
 The young stars in H II regions show evidence for containing planetary systems . The Hubble Space Telescope has revealed hundreds of protoplanetary disks ( proplyds ) in the Orion Nebula . At least half the young stars in the Orion Nebula appear to be surrounded by disks of gas and dust , thought to contain many times as much matter as would be needed to create a planetary system like the Solar System . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical properties = = = 
 H II regions vary greatly in their physical properties . They range in size from so @-@ called ultra @-@ compact ( <unk> ) regions perhaps only a light @-@ year or less across , to giant H II regions several hundred light @-@ years across . Their size is also known as the <unk> radius and essentially depends on the intensity of the source of ionising photons and the density of the region . Their densities range from over a million particles per cm ³ in the ultra @-@ compact H II regions to only a few particles per cm ³ in the largest and most extended regions . This implies total masses between perhaps 100 and 105 solar masses . 
 There are also " ultra @-@ dense HII " regions ( <unk> ) . 
 Depending on the size of an H II region there may be several thousand stars within it . This makes H II regions more complicated than planetary nebulae , which have only one central ionising source . Typically H II regions reach temperatures of 10 @,@ 000 K. They are mostly ionised gases with weak magnetic fields with strengths of several <unk> . Nevertheless , H II regions are almost always associated with a cold molecular gas , which originated from the same parent GMC . Magnetic fields are produced by these weak moving electric charges in the ionised gas , suggesting that H II regions might contain electric fields . 
 A number of H II regions also show signs of being permeated by a plasma with temperatures exceeding 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 K , sufficiently hot to emit X @-@ rays . X @-@ ray observatories such as Einstein and Chandra have noted diffuse X @-@ ray emissions in a number of star @-@ forming regions , notably the Orion Nebula , Messier 17 , and the Carina Nebula . The hot gas is likely supplied by the strong stellar winds from O @-@ type stars , which may be heated by supersonic shock waves in the winds , through collisions between winds from different stars , or through colliding winds channeled by magnetic fields . This plasma will rapidly expand to fill available cavities in the molecular clouds due to the high speed of sound in the gas at this temperature . It will also leak out through holes in the periphery of the H II region , which appears to be happening in Messier 17 . 
 Chemically , H II regions consist of about 90 % hydrogen . The strongest hydrogen emission line at 656 @.@ 3 nm gives H II regions their characteristic red colour . Most of the rest of an H II region consists of helium , with trace amounts of heavier elements . Across the galaxy , it is found that the amount of heavy elements in H II regions decreases with increasing distance from the galactic centre . This is because over the lifetime of the galaxy , star formation rates have been greater in the denser central regions , resulting in greater enrichment of those regions of the interstellar medium with the products of nucleosynthesis . 
 = = = Numbers and distribution = = = 
 H II regions are found only in spiral galaxies like the Milky Way and irregular galaxies . They are not seen in elliptical galaxies . In irregular galaxies , they may be dispersed throughout the galaxy , but in spirals they are most abundant within the spiral arms . A large spiral galaxy may contain thousands of H II regions . 
 The reason H II regions rarely appear in elliptical galaxies is that ellipticals are believed to form through galaxy mergers . In galaxy clusters , such mergers are frequent . When galaxies collide , individual stars almost never collide , but the GMCs and H II regions in the colliding galaxies are severely agitated . Under these conditions , enormous bursts of star formation are triggered , so rapid that most of the gas is converted into stars rather than the normal rate of 10 % or less . 
 Galaxies undergoing such rapid star formation are known as starburst galaxies . The post @-@ merger elliptical galaxy has a very low gas content , and so H II regions can no longer form . Twenty @-@ first century observations have shown that a very small number of H II regions exist outside galaxies altogether . These intergalactic H II regions may be the remnants of tidal disruptions of small galaxies , and in some cases may represent a new generation of stars in a galaxy 's most recently accreted gas . 
 = = = Morphology = = = 
 H II regions come in an enormous variety of sizes . They are usually clumpy and inhomogeneous on all scales from the smallest to largest . Each star within an H II region <unk> a roughly spherical region — known as a Strömgren sphere — of the surrounding gas , but the combination of ionisation spheres of multiple stars within a H II region and the expansion of the heated nebula into surrounding gases <unk> sharp density gradients that result in complex shapes . Supernova explosions may also sculpt H II regions . In some cases , the formation of a large star cluster within an H II region results in the region being hollowed out from within . This is the case for NGC 604 , a giant H II region in the Triangulum Galaxy . For a HII region which cannot be resolved , some information on the spatial structure ( the electron density as a function of the distance from the center , and an estimate of the clumpiness ) can be inferred by performing an inverse Laplace transform on the frequency spectrum . 
 = = Notable H II regions = = 
 Notable Galactic H II regions include the Orion Nebula , the Eta Carinae Nebula , and the Berkeley 59 / Cepheus <unk> Complex . The Orion Nebula , which lies at a distance of about 500 pc ( 1 @,@ 500 light @-@ years ) , is part of a GMC ( called OMC @-@ 1 ) . If this were visible , it would fill most of the constellation of Orion . The Horsehead Nebula and Barnard 's Loop are two other illuminated parts of this cloud of gas . The Orion Nebula is actually a thin layer of ionised gas on the outer border of the OMC @-@ 1 cloud . The stars in the Trapezium cluster , and especially θ1 Orionis , are responsible for this ionisation . 
 The Large Magellanic Cloud , a satellite galaxy of the Milky Way at about 50 kpc ( 160 thousand light years ) , contains a giant H II region called the Tarantula Nebula . Measuring at about 200 pc ( 650 light years ) across , this nebula is the most massive and the second @-@ largest H II region in the Local Group . It is much bigger than the Orion Nebula , and is forming thousands of stars , some with masses of over 100 times that of the sun — OB and Wolf @-@ Rayet stars . If the Tarantula Nebula were as close to Earth as the Orion Nebula , it would shine about as brightly as the full moon in the night sky . The supernova SN 1987A occurred in the outskirts of the Tarantula Nebula . 
 Another giant H II region — NGC 604 is located in M33 spiral galaxy , which is at 817 kpc ( 2 @.@ 66 million light years ) . Measuring at approximately 240 × 250 pc ( 800 × 830 light years ) across , NGC 604 is the second @-@ most @-@ massive H II region in the Local Group after the Tarantula Nebula , although it is slightly larger in size than the latter . It contains around 200 hot OB and Wolf @-@ Rayet stars , which heat the gas inside it to millions of degrees , producing bright X @-@ ray emissions . The total mass of the hot gas in NGC 604 is about 6 @,@ 000 Solar masses . 
 = = Current issues = = 
 As with planetary nebulae , estimates of the abundance of elements in H II regions are subject to some uncertainty . There are two different ways of determining the abundance of metals ( metals in this case are elements other than hydrogen and helium ) in nebulae , which rely on different types of spectral lines , and large discrepancies are sometimes seen between the results derived from the two methods . Some astronomers put this down to the presence of small temperature fluctuations within H II regions ; others claim that the discrepancies are too large to be explained by temperature effects , and hypothesise the existence of cold knots containing very little hydrogen to explain the observations . 
 The full details of massive star formation within H II regions are not yet well known . Two major problems hamper research in this area . First , the distance from Earth to large H II regions is considerable , with the nearest H II ( California Nebula ) region at 300 pc ( 1 @,@ 000 light @-@ years ) ; other H II regions are several times that distance from Earth . Secondly , the formation of these stars is deeply obscured by dust , and visible light observations are impossible . Radio and infrared light can penetrate the dust , but the youngest stars may not emit much light at these wavelengths . 
 = Slow Down Baby = 
 " Slow Down Baby " is a song by American recording artist Christina Aguilera from her fifth studio album , Back to Basics ( 2006 ) . It was released as the album 's fourth single on July 28 , 2007 by RCA Records . It was written by Aguilera , Mark Ronson , Kara DioGuardi and Raymond Angry , and produced by Ronson and co @-@ produced by Aguilera . The song is built around samples of " Window Raisin ' Granny " ( 1973 ) by American group Gladys Knight and the Pips and " So Seductive " ( 2005 ) by American rapper Tony Yayo . Due to the inclusion of the samples , the original songs ' writers obtained writing credits . 
 Musically , " Slow Down Baby " is a pop and R & B song that incorporates elements of funk , hip hop and soul . It features <unk> , horn , organ and piano instrumentation . The single was only released in Australia during the Oceanian leg of Aguilera 's Back to Basics Tour ( 2007 ) . " Slow Down Baby " peaked at number 21 on the Australian Singles Chart , although it did not receive any promotion in that country . 
 = = Background = = 
 Aguilera 's fifth studio album , Back to Basics , is made up of two discs . Aguilera worked with " more beat @-@ driven " producers on the first disc , such as DJ Premier and Mark Ronson , who included samples in the production . The second disc consists solely of collaborations with producer Linda Perry . Aguilera sent letters to different producers that she hoped could help her with the direction she was taking for the project , encouraging them to experiment , re @-@ invent and create a modern soul feel . She described the first disc as " kind of a throwback with elements of jazz , blues and soul music combined with a modern @-@ day twist , like hard @-@ hitting beats " . 
 Aguilera and Ronson wrote " Slow Down Baby " alongside Kara DioGuardi and Raymond Angry , and Ronson completed the production with assistance from Aguilera . In an interview for Herald Sun , Ronson elaborated on the collaboration : " I heard [ Aguilera ] was looking for tracks . I was a bit narrow @-@ minded , I assumed nothing I was doing would be something she 'd be into . I sent around some hip hop tracks I had lying about and got a call four days later saying she liked them . " He stated that he had initially imagined offering " Slow Down Baby " to someone like rap duo M.O.P. Ronson provided the beats and played the guitar and bass , while Angry played the <unk> , organ and piano . Ronson recorded Aguilera 's vocals at Allido Sound in New York City and additional recording was helmed by Oscar Ramirez at The Record Plant in Los Angeles , California . Dave " Hard Drive " Pensado later completed the mixing process at Larrabee North in North Hollywood . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Slow Down Baby " is an uptempo pop and R & B song that blends modern and " old school " R & B. It has elements of funk , hip hop and soul . Nick Levine of Digital Spy called it " hot <unk> <unk> " , and <unk> critic Sonia Murray observed that it " <unk> " combines hip hop and early soul . " Slow Down Baby " ' s instrumentation consists of pianos and horns , which recall the 1970s blaxploitation film genre . In the lyrics , Aguilera tells a " lusty " man to leave her alone as she sings , " If you knew anything you 'd realise I 'm wearing a ring " . The song contains two samples , " Window Raisin ' Granny " ( 1973 ) by R & B group Gladys Knight & the Pips — written by William Guest , <unk> Knight , Edward Patten and Gladys Knight — and " So Seductive " ( 2005 ) by rapper Tony Yayo — written by Marvin Bernard , Michael Harper and Curtis Jackson . Due to its sampling , the original songs ' writers are credited as songwriters . According to sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Universal Music Publishing Group , " Slow Down Baby " is written in the time signature of common time with a moderate beat rate of 110 beats per minute . The song is written in the key of F ♯ minor and Aguilera 's vocal range spans from the low @-@ note of A3 to the high @-@ note of G5 . According to Spence D. of IGN , " Slow Down Baby " interpolates a " vocal page " from LL Cool J 's " Jingling Baby " ( 1990 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Guardian critic Dorian Lyskey was positive regarding " Slow Down Baby " , writing that it " smartly slaps a 50 Cent <unk> funk " . John Murphy of musicOMH named it one of the album 's highlights and deemed it " fresh and funky " . Moreover , Murphy called it " sharp and sassy infectious pop " and used it as an example of Aguilera being " at her best " . Writing for The Boston Globe , Joan Anderman commented that the song 's " tangle of horns and pianos [ are ] pushed to the edge of sonic sense " . Len Righi of The Morning Call wrote that Aguilera " sings with remarkable conviction " throughout the album , but the soul and funk of " Slow Down Baby " put her at " Aretha Franklin 's doorstep " . The Virginian @-@ Pilot writer Malcolm Venable commented that " Slow Down Baby " , alongside " Back in the Day " and " Without You " , displays Aguilera 's " well @-@ shaking " vocals and " tight , seemingly effortless songwriting " . 
 Jody Rosen of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the song " neatly blends old- and new @-@ school R & B " . Tampa Bay Times critic Sean Daly referred " Slow Down Baby " to as " the very essence of Aguilera " , indicating " old school , new school and big vocal belting " . Spence D. of IGN recommended " Slow Down Baby " for digital download and commended Aguilera 's " throaty insistence " . Scott Mervis of Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette wrote that the song , alongside the album 's first single " Ain 't No Other Man " and " Understand " , " keep [ Aguilera ] on the track of torchy old @-@ school soul that lets her limitless voice run wild and free " . In 2010 , Digital Spy 's critic Nick Levine included " Slow Down Baby " on a list of Aguilera 's ten best songs . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 To promote the Oceanian leg of the Back to Basics Tour , " Slow Down Baby " was released as the album 's fourth single on July 28 , 2007 , in Australia . It debuted at number 41 on the ARIA Digital Tracks chart in the issue dated July 23 , 2007 . The song later entered the main singles chart at number 21 in the issue dated August 6 , 2007 . The position became its peak , which made it Aguilera 's first single since " I Turn to You " ( 2000 ) to miss the top ten . The same week , " Slow Down Baby " debuted at number 20 on the physical singles chart , and rose to number 22 on the digital chart . It remained on the main chart for six weeks . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Aguilera first performed the song during a concert held in front of 1 @,@ 500 fans and invited guests in London on July 20 , 2006 . The 40 @-@ minute concert comprised songs from the then @-@ upcoming Back to Basics and other songs , including " Lady Marmalade " ( 2001 ) and " Beautiful " ( 2002 ) . Aguilera ended the show with " Slow Down Baby " , and David Smyth of Evening Standard commented that the song " rounded things up with big horns and bigger beats " . The song was later performed during the worldwide Back to Basics Tour . The performance was preceded by newspapers headlines that flashed across a big screen , such as , " Christina goes from ' dirrty ' to demure " and " Christina cleans up her act " . Aguilera wore black lace thigh @-@ high boots and a white bodysuit . The performance is included on the video release Back to Basics : Live and Down Under ( 2008 ) . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 CD single / digital download 
 " Slow Down Baby " ( album version ) – 3 : 27 
 " Slow Down Baby " ( instrumental version ) – 3 : 27 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and samples 
 Recorded at Allido Sound , New York City and The Record Plant , Los Angeles , California 
 Contains a sample from " Window Raisin ' Granny " , written by William Guest , M. Knight , Edward Patten and Gladys Knight as performed by Gladys Knight and the Pips 
 Contains a sample from " So Seductive " , written by Marvin Bernard , Michael Harper and Curtis Jackson as performed by Tony Yayo 
 Personnel 
 Credits are adapted from the " Slow Down Baby " liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = PSR B1937 + 21 = 
 PSR B1937 + 21 is a pulsar located in the constellation <unk> a few degrees in the sky away from the first discovered pulsar , PSR <unk> + 21 . The name PSR B1937 + 21 is derived from the word " pulsar " and the declination and right ascension at which it is located , with the " B " indicating that the coordinates are for the 1950 @.@ 0 epoch . PSR B1937 + 21 was discovered in 1982 by Don Backer , Shri Kulkarni , Carl <unk> , Michael Davis , and Miller Goss . It is the first discovered millisecond pulsar , with a rotational period of 1 @.@ <unk> milliseconds , meaning it completes almost 642 rotations per second . This period was far shorter than astronomers considered pulsars capable of reaching , and led to the suggestion that pulsars can be spun @-@ up by accreting mass from a companion . 
 The rotation of PSR B1937 + 21 , along with other millisecond pulsars discovered later , are very stable in their rotation . They are capable of keeping time as well as atomic clocks . PSR B1937 + 21 is unusual in that it is one of few pulsars which occasionally emits particularly strong pulses . The flux density of the giant pulses emitted by PSR <unk> + 21 are the brightest radio emission ever observed . These properties of PSR B1937 + 21 , and its unexpected discovery , are credited with helping revitalize research on pulsars . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first pulsar was discovered in 1967 by Jocelyn Bell and her PhD supervisor Antony <unk> using the Interplanetary <unk> Array . Shortly after the discovery of pulsars , Franco Pacini and Thomas Gold independently suggested that pulsars are highly magnetized rotating neutron stars , which form as a result of a supernova at the end of the life stars more massive than about 10 times the mass of the Sun . The radiation emitted by pulsars is caused by interaction of the plasma surrounding the neutron star with its rapidly rotating magnetic field . This interaction leads to emission " in the pattern of a rotating beacon , " as emission escapes along the magnetic poles of the neutron star . The " rotating beacon " property of pulsars arises from the misalignment of their magnetic poles with their rotational poles . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 In the late 1970s , the radio source 4C21.53 captured the attention of radio astronomers , " because of its anomalously high level of interplanetary scintillation . " As interplanetary scintillation is associated with compact radio sources , the interplanetary scintillation observations suggested that 4C21.53 might be a supernova remnant , but a pulsar survey carried out at Arecibo Observatory in 1974 by Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor in the region did not discover a pulsar associated with <unk> With the lack of success in finding a pulsar in the region , other explanations for the scintillation were explored , including suggestion of entirely new classes of objects . After realizing in 1982 that previous searches for a pulsar in the region of 4C21.53 were not sensitive to periods short enough to produce the observed scintillation , Don Backer initiated a search in the area that would be sensitive to a wide range of pulse periods and dispersion measures , including very short periods . The initial search plan was to sample at a rate of 500 Hz , which would have been insufficiently fast to detect a pulsar spinning at 642 Hz . To simplify the search apparatus , Backer 's then student , Shri Kulkarni , sampled as quickly as was possible , and time averaged the signal over a period of 0 @.@ 4 milliseconds , thus effectively sampling at 2500 Hz . As a result , Backer et al. determined in November 1982 that the source was a pulsar rotating every 1 @.@ 558 milliseconds , a rate far beyond anything that astronomers studying pulsars had expected . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Age and spin down rate = = = 
 When Backer et al. reported their finding in November 1982 , they found that the rotation period of PSR B1937 + 21 was decreasing at a rate of 3 × 10 @-@ 14 seconds per second . Pulsars are expected to slow over time , as the energy that they emit is ultimately drawn from the rotational energy of the pulsar . Using the initially observed values for the period and spin down rate , and assuming a minimum period of 0 @.@ 5 milliseconds for pulsars , the maximum age for PSR B1937 + 21 was found to be about 750 years old . The estimate of the minimum possible period is obtained from the centrifugal break @-@ up limit , which is the rotational period at which the centrifugal force and the self @-@ gravity of the pulsar are equal . The value of the minimum rotational period depends upon the neutron star equation of state , with different models giving values between 0 @.@ 3 and 1 millisecond , which corresponds to a rotation frequency of 1 @-@ 3 kilohertz . There may be mechanisms such as gravitational radiation which keep the pulsar from reaching this absolute limit , but pulsars can spin no faster . 
 An age of no more than 750 years for the PSR B1937 + 21 was at odds with the observations of the region in other wavelengths . No optical supernova remnant , nor bright x @-@ ray source , had been observed in the vicinity of the PSR B1937 + 21 . If PSR B1937 + 21 was that young , it would not have had time to move far from the site at which it formed . As neutron stars are formed as the result of supernova explosions , evidence of the explosion should be nearby for a young pulsar . If it was that young , it would also be expected to still be hot , in which case the thermal radiation from PSR B1937 + 21 would be observable at x @-@ ray wavelengths . Venkatraman Radhakrishnan and G. Srinivasan used the lack of observed supernova remnant to argue that PSR B1937 + 21 had not formed with such a fast period , but instead had been " spun up " by a companion star which essentially gave the pulsar its angular momentum , a mechanism now generally used to explain millisecond pulsars . They also made a theoretical estimate of the necessary spin down rate to be 1 × 10 @-@ 19 seconds per second . Backer et al. revised their estimate of the upper limit of the spin down rate just a month after the initial discovery , to 1 × 10 @-@ 15 seconds per second , but the currently measured value is more nearly in line with the theoretical estimate , at 1 @.@ 05 × 10 @-@ 19 seconds per second . The age of PSR B1937 + 21 was also later determined to be 2 @.@ 29 × 108 years , a value which is consistent with the observational evidence . 
 The companion which is supposed to have spun @-@ up PSR B1937 + 21 is no longer present , making it one of few millisecond pulsars which does not have a stellar mass companion . The generally high occurrence of companions to millisecond pulsars is to be expected , considering a companion is necessary to spin @-@ up millisecond pulsars to their short periods . However , millisecond pulsars do not actively accrete matter from a companion , but instead need to have only done this at some time in the past , and thus the lack of companion for PSR B1937 + 21 is not seen as a being in disagreement with the spin @-@ up model . Possible mechanisms for creating isolated millisecond pulsars include evaporation of the donor star or tidal disruption of the system . 
 = = = Pulses = = = 
 During one period of rotation for PSR B1937 + 21 , there are two peaks observed , known as the pulse and interpulse . PSR B1937 + 21 is unusual among pulsars in that it occasionally produces pulses far brighter than an average pulse . Until 1995 , the sole other pulsar known to produce giant pulses was the Crab pulsar , and by 2006 , there were 11 pulsars that had been observed to produce giant pulses out of more than 1500 known pulsars . The giant pulses of PSR B1937 + 21 were first observed in 1984 , shortly after its discovery , but difficulty in observing single pulses of PSR B1937 + 21 due to its fast period meant that the pulses were not studied in more depth until a decade after they were first observed . In more recent follow up observations , more giant pulses have been found . These giant pulses have been observed to occur at the trailing edge of both the pulse and interpulse . The duration of these giant pulses is short compared to the period of the pulsar , lasting on the order of 10 nanoseconds . The flux density of observed pulses is somewhat variable , but has been observed to be as high as 6 @.@ 5 × 10 − 22 Wm − <unk> − 1 ( 6 @.@ 5 × 104 <unk> ) . The brightness temperature of a pulse with such high flux density and such low duration exceeds 5 × 1039 Kelvin , making the pulses of PSR B1937 + 21 the brightest radio emission ever observed . PSR B1937 + 21 is intrinsically the most luminous millisecond pulsar . In addition to the radio pulses observed , pulses have been detected at x @-@ ray wavelengths , which show the same pulse and interpulse pattern . 
 = = Evidence for companions = = 
 After the discovery of planetary mass companions around PSR B1257 + 12 in 1990 by Aleksander Wolszczan , data for PSR B1937 + 21 and other pulsars were analyzed for the presence of similar companions . By 1994 , an upper limit of about one thousandth of the mass of Earth was determined for any companion of PSR B1937 + 12 within 2 astronomical units . In 1999 , Aleksander Wolszczan reported variations in the times of arrival of pulses from PSR B1937 + 21 , as well as previous analysis by Tokio Fukushima which suggested that these timing variations could be caused by a dwarf planet around the pulsar . The data were consistent with a companion having a mass similar to Ceres and located at 2 @.@ 71 astronomical units from the pulsar , but data over a longer period of time are required in order to verify the proposed companion . More recent observations have not detected any regular periodic signal associated with this companion , but argue that the slight variations in pulse arrival times are consistent with an asteroid belt having a total mass less than 0 @.@ 05 that of the Earth , but acknowledge that the detection of periodicity in pulse timing variations associated with individual asteroids is necessary to confirm the possible asteroid belt . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Until the discovery of PSR <unk> @-@ <unk> in 2006 , which spins 716 times per second , PSR B1937 + 21 was the fastest spinning neutron star known . As of 2010 , PSR <unk> + 21 remains the second fastest spinning pulsar known . In addition to extending the range of periods observed in pulsars by a factor of 20 , it also extended the range of magnetic fields observed by a factor of 100 , with a magnetic field of 4 @.@ 2 × 108 gauss ( 42 kT ) . 
 As the first discovered millisecond pulsar , PSR B1937 + 21 " sparked a ' theory frenzy ' " by providing a new laboratory in which to study pulsars , neutron stars more generally , and perhaps even some other astrophysical problems such as gravitational waves . For instance , as the density required to spin at such high rates are comparable to nuclear densities , the fastest spinning millisecond pulsars are important in understanding how matter behaves at such densities . The initially high estimate of the spin down rate was also intriguing , as it implied a signal that could be directly detected by gravitational wave detectors , but the actual spin down rate put the expected signal below the sensitivity of current detectors . The currently accepted value spin down rate corresponds to a change in the rotational period of 1 @.@ 5 Hz over the course of one million years . The stability of rotation of PSR B1937 + 21 is of the same order of the stability of the best atomic clocks , and is thus a tool used in establishing ephemeris time . 
 The discovery of B1937 + 21 launched " extensive pulsar surveys at all major radio observatories " and " happened to revitalize pulsar astronomy at a time when most people thought the field was moribund . " 
 = Guitar Hero Smash Hits = 
 Guitar Hero Smash Hits ( titled Guitar Hero Greatest Hits in Europe and Australia ) is a music rhythm game and the fourth expansion game to the Guitar Hero series . The game features 48 songs originally featured in five previous games in the series — Guitar Hero , Guitar Hero II , Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s , Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock and Guitar Hero : Aerosmith — redesigning the songs to be based on master recordings and to include support for full band play first introduced to the series in Guitar Hero World Tour . The game was developed by Beenox , published by Activision and distributed by RedOctane for release on the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Wii , and Xbox 360 systems and was released around the world in the second half of June 2009 . 
 The game reuses many elements from previous titles in the series , including Guitar Hero World Tour and Guitar Hero : Metallica . Beenox designed the game around playing the greatest songs of the series at venues located in the greatest places on Earth , and created venues based on various Wonders of the World for the game . While the game 's soundtrack and expansion into a four @-@ player band were well received by reviewers , the game was highly criticized for being a full @-@ cost standalone title instead of being downloadable content for existing games in the series . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Guitar Hero : Smash Hits plays similar to Guitar Hero World Tour , featuring support for a four @-@ instrument band : lead guitar , bass guitar , drums , and vocal . In addition to using master recordings for each song , the songs have been charted to use gameplay features introduced in World Tour including the open bass strumming & slider sections for intense solos using the touchpad on the guitar bundled with World Tour . Certain songs have been <unk> or remixed to be more accessible to the full band ; for example , " I Love Rock N Roll " includes a drum and vocals solo without guitar portions that were omitted in the original Guitar Hero , while the piano introduction in " Killer Queen " is tapped out by the lead guitar player . The game borrows gameplay and graphical elements from Guitar Hero : Metallica , including the " Expert + " difficulty level using two bass drum pedals and the rearrangement of on @-@ screen meters for band mode . Smash Hits includes a Music Studio creation mode and is compatible with the " GHTunes " custom song sharing service present in World Tour and Metallica . Smash Hits also includes all the game modes present in World Tour , including single player and band career modes , and the eight @-@ player " Battle of the Band " mode . 
 The game presents a story sequence that ties in with the Career mode , as has been present in more recent Guitar Hero games . In Smash Hits , the players are challenged by the " God of Rock " to play at venues at various Wonders of the World in order to charge a power artifact ; it is revealed later that the God of Rock is actually Lou the Devil in disguise seeking the power of the artifact , the real God trapped by Lou . The player 's band is able to discover Lou 's deception and free the God of Rock ; the band then rejects the God of Rock 's offer of ascension to immortality , instead wanting to return to Earth to continue to rock . After completing each venue , the players earn venue @-@ specific clothing to customize their avatars . The career mode follows the same star @-@ tier system used in Metallica , requiring players to earn a fixed number of stars to proceed from one tier to the next . As with Guitar Hero : Metallica , all songs are available to play in Quickplay mode without unlocking them through the career mode . 
 = = Development = = 
 Guitar Hero : Smash Hits was one of three new titles for the Guitar Hero series announced in early 2009 . Though the game was initially called Guitar Hero : Greatest Hits , cover art for the game in North America had shown the title had changed to Guitar Hero : Smash Hits . The game was still released as Guitar Hero : Greatest Hits in Europe and Australia . 
 Paul <unk> , developer at Beenox Studios , identified that their goal for the game was to focus on the music from the past games in the Guitar Hero series , and that the selection of the soundtrack was one of the core features they focused on first . Songs were selected based on several factors , including songs that were not formerly available to Wii and PlayStation 3 owners , and songs that played well in both single player and band modes . They also thought of playing the " greatest songs " in the " greatest places " , and developed eight new venues based on Wonders of the World , including " Amazon Rain Forest " , " The Polar Ice Caps " and " The Grand Canyon " . The team opted to reuse the original Guitar Hero characters instead of attempting to bring in musical celebrities as was done in Guitar Hero World Tour and Guitar Hero : Metallica , fearing that the star power would have outshone the music selection . Beenox performed all of the major development efforts , including designing the venues , selecting the songs , and creating the note tracks , though Neversoft provided their own development tools and provided Beenox with their own insight from developing the other Guitar Hero games in the series . While the Beenox developers were provided with the note charts from the songs in their original games , they only looked at these after developing new charts for the songs on their own , and modified their new charts to accommodate sections from the originals that made them fun to play in the first place . The game 's full setlist was revealed over the course of April and May 2009 by allowing users to vote on the order of the remastered tracks from the four previous games . 
 In North America , various retailers provided pre @-@ order incentives for those who reserved Smash Hits . GameStop and EB Games gave away a pair of branded drumsticks with the game . Best Buy provided a discount towards any Guitar Hero World Tour @-@ related product with pre @-@ orders of the game , and provided a limited supply of extra drum bass pedals for the " Expert + " mode with purchase of the game . Game Crazy offered exclusive cheat codes as their incentive . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 All 48 tracks in the game are master recordings of songs previously featured in the first five published games of the Guitar Hero series : Guitar Hero , Guitar Hero II , Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s , Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , and Guitar Hero : Aerosmith . " Freya " and " Cult of Personality " are re @-@ recordings performed by The Sword and Living Colour , respectively , while two other songs are taken from live concert recordings ; all other songs are based on original studio recordings . Although the game supports user @-@ created songs through the " GHTunes " service ( common to Guitar Hero World Tour and Guitar Hero : Metallica ) , other existing downloadable content does not work with Smash Hits . Songs in either the Career single player or band mode are arranged in tiers roughly in order of difficulty for the particular instrument , with different orders for each of the five Career paths . However , all songs are playable from the game 's " Quickplay " mode without completing any Career goals . Twenty @-@ one of the songs were exportable to both Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero for a small fee , with music licensing limiting which songs could be exported . The songs included in the game are as follows . 
 ^ a Also available as DLC for Guitar Hero 5 and Guitar Hero Warriors of Rock . The charts are different for the Wii , but the charts are the same as the Smash Hits version for the PS3 and Xbox 360 . ^ b Not available as part of the Smash Hits export package but is available as DLC for Guitar Hero 5 and Guitar Hero Warriors of Rock . ^ c Also available as DLC for Guitar Hero Warriors of Rock . ^ d Song does not contain a vocals track . ^ + Song contains both a single and double bass drums chart . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Guitar Hero : Smash Hits received moderate praise from reviews , many of which cited that the game itself demonstrates the over @-@ saturation of the music game market and the sheer number of titles with the Guitar Hero series that Activision has marketed . Chris Roper of IGN summarized that the game " is the definition of ' milking ' " , noting that , save for the PlayStation 2 version , all of the songs in the game could have been distributed as downloadable content or reused within other compatible titles . Jeff Gerstmann of Giant Bomb commented that " something about the game 's full [ ... ] price tag doesn 't quite feel right " and reaffirmed that being able to select a handful of the songs to play again would have been a preferred method of distribution . Tom Bramwell of Eurogamer further suggested that a simultaneous release of both the retail product and the same songs as downloadable content would have been an improvement . Chris Kohler of Wired listed Smash Hits on a list of " raw deals " for gamers , citing Activision 's approach that results in " players end up paying more for segregated song lists " , and contrasted the approach to that of the Rock Band series , in which downloadable content is integrated into existing games . Game Informer 's Matt Helgeson noted that , ultimately , the cost per song was still cheaper than current prices for downloadable content , but he still felt the game 's purpose was solely for " creating revenue for Activision " . 
 The song selection , use of master recordings , and expansion to the full @-@ band experience were praised . Dan Amrich of Official Xbox Magazine called the selection an " excellent selection of material " that avoided the most popular songs in favor of those that " are the most fun to play " . Addition of full band tracking for the songs was considered helpful to avoid making the game 's material feel like " warmed @-@ over leftovers from the series ' past " , according to Gerstmann . The mixing of some of the songs was also considered to be off , with Roper specifically noting a too @-@ loud bass and too @-@ soft vocals for " No One Knows " . Roper noted that the PlayStation 2 version of the game suffered from graphics " stuttering " , making it difficult to hit notes even after refining the game 's controller calibration , considering the impact as " crippling the game " . 
 The game 's note tracks were particularly analyzed and compared with the songs ' previous versions in the older games . While the note @-@ tracking has generally been improved to avoid " walls of notes " — long sections of fast @-@ moving notes requiring significant skill to surpass — these patterns are significantly different from their previous incarnation and may take some getting used to . Roper also noted that the new features of Guitar Hero World Tour , particularly the use of " slider notes " that use either the World Tour touchpad or simple tapping without strumming on any other guitar controller 's frets , makes many of the more difficult parts of the songs easily passed , requiring less technical skill to complete ; Roper cited his ability to easily pass the first solo in what is considered to be the series ' most difficult song , " Through the Fire and Flames " in Smash Hits while he could not pass this section on Guitar Hero III . In contrast , Abbie Heppe of G4 TV found the recreation of the note tracking to have " varying degrees of success " , noting that while some of the guitar solos are more manageable , there were questionable sections in other songs arising from the nature of Star Power phrases when it was changed in Guitar Hero III . Gerstmann said that the difficulty of the non @-@ lead guitar portions of the game was not as high as that of the lead guitar , primarily due to these songs ' having been selected originally for being played by guitar controllers and not by a full band . Heppe suggests that some of these problems may be due to the farming out of the series to a different developer with no previous experience in the series . However , Bramwell was careful to note that Beenox Studios ' effort on the game was strong , particularly with following the Guitar Hero : Metallica model , and their effort should not be dismissed due to how Activision chose to release the title . 
 = French seaplane carrier Commandant Teste = 
 Commandant Teste was a large seaplane tender of the French Navy ( French : Marine Nationale ) built before World War II . She was designed to be as large as possible without counting against the Washington Treaty limits . During the Spanish Civil War , she protected neutral merchant shipping and played a limited role during World War II as she spent the early part of the war in North African waters or acting as an aviation transport between France and North Africa . She was slightly damaged during the British bombardment of the French Fleet at Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir in July 1940 . Commandant Teste was scuttled at Toulon when the Germans invaded Vichy France in November 1942 , but was refloated after the war and considered for conversion to an escort or training carrier . Neither proposal was accepted and she was sold for scrap in 1950 . 
 = = Design = = 
 After the completion of aircraft carrier Béarn , the Marine Nationale desired another aviation vessel , but the lack of another hull that could cheaply be converted made another aircraft carrier too expensive . It settled for a seaplane carrier ( French : transport d 'aviation ) that could act as a mobile aviation base and support seaplanes for a specific attack . The ship was restricted to a maximum size of 10 @,@ 000 t ( 9 @,@ 800 long tons ) at standard displacement , which prevented her from counting against France 's 60 @,@ 000 long tons ( 61 @,@ 000 t ) Washington Treaty carrier allotment . This also served to keep her costs relatively low . 
 = = Description = = 
 Commandant Teste was 167 m ( 547 ft 11 in ) long overall . She had a maximum beam of 27 m ( 88 ft 7 in ) and a draught of 6 @.@ 7 m ( 22 ft 0 in ) . She displaced 10 @,@ 000 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) at standard load , 11 @,@ 500 t ( 11 @,@ 300 long tons ) at normal load and 12 @,@ 134 t ( 11 @,@ 942 long tons ) at full load . 
 Because of the ship 's high profile , there were concerns about her stability in bad weather as she had a significant amount of weight mounted high in the ship ; notably her catapults , cranes and anti @-@ aircraft guns . To increase her stability , two lateral tanks were fitted with a pressurized butterfly valve connecting them so that water could flow between the tanks to counter her rolling motion . On trials in 1933 , the system was judged successful as it deadened the ship 's roll by 37 @-@ 65 % . However , maintenance of the system proved to be problematic as the tanks were difficult to access . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Commandant Teste had a two shaft unit machinery layout with alternating boiler and engine rooms . Her Schneider @-@ Zoelly direct @-@ action geared steam turbines were designed for 23 @,@ 230 shp ( 17 @,@ 320 kW ) . Four superheated Loire @-@ Yarrow small @-@ tube boilers powered the turbines at a pressure of 20 kg / cm2 ( 2 @,@ 000 kPa ; 280 psi ) at a temperature of 290 ° C ( 554 ° F ) . These were the first superheated boilers in the Marine National and required some modifications after the ship 's trials . The two in the forward boiler room were oil @-@ fired , but the other two could use either fuel oil or coal . Commandant Teste had a designed speed of 21 kn ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) , but she exceeded 22 kn ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) on trials on 23 July 1933 . 1 @,@ 163 t ( 1 @,@ 282 short tons ) of fuel oil was carried as well as 700 t ( 770 short tons ) of coal . This provided a range of 2 @,@ 000 nmi ( 3 @,@ 700 km ; 2 @,@ 300 mi ) at 18 kn ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) or 2 @,@ 500 nmi ( 4 @,@ 600 km ; 2 @,@ 900 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) using only coal . Two 300 kilowatt ( kW ) turbo generators provided electricity at 235 volts . Three 150 kW diesel generators were fitted to provide power while in harbor . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Commandant Teste was originally going to carry a mixture of 138 @.@ 6 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) or 155 mm ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) anti @-@ surface and 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns , but this was changed before construction began to a homogeneous main battery of twelve 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) 45 @-@ caliber dual purpose guns on powered single mounts . Five guns each were mounted on the fore and aft superstructures and two were mounted between the catapults . Their elevation limits were -10 ° to + 85 ° . Their rate of fire was 10 rounds per minute . They had a maximum range of about 15 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 yd ) with a 14 @.@ 95 kg ( 33 @.@ 0 lb ) armor @-@ piercing shell at a muzzle velocity of 755 m / s ( 2 @,@ 480 ft / s ) . 280 rounds were provided for each gun , including 40 starshell rounds and 19 tracer rounds . 
 Eight 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) / 50 cal semi @-@ automatic AA guns were carried by Commandant Teste . Two each were fitted on the fore and aft superstructures and four on platforms around the single funnel . 4 @,@ 000 rounds were carried ; 500 rounds per gun . The guns could depress 15 ° and elevate to 80 ° . They fired <unk> kg ( 1 @.@ 60 lb ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 810 m / s ( 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ) . Their effective anti @-@ aircraft ceiling was less than 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 Six twin 13 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 520 in ) machine gun mounts were also fitted . Two mounts on the bridge wings , two on the upper funnel platform , and two on the stern . The Hotchkiss guns had a cyclic rate of fire of 450 rounds per minute , but the practical rate was between 200 and 250 rounds per minute to allow for reloading its 30 @-@ round magazines . They had a theoretical ceiling of 4 @,@ 200 m ( 13 @,@ 800 ft ) . 
 Two fire @-@ control directors were mounted to control the 100 mm guns ; one above the bridge and the other atop the rear superstructure . Each director was fitted with a 3 m ( 9 ft 10 in ) stereoscopic rangefinder . An upgrade to 5 m ( 16 ft 5 in ) rangefinders was planned to improve the director 's performance against surface targets , but was never carried out . The midships 37 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns were controlled by a single 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) rangefinder , but nothing was provided for the fore and aft 37 mm guns . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 Commandant Teste had a waterline armor belt with a maximum thickness of 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) abreast the machinery spaces and was 3 @.@ 76 m ( 12 @.@ 3 ft ) high . The ship was protected from axial fire at the waterline by partial transverse bulkheads 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The magazines were protected by 5 cm sides and 2 cm ends and roofs . The deck consisted of two layers of 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) plating which increased to three layers above the boilers . 2 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) of armor protected the steering gear . The sides of the conning tower were 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick , but its roof was 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . 
 = = = Aircraft arrangements = = = 
 Commandant Teste had a very large hangar amidships that was three decks high and measured approximately 80 m × 26 @.@ 5 m ( 262 ft 6 in × 86 ft 11 in ) . It was partitioned in two by a bulkhead that incorporated the exhaust uptakes for the funnel and the ventilation trunking for the machinery spaces . It could accommodate ten large torpedo bombers with folding wings ; two smaller aircraft with folding wings could be stowed in lieu of each torpedo bomber . Two additional large aircraft and four smaller aircraft could be carried dismantled in crates in a hold below the hangar . 
 The aircraft were moved on a system of wheeled trolleys running on <unk> rails that extended throughout each half @-@ hangar to the quarterdeck at the rear of the ship . The torpedo bombers would be moved to the quarterdeck where their wings would be extended and then they would be lowered into the water by the large crane at the very stern of the ship . 
 The hangar was surmounted by four <unk> compressed @-@ air catapults , each with a launch capacity of 2 @.@ 5 t ( 2 @.@ 5 long tons ) . The smaller fighter and reconnaissance seaplanes were lifted through large 15 m × 7 m ( 49 ft 3 in × 23 ft 0 in ) hatches in the hangar roofs by one of the four cranes mounted at each corner of the hangar and mounted on the catapult . During trials in 1937 , it took three hours to embark or disembark a group of 16 aircraft , 17 minutes to embark a single Gourdou @-@ Leseurre GL @-@ 812 reconnaissance floatplane , and seven minutes to launch a section of four floatplanes by catapult . 
 = = Aircraft = = 
 Commandant Teste was designed to accommodate the naval version of the Farman F.60 Goliath torpedo bomber , but they were obsolete when she was commissioned in 1932 . Biplane Levasseur <unk> torpedo bomber floatplanes were only briefly used as they proved to be too fragile for landing at sea . They were replaced by improved Levasseur <unk> biplanes from July – August 1934 . The <unk> 298 monoplane replaced the <unk> in March – May 1939 . The scouting squadron was initially equipped with fixed @-@ wing Gourdou @-@ Leseurre GL @-@ 810 floatplanes until the folding wing Gourdou @-@ Leseurre GL @-@ 811 arrived in October 1933 . They were replaced in turn by the improved Gourdou @-@ Leseurre GL @-@ 813 in early 1936 . The larger Loire 130 flying boat replaced the GL @-@ 813 from April 1938 , although the catapults had to be modified to handle their greater weight . No fighter seaplanes were ever embarked on Commandant Teste , although the Loire 210 floatplane was designed for the role . However , it proved to be greatly out @-@ classed by contemporary land @-@ based fighters and only 20 were built in 1939 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Commandante Teste served with the Mediterranean Squadron upon commissioning in 1932 . She was refitted between November 1935 and August 1936 when her 100 mm guns were given gun shields . From September 1937 , she was based at Oran to protect neutral shipping from commerce raiders during the Spanish Civil War . In February 1938 , she was refitted in Toulon to upgrade her catapults and then served as an aviation transport between France and her colonies in North Africa . 
 In August 1939 , she embarked six Loire 130s and eight <unk> <unk> and sailed for Oran , where she was when World War II began the next month . Commandant Teste remained in North African waters until December 1939 , when she returned to Toulon and landed her aircraft . She served as an aircraft transport between French North Africa and Metropolitan France for the first half of 1940 . In late June 1940 , she was transferred from the over @-@ crowded anchorage at Oran to Mers El Kébir . She was lightly damaged by shell splinters during the British attack on Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir on 3 July 1940 , but suffered no casualties . She arrived at Toulon on 18 October where she was subsequently disarmed . In June 1941 , Commandant Teste was reactivated as a gunnery training ship . 
 She was at Toulon when the Germans invaded Vichy France and was scuttled there on 27 November 1942 to avoid capture by the Germans . Refloated by the Italians on 1 May 1943 , Commandant Teste was captured by the Germans in September 1943 and sunk again the following year by Allied bombs on 18 – 19 August 1944 . Raised again in February 1945 , she was still thought to be repairable and was considered for conversion as an escort or training carrier . The proposals were eventually dropped and the ship was used as a store ship for U.S.-built equipment until sold for scrap on 15 May 1950 . 
 = Omphalotus nidiformis = 
 Omphalotus nidiformis , or ghost fungus , is a gilled basidiomycete mushroom most notable for its bioluminescent properties . It is known to occur primarily in southern Australia and Tasmania , but was reported from India in 2012 . The fan- or funnel @-@ shaped fruit bodies are up to 30 cm ( 12 in ) across , with cream @-@ coloured caps overlain with shades of orange , brown , purple , or bluish @-@ black . The white or cream gills run down the length of the stipe , which is up to 8 cm ( 3 in ) long and tapers in thickness to the base . The fungus is both saprotrophic and parasitic , and its fruit bodies are generally found growing in overlapping clusters on a wide variety of dead or dying trees . 
 First described scientifically in 1844 , the fungus has been known by several names in its taxonomic history . It was assigned its current name by Orson K. Miller , Jr. in 1994 . Its scientific name is derived from the Latin nidus " nest " , hence ' nest shaped ' . Similar in appearance to the common edible oyster mushroom , it was previously considered a member of the same genus , Pleurotus , and described under the former names Pleurotus nidiformis or Pleurotus lampas . Unlike oyster mushrooms , O. nidiformis is poisonous ; while not lethal , its consumption leads to severe cramps and vomiting . The toxic properties of the mushroom are attributed to compounds called illudins . O. nidiformis is one of several species in the cosmopolitan genus Omphalotus , all of which have bioluminescent properties . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The ghost fungus was initially described in 1844 by English naturalist Miles Joseph Berkeley as Agaricus nidiformis . Berkeley felt it was related to Agaricus ostreatus ( now Pleurotus ostreatus ) but remarked it was a " far more magnificent species " . Material was originally collected by Scottish naturalist James Drummond in 1841 on Banksia wood along the Swan River . He wrote " when this fungus was laid on a newspaper , it emitted by night a phosphorescent light , enabling us to read the words around it ; and it continued to do so for several nights with gradually decreasing intensity as the plant dried up . " More material collected from near the base of a " sickly but living " shrub ( Grevillea drummondii ) was named as Agaricus lampas by Berkeley . He noted both were phosphorescent and closely related species . Tasmanian botanist Ronald Campbell Gunn collected material in October 1845 from that state , which Berkeley felt differed from previous collections in having more demarcated and less decurrent gills and a shorter stipe , and named it Agaricus phosphorus in 1848 . Italian mycologist Pier Andrea Saccardo placed all three named taxa in the genus Pleurotus in 1887 . These names have been synonymised with O. nidiformis , although the name Pleurotus lampas persisted in some texts , including the 1934 – 35 monograph of Australian fungi by John Burton Cleland . In reviewing the published literature , Victorian botanical liaison officer Jim Willis was aware of Rolf Singer 's placing of Pleurotus olearius into the genus Omphalotus , but stopped short of transferring the ghost fungus across , even though he conceded it was wrongly placed in Pleurotus . Investigating the species in 1994 , Orson K. Miller , Jr. gave the ghost fungus its current binomial name when he transferred it to the genus Omphalotus with other bioluminescent mushrooms . 
 The specific epithet nidiformis is derived from the Latin terms <unk> ' nest ' and forma ' shape ' or ' form ' , hence ' nest shaped ' . <unk> is derived from the Greek lampas / <unk> ' torch ' . Common names include ghost fungus and Australian glow fungus . Drummond reported that the local aborigines were fearful when shown the luminescent fungus and called out <unk> , a local word for spirit ; Drummond himself likened it to a will @-@ o ' -the @-@ wisp . Likewise on the Springbrook Plateau in southeastern Queensland , the local <unk> people believed the lights to be ancestors and gave the area a wide berth out of respect . 
 Several Omphalotus species with similar bioluminescent properties occur worldwide , all of which are presumed poisonous . The best known are the North American jack o <unk> mushroom ( O. olearius ) and the <unk> ( O. japonicus ( <unk> . ) <unk> . & O.K. Mill . ( formerly known as <unk> japonicus ( <unk> . ) Sing . ) , found in Japan and eastern Asia . A 2004 molecular study shows the ghost fungus to be most closely related to the western jack o <unk> mushroom ( O. olivascens ) , which is abundant in Southern and Central California . Miller notes that the colours and shades of the ghost fungus most closely resemble this species . 
 Laboratory breeding experiments with it and other Omphalotus species have revealed a low level of compatibility ( ability to breed and produce fertile hybrids ) , suggesting it is genetically distinct and has been isolated for a long time . It is particularly poorly compatible with O. <unk> , the authors of the study suggesting the separation may have been as long ago as the Late Carboniferous separation of Gondwana from Laurasia but conceding the lack of any fossil record makes it impossible to know whether the genus even existed at the time . 
 = = = Variation = = = 
 Miller noted there appeared to be two colour forms reported across its range , namely a more cream @-@ coloured form with darker shades of brown and grey in its cap that darkens with age , and a more wholly brownish form with paler edges and darker centre to its cap . He found the cream @-@ coloured form to be strongly luminescent — the brightest of any fungus in the genus — with the cap , stipe and gills all glowing . The brown form was generally fainter , with its luminescence restricted to the gills . However , some strongly luminescent wholly brown @-@ coloured mushrooms were recorded , and laboratory experiments showed all interbred freely and produced fertile offspring , leading Miller to conclude that these were phenotypic variants of a single taxon . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of the ghost fungus can be found on dead or diseased wood . They may be first seen at night as a pale whitish glow at the base of trees in a eucalypt forest . The cap is very variable in colour , sometimes cream though often tinted with orange , brownish , greyish , purple or even bluish @-@ black shades . The margin is lighter , generally cream , though brown forms have tan or brown edges . The centre generally has several darker shades , and younger specimens are often darker . Growing up to 30 cm ( 12 in ) in diameter it is funnel @-@ shaped or fan @-@ shaped in appearance with inrolled margins . The cream @-@ white gills are decurrent and often drip with moisture . They are up to 13 mm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) deep , somewhat distant to closely spaced , and have a smooth edge until they erode in maturity . The stipe may be central to lateral in its attachment to the cap and is up to 8 cm ( 3 in ) long and tapers to the base . The thin flesh is generally creamy white in colour , but can have reddish tones near the base of the stipe . There is no distinctive smell or taste . The spore print is white . 
 The spores are roughly elliptical , or , less commonly , somewhat spherical , and have dimensions of 7 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 5 by 5 – 7 μm . They are thin @-@ walled , inamyloid , and have a smooth surface . Each features a prominent hilar appendage . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) , measuring 32 – 42 by 6 – 9 μm , are club @-@ shaped and four @-@ spored , with sterigmata up to 7 μm long . Cheilocystidia ( cystidia found on the gill edges ) are abundant , and measure 15 – 40 by 3 – 6 μm ; no <unk> ( cystidia on the gill faces ) are present . The cap cuticle comprises a thin layer of 3 – 6 μm @-@ wide hyphae that are interwoven either loosely or tightly . All hyphae of O. nidiformis have clamp connections . 
 The bioluminescence of O. nidiformis fruit bodies is best seen in low @-@ light conditions when the viewer 's eyes have become dark @-@ adapted . The gills are the most luminescent part of the fungus , emitting a greenish light that fades with age . Although the intensity of the luminescence is variable , William Henry Harvey once reported that it was bright enough to read a watch face by . It is not known if the mycelium is also luminescent . 
 Omphalotus nidiformis may be confused with the edible brown oyster mushroom ( Pleurotus australis ) , which is brown and does not glow in the dark . Confusion with another edible lookalike , Pleurotus ostreatus , common in the Northern Hemisphere and cultivated commercially , has been the source for at least one case of poisoning reported in the literature . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Omphalotus nidiformis occurs in two disjunct ranges in southern Australia . In southwest Western Australia , it has been recorded from Perth and the Avon wheatbelt southwest to Augusta and east along the southern coastline to Esperance . In the southeast of the continent , it is found from eastern South Australia , where it has been recorded from Mount Gambier and the Fleurieu Peninsula , the Mount Lofty Ranges around Adelaide , the <unk> , and north to the Flinders Ranges and from Lincoln National Park at the apex of the Eyre Peninsula , through to southeast Queensland . It also occurs in Tasmania . It can be found in eucalypt and pine forests , in habitats as diverse as the arid scrubland of <unk> National Park and subalpine areas of Mount Buffalo National Park , as well as in urban parks and gardens . Fruit bodies can be numerous and occur in overlapping clusters on dead wood . Outside Australia , it has been recorded from Norfolk Island . In 2012 , it was reported for the first time from Kerala , India , where it was discovered growing on a coconut tree stump . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 A saprobe or parasite , O. nidiformis is nonspecific in its needs and is compatible with a wide variety of hosts . It has been recorded on native Banksia ( including B. attenuata and B. menziesii ) , Hakea , Acacia , Nuytsia floribunda and various Myrtaceae , including Agonis flexuosa and Melaleuca species , and especially Eucalyptus , as well as Nothofagus , Casuarina species and Allocasuarina fraseriana , and even introduced trees such as Pinus or Platanus species . It plays an important role in breaking down wood and recycling nutrients into the soil . 
 Omphalotus species cause a white rot by breaking down lignin in their tree hosts . The fungus infiltrates the heartwood of the tree via a breach in its bark , either by a branch falling , damage from insects or mistletoe , or by mechanical damage from logging . O. nidiformis has been implicated in the heartwood rot of several species of eucalypt around Australia , including marri ( Corymbia calophylla ) in southwest Western Australia , in spotted gum ( C. maculata ) and messmate ( Eucalyptus obliqua ) in New South Wales , and in blackbutt ( E. pilularis ) , Sydney blue gum ( E. saligna ) , red stringybark ( E. <unk> ) and Forth River peppermint ( E. radiata ) in Victoria . 
 The US Department of Agriculture considers there is a moderate to high risk of O. nidiformis being accidentally introduced to the United States in untreated eucalyptus woodchips from Australia . Nearly a century ago , Cleland and Edwin Cheel suggested that even though the fungus was of " no great economic importance " , " it would be advisable to destroy it by burning wherever found . " 
 Several species of <unk> flies have been collected from the fruit bodies , including T. cinctipes , T. <unk> , and T. nigricornis ; the latter species uses the fruit bodies as a host to rear its young . Fruit bodies in Springbrook National Park have been observed to attract nocturnal insects such as beetles , native cockroaches and crickets ( white @-@ kneed cricket ( <unk> spp . ) and thorny cricket ) , as well as giant rainforest snails ( <unk> falconeri ) and red triangle slugs ( <unk> <unk> ) , which voraciously consume the fungus . 
 = = Biochemistry = = 
 Omphalotus nidiformis is not edible . Although reputedly mild tasting , eating it will result in vomiting which generally occurs 30 minutes to two hours after consumption and lasts for several hours . There is no diarrhea and patients recover without lasting ill @-@ effects . Its toxicity was first mentioned by Anthony M. Young in his 1982 guidebook Common Australian Fungi . The toxic ingredient of many species of Omphalotus is a sesquiterpene compound known as <unk> S. This , along with <unk> M and a co @-@ metabolite <unk> , have been identified in O. nidiformis . The two illudins are common to the genus Omphalotus and not found in any other basidiomycete mushroom . An additional three compounds unique to O. nidiformis have been identified and named illudins F , G and H. 
 Extracts of several species of Australian mushrooms have been investigated for cytotoxicity to cancer cells ; material from O. nidiformis showed marked toxicity to gastric ( AGS ) , colon ( HT @-@ 29 ) and estrogen @-@ independent breast cancer ( MDA @-@ MB @-@ 231 ) cell lines . <unk> , a compound derived from <unk> S , is undergoing phase II clinical trials as a possible therapy for various types of cancers . Fruit body extracts have antioxidant and free radical scavenging properties , which may be attributed to the presence of phenolic compounds . 
 = Mário de Andrade = 
 Mário Raul de Morais Andrade ( October 9 , 1893 – February 25 , 1945 ) was a Brazilian poet , novelist , musicologist , art historian and critic , and photographer . One of the founders of Brazilian modernism , he virtually created modern Brazilian poetry with the publication of his Paulicéia Desvairada ( Hallucinated City ) in 1922 . He has had an enormous influence on modern Brazilian literature , and as a scholar and essayist — he was a pioneer of the field of ethnomusicology — his influence has reached far beyond Brazil . 
 Andrade was the central figure in the avant @-@ garde movement of São Paulo for twenty years . Trained as a musician and best known as a poet and novelist , Andrade was personally involved in virtually every discipline that was connected with São Paulo modernism , and became Brazil 's national polymath . His photography and essays on a wide variety of subjects , from history to literature and music , were widely published . He was the driving force behind the Week of Modern Art , the 1922 event that reshaped both literature and the visual arts in Brazil , and a member of the avant @-@ garde " Group of Five . " The ideas behind the Week were further explored in the preface to his poetry collection <unk> Desvairada , and in the poems themselves . 
 After working as a music professor and newspaper columnist he published his great novel , Macunaíma , in 1928 . Work on Brazilian folk music , poetry , and other concerns followed unevenly , often interrupted by Andrade 's shifting relationship with the Brazilian government . At the end of his life , he became the founding director of São Paulo 's Department of Culture , formalizing a role he had long held as the catalyst of the city 's — and the nation 's — entry into artistic modernity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Andrade was born in São Paulo and lived there virtually all of his life . As a child , he was a piano prodigy , and he later studied at the Music and Drama Conservatory of São Paulo . His formal education was solely in music , but at the same time , as Albert T. Luper records , he pursued persistent and solitary studies in history , art , and particularly poetry . Andrade had a solid command of French , and read Rimbaud and the major Symbolists . Although he wrote poetry throughout his musical education , he did not think to do so professionally until the career as a professional pianist to which he aspired was no longer an option . 
 In 1913 , his 14 @-@ year @-@ old brother Renato died suddenly during a football game ; Andrade left the Conservatory to stay at <unk> , where his family had a farm . When he returned , his piano playing was afflicted intermittently by trembling of his hands . Although he ultimately did receive a degree in piano , he gave no concerts and began studying singing and music theory with an eye toward becoming a professor of music . At the same time , he began writing more seriously . In 1917 , the year of his graduation , he published his first book of poems , <unk> uma <unk> de Sangue em Cada Poema ( There is a drop of blood in each poem ) , under the pseudonym Mário Sobral . The book contains hints of Andrade 's growing sense of a distinctive Brazilian identity , but it does so within the context of a poetry that ( like most Brazilian poetry of the period ) is strongly indebted to earlier European — particularly French — literature . 
 His first book does not seem to have had an enormous impact , and Andrade broadened the scope of his writing . He left São Paulo for the countryside , and began an activity that would continue for the rest of his life : the meticulous documentation of the history , people , culture , and particularly music of the Brazilian interior , both in the state of São Paulo and in the wilder areas to the northeast . He published essays in São Paulo magazines , accompanied occasionally by his own photographs , but primarily he accumulated massive amounts of information about Brazilian life and folklore . Between these trips , Andrade taught piano at the Conservatory , and became one of its professors in 1921 . 
 = = The Week of Modern Art = = 
 While these folklore @-@ gathering trips were going on , Andrade developed a group of friends among young artists and writers in São Paulo , who , like him , were aware of the growing modernist movement in Europe . Several of them were later known as the Grupo dos Cinco ( the Group of Five ) : Andrade , poets Oswald de Andrade ( no relation ) and Menotti del <unk> , and artists <unk> do Amaral and Anita Malfatti . Malfatti had been to Europe before World War I , and introduced São Paulo to expressionism . Jack E. Tomlins , the translator of Andrade 's second book , describes in his introduction a particularly crucial event in the development of Andrade 's modernist philosophy . In 1920 , he had recently met the modernist sculptor Victor <unk> , and bought a sculpture from him entitled " Bust of Christ , " which depicted Christ as a Brazilian with braided hair . His family ( apparently to his surprise ) was shocked and furious . Andrade retreated to his room alone , and later recalled , in a lecture translated by Tomlins , that — still " delirious " — he went out onto his balcony and " looked down at the square below without actually seeing it . " 
 Retaining that title ( Paulicéia Desvairada , in Portuguese ) , Andrade worked on the book for the next two years . He very quickly produced a " barbaric canticle " , as he called it in the same lecture , and then gradually edited it down to half its original size . 
 These poems were entirely different from his earlier formal and abstract work . The lines of verse vary greatly in length and in syntactical structure , consisting primarily of impressionistic and fragmented descriptions interspersed with seemingly overheard , disconnected bits of speech in São Paulo dialect . The speaker of the poems often seems overwhelmed by the maze of dialogue that constantly interrupts him , as in " <unk> Sentimental " : 
 After the poems were completed , Andrade wrote what he called an " Extremely Interesting Preface " , in an attempt to explain in hindsight the poems ' theoretical context ( though Bruce Dean Willis has suggested that the theories of the preface have more to do with his later work than with Paulicéia ) . The preface is self @-@ deprecating ( " This preface — although interesting — useless " ) but ambitious , presenting a theory not just of poetry but of the aesthetics of language , in order to explain the innovations of his new poems . Andrade explains their tangle of language in musical terms : 
 He makes a distinction , however , between language and music , in that " words are not fused like notes ; rather they are shuffled together , and they become incomprehensible . " However , as Willis has pointed out , there is a pessimism to the preface ; in one of its key passages , it compares poetry to the submerged riches of El Dorado , which can never be recovered . 
 In 1922 , while preparing Paulicéia Desvairada for publication , Andrade collaborated with Malfatti and Oswald de Andrade in creating a single event that would introduce their work to the wider public : the Semana de Arte Moderna ( Week of Modern Art ) . The Semana included exhibitions of paintings by Malfatti and other artists , readings , and lectures on art , music , and literature . Andrade was the chief organizer and the central figure in the event , which was greeted with skepticism but was well @-@ attended . He gave lectures on both the principles of modernism and his work in Brazilian folk music , and read his " Extremely Interesting Preface . " As the climactic event of the Semana , he read from Paulicéia Desvairada . The poems ' use of free verse and colloquial São Paulo expressions , though related to European modernist poems of the same period , were entirely new to Brazilians . The reading was accompanied by persistent jeers , but Andrade persevered , and later discovered that a large part of the audience found it transformative . It has been cited frequently as the seminal event in modern Brazilian literature . 
 The Group of Five continued working together in the 1920s , during which their reputations solidified and hostility to their work gradually diminished , but eventually the group split apart ; Andrade and Oswald de Andrade had a serious ( and public ) falling @-@ out in 1929 . New groups were formed out of the splinters of the original , and in the end many different modernist movements could trace their origins to the Week of Modern Art . 
 = = " The apprentice tourist " = = 
 Throughout the 1920s Andrade continued traveling in Brazil , studying the culture and folklore of the interior . He began to formulate a sophisticated theory of the social dimensions of folk music , which is at once nationalistic and deeply personal . Andrade 's explicit subject was the relationship between " artistic " music and the music of the street and countryside , including both Afro @-@ Brazilian and Amerindian styles . The work was controversial for its formal discussions of dance music and folk music ; those controversies were compounded by Andrade 's style , which was at once poetic ( Luper calls it " Joycean " ) and polemical . 
 His travels through Brazil became more than just research trips ; in 1927 , he started writing a travelogue called " The apprentice tourist " for the newspaper O Diario Nacional . The column served as an introduction for <unk> to indigenous Brazil . At the same time , it served as an advertisement for Andrade 's own work . A number of Andrade 's photographs were published alongside the column , showing the landscape and people . Occasionally , Andrade himself would appear in them , usually filtered through the landscape , as in the self @-@ portrait @-@ as @-@ shadow on this page . His photographs thus served to further his modernist project and his own work at the same time as their function in recording folklore . 
 Though Andrade continued taking photographs throughout his career , these images from the 20s comprise the bulk of his notable work , and the 1927 series in particular . He was particularly interested in the capacity of photographs to capture or restate the past , a power he saw as highly personal . In the late 1930s , he wrote : 
 In many of the images , figures are shadowed , blurred , or otherwise nearly invisible , a form of portraiture that for Andrade became a kind of modernist sublime . 
 = = Macunaíma = = 
 At the same time , Andrade was developing an extensive familiarity with the dialects and cultures of large parts of Brazil . He started to apply to prose fiction the speech @-@ patterned technique he had developed in writing the poems of Hallucinated city . He wrote two novels during this period using these techniques : the first , Love , Intransitive Verb , was largely a formal experiment . ; the second , written shortly after and published in 1928 , was Macunaíma , a novel about a man ( " The hero without a character " is the subtitle of the novel ) from an indigenous tribe who comes to São Paulo , learns its languages — both of them , the novel says : Portuguese and Brazilian — and returns . The style of the novel is composite , mixing vivid descriptions of both jungle and city with abrupt turns toward fantasy , the style that would later be called magical realism . Linguistically , too , the novel is composite ; as the rural hero comes into contact with his urban environment , the novel reflects the meeting of languages . Relying heavily on the primitivism that Andrade learned from the European modernists , the novel lingers over possible indigenous cannibalism even as it explores Macunaíma 's immersion in urban life . Critic <unk> S. López has argued that cannibalism is the novel 's driving thematic force : the eating of cultures by other cultures . 
 Formally , Macunaíma is an ecstatic blend of dialects and of the urban and rural rhythms that Andrade was collecting in his research . It contains an entirely new style of prose — deeply musical , frankly poetic , and full of gods and almost @-@ gods , yet containing considerable narrative momentum . At the same time , the novel as a whole is pessimistic . It ends with Macunaíma 's willful destruction of his own village ; despite the euphoria of the collision , the meeting of cultures the novel documents is inevitably catastrophic . As Severino João Albuquerque has demonstrated , the novel presents " construction and destruction " as inseparable . It is a novel of both power ( Macunaíma has all kinds of strange powers ) and alienation . 
 Even as Macunaíma changed the nature of Brazilian literature in an instant — Albuquerque calls it " the cornerstone text of Brazilian Modernism " — the inner conflict in the novel was a strong part of its influence . <unk> , as Andrade depicted it , was formally tied to the innovations of recent European literature and based on the productive meeting of cultural forces in Brazil 's diverse population ; but it was fiercely nationalistic , based in large part on distinguishing Brazil 's culture from the world and on documenting the damage caused by the lingering effects of colonial rule . At the same time , the complex inner life of its hero suggests themes little explored in earlier Brazilian literature , which critics have taken to refer back to Andrade himself . While Macunaíma is not autobiographical in the strict sense , it clearly reflects and refracts Andrade 's own life . Andrade was a mulatto ; his parents were landowners but were in no sense a part of Brazil 's Portuguese pseudo @-@ aristocracy . Some critics have paralleled Andrade 's race and family background to the interaction between categories of his character Macunaíma . Macunaíma 's body itself is a composite : his skin is darker than that of his fellow tribesmen , and at one point in the novel , he has an adult 's body and a child 's head . He himself is a wanderer , never belonging to any one place . 
 Other critics have argued for similar analogues between Andrade 's sexuality and Macunaíma 's complex status . Though Andrade was not openly gay , and there is no direct evidence of his sexual practices , many of Andrade 's friends have reported after his death that he was clearly interested in men ( the subject is only reluctantly discussed in Brazil ) . It was over a pseudonymous accusation of effeminacy that Andrade broke with Oswald de Andrade in 1929 . Macunaíma prefers women , but his constant state of belonging and not belonging is associated with sex . The character is sexually precocious , starting his romantic adventures at the age of six , and his particular form of eroticism seems always to lead to destruction of one kind or another . 
 Inevitably , Macunaíma 's polemicism and sheer strangeness have become less obvious as it has grown ensconced in mainstream Brazilian culture and education . Once regarded by academic critics as an awkwardly constructed work of more historical than literary importance , the novel has come to be recognized as a modernist masterpiece whose difficulties are part of its aesthetic . Andrade is a national cultural icon ; his face has appeared on the Brazilian currency . A film of Macunaíma was made in 1969 , by Brazilian director Joaquim Pedro de Andrade , updating Andrade 's story to the 1960s and shifting it to Rio de Janeiro ; the film was rereleased internationally in 2009 . 
 = = Late life and musical research = = 
 Andrade was not directly affected by the Revolution of 1930 , in which Getúlio Vargas seized power and became dictator , but he belonged to the landed class the Revolution was designed to displace , and his employment prospects declined under the Vargas regime . He was able to remain at the Conservatory , where he was now Chair of History of Music and Aesthetics . With this title he became a de facto national authority on the history of music , and his research turned from the personal bent of his 1920s work to textbooks and chronologies . He continued to document rural folk music , and during the 1930s made an enormous collection of recordings of the songs and other forms of music of the interior . The recordings were exhaustive , with a selection based on comprehensiveness rather than an aesthetic judgment , and including context , related <unk> , and other non @-@ musical sound . Andrade 's techniques were influential in the development of ethnomusicology in Brazil and predate similar work done elsewhere , including the well @-@ known recordings of Alan Lomax . He is credited with coining the word " <unk> , " which he defined as imitations of Brazilian folk music by erudite urban musicians ( " erudite " is generally a deprecation in Andrade 's vocabulary ) . The word continues to have currency in discussion of Brazilian music as both a scholarly and nationalist category . 
 In 1935 , during an unstable period in Vargas 's government , Andrade and writer and archaeologist Paulo Duarte , who had for many years desired to promote cultural research and activity in the city through a municipal agency , were able to create a unified São Paulo Department of Culture ( Departamento de Cultura e <unk> da <unk> Municipal de São Paulo ) . Andrade was named founding director . The Department of Culture had a broad purview , overseeing cultural and demographic research , the construction of parks and playgrounds , and a considerable publishing wing . Andrade approached the position with characteristic ambition , using it to expand his work in folklore and folk music while organizing myriad performances , lectures , and expositions . He moved his collection of recordings to the Department , and expanding and enhancing it became one of the Department 's chief functions , overseen by Andrade 's former student , <unk> <unk> . The collection , called the <unk> Municipal , was " probably the largest and best @-@ organized in the entire hemisphere . " 
 At the same time , Andrade was refining his theory of music . He attempted to pull together his research into a general theory . Concerned as always with <unk> 's need to break from the past , he formulated a distinction between the classical music of 18th- and 19th @-@ century Europe , and what he called the music of the future , which would be based simultaneously on modernist breakdowns of musical form and on an understanding of folk and popular music . The music of the past , he said , was conceived in terms of space : whether counterpoint , with its multiple voices arranged in vertical alignment , or the symphonic forms , in which the dominant voice is typically projected on top of a complex accompaniment . Future music would be arranged in time rather than space : " moment by moment " ( in Luper 's translation ) . This temporal music would be inspired not by " contemplative remembrance " , but by the deep longing or desire expressed by the Portuguese word <unk> . 
 Through his position at the Department of Culture in this period , he was able to assist Dina Lévi @-@ Strauss and her husband , Claude Lévi @-@ Strauss with films they were making based on field research in Mato Grosso and Rondônia . 
 Andrade 's position at the Department of Culture was abruptly revoked in 1937 , when Vargas returned to power and Duarte was exiled . In 1938 Andrade moved to Rio de Janeiro to take up a post at the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro . While there he directed the <unk> da <unk> Nacional <unk> ( Congress of National Musical Language ) , a major folklore and folk music conference . He returned to São Paulo in 1941 , where he worked on a collected edition of his poetry . 
 Andrade 's final project was a long poem called " <unk> <unk> o Tietê . " The work is dense and difficult , and was dismissed by its early critics as " without meaning " , although recent work on it has been more enthusiastic . One critic , David T <unk> , has compared it favorably to William Carlos Williams 's Paterson , a dense but influential unfinished epic using composite construction . Like Paterson , it is a poem about a city ; the " <unk> " is centered on the Tietê River , which flows through São Paulo . The poem is simultaneously a summation of Andrade 's career , commenting on poems written long before , and a love poem addressed to the river and to the city itself . In both cases , the poem hints at a larger context : it compares the river to the Tagus in Lisbon and the Seine in Paris , as if claiming an international position for Andrade as well . At the same time , the poem associates both Andrade 's voice and the river with " <unk> , " a word from the Afro @-@ Brazilian musical tradition : music that can unite man and river . The poem is the definitive and final statement of Andrade 's ambition and his nationalism . 
 Andrade died at his home in São Paulo of a heart attack on February 25 , 1945 , at the age of 52 . Because of his tenuous relationship with the Vargas regime , the initial official reaction to his career was muted . However , the publication of his Complete Poems in 1955 ( the year after Vargas 's death ) signalled the start of Andrade 's canonization as one of the cultural heroes of Brazil . On February 15 , 1960 , the municipal library of São Paulo was renamed Biblioteca Mário de Andrade . 
 = = Partial bibliography = = 
 = = English translations = = 
 Fraulein ( Amar , Verbo <unk> ) . Trans . Margaret Richardson Hollingsworth . New York : Macaulay , 1933 . 
 Popular Music and Song in Brazil . 1936 . Trans . Luiz Victor Le Cocq D 'Oliveira . Sponsored by the Ministry of State for Foreign Affairs of Brazil : Division of Intellectual Cooperation . Rio de Janeiro : <unk> Nacional , 1943 . 
 Portuguese version published in the second edition ( 1962 ) of <unk> sobre a Música Brasileira . 
 Hallucinated City ( <unk> Desvairada ) . Trans . Jack E. Tomlins . Nashville : Vanderbilt UP , 1968 . 
 Macunaíma . Trans . E.A. Goodland . New York : Random House , 1984 . 
 Brazilian Sculpture : An Identity in Profile / <unk> Brasileira : <unk> de uma <unk> . Catalog of exhibition in English and Portuguese . Includes text by Mário de Andrade and others . Ed . <unk> Ferreira de Santana Filho . São Paulo , Brazil : Associação dos Amigos da <unk> , 1997 . 
 = Winter Madness = 
 " Winter Madness " is the eleventh episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 69th overall episode of the series . The episode was written by Tom Ceraulo and Vali Chandrasekaran , and directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on January 21 , 2010 . Guest stars in this episode include Ray <unk> , Cheyenne Jackson , Kevin Meaney , and Julianne Moore . 
 In the episode , when head writer Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) decides to take the fictitious show The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) on the road to cure the staff 's case of the winter madness , the anticipated trip does not exactly go as planned . Her boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , chooses Boston as the destination and travels with the show in order to visit Nancy Donovan ( Moore ) , and while away from New York , the TGS crew blames Liz for all of their misfortunes . This episode also continued a story arc involving Nancy as a love interest for Jack , which began in the episode " Secret Santa " that aired in December 2009 . 
 " Winter Madness " received generally mixed reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 5 @.@ 585 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 TGS head writer Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) , along with producer Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) , decides to take the show 's staff to Miami for a week , due to Liz 's hate of the cold weather and the staff 's case of " winter madness " . Her boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , decides to take them to Boston instead , so he can see Nancy Donovan ( Julianne Moore ) , a woman Jack ponders having a possible romance with . He learns that Nancy 's husband has left her as a way of getting her to ask for a divorce , but Nancy refuses to do so , fearing what others might think . Jack admits his true feelings to Nancy and insists that the two talk . She suggests that they should say four words to each other as a way of putting their relationship on hold ; Jack says to her " I 'll wait . Not forever " , while Nancy tells him " I 'll try . Wicked hard . " 
 Meanwhile , the TGS staff — Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) , Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) , Sue Laroche @-@ Van der Hout ( Sue Galloway ) , Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) , Cerie Xerox ( Katrina Bowden ) , and Danny Baker ( Cheyenne Jackson ) — vent their anger at Liz ; they complain that Boston is colder than New York , and they do not like sharing an office with the all @-@ male staff of Boston Bruins fans who write for the Bruins Beat . Liz gets a tip from Jack to find a common enemy in the Boston affiliate of NBC . Liz comes up with the name " Dale Snitterman " , and tells the staff that Snitterman is causing all of their problems , not realizing until later that she had seen the name somewhere and did not make it up . At that point , the staff finds Snitterman ( Ray <unk> ) and harass him . 
 At the same time , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) goes on Boston 's Freedom Trail . He accuses the actor playing John Hancock ( Kevin Meaney ) that his character did not actually set all Americans free . When he tells him " Patriots suck ! " , he inadvertently says it near a group of New England Patriots fans . At the end of the episode , Hancock brings in the Crispus Attucks character and tells Tracy he does have black friends . When Hancock says he met Attucks in 1775 , Tracy is able to one up him as he knows that Attucks was killed in the Boston Massacre in 1770 . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Winter Madness " was written by script co @-@ coordinator Tom Ceraulo and co @-@ producer Vali Chandrasekaran , and directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller . This episode was Ceraulo 's second writing credit , having co @-@ written season three episode " The Funcooker , and the first written episode by Chandrasekaran . This was McCarthy @-@ Miller 's tenth directed episode . " Winter Madness " originally aired in the United States on January 21 , 2010 , on NBC as the eleventh episode of the show 's fourth season and the 69th overall episode of the series . 
 In November 2009 , it was announced that actress Julianne Moore would guest star on 30 Rock as a love interest for Jack Donaghy , Alec Baldwin 's character . She made her debut as the character Nancy Donovan in the December 10 , 2009 , episode " Secret Santa " . This episode was Moore 's second appearance on the show . " Winter Madness " was filmed on November 17 , 2009 . Comedian Kevin Meaney guest starred as the actor portraying John Hancock . This was actor Cheyenne Jackson 's fourth appearance as Danny Baker in the series . He made his debut in the November 12 , 2009 , episode " The Problem Solvers " , and would later guest star on the episodes " Secret Santa " , " Black Light Attack ! " , " Floyd " , and " The Moms " . In " Winter Madness " , while venting their anger towards Liz , Danny admits his refusal to hit on Jenna . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the beginning of the episode , Liz complains about the cold weather saying that she has been stuck inside her apartment playing online Boggle , a word game designed by using a plastic grid of lettered dice , in which players attempt to find words in sequences of adjacent letters . Later , Jack tells Liz that she is the female version of former Boston Celtics basketball player Kevin McHale . Jack 's Boston office is a duplication of his New York one . When Liz enters , Jack asks her if she can tell which seven items are different , prompting the two to look into the camera and smile and thus breaking the fourth wall , a term used when a character in a television show , film or on stage directly addresses the audience . In one scene , Jack says that many Boston residents have named their daughters " Belichick " , after New England Patriots head coach Bill Belichick . 
 During one scene of " Winter Madness " , Toofer tells the writing staff that he went to college in Boston , " Well , not in Boston , but nearby " , mocking a common stereotype of Harvard students that they will not mention that they attend the University , for fear of intimidating anyone , but will still strongly hint to it . Later , Jack and Nancy imitate former Boston newscasters Chet Curtis and Natalie Jacobson , who were the most @-@ watched news team in Boston for twenty years . Nancy tells Jack that her husband moved to New Orleans to rebuild houses that were affected by Hurricane Katrina as part of actor Brad Pitt 's Make It Right Foundation , an organization building affordable housing to help those families most in need following the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Winter Madness " was watched by 5 @.@ 585 million households , according to the Nielsen Media Research . It received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that 2 @.@ 8 percent of all people in that group , and 7 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was an increase from the previous episode , " Black Light Attack ! " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 014 million American viewers . " Winter Madness " ranked third in the timeslot and was the only episode getting more viewers , going up 22 percent from the previous week 's episode rating . 
 The episode received generally mixed reviews from television critics . Robert Canning of IGN said the episode was great and gave it an 8 @.@ 8 out 10 rating , saying that he was " impressed " with how the ending handled Jack and Nancy 's " not @-@ quite romance . " Canning enjoyed the " platonic romance " between them saying , " A lesser series could have simply had the pair hook up , break up and move on , but 30 Rock has drawn out the relationship with flirtation , what @-@ ifs and possible future ex @-@ husbands . " Meredith Blake , writing for the Los Angeles Times , found the episode " perfectly " and " well @-@ timed " . Leonard Pierce for The A.V. Club said that the episode started " out wicked strong , with everyone in the cast getting great lines " . In regards to the two plots , Pierce said that the Liz , TGS , and Dale Snitterman story was " stuffed with great comedic moments " , while the Jack and Nancy angle just sat there and flopped " around like a dying fish . " Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad enjoyed the Boston theme in " Winter Madness " ; his only complaint was that the episode had nothing to do with TGS , the fictional show on 30 Rock . " I 'm getting a little tired of that . I want more sketches and NBC network shenanigans . " 
 Entertainment Weekly ’ s Margaret Lyons reported that " Winter Madness " was " something of a letdown . " She commented that Julianne Moore 's Nancy was not " funny enough " as a " romantic foil for Jack " , and that taking the show to Boston seemed off the mark . Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger reported that " Winter Madness " fell into the category of an episode that featured " a lot of funny gags but aren 't wholly satisfying " and added that it " just stopped , rather than building to a real conclusion " . Sean Gandert of Paste rated unfavorably the pairing of Alec Baldwin and Julianne Moore 's characters , citing that they do not have " much rapport , so the scenes with the two of them together are a bit dead , as much as I usually enjoy seeing Julianne Moore in pretty much anything . " Amos Barshad for New York magazine criticized Moore 's Boston accent , citing that it was " atrocious " , while TV Guide Magazine ’ s Bruce Fretts opined that the accent was " wicked bad " . Regarding the episode itself , Fretts said that it was " weak " . 
 Despite the criticism towards Moore 's Boston accent in the series , executive producer Robert Carlock , who is from Boston , defended Moore . In an interview with New York magazine , Carlock said , " I grew up with people like that . Not everyone talks like that in Boston , but I think she 's enough of an actress to pull it off . " When asked if her accent " sounded realistic " , he noted , " I 'm going to go with that . I know people who sound like that . " In response to the accent , Moore explained " I went to school in Boston and worked with a lot of guys from Dorchester , so that 's where [ the accent ] came from . We made it thick ... for humor 's sake , but then again , not really . There are folks with seriously heavy accents there , and they are proud of it . " 
 = SMS Arcona = 
 SMS Arcona was the ninth member of the ten @-@ ship Gazelle class , built by the Imperial German Navy , and named after Cape Arkona on the German island of Rügen . She was built by the AG Weser dockyard in Bremen , laid down in 1901 , launched in April 1902 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in May 1903 . Armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , Arcona was capable of a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . 
 Arcona served in all three German navies in the first half of the 20th century . She served both with the fleet and abroad during her career in the Imperial Navy in the early 1900s . In World War I , she was used as a coastal defense ship and then as a support vessel for the U @-@ boat campaign in the Atlantic . After the war , she served briefly in the Reichsmarine before being withdrawn and used for secondary duties . After the German Navy became the Kriegsmarine in 1935 , it rebuilt Arcona as a floating anti @-@ aircraft battery and used her to defend several German ports during World War II . She was scuttled in the final days of the war , and broken up for scrap in 1948 – 1949 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Arcona was ordered under the contract name " H " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1901 and launched on 22 April 1902 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 12 May 1903 . The ship was 105 meters ( 344 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 12 @.@ 4 m ( 41 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 99 m ( 16 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 180 t ( 3 @,@ 130 long tons ; 3 @,@ 510 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines manufactured by AG Weser . They were designed to give 8 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) , for a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . The engines were powered by eight coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . Arcona carried 700 tonnes ( 690 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 14 officers and 256 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . They were submerged in the hull on the broadside . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 20 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick . The conning tower had 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Arcona was assigned to the fleet reconnaissance forces . In 1905 , she was assigned to the Cruiser Division , alongside her sister Frauenlob and the cruisers Hamburg and Friedrich Carl . Arcona was assigned to overseas duty in 1907 , which lasted for three years . In 1909 , Arcona cruised the Pacific coast on the United States , including a stop in Honolulu . While there , on 10 December , she assisted the British merchant ship Celtic Chief , which had run aground on a reef outside Honolulu . After the ship had been lightened by removing its cargo , Arcona pulled the merchantman free from the reef . 
 Arcona returned to Germany in 1910 and resumed service with the fleet . She was modernized in the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven in 1911 – 1912 . Two of the ship 's 10 @.@ 5 cm guns were removed , and two 50 cm ( 20 in ) deck @-@ mounted torpedo tubes were installed , along with provisions to carry 200 naval mines . After returning to duty in 1913 , the ship was withdrawn from front @-@ line service for use as a mine warfare test ship . The two guns removed in 1912 were reinstalled in 1914 . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Arcona was employed as a coastal defense vessel . Later in the war , Arcona was transferred to the Ems estuary , where she coordinated radio communications with the U @-@ boats attacking British merchant shipping . 
 After the end of the war , Germany was charged with sweeping all naval mines in the North Sea by the Treaty of Versailles . Arcona was used as a depot ship for the minesweepers engaged in this duty , from 1919 to 1920 . She was thereafter commissioned into the newly reorganized Reichsmarine in 1921 and served until 1923 , when she was withdrawn from service . She was stricken on 15 January 1930 and used as a barracks ship initially in Wilhelmshaven , after 1936 , in Swinemünde by the newly renamed Kriegsmarine , and in Kiel after 1938 , where she remained until the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 . 
 In May 1940 , Arcona was converted into a floating anti @-@ aircraft battery in Swinemünde , where she was stationed initially . Her armament now consisted of one 10 @.@ 5 cm SK C / 32 gun , four 10 @.@ 5 cm SK C / 33 guns , two 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns , and four 2 cm guns . She was later moved to Wilhelmshaven , where she was assigned to Naval Anti @-@ Aircraft Group 233 , and she was transferred to Brunsbüttel later in the war . In closing days of the war in Europe , her crew scuttled the ship to prevent her from being captured , on 3 May 1945 . Nevertheless , the Royal Navy took control of the naval installation at Brunsbüttel on 7 May , after the German surrender . Arcona was among the warships that were seized , including four U @-@ boats and the badly damaged destroyer Z31 . Their German crews unloaded ammunition and removed weapons from the ships under British supervision . She was subsequently broken up for scrap in 1948 – 1949 . 
 = I Miss You ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " I Miss You " is a song by American recording artist Beyoncé , taken from her fourth studio album , 4 ( 2011 ) . It was written by Beyoncé , Frank Ocean and Shea Taylor while production was handled by Beyoncé and Taylor . The song 's development was motivated the fact that Beyoncé wanted to focus on songs being classics , songs that would last , and songs that she could sing when she becomes old . A mid @-@ paced R & B ballad , " I Miss You " is influenced by the ballads of the 1980s . Its instrumentation consists essentially of synthesizers and keyboards . " I Miss You " finds Beyoncé , as the protagonist , thinking deeply over her relationship with her love interest from whom she parted ; however , she still pines for him and feels self @-@ conscious for doing so . 
 " I Miss You " was generally praised by music critics who complimented its very sparse production as well as its aurally remarkable 1980s influence . Some of them also described the song as a " haunting " ballad and called it the highlight of the record . Critics also complimented how Beyoncé 's vocals keep on alternating from desperate and calm throughout the song , and highlighted the vulnerability in her voice . Following the release of 4 in early July 2011 , " I Miss You " charted at number 184 on the UK Singles Chart and at number 34 on the South Korea Gaon International Singles Chart , based on downloads alone . The song was part of Beyoncé 's set list for her 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé , held in Roseland Ballroom , New York City in August 2011 . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 " I Miss You " was written by Beyoncé , Odd Future collective member Frank Ocean , and Shea Taylor while production was handled by Beyoncé and Taylor themselves . In early March 2011 , Ocean made known that Beyoncé was back in the studio working on her then upcoming fourth studio album , 4 . Ocean posted a snap of Beyoncé in his studio on Twitter , fuelling reports that he had worked with Beyoncé on the new record . As well as posting a picture of Beyoncé recording new material , he also accompanied the image with the comment : " This is the room i am working in this day. not to brag but man , this is <unk> like [ ... ] she is singing my songs . If time were to stop right now , the past couple weeks would be near the top of the highlight reel for my short time on earth [ sic ] . " 
 In July 2011 , Beyoncé sat for an interview with Gabriel Alvarez of Complex magazine , where she elaborated on how she came to know about Ocean : " Jay [ <unk> ] had a CD playing in the car one Sunday when we were driving to Brooklyn . I noticed his tone , his arrangements , and his storytelling . I immediately reached out to him — literally the next morning . I asked him to fly to New York and work on my record . " In this way , Ocean ended up co @-@ writing " I Miss You " . Beginning on June 16 to June 27 , 2011 , the songs from 4 were available to listen to in full each day on Beyoncé 's official website , paired with its accompanying photo spread from the album packaging and an insightful quote . On June 18 , 2011 , " I Miss You " " was the third song to be chosen . The quote found Beyoncé elaborating on what motivated her to record a song like " I Miss You " : 
 [ 4 ] is definitely an evolution . It is bolder than the music on my previous albums because I ’ m bolder . The more mature I become and the more life experiences I have , the more I have to talk about . I really focused on songs being classics , songs that would last , songs that I could sing when I ’ m 40 and when I ’ m 60 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " I Miss You " is a mid @-@ tempo ballad that draws from the genres of R & B and contains elements of pop music and trip hop . Michael Cragg , writing for both The Guardian and The Observer , noted that it is heavily influenced by the 1980s ballads . This was further noted by Charles <unk> of The Quietus and Priya Elan of NME , who commented that " I Miss You " is influenced by the 1980s electro soul and neo soul music styles respectively . A generally low @-@ key song , " I Miss You " is built on a simple <unk> metronomic beat , which has been further described as a " minimal , geiger @-@ counter @-@ sounding click @-@ pop [ one ] " . " I Miss You " feels " light and understated " , sparing the musical histrionics of " Dangerously in Love " ( 2003 ) or " If I Were a Boy " ( 2008 ) , according to Andrew Unterberger of PopCrush . The song 's instrumentation consists of " layers of atmospheric keyboards " , ambient synthesizers , and tinny 808 drums The synthesizers expand and contract as they progress through their chords , maintaining an even level of intensity throughout . 
 As stated by Unterberger , owing to its " same kind of vocal longing , late @-@ night desperation lyrics , and most importantly , thick , moody synth [ <unk> ] " , " I Miss You " bears resemblance to a mid @-@ 1980s Foreigner ballad . Additionally , Rich Juzwiak of The Village Voice commented that Martika 's 1991 song " Love ... Thy Will Be Done " is conjured in " I Miss You " . Matthew Horton of BBC felt that " I Miss You " features " the kind of subtle tension " achieved by Alicia Keys ' Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart ( 2010 ) . Jim Farber of Daily News added that " ' I Miss You ' contrasts a soft bed of synth [ <unk> ] and heavily echoed drums " in a way similar to Phil Collins ' 1981 song " In the Air Tonight " . 
 Described by Matthew Horton as a song that " tug [ s ] heartstrings " , " I Miss You " finds Beyoncé , as the female protagonist , ruminating over her relationship with her ex @-@ love interest without firm verdicts ; she is " confused , conflicted , very human " , as stated by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times 's Thomas Conner . Even though they have parted , Beyoncé " still cannot let go and her needs are vexing her " , according to Melinda Newman of HitFix . Also , Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone added that the song features Beyoncé " at her most understated " . Throughout the song , her phrasing is " cool , calm and collected " . Ian Walker of AbsolutePunk stated that the lyrics of " I Miss You " are a mixture of " hopeful longing and loneliness . " 
 Beyoncé begins the first verse of the song in a near @-@ whisper , " I thought that things like this get better with time / But I still need you / Why is that ? " The latter rhetorical question reappears throughout the song . In the chorus lines , she questions herself , " I miss you / But if I got with you , could it feel the same ? " From the second verse and onwards , the song finds Beyoncé " vocalizing an internal battle , alternately desperate and calm " , as stated by Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle . She starts to sing in a double voice ; her lower vocal notes are set as the song 's base , while her voice in a heightened key is played over it . In the second verse , she sings , " The words don ’ t ever seem to come out right / But I still mean [ th ] em " , pining for her ex @-@ love interest and feeling self @-@ conscious for doing so , " It hurts my pride to tell you how I feel , but I still need to " before asking again , " Why is that ? " . The bridge features Beyoncé chanting , " No matter who you are / It is so simple / A feeling / But it ’ s everything . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " I Miss You " received generally positive reviews . David Amidon of PopMatters who stated that " 1 + 1 provides Beyoncé a song that " can compete with the favorites of this generation ’ s parents " , came to the conclusion that " 1 + 1 " and " I Miss You " are " equally competent , if safer , attempts at the same formula " . He concluded that these songs make it clear that Beyoncé is " head and shoulders above her Clear Channel competition in R & B " . Joanne Dorken of MTV UK who described " I Miss You " as " heartfelt ballad " with her vocals being " on point " , as she delivers the song with " raw emotion " . Ben Cardew of Music Week appreciated " the influence of Frank Ocean " , which according to him , made it feel like " the first track on the album to have a modern feel " . He went on praising the fact that the ballad is constructed from " a stripped down beat and washes of synth , making a very simple track but one that benefits from its simplicity " . Describing " I Miss You " as a " gently pulsing , sci @-@ fi ballad " , Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle called the song " one of the most fascinating moments amid a dozen tracks " . Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun wrote that " I Miss You " is a nocturnal and experimental ballad due to its synth washes . Michael Cragg of The Observer called " the minimal ' I Miss You ' the highlight [ of 4 ] " . Brandon Lewis of Blogcritics found " I Miss You " both " haunting and gorgeous , with an ominous vocal and very sparse production " . Showing high favoritism for " I Miss You " , Roberts Randall of Los Angeles Times wrote : 
 Beyoncé Knowles is not worried chasing fads , though she is well aware of them . Over the years , she has learned how to harness them so effortlessly that they seem like her ideas . Take the standout track on her new album , 4 , ' I Miss You ' , a slow @-@ burn jam of desire co @-@ written by Odd Future @-@ affiliated crooner Frank Ocean . In its beginning moments , the song draws on the sparse wave of recent music by British band The xx by using silence as a weapon , a notion that extends across the 12 @-@ song album . 
 Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly was also positive , writing that Beyoncé " pants and sweats and grunts ( except , you know , sexy @-@ like ) , her voice climbing ever higher in search of an octave big enough to hold it " . Embling of Tiny Mix Tapes wrote that " [ ... ] " if sung by anyone else , ' I Miss You ' would be a thin wisp of a ballad , but Beyoncé allows her voice to crack at the right moments , moving tenuously , self @-@ consciously through the soft , circular melody . " He concluded that songs like " I Miss You " and " Start Over " would earn deserved spots in " the Beyoncé pantheon " once fans take the time to grow attached to them . Andrew Unterberger of PopCrush praised the way Beyoncé delivers the line " Why is that ? " , writing that it is " a nice little nod to the confusion of heartbreak , and a rare , welcome glimpse of vulnerability for an artist who too often seems to have all of the answers . " Referring to " I Miss You " , Alexis Petridis of The Guardian wrote that " the [ 19 ] 80s influence is not always a bad thing . " He considered the song to be " a woozy update of an old @-@ fashioned slow jam " , further stating that " it is probably pushing it a bit to call it an R & B equivalent of Ariel Pink 's hypnagogic pop , but there 's something enveloping and dream @-@ like about it . " Ian Walker of AbsolutePunk commented that the " [ the ] hollow beat and dismal synthesizers , allow [ ed ] Beyoncé and her morosely beautiful voice center stage . [ ... ] Beyoncé delivers a believable performance effortlessly . " By contrast , Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune was negative , writing that " [ ' I Miss You ' is ] easily overlooked with its forlorn keyboard and beat @-@ box <unk> . " Similarly , Consequence of Sound writer Chris Coplan felt that the ballad is " too @-@ saccharine @-@ for @-@ its @-@ own @-@ good . " The Guardian 's critics Ben Beaumont Thomas and Rebecca Nicholson ranked " I Miss You " at numbers four and nine respectively on their lists of The 10 Best Tracks of 2011 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé performed " I Miss You " live for first time on August 14 , 2011 during her 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé in Roseland Ballroom , New York City . She performed the song in front of 3 @,@ 500 people wearing a gold dress and backed by her all @-@ female band and her backing singers , called the Mamas . During the ITV special A Night With Beyoncé which aired on December 4 in the United Kingdom , Beyoncé performed " I Miss You " to a selected crowd of fans . 
 In May , 2012 , Beyoncé performed " I Miss You " during her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue in Atlantic City , New Jersey , United States ' entertainment resort , hotel , casino and spa , Revel . An electronic backdrop behind Beyoncé and a male dancer in kinetic , black @-@ and @-@ white stripes accompanied Beyoncé on stage . Dan DeLuca of The Philadelphia Inquirer noted that " the set list tipped too heavily at times toward bombastic balladry like ' I Care ' and ' I Miss You ' " . Jim Farber of Daily News commented that the song was sung with " precision and sweep , she tipped the balance decidedly softer , giving her power grounding " . Tris McCall of New Jersey On @-@ Line wrote , " Even ' I Miss You , ' perhaps the least flashy song in her catalog , felt like a necessary breather , and an occasion for her to break out her conversational lower register . " 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 On November 5 , 2011 , Ocean performed " I Miss You " at the House of Blues in New Orleans . Dressed in a black suit with a red @-@ and @-@ white bandana around his head , he sat down at an electric piano to perform it live to end the evening . The crowd also sang along . Alex Rawls of Rolling Stone found his performance to be " warm and soulful " . British indie pop band The xx covered the song on February 14 , 2013 during their concert in Austin , Texas and later posted the cover on their official blog . Their cover of the song was a duet between Romy Madley Croft and Oliver Sim accompanied by spare guitar and bass . Their cover of the song was described as " great " by Jenn Pelly of Pitchfork Media , while Sam Weiss of Complex magazine praised the performance saying that the band made the song sound similar to their own material from the album Coexist ( 2012 ) . Chris Martins of Spin magazine commented that " It 's exactly what you 'd expect to hear , and it 's exactly as beautiful as you 'd hope it would be . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Selling 16 @,@ 032 digital downloads , " I Miss You " opened at number 34 on the South Korea Gaon International Singles Chart for the week ending July 2 , 2011 . Following the release of 4 , " I Miss You " also charted at number 184 on the UK Singles Chart on July 9 , 2011 , based on downloads alone . 
 = Chrono Trigger : Crimson Echoes = 
 Chrono Trigger : Crimson Echoes is a fangame developed by the international team Kajar Laboratories as a ROM hack of Square 's role @-@ playing video game Chrono Trigger for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . It was conceived as an unofficial installment in the Chrono series , set between the events of Chrono Trigger and its sequel Chrono Cross . 
 The game , as a ROM hack , runs on the Chrono Trigger game engine and has gameplay similar to the original . It is based five years after the events of Chrono Trigger and features all the playable characters from the original game , who come together across different time periods to fight an enemy attempting to change the past . The plot includes elements from both official games . Crimson Echoes concludes by setting up several plot points that were used in Chrono Cross . 
 The project was in development from 2004 – 09 , with 98 % of the game completed . The game reportedly totaled around 35 hours of play time , and had ten alternate endings . A few weeks prior to the expected released date , Square Enix sent the developers a cease @-@ and @-@ desist letter for knowingly violating Square Enix 's intellectual property , which led to the cancellation of the project . This cancellation was widely reported in the gaming press , who were largely sympathetic to the project . Despite its cancellation , versions of the game ranging from an alpha to a release candidate have since been leaked onto the internet and can be played through to the end . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As Crimson Echoes runs on the Chrono Trigger game engine , the gameplay is similar to that of the original title . Players and enemies may use physical or magical attacks to wound targets during battle , and players may use items to heal or protect themselves . Each character and enemy has a certain number of hit points that are reduced by successful attacks and can be restored through potions and spells . When a playable character loses all hit points , he or she faints . It also uses the Active Time Battle 2 @.@ 0 system from the first game . The game features new maps , graphics and sprites . New minigames were designed to reward players with items and equipment , including a " Coliseum " battle mode based on that of Final Fantasy VII and a casino featuring luck @-@ based games . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Crimson Echoes features all the playable characters of the original game , and is set five years after the events of Chrono Trigger . Crono and Marle are junior regents of the Kingdom of Guardia ; Lucca continues her scientific endeavors . The three struggle to ease tensions with Porre , which has modernized its military and seeks to end Guardia 's economic hegemony . Frog lives in 605 A.D. , restored to his human form , though this was not implemented before the cease and desist letter . Magus searches for Schala in the still @-@ frozen 11 @,@ 995 B.C. , and feuds with Dalton , obsessed with finding artifacts from the lost Kingdom of Zeal . Ayla dwells in 64 @,@ 999 @,@ 995 B.C. , and has given birth to her tribe 's successor . Robo assists the Guru of Time Belthasar , who has established a clandestine temporal research facility named Chronopolis in 2305 A.D. Belthasar claims it will be a guardian of time to ensure a threat such as Lavos will never arise . He nonetheless harbors darker wishes to leave a grand legacy in history , and is almost recklessly pragmatic . He fixes the Epoch during the story 's course , which returns as the Neo @-@ Epoch ( akin to its design in Chrono Cross ) . 
 The main villain of Crimson Echoes is King Zeal , revived by Lavos through the Frozen Flame . Confused and saddened by the loss of his kingdom , he is easily manipulated by Lavos , who uses him to attempt revenge on Crono and his friends . He later learns of his deception , and seeks to dominate Lavos and recreate his kingdom through unmatched temporal power . While under Lavos 's influence , he recruits Dalton and Kasmir to his cause . Kasmir is an illusionist who served under Magus in the Mystic War . King Zeal gives him the Masamune , and he assumes leadership of the Mystics after 600 A.D. Other foes come from the Reptite timeline , an alternate universe temporarily brought into existence by King Zeal 's meddling . They number the Dragon God — a Reptite artificial intelligence created in an alternate timeline — and the <unk> time travelers , who were used by King Zeal and survive into the restored human world . The party also visit 1 A.D. , the era of the founding of Guardia . There , they meet Cedric the Executor , the ruthless first King of Guardia , as well as Antaeus , the ancestor of Porre . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game begins as Crono , Marle , and Lucca attend a political meeting between the Kingdom of Guardia and Porre . An assassin attacks ; the party pursues him to the <unk> <unk> . , where Lucca 's prototype Time Egg backfires and sends them to the future . They find Belthasar there , who has established a research facility called Chronopolis . He warns of a new threat to the timeline , and sends the party to the Ocean Palace ruins of 11 @,@ 995 B.C. to investigate . They find Magus , still searching for Schala and feuding with Dalton . They confront a mysterious villain who resurrects Schala and robs the early Masamune , still embedded in the husk of the Mammon Machine . Its theft changes history , causing the Mystics ' war in the Middle Ages to drag on another 50 years , led by the illusionist Kasmir . The party retrieve Frog ( named Glenn in Crimson Echoes ) from 605 A.D. and meet with Belthasar . 
 He explains the mysterious villain was King Zeal , somehow alive and in possession of the Frozen Flame , a shard of Lavos with incredible powers . Melchior takes up residence in Chronopolis to aid the fight against him . The party goes to 64 @,@ 999 @,@ 995 B.C. to find the Dragon 's Tooth , an enchanted totem that will assist Chronopolis . King Zeal confronts them at the old Lavos impact crater , scattering them through time and unleashing the " Atash Kedah " , a destructive spell that changes history . Marle awakens in 1 A.D. to discover Reptites have survived the long ice age , and war with humanity for control of the planet . Lucca and Robo arrive in 2305 A.D. , awaking in the midst of a futuristic Reptite civilization . They ally with rebellious , sentient robots and venture to Dinopolis , the equivalent of Chronopolis in this timeline . They destroy the Vision Serpent , an artificial intelligence created to administrate the world . Crono , Magus , and Glenn awaken in 1005 A.D. , and assault the earlier Dinopolis , where Reptite time travelers from 2305 A.D. have come to conduct research on the past . The party use the temporal technology in place to return to 64 @,@ 999 @,@ 995 B.C. and stop the Atash Kedah spell , restoring the human timeline . 
 Marle awakens in 1 A.D. once more , this time witnessing her ancestor , Cedric Guardia , brutally unify the world with the Frozen Flame . A ubiquitous agent from Chronopolis — code @-@ named 12 — brings her back to the future . The party learn that the Reptite time travelers — named <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> — survived the human world 's restoration , and had been manipulated by King Zeal . The party fix the Mystic War by retrieving the Masamune from Kasmir and putting it back in antiquity . In 1005 A.D. , new diplomatic talks are about to begin . Porre instead launches an assault , backed by King Zeal and Dalton , placed in Porre 's high command by the king . King Guardia dies in the attack . The party venture to 11 @,@ 995 B.C. once more with Schala , intent on striking the Frozen Flame in antiquity to lure out King Zeal . This unleashes wild energies , and the party must overcome individual mental assaults by the Flame . King Zeal retreats , and the energies cause Schala to fall into the Darkness Beyond Time , a temporal netherworld . Unsuccessful , the party seek out Gaspar tens of millions of years in the past ( known as the Dreamtime ) , where he 's gone to witness the birth of the planet 's consciousness . King Zeal attacks them there ; Crono falls near the rifts of the forming planet and is partly infused with its natal awareness . The party learn that King Zeal 's ultimate goal is to resurrect the Kingdom of Zeal in 11 @,@ 995 B.C. 
 The party return to antiquity and defeat Dalton . King Zeal nears the fruition of his plan , but Melchior and Belthasar enter the time period to dissuade him . King Zeal leaves the Sun Stone , the trigger for the revival of Zeal , with a follower and walks to the North Cape . He reveals that Lavos survived defeat in Chrono Trigger and clung to life in the Darkness Beyond Time . He used the Frozen Flame to revive King Zeal , manipulating him to take revenge on the heroes . He is now merging with Schala , as he has done with all the other " <unk> " who have used the Frozen Flame throughout history . Lavos calls King Zeal , intending to merge with him as well and evolve to become the Dream Devourer ( as seen in Chrono Trigger DS ) . The party convince Zeal 's followers not to activate the Sun Stone , and pursue Zeal to the Darkness Beyond Time . King Zeal confronts them once more , revealing his will is stronger than that of Lavos ; he 'll merge , but become the dominant personality within the Dream Devourer and create a new Zeal using its vast power . The party defeat him and return to Chronopolis . They notice the planet 's Gates are closing again , and depart to their homes , promising to stay in touch . Belthasar meanwhile reveals he has the Frozen Flame , which activates and informs him that Lavos is still alive and will become the Time Devourer , the enemy of Chrono Cross . It challenges Belthasar to a grand game , and he begins drawing up plans for Project Kid . The game closes with King Zeal , shown to be alive and imprisoned by Magus in 11 @,@ 995 B.C. , who forces him to teach advanced temporal magic . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Crimson Echoes project was launched by ZeaLitY in 2004 . The development team , dubbed Kajar Laboratories , primarily consisted of members of the Chrono fansite Chrono Compendium . The team was led by a game director , Agent 12 , and two co @-@ directors , ZeaLitY and Chrono ' 99 . To create a story that was compatible with Chrono Trigger and Chrono Cross , the team took full advantage of the Chrono Compendium 's encyclopedia and the fandom 's knowledge and analysis of the series . 
 The game took the form of a ROM hack of the Super Nintendo Entertainment System version of Chrono Trigger . It was coded using Chrono Trigger ROM editing software , and was meant to be played on a Super Nintendo Entertainment System emulator . The finished game was intended to be released as a patch file in the IPS ( International Patching System ) format , so as to avoid illegal distribution of a full Chrono Trigger ROM . 
 The project lasted four and a half years , with a planned release date of May 31 , 2009 . However , Square Enix sent ZeaLitY and Agent 12 a cease @-@ and @-@ desist letter on May 8 , 2009 for trademark and copyright infringement , ordering that the team stop development and cancel all ROM hacking activities , including translation and distribution of all their other projects that were in progress or already released . The letter noted that ZeaLitY and Agent 12 risked being sued for " up to $ 150 @,@ 000 per work " in damages . At the time of the cancellation , the game was " around 98 % complete " ; it allegedly featured 23 story chapters adding up to roughly 35 hours of gameplay and ten alternate endings . 
 = = Internet circulation = = 
 Shortly after the project received the cease and desist letter , an alpha version of the patch was leaked on the internet . ZeaLitY expressed his disapproval and embarrassment on the Crimson Echoes website , noting that the alpha version was extremely buggy and lacked many of the improvements made in the beta version . In January 2011 , a more complete beta version was leaked which could be played from beginning to end , believed to be the final build of the project prior to cancellation . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Kajar Laboratories complied with the cease @-@ and @-@ desist letter and all traces of Crimson Echoes were removed from the Chrono Compendium . CNET senior associate editor Eric Franklin noted that it was " sad to see four and a half years of work go spinning down the drain , " stating : " I feel for the fans who were anticipating this . " 1UP.com called the project " ambitious , " noting that " This wasn 't just some fly @-@ by @-@ night hack . " Earnest Cavalli , from Wired , stated : " I fully understand Square Enix ’ s desire to protect its properties , but that doesn ’ t make this any less depressing . The game looked quite good ( if obviously derivative ) . " The project 's cancellation was also reported by gaming journalists in the Netherlands , France , and Japan . In February 2010 , GamesRadar included the game in an article about the " 10 fan games that shouldn 't be ceased or desisted " . 
 Keith Stuart , from The Guardian , pointed out the contrast between Square Enix 's policy and that of companies like Valve , which officially adopted the Half @-@ Life fan mods Counter @-@ Strike and Day of Defeat , and Vivendi Universal Games , which granted a licence to the King 's Quest fan game The Silver Lining . He noted that since Crimson Echoes was a ROM hack , it was in a " trickier area of copy protection law " than those other projects , but felt that its release would have had next to no commercial impact since the game was to be distributed as an IPS patch rather than a ROM image . Finally , he noted that an official port of the fangame to the Nintendo DS or WiiWare would have had more " marketing benefits " for Square Enix . 
 = Whitefish Bay National Forest Scenic Byway = 
 The Whitefish Bay National Forest Scenic Byway is a National Forest Scenic Byway that runs along Whitefish Bay in the Hiawatha National Forest in the U.S. state of Michigan . The byway mostly follows Federal Forest Highway 42 ( FFH 42 ) through Chippewa County in the Upper Peninsula . As a forest highway , it is maintained jointly by the Chippewa County Road Commission ( CCRC ) and the U.S. Forest Service ( USFS ) . The route of the byway first existed as an earth road by the 1930s ; it was improved into a gravel road in the 1940s and paved between the 1950s and the 1980s . The byway designation was created in 1989 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The byway starts at an intersection with M @-@ 123 south of Paradise in the Hiawatha National Forest where it runs eastward along Lake Superior Shoreline Road through birch forests . The roadway runs parallel to the North Country Trail , a hiking trail that spans several northern U.S. states ; the trail crosses the road near Naomikong Creek . After about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) , the road comes to the shores of Tahquamenon Bay , part of the larger Whitefish Bay . The byway follows the shoreline running near sandy beaches at the edge of the forest . Near Naomikong Point , the roadway turns inland for about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . Along this section , Lake Superior Shoreline Road , which bears the FFH 3150 designation , ends at the intersection with Lakeshore Road . East of here , the byway transitions from FFH 3150 to follow FFH 42 easterly . FFH 42 runs along the shoreline providing access to two campgrounds at Monocle Lake and Bay View as well as picnic areas . The road also provides access to the Point Iroquois Lighthouse which is open for tours . The lighthouse was built in 1870 and offers visitors a view of the Canadian shore at the top of its spiral staircase . After passing through the Point Iroquois area , FFH 42 turns southward to follow the shore line on Iroquois Road , terminating at the national forest boundary west of Brimley . The FFH 42 number is not signed along the roadway . 
 = = History = = 
 The roadway is part of the Forest Highway System that is funded and administered by the USFS and the Federal Highway Administration ; the system was created by the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 . An earthen roadway was present through the area by 1936 . In the beginning of 1937 , the easternmost section around Point Iroquois was improved to a gravel road . Two years later , the westernmost section from Naomikong Point to the junction with M @-@ 123 was improved to gravel . The entire road surface was improved to gravel by 1945 . Paving started on the road in the mid @-@ 1950s on the eastern end . 
 The section through the Naomikong Point area was built starting in 1967 by the Michigan State Highway Department under contract to the USFS . The road , at the time , was intended to be part of a longer scenic highway that would connect a proposed lakeshore road through the Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore with roads running along Whitefish Bay and the St. Marys River south of Sault Ste . Marie . The western end was realigned and paved in the late 1970s , moving the roadway closer to Tahquamenon Bay west of Naomikong Point . The former roadway was removed in the process . The last section was paved in 1987 between the two paved sections at Naomikong and Iroquois points . The National Forest Scenic Byway designation was granted on February 8 , 1989 . The roadway is maintained by the CCRC along with the USFS . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire byway is in Chippewa County . 
 = Barry John = 
 Barry John ( born 6 January 1945 ) is a former Welsh rugby union fly @-@ half who played , during the amateur era of the sport , in the 1960s and early 1970s . John began his rugby career as a schoolboy playing for his local team Cefneithin RFC before switching to first @-@ class west Wales team Llanelli RFC in 1964 . It was while at Llanelli that John was first selected for the Wales national team , a shock selection as a replacement for David Watkins to face a touring Australian team . 
 In 1967 John left Llanelli RFC for Cardiff RFC and here he formed a partnership with Gareth Edwards that became one of the most famous half @-@ back pairings in world rugby . From 1967 , John and Edwards made an inseparable partnership with rugby selectors , being chosen to play together at all levels of the sport , for Cardiff , Wales , the Barbarians and in 1968 for the British Lions tour of South Africa . The 1968 British Lions tour ended prematurely for John when he suffered a broken collarbone in the first Test match against the South African national team . 
 In 1971 the Wales national team entered what is considered their second ' Golden Age ' , with a team rich in experience and talent . John was part of the team that won the 1971 Five Nations Championship , the first time Wales had achieved a Grand Slam win since 1952 . He then cemented his reputation as one of the sport 's greatest players with his pivotal role in the British Lions winning tour over New Zealand in 1971 . On the 1971 tour , John played in all four Tests , playing some of his finest rugby and finishing as the Lions ' top Test scorer . 
 John won 25 caps for the Wales national team and five for the British Lions . Possessing excellent balance to his running and along with precision kicking made him one of the great players of the modern era . He retired from rugby at the age of 27 , as Wales highest points scorer , citing the pressure of fame and expectation behind his decision . 
 = = Rugby career = = 
 = = = Early career with Llanelli = = = 
 Barry John was born in Cefneithin , Carmarthenshire in Wales . He was educated at Gwendraeth Grammar School in the Gwendraeth Valley , north of Llanelli . He attended <unk> Primary , and there he was fortunate to receive skilled rugby teaching . The headmaster , William John Jones , and teacher Ray Williams , were both former Wales international rugby players . Despite his natural talents , he never played at schoolboy level for Wales , but represented both his school and his local village team , Cefneithin RFC . He once played a game for rival team Pontyberem while still a schoolboy , but John recalls in his autobiography that the local resentment at making such a sporting faux pas ensured he never did so again . While still a teenager attending grammar school , he made his first top @-@ flight rugby appearance for Llanelli , on 4 January 1964 in an encounter with Moseley . Although Llanelli lost the encounter , John scored a try and converted it , and played in four more matches for the Llanelli senior team towards the end of the season . He continued to represent Llanelli while at Trinity College , Carmarthen , and gained a reputation as a kicking fly @-@ half with a penchant for putting over dropped goals . During the 1964 / 65 season , John began to make an impact on the Welsh club scene . His dropped goal against Aberavon on 26 October 1964 , only 17 games in , was his 11th of the season . 
 John gained more attention the following season . A win over Swansea , where he scored two dropped goals , was described by the Llanelli Star as being down to the " genius of one player , Barry John " . He almost missed the second away encounter of the season with Swansea when he was ' held to ransom ' by his fellow students at Trinity College . He was only released when Llanelli 's club chairman , <unk> Jones , promised to make a donation to the college " Rag " . Llanelli won all four fixtures against Swansea that season , John scoring in all of them . As well as his two dropped goals in the first away fixture , he scored another in the second away game and a try in both the home matches at Stradey Park . In the 1965 / 66 season John was chosen to play in trial matches for the Wales national team . Although he was not picked , he was chosen as reserve to regular fly @-@ half David Watkins . 
 During the 1966 / 67 season John was again chosen to trial for Wales . One of the trials forced him to miss the second Swansea encounter of the season , played away on 12 November 1966 ; his place in the Llanelli team was given to a youth debutant from the <unk> club , Phil Bennett . Bennett became one of the greatest fly @-@ halves produced by Wales , but he was kept from the Wales squad in his early career by the presence of John . In 1966 , John was awarded his first international cap for Wales , taking David Watkins place at fly @-@ half for the match against the touring Australia team . This was seen as a surprise move by the Welsh Rugby Union selectors , as Watkins had recently returned from a British Lions tour where he was team captain . Wales lost to Australia 11 – 4 , the first time the Welsh had been beaten by the ' Wallabies ' , due to poor form in the midfield , with the criticism aimed at John , Gerald Davies and John Dawes . Although experiencing defeat in his first international , John managed to gain revenge over Australia just over a month later when the same team faced Llanelli at Stradey Park . Llanelli beat the Wallabies 11 – 0 after a bruising forward contest . John himself scored a try , and then added to his tally with a dropped goal . 
 Despite the Wales loss against Australia , the selectors kept faith with John , and he retained his place for the next Wales international . Played away from home , the opener of the 1967 Five Nations Championship against Scotland had him paired at half @-@ back with Cardiff 's Billy <unk> . John played badly while carrying a leg injury , and the very next match he was dropped , replaced by the more experienced Watkins . 
 = = = Joining Cardiff = = = 
 In the 1967 / 68 season , John left Llanelli and joined Cardiff , where he formed a partnership with Gareth Edwards . Although John and Edwards later became the scourge of New Zealand , their first international pairing had an inauspicious start . On 11 November 1967 , the pair played their first international together , facing Brian Lochore 's touring New Zealand team . Edwards , like John , had two international games to his name , paired with Watkins in the final two matches of the 1967 Five Nations Championship . John regained his international place after Watkins had switched to professional rugby league just the month before , joining Salford for a club record fee of £ 16 @,@ 000 . Wales had an error @-@ strewn game , in a match played in a cutting , rain @-@ laden wind which turned the pitch into a muddy field . Wales captain Norman Gale won the toss and chose to play the first half into the gale , and finished the half 8 – 0 down . John raised Welsh hopes with an early dropped goal , his first international points , but a panicked blind back pass from Wales ' number 8 , John Jeffery , gifted Bill Davies an easy try . The game ended 13 – 6 to New Zealand , with Edwards looking uncomfortable throughout , and John 's kicking inaccurate , there was little to suggest the pair would become one of the great half @-@ back pairings in rugby history . 
 Just over a month after playing for Wales against New Zealand , John faced the tourists again , this time as part of an East Wales team , made up of players from Cardiff , London Welsh and Bridgend . The New Zealand ' All Blacks ' were under pressure throughout the match , with John kicking from deep and away from the opposing forwards , allowing his team to make rushes on the ' All Black ' defence . After 22 minutes East Wales took the lead when a missed drop goal attempt from John was collected by Cardiff wing Frank Wilson for a try . A defensive lapse from the East Wales team allowed an equalising try , but with the score at 3 – 3 , East Wales dominated the last ten minutes of the match . With the last kick of the match , John had space for one final dropped goal , but his kick sailed inches outside the post . The New Zealanders were glad to escape with the draw and finished the tour without losing a single match . Three days after turning out for East Wales , John and Edwards were paired to face the same New Zealand team , this time played at Twickenham for invitational touring side the Barbarians . The half time result of 3 – 3 flattered the Barbarians , who were out @-@ played in the forward positions , but the team took the lead early in the second half when a perfect diagonal kick to the corner by John resulted in a try by England 's Bob Lloyd . The Barbarians defended strongly for twenty minutes , but lost to two very late tries . 
 Both John and Edwards were selected for all four matches of the 1968 Five Nations Championship . The first match , away at Twickenham to England , recorded Wales coming from 11 – 3 down to draw 11 all . Both half @-@ backs were on the score sheet , Edwards with a try , John with one of his trademark dropped goals . After a home win over Scotland , Wales lost to both Ireland and , eventual Championship winners , France . At club level , John finished the season with a total of nine tries and nine dropped goals for Cardiff . 
 = = = 1968 British Lions , the 1969 Triple Crown and Wales tour = = = 
 John was selected for the British Lions in their tour of South Africa in 1968 , but played in just four games before an injury forced him to return home . He played in three matches against district teams , Western Province , South Western Districts and Natal , all wins for the tourists . He was then selected for the First Test , played at Johannesburg , against the South Africa national team . John 's first Test for the British Lions lasted for only fifteen minutes , when after running for the line he was tackled by Jan Ellis , and John broke his collarbone on landing on the hard ground . 
 John played infrequently for Cardiff during the 1968 / 69 season , making just 14 appearances . Despite this he was available for all matches in the 1969 Five Nations Championship , again playing in each match paired with Edwards . The Welsh selectors had dropped five players from the previous Championship , and notable debutants in the team to face Scotland at Murrayfield on 1 February 1969 were <unk> Williams and Mervyn Davies . John scored his first international try in the encounter after charging down a kick and <unk> his way over . Scotland , who were under enormous pressure from the kick @-@ off , lost 17 – 3 . When Ireland came to the Cardiff Arms Park in March the team was on a seven match unbeaten run , and were looking at taking the Grand Slam after defeating England , France and Scotland . It therefore came as a surprise at the ease with which the Welsh pack dominated . Wales won 24 – 11 , with Dai Morris the stand @-@ out Welsh player , though John also had one of his best matches , keeping pressure on the Irish with long touch kicks and scoring with a dropped goal . Despite out @-@ scoring France in tries scored , the match at Stade Colombes ended in an 8 – 8 draw , preventing a Welsh Grand Slam , though a win in the final match to England would give Wales the Championship . The England decider is best remembered for Maurice Richards ' four tries , but John too was on the scoresheet with a dropped goal and a try of his own . The game finished 30 – 9 to Wales , giving John his first Championship title and made him a Triple Crown winning player , as Wales had beaten all three other Home Nation teams . 
 Before the end of the season , John took part in his one and only seven @-@ a @-@ side tournament for Cardiff when he participated in the 1969 Snelling Sevens tournament . Cardiff progressed to the final , where they succeeded in beating John 's former club Llanelli . As well as the title , John won the " Bill Everson – Player of the Tournament " award . 
 With the end of the 1968 / 69 season , the Welsh Rugby Union sent a team to tour New Zealand and Australia . At half @-@ back , Wales sent John , Edwards , Phil Bennett and Ray " Chico " Hopkins , but in all three Tests , two against the New Zealand " All Blacks " and one against Australia , Welsh coach Clive Rowlands kept faith with John and Edwards . The Welsh team were completely overwhelmed by the All Blacks , losing both Tests , 0 – 19 and 12 – 33 . A change of tactics by Rowlands , by switching Gerald Davies to the right wing , gave Wales a victory over Australia , and a six try victory over Fiji ( in which John was replaced by Bennett ) on their return to Britain , helped the team gain a warm reception on their return . 
 = = = South Africa , the 1970 Championship and the 1971 Grand Slam = = = 
 On 13 December 1969 , Cardiff played host to the sixth touring South Africa team . The tour is remembered for the anti @-@ apartheid protests that followed the team , and before the match 1 @,@ 500 protesters had marched through the Welsh capital . John was unavailable for the encounter having fractured a rib while playing for the Barbarians against an Oxford University Past and Present eleven days earlier . His place was taken by Beverley Davies and Cardiff lost 17 – 3 . John recovered in time for the South Africa against Wales match on 24 January , and was selected alongside Edwards . The game was played in atrocious muddy conditions , and a last minute try from Edwards snatched a 6 – 6 draw Both John and Edwards had a substandard game that day , but they combined well in the last move of the game to avoid defeat . A week later on 31 January , John and Edwards faced the South Africans again , this time as part of the Barbarians . The South Africans produced their best play of the tour to come from behind to win 21 – 12 . 
 There was little rest for the two Cardiff half @-@ backs when on 7 February 1970 they were called back into the Wales team for the first match of the 1970 Five Nations Championship , a home encounter at the Cardiff Arms Park against Scotland . Despite Scotland being 9 – 0 ahead at one point , Wales took the initiative and scored four tries without reply , winning 18 – 9 . The England game was John and Edwards ' fifteenth Wales international together , in an away match which recorded the largest haul of tries for the Welsh team in England since 1908 . John scored one of the tries along with a dropped goal . Due to an injury to Edwards , John finished the game alongside " Chico " Hopkins . With only Ireland standing in front of a Welsh Triple Crown win , hopes were high , but Ireland , made John and Edwards look ordinary in a 0 – 14 defeat . John was unavailable for the final game of the tournament to France , his place taken by Phil Bennett . Wales beat France and shared the Championship with the French . 
 The 1971 Five Nations Championship was a new dawn for Welsh rugby . The new National Stadium was completed , and the team now into their Second Golden era were both experienced and talented . John and Edwards played in all four games , starting with an easy win over England . Wales won 22 – 6 , with John scoring six points from two dropped goals . The second game of the Championship , played against Scotland , was a close encounter , won by Wales 19 – 18 thanks to a late Gerald Davies try converted by John Taylor . Barry John scored eight of Wales ' points , with a try , penalty goal and a conversion ; missing only his trademark drop goal to complete a full house of scores . John surpassed his Scotland tally in the next match , a home game against Ireland , scoring 11 points with a dropped goal , conversion and two penalty goals . Seen as one of Wales ' more accomplished victories , the 23 – 0 win gave the team a Triple Crown title , and set up a Grand Slam encounter with France . Despite the low score , the 9 – 5 win over France at Stade Colombes on 27 March was a match of the highest quality . Edwards and John scored all the points in the encounter , Edwards with a try , John a try and a penalty goal . This was Wales ' first Grand Slam since 1952 and the 1971 squad is seen as the greatest ever to be fielded by Wales . 
 = = = 1971 British Lions = = = 
 In 1971 , on their tour of New Zealand , John was again selected for the British Lions . With the painful memories of the woeful 1969 Wales Tour to New Zealand , John was determined to succeed with the Lions . Under the management of Doug Smith and the coaching of Carwyn James ( also from Cefneithin ) , John rose to great individual heights with his match @-@ winning performances . Of the 26 tour matches , he played in 17 , only bettered by captain John Dawes and " Mighty Mouse " prop Ian <unk> . By the time of the first Test in Carisbrook , John had faced six teams , including the New South Wales Waratahs and the New Zealand Māori . All six games had been won by the Lions and John had recorded 88 points , including a full house against Waikato . In the First Test John terrorised New Zealand 's fullback Fergie McCormick with ruthless tactical kicking . The All Blacks were shunted all over the field by John , who was well protected by his forwards , something that he was not afforded with Wales in 1969 . The Lions won the Test 9 – 3 , six of the Lions ' points coming from two John penalties ; McCormick never played for the All Blacks again . 
 Before the second Test John played in two more tour matches ; wins over Southland and New Zealand Universities , in which he scored 32 points . In the game against the Universities John scored one of his most famous tries . John <unk> a drop @-@ goal before running through the Universities ' defence , stepping inside the final tackler before touching the ball down under the posts , stunning the home crowd . The second Test , played at Christchurch , finished with the series drawn after New Zealand won 22 – 12 , John scoring half of the Lions points . In between the second and third Tests , John played in three of the four regional matches , scoring 37 points including two tries in the game against Wairarapa . 
 A win in the third Test was vital to keep the Lions hope of a series win alive . John scored ten points of the 13 – 3 win , the other three coming from Wales ' team @-@ mate Gerald Davies . The final Test ended in a 14 – 14 draw , giving the series to the tourists . John scored eight of the Lions points , having scored in every match , Test and regional , he had played in . 
 It was on this tour that John received the nickname " The King " from the New Zealand press , though as early as 1965 he remembered being dubbed " King John " by a newspaper sub @-@ editor while still at Llanelli . He scored 30 of the Lions 48 points over the four Tests , scored a record 191 points across the tour ( 6 tries , 31 conversions , 8 dropped goals and 27 penalties ) and cemented his reputation as one of the game 's greatest players . 
 = = = 1972 Championship and retirement = = = 
 John 's final season with Wales ended disappointingly as both Scotland and Wales refused to travel to Ireland due to the increased violence in Ulster and the events of Bloody Sunday . Despite this , John had a good Championship , scoring 35 points in the three games against England , Scotland and France . The opener , away to England , was won 12 – 3 , with John scoring two penalty goals and converting a <unk> Williams try . This was followed by a win over Scotland , in which John played well , converting three of the five Welsh tries and scoring three penalty goals . John 's final international was at home to France . He successfully converted four penalty goals in a 20 – 6 victory to Wales , and in scoring his final penalty surpassed the Wales international points scoring record of Jack Bancroft set nearly 60 years earlier . The Welsh Rugby Union 's refusal to allow travel to Ireland stole the team 's possibility of a consecutive Grand Slam title . 
 In 1972 , at the age of only 27 , with 25 Wales caps and five British Lions caps , Barry John retired from the game . John cited the media attention and the unfair expectations of his country as reasons , believing he was " living in a goldfish bowl " . It is part of rugby folklore that the event that convinced him to retire from rugby was when a young girl curtsied to him outside the opening of an extension to a local bank but in Frank Keating 's book The Great Number Tens , John is quoted as saying that it was actually the head cashier who curtsied to him . 
 His 25 caps for Wales resulted in 90 points scored , 5 tries , 9 conversions , 13 penalties and 8 dropped goals . His British Lions career added a further 30 international points , with a single try , 3 conversions , 5 penalties and 2 dropped goals . For Cardiff he played 5 seasons , playing 93 matches , during which he scored 24 tries and 30 dropped goals . His dropped goal total for Cardiff was the club 's second highest total , drawn with Wilf Wooller but short of Percy Bush 's tally of 35 . 
 = = = International games = = = 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 As the authors of the official history of the Welsh Rugby Union , David Smith and Gareth Williams , wrote of him : " The clue to an understanding of his achieved style lies in what he could make others do to themselves . The kicking , whether spinning trajectories that rolled away or precise chips or <unk> <unk> , was a long @-@ range control , but his running , deft , poised , a fragile illusion that one wrong instant could crack , yet rarely did , was the art of the fly @-@ half at its most testing . He was the dragonfly on the anvil of destruction . John ran in another dimension of time and space . His opponents ran into the glass walls which covered his escape routes from their bewildered clutches . He left mouths , and back rows , agape . " 
 Gareth Edwards , in his 1978 autobiography , when describing John , wrote : " He had this marvellous easiness in the mind , reducing problems to their simplest form , backing his own talent all the time . One success on the field bred another and soon he gave off a cool superiority which spread to others in the side . Physically he was perfectly made for the job , good and strong from the hips down and firm but slender from the waist to the shoulders . " 
 Gerald Davies , who played with John for Wales and the British Lions , in his 1971 autobiography when contrasting Gareth Edwards ' and John 's different temperaments described Edwards as " fiery and impulsive " , but John was " ... fairer , aloof and apart . Whilst the hustle and bustle went on around him he could divorce himself from it all ; he kept his emotions in check and a careful rein on the surrounding action . The game would go according to his will and no @-@ one else 's ... " 
 Rodney Webb , who represented England between 1967 and 1972 , is quoted as saying " Barry John 's punting was phenomenal . He could drop the ball on a sixpence and he could do it every time " . Webb , who developed the modern rugby ball , believes that John can not be compared to modern kickers because " the modern ball is coated in a laminate , has dimpled surfaces , unobtrusive lacing and multi panels . In the seventies the balls soaked up water , swerved all over the place and were placed in the mud and slime when kicking for goal " . 
 Barry John came third in the 1971 BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award , beaten by winner Princess Anne and runner @-@ up George Best . John was one of the inaugural inductees of the International Rugby Hall of Fame in 1997 and in 1999 was inducted into the Welsh Sports Hall of Fame . In 2015 John was inducted into the World Rugby Hall of Fame . 
 = = = Amateurism = = = 
 As an amateur rugby union player John was not paid to play rugby at club or international level . To receive money for playing would have been recognised as an act of professionalism and would have resulted in action from one of the governing unions , normally suspension or a ban . To prevent players switching to professional rugby league , players were given ' boot money ' by their clubs or sponsors , named after the early practice of placing money in the players ' boots . In his 2011 book Addy , Meirion Appleton claimed that in the 1970s he made illegal payments to both John and Gareth Edwards . Appleton claims that before an international match he gave both players envelopes containing money from sportswear manufacturer Adidas . John was never charged with taking illegal payments during his career . 
 = = Personal history = = 
 John was born at Low @-@ land , a smallholding at Cefneithin . He was the second child of William and Vimy John , his brother Delville was three years his senior . John had a further four siblings , Alan , Clive , <unk> and Diane . All three of his brothers played rugby . Delville played for Cefneithin , captaining them for two seasons ; Alan progressed from the local club to Llanelli and also toured Argentina with Wales ; while Clive was a Llanelli wing forward who was selected for Wales ' B ' . The family went to live at <unk> , staying with an uncle and aunt , shortly after John 's birth but returned to Cefneithin when John was two . His early schooling was at Cefneithin Primary , and after failing his 11 @-@ Plus he spent a year at Cross Hands senior centre . He passed the entrance exam and was accepted into Gwendraeth Grammar School at <unk> . 
 At eighteen he left grammar school , and was awarded a place at Trinity College , Carmarthen , with ambitions of becoming a teacher . He studied physical education , junior science and horticulture . He left Trinity in the summer of 1967 , and took up a post as a physical education teacher at Monkton House School in Cardiff , a private school for boys between the ages of eight and sixteen . John moved to Cardiff and shared a house with several other rugby players , including former Llanelli team mate Gerald Davies . John quit his position at Monkton House when he toured South Africa in 1968 and never taught again . On his return from Africa , John moved back to his family home at Cefneithin . He spent six weeks unemployed and during this period he considered turning to professional rugby league , almost signing for St Helens RLFC . Following an interview with David Coleman for the BBC programme , <unk> , in which his jobless situation was discussed , John was offered a job working for Forward Trust , a finance company in Cardiff . When John quit playing rugby in 1972 he also left his job as a finance representative , signing a contract to write a weekly column and cover important matches for the Daily Express . He was also signed to take part in sport programmes presented by HTV , the Wales and West of England commercial television company . 
 In September 1969 John married Janet Talfan Davies , daughter of Alun Talfan Davies QC , a leading Welsh lawyer . John and Jan had four children and as of 2009 , nine grandchildren , though the couple have now separated . 
 In 2009 he decided to sell his rugby memorabilia , including his Wales caps , stating that he felt no nostalgia towards the items and the honour of playing for Wales was all that mattered . 
 = HMS X1 = 
 HM Submarine X1 was conceived and designed as a submersible commerce raider for the Royal Navy ; at the time of her launching she was the largest submarine in the world . The idea of a submarine cruiser had been proposed as early as 1915 , but was not put into practice until 1921 . X1 , which was based on the uncompleted German U @-@ 173 class of 2 @,@ 000 @-@ ton " U @-@ cruisers " , was laid down on 2 November 1921 at the Naval Dockyard Chatham and completed on 23 September 1925 , commissioning in December 1925 . 
 The 1922 Washington Naval Treaty , of which Britain was a signatory , did not ban submarines but it did ban their use against merchant ships , which was X1 's unacknowledged purpose ; its armament had been designed to successfully engage the classes of vessels likely to be escorting convoys , such as destroyers and frigates . Therefore , a certain amount of secrecy surrounded X1 , the government even going to the lengths of taking a national newspaper to court over its pictures of the new submarine following her launch , all copies of the paper being seized . 
 = = Description = = 
 The X1 's 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) thick pressure hull was 19 feet 7 @.@ 5 inches ( 5 @.@ 982 m ) in diameter amidships , and was divided into 10 water @-@ tight compartments . This was almost completely surrounded by her external hull , which also contained the main ballast tanks and most of her fuel . Her intended maximum diving depth was 500 feet ( 150 m ) , but was reduced to 350 feet ( 110 m ) once in service . 
 She was expected to sink her targets using gunfire and so was given four 5 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) guns to be able to defeat a destroyer or armed merchant ship , although she was fitted with six bow tubes for 21 @-@ inch ( 530 mm ) torpedoes to supplement her guns . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 X1 carried four QF 5 @.@ 2 inch Mk I guns in twin unarmoured turrets , one forward and one aft of the conning tower . They had a range of about 16 @,@ 000 yards ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) . A circular trunk ran from each mounting to the magazine in the pressure hull which contained 100 rounds per gun . A working chamber which was 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in diameter encircled the trunk between the pressure hull and the gun mount . Her ammunition hoists were problematic and could not sustain the desired rate of fire of six rounds per gun per minute . Special ballast tanks were used to compensate for the loss of weight as ammunition was fired . Working and control of the guns required no less than 58 men . The fire @-@ control tower was in the middle of the conning tower and had a top section that could be raised 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) when in use . The upper control room was between the tower and the pressure hull . Just aft of the control room was the rangefinding room , with a 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) rangefinder on the bridge that could be raised 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) . 
 Her six torpedo tubes came from a cancelled L @-@ class submarine and she was provided with one reload for each tube . It took some 24 minutes to reload them all because space in the torpedo room was restricted . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The main engines were two 8 @-@ cylinder Admiralty diesel engines with a total output of 3 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 2 @,@ 200 kW ) . Two auxiliary 1 @,@ 200 @-@ horsepower ( 890 kW ) MAN diesel engines taken from U @-@ 126 were installed for battery @-@ charging purposes . For underwater propulsion , two GEC electric motors of 1 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 750 kW ) each were fitted . It was hoped to achieve over 8 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) using both diesels and electric motors together , but the highest power achieved ( during a full power trial in March 1926 ) was 7 @,@ 135 horsepower ( 5 @,@ 321 kW ) . She had three groups of batteries , each with 110 cells weighing a total of 70 long tons ( 71 t ) . These batteries were also fitted with water filled cooling tubes , jackets , centrifugal pumps and finned heat exchangers ( the first recorded use of battery cooling ) to reduce core temperatures during aggressive charge and discharge cycles . 
 In theory she could make 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ) on the surface , and at economical speed she had a greater range than normal cruisers , but both sets of diesel engines suffered from continual mechanical problems that reduced her speed and range . The X1 's average diving time ( to periscope depth ) was 2 minutes 20 seconds . Her handling underwater was considered superior to other submarines of the period . 
 = = Career = = 
 After X1 was commissioned in December 1925 and accepted in April 1926 she made a voyage to Gibraltar after which her main engine drive wheels were found to be damaged . After repairs she was sent to the Mediterranean Sea . Her starboard camshaft driveshaft broke during a full @-@ power run in January 1928 and a new set of gears was needed , but after refitting at Malta her port camshaft driveshaft broke in the same place in April 1928 . By 1930 her commanding officer reported " internal arrangements not very satisfactory because of overcrowding with auxiliary machinery , accommodation is cramped , ventilation poor and the ship suffers from humidity , diving arrangements good . " Both the main and auxiliary engines were troublesome and she spent most of her time under repair , before being laid up . X1 was placed in reserve after 1930 , before she was finally scrapped at Pembroke on 12 December 1936 . 
 = John Jervis , 1st Earl of St Vincent = 
 Admiral of the Fleet John Jervis , 1st Earl of St Vincent GCB , PC ( 9 January 1735 – 14 March 1823 ) was an admiral in the Royal Navy and Member of Parliament in the United Kingdom . Jervis served throughout the latter half of the 18th century and into the 19th , and was an active commander during the Seven Years ' War , American War of Independence , French Revolutionary War and the Napoleonic Wars . He is best known for his victory at the 1797 Battle of Cape Saint Vincent , from which he earned his titles , and as a patron of Horatio Nelson . 
 Jervis was also recognised by both political and military contemporaries as a fine administrator and naval reformer . As Commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Mediterranean , between 1795 and 1799 he introduced a series of severe standing orders to avert mutiny . He applied those orders to both seamen and officers alike , a policy that made him a controversial figure . He took his disciplinarian system of command with him when he took command of the Channel Fleet in 1799 . In 1801 , as First Lord of the Admiralty he introduced a number of reforms that , though unpopular at the time , made the Navy more efficient and more self @-@ sufficient . He introduced innovations including block making machinery at Portsmouth Royal Dockyard . St Vincent was known for his generosity to officers he considered worthy of reward and his swift and often harsh punishment of those he felt deserved it . 
 Jervis ' entry in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography by P. K. <unk> describes his contribution to history : " His importance lies in his being the organiser of victories ; the creator of well @-@ equipped , highly efficient fleets ; and in training a school of officers as professional , energetic , and devoted to the service as himself . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Jervis was born in Meaford , Staffordshire , on 9 January 1735 , the second son of Swynfen and Elizabeth Jervis . His father was a barrister , counsellor to the Admiralty Board and auditor of Greenwich Hospital . Swynfen Jervis intended that his son should follow him to the bar . The young Jervis was educated at Burton @-@ upon @-@ Trent Grammar School and subsequently at Reverend Swinden 's Academy in Greenwich , London . 
 Their family name Jervis is pronounced ' <unk> ' . The name Jervis originates from the Norman name Gervase . 
 = = Early naval career = = 
 At the age of thirteen Jervis ran away and joined the navy at Woolwich , London . After a short time he returned home as he had heard his family were very upset at his disappearance . Lady Jane Hamilton ( mother of Sir William Hamilton ) and Lady Burlington became aware of Jervis ' desire to join the navy and lobbied his family on his behalf . Eventually they introduced the Jervis family to Admiral George Townshend who agreed to take the boy aboard one of his ships . 
 On 4 January 1749 Jervis entered the navy as an able seaman aboard the 50 @-@ gun Gloucester on her way to Jamaica . On arrival in the West Indies , Jervis was detached on HM sloop Ferret to the Mosquito Coast where he saw constant service against Spanish guarda @-@ <unk> and privateers . When Townshend quit the West Indies he discharged Jervis into the Severn under Admiral Thomas Cotes . Cotes ' flag captain Henry Dennis rated Jervis as a midshipman . On 31 July 1754 Jervis moved to the 24 @-@ gun Sphinx . Jervis commented in a letter to his sister : " my chief employ when from my duty is reading studying navigation and perusing my old letters of which I have almost enough to make an octavo volume . " While in Jamaica , the young Jervis drew funds against his father 's account with a local banker . When the reply came from England that the withdrawal could not be honoured , the midshipman found himself in debt . Jervis was forced to quit his mess and live on ship 's rations in order to pay off the loan . The event deeply affected the young Jervis who swore never to " draw another bill without the certainty of it being paid " . Sphinx was paid off at Spithead on 7 November 1754 . Jervis was assigned to the 20 @-@ gun Seaford in December of the same year and then from the end of December until February 1755 was assigned to HM Yacht William and Mary under the navigational expert Captain John Campbell . 
 Jervis passed his lieutenant 's examination on 2 January 1755 and was assigned as sixth lieutenant to the first @-@ rate Royal George of 100 guns . By March , he had moved to third lieutenant of the 60 @-@ gun Nottingham . The Nottingham was part of Edward Boscawen 's fleet that attempted to prevent French reinforcements reaching New France . On 31 March 1756 Jervis moved to the 74 @-@ gun HMS Devonshire and on 22 June he was promoted to be fourth lieutenant of the 90 @-@ gun Prince under Captain Charles Saunders in the Mediterranean . When the captain was promoted to admiral , Jervis followed him to the 74 @-@ gun Culloden in November 1756 . In January 1757 Jervis was promoted to temporary command of HMS Experiment . In her , he fought a large French privateer in an indecisive action off Cape Gata . When the captain of the Experiment regained his health Jervis moved back to the Culloden . In June 1757 , he followed Saunders to the 90 @-@ gun HMS St George . Jervis returned to England in temporary command of the 80 @-@ gun Foudroyant , a ship that had been captured by Henry Osborn 's fleet at the Battle of Cartagena . He followed Saunders once more when the admiral was promoted to command the North American station ; Jervis was promoted to Lieutenant of HMS Prince . 
 = = = Quebec and promotion to captain = = = 
 The fleet , part of an expedition to capture the French possessions in North America , left England in February 1759 . They stopped first at Louisbourg , which had been captured from the French the previous year . By June , the ice along the Saint Lawrence River had broken up and the fleet along with the military transports headed up river to the assault of Quebec City . On 15 May 1759 , Jervis had been promoted acting commander of the sloop HMS Porcupine . In this command Jervis impressed General James Wolfe in the preparations that led to the Battle of the Plains of Abraham . Porcupine and the frigate Halifax led the armed transports past Quebec to land up river . One biographer , Jedediah Tucker , notes that as the approach was so critical , both Wolfe and the subsequently famous James Cook boarded the Porcupine to ensure the success of the mission . 
 For his efforts Jervis was promoted commander and took command of HMS Scorpion . Jervis returned to England in September but immediately returned to North America in command of the Albany . In May 1760 Jervis was attached to Admiral Sir George Rodney 's Channel squadron . 
 In October 1760 he was made post @-@ captain in command of the 44 @-@ gun Gosport . Gosport had on board a young midshipman , George Elphinstone , later Viscount Keith , who took over Jervis ' command in the Mediterranean after Jervis ' departure in 1799 . In 1762 , HMS Gosport , HMS Danae and HMS Superb under Captain Joshua Rowley , convoyed the East and West Indian trade to the westward , and successfully protected it from the squadron of Commodore de Ternay . 
 By the end of 1763 the Gosport has been paid off and Jervis remained unemployed until February 1769 when he was appointed to the 32 @-@ gun HMS Alarm , the first coppered warship in the Royal Navy . He was tasked with delivering bullion to the English merchants in Genoa . During his time in Genoa two Turkish slaves escaped a Genoese galley and hid aboard one of Alarm 's boats . They were forcibly removed ; Jervis made an official protest and promised retaliation if they were not handed over . The slaves were produced and Jervis took custody of them . 
 On 30 March 1770 the Alarm was driven ashore off Marseilles but with the efforts of Jervis , the crew and the local French authorities under the governor of Marseilles , Georges René Le <unk> de <unk> she was brought off and repaired . Jervis personally returned to Marseilles with a letter of thanks from the Board of the Admiralty to the governor for his assistance . 
 In 1771 Alarm returned to England to collect the Duke of Gloucester , King George III 's brother in order that he could winter in Italy . He lived aboard with his entourage until May 1772 when Alarm returned to England and was paid off . 
 = = = Touring Europe and Russia = = = 
 Between October 1772 and June 1775 , Jervis travelled extensively . He began in France where he studied the language and made observations about French life . He accompanied Captain Samuel Barrington to Russia where they spent time in Saint Petersburg and inspected the arsenal and dockyards at Kronstadt and took a tour of the yacht designed by Sir Charles Knowles for Catherine of Russia . The pair continued on to Sweden , Denmark and northern Germany . All the while Jervis made notes on defences , harbour charts and safe anchorages . They came home via the Netherlands , Jervis once again making extensive studies of the area and taking copious notes describing any useful information . He and Barrington then took a private cruise along the Channel coast calling at various harbours including Brest , making and improving their charts as they went . When Jervis later became the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Channel Fleet he was aided significantly in his blockade of Brest by these charts . In later years , he commented : " Had the young Captain Jervis not performed such a complete survey of this port then the Earl St Vincent would not have been able to effect such a thorough blockade of it . " 
 = = American War of Independence = = 
 = = = First Battle of Ushant = = = 
 At the outbreak of the American War of Independence in 1775 Jervis was given the command of HMS Kent ; however , she was surveyed by the dockyard and found unfit for service . He was therefore appointed instead to command of HMS Foudroyant , the ship he had brought to England as a prize seventeen years earlier . For the first few years of the war , the French supplied arms , funding , and military advice on an informal and limited basis to the newly emerging nation of America . With the signing of the Treaty of Alliance in 1778 and the creation of the Franco @-@ American alliance , the war widened . Jervis spent the first few years of the war patrolling the Channel in Foudroyant without seeing any significant action , but as the war reached Europe Jervis was placed under the command of Admiral Augustus Keppel . The Channel fleet , under Keppel , sighted the French fleet intending to enter Brest on 23 July . The British fleet of 30 ships of the line chased the French fleet of 29 ships and engaged them on 27 July in what became known as the First Battle of Ushant . The battle was indecisive and in the political aftermath Jervis provided a stalwart defence of Admiral Keppel at the latter 's court @-@ martial , helping to secure Keppel 's acquittal . 
 = = = Relieving Gibraltar and capture of the Pégase = = = 
 Jervis remained in Foudroyant attached to the Channel Fleet and for a short time acted as flag captain to Admiral Molyneux Shuldham . In 1780 Jervis was with Admiral Rodney when the British fleet relieved Gibraltar . In 1781 he was with Admiral George Darby at the second relief of Gibraltar . On 19 April 1782 Jervis was with his old friend and travelling companion when a ship in Admiral Barrington 's squadron sighted a French convoy leaving Brest . The squadron gave chase and Foudroyant caught and engaged the French 74 @-@ gun Pégase . After an engagement of more than an hour Pégase struck . Jervis himself was wounded in the attack . For his services he was invested as a Knight of the Bath on 19 May 1782 . He was again at the relief of Gibraltar with Earl Howe 's fleet in 1782 and took part in the indecisive Battle of Cape Spartel . Jervis was promoted commodore and hoisted his broad pennant in the 50 @-@ gun HMS Salisbury in December 1782 , with orders to proceed to the West Indies . Due to the peace negotiations his orders were rescinded and he struck his pennant on 14 January 1783 . 
 = = Marriage and political office = = 
 During the peace Jervis married his cousin Martha , daughter of Lord Chief Baron Sir Thomas Parker . Jervis was also returned as MP for Launceston in 1783 . Jervis began his political career in earnest and voted for Pitt 's parliamentary reforms and against Charles James Fox and his East India Bill . During the elections of 1784 Jervis stood for election in the independent borough of Great Yarmouth where he was returned as MP alongside Henry Beaufoy . Jervis then voted against Pitt 's further bills for reform but supported him once more during the 1788 – 1799 Regency Crisis . 
 On 24 September 1787 Jervis was promoted rear @-@ admiral of the blue and hoisted his flag in the 74 @-@ gun Carnatic for several months during the tensions arising from the Prussian invasion of the Netherlands . In 1790 Jervis was recalled to service once more and moved his flag to the second @-@ rate Prince during the Nootka Sound crisis that threatened war between England and Spain . Also in 1790 Jervis was promoted rear @-@ admiral of the white and stood down as MP for Great Yarmouth and stood instead for the Chipping Wycombe seat to which he was returned as MP alongside the Marquess of Lansdowne . With his interest in politics wavering he spoke rarely and then almost exclusively on naval matters . In 1794 he resigned his seat and did not stand again for political office . In 1792 Jervis proposed a scheme to alleviate the financial hardship of superannuated seamen . He later withdrew the proposal as Viscount Melville promised that the matter would be addressed by the Admiralty Board . 
 = = French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars = = 
 Jervis was promoted vice @-@ admiral of the blue and was appointed to command of the Leeward Islands station . Jervis took with him an army that , combined with the navy , formed a joint military expedition . The goal of the expedition was to capture French colonies and thereby weaken France 's international trade . The army commander was Sir Charles Grey , a friend and political ally . Jervis hoisted his flag in HMS Boyne . He took Grey 's son , Captain George Grey , later Sir George Grey , 1st Baronet , as his flag @-@ captain . The combined forces captured the French colonies of Martinique , Guadeloupe and Saint Lucia and restored monarchist rule . 
 The French counter @-@ attacked and recaptured Guadeloupe on 2 June 1794 . Jervis and Grey landed a force to recapture the island but were repulsed by the reinforced French garrison and the British expedition withdrew . In November 1794 Admiral Benjamin Caldwell replaced Jervis . Disputes over prize money were widely held as the reason that Jervis and Grey were not awarded peerages for their service . Grey and Jervis ' enemies proposed a vote of censure against the General and Admiral . The vote itself was negative . The prize money for the capture of the three islands , when finally calculated , amounted to £ 70 @,@ 000 that was due to the officers and men of the navy . If adjusted for inflation this would equal approximately £ 6 @,@ 538 @,@ 000 as of 2016 . Jervis and Grey were however awarded the thanks of both Houses of Parliament for their services . On 12 April 1794 Jervis was promoted vice @-@ admiral of the white . 
 = = = Command of the Mediterranean Fleet = = = 
 Jervis was promoted admiral of the blue on 1 June 1795 and appointed to command the Mediterranean Fleet . Unfortunately the Boyne had caught fire on 1 May 1795 and had blown up in Spithead , the result of an accident , and Jervis lost almost all of his possessions . Jervis went to take command of the Mediterranean fleet in the frigate Lively and once more took Charles Grey 's son , Captain George Grey , as his flag @-@ captain . Jervis also took Robert Calder as his captain of the fleet . On arrival at Gibraltar Jervis took HMS Victory as his flagship . Among Jervis ' subordinates were Captains Horatio Nelson , Cuthbert Collingwood and Thomas Troubridge . Jervis began a close blockade of Toulon and Nelson was assigned the task of aiding the Austrian army along the Italian coast . By September 1796 the British presence in the Mediterranean had become untenable . Napoleon had beaten Britain 's Austrian allies who were in disarray and , in October , Spain had surrendered and allied themselves to the French . Jervis recalled Admiral Robert Mann to aid in the blockade of Cadiz . Mann took his ships instead to Spithead . Jervis abandoned Corsica between September and November 1796 and withdrew his forces to Gibraltar . A Spanish fleet made up of twenty four line @-@ of @-@ battle ships and seven frigates sailed from Toulon on 1 February 1797 . Jervis ' fleet of ten ships @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line was patrolling off Cape Saint Vincent and was subsequently joined by five more under Sir William Parker . The Spanish admiral , José de Córdoba , had taken his ships into the Atlantic to weather a storm and was making his way to Cadiz when the two fleets caught sight of each other . 
 = = = = The Battle of Cape St. Vincent = = = = 
 The British and Spanish fleet sighted one another at dawn on 14 February 1797 . The British fleet had fifteen line @-@ of @-@ battle ships against the twenty four Spanish ships . On the quarter @-@ deck of Victory , Jervis and his flag captain , Robert Calder counted the ships . It was at this point Jervis discovered that he was outnumbered nearly two @-@ to @-@ one : 
 " There are eight sail of the line , Sir John " 
 " Very well , sir " 
 " There are twenty sail of the line , Sir John " 
 " Very well , sir " 
 " There are twenty five sail of the line , Sir John " 
 " Very well , sir " 
 " There are twenty seven sail of the line , Sir John " 
 " Enough , sir , no more of that ; the die is cast , and if there are fifty sail I will go through them . " 
 A passenger aboard Victory , Captain Benjamin Hallowell , achieved a brief notoriety for slapping the admiral on the back and calling out " That 's right Sir John , that 's right . By God , we shall give them a damned good licking ! " 
 During the battle Nelson , in command of HMS Captain , wore out of line and performed a stunning feat by capturing two of the enemy vessels within moments . Nelson and his crew boarded and captured one and crossed her deck and boarded and captured the second , which had collided in the smoke and general melee of the battle . The move was later feted by the public and press and dubbed " Nelson 's patent bridge for boarding first @-@ rates " . When the Spanish retreated Jervis did not press his advantage but consolidated his victory and began the lengthy job of repairing both his ships and crews . The British had suffered casualties of 73 killed and 227 wounded . 
 Sir John did not mention Nelson 's achievement in his initial despatch to the Admiralty despite Nelson 's obvious contribution to the success of the battle . In later despatches Jervis did mention Nelson . In one anecdote , when discussing the battle with his flag @-@ captain , Sir Robert , who had been mentioned in the despatch and had been awarded a knighthood for his services , brought up the issue of Nelson 's disobedience of the admiral 's orders for having worn out of the line of battle in order to engage the enemy . Jervis silenced him by saying : " It certainly was so , and if you ever commit such a breach of your orders , I will forgive you also . " 
 Despite the capture of only four vessels , the Battle of Cape Saint Vincent became celebrated as an outstanding victory and the awards and recognition far outweighed the achievement . The bad news of the evacuation of the Mediterranean , the capitulation of the Spanish and the Italian city @-@ states and the defeat of the Austrian army alongside the increasing threat of a French invasion of Britain had depressed the politicians and general public . A victory , such as that of Cape Saint Vincent , was more important for the morale of the country as a whole than its military ramifications . Both Jervis and Nelson were hailed as heroes and Jervis was made Baron Jervis of Meaford and Earl St Vincent . Songs were written about Jervis and the battle and there was a general feeling of relief in both the Government and people of Britain . Nelson for his services was invested as a Knight of the Bath . The now Earl St Vincent was gifted a pension for life of £ 3 @,@ 000 per year . The City of London presented him with the Freedom of the City in a gold box valued at 100 guineas and awarded both him and Nelson a ceremonial sword . The presentation box and sword are both currently held at the National Maritime Museum , Greenwich . The two swords awarded Jervis and Nelson were the first of their kind that the City of London issued . St Vincent was awarded the thanks of both Houses of Parliament and given a gold medal by the King . The London Gazette published an advertisement in 1798 regarding the prize money that was due to the officers and men who had fought at the battle . The sum quoted was £ 140 @,@ 000 , in inflationary terms this would be approximately £ 13 @,@ 076 @,@ 100 as of 2016 , of which , as admiral , Jervis was entitled to a sizeable share . Jervis resumed his blockade of the Spanish fleet in Cadiz . 
 = = = = Mutiny and discipline = = = = 
 During 1797 there was considerable discontent among the seamen of the Royal Navy . This discontent manifested itself at the Nore and at Spithead when the greater part of the Channel Fleet rose up against their officers . These mutinies were not overly violent and the officers were put ashore and the heads of the mutinies established their own order and kept the ships under " committee " control until their collective demands were met . The mutineers demands ranged from discontent at cruel officers to poor pay and long sea service without shore leave . There were other mutinies throughout the Navy that year , most notably HMS Hermione and HMS Marie Antoinette both on the Jamaica station . These mutinies resulted in the crews killing their officers and taking their ships into enemy held ports . 
 Jervis had the reputation as a disciplinarian and put in place a new system that would ensure that the men in the Mediterranean fleet did not mutiny . To begin with the admiral wrote a new set of standing orders . For example , Jervis divided the seamen and marines and berthed the two separately putting the marines between the officers aft and the men forward . Thus he created an effective barrier between officers and potentially unruly crews . 
 Jervis discouraged conversation in Irish though he did not ban it . He ordered the marine detachments to be paraded every morning and , if there was a band available , for " God Save the King " to be played . The marine detachment was then to remain armed at all times . Marines and soldiers were also excused from duties in regard to the general running of the ship . 
 In order to keep his crews active and to ensure that the Spanish did not perceive that there might be discontent in the fleet , Jervis ordered the nightly bombardment of Cadiz in his own words to " <unk> the animal . " 
 The Admiral isolated the ships from one another to minimise collusion and the opportunities the men might have to band together in mutiny . St Vincent did ensure , however , that the men under his command were cared for . When the stock of tobacco ran low the Admiral ensured that the supply was renewed from his own funds . When the postmaster in Lisbon detained the letters and packets arriving from England for the men for fear that they would carry seditious communications , Jervis set up a post office aboard his flagship HMS Ville de Paris to receive and distribute all the letters that arrived for both seamen , marines and officers . 
 Jervis strictly adhered to the Articles of War and individual regulations that he had written for his fleet . Any infraction was dealt with harshly and he was renowned for treating both officers and seamen with the same harsh discipline . As an example , one officer who allowed his boats crew to plunder a fishing boat was placed before a court martial and it was ordered that he be " degraded from the rank of Midshipman in the most ignominious manner by having his uniform stripped from his back on the quarter deck of the ( ship unknown ) [ sic ] . before the whole ship 's company and to be further disposed of as the Commander @-@ in @-@ chief shall direct . To be <unk> of his pay now due to him for his services on board any ship of his Majesty 's service and to be rendered incapable of ever serving as an Officer or a Petty Officer in any of His Majesty 's ships . " Jervis later personally directed that the midshipman should have his head shaved , a notice hung around his neck describing his crime and that he should be solely responsible for the cleaning of the head ( naval term for the communal toilets situated at the bow of the ship ) until further notice . In another incident , St Vincent instructed that two men aboard HMS St George who were tried for mutiny on a Saturday were executed on Sunday . The men were duly executed but Admiral Charles Thompson raised an objection to formal executions on the Sabbath and Jervis wrote to the Board of Admiralty demanding Thompson 's removal or that they accept his own resignation . The Board relieved Thompson . On 9 July 1797 Nelson wrote to Jervis congratulating him in his resolve and wholeheartedly supporting his decision to execute the men on a Sunday . 
 Jervis could also be exceptionally kind when he felt that the situation warranted it . On one occasion , while the fleet was becalmed the men of the flagship were ordered to bathe . The men leapt over the side to swim in a sail that had been lowered over the side . One of the men , a senior able seaman , jumped in wearing his trousers . In one of the pockets he had his prize money and back pay that he had been saving for several years . The bank notes were destroyed by the water and when the man came aboard and discovered what had happened he began to weep . The Admiral saw the man and asked the problem . One of his officers told him and St Vincent went to his cabin . When he returned he had the crew mustered and called the man forward . " Roger Odell you are convicted , Sir , by your own appearance of tarnishing the British oak with tears . What have you to say in your defence why you should not receive what you deserve ? " The man told him what had happened and St Vincent replied " Roger Odell you are one of the best men in this ship you are moreover a captain of a top and in my life I never saw a man behave himself better in battle than you did in the Victory in the action with the Spanish fleet . To show therefore that your Commander @-@ in @-@ chief will never pass over merit wheresoever he may find it . There is your money Sir ! " The Earl produced £ 70 of his own money and presented it to the surprised sailor " but no more tears mind , no more tears Sir " . 
 When Nelson returned to the Mediterranean St Vincent wrote to Earl Spencer , First Lord of the Admiralty : " I do assure your Lordship that the arrival of Admiral Nelson has given me new life ; you could not have gratified me more than in sending him . His presence in the Mediterranean is so very essential . " St Vincent detached Nelson to pursue Napoleon in his invasion of Egypt Rear @-@ Admiral Sir John Orde who was senior to Nelson complained publicly and bitterly about what he considered a personal slight . Jervis ordered Orde home . Orde requested that he be court @-@ martialled in order that he might have the opportunity to clear his name . The Board refused . Orde then requested that St Vincent be brought before a court @-@ martial . Again , the Board refused . The Board censured Jervis for not having supported his subordinates . Orde later challenged the ageing admiral to a duel . The challenge became public knowledge and the king ordered Jervis to decline . Before the challenge was formally declined , Orde wrote to the Board to inform them that he had withdrawn it . 
 When the men aboard the Marlborough refused to execute a man for mutinous behaviour and their captain did nothing , the Earl threatened the captain with replacement and had boats from the rest of the fleet armed with carronades surround the Marlborough ; he then threatened to sink the ship if his orders were not carried out . The man was duly executed . St Vincent turned to an officer beside him watching the mutineer hanging from the yard arm and said " Discipline is preserved , Sir ! " 
 Between 1797 and 1799 alongside the suppression of mutiny Jervis set himself the task of improving the dockyards and defences of Gibraltar including building a new Victualling Yard and Water Tanks to replenish his ships . After the Battle of the Nile the dockyards , under Jervis ' watchful eye , managed to successfully repair most of the fleet . Lady Lavinia Bingham , wife of Earl Spencer wrote to St Vincent to congratulate him for having provided the necessary tools for Nelson to have achieved the victory he did at the Nile . " Never did disinterested zeal and friendship meet with a brighter reward than yours has reaped in this victory of your gallant friend . " Nelson commented that he had " never beheld a fleet equal to Sir John Jervis ' " Having had great difficulty supplying the fleet with fresh water the Admiral arranged for large tanks to be built in Gibraltar . On 14 February 1799 St Vincent was created admiral of the white . Constant service and approaching old age meant that the admiral became increasingly unwell . Despite his failing health , St Vincent was reluctant to relinquish command and the Board reluctant to supersede him . By 17 June 1799 he had no choice but to resign his command and return to England . During his time ashore the Earl lived in <unk> , Essex with his wife . 
 = = = Command of the Channel Fleet = = = 
 As his health had improved he was given command of the Channel Fleet . St Vincent was to comment " The King and the government require it and the discipline of the British Navy demands it . It is of no consequence to me whether I die afloat or ashore . The die is cast . " 
 He took command of the Channel fleet in HMS Namur on 26 April 1800 and took up a close blockade of Brest . Once at Brest he transferred to the Ville de Paris of 110 guns and took Sir Thomas Troubridge as his captain of the fleet . He was also accompanied by his personal physician , Doctor Andrew Baird . Baird was later to become instrumental in the plans of the commander @-@ in @-@ chief and the health and well being of the Channel fleet . 
 St Vincent 's appointment was not popular among the officers of the Channel fleet . His reputation as a strict disciplinarian had followed him from the Mediterranean and he immediately issued orders banning officers and captains from sleeping ashore and forbade them from travelling more than three miles from their ship . Among other strict regulations introduced were orders that ships were to be repaired where possible at sea and that Ushant was to be the official rendezvous for the Channel fleet rather than the traditional Torbay . The wife of one of his captains is said to have toasted the news of his appointment with the line " May his next glass of wine choke the wretch . " Ships were forbidden to go to Spithead without specific written orders from the Admiral or Admiralty . During his command he remained with the fleet and became respected by the officers and men for suffering their hardships with them . 
 With the charts that he had made with Barrington in 1775 the inshore squadron at Brest was able to keep a much tighter blockade . In one incident , the inshore squadron sighted several French ships leaving Brest . Sir Edward Pellew , captain of HMS Impétueux , gave chase . The rear admiral in charge of the inshore squadron recalled him , worried that the Impétueux would run aground . The French escaped . After several letters went back and forth between the two admirals , St Vincent , tired of his subordinate 's excuses , took the entire offshore squadron and sailed them between the inshore squadron and the shore thus proving that the ships had a shallow enough draught to have given chase and captured the French . St Vincent then wrote to the rear admiral and suggested that he strike his flag and return to shore for some needed rest . 
 St Vincent was as generous in the Channel as he had been in the Mediterranean . A particular letter from England made the admiral host a dinner aboard the flagship for fifty of the officers whom he felt closest to . At the dinner he revealed that the letter was from an orphanage near Paddington in London . The orphanage had run out of money to support the children of sailors who had died in the service of their country . St Vincent solicited from each captain and lieutenant a sum of money and then added his own donation . The cutter sailed back to England the same evening . St Vincent gave the orphanage £ 1 @,@ 000 
 St Vincent 's skills as an administrator and logistician came into play and he issued orders regarding the health and well being of the fleet . St Vincent wrote to Earl Spencer , commenting " I have ever considered the care of the sick and wounded as one of the first duties of a Commander @-@ in @-@ chief , by sea or land . " Based on Doctor Baird 's advice on cleanliness and hygiene the admiral brought in as many fresh vegetables as he could , along with vast quantities of fresh lemon juice to minimise illness , particularly scurvy . The effect was dramatic . The hospital ship that accompanied the fleet was sent home unneeded and in November 1800 when the fleet came to anchor in Torbay there were as few as sixteen hospital cases among the estimated twenty three thousand men . In a letter to Sir Evan Nepean , first secretary to the Admiralty , St Vincent described Baird as " the most valuable man in the Navy not excepting the Board itself , " The oncoming winter of 1800 – 1801 forced the admiral to live ashore at Torre Abbey overlooking Torbay . Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Henry Harvey took over operational command of the fleet in St Vincent 's absence . 
 In 1801 in a letter to the Board of Admiralty , St Vincent made the now famous remark : " I do not say , my Lords , that the French will not come . I say only they will not come by sea . " In 1801 St Vincent was replaced by Admiral William Cornwallis and the new Prime Minister Henry Addington promoted St Vincent to First Lord of the Admiralty . 
 = = First Lord of the Admiralty = = 
 In January 1801 St Vincent had written a short letter to the then First Lord Earl Spencer stating : " Nothing short of a radical sweep in the dockyards can cure the enormous evils and corruptions in them ; and this cannot be attempted till we have peace . " As First Lord St Vincent intended to investigate , discover and remove all of the corruption that he considered plagued the Navy , the Royal Dockyards and their civilian administration . Consequently , he clashed with the various Navy Boards , the civil administration of the Royal Navy that administered among other things the navy yards and stores . St Vincent saw these boards and individuals as hindering the efforts of the Navy . 
 = = = The Commission of Inquiry = = = 
 During the peace with France , after the Treaty of Amiens was signed on 25 March 1802 , St Vincent ordered the Navy Board to begin an investigation for fraud and corruption in the Royal Dockyards . He swiftly found that the investigations were not being conducted effectively and ordered the commissioners to retrieve all logs and accounts and inventories and put them under their " personal seal " in anticipation of the Admiralty Board travelling to the various yards itself and conducting their own inspection . The investigation began in earnest in 1802 . St Vincent swiftly uncovered casual and obvious abuses of the system . Some men were listed as having done work , then over @-@ time and then acted as night watchmen for years without a break of any kind . Others were listed as workmen ashore but also as sailors receiving pay in the Receiving Ship . Work was done and then the identical work was charged for over various periods , often by different departments or sections . In another yard , " The men of an entire department were found to be <unk> , as old , infirm boys , cripples , or idiots , and the department itself to have the appearance of an asylum for every rogue and vagabond that could not obtain a meal by any other means . " St Vincent found that minor dockyard officials were the tip of a far bigger corruption . He lobbied the government to create a special commission of inquiry that would have the power to question suspects under oath . The cabinet determined that the outcome of such an inquiry might be damaging politically ( and possibly in some cases , personally ) and gave the board of inquiry permission to question suspects under oath but gave the suspects the right to refuse to answer questions that might incriminate themselves . This addendum removed the ability of the inquiry to act effectively in any way . The Commission of Inquiry produced twelve reports : 
 1 . Foreign Yards ; 
 2 @.@ the Chatham Chest ( the pension fund for seamen ) ; 
 3 @.@ supply of Blocks and Naval Cooperage ; 
 4 @.@ prize money and prize causes ; 
 5 @.@ the Collection of the sixpence from Merchant Seamen ; 
 6 @.@ the Economy of the Naval Yards ; 
 7 @.@ the Naval Hospitals and the Hospital ships for French prisoners at Plymouth ; 
 8 @.@ the Victualling and Cooperage at Plymouth ; 
 9 @.@ the receipt and expenditure of stores at Plymouth ; 
 10 . Office of Treasurer of the Navy ; 
 11 @.@ the issue of Money Bills ; 
 12 @.@ the purchase Stores for the Naval Service more particularly Masts , <unk> , Fir and Hemp 
 One of St Vincent 's biographers put the findings of the commission succinctly " The valuable British oak rotted in the forests for want of the axe ; the frames building rotted on the stocks for want of timber ; the ships at sea rotted before their day because constructed of such worthless perishable materials . " 
 = = = Reform = = = 
 One reform St Vincent did achieve was the introduction of block making machinery at the navy yard in Portsmouth . The machinery was designed by Marc Isambard Brunel and Samuel Bentham . By 1808 forty @-@ five machines were turning out 130 @,@ 000 pulley blocks per year . The innovation meant that only ten to thirty unskilled men were able to equal the output of 100 skilled <unk> and the capital cost of the project was recovered in three years . The revolution of machinery enabled the Navy to become self @-@ sufficient in regard to the production of the essential blocks . This self @-@ sufficiency removed a great deal of corruption , from external contractors producing inferior goods that jeopardised sailors ' lives , to the corruption that arose from poorly paid officials responsible for awarding contracts and the bribes that might ensue . The buildings that housed the Block Machinery remain to this day and make up part of the Historic Portsmouth Dockyard . 
 As First Lord , St Vincent also determined to build a breakwater in Plymouth . The First Lord commissioned a civil engineer , John Rennie , and Joseph Whidbey , the former Master @-@ Attendant at Woolwich dockyard , to design the breakwater . Work did not begin until 1811 but the earl is widely credited as the force behind its construction . 
 St Vincent spoke with the King regarding the contribution made by marines to the general service of the Navy and recommended to the King that the prefix " Royal " be added . These were the first official discussions into the retitling of the corps to Royal Marines . 
 During his tenure , the workers in the Royal dockyards demanded an increase in pay due to an increase in living costs . St Vincent reacted by dismissing the ringleaders and every man who had taken an active role in the strike . He eventually agreed to a small temporary allowance for the purchase of bread while the price of bread remained high . 
 St Vincent 's gaze passed over every aspect of the Navy from the Sea Fencibles to the Navy Hospitals . The earl attempted to disband the Sea Fencibles claiming that they were needed only to quiet the fears of little old ladies and that good men passed their whole careers without hearing a shot fired . Doctor Baird , St Vincent 's personal physician , was appointed to the Sick and Hurt Board as Inspector of all Hospitals . 
 = = = Powers to promote = = = 
 Another burden of his promotion to First Lord of the Admiralty was that St Vincent was inundated with letters from aspiring officers and their relatives and friends . <unk> employment from those in positions of influence in the navy had become common practice and was a generally accepted method of securing a good posting . The more influence that an officer could draw upon , the better and often more lucrative the position . Also , due to the peace with France the navy had been reduced and employment was scarce . The First Lord could not , therefore , provide every officer of influence a position and was obliged to reject many of the letters that he received . Despite St Vincent having declared both publicly and privately that officers would be promoted or given position commensurate with their achievements and not based on their political or social influence , the letters continued to flow to the Admiralty . 
 The ways in which St Vincent chose to communicate the rejections often depended on the number of letters , the individual concerned , or the demands made by their respective well wishers . To the Earl of Portsmouth he wrote : " I cannot possibly agree in opinion with your Lordship , that a person sitting quietly by his fireside , and enjoying very nearly a sinecure , during such a war as we have been engaged in , has the same pretensions to promotion with the man who has exposed his person , and <unk> his constitution in every clime . " A harsh rebuff to a peer of the realm . Yet to a lady of no discernible rank or influence he wrote : " Although I cannot admit the force of your argument in favour of Captain ( name unknown ) [ sic . ] , there is something so amiable and laudable in a sister contending for the promotion of her brother that no apology was necessary for your letter of the 24th , which I lose no time in acknowledging ; " 
 Famously , when Commander Lord Cochrane captured the 32 @-@ gun Spanish frigate El Gamo in the 14 @-@ gun sloop HMS Speedy a promotion was the usual reward for such a feat of skill and seamanship . It would be fair to argue that it would have been expected by both the commander and his friends and family . Unfortunately for Cochrane , the ship carrying the letter of that victory was intercepted and it was only received after he had himself been captured by the French and was facing a court @-@ martial over the loss of his ship . A court @-@ martial for losing one 's ship was common practice at the time and in many cases , including Cochrane 's , it was only a formality . It was only when Cochrane was cleared by the court that he could be promoted . Unfortunately the commander thought that the First Lord had deliberately withheld the promotion due to an unforeseen grudge ; he held this opinion for the rest of his life . Cochrane had many powerful friends and relatives who lobbied continuously on his behalf . These solicitations may have had a negative effect on Cochrane 's career as it is possible that Jervis became irritated by them . 
 = = = Resignation as First Lord = = = 
 The detailed investigation into corruption that St Vincent began caused him to become extremely unpopular as many influential men were involved in the various money making schemes perpetrated . The board of inquiry set up by St Vincent was responsible for the impeachment of Henry Dundas , 1st Viscount Melville and his trial for misappropriation of public funds . St Vincent had made an enemy of Pitt and Pitt used the naval reform and its unpopularity to attack the First Lord and the Addington administration . St Vincent left the office on 14 May 1804 when Addington was replaced as Prime Minister by Pitt . Lord Howick , second son of St Vincent 's friend Sir Charles Grey came to his defence and with the assistance of Charles James Fox moved for a vote of thanks in the Commons for St Vincent 's tireless efforts in naval reform in 1806 . 
 On 14 May 1806 , John Jeffery , one of the Members of Parliament for Poole , opened a Parliamentary debate condemning St Vincent for " unprecedented neglect in building and repairing of ships while his Lordship presided at the Board of Admiralty and with delivering up the navy to his successor in a far less efficient state than that in which he received it " . This motion was rejected and instead the Foreign Secretary , Charles James Fox , proposed a vote of thanks to Earl St Vincent , " That it appears to this house , that the conduct of the Earl of St. Vincent , in his late naval administration , has added an additional lustre to his exalted character , and is entitled to the approbation of this house . " 
 Fox had said of St Vincent 's appointment in 1801 " allow me to say , that I do not think it would be easy , if possible , to find a man in the whole community better suited , or more capable of the high office he fills , than the distinguished person at the head of the Admiralty – I mean the Earl of St Vincent . " and had continued his support of the Earl throughout his time as first lord . 
 = = Resumption of command = = 
 On 9 November 1805 St Vincent was promoted admiral of the red . He took command of the Channel fleet once more in the 110 @-@ gun first @-@ rate HMS Hibernia . During his tenure in command he spent much of his time at a house that he rented in the village of Rame . Once again he issued the orders that had become so effective in the Mediterranean and his previous Channel command . Once again these orders proved unpopular . For a short time in 1806 he gave command of the Channel fleet to his second @-@ in @-@ command Sir Charles Cotton in order that he might travel to Portugal on a particular mission . Portugal was under threat of invasion and St Vincent had been ordered , if necessary , to take the Portuguese court to its colony in Brazil . The invasion of Portugal was delayed and St Vincent was recalled to the Channel fleet . It was Sir Sidney Smith and Graham Moore who led the Royal family to safety in Brazil . St Vincent had long suffered from poor health and a change in government led to his resignation on 24 April 1807 . 
 The Earl had always attempted to promote on merit rather than patronage and had become increasingly frustrated with the system of preferment by social rank and not competence . At his retirement in 1807 he had an audience with the King . The King asked if the navy were a better institution now than it had been on St Vincent 's entrance into it . St Vincent replied that it was not . He stated : " Sire I have always thought that a sprinkling of nobility was very desirable in the Navy , as it gives some sort of consequence to the service ; but at present the Navy is so overrun by the younger branches of nobility , and the sons of Members of Parliament and they so swallow up all the patronage and so choke the channel to promotion , that the son of an old Officer , however meritorious both their services may have been , has little or no chance of getting on . " He continued on " I would rather promote the son of an old deserving Officer than of any noble in the land . " In a letter dated 18 October 1806 to Viscount Howick , then the First Lord . " If you will , my good Lord , bring a bill into Parliament to disqualify any Officer under the rank of Rear @-@ Admiral to sit in the House of Commons , the Navy may be preserved ; but while a little , drunken , worthless <unk> is permitted to hold the seditious language he has done , in the presence of Flag @-@ officers of rank , you will require a man of greater health and vigour than I possess to command your fleets . " Presumably St Vincent was referring to a particular member of Parliament although his feelings on the subject remain clear . 
 = = Final years = = 
 In his retirement he seldom took his seat in the House of Lords and made his last appearance in either 1810 or 1811 . During these final years St Vincent gave generously to various charities , organisations and individuals . He donated £ 500 to the wounded and survivors of the Battle of Waterloo and £ 300 to relieve starvation in Ireland . St Vincent also donated £ 100 to the building of a Jewish chapel in Whitechapel , London . In 1807 St Vincent , as a member of the House of Lords , opposed a bill to abolish the slave trade . His motives appear to have been practical rather than humanitarian or otherwise . St Vincent argued that if Britain were to ban the trade it would simply be continued by other countries and thereby Britain would lose the revenue generated and be weakened accordingly . St Vincent spoke in opposition to the Convention of Sintra He spoke against the Walcheren Campaign and then condemned its failure , although conspicuously excluded the failure of its officers and men . St Vincent spoke in defence of Lieutenant @-@ General Sir John Moore 's retreat through Spain and Portugal and condemned the government and army commanders for failure to support him thoroughly . In 1816 his wife Martha died at <unk> in Essex . The couple had no children . In the winter of 1818 – 1819 St Vincent went to recover his health in France . When he arrived at Toulon he was greeted by Admiral Édouard <unk> who said of St Vincent that he was : " as much the father of the French as of the English Navy " . 
 = = = Further honours = = = 
 In 1800 St Vincent was made an honorary lieutenant @-@ general of Marines and in 1814 was promoted to general . These positions were little more than a sinecure and carried no official duties . In 1801 St Vincent had been created Viscount St Vincent of Meaford , <unk> a title that because he had no children passed to his nephew , Edward Jervis Ricketts . In 1806 he was appointed as one of the thirty one elder brothers of Trinity House . The elder brothers along with the master form the court of Trinity House . In 1809 St Vincent was honoured by John VI of Portugal who awarded him the Royal Portuguese Military Order of the Tower and Sword in order to commemorate the safe arrival of the Royal Family in Brazil , after Napoleon had invaded Portugal . In May 1814 he was promoted acting admiral of the fleet and commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Channel squadron . He was confirmed Admiral of the fleet on 19 July 1821 and George IV sent him a gold topped baton as a symbol of the office . The baton is currently held in the collections of the National Maritime Museum , Greenwich . On 2 January 1815 he was made Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath when the order was rearranged by the Prince Regent . The knight grand cross is the highest rank in the order . 
 = = = Death and memorial = = = 
 St Vincent died on 13 March 1823 and , because he had no children , the Barony of Jervis and the Earldom of St Vincent became extinct . His nephew , Edward Jervis Ricketts , became the 2nd Viscount St Vincent and changed his surname to Jervis , becoming Edward Jervis Jervis in honour of his uncle . St Vincent was buried at Stone in Staffordshire , in the family mausoleum , at his own request and a monument was erected in the crypt of St. Paul 's Cathedral . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 At least three ships and two stone frigates ( or shore establishments ) have been named HMS St Vincent either in honour of the Earl or after that battle that he won . HMS St. Vincent , commissioned in 1910 , was the first of her class and therefore the class of battleship was named after her . The St. Vincent – class battleships included HMS Collingwood and HMS Vanguard . Jervis , a J @-@ class destroyer , launched just prior to the Second World War , was named after the Admiral . HMS Jervis served throughout the war . She was known as a lucky ship as , despite taking part in several actions , she never lost a man to enemy fire . HMS Jervis Bay , an armed merchant cruiser that was lost in heroic circumstances , was indirectly named after him . 
 Jervis has also been remembered in schools in England . He has a boarding house ( Saint Vincent ) named in his honour at the Royal Hospital School . St Vincent College in Gosport , England is named after the admiral 's most famous battle . 
 As with many other officers during the great age of discovery there are several areas of the world named in the earl 's honour . Cape Jervis and Gulf St Vincent , South Australia , and Jervis Bay , New South Wales , Australia were named for him as was the town of <unk> and Jervis Bay National Park . The County of St Vincent , New South Wales was also named in his honour . Jervis Inlet , in British Columbia , Canada , was also named for him . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 Though Jervis clearly had a strong impact during the Napoleonic Wars and afterwards on the development of the Navy , surprisingly few contemporary biographies of Jervis are available , and those are seriously lacking in breadth and thoroughness . The most recent work related to Jervis is The <unk> of the English Navy by Admiral St. Vincent : The Great Unclaimed Naval Revolution by Charles Arthur , 1986 , but this focused more on Jervis 's reforms to the docks , and less to other parts of his life . Evelyn Berkman 's Nelson 's Dear Lord : Portrait of St. Vincent ( 1962 ) , as the bibliographer Eugene <unk> points out , is merely an " effort " to create a biography . The same bibliographer says much the same about William Milbourne James 's " Old Oak " : The Life of John Jervis , Earl St. Vincent ( 1950 ) and Owen Sherrard 's A life of Lord St. Vincent ( 1933 ) , pointing to both as mediocre . Ruddock Mackay published an article in Mariner 's Mirror , which documented the early life of Jervis . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 <unk> , Ronald ( 2000 ) . Iron Admirals : Naval Leadership in the Twentieth Century . Greenwood Publishing Group . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 313 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Brenton , Edward Pelham ( 1838 ) . Life and Correspondence of John , Earl of St Vincent , G. C. B. , Admiral of the Fleet 1 . Henry Colburn . OCLC <unk> . 
 Brenton , Edward Pelham ( 1838 ) . Life and Correspondence of John , Earl of St Vincent , G. C. B. , Admiral of the Fleet 2 . Henry Colburn . OCLC <unk> . 
 The Naval Chronicle 04 . Bunney & Gold . OCLC 1759531 . 
 The Naval Chronicle 11 . Bunney & Gold . OCLC 1759531 . 
 The Naval Chronicle 13 . Bunney & Gold . OCLC 1759531 . 
 The Naval Chronicle 15 . Bunney & Gold . OCLC 1759531 . 
 Coleman , Terry ( 2001 ) . Nelson : The man and the legend . Bloomsbury . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7475 @-@ 5900 @-@ 9 . 
 <unk> , Tom ( 2007 ) . The Ramage Companion . <unk> Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 05 @-@ 5 . 
 Lavery , Brian ( 1983 ) . The Ship of the Line Volume 1 . Conway Maritime Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 85177 @-@ 252 @-@ 3 . 
 The Life of Nelson , Volume 1 ( of 2 ) by A. T. Mahan at Project Gutenberg 
 Marcus , Geoffrey ( 1971 ) . The Age of Nelson , The Royal Navy 1793 – 1815 . Viking Adult . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Moseley , Brian ( 26 February 2013 ) . " Plymouth Breakwater " . The Encyclopaedia of Plymouth History . Plymouth , UK : <unk> Info . Archived from the original on 17 May 2013 . Retrieved 12 February 2015 . 
 Palmer , Michael ( 2005 ) . Command at sea : naval command and control since the sixteenth century . President and Fellows of Harvard College . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , J ( 1828 ) . Naval Biography of Great Britain , Volume 1 . Whitemore & Fenn . OCLC <unk> . 
 Tucker , Jedediah Stephens ( 1844 ) . Admiral the Right Hon The Earl of St Vincent GCB & C. Memoirs 1 . Richard Bentley , New Burlington Street . OCLC <unk> . 
 Tucker , Jedediah Stephens ( 1844 ) . Admiral the Right Hon The Earl of St Vincent GCB & C. Memoirs 2 . Richard Bentley , New Burlington Street . OCLC <unk> . 
 Vale , Brian ( 2004 ) . The Audacious Admiral Cochrane : The True Life of a Naval Legend . Conway Maritime Press. pp. 34 – 37 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 85177 @-@ 986 @-@ 7 . 
 Winfield , Rif ( 2007 ) . British Warships in the Age of Sail 1714 – 1792 : Design , Construction , Careers and Fates . Seaforth Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84415 @-@ 700 @-@ 6 . 
 <unk> maritimes sous la république et l <unk> , Jean Pierre Edmond Jurien de La <unk> , Pierre Charles Jean Baptiste Silvestre de Villeneuve , Charpentier , 1860 Tome 1 , pp. 101 – 119 
 = CBS Reports : The Homosexuals = 
 " The Homosexuals " is a 1967 episode of the documentary television series CBS Reports . The hour @-@ long broadcast featured a discussion of a number of topics related to homosexuality and homosexuals . Mike Wallace anchored the episode , which aired on March 7 , 1967 . Although this was the first network documentary dealing with the topic of homosexuality , it was not the first televised in the United States . That was The Rejected , produced and aired in 1961 on KQED , a public television station in San Francisco . 
 Three years in the making , The Homosexuals went through two producers and multiple revisions . The episode included interviews with several gay men , psychiatrists , legal experts and cultural critics , interspersed with footage of a gay bar and a police sex sting . The Homosexuals garnered mixed critical response . The network received praise from some quarters and criticism from others for even airing the program . 
 = = Production = = 
 The program was initially proposed in 1964 . The first version was produced by William Peters , with production supervised by executive producer Fred W. Friendly . Upon accepting the assignment , Peters began his research by reading books and consulting with experts in the field . Peters suggested that the program focus exclusively on gay men and that he cover lesbians in a second program , and Friendly agreed . Principal filming took place starting in the fall of 1964 and continued through early 1965 . Peters interviewed men in San Francisco , Philadelphia , Charlotte and New York City , accumulating 30 hours of footage . The identities of several of the men were obscured in some fashion , either in shadow or , in one instance , behind a large potted palm tree . Also interviewed were psychiatrist Charles Socarides , who strongly advocated the position that homosexuality is a mental disorder , and fellow psychiatrist Irving Bieber , who shared Socarides ' opinion of homosexuality as pathology . Interspersed with these interview segments was footage , described as being in the cinéma vérité style , of the inside of a gay bar along with shots of hustlers working a street corner and a teenager being arrested in a public sex sting . 
 After assembling a rough cut , Peters approached Mike Wallace to anchor the hour . Wallace was initially reluctant but after viewing the program enthusiastically agreed . Despite his enthusiasm , Wallace 's commentary disparaged homosexuals . 
 The average homosexual , if there be such , is promiscuous . He is not interested or capable of a lasting relationship like that of a heterosexual marriage . His sex life , his love life , consists of a series of one – chance encounters at the clubs and bars he inhabits . And even on the streets of the city — the pick @-@ up , the one night stand , these are characteristics of the homosexual relationship . 
 Friendly generally approved of the first version but believed that it was necessary to include information on same @-@ sex sexual practices . When those practices were explained to him , however , he changed his mind . While the documentary was still in production , Friendly was promoted to the presidency of CBS News but left soon after over a disagreement over the network 's coverage of the Vietnam War . He was replaced by Richard S. Salant , who was known for his cost @-@ consciousness , which put the future of the documentary and the CBS Reports series in question . 
 Salant did try to kill the documentary , but stories about it began appearing in the trade press , putting CBS into a potentially embarrassing situation were it not to air . In mid @-@ 1965 , Salant gave Peters the go @-@ ahead to complete the episode . Peters worked with the New York chapter of the Mattachine Society to secure interviews with two additional gay subjects , Lars Larson and Jack Nichols , both of whom were fully accepting of their sexuality . Nichols later recalled his encounter with Wallace : 
 [ A ] fter we finished and the camera was turned off , Mike Wallace sat down with me and talked for about half an hour . He said , " You know , you answered all of my questions capably , but I have a feeling that you don 't really believe that homosexuality is as acceptable as you make it sound . " I asked him why he would say that . " Because , " he said , " in your heart I think you know it 's wrong . " It was infuriating . I told him I thought being gay was just fine , but that in his heart he thought it was wrong . 
 Peters added more footage of psychiatrists espousing that model along with scenes from the 1965 convention of the East Coast Homophile Organizations . CBS gave final approval to " The Homosexuals " and scheduled it to air in the spring of 1966 . 
 Salant later pulled the episode from the schedule and assigned producer Harry Morgan to re @-@ edit it . According to Wallace , Salant found the piece sensationalistic ; however , C. A. Tripp , a psychologist who had put CBS in touch with his patient Larson , claimed that Salant felt the piece was pro @-@ homosexuality . Morgan scrapped all but about 10 minutes of Peters ' final cut . CBS felt that the self @-@ accepting gay men made too favorable of an impression , so Morgan edited two of the interviews to make the men seem <unk> . According to Wallace , no sponsor would buy time during the episode because of the taboo nature of the subject matter . Commercial spots were filled by public service announcements for the Peace Corps and the Internal Revenue Service . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The first interview subject was a gay man , Lars Larson , who appeared undisguised and who spoke positively about his sexuality . Following his interview , Wallace gave the results of a CBS News poll that found that Americans considered homosexuality more harmful to the United States than adultery , abortion or prostitution , that two @-@ thirds of Americans described their reaction to homosexuality as " disgust , discomfort or fear " and that one in ten described their reaction as " hatred " . Just ten percent believed homosexuality was a crime but the majority still believed it should be criminally sanctioned . 
 Following the poll , another gay man was interviewed from his psychiatrist 's couch with his face obscured by shadow . He described coming out to his family , saying they treated him " like some wounded animal they were going to send to the vet . " Following this man was another unobscured subject Jack Nichols ( who had taken on the pseudonym " Warren Adkins " for the programme ) , co @-@ founder of the Washington , D.C. branch of the Mattachine Society . He contrasted the comments of the previous subject , saying that he had come out to his family at age 14 and , far from being treated like a sick animal , they treated him with warmth and understanding . 
 After remarks from Socarides advocating the disease model of homosexuality , Wallace discussed the legal aspects of homosexuality , noting that England was preparing to de @-@ criminalize homosexual acts . Federal judge James Braxton Craven , Jr. from North Carolina advocated a re @-@ evaluation of United States law , commenting , " Is it not time to redraft a criminal statute first enacted in 1533 ? " Following footage of Nichols and Mattachine D.C. co @-@ founder Frank Kameny picketing Independence Hall and the State Department , Kameny , under his real name , advocated a re @-@ examination of federal law that placed a blanket ban on known homosexuals receiving security clearances . 
 Next , Albert Goldman ( then an English professor at Columbia University ) and author and playwright Gore Vidal debated homosexuality , with an emphasis on the presence of homosexuals in the creative arts . Goldman asserted that homosexuality " is just one of a number of ... things all tending toward the subversion , toward the final erosion , of our cultural values . " Vidal , asserting that homosexuality is as natural as heterosexuality , countered by saying " The United States is living out some mad Protestant nineteenth @-@ century dream of human behavior .... I think the so @-@ called breaking of the moral fiber of this country is one of the healthiest things that 's begun to happen . " 
 Wallace closed with an interview with a gay man , with a wife and two children , who claimed that the narcissism of gay men made it impossible for two men to form a long @-@ term loving relationship . Wrapping up the hour , Wallace concluded : 
 The dilemma of the homosexual : told by the medical profession he is sick ; by the law that he 's a criminal ; shunned by employers ; rejected by heterosexual society . Incapable of a fulfilling relationship with a woman , or for that matter with a man . At the center of his life he remains anonymous . A displaced person . An outsider . 
 Also discussed were religious attitudes toward homosexuality and the Boise homosexuality scandal , a sweeping investigation of a supposed " homosexual underground " in Boise , Idaho in 1955 . 
 = = Critical reaction = = 
 Critical response of the time to the program was mixed . The New York Times , The Washington Star , and the Chicago Daily News praised CBS for addressing the subject . George Gent of the Times , however , commented on the anti @-@ gay bias of the show , noting that it would " have been better to give the minority viewpoint that homosexuals are just as normal as anyone else a chance to speak for itself . " The Chicago Tribune titled its review " TV No Spot to <unk> Garbage " and attacked CBS for presenting such material to young and impressionable viewers . 
 More recent critical attention to " The Homosexuals " has also been mixed , trending to the negative . In one corner , anchor Mike Wallace is praised for debunking negative stereotypes about gay men . In the other , Wallace 's commentary is condemned as " a string of gross generalizations and negative stereotypes [ that ] sounds as if it was scripted by Rev. Jerry Falwell . " In noting that approximately 20 % of television viewers in the United States saw the program , LGBT activist Wayne <unk> labels the broadcast " the single most destructive hour of <unk> propaganda in our nation 's history . " He says that " [ ' The Homosexuals ' ] not only had a devastating effect on public opinion but also was a nuclear bomb dropped on the psyches of gay and lesbian Americans , who , prior to this show , had never been represented as a group on national television . " 
 = = Participants ' response and personal consequences = = 
 Lars Larson , the first interview subject , was infuriated after seeing the finished program . He had been led to believe that the episode would present a far more positive picture of American gay life . Larson , whose interview had been altered to make him seem less happy , filed a formal fraud complaint and withdrew his release . " They had some rather nasty , angry anti @-@ gay people on there who were treated as professionals , " he said . " I had no problem with Harry Morgan or Mike Wallace because they were thorough . But obviously others in the decision @-@ making process were truly upset with homosexuality . They saw it as a threat to the human race and were out to kill as best they could . " Jack Nichols was fired from his job as a hotel sales manager the day after the program aired . 
 For his part , anchor Mike Wallace came to regret his participation in the episode . " I should have known better , " he said in 1992 . Speaking in 1996 , Wallace stated , " That is — God help us — what our understanding was of the homosexual lifestyle a mere twenty @-@ five years ago because nobody was out of the closet and because that 's what we heard from doctors — that 's what Socarides told us , it was a matter of shame . " However , Wallace was at the time of broadcast close friends with noted designer James Amster ( creator of the landmark Amster Yard courtyard in New York City ) and Amster 's male long @-@ term companion , men whom Wallace later described as " a wonderful old married couple " and " [ b ] oth people that [ he ] admired " . Despite this personal knowledge , Wallace relied on the American Psychiatric Association 's categorization of homosexuality as a mental illness rather than his own experience in creating the episode . As recently as 1995 , Wallace told an interviewer that he believed homosexuals could change their orientation if they really wanted to . 
 = Horse rings in Portland , Oregon = 
 Horse rings , remnants of a time when horses and horse @-@ drawn vehicles provided the primary mode of transportation , can be found throughout Portland , Oregon . They were removed from curbs and sidewalks for safety purposes until the late 1970s , when one Portland resident complained about the rings disappearing . Today , the city of Portland helps to preserve the rings by requiring them to be replaced following sidewalk construction or repair . 
 In recent years Portland residents have started tethering model horses to the rings , sparking interaction , and drawing attention to part of the city 's history . The Horse Project , started by one resident of the Woodstock neighborhood in 2005 , encourages participation in the urban art movement . The rings and art installations have become a tourist attraction . 
 = = Background and history = = 
 Horse rings , often made of iron or brass , are remnants from the 1800s , when horses , and horse @-@ drawn vehicles , provided the primary mode of transportation . In 1978 , The Register @-@ Guard suggested that the rings might only be as old as the early 1900s . The rings allowed residents to tether their horses to sidewalks . 
 Prior to the late 1970s , rings were removed during sidewalk reconstruction or repair for safety purposes . In 1978 , after one Portland resident complained about the disappearance of rings , Connie McCready , then a City Commissioner , announced that rings could be replaced at a homeowner 's request , likely for a fee of $ 5 . Today , the city of Portland is committed to preserving the horse rings , which are reinstalled following curb and sidewalk construction or repair . An ordinance requires rings to be replaced at their original location ( or " as close as practical " ) . Original street names are also reset or <unk> into new concrete . The ring supply is monitored by the Bureau of Maintenance . Portland is not the only city to preserve horse rings . City officials in Oak Harbor , Washington , confirmed that the last in a series of horse rings would be preserved during a February 2011 sidewalk construction project . 
 = = Horse Project = = 
 In September 2005 , Woodstock resident Scott Wayne Indiana tied his first plastic toy horse to a horse ring located in the Pearl District . Of his attempt to draw attention to the rings , and to celebrate Portland 's history , Indiana said : " I loved the rings , and felt that people just weren 't noticing them . This was an attempt to shake people out of their routines and get them to notice their surroundings . " Since then , the Horse Project has gained momentum and participation ; horses can be found tied to rings throughout the city , especially in east Portland . The installations have sparked interaction with residents , who have left hay , <unk> , riders , saddles , water , wool blankets , and other " treats " for the horses . Horses are often defaced or go missing . 
 The Horse Project has an official website , which encourages participation , and offers instructions for tethering . The project accepts donations and volunteer support . Participants considered selling kits for consumers interested in tethering horses . One Portland resident has reportedly installed more than 150 horses . Horses are the most frequent animal to be tied to rings , but pigs , dolls , and other animals have also appeared throughout the city . 
 Willamette Week included the Horse Project in its Best of Portland list for 2006 under the category Best Horse of a Different Color . In 2007 , The Oregonian 's Anna Griffin mentioned the project in an article about the " Keep Portland Weird " slogan , writing : " The ' Horse Project ' comes up anytime the subject of Portland weirdness arises . " Project participation continues despite Indiana 's move out of state in 2008 . In 2011 , the documentary film It 's a Ring Thing : The Portland Horse Project premiered at NW Documentary 's Homegrown <unk> . In 2012 , The Oregonian highlighted the engagement of a couple who attribute the start of their relationship to a horse ring installation in the Pearl District . 
 The city 's " Sustainable Stormwater Management " calendar for 2012 called the installations " stormwater art " , which " highlights healthy watersheds and demonstrates that stormwater is a resource and an asset " . The horse rings , and urban art installations , have become a tourist attraction . 
 = Château Gaillard = 
 Château Gaillard ( " Hearty Castle " ) is a ruined medieval castle , located 90 m above the commune of Les Andelys overlooking the River Seine , in the Eure département of historical Normandy , now Upper Normandy , France . It is located some 95 kilometres ( 59 mi ) north @-@ west of Paris and 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) from Rouen . Construction began in 1196 under the auspices of Richard the Lionheart , who was simultaneously King of England and feudal Duke of Normandy . The castle was expensive to build , but the majority of the work was done in an unusually short time . It took just two years , and at the same time the town of Petit Andely was constructed . Château Gaillard has a complex and advanced design , and uses early principles of concentric fortification ; it was also one of the earliest European castles to use machicolations . The castle consists of three enclosures separated by dry moats , with a keep in the inner enclosure . 
 Château Gaillard was captured in 1204 by the French king , Philip II , after a lengthy siege . In the mid @-@ 14th century , the castle was the residence of the exiled David II of Scotland . The castle changed hands several times in the Hundred Years ' War , but in 1449 the French king captured Château Gaillard from the English king definitively , and from then on it remained in French ownership . Henry IV of France ordered the demolition of Château Gaillard in 1599 ; although it was in ruins at the time , it was felt to be a threat to the security of the local population . The castle ruins are listed as a monument historique by the French Ministry of Culture . The inner bailey is open to the public from March to November , and the outer baileys are open all year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Richard the Lionheart inherited Normandy from his father , Henry II , in 1189 when he ascended to the throne of England . There was rivalry between the French king and Richard as the King of England was more powerful than the King of France , despite the fact that Richard was a vassal of the French king and paid homage for his lands in the country . From 1190 to 1192 , Richard the Lionheart was on the Third Crusade . He was joined by Philip II of France as each was wary that the other might invade his territory in his absence . Richard was captured and imprisoned on the return journey to England , and he was not released until 4 February 1194 . In Richard 's absence , his brother John revolted with the aid of Philip ; amongst Philip 's conquests in the period of Richard 's imprisonment was Normandy . It took Richard until 1198 to reconquer Normandy . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Perched high above the River Seine , an important transport route , the site of Château Gaillard , in the manor of Andeli , was identified as a naturally defensible position . In the valley below the site was the town of Grand Andely . Under the terms of the Treaty of Louviers ( January 1196 ) between Richard and Philip II neither king was allowed to fortify the site ; despite this , Richard intended to build a castle at Andeli . Its purpose was to protect the duchy of Normandy from Philip II — it helped fill a gap in the Norman defences left by the fall of Château de Gisors and was 7 @.@ 4 miles ( 11 @.@ 9 km ) away from Château de <unk> , a castle which belonged to Philip — and to act as a base from which Richard could launch his campaign to take back the Norman Vexin from French control . Richard tried to obtain the manor through negotiation . Walter de Coutances , Archbishop of Rouen , was reluctant to sell the manor as it was one of the diocese 's most profitable , and other lands belonging to the diocese had recently been damaged by war . When Philip besieged Aumale in Normandy , Richard grew tired of waiting and seized the manor , although the act was opposed by the Church . 
 In an attempt to get Pope Celestine III to intercede , Walter de Coutances left for Rome in November 1196 . Richard sent a delegation to represent him in Rome . One of the party , Richard 's Lord Chancellor William Longchamp ( who was also Bishop of Ely ) , died during the journey , although the rest , including the Philip of Poitou , Bishop of Durham , and Guillaume de <unk> , Bishop of Lisieux , arrived in Rome . Walter de Coutances meanwhile issued an interdict against the duchy of Normandy which prohibited church services from being performed in the region . Roger of Howden detailed " the unburied bodies of the dead lying in the streets and square of the cities of Normandy " . Construction began with the interdict hanging over Normandy , but it was later repealed in April 1197 by Celestine , after Richard made gifts of land to Walter de Coutances and the diocese of Rouen , including two manors and the prosperous port of Dieppe . The site of Château Gaillard had not been fortified before , and the town of Petit Andely was constructed at the same time ; together with Grand Andely , the two are known as Les Andelys . The castle sits on a high limestone promontory , 90 m above Les Andelys and overlooking a bend in the River Seine . The castle was connected with Andelys through a series of contemporary outworks . 
 During King Richard 's reign , the Crown 's expenditure on castles declined from the levels spent by Henry II , Richard 's father , although this has been attributed to a concentration of resources on Richard 's war with the king of France . However , the work at Château Gaillard cost an estimated £ 12 @,@ 000 between 1196 and 1198 . Richard only spent an estimated £ 7 @,@ 000 on castles in England during his reign , similar as his father Henry II . The Pipe rolls for the construction of Château Gaillard contain the earliest details of how work was organised in castle building and what activities were involved . Amongst those workmen mentioned in the rolls are miners , stone cutters , quarrymen , masons , lime @-@ workers , carpenters , smiths , <unk> , water carriers , soldiers to guard the workers , diggers who cut the ditch surrounding the castle , and carters who transported the raw materials to the castle . A master @-@ mason is omitted , and military historian Allen Brown has suggested that it may be because Richard himself was the overall architect ; this is supported by the interest Richard showed in the work through his frequent presence . 
 Not only was the castle built at considerable expense , but it was built relatively rapidly ; construction of large stone castles often took the better part of a decade ; for instance the work at Dover Castle took place between 1179 and 1191 ( at a cost of £ 7 @,@ 000 ) . Richard was present during part of the construction to ensure construction proceeded at a rate he was happy with . According to William of Newburgh , in May 1198 Richard and the labourers working on the castle were drenched in a " rain of blood " . While some of his advisers thought the rain was an evil omen , Richard was undeterred : 
 the king was not moved by this to slacken one whit the pace of work , in which he took such keen pleasure that , unless I am mistaken , even if an angel had descended from heaven to urge its abandonment he would have been roundly cursed . 
 After just a year , Château Gaillard was approaching completion and Richard remarked " Behold , how fair is this year @-@ old daughter of mine ! " Richard later boasted that he could hold the castle " were the walls made of butter " . By 1198 , the castle was largely completed . At one point , the castle was the site of the execution of three French soldiers in retaliation for a massacre of Welsh mercenaries ambushed by the French ; the three were thrown to their deaths from the castle 's position high above the surrounding landscape . In his final years , the castle became Richard 's favourite residence , and writs and charters were written at Château Gaillard , bearing " apud Bellum Castrum de <unk> " ( at the Fair Castle of the Rock ) . Richard did not enjoy the benefits of the castle for long , however , as he died in Limousin on 6 April 1199 , from an infected arrow wound to his shoulder , sustained while besieging <unk> . 
 = = = The Siege of Château Gaillard = = = 
 After Richard 's death , King John of England failed to effectively defend Normandy against Philip 's ongoing campaigns between 1202 and 1204 . Château de Falaise fell to Philip 's forces , as well as castles from Mortain to <unk> while Philip simultaneously besieged Rouen , which capitulated to French forces on 24 June 1204 , effectively ending Norman independence . Philip laid siege to Château Gaillard , which was captured after a long siege from September 1203 to March 1204 . As Philip continued the siege throughout the winter and King John made no attempt to relieve the castle , it was only a matter of time before the castellan was forced to capitulate . The main source for the siege is <unk> , a poem by William the Breton , Philip 's chaplain . As a result , modern scholars have paid little attention to the fate of the civilians of Les Andelys during the siege . 
 The local population sought refuge in the castle to escape from the French soldiers who ravaged the town . The castle was well supplied for a siege , but the extra mouths to feed rapidly diminished the stores . Between 1 @,@ 400 and 2 @,@ 200 non @-@ combatants were allowed inside , increasing the number of people in the castle at least fivefold . In an effort to alleviate the pressure on the castle 's supplies , Roger de Lacy , the castellan , evicted 500 civilians ; this first group was allowed to pass through the French lines unhindered , and a second group of similar size did the same a few days later . Philip was not present , and when he learned of the safe passage of the civilians , he forbade further people being allowed through the siege @-@ lines . The idea was to keep as many people as possible within Château Gaillard to drain its resources . Roger de Lacy evicted the remaining civilians from the castle , at least 400 people , and possibly as many as 1 @,@ 200 . The group was not allowed through , and the French opened fire on the civilians , who turned back to the castle for safety , but found the gates locked . They sought refuge at the base of the castle walls for three months ; over the winter , more than half their number died from exposure and starvation . Philip arrived at Château Gaillard in February 1204 , and ordered that the survivors should be fed and released . Such treatment of civilians in sieges was not uncommon , and such scenes were repeated much later at the sieges of Calais in 1346 and Rouen in 1418 – 1419 , both in the Hundred Years ' War . 
 The French gained access to the outermost ward by undermining one of the towers . Following this , Philip ordered a group of his men to look for a weak point in the castle . They gained access to the next ward when a soldier named Ralph found a latrine chute in use through which the French could clamber into the chapel . After ambushing several unsuspecting guards , and setting fire to the buildings , Philip 's men then lowered the drawbridge and allowed the rest of their army into the castle . The Anglo @-@ Norman troops retreated to the inner ward . After a short time the French successfully breached the gate of the inner ward , and the garrison retreated finally to the keep . With supplies running low Roger de Lacy and his garrison of 20 knights and 120 other soldiers surrendered to the French army , bringing the siege to an end on 6 March 1204 . In drawn @-@ out medieval sieges , contemporary writers often emphasised the importance of dwindling supplies in the capitulation of the garrison , as was the case with the Siege of Château Gaillard . With the castle under French control , the main obstacle to the French entering the Seine valley was removed ; they were able to enter the valley unmolested and take Normandy . Thus , for the first time since it had been given as a duchy to Rollo in 911 , Normandy was directly ruled by the French king . The city of Rouen surrendered to Philip II on 23 June 1204 . After that , the rest of Normandy was easily conquered by the French . 
 = = = Under French control = = = 
 In 1314 , Château Gaillard was the prison of Margaret and Blanche of Burgundy , future queens of France ; they had been convicted of adultery in the Tour de Nesle Affair , and after having their heads shaved they were locked away in the fortress . Following the Scottish defeat at the Battle of Halidon Hill in 1333 during the Second War of Scottish Independence , the child @-@ king David II and certain of his court were forced to flee to France for safety . At the time , southern Scotland was occupied by the forces of King Edward III of England . David , then nine years old , and his bride Joan of the Tower , the twelve @-@ year @-@ old daughter of Edward II , were granted the use of Château Gaillard by Philip VI . It remained their residence until David 's return to Scotland in 1341 . David did not stay out of English hands for long after his return ; he was captured after the Battle of Neville 's Cross in 1346 and endured an eleven @-@ year captivity in the Tower of London . 
 During the Hundred Years ' War between the English and French crowns , possession of the castle switched several times . Château Gaillard — along with Château de Gisors , Château de La Roche @-@ Guyon , Ivry @-@ la @-@ Bataille , and Mont Saint @-@ Michel — was one of five castles in the Normandy which offered resistance to Henry V of England in 1419 , after the capitulation of Rouen and much of the rest of the Duchy . Château Gaillard was besieged for a year before it was surrendered to the English in December 1419 ; all the resisting castles except Mont Saint @-@ Michel eventually fell , and Normandy was temporarily returned to English control . Étienne de <unk> , a mercenary ( <unk> ) known as La Hire , then re @-@ captured Château Gaillard for the French in 1430 . However , the English were revived by the capture and execution of Joan of Arc , and although by then the war was turning against them , a month later they captured Château Gaillard again . When the French gained ascendency again between 1449 and 1453 the English were forced out of the region , and in 1449 the castle was taken by the French for the last time . 
 By 1573 , Château Gaillard was uninhabited and in a ruinous state , but it was still believed that the castle posed a threat to the local population if it was repaired . Therefore , at the request of the French States @-@ General , King Henry IV ordered the demolition of Château Gaillard in 1599 . Some of the building material was reused by Capuchin monks who were granted permission to use the stone for maintaining their monasteries . In 1611 , the demolition of Château Gaillard came to an end . The site was left as a ruin , and in 1862 was classified as a monument historique . In 1962 , a conference on the contributions of the Normans to medieval military architecture was held at Les Andelys . Allen Brown attended the conference and remarked that the castle was " in satisfying receipt of skilful care and attention " . The journal Château Gaillard : Études de <unk> <unk> , which was published as a result of the conference , has since run to 23 volumes , based on international conferences on the subject of castles . In the 1990s , archaeological excavations were carried out at Château Gaillard . The excavations investigated the north of the fortress , searching for an entrance postulated by architect Eugène Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc , but no such entrance was found . However , the excavation did reveal was that there was an addition to the north of the castle to enable the use of guns . <unk> , the structure has been dated to the 16th century . The conclusion of the excavations was that the site had " enormous archaeological potential " , but that there were still unanswered questions about the castle . After Philip II took Chateau Gaillard , he repaired the collapsed tower of the outer bailey that had been used to gain access to the castle . The archaeological investigation examined the tower generally thought to be the one collapsed by Philip , and although it did not recover any dating evidence , the consensus is that he completely rebuilt the tower . In conjunction with the archaeological work , efforts were made to preserve the remaining structures . Today , Château Gaillard 's inner bailey is open to the public from March to November , while the outer baileys are open all year round . 
 = = Layout and innovations = = 
 Château Gaillard consists of three baileys — an inner , a middle , and an outer with the main entrance to the castle — and a keep , also called a donjon , in the inner @-@ bailey . The baileys , which were separated by rock @-@ cut ditches , housed the castle 's stables , workshops , and storage facilities . It is common for extant castles to be the result of several phases of construction , and were adapted and added to over the period of their use ; however Château Gaillard essentially is the result of one period of building . The division into three wards bears similarities with the design of Château de Chinon , built by Henry II in the mid @-@ 12th century on a promontory overlooking a town . 
 The outer bailey is the southernmost feature of the castle ; it is pentagon shaped and there are five towers spaced along the wall , three of which are at corners . North of the outer bailey is the middle bailey which is an irregular polygon ; like the outer bailey , the wall of the middle bailey is studded with towers . The towers allowed the garrison to provide enfilading fire . In the fashion of the time , most of the towers in the curtain walls of the middle and outer baileys were cylindrical . Château Gaillard was one of the first castles in Europe to use machicolations — stone projections on top of a wall with openings that allowed objects to be dropped on an enemy at the base of the wall . Machicolations were introduced to Western architecture as a result of the Crusades . Until the 13th century , the tops of towers in European castles had usually been surrounded by wooden galleries , which served the same purpose as machicolations . An Eastern innovation , they may have originated in the first half of the 8th century . 
 Within the middle bailey was the inner bailey . The gatehouse from the middle to the inner @-@ bailey was one of the earliest examples of towers flanking the entrance to remove the blind @-@ spot immediately in front of the gate . This was part of a wider trend from around the late 12th or 13th century onwards for castle gateways to be strongly defended . 
 The design of the inner bailey , with its wall studded with semi @-@ circular projections , is unparalleled . This innovation had two advantages : firstly , the rounded wall absorbed the damage from siege engines much better as it did not provide a perfect angle to aim at ; secondly , the arrowslits in the curved wall allowed arrows to be fired at all angles . The inner bailey , which contained the main residential buildings , used the principles of concentric defence . This and the unusual design of the inner bailey 's curtain wall meant that castle was advanced for its age , since it was built before concentric fortification was fully developed in Crusader castles such as Krak des Chevaliers . Concentric castles were widely copied across Europe ; for instance when Edward I of England — who had himself been on Crusade — built castles in Wales in the late 13th century , four of the eight he founded were concentric . 
 The keep was inside the inner bailey and contained the king 's accommodation . It had two rooms : an antechamber and an audience room . While Allen Brown interpreted the audience room as the king 's chamber , historian Liddiard believes it is probably a throne room . A throne room emphasises the political importance of the castle . In England there is nothing similar to Château Gaillard 's keep , but there are buildings with a similar design in France in the 12th and 13th centuries . 
 Allen Brown described Château Gaillard as " one of the finest castles in Europe " and the military historian Sir Charles Oman wrote that : 
 Château Gaillard , as we have already had occasion to mention , was considered the masterpiece of its time . The reputation of its builder , Coeur de Lion , as a great military engineer might stand firm on this single structure . He was no mere copyist of the models he had seen in the East , but introduced many original details of his own invention into the stronghold . 
 Despite Château Gaillard 's reputation as a great fortress , Liddiard highlights the absence of a well in the keep as a peculiar weakness , and the castle was built on soft chalk , which would have allowed the walls to be undermined . This is attributed to Château Gaillard being important not solely as a military structure , but as a salient symbol of the power of Richard the Lionheart . It was a statement of dominance by Richard , having reconquered the lands Philip II had taken . Castles such as Château Gaillard in France , and Dover in England , were amongst the most advanced of their age , but were surpassed in both sophistication and cost by the works of Edward I of England in the latter half of the 13th century . 
 = Rhodium = 
 Rhodium is a chemical element with symbol Rh and atomic number 45 . It is a rare , silvery @-@ white , hard , and chemically inert transition metal . It is a member of the platinum group . It has only one naturally occurring isotope , <unk> . Naturally occurring rhodium is usually found as the free metal , alloyed with similar metals , and rarely as a chemical compound in minerals such as <unk> and <unk> . It is one of the rarest and most valuable precious metals . 
 Rhodium is a noble metal , resistant to corrosion , found in platinum or nickel ores together with the other members of the platinum group metals . It was discovered in 1803 by William Hyde Wollaston in one such ore , and named for the rose color of one of its chlorine compounds , produced after it reacted with the powerful acid mixture aqua regia . 
 The element 's major use ( approximately 80 % of world rhodium production ) is as one of the catalysts in the three @-@ way catalytic converters in automobiles . Because rhodium metal is inert against corrosion and most aggressive chemicals , and because of its rarity , rhodium is usually alloyed with platinum or palladium and applied in high @-@ temperature and corrosion @-@ resistive coatings . White gold is often plated with a thin rhodium layer to improve its appearance while sterling silver is often rhodium @-@ plated for tarnish resistance . 
 Rhodium detectors are used in nuclear reactors to measure the neutron flux level . 
 = = History = = 
 Rhodium ( Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " rose " ) was discovered in 1803 by William Hyde Wollaston , soon after his discovery of palladium . He used crude platinum ore presumably obtained from South America . His procedure involved dissolving the ore in aqua regia and neutralizing the acid with sodium hydroxide ( NaOH ) . He then precipitated the platinum as ammonium chloroplatinate by adding ammonium chloride ( NH 
 4Cl ) . Most other metals like copper , lead , palladium and rhodium were precipitated with zinc . <unk> nitric acid dissolved all but palladium and rhodium , which were dissolved in aqua regia , and the rhodium was precipitated by the addition of sodium chloride as Na 
 3 [ <unk> 
 6 ] · nH 
 2O . After being washed with ethanol , the rose @-@ red precipitate was reacted with zinc , which displaced the rhodium in the ionic compound and thereby released the rhodium as free metal . 
