 After the discovery , the rare element had only minor applications ; for example , by the turn of the century , rhodium @-@ containing thermocouples were used to measure temperatures up to 1800 ° C. The first major application was electroplating for decorative uses and as corrosion @-@ resistant coating . The introduction of the three @-@ way catalytic converter by Volvo in 1976 increased the demand for rhodium . The previous catalytic converters used platinum or palladium , while the three @-@ way catalytic converter used rhodium to reduce the amount of NOx in the exhaust . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Rhodium is a hard , silvery , durable metal that has a high reflectance . Rhodium metal does not normally form an oxide , even when heated . Oxygen is absorbed from the atmosphere only at the melting point of rhodium , but is released on solidification . Rhodium has both a higher melting point and lower density than platinum . It is not attacked by most acids : it is completely insoluble in nitric acid and dissolves slightly in aqua regia . 
 = = = Chemical properties = = = 
 Rhodium belongs to group 9 of the periodic table , but the configuration of electrons in the outermost shells is atypical for the group . This anomaly is also observed in the neighboring elements , niobium ( 41 ) , ruthenium ( 44 ) , and palladium ( 46 ) . 
 The common oxidation state of rhodium is + 3 , but oxidation states from + 0 to + 6 are also observed . 
 Unlike ruthenium and osmium , rhodium forms no volatile oxygen compounds . The known stable oxides include Rh 
 2O 
 3 , <unk> 
 2 , <unk> 
 2 · <unk> 
 2O , Na 
 <unk> 
 3 , Sr 
 <unk> 
 6 and Sr 
 <unk> 
 6 . Halogen compounds are known in nearly the full range of possible oxidation states . Rhodium ( III ) chloride , rhodium ( IV ) fluoride , rhodium ( V ) fluoride and rhodium ( VI ) fluoride are examples . The lower oxidation states are stable only in the presence of ligands . 
 The best @-@ known rhodium @-@ halogen compound is the Wilkinson 's catalyst <unk> ( triphenylphosphine ) rhodium ( I ) . This catalyst is used in the <unk> or hydrogenation of alkenes . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Naturally occurring rhodium is composed of only one isotope , <unk> . The most stable radioisotopes are <unk> with a half @-@ life of 3 @.@ 3 years , <unk> with a half @-@ life of 207 days , <unk> with a half @-@ life of 2 @.@ 9 years , and <unk> with a half @-@ life of 16 @.@ 1 days . Twenty other radioisotopes have been characterized with atomic weights ranging from 92 @.@ 926 u ( <unk> ) to 116 @.@ 925 u ( <unk> ) . Most of these have half @-@ lives shorter than an hour , except <unk> ( 20 @.@ 8 hours ) and <unk> ( 35 @.@ 36 hours ) . It has numerous meta states , the most stable being <unk> ( 0 @.@ 141 MeV ) with a half @-@ life of about 2 @.@ 9 years and <unk> ( 0 @.@ 157 MeV ) with a half @-@ life of 4 @.@ 34 days ( see isotopes of rhodium ) . 
 In isotopes weighing less than 103 ( the stable isotope ) , the primary decay mode is electron capture and the primary decay product is ruthenium In isotopes greater than 103 , the primary decay mode is beta emission and the primary product is palladium . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 Rhodium is one of the rarest elements in the Earth 's crust , comprising an estimated 0 @.@ 0002 parts per million ( 2 × 10 − 10 ) . Its rarity affects its price and its use in commercial applications . 
 = = = Mining and price = = = 
 The industrial extraction of rhodium is complex because the ores mixed with other metals such as palladium , silver , platinum , and gold and there are very few rhodium @-@ bearing minerals . It is found in platinum ores and extracted as a white inert metal that is difficult to fuse . Principal sources are located in South Africa ; in river sands of the Ural Mountains ; and in North America , including the copper @-@ nickel sulfide mining area of the Sudbury , Ontario , region . Although the quantity at Sudbury is very small , the large amount of processed nickel ore makes rhodium recovery cost @-@ effective . 
 The main exporter of rhodium is South Africa ( approximately 80 % in 2010 ) followed by Russia . The annual world production is 30 tonnes . The price of rhodium is highly variable . In 2007 , rhodium cost approximately eight times more than gold , 450 times more than silver , and 27 @,@ 250 times more than copper by weight . In 2008 , the price briefly rose above $ 10 @,@ 000 per ounce ( $ 350 @,@ 000 per kilogram ) . The economic slowdown of the 3rd quarter of 2008 pushed rhodium prices sharply back below $ 1 @,@ 000 per ounce ( $ 35 @,@ 000 per kilogram ) ; the price rebounded to $ 2 @,@ 750 by early 2010 ( $ 97 @,@ 000 per kilogram ) ( more than twice the gold price ) , but in late 2013 , the prices were less than $ 1000 . 
 Political and financial problems led to very low oil prices and oversupply , causing most metals to drop in price . The economies of China , India and other emerging countries slowed in 2014 and 2015 . In 2014 alone , 23 @,@ 722 @,@ 890 motor vehicles were produced in China , excluding motorbikes . This resulted in a rhodium price of 740 @.@ 00 <unk> $ per Troy ounce ( 31 @.@ 1 grams ) in late November 2015 . 
 = = = Used nuclear fuels = = = 
 Rhodium is a fission product of uranium @-@ 235 ; therefore , each kilogram of fission product contains a significant amount of the lighter platinum group metals including rhodium . Used nuclear fuel is a potential source of rhodium . However , the extraction is complex and expensive , and the presence of rhodium radioisotopes requires a period of cooling storage for multiple half @-@ lives of the longest @-@ lived isotope ( about 10 years ) . These factors make the source unattractive and no large @-@ scale extraction has been attempted . 
 = = Applications = = 
 The primary use of this element is in automobiles as a catalytic converter , changing harmful unburned hydrocarbons , carbon monoxide , and nitrogen oxide exhaust emissions into less noxious gases . Of 30 @,@ 000 kg of rhodium consumed worldwide in 2012 , 81 % ( 24 @,@ 300 kg ) went into and 8 @,@ 060 kg was recovered from this application . About 964 kg of rhodium was used in the glass industry , mostly for production of fiberglass and flat @-@ panel glass , and 2 @,@ 520 kg was used in the chemical industry . 
 = = = Catalyst = = = 
 In 2012 , 81 % of the world production of rhodium was consumed in automobile catalytic converters . Rhodium is preferable to the other platinum metals in the reduction of nitrogen oxides to nitrogen and oxygen : 
 2 NOx → x O 
 2 + N 
 2 
 Rhodium catalysts are used in a number of industrial processes , notably in catalytic carbonylation of methanol to produce acetic acid by the Monsanto process . It is also used to catalyze addition of <unk> to molecular double bonds , a process important in manufacture of certain silicone rubbers . Rhodium catalysts are also used to reduce benzene to <unk> . 
 The complex of a rhodium ion with <unk> is a widely used chiral catalyst for chiral synthesis , as in the synthesis of menthol . 
 = = = Ornamental uses = = = 
 Rhodium finds use in jewelry and for decorations . It is electroplated on white gold and platinum to give it a reflective white surface at time of sale , after which the thin layer wears away with use . This is known as rhodium flashing in the jewelry business . It may also be used in coating sterling silver to protect against tarnish ( silver sulfide , <unk> , produced from atmospheric hydrogen sulfide , H2S ) . Solid ( pure ) rhodium jewelry is very rare , more because of the difficulty of fabrication ( high melting point and poor malleability ) than because of the high price . The high cost ensures that rhodium is applied only as an <unk> . 
 Rhodium has also been used for honors or to signify elite status , when more commonly used metals such as silver , gold or platinum were deemed insufficient . In 1979 the Guinness Book of World Records gave Paul McCartney a rhodium @-@ plated disc for being history 's all @-@ time best @-@ selling songwriter and recording artist . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 Rhodium is used as an alloying agent for hardening and improving the corrosion resistance of platinum and palladium . These alloys are used in furnace windings , bushings for glass fiber production , thermocouple elements , electrodes for aircraft spark plugs , and laboratory crucibles . Other uses include : 
 Electrical contacts , where it is valued for small electrical resistance , small and stable contact resistance , and great corrosion resistance . 
 Rhodium plated by either electroplating or evaporation is extremely hard and useful for optical instruments . 
 Filters in mammography systems for the characteristic X @-@ rays it produces . 
 Rhodium neutron detectors are used in combustion engineering nuclear reactors to measure neutron flux levels – this method requires a digital filter to determine the current neutron flux level , generating three separate signals : immediate , a few seconds delay , and a minute delay , each with its own signal level ; all three are combined in the rhodium detector signal . The three Palo Verde nuclear reactors each have 305 rhodium neutron detectors , 61 detectors on each of five vertical levels , providing an accurate 3D " picture " of reactivity and allowing fine tuning to consume the nuclear fuel most economically . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Being a noble metal , pure rhodium is inert . However , chemical complexes of rhodium can be reactive . Median lethal dose ( LD50 ) for rats is 198 mg of rhodium chloride ( <unk> 
 3 ) per kilogram of body weight . Like the other noble metals , all of which are too inert to occur as chemical compounds in nature , rhodium has not been found to serve any biological function . In elemental form , the metal is harmless . 
 People can be exposed to rhodium in the workplace by inhalation . The Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has specified the legal limit ( Permissible exposure limit ) for rhodium exposure in the workplace at 0 @.@ 1 mg / m3 over an 8 @-@ hour workday , and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) has set the recommended exposure limit ( REL ) , at the same level . At levels of 100 mg / m3 , rhodium is immediately dangerous to life and health . For soluble compounds , the PEL and REL are both 0 @.@ 001 mg / m3 . 
 = Survivor Series ( 1993 ) = 
 Survivor Series ( 1993 ) was the seventh annual Survivor Series pay @-@ per @-@ view professional wrestling event produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . It took place on Thanksgiving Eve , November 24 , 1993 , at the Boston Garden in Boston , Massachusetts . 
 The event consisted of four tag @-@ team elimination matches and a bout for the Smoky Mountain Wrestling Tag Team Championship . The main event match saw the All @-@ Americans , a team of face wrestlers from the United States , competing against the Foreign Fanatics , a team of heels that represented other countries . The All @-@ Americans won the match when Lex Luger was the last man remaining . In an undercard match , four members of the Hart family competed against Shawn Michaels and a group of masked men . The original plan was for the Harts to face Jerry Lawler , with whom they were feuding , but Lawler was not able to appear at the event . The Harts won the match , but a confrontation between Bret Hart and Owen Hart after the match led to Owen turning against the family the following year . 
 The majority of the feuds remained unresolved and carried on to future events . Bam Bam Bigelow was scheduled to face his main rival , Doink the Clown , but Bigelow 's team ended up facing four other wrestlers wearing clown makeup instead . Matches from the Survivor Series also helped set up feuds for Royal Rumble 1994 , the WWF 's next pay @-@ per @-@ view . Razor Ramon 's rivalry with Irwin R. Schyster intensified at Survivor Series and led to Ramon defending his WWF Intercontinental Championship against Schyster at the Royal Rumble . This event also marked the beginning of The Undertaker 's feud with Yokozuna , and Yokozuna defended his WWF Championship against The Undertaker at the Royal Rumble . 
 = = Background = = 
 Several feuds surrounded the opening match , which saw the team of Razor Ramon , Marty Jannetty , the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid and Mr. Perfect face the team of Irwin R. Schyster ( I.R.S. ) , Diesel , Rick Martel , and Adam Bomb . Diesel made his WWF debut on June 6 , 1993 as a bodyguard for Shawn Michaels in a match between Michaels and Jannetty . Diesel 's interference in the match helped Michaels to defeat Jannetty and win the WWF Intercontinental Championship . Diesel was also at ringside to help Michaels when Michaels faced Mr. Perfect for the title belt at SummerSlam 1993 . Diesel attacked Perfect on multiple occasions during the match and ultimately caused Perfect to lose the match via countout . In September 1993 , Michaels was stripped of the Intercontinental Championship by WWF President Jack Tunney . A battle royal was scheduled to determine the top two contenders for the championship . Ramon and Martel were the last two wrestlers in the ring , and they faced each other in a title match on the September 27 episode of Monday Night Raw . Ramon won the match and was awarded the championship belt . 
 Schyster had initiated a feud with Ramon in May 1993 after Ramon lost a match to The Kid ( later the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid ) , who was competing as a jobber at the time . Schyster and his tag team partner Ted DiBiase made fun of Ramon for the loss and offered him a job as a servant . In response , Ramon teamed with the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid for a series of matches against Schyster and DiBiase , and he also distracted Schyster during a match and caused him to lose to jobber P.J. Walker . Adam Bomb was not involved in any feuds with his opponents at Survivor Series , but there was animosity between Bomb and his teammate Rick Martel . Bomb 's manager , Harvey Wippleman , was at ringside to help Martel in a match against Ramon . Wippleman was standing in the way of the match , and Martel ran in to him . While Martel was distracted , Ramon pinned him to win the match . Martel then yelled at Wippleman and pushed him . Bomb came to the ring to defend his manager , and an argument ensued until Diesel and Schyster came to the ring to calm their teammates . 
 Jerry Lawler spent much of 1993 building a feud with the Hart family . Lawler had been using the nickname " The King " since defeating Jackie Fargo for the AWA Southern Heavyweight Championship in 1974 . After Bret Hart won the WWF 's 1993 King of the Ring tournament , Lawler confronted him and claimed to be the only king in the WWF . Lawler then attacked Hart from behind , hitting Hart with the scepter and throne that had been set up for the coronation ceremony . The feud escalated when Lawler involved Helen and Stu Hart , Bret 's parents , by insulting them while serving as commentator for WWF television programs . In what was billed as a " Family Feud " match , Bret Hart was joined by his brother Owen , who also worked for the WWF at the time , as well as his brothers Bruce and Keith , both of whom had also wrestled professionally . Lawler 's partners were three masked wrestlers known only as the Blue Knight , the Red Knight , and the Black Knight . 
 Lawler was unable to appear at the event , however , as he was indicted after being accused of raping and <unk> a teenage girl , who later admitted to making up the story . Shawn Michaels , who replaced Lawler in the match , also had a rivalry with Bret Hart dating back to the previous year . Hart , who held the Intercontinental Championship for much of 1992 , defended the belt against Michaels many times , including in the WWF 's first ladder match . They had also wrestled each other in the main event of Survivor Series 1992 , when Hart defended his newly @-@ won WWF Championship against Michaels . 
 The Smoky Mountain Wrestling Tag Team Championship was defended at Survivor Series as part of a working agreement between WWF owner Vince McMahon and Smoky Mountain Wrestling ( SMW ) owner Jim Cornette . The Rock ' n ' Roll Express , who held the belts going into the event , had been feuding with The Heavenly Bodies over the title for over a year . The rivalry had been violent at times , including a barbed wire cage match and a Texas deathmatch . 
 Doink the Clown had annoyed Bam Bam Bigelow throughout October and November with such pranks as throwing water and confetti on him and dumping a pail of water on Bigelow 's on @-@ screen girlfriend Luna Vachon . He also tied a tripwire across the aisle during one of Bigelow 's matches ; after Bigelow fell over the wire , Doink attacked him with a broom . Bigelow responded by coming to the ring during one of Doink 's matches and destroying Doink 's toy wagon . The character of Doink was played by several wrestlers , who occasionally appeared at the same time . The match booked for Survivor Series advertised Bigelow teaming with Bastion Booger , who portrayed an overweight and dirty glutton , and The Headshrinkers ( Samu and Fatu ) , a team of Samoans who were portrayed as savages , to face four Doinks . To promote the match , Doink appeared on the video wall that was part of the set during Bigelow 's matches leading up to the event . The wall used a split screen to show multiple Doinks talking and laughing at the same time . 
 In the main event , the team of the All @-@ Americans , which consisted of Lex Luger , Tatanka , and the Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott Steiner ) faced the Foreign Fanatics , which consisted of Yokozuna , Ludvig Borga , and The Quebecers ( Jacques and Pierre ) . The main storyline behind the match began that summer when Yokozuna , a Japanese sumo wrestler , challenged any American athlete to bodyslam him on the deck of the USS Intrepid during an event on Independence Day . After several challengers were unable to lift Yokozuna , Luger arrived via helicopter and successfully performed what was termed " the bodyslam heard around the world " . Luger was granted a match for Yokozuna 's WWF Championship at SummerSlam . Luger got a victory via countout but did not win the title . In the dressing room after the match , Borga , a Finnish wrestler , interrupted Luger 's celebration by criticizing Luger and initiating a new feud . 
 The Steiner Brothers spent the fall 1993 feuding with The Quebecers , a Canadian tag team . They had faced each other several times since The Quebecers had won the WWF Tag Team Championship from the Steiners on September 13 . Since arriving in the WWF , Tatanka had been on a two @-@ year winning streak . Borga ended the streak on the October 30 , 1993 episode of WWF Superstars by pinning Tatanka after hitting him with a chair . After the match , Borga and Yokozuna attacked Tatanka , causing kayfabe injuries that forced Tatanka to withdraw from the match at Survivor Series . The All @-@ Americans recruited The Undertaker to replace Tatanka . On the November 15 episode of Monday Night Raw , Luger defeated Pierre ; as a result of a kayfabe injury in the match , the Foreign Fanatics had to replace Pierre with Crush , the sole American of the team . 
 Crush was feuding with Randy Savage going into the event . They had been on @-@ screen friends , but Crush was angry that Savage had not saved him from an attack by Yokozuna on the July 12 , 1993 episode of Monday Night Raw . To make his injuries seem real , Crush did not appear on WWF television programming for several months . He made his return on October 18 , accompanied by Yokozuna 's manager , Mr. Fuji , claiming that they sympathized with Crush 's sense of betrayal by Savage . Savage tried to make amends with Crush , who then attacked Savage and announced that he had turned against Savage and the United States and was aligning himself with Yokozuna , Fuji , and Japan . 
 = = Event = = 
 Prior to the televised broadcast , Billy Gunn defeated The Brooklyn Brawler in a dark match . The first match on the pay @-@ per @-@ view event saw Razor Ramon , Randy Savage , the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid , and Marty Jannetty face Diesel , Irwin R. Schyster , Rick Martel , and Adam Bomb . Prior to the match , Ramon announced that Savage was taking the place of Perfect , who was unable to appear . Martel and Ramon began the match in the ring , but Martel soon tagged out to bring Bomb into the match . Ramon performed a suplex on Bomb and attempted to pin his opponent . Martel tried to rescue his partner but ended up hitting Bomb instead and causing an argument . The 1 – 2 – 3 Kid entered the match but was overpowered by Bomb and Diesel . After the Kid tagged out , Savage performed a diving elbow drop on Diesel before getting the pinfall to eliminate Diesel from the match . Ramon was attacked by his opponents but eventually tagged Savage back into the match . Savage got distracted when Crush appeared in the aisle , however , which allowed Schyster to eliminate him from the match . Ramon then performed a Razor 's Edge on Schyster and pinned him . Ramon attempted the same move on Martel , but Schyster snuck back into the ring and hit Ramon with a briefcase . Ramon fell out of the ring and was counted out of the match . The remaining four wrestlers fought back and forth , but the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid eventually pinned Martel after a sunset flip . Almost immediately , Jannetty performed a sunset flip on Bomb to win the match for his team . 
 The next bout was the " Family Feud " match that saw the Hart brothers ( Bret , Owen , Bruce , and Keith ) facing Shawn Michaels and His Knights . The knights wore masks to hide their identities , but it has been revealed that Jeff Gaylord was the Black Knight , Greg Valentine was the Blue Knight , and Barry Horowitz was the Red Knight . Ray Combs , then host of Family Feud , told jokes to insult Shawn Michaels prior to the bout and later served as guest commentator for the match . Michaels began the match by wrestling Bruce Hart . Although Michaels was able to go on the offensive against the Hart brothers , the knights were unable to achieve much success against the Harts . At one point , all four wrestlers brawled in the ring , but Owen was able to eliminate the Black Knight after performing a missile dropkick . Michaels and the knights regained control of the match , but Bret turned things around by eliminating the Red Knight via submission to the Sharpshooter . Bret sustained a kayfabe injury after being thrown out of the ring and sat out of the match for a few minutes . Meanwhile , Michaels provoked Stu Hart into punching him . Inside the ring , Owen forced the Blue Knight to submit to the Sharpshooter , which left Michaels by himself . While Bret was standing on the ring apron , however , Owen ran in to him and got distracted . This allowed Michaels to pin Owen and eliminate him from the match . Bret dominated the rest of the match against Michaels until Michaels walked back to the locker room . As a result , Michaels was counted out , and the Harts won the match . After the match , Owen returned to the ring and yelled at Bret , blaming Bret for causing him to be eliminated from the match . 
 All four men began the SMW Tag Team Championship match in the ring . The Rock ' n ' Roll Express ( Ricky Morton and Robert Gibson ) controlled most of the opening of the match with aerial maneuvers against The Heavenly Bodies ( Jimmy Del Ray and Tom Pritchard ) . Del Ray tried to help his partner but superkicked him instead . The Heavenly Bodies gained the advantage after Pritchard performed a powerbomb on Morton , which Del Ray followed with a moonsault . Del Ray and Morton fought back and forth , with Del Ray performing another moonsault and Morton executing a hurricanrana . After all four wrestlers brawled in the ring once more , Del Ray hit Gibson in the back with a tennis racquet . Pritchard then pinned Gibson to win the belts for The Heavenly Bodies . 
 The next match pitted Bam Bam Bigelow , Bastion Booger and The Headshrinkers ( accompanied by Luna Vachon and Afa ) against a team calling themselves the Four Doinks . After Bigelow 's team was introduced , Doink the Clown 's theme song began to play , but immediately switched to the theme of The Bushwhackers and Howard Finkel introduced the pair as Luke Doink and Butch Doink as they came down wearing clown wigs , with Luke riding a scooter and Butch pulling a wagon . As the fans waited to see who would be the other two Doinks , the intro to Doink 's theme played again and the two Doinks were joined by Mabel Doink and Mo Doink with their rapping manager Oscar Doink ; as they came to the ring they were referred to by Bobby Heenan as " Doinks on a Mission " . 
 Headshrinker Samu was eliminated first after he bit several of the balloons being carried by his opponents . He was purposely offered one more balloon by the Doinks , which he willfully bit into . Samu was stunned to find out that the balloon was full of water , which caused him to stumble back in surprise and Luke rolled him up and pinned him . Later , Booger has a chance to pin Luke after he hit the Trip to the Batcave on him . However , Booger got off of Luke and went to the corner where Headshrinker Fatu offered him a banana . As Booger was looking to perform the move again , his teammates dragged him away and Booger landed on his knees . Luke and Butch performed their trademark battering ram on Booger . Mabel then executed a leg drop on Booger and pinned him . Down four wrestlers to two , Bigelow 's team appeared to be making a comeback when Fatu began taking down his opponents with the carcass of a turkey that Afa had been eating from the entire match . He then performed a top rope splash onto Mo . Fatu got distracted , however , and examined a banana peel with curiosity . Butch entered the ring with a bucket and faked out Fatu by making like he was going to toss the contents of the <unk> onto him . This resulted in Fatu slipping on the banana peel , and Butch pinned him to eliminate him from the match . Left by himself , Bigelow began brutally <unk> three of the Doinks and seemed to get the upper hand when Mabel entered the ring and Bigelow was unable to do much to him . Meanwhile , Butch dumped a bucket of confetti all over Luna , which caused Bigelow to become momentarily distracted and Mabel and Mo sandwiched him in the corner . Bigelow fell , Mabel performed a splash on him , and the referee counted the pin as the other three Doinks piled on . After the match , the real Doink the Clown appeared on the video screen to taunt Bigelow . 
 In the final match of the evening , The All @-@ Americans , consisting of Lex Luger , The Undertaker , and The Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott ) , competed against the Foreign Fanatics ( Yokozuna , Ludvig Borga , Quebecer Jacques , and Crush ) . Scott Steiner and Jacques began the match , but Scott soon tagged in his brother Rick . Rick knocked Yokozuna out of the ring , but he was unable to perform much offense against Borga . Rick attempted a crossbody , during which Borga was supposed to catch him . Borga botched the move , but he pinned Rick anyway to eliminate him from the match . Crush faced Scott Steiner inside the ring , but Randy Savage then appeared in the aisle trying to get to the ring but was restrained by officials and The Smoking Gunns . Scott knocked Crush out of the ring , and Crush fought with Savage until being counted out of the match . Scott then turned his attention to Jacques before tagging Luger into the match . Luger eliminated Jacques with an elbow drop and a pinfall . Scott Steiner re @-@ entered the match and executed a superplex on Borga . When he tried to pin Borga , however , Yokozuna entered the ring . Yokozuna performed a leg drop on Steiner and pinned him to even the match at two wrestlers each . Luger fought with Borga and Yokozuna before tagging The Undertaker into the match . The Undertaker gained control of the match , but Yokozuna turned the momentum around by performing his signature move , the Banzai drop , on The Undertaker . When he attempted the move a second time , The Undertaker sat up . The two men then fought outside the ring until both were counted out and eliminated from the match . Luger and Borga then fought back and forth until Luger performed a running forearm smash and pinned Borga to win the match . After the match , Santa Claus came to the ring to celebrate with Luger . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Razor Ramon continued with two of his feuds after Survivor Series . Irwin R. Schyster stole Ramon 's gold chains , which set up a match for the Intercontinental Championship at Royal Rumble 1994 . Despite interference from Shawn Michaels , Ramon pinned Schyster to retain the title . Michaels and Ramon then faced each other at WrestleMania X. Diesel got involved , but Ramon won the match . Ramon then defended his title against Diesel on April 13 , 1994 . Diesel won the match and became the new WWF Intercontinental Champion . Ramon regained the belt in a rematch at SummerSlam 1994 , however . Meanwhile , the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid and Marty Jannetty continued with their push from the promotion and won the WWF Tag Team Championship on January 10 , 1994 . 
 Owen Hart challenged Bret Hart to a match after Survivor Series , but Bret refused to fight his brother . The two reunited to face The Quebecers for the Tag Team Championship at Royal Rumble 1994 . Bret sustained a kayfabe injury during the match , which forced the referee to stop the match . Owen blamed Bret for the loss and attacked him after the match . They faced each other at WrestleMania X , where Owen defeated Bret . The rivalry continued , however , and the brothers feuded throughout 1994 and into 1995 . Bret 's feud with Lawler remained , but the two did not face each other again until In Your House 1 in May 1995 . The feud was reignited at that time , and they feuded at several pay @-@ per @-@ view events in 1995 . 
 Bam Bam Bigelow 's feud with Doink the Clown remained unresolved for several months . They were in the ring at the same time during the main event of the 1994 Royal Rumble , which was a battle royal @-@ style match . Bigelow attacked Doink and eliminated him from the match . The blow off match came at WrestleMania X , where Doink and his midget sidekick Dink faced Bigelow and his girlfriend Luna Vachon in a mixed tag team match . Bigelow and Vachon won the match to settle the feud . 
 The Steiner Brothers continued to challenge The Quebecers , but they were unable to regain the Tag Team Championship . As a result of their confrontation at Survivor Series , The Undertaker and Yokozuna faced each other at Royal Rumble 1994 in a casket match for Yokozuna 's WWF Championship . Mr. Fuji , Yokozuna 's manager , recruited several heel wrestlers to help Yokozuna win the match . The Undertaker supposedly died and disappeared from the WWF for several months , although , in reality , he was simply recovering from injuries . He resumed the feud with Yokozuna upon his return , however , and defeated Yokozuna in a casket match at Survivor Series 1994 . Luger also continued his rivalry with Yokozuna . As a co @-@ winner of the 1994 Royal Rumble match , Luger was granted a shot at Yokozuna 's WWF Championship . Mr. Perfect , who had returned to the WWF , was the referee for the match and turned heel by disqualifying Luger during the match . 
 Ludvig Borga was scheduled to continue his feud with Tatanka in a match at Royal Rumble 1994 . Borga sustained a legitimate ankle injury , however , and never returned to the WWF . WWF writers had also planned to have Borga feud with Luger , but they were forced to drop the storyline because of Borga 's departure . 
 Crush and Randy Savage also continued their feud . They fought each other during the battle royal at Royal Rumble 1994 until Crush eliminated Savage . To end the rivalry , they faced each other in a Falls Count Anywhere match at WrestleMania X , which Savage won . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The attendance for the event was 15 @,@ 509 , which generated $ 180 @,@ 000 in ticket sales . This was the lowest attendance for a Survivor Series event since 1989 . The pay @-@ per @-@ view buyrate was 0 @.@ 82 , down from 1 @.@ 4 the previous year , and was the lowest buyrate in Survivor Series history to that point . 
 The event has been rated by several sources . Adam Gutschmidt , writing for Online Onslaught , stated that " many of the substitutions hurt the matches " and that " the main event was bland " . The Other Arena opined that the Four Doinks match was the worst on the card and that the confrontation between Lex Luger and Ludvig Borga was boring . Scott <unk> and Justin <unk> reviewed the event for The History of WWE . Both writers gave Survivor Series 1993 a " C " rating and viewed the Family Feud match as the worst on the card . Matt <unk> , writing for 411mania.com , gave the event a 5 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating . He pointed to the crowd 's chant of " We want Doink ! " as evidence that fans were upset by the Four Doinks match . 
 Survivor Series 1993 was released on VHS by Coliseum Video on December 15 , 1993 in North America . It was released in the United Kingdom by Silver Vision ; the VHS version was released on March 14 , 1994 , and the DVD was released as part of the WWE Tagged Classics line ( packaged together with Survivor Series 1994 ) on September 4 , 2006 . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Survivor Series elimination matches = = = 
 ^ 1 
 ^ 2 
 ^ 3 
 ^ 4 
 = John Grant ( Gunpowder Plot ) = 
 John Grant ( c . 1570 – 30 January 1606 ) was a member of the failed Gunpowder Plot , a conspiracy to replace the Protestant King James I of England with a Catholic monarch . Grant was born around 1570 , and lived at Norbrook in Warwickshire . He married the sister of another plotter , Thomas Wintour . Grant was enlisted by Robert Catesby , a religious zealot who had grown so impatient with James 's lack of toleration for Catholics that he planned to kill him , by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder . Grant 's role in the conspiracy was to provide supplies for a planned Midlands uprising , during which James 's daughter , Princess Elizabeth , would be captured . However , on the eve of the planned explosion , Guy Fawkes was discovered guarding the explosives the plotters had positioned in the undercroft beneath the House of Lords , and arrested . 
 As the government searched for Fawkes 's accomplices , Grant and the others engaged in a futile mission for support for the uprising . They stole horses from Warwick Castle , and further supplies from Hewell Grange , before stopping at Holbeche House . The plotters laid in front of the fire some of the gunpowder they had collected , to dry out , but a stray spark ignited the powder , and in the resultant conflagration Grant was blinded . Government forces besieged the house , and he was captured and taken to London . 
 At his arraignment in January 1606 Grant pleaded not guilty to high treason , but he was nevertheless sentenced to be hanged , drawn and quartered , and was executed three days later , on 30 January . 
 = = Background = = 
 Born some time around 1570 , John Grant lived at Norbrook , near Snitterfield in Warwickshire . He was married to Thomas Wintour 's sister , Dorothy , with a son , Wintour Grant . He is described by author Antonia Fraser as a melancholy individual , but also an intellectual who studied Latin and other languages . He was a resolute character , as the <unk> who searched his home for Catholic priests were no doubt aware ; he was so unwelcoming to them that they eventually shied away from Norbrook . Grant was also involved in the Essex Rebellion against Elizabeth I , as were several of the men with whom he became better acquainted through what became known as the Gunpowder Plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 English Catholics hoped that the years of persecution they had suffered during Elizabeth 's reign would end when James I came to the throne , as his attitude appeared moderate , even tolerant towards Catholics . In Robert Catesby 's view however , James had reneged on his promises , and he quickly lost patience with the new dynasty . He therefore planned to kill James by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder , and inciting a popular revolt during which a Catholic monarch would be restored to the throne . 
 Catesby enlisted the help of six fellow Catholics , and by 25 March 1605 he had recruited three others : Robert Wintour , Christopher Wright , and Grant . Grant had received a letter from Catesby inviting him to a meeting that took place in Oxford at the Catherine Wheel inn , where he and Robert Wintour swore an oath after which they were told of the plan . Grant 's role in the uprising centred on his house at Norbrook , ideally located in the English Midlands close to Warwick and Stratford , and to Catesby 's childhood home at Lapworth ( then owned by John Wright ) . In summer 1605 Grant likely stored weapons and ammunition at Norbrook , but he was also to take charge of the provision of rare war horses from the nearby Warwick Castle . 
 Concern over the plague had delayed Parliament 's opening from February , to October 1605 , and the government later claimed that by December 1604 the plotters were busily digging a tunnel beneath Parliament . No evidence exists to substantiate this claim , and no trace of a tunnel was ever found , but perhaps because of the change of dates Grant seems not to have been involved in the endeavour , which was stopped when the tenancy to the undercroft beneath the House of Lords became available . By 20 July the explosives were in position , but the opening of Parliament was again prorogued , this time until 5 November 1605 . As Catesby added three more to the conspiracy , the last few details were worked out ; Fawkes was to light the fuse that would set off the explosion , and then escape to the continent , while the others would incite the Midlands uprising , and capture James 's daughter , Princess Elizabeth . Thus , as the plot moved closer to fruition , on Monday 4 November Grant and a friend were to be found in Dunchurch at the Red Lion inn , with the newly recruited Everard Digby and his " hunting party " . The group attended a Mass the next morning , before moving on . 
 = = Failure = = 
 Tipped off by an anonymous letter to William Parker , 4th Baron Monteagle , late on Monday night the authorities had made a search of Parliament . There they had discovered Fawkes guarding the gunpowder the plotters had placed in the undercroft beneath the House of Lords . Catesby and the others , en route to the Midlands , had been alerted to his arrest by those conspirators who had since fled London , and together had rode to Dunchurch to meet Digby and his party . 
 By Wednesday 6 November the government was busy searching for Fawkes ' accomplices , and towards the end of the day Grant 's name appeared on the list of suspects drawn up by the Lord Chief Justice . However , confirmation of his status as a fugitive would not arrive until the next day , when provoked by their raid for supplies on Warwick Castle , the government issued a public proclamation naming Percy , Catesby , Rookwood , Thomas Wintour and both Wright brothers as wanted men . On the same proclamation Grant was misidentified as Edward Grant , and Catesby 's servant , Thomas Bates , was probably also misnamed as Robert Ashfield . From Warwick they rode to Grant 's home at Norbrook , collecting muskets , <unk> and ammunition that he had stored there . Then they continued west through Snitterfield toward Alcester , before stopping at Huddington at about 2 : 00 pm that afternoon . Early the next morning they attended a Mass conducted by Father Nicholas Hart , who also heard their confessions — a sign that in Fraser 's opinion demonstrates that none of them thought they had long to live . 
 Riding through pouring rain , the fugitives helped themselves to arms , ammunition and money from the vacant home of Lord Windsor at Hewell Grange . Any hopes they harboured of a larger uprising were dashed by the locals , who on hearing that the party stood for " God and Country " , replied that they were for " King James as well as God and Country " . The group finally reached Holbeche House , on the border of Staffordshire , at about 10 : 00 pm . Tired and desperate they spread in front of the fire some of the now @-@ soaked gunpowder taken from Hewell Grange , to dry out . An ember from the fire landed on the powder , and the resultant flames engulfed Catesby , Rookwood , Grant and another man . 
 Grant was blinded by the conflagration , his eyes " burnt out " . Some of the plotters disappeared into the night , but Grant stayed with Catesby , Thomas Wintour , Rookwood , the Wright brothers and Percy . With the arrival of the Sheriff of Worcester and his company early on 8 November , the house was besieged . Catesby and Percy were killed , as were both Wright brothers . Wintour and Rookwood were each wounded and were easily captured , as was Grant . 
 = = Trial and execution = = 
 Grant and the survivors were taken first to Worcester in the custody of the Sheriff , and then to the Tower of London . At their arraignment on 27 January 1606 all except Digby pleaded " Not Guilty " , but the outcome was never in doubt ; they were all found guilty of high treason , and sentenced to be hanged , drawn and quartered . 
 The first executions were scheduled for Thursday 30 January 1606 . Along with Digby and Robert Wintour ( Bates was brought separately , from the Gatehouse Prison ) , Grant was strapped to a wattled hurdle and dragged through the streets of London to St Paul 's churchyard , by St.Paul 's Cathedral . Digby was the first to ascend the scaffold , and before he was executed gave a short speech . Wintour followed , saying little . Grant was next . At his trial , when asked why a death sentence should not be pronounced against him , he had replied that he was " guilty of a conspiracy intended , but never effected . " Similarly , when faced with the executioner 's halter he refused to confess — the only one of the condemned to do so . He was led quietly up the ladder and crossed himself , before being hanged and then subjected to the latter part of his sentence . The other four plotters were executed the following day , in Old Palace Yard . 
 = SMS Condor = 
 SMS Condor ( " His Majesty 's Ship Condor " ) was an unprotected cruiser of the Imperial German Navy . She was the fourth member of the Bussard class , which included five other vessels . The cruiser 's keel was laid down in Hamburg in 1891 , she was launched in February 1892 , and was commissioned in December of that year . Intended for overseas duty , Condor was armed with a main battery of eight 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns , and could steam at a speed of 15 @.@ 5 knots ( 28 @.@ 7 km / h ; 17 @.@ 8 mph ) . 
 Condor served abroad for the majority of her career , first in German East Africa in the 1890s , followed by a stint in the South Seas Station in the Pacific Ocean in the 1900s . She was present in East Africa amid rising tensions with Britain during the Second Boer War in 1899 , and frequently suppressed uprisings in Germany 's Pacific island holdings in the decade before the outbreak of World War I. Badly worn out , she returned to Germany in March 1914 and was removed from service . In 1916 , she was converted into a storage hulk for mines . After the end of World War I , she was discarded and broken up for scrap in 1921 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Condor was 83 @.@ 9 meters ( 275 ft ) long overall , with a beam of 12 @.@ 7 m ( 42 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 42 m ( 14 @.@ 5 ft ) forward . She displaced 1 @,@ 864 t ( 1 @,@ 835 long tons ; 2 @,@ 055 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two horizontal 3 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines powered by four coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers . These provided a top speed of 15 @.@ 5 kn ( 28 @.@ 7 km / h ; 17 @.@ 8 mph ) and a range of approximately 2 @,@ 950 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 460 km ; 3 @,@ 390 mi ) at 9 kn ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . She had a crew of 9 officers and 152 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with eight 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 35 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns in single pedestal mounts , supplied with 800 rounds of ammunition in total . They had a range of 10 @,@ 800 m ( 35 @,@ 400 ft ) . Two guns were placed side by side forward , two on each broadside , and two side by side aft . The gun armament was rounded out by five revolver cannon . She was also equipped with two 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes , both of which were mounted on the deck . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Condor was ordered as a replacement for the gunboat SMS Eber , which had been sunk by the hurricane that hit Apia in 1889 . She was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg in 1891 . An outbreak of Cholera in Hamburg made work on the ship difficult , but the completed hull was nevertheless ready for launching as scheduled , on 23 February 1892 . Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Wilhelm Schröder , the Chief of the Baltic Station , gave the speech at her launching , and she was christened by Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) von <unk> , the director of the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Dockyard ) in Wilhelmshaven . The ship accidentally launched itself due to the tide coming earlier than expected . She was completed on 9 December of that year , when she was commissioned into the Imperial German Navy ; precautions against cholera delayed the beginning of sea trials until 15 December . 
 = = = East Africa Station = = = 
 On 2 October 1894 , Condor was deployed to German East Africa , based in Dar es Salaam to replace the gunboat Möwe . One of the major reasons Condor was sent to the East African Station was the pressure Britain was placing on the Boer republics — the Transvaal and the Orange Free State — which Germany held to be in its interest . While in East Africa , Condor would have been able to rapidly respond to British actions in the region . And so while stationed here , Condor frequently moved back and forth between German East Africa and the eastern coast of South Africa until 1899 , when the Second Boer War broke out . From 15 December 1894 to 1 January 1895 , Condor was anchored in Lourenço Marques , the capital of Portuguese Mozambique . On 27 June , she joined her sister Cormoran in Delagoa Bay . Despite the tensions between Germany and Britain , Condor went to Durban for her annual overhaul , which lasted from 3 August to 16 November . She thereafter returned to German East Africa and replaced her sister Seeadler there . 
 In late December 1895 , the British launched the so @-@ called Jameson Raid into the Transvaal ; this prompted the German Navy to send Condor back to Lourenço Marques in January 1896 . From 14 to 16 June , she was sent to Mahé in the Seychelles to rest her crew . She was called back early to return to East Africa . From 26 August to 25 November , she lay off Cape Town , but protests against the German consul , Count von Pfeil , led to moving the cruiser back to Lourenço Marques , where she remained from 11 December to 2 February 1897 . A delegation from the cruiser was sent to the opening ceremonies for the Pretoria – Lourenço Marques rail line , which had been built with German funding . During this period , she served with the cruiser Schwalbe . On 3 January 1901 , Condor departed Africa , bound for Germany . While en route in the North Sea , she responded to the distress signal from the German steamer <unk> . 
 = = = South @-@ Seas Station = = = 
 While in Germany , she underwent repairs to her hull and propulsion system . Two years later , she was sent to the Pacific to replace Cormoran on the South @-@ Seas Station . On 26 June 1903 , she arrived in Singapore . In 1904 , Condor served with her sister Seeadler and the old gunboat Möwe , which had by that time been converted to a survey ship . Condor helped suppress minor unrest in German Samoa between July and September 1904 . In April – May 1905 , she went to Sydney , Australia for basic repairs . She thereafter carried the Imperial governor of German Samoa , Wilhelm Solf , on a visit to Hawaii ; the trip lasted from 30 August to 14 September . Annual overhauls in Sydney took place during the periods 9 March – 16 May 1907 and 10 March – 18 May 1908 . In October 1907 , Condor was sent to the southern <unk> Chain to conduct gunnery training . The gunfire was intended as a show of force to prevent the local tribal chief from rebelling against the German authorities . 
 In concert with the gunboat Jaguar , Condor participated in the suppression of unrest in the Marshall Islands in September and October 1908 . During this operation , she carried a contingent of Melanesian infantry to the island of Pohnpei to suppress tensions between rival factions on the island . In early 1909 , unrest broke out in Apia ; because Condor was absent , the light cruisers Leipzig and Arcona and Jaguar were sent to suppress the uprising . In August , Condor searched unsuccessfully for the lost government steamer <unk> , which had been sailing to Brisbane . Condor met the armored cruiser Scharnhorst and the light cruisers Nürnberg and Emden from the East Asia Squadron in Apia in July 1910 . In January 1911 , she went to Pohnpei again to suppress the Sokehs Rebellion , along with Leipzig and Cormoran . 
 From 20 May 1911 to 1 October 1911 , she underwent basic repairs at the Kaiserliche Werft at Tsingtau . During the Agadir Crisis in November , she went to Yap in order to be able to quickly receive news from the recently constructed wireless station there . Further maintenance was effected at Sydney from 1 March to 18 April 1912 . That year , her survey staff was enlarged to allow for greater coastal survey work in the German protectorates . On 3 December she left <unk> in Rabaul , by request of the governor of German New Guinea , to get in touch with a German scientific expedition . From 11 to 13 December the ship anchored in the Empress Augusta river ( Sepik ) , Kaiser @-@ Wilhelmsland , 246 nmi ( 456 km ; 283 mi ) upstream . At the times the base camp of the German Empress Augusta river expedition ( 1912 @-@ 1913 ) was situated here . She returned to <unk> on 18 December . On 8 January 1913 , Condor was reclassified as a gunboat . During basic repairs in Tsingtao in May , her hull was found to be in very bad condition . The order to return to Germany came while she was stationed in Apia in November . While en route , she had to protect the German steamer Zanzibar from hostile Moroccans , which had run aground off the Moroccan coast . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Condor arrived in Danzig on 30 March 1914 , where she was placed out of service . Starting in 1916 , she was reduced to a hulk for storing naval mines off Friedrichsort in Kiel . She served in this capacity throughout World War I , and she was discarded in the post @-@ war reduction in the strength of the German navy . She was stricken on 18 November 1920 and sold for scrapping on 8 April 1921 . She was broken up that year in Hamburg . 
 = Landing at Kip 's Bay = 
 The Landing at Kip 's Bay was a British amphibious landing during the New York Campaign in the American Revolutionary War on September 15 , 1776 , occurring on the eastern shore of present @-@ day Manhattan . 
 Heavy advance fire from British naval forces in the East River caused the inexperienced militia guarding the landing area to flee , making it possible for the British to land unopposed at Kip 's Bay . Skirmishes in the aftermath of the landing resulted in the British capture of some of those militia . British maneuvers following the landing very nearly cut off the escape route of some Continental Army forces stationed further southeast on the island . The flight of American troops was so rapid that George Washington , who was attempting to rally them , was left exposed dangerously close to British lines . 
 The operation was a British success , and resulted in the withdrawal of the Continental Army to Harlem Heights , ceding control of New York City on the lower half of the island . However , the following day , the Battle of Harlem Heights resulted in an American victory . The campaign of 1776 had not been a decisive victory for the British as the enemy 's resistance had not been broken . All the efforts at subjugation of the rebellion had failed and their armies had not been destroyed . 
 = = Background = = 
 The American Revolutionary War had not gone well for the British military in 1775 and early 1776 . At besieged Boston , the arrival of heavy guns for the Continental Army camp prompted General William Howe to withdraw from Boston to Halifax , Nova Scotia in March 1776 . He regrouped there , acquired supplies and reinforcements , and embarked in June on a campaign to gain control of New York City . Anticipating that the British would next attack New York , General George Washington moved his army there to assist General Putnam in the defensive preparations , a task complicated by the large number of potential landing sites for a British force . 
 Howe 's troops began an unopposed landing on Staten Island in early July , and made another unopposed landing on Long Island , where Washington 's Continental Army had organized significant defenses , on August 22 . On August 27 , Howe successfully flanked Washington 's defenses in the Battle of Long Island , leaving Washington in a precarious position on the narrow Brooklyn Heights , with the British Army in front and the East River behind him . On the night of August 29 – 30 , Washington successfully evacuated his entire army of 9 @,@ 000 troops to York Island ( as Manhattan was then known ) . 
 Despite showing discipline and unity during the evacuation , the army quickly devolved in despair and anger . Large numbers of militia , many of whose summertime enlistments ending in August , departed for home . Leadership was questioned in the ranks , with soldiers openly wishing for the return of the colorful and charismatic General Charles Lee . Washington sent a missive to the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia asking for some direction — specifically , if New York City , which then occupied only the southern tip of Manhattan Island , should be abandoned and burned to the ground . " They would derive great conveniences from it , on the one hand , and much property would be destroyed on the other , " Washington wrote . 
 = = Geography = = 
 York Island was occupied principally on the southern tip ( what would now be considered Lower Manhattan ) by New York City , on the western tip by Greenwich village , and in the north by the village of Harlem . The sparsely @-@ populated center of the island featured a few low hills , principally <unk> and Crown Heights . Ferry services connected the island to the surrounding lands , with the primary ferry to the mainland of Westchester County ( now the Bronx ) crossing the Harlem River at King 's Bridge near the northern tip of the island . The island was bordered by two rivers , on the west by the Hudson River and on the east by the East River , which separated the island from Long Island . Kip 's Bay was a cove on the eastern shore of the island , extending roughly from present @-@ day 32nd to 38th Streets , and as far west as Second Avenue . The bay no longer exists as such , having been filled in , but in 1776 , it provided an excellent place for an amphibious landing : deep water close to the shore , and a large meadow for mustering landed troops . Opposite the bay on Long Island , the wide mouth of Newtown Creek , also surrounded by <unk> , offered an equally excellent staging area . 
 = = Planning = = 
 Washington , uncertain of General Howe 's next step , spread his troops thinly along the shores of York Island and the Westchester shore , and actively sought intelligence that would yield clues to Howe 's plans . He also ordered an attempt to be made on HMS Eagle , the flagship of General Howe 's brother and commander of the Royal Navy at New York , Admiral Richard Howe . On September 7 , in the first documented case of submarine warfare , Sergeant Ezra Lee , volunteered to pilot the submersible Turtle to the Eagle and attach explosives to the ship ; the submersible 's drill struck an iron band it could not penetrate , and Lee was unable to attach the required explosives . Lee was able to escape , although he was forced to release his explosive payload to fend off small boats sent by the British to investigate when he surfaced to orient himself . The payload exploded harmlessly in the East River . 
 Meanwhile , British troops , led by General Howe , were moving north up the east shore of the East River , towards King 's Bridge . During the night of September 3 the British frigate Rose , took advantage of a north @-@ flowing tide and , towing thirty flatboats , moved up the East River and anchored in the mouth of Newtown Creek . The next day , more transports and flatboats moved up the East River . Three warships — HMS Renown , HMS Repulse and HMS Pearl — along with the schooner HMS Tryal , sailed into the Hudson . 
 On September 5 , General Nathanael Greene , recently returned to duty from a serious illness , sent Washington a letter urging an immediate withdrawal from New York . Without possession of Long Island , Greene argued , New York City could not be held . With the army scattered in encampments on York Island , the Americans would not be able to stop a British attack . Another decisive defeat , he argued , would be catastrophic with regard to the loss of men and the damage to morale . He also recommended burning the city ; once the British had control , it could never be recovered without a comparable or superior naval force . There was no American benefit to preserving New York City , Greene summarized , and recommended that Washington convene a war council . By the time the council was gathered on September 7 , however , a letter had arrived from John Hancock stating Congress 's resolution that although New York should not be destroyed , Washington was not required to defend it . Congress had also decided to send a three @-@ man delegation to confer with Lord Howe — John Adams , Benjamin Franklin , and Edward Rutledge . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On September 10 , British troops moved from Long Island to occupy Montresor 's Island , a small island at the mouth of the Harlem River . One day later , on September 11 , the Congressional delegation arrived on Staten Island and met with Admiral Lord Howe for several hours . The meeting came to nothing , as Lord Howe was not authorized to grant terms the Congressional delegation insisted on . It did , however , postpone the impending British attack , allowing Washington more time to decide if and where to confront the enemy . 
 In a September 12 war council , Washington and his generals made the decision to abandon New York City . Four thousand Continentals under General Israel Putnam remained to defend the city and lower Manhattan while the main army moved north to Harlem and King 's Bridge . On the afternoon of September 13 , major British movement started as the warships Roebuck and Phoenix , along with the frigates Orpheus and Carysfort , moved up the East River and anchored in Bushwick Creek , carrying 148 total cannons and accompanied by six troop transport ships . By September 14 the Americans were urgently moving stores of ammunition and other materiel , along with American sick , to Orangetown , New York . Every available horse and wagon was employed in what Joseph Reed described as a " grand military exertion " . Scouts reported movement in the British army camps but Washington was still uncertain where the British would strike . Late that afternoon , most of the American army had moved north to King 's Bridge and Harlem Heights , and Washington followed that night . 
 General Howe had originally planned a landing for September 13 , recalling the date of James Wolfe 's key landing before the Battle of the Plains of Abraham in 1759 . He and General Clinton disagreed on the point of attack , with Clinton arguing that a landing at King 's Bridge would have cut Washington off once and for all . Howe originally wanted to make two landings , one at Kip 's Bay and another at Horn 's Hook , further north ( near modern 90th Street ) on the eastern shore . He struck the latter option when ship 's pilots warned of the dangerous waters of the Hell Gate , where the Harlem River and waters of Long Island Sound meet the East River . After delays due to unfavorable winds , the landing , targeted for Kip 's Bay , began on the morning of September 15 . 
 = = Landing = = 
 Admiral Howe sent a noisy demonstration of Royal Navy ships up the Hudson River early on the morning of September 15 , but Washington and his aides determined that it was a diversion and maintained their forces at the north end of the island . Five hundred Connecticut militia under the command of Colonel William Douglas had erected a crude breastwork on the American line at Kip 's Bay , but many of these farmers and shopkeepers were inexperienced and had no muskets . They carried instead homemade pikes constructed of scythe blades attached to poles . After having been awake all night , and having had little or nothing to eat in the previous twenty @-@ four hours , at dawn they looked over their meager redoubt to see five British warships in the East River near their position . As the militia at Kip 's Bay lay in their ditches , the British ships , anchored 200 yards ( 180 m ) offshore , also lay quiet . The day was oppressively hot . At about 10 am , General Sir Henry Clinton , to whom Howe had given the task of making the landing , ordered the crossing to begin . A first wave of more than eighty flatboats carried 4 @,@ 000 British and Hessian soldiers , standing shoulder to shoulder , left Newtown Cove and entered the waters of the East River , heading towards Kip 's Bay . 
 Around eleven , the five warships began a salvo of broadside fire that flattened the flimsy American breastworks and panicked the Connecticut militia . " So terrible and so incessant a roar of guns few even in the army and navy had ever heard before , " wrote Ambrose <unk> , private secretary to Lord Howe . Nearly eighty guns fired at the shore for a full hour . The Americans were half buried under dirt and sand , and were unable to return fire due to the smoke and dust . After the guns ceased , the British flatboats appeared out of the smoke and headed for shore . By then the Americans were in a panicked retreat , and the British began their amphibious landing . 
 Although Washington and his aides arrived from the command post at Harlem Heights soon after the landing began , they were unable to rally the retreating militia . About a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) inland from Kip 's Bay , Washington rode his horse among the men , trying to turn them around and impose some order on them , cursing furiously and violently . By some accounts , he lost control of his temper ; he brandished a cocked pistol and drew his sword , threatening to run men through and shouted , " Take the walls ! Take the cornfield ! " When no one obeyed , he threw his hat to the ground , exclaiming in disgust , " Are these the men with which I am to defend America ? " When some fleeing men refused to turn and engage a party of advancing Hessians , Washington reportedly struck some of their officers with his riding crop . The Hessians shot or bayoneted a number of American troops who were trying to surrender . Two thousand Continental Army troops under the command of Generals Samuel Parsons and John Fellows arrived from the north , but at the sight of the chaotic militia retreat , they also turned and fled . Washington , still in a rage , rode within a hundred yards of the enemy before his aides managed to get him off the field . More and more British soldiers came ashore , including light infantry , grenadiers , and Hessian Jägers . They spread out , advancing in several directions . By late afternoon another 9 @,@ 000 British troops had landed at Kip 's Bay , and Howe had sent a brigade toward New York City , officially taking possession . While most of the Americans managed to escape to the north , not all got away . " I saw a Hessian sever a rebel 's head from his body and clap it on a pole in the entrenchments , " recorded a British officer . The southern advance pushed for a half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) to Watts farm ( near present @-@ day 23rd Street ) before meeting stiff American resistance . The northern advance stopped at the <unk> ( now Murray Hill , a rise west of Kip 's Bay ) , just west of the present Lexington Avenue , under orders from General Howe to wait for the rest of the invading force . This was extremely fortunate for the thousands of American troops south of the invasion point . Had Clinton continued west to the Hudson he would have cut off General Putnam 's troops , nearly one third of Washington 's forces , from the main army , trapping them in lower Manhattan . 
 General Putnam had come north with some of his troops when the landing began . After briefly conferring with Washington about the risk of entrapment to his forces in the city , he rode south to lead their retreat . Abandoning supplies and equipment that would slow them down , his column , under the guidance of his aide Aaron Burr , marched north along the Hudson . The forced march of Putnam 's men was so quick , and the British advance sufficiently slow , that only the last companies in Putnam 's column skirmished with the advancing British . When Putnam and his men marched into the main camp at Harlem after dark , they were greeted by cheers , having been given up for lost . Henry Knox arrived later after a narrow escape made possible by seizing a boat on the Hudson and he too received an excited and enthusiastic greeting , and was even embraced by Washington . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The British were welcomed by the remaining New York City population , pulling down the Continental Army flag and raising the Union Flag . Howe , who had wanted to capture New York quickly and with minimal bloodshed , considered the invasion a complete success . Not wanting to continue battling with the Americans that day , Howe stopped his troops short of Harlem . 
 Washington was extremely angry with his troops ' conduct , calling their actions " shameful " and " scandalous " . The Connecticut militia , who already had a poor reputation , were labeled cowards and held to blame for the rout . However , others were more circumspect , such as General William Heath , who said , " The wounds received on Long Island were yet bleeding ; and the officers , if not the men , knew that the city was not to be defended . " If the Connecticut men would have stayed to defend York Island under the withering cannon fire and in the face of overwhelming force , they would have been annihilated . 
 The next day , September 16 , the two armies fought the Battle of Harlem Heights . 
 = Charles H. Constable = 
 Charles H. Constable ( July 17 , 1817 – October 9 , 1865 ) was an American attorney , Illinois State Senator , judge , and real estate entrepreneur . He was raised in Maryland and graduated from the University of Virginia with a degree in Law . After settling in Illinois , he married the oldest daughter of Thomas S. Hinde , a pioneer and real estate developer . Initially , he practiced law in Mount Carmel , Illinois , the town founded by Hinde . He managed the business and real estate affairs of his father @-@ in @-@ law until Hinde died in 1846 . 
 Later , Constable was active in Illinois politics and for a time was a close friend of Abraham Lincoln . During his life Constable was a one @-@ term Illinois State Senator , a delegate to the Illinois Constitutional Convention , and a one @-@ term Circuit Court Judge . One source described Constable at the time of the Matson slave case to be " the best educated lawyer at the bar . " He is most commonly remembered for his decision to allow four Union deserters to go free during the Civil War . This decision led to Constable 's arrest by Union military leaders and a trial in federal court . Constable argued that legal precedent supported his decision , and all charges were dropped in Federal court . 
 Following the dismissal of charges and his return to the bench , Constable and his family endured repeated threats , violence , and humiliation at the hands of partisan mobs angry at his release of the Civil War deserters . Not long after his release , Constable developed an addiction to morphine , then available over the counter . He died at the age of 48 from an overdose of the drug . One source stated the morphine overdose was a suicide . His wife , Martha Hinde Constable , died shortly after he did . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Charles Constable was born and raised in Maryland . He attended Bel Air High School , which was a scientific and classical school in Harford County , Maryland . Later he enrolled and graduated from the University of Virginia with high honors . In 1838 , he moved to Mount Carmel , Illinois , and shortly thereafter he married Martha Hinde . Martha was the daughter of Thomas S. Hinde , a noted attorney , Methodist minister , real estate entrepreneur , writer , and the founder of Mount Carmel . 
 Thomas S. Hinde died early in 1846 , followed soon by his wife . Martha and her husband took over the care of her younger orphaned siblings , Edmund , Charles , and Belinda Hinde . In the diaries of his nephew , Constable and his wife were described as good and honest people , and they cared for many relatives and friends in their household through the years . During this time , Constable practiced law in Mount Carmel , and sold town lots in Mount Carmel that had been owned by his father @-@ in @-@ law before his death . 
 After Hinde 's death , Constable quickly gathered all of his writings , diaries , business documents , and miscellaneous other items and donated them to Lyman Draper in 1864 , who was known for collecting the papers of figures of the Trans @-@ Allegheny frontier . Because of this donation , many scholars and historians have been able to study these papers . The Thomas S. Hinde documents are owned and kept at the Wisconsin Historical Society . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 For a short time after the death of Thomas S. Hinde , Constable remained in Mount Carmel with his wife and extended family . He was elected to the Illinois Senate in 1844 and was a delegate for Wabash County , Illinois , to the Illinois constitutional convention . As a member of the Illinois Constitutional Convention , he made substantial contributions during the negotiations and drafting of the Illinois Constitution . He was selected as chairman of the committee to prepare the address about the constitution to the citizens of Illinois . During this time , Constable and Lincoln became close friends ; Lincoln is quoted as calling Constable , " my esteemed friend . " In 1850 in Peoria , Illinois , Constable was elected Grand Patriarch of the Odd Fellows . 
 = = Matson slave case = = 
 In 1847 , Abraham Lincoln defended Robert Matson , a slave owner who was trying to retrieve his fugitive slaves . Matson had brought the slaves from his Kentucky plantation to work on land he owned in Illinois . The slaves were represented by Orlando <unk> , Usher Linder , and Charles H. Constable . The slaves ran away while in Illinois and believed that they were free , knowing that the Northwest Ordinance forbade slavery in Illinois . In this case , Lincoln invoked the right of transit , which allowed slave holders to take their slaves temporarily into free territory . Lincoln also stressed that Matson did not intend the slaves to remain permanently in Illinois . 
 Even with these arguments , the judge in Coles County ruled against Lincoln , and the slaves were set free . This was part of a principle " once free , always free , " which was adopted in Illinois and other free states . One source described Constable at the time of the Matson slave case to be " the best educated lawyer at the bar . " 
 = = Attempted government appointments = = 
 According to one source , after Zachary Taylor was elected president in 1848 , Constable wrote to Lincoln and David Davis seeking a political appointment to a Latin American country as a chargé d 'affaires , because of his growing family and declining law practice . Even though both Lincoln and Davis wrote letters in support of Constable , he did not receive any appointments . In January 1851 , Lincoln wrote a letter to Senator James Pearce recommending Constable be nominated for an Oregon federal judgeship . Constable was not gain this appointment . 
 Around 1848 , he moved with his family to Marshall , Illinois , and ran unsuccessfully for circuit court judge that same year . In 1858 , Constable ran in a special election to fill a vacant seat of the Illinois Supreme Court , but was defeated by Pinckney H. Walker by a vote margin of 229 votes to 95 . Constable ran again in 1861 and was elected as a state circuit court judge of the Illinois 4th circuit . 
 = = Change of political parties = = 
 Originally , Constable was a member of the Whig party , likely due to the close friendship of his father @-@ in @-@ law and Henry Clay . Due mainly to frustrations over how the Whig party had treated him , Constable decided to switch parties . He is quoted as saying , " that the party was dominated by old <unk> who are indifferent to younger men . " His inclination toward the Democratic Party almost led to a fistfight between himself and Lincoln in a tavern in Paris , Illinois . Lincoln was quoted as saying , " Mr. Constable , I understand you perfectly , and have noticed for some time that you have been slowly and cautiously picking your way over to the Democratic party . " After this heated exchange , the men reconciled , but by 1856 Lincoln claimed that Constable had left the party . In 1858 , Constable was the Illinois elector at @-@ large for the election of President James Buchanan , a Democrat . 
 In 1861 , Constable was elected judge on the Democratic ticket of the Illinois fourth circuit . This led to a falling out between Lincoln and Constable . On several occasions while Lincoln was President , Constable repudiated him in front of large crowds . During a rally of more than 40 @,@ 000 people in Springfield , Illinois , Constable was elected to a leadership position of an organization set up to oppose Lincoln 's policies . 
 = = Civil War arrest = = 
 During the Civil War , Constable ordered that four Union deserters be released from military custody , arguing that the Union soldiers had no right to arrest the deserters in the sovereign state of Illinois . Shortly thereafter , Colonel Henry B. Carrington , commander of the Indiana Military District , was sent to Marshall . He arrested Constable , appearing while court was in session and surrounding the courthouse with over 200 Union soldiers . Carrington believed the Knights of the Golden Circle , a secret society said to be supporting the South , was responsible for the release of the deserters . 
 Worried about potential violence , he believed that he needed the troops to support his rescue of the Union soldiers who had been ordered by Constable to be arrested for kidnapping the deserters . But , there was little to no resistance , and Constable invited Carrington to have dinner at his home before they left for Indianapolis . Constable 's arrest and ruling resulted in widespread condemnation — even Richard W. Thompson thought Constable 's ruling was " illegal and arbitrary " — and eventually led to his trial . After being heard by Judge Samuel H. Treat of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Illinois on April 7 , 1863 , Constable was released and the charges were dismissed . The case is still noted by legal scholars and historians as an example of the military interfering in civilian courts . 
 = = Treatment after dismissal of charges = = 
 After Constable was released from custody and returned to his home in Marshall , he was ostracized by many members of the public , who thought he had acted against the Union . One account states that Constable received death threats , threats to burn his house , and threats to kill his children . The arrest triggered a riot in Charleston , Illinois , commonly referred to as the Charleston Riot . During the riot : 
 [ Two small boys ] saw Judge Constable , white and trembling , in an angle of the wall in the alley to their right , evidently uncertain what to do or where to go next . How a man of his portly form could have vacated the Judge 's bench , come down from the court room , and got there so soon after the firing began never ceased to be a wonder to those boys . 
 In January 1864 , Union soldiers forced Constable under threat of violence to make an oath of allegiance to the federal government in Mattoon , Illinois . One source described the Union soldiers as a " mob " and stated that Constable " shed tears . " Another source stated that the soldiers violently dragged Constable off his wagon and humiliated him by making him kneel on the ground and swear his allegiance , and that these actions caused an eruption of violence in Mattoon the following day . After the Republican victories in the Illinois elections of 1864 , the legislature cut Constable 's judicial circuit from six to two counties in early 1865 . In the diaries of his nephew Edmund C. Hinde , Constable is described as an honest man with good character , and his opponents are called " cowards " who did not understand the circumstances of the events . According to historian David Williamson , Hinde 's argument supporting his uncle 's ruling has legal merit . He said that Chief Justice Roger B. Taney made a similar argument in Ex parte Merryman . 
 = = Death = = 
 During the Civil War , Constable became addicted to morphine , which was then available for sale over the counter in pharmacies . In Edmund C. Hinde 's diaries , Constable is described as a " slave " to morphine , and in one journal entry he is described as lying on the floor and talking like a child while on the drug . He died at the age of 48 from an overdose of morphine , while in Effingham , Illinois , in 1865 , on circuit duty as a judge . His wife died shortly after he did . One historian called it suicide . Another source described it in the following way : 
 He departed this life some years ago , and the manner of that departure I shall not dwell upon . It was sad , but not dishonorable ; and I do not believe that he left a single stain , blemish or blot upon his reputation ; and I now bid farewell to his memory . 
 = Vienen = 
 " Vienen " is the eighteenth episode of the eighth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files , and is the 179th episode overall . The episode first aired in the United States and Canada on April 29 , 2001 , on the Fox Network , and in the United Kingdom on June 7 . It was written by staff member Steven Maeda , was directed by Rod Hardy , and forms part of the series ' overarching mythology . The episode received a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 4 and was viewed by 11 @.@ 8 million viewers . " Vienen " received mixed to positive reviews from critics , many of whom appreciated its hearkening @-@ back to the older mythology of The X @-@ Files . 
 The season centers on FBI special agents Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , her new partner John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , and Scully 's former partner Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) , who work on X @-@ Files — cases linked to the paranormal . In this episode , Mulder disobeys orders to stay away from the X @-@ Files and finds himself stranded on a quarantined oil platform with Doggett . They soon discover that the crew has been infected with the black oil , an alien virus that Mulder and Scully have encountered many times before . Despite their dislike for each other , Mulder and Doggett team up and escape before the infected crew members are able to capture and kill them . 
 The episode was a series milestone , and features the last appearance of the alien black oil before the series finale , where it appeared via flashback — a plot device that plays a significant role in the series and in the 1998 X @-@ Files movie . The oil effects were created using chocolate syrup and molasses . Principal filming for " Vienen " was carried out at three locations : an oil platform , an oil refinery , and on a specially @-@ created set . The episode 's title is a Spanish word meaning " they come " or " they are coming " , and has been interpreted as foreshadowing the show 's Super Soldier narrative arc . Elements of the plot have been compared to the ancient Greek religious and mythological figure Orpheus . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Simon de la Cruz , a worker on an oil platform in the Gulf of Mexico , fatally stabs fellow crew member Ed Dell , the radio operator . He then starts destroying the platform 's radio equipment but is confronted by Bo Taylor , whose body begins to glow . 
 At FBI headquarters , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) tells John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) about the murder and explains that ninety percent of de la Cruz 's body was covered with apparent radiation burns . Galpex Petroleum , the platform 's owner , officially attributes the burns to an explosion but Mulder suspects the involvement of black oil . Mulder and Doggett meet Galpex 's vice @-@ president Martin Ortega ( Miguel Sandoval ) , who tells them that the company has discovered a large oil reserve in the Gulf . Alvin Kersh ( James Pickens , Jr . ) sends Doggett to the Gulf to investigate , but Mulder is already present when Doggett arrives . The agents meet Taylor , who claims de la Cruz tried to blow up the platform . 
 Meanwhile , Dana Scully finds black oil in de la Cruz 's skull during an autopsy — the oil is dead and seems to have been irradiated . She concludes that he may have had some immunity to the black oil because he is a <unk> Indian , or an indigenous Mexican national . Doggett and Mulder find proof of black oil on the platform and quarantine it , but de la Cruz 's friend Diego Garza is missing . Ortega threatens to bring back the crew unless the agents can provide proof of an infection . Doggett and Mulder search for Garza who , like de la Cruz , also has Native American heritage . Mulder and Doggett later discover that somebody has set fire to the communications room . As the agents tackle the fire , Garza attacks Doggett and renders him unconscious . When he awakens , Garza , now mentally unstable , cuts his arm to check for the presence of black oil . 
 Meanwhile , an annoyed Kersh tells Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) that he is lifting the quarantine of the oil platform . Scully opposes the idea but she has no choice other than to obey . Scully then realizes that de la Cruz is immune to the black oil , and because of it , he suffered from radiation burns instead of infection . After talking to Garza , Doggett leaves to find Mulder but is attacked by Taylor . Mulder arrives and overpowers Taylor , and Mulder and Doggett barricade themselves in the communication room , and try to relay a message while the platform 's crew attack the door . 
 Scully receives Doggett and Mulder 's message , and tells them that Kersh has broken the quarantine . Mulder destroys the platform 's radio so that the black oil @-@ infected crew cannot communicate with the aliens . Suddenly , the platform workers stop their attack and begin to sabotage the rig . Doggett and Mulder leave the radio room , and jump off the rig when they realize that the crew are going to destroy it . They are rescued by the helicopters Kersh has sent to break the quarantine . Later , at the FBI , Mulder tells Doggett that he has been dismissed from the bureau . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 " Vienen " was written by Steven Maeda as a vehicle for Mulder to pass on the X @-@ Files legacy to Doggett . Patrick compared Mulder to a Greek chorus and said that the episode was a " way to have Mulder give Doggett his blessing and pass him The X @-@ Files baton . " Maeda complimented the show 's producers for deciding to pass the X @-@ Files division over to Doggett , noting that they were " aware of what 's going on in the audience 's head " . The title , " Vienen , " is Spanish ; it is the third @-@ person plural present indicative form of <unk> , which means " they come " or " they are coming " . 
 The episode was directed by Rod Hardy , who directed the earlier season eight episodes " Roadrunners " and " Salvage " . Hardy was offered the role after an unknown individual working on The X @-@ Files saw his TBS remake of the film High Noon . Of the three season eight episodes that he helmed , Hardy enjoyed directing this episode most due to its adherence to the series ' mythology ; he later described the episode as " classic X @-@ Files . " The eighth season was filmed out of order ; " Vienen " was the sixteenth episode produced but the eighteenth aired , largely due to Duchovny 's availability . Each episode of The X @-@ Files usually took about eighteen days to film , including seven days for pre @-@ production , nine for main unit shooting , and two for second unit filming . " Vienen " was produced in eleven days because the crew worked <unk> to fourteen @-@ hour shifts . 
 " Vienen " was shot in three locations : a studio in Los Angeles , a closed down <unk> oil refinery in Santa Fe Springs , and an offshore oil platform in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Santa Barbara . During the show 's previous seasons , location manager Ilt Jones had been required to scout for locations after scripts were submitted . Starting with the eighth season , however , he was allowed to go on several " scouting roadshow [ s ] " in order to find new and interesting locations that could be written into scripts . Jones , who discovered the oil platform and the refinery during his first scouting trip , later said the oil platform was " his favorite example " of places he was able to find . Because the platform and refinery were scouted in advance , Jones was given six weeks to prepare the shoot — a " far cry " from the usual two . This added time also saved the series a considerable amount of money . Filming on the oil platform occurred between sunrise and sunset in one day . The film crew used Steadicams for filming on the oil platform because the decks were slick with oil and , according to Hardy , the cameras " sort of fit and blend [ ed ] in quite well " on the platform . 
 The series ' leading actors were required to film in three separate locations . Anderson 's scenes were filmed solely on the show 's sets in Los Angeles . Since her character did not accompany Mulder and Doggett , Anderson had no scenes with Patrick and Duchovny , except for the opening sequence that takes place in Kersh 's office . Most of Patrick and Duchovny 's scenes were filmed on the oil platform and at the refinery , although several key scenes , including the destruction of the oil platform , were filmed on the show 's set in Los Angeles . Patrick and Duchovny were flown between the three locations . Others scenes were filmed in the studio . Production designer Corey Kaplan was tasked with recreating the oil platform 's control room , mess hall , and some operational sections , which required " a brilliant piece of synergy between all [ of the series ' ] departments " in order to come together . The scene in which the oil platform bursts into flame was created in the studio on the mock @-@ rig set . Although the set was made of wood , the art department was tasked with trying to create the illusion of fire burning steel . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 The scene in which Mulder and Doggett agree to jump from the oil platform , which was shot in a way that recalls a scene in the 1969 film Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid , was filmed by having Patrick and Duchovny jump in front of a green screen . Separate footage of the rig exploding — created by combing actual shots of the rig with CGI — was then filmed , and the two shots were composited on top of one another . 
 The episode featured the penultimate appearance of the alien black oil ; it would appear for a final time via flashback in the series ' finale . Visual effects for the black oil were created with molasses , chocolate syrup , and computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) . A scene showing black oil coming out of a worker 's eyes , ears , and mouth was mostly filmed on a visual effects stage . Nine takes were needed to get the syrupy mixture to spill correctly . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Michelle Bush , in her book Myth @-@ X , noted that the oil platform is named " Galpex @-@ <unk> " , a reference to the ancient Greek religious and mythological figure Orpheus , who was a legendary musician , poet , and prophet . According to the myth , Orpheus 's wife Eurydice was killed by a serpent . Hades , the god of the underworld — after hearing Orpheus ' moving music — allowed Orpheus to retrieve his wife as long as he does not look back at her until they are safely out of the underworld . Orpheus fails , and his wife 's soul slips back into the underworld . Bush compared Orpheus 's otherworldly singing to the " broadband signal which is the catalyst for the events on the rig " . In the episode , Mulder , Doggett , and the two <unk> Indians " wreck havoc " because of their fear , and the " black oil slips back to the underworld " . 
 In regards to the episode 's title , Bush argued that while the Spanish word <unk> means " they come " , the episode does not explain who " they " are . She wrote that the verb could refer to either " the aliens " who are planning on colonizing the Earth or to " the humans that are disturbing the black oil " . Douglas Kellner , in his book Media Spectacle , wrote that , because the episode features the second major hinting after " This is Not Happening " towards the series ' " Super Soldiers " story arc — a plot thread that would be explored near the end of the eighth season and throughout the ninth — the title refers to the inevitable onslaught of these superior alien warriors . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings and release = = = 
 " Vienen " premiered on American television on April 29 , 2001 . It received a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 4 , meaning that it was seen by an estimated 7 @.@ 4 % of US households and was viewed by 11 @.@ 8 million viewers overall . The episode debuted in Ireland and the United Kingdom on June 7 on Sky 1 , and was the channel 's sixth @-@ most watched program for that week with 0 @.@ 52 million viewers . On November 4 , 2003 , the episode was released as part of the eighth season DVD box set . Vienen was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers , a DVD collection including episodes involving the alien super soldiers arc . 
 The episode 's casting and plot initially proved controversial when in early 2001 , Hispanic activists complained about the often negative portrayal of Latinos on television , particularly in the Law & Order episode " Sunday in the Park with Jorge " . In turn , the major broadcasters signed agreements that created a head of diversity at each network . When the episode 's title and synopsis were announced , some activists worried that it would further propagate negative stereotypes . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Michael Liedtke and George Avalos of the Contra Costa Times were pleased with the episode and wrote , " The latest episode also contained many of the elements of a classic mythology episode . The stakes were huge and the heroes faced the greatest of hazards . The use of the oil rig created a sense of isolation for Mulder and Doggett , and the paranoia levels were sky @-@ high . We still can 't figure out why we haven 't seen more episodes along the lines of " Vienen " during the past three seasons . " Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity awarded the episode a " B – " . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave Vienen a positive review , and wrote , " after watching ' Vienen ' , I can honestly say that for once of the few times this season , it felt good to be an X @-@ Files fan again " . Kessenich praised the significant development in Mulder and Scully 's relationship and the return of the " fourth season version " of the black oil ; the 1998 movie had dramatically altered the nature of the substance — infected hosts gestate aliens inside their bodies rather than merely being taken over . 
 Todd VanDerWerff from The A.V. Club named the episode one of the " 10 must @-@ see episodes " of The X @-@ Files , and wrote that it " abruptly makes the series ’ alien @-@ conspiracy storyline relevant again . " His review concludes , " [ i ] t 's a fine example of a show past its glory days , nevertheless finding a way to make itself relevant again . " VanDerWerff later awarded the episode an " A – " and praised — in addition to its refreshing take on the alien mythology — the episode 's location , noting that the oil rig 's " isolation and man @-@ made island status , was definitely the sort of place that would look and feel different from just about every other episode of the show . " He also applauded the dynamic between Mulder and Doggett , and wrote that the episode successfully was a way for " David Duchovny and Fox Mulder to pass the torch to Robert Patrick and John Doggett . " 
 Not all reviews were positive . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five and wrote that the installment 's return to the black oil mythos seemed " out of date " . They also wrote that Mulder and Doggett are " good at running away , which doesn 't give either of them much dignity . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . She wrote , " as action @-@ adventure , ' <unk> ' is so @-@ so . Except for the big ' money shot ' explosion at the end , it doesn 't exploit the possibilities of the physical location . " Meghan Deans of Tor.com ultimately concluded that " while ' Vienen ' works hard to hit its marks — a classic villain , a battle of dudes — it can ’ t measure up to all that ’ s come before it . " She surmised that " the transfer [ from Mulder to Doggett ] is functional , but the transfer is hollow . " She did , however , applaud the return of the black oil , noting that she was " happy to have it back . " 
 = Vanadinite = 
 Vanadinite is a mineral belonging to the apatite group of phosphates , with the chemical formula Pb5 ( VO4 ) 3Cl . It is one of the main industrial ores of the metal vanadium and a minor source of lead . A dense , brittle mineral , it is usually found in the form of red hexagonal crystals . It is an uncommon mineral , formed by the oxidation of lead ore deposits such as galena . First discovered in 1801 in Mexico , vanadinite deposits have since been unearthed in South America , Europe , Africa , and in other parts of North America . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Vanadinite is an uncommon mineral , only occurring as the result of chemical alterations to a pre @-@ existing material . It is therefore known as a secondary mineral . It is found in arid climates and forms by oxidation of primary lead minerals . Vanadinite is especially found in association with the lead sulfide , galena . Other associated minerals include wulfenite , limonite , and barite . 
 It was originally discovered in Mexico by the Spanish mineralogist Andrés Manuel del Río in 1801 . He called the mineral " brown lead " and asserted that it contained a new element , which he first named <unk> and later , erythronium . However , he was later led to believe that this was not a new element but merely an impure form of chromium . In 1830 , Nils Gabriel Sefström discovered a new element , which he named vanadium . It was later revealed that this was identical to the metal discovered earlier by Andrés Manuel del Río . Del Río 's " brown lead " was also rediscovered , in 1838 in <unk> , Hidalgo , Mexico , and was named vanadinite because of its high vanadium content . Other names that have since been given to vanadinite are <unk> and lead vanadate . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 Vanadinite occurs as a secondary mineral in the oxidized zone of lead @-@ bearing deposits , the vanadium is leached from wall @-@ rock silicates . Associated minerals include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , wulfenite , <unk> , <unk> , calcite , barite , and various iron oxide minerals . 
 Deposits of vanadinite are found worldwide including Austria , Spain , Scotland , the Ural Mountains , South Africa , Namibia , Morocco , Argentina , Mexico , and 4 states of the United States : Arizona , Colorado , New Mexico , and South Dakota . 
 Vanadinite deposits are found in over 400 mines across the world . Notable vanadinite mines include those at <unk> and <unk> in Morocco ; Tsumeb , Namibia ; Cordoba , Argentina ; and Sierra County , New Mexico , and Gila County , Arizona , in the United States . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Vanadinite is a lead <unk> with the chemical formula Pb5 ( VO4 ) 3Cl . It is composed ( by weight ) of 73 @.@ 15 % lead , 10 @.@ 79 % vanadium , 13 @.@ 56 % oxygen , and 2 @.@ 50 % chlorine . Each structural unit of vanadinite contains a chlorine ion surrounded by six divalent lead ions at the corners of a regular octahedron , with one of the lead ions provided by an adjoining vanadinite molecule . The distance between each lead and chlorine ion is 317 picometres . The shortest distance between each lead ion is 4 @.@ 48 Å . The octahedron shares two of its opposite faces with that of neighbouring vanadinite units , forming a continuous chain of octahedrons . Each vanadium atom is surrounded by four oxygen atoms at the corners of an irregular tetrahedron . The distance between each oxygen and vanadium atom is either 1 @.@ 72 or 1 @.@ 76 Å . Three oxygen tetrahedrons adjoin each of the lead octahedrons along the chain . 
 Crystals of vanadinite conform to a hexagonal system of symmetry . This internal structure is often reflected in the hexagonal external shape of the crystals . The crystals are usually in the form of short hexagonal prisms , but can also be found as hexagonal pyramids , rounded masses or crusts . A unit cell of vanadinite , the smallest divisible unit that possesses the same symmetry and properties , is in the form of a hexagonal prism . The unit cell of vanadinite is composed of two of its molecules and has the dimensions a 
 = 10 @.@ 331 Å and c = 
 7 @.@ 343 Å ) , where a is the length of each side of the hexagon and c is the height of the prism . The volume of each unit cell of vanadinite , given by the formula V = <unk> sin ( 60 ° ) , is 678 @.@ 72 <unk> . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Vanadinite is in the apatite group of phosphates , and forms a chemical series with the minerals <unk> ( Pb5 ( PO4 ) 3Cl ) and <unk> ( Pb5 ( AsO4 ) 3Cl ) , with both of which it may form solid solutions . Whereas most chemical series involve the substitution of metallic ions , this series substitutes its anion groups ; phosphate ( PO4 ) , arsenate ( AsO4 ) and vanadate ( VO4 ) . Common impurities of vanadinite include phosphorus , arsenic and calcium , where these may act as an isomorphic substitute for vanadium . Vanadinite when containing a high amount of the arsenic impurity is known as <unk> . 
 Vanadinite is usually bright @-@ red or orange @-@ red in colour , although sometimes brown , red @-@ brown , grey , yellow , or colourless . Its distinctive colour makes it popular among mineral collectors . Its streak can be either pale yellow or brownish @-@ yellow . Vanadinite may be transparent , translucent or opaque , and its lustre can range from resinous to adamantine . Vanadinite is anisotropic , meaning that some of its properties differ when measured along different axes . When measured perpendicular and parallel to its axis of anisotropy , its refractive indices are 2 @.@ 350 and 2 @.@ 416 respectively . This gives it a birefringence of 0 @.@ 066 . 
 Vanadinite is very brittle , producing small , conchoidal fragments when fractured . Its hardness is 3 – 4 on the Mohs scale , about the same as a copper coin . Vanadinite is particularly heavy for a translucent mineral . It has a molar mass of 1416 @.@ 27 g / mole and its specific gravity can range between 6 @.@ 6 and 7 @.@ 2 because of impurities . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Along with carnotite and <unk> , vanadinite is one of the main industrial ores of the element vanadium , which can be extracted by roasting and smelting . Vanadinite is also occasionally used as a source of lead . A common process for extracting the vanadium begins with the heating of vanadinite with salt ( NaCl ) or sodium carbonate ( Na2CO3 ) at about 850 ° C to produce sodium vanadate ( <unk> ) . This is dissolved in water and then treated with ammonium chloride to give an orange @-@ coloured precipitate of ammonium <unk> . This is then melted to form a crude form of vanadium pentoxide ( V2O5 ) . Reduction of vanadium pentoxide with calcium gives pure vanadium . 
 = John the bookmaker controversy = 
 " John " or " John the bookmaker " is the name given to an Indian bookmaker who in 1994 – 95 gave money to Australian cricketers Mark Waugh and Shane Warne , in return for pitch and weather information . 
 According to the players , they refused to divulge more strategic material , such as team tactics and player selection policies . One of the most publicised of a series of betting controversies in cricket in the 1990s , the matter was initially covered up by the Australian Cricket Board ( ACB ) , which decided that it was sufficient to privately fine the players . The ACB concluded that , since Waugh and Warne had previously accused Pakistani cricket captain Saleem Malik of attempting to bribe them to lose matches , their credibility as witnesses would be damaged if their own involvement with John was publicised . The ACB reported the matter to the International Cricket Council , and there the matter ended . 
 When the issue was uncovered by the media in late 1998 , the two players were widely condemned by the press and public , as was the ACB for their cover @-@ up . Waugh received a hostile reaction from Australian spectators when he walked out to bat during a Test match immediately after the news broke . On the other hand , the sports community was generally supportive of the players . The ACB appointed Rob O 'Regan QC to conduct an independent inquiry into the matter . O 'Regan concluded that the fines were inadequate and wrote that a suspension for a " significant time " would have been a more appropriate penalty . He strongly condemned the players ' behaviour and their failure as role models for young fans . O 'Regan further added that players needed to be better informed about the dangers of gambling and unauthorised bookmakers . 
 The controversy prompted Pakistan to ask the two Australian players to appear in front of their own judicial inquiry into corruption ; Australia responded by granting the Pakistanis permission to hold hearings in Australia with full privileges . The players were questioned about their accusations against Malik , and whether their dealings with John detracted from their credibility . Both Waugh and Warne denied any suggestions they played with less determination in the matches in question , stating that they were among the leading players in those games . 
 = = Involvement with bookmaker = = 
 During the Singer World Series tournament in Sri Lanka in September 1994 , which involved India , Sri Lanka , Pakistan and Australia , the Australian team stayed at the Oberoi Hotel in the capital Colombo . There was a casino in close proximity to the hotel , which Waugh and Warne visited . Team manager Colin Egar had advised Warne that he had been told that the venue was unsavoury , but he was vague in his comments , and at the time , casinos were not perceived as trouble spots or traps for unwary cricketers . 
 Waugh was approached at the Oberoi by an Indian man , who was also staying at the hotel . The man called himself " John " and gave no surname . John said he was a man who had won money betting on cricket and asked Waugh to provide pitch and weather information ; he also asked the Australian to reveal inside knowledge about the team , such as tactics and player selections , in exchange for US $ 4 @,@ 000 . Waugh accepted the money and agreed to provide information about the pitch and weather , but he refused to divulge the tactics that the Australians intended to use against their opposition , or information on which players would play and what their role would be . Information on pitch conditions provides an insight into the strategies that the team might adopt and which players might be used , and teams will field different players depending on the pitch , as their skills are suited to different conditions . The arrangement with John remained in place until the end of the 1994 – 95 Australian summer . Waugh later said that at the time , he did not see anything wrong with his actions , reasoning that the agreement was similar to a player speculating about their form and the playing conditions in a pre @-@ match media interview . 
 Waugh also agreed to introduce John to Warne . The meeting occurred at the casino near the team hotel . The trio chatted as Warne was playing roulette ; he had a bad night and lost US $ 5 @,@ 000 . John introduced himself to Warne as a person who bet on cricket matches . The next day he invited Warne to his hotel room and , describing himself as a big fan , flattered Warne 's leg spinning abilities . Warne accepted a US $ 5 @,@ 000 gift , with " no strings attached " , which covered his gambling losses . Warne reported that he initially rejected the gift , but accepted the offer at the insistence of John , who said that he would be offended if the offer was declined . Warne later lost this money at the casino . Warne wrote in his autobiography that John told him that he was a wealthy man and that the payment was a token of his appreciation — he had made money by betting on Australian victories in the past . 
 The two players did not tell their teammates or management about the deal , feeling that their interactions with bookmakers would meet with disapproval . They said that they did not feel that their liaisons were harming their team 's chances in any way . They remained silent even after they reported Pakistan captain Saleem Malik for attempting to bribe them during the team 's subsequent tour of Pakistan . Australian coach Bob Simpson later said that he was unaware of these events , asserting that his anti @-@ betting attitude would have deterred any players from discussing their involvement in such matters with him . 
 Both players kept in contact with John throughout the 1994 – 95 Australian summer , when England toured for five Tests . Warne spoke with John three times during the season , while Waugh continued to deliver pitch and weather conditions . An inquiry conducted by Rob O 'Regan QC in late @-@ 1998 and early @-@ 1999 concluded the following : 
 Mark Waugh had been warned in 1994 by a senior player rooming with him that providing information over the telephone about conditions , games and teams was unwise as it was likely to come back and haunt him later in his career . 
 = = Secretly punished = = 
 In early 1995 , snippets of information about the world of cricket betting and match @-@ fixing began to be reported by the media . Phil Wilkins of The Sydney Morning Herald reported that an unnamed Pakistani player had attempted to bribe Tim May , Warne and Waugh during Australia 's tour of the country in late @-@ 1994 , immediately after the Singer Trophy . The player was later identified as Saleem Malik , and it was revealed that the Australian trio had privately reported him for offering them money to throw matches . 
 As a result of the media interest , the ACB privately launched an investigation to determine if any Australian players had been involved with bookmakers . Journalists told officials about speculation that an Australian player was having financial dealings with bookmakers , after Mark Ray of the Sunday Age received an anonymous letter alleging that Waugh and Warne were being paid by a bookmaker for information . Following a private investigation opened by team manager Ian McDonald , Waugh and Warne wrote unsigned handwritten statements on 20 February 1995 , acknowledging their involvement . The statements were faxed and sent to Graham Halbish , the CEO of the ACB . Warne and Waugh were called to Sydney for an interview with ACB chairman Alan Crompton at the team hotel , where the Australians had assembled before departing for a tour of the West Indies . The pair admitted their involvement with the bookmaker and were fined A $ 10 @,@ 000 and A $ 8 @,@ 000 respectively ; at the time , these were the highest fines ever imposed on Australian cricketers . 
 The report compiled by Halbish and Crompton was privately forwarded to the ACB 's remaining directors and the International Cricket Council ( ICC ) . The ICC was not informed directly ; the ACB delivered the news to their chairman Clyde Walcott and chief executive David Richards . Crompton and Halbish did not consult the other board members before making their decision and effectively handed them a fait accompli ; they failed to inform their colleagues until the players had left for the West Indies tour . 
 The other board members were told about the matter at the end of the meeting . The minutes of the meeting read : 
 The chairman and chief executive officer reported on a further matter that had come to their attention and been dealt with by them in a manner considered appropriate . The actions of the chairman and the chief executive were approved by the directors present . It was resolved that details should be provided to ICC on a private and confidential basis . 
 Some board members were uncomfortable with the way the matter was handled . Bob Merriman said that the other board members were " absolutely <unk> [ angry ] . I don 't know what the vote was because there was nobody there " . Malcolm Gray said that " it was disgraceful that the Board hadn 't been informed before " . Damien Mullins said he thought " it was poor and unsatisfactory " . 
 Crompton and Halbish knew that if the involvement of Waugh and Warne with bookmakers was revealed , the credibility of the two players as witnesses against the Pakistani captain Malik would be severely questioned , as they too were involved in activities associated with unregistered gambling . There would be significant pressure on the ACB to ban the players , so they decided to cover up the matter . Board member Cam Battersby said , " The only way he [ Malik ] was ever going to be convicted was if our evidence was credible ... Revealing the information ... would provide an excuse for Pakistan to do nothing " . The ACB prepared a press release in case the matter was leaked . The ACB 's legal adviser Graeme Johnson later said that he had told Crompton that they were not obliged to tell the press about the matter . 
 Initially , coach Simpson was not informed ; when he found out , he was angry that the ACB had not trusted him enough to tell him what his players had done . Captain Mark Taylor was also aware of the issue by the time he took the team to the West Indies , as were vice @-@ captain Ian Healy and Waugh 's brother Steve . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In December 1998 , before the Third Test between Australia and England at the Adelaide Oval , the journalist Malcolm Conn of The Australian uncovered the story of John . His report on the matter won him a Walkley Award for journalism . On 8 December , three days before the start of the Test , Conn informed Malcolm Speed — the CEO of the ACB — that he was going to reveal the details of a cover @-@ up of the fines that were imposed on Waugh . At the time , Conn was unaware of Warne 's involvement . The ACB responded by pre @-@ empting Conn and releasing a statement , revealing that two unnamed players had been fined in 1994 – 95 for having financial dealings with bookmakers . Later that evening , former Test cricketer David Hookes , who was then a sports broadcaster , named Waugh and Warne on the Melbourne radio station 3AW . The next day , Conn 's story was released on the front page , with the headline " Cricket 's Betting Scandal " . The article was accompanied by a picture of Waugh with his hand on his head . 
 On the morning of the publication of Conn 's article , the managers of Warne and Waugh organised a media conference after Australia 's training session . Both players faced a room packed with media and read prepared statements . Both said they had been " naive and stupid " . Waugh concluded : 
 I regret [ it ] entirely and wish to restate in the strongest possible manner that I have always given my best for my country in every match I have played and I believe my record , particularly in the last three years , fully supports this statement . I must emphasise that I have never been involved in match @-@ fixing or bribery on cricket matches in any stage of my career . 
 Much to their discontent , the media were not allowed to ask questions . Patrick Smith of The Age said , " To deliver such bland explanations to the world media as they did yesterday and then not accept questions was contemptuous of the Australian public they have let down so badly . " The press attention was so intense that when Waugh attempted to relax with a round of golf at a local course , media helicopters flew overhead . 
 The players were widely condemned by the media and public ; Prime Minister John Howard stated that he felt an " intense feeling of disappointment " , while former player Neil Harvey called for bans . Malik , whom Warne and Waugh had accused of attempting to bribe them , said that he was delighted at the revelation . The Pakistani player said that the revelations discredited his accusers and vindicated his protestations of innocence . On the preceding tour of Pakistan a few months earlier , Waugh had appeared before a Pakistan Cricket Board judicial inquiry in Lahore to present his claims against Malik ; the inquiry questioned the credibility of both Australian players and asked them to return to Pakistan to re @-@ present their accounts of the events . 
 The sports community strongly supported the players . May , the President of the Australian Cricketers ' Association , and co @-@ accuser of Malik , pledged his organisation 's support for the players , whom he described as " outstanding servants of Australian cricket " . Waugh received similar statements of support from sports identities . Warne 's first Australian captain , Allan Border , defended him , as did former captain and leading commentator Richie Benaud . Sir Don Bradman , widely regarded as the greatest batsman of all time , and former ACB chairman , said that Warne was one of the best influences on Australian cricket for generations , and that the dealings with John did not change this . 
 Media and public opinion was more hostile . The Sydney Morning Herald ran the headline " Baggy Green Shame " while The Australian wrote of the " $ 11 @,@ 000 price of disgrace " . Many newspaper columns and letters to the editor attacked the players . The editorial of The Australian stated that " Waugh and Warne said yesterday they had been naïve and stupid . Put the emphasis on the second adjective — and add greedy . " Readers called for the players to be banned from playing for Australia as well as the sacking of the ACB officials who had kept the matter secret ; some said that the players should never be appointed to leadership roles in the cricket community . In the Weekend Australian of 12 December , Warwick Hadfield and Brian Woodley editorialised that " Warne is in need of some good advice , but not from business managers and PR folk too happy to tell him how wonderful he is in order to flog a few more videos , books , pairs of duds , sports shoes or anti @-@ smoking ads " . Warne 's major sponsors reviewed their partnerships with him , and three newspapers , the Daily Mirror of the United Kingdom , The Age of Melbourne and the Sydney Morning Herald severed their ties with him . 
 A few days later , in the wake of the scandal , Waugh was widely jeered by an Australian crowd when he walked out to bat on the first day of the Test . In what he described as the toughest day of his career , Waugh gave an unconvincing and hesitant performance . Waugh managed only seven runs in 36 minutes before being removed by Peter Such , caught and bowled . The cricket writer Peter Roebuck opined that it was the worst home crowd reception for an Australian player that he could remember . Warne was injured at the time and did not play , so he did not have to face the hostile crowd . 
 = = Later inquiries = = 
 On 8 January 1999 , Pakistan 's Judicial Commission held a hearing in Melbourne into bribery and match @-@ fixing . The commission had originally summoned Waugh and Warne to Pakistan but the ACB instead decided to offer them court privileges in Australia . Both Warne and Waugh gave evidence at the public hearing . Waugh seemed nervous and uncertain , whereas Warne appeared assured and confident . They were questioned for approximately 80 and 45 minutes respectively . The Pakistani investigators attempted to link the Australians ' dealings with John to various games between Pakistan and Australia in 1994 , over which they had suspicions of match @-@ fixing . 
 Immediately after Warne and Waugh had met John in Colombo , Australia defeated Pakistan in a one @-@ day match , scoring 7 / 179 and restricting Pakistan to 9 / 151 in reply . There were suspicions that the Pakistanis had thrown the game by batting slowly , although Warne said he had genuinely tried his best , pointing out that he was named man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match . Warne and May had alleged that Malik offered them money to bowl badly on the final day of the First Test in Karachi . Australia then reduced Pakistan from 3 / 157 to 9 / 258 , and appeared set for victory , but a last @-@ wicket partnership took them to the target of 314 . The win was registered when wicket @-@ keeper Ian Healy missed a stumping chance from Warne and the ball went for four byes . Warne denied that he had thrown the match , again pointing out he was named man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match . Waugh had alleged that Malik offered him money to help Australia lose a one @-@ day match during the same tour . He denied the allegation that he did so . Waugh scored an unbeaten 121 , but it was not enough to prevent Australia from suffering a nine @-@ wicket defeat . 
 Waugh denied betting on cricket , but said he had given John information " about ten times " , contradicting his earlier statement that the pair had only talked on " a handful " of occasions . Warne testified that he gave pitch and weather information to John before matches three times — a one @-@ day international against England at the Sydney Cricket Ground in December 1994 , the Second Test at the Melbourne Cricket Ground and the Fifth Test at the WACA Ground . 
 Crompton was the last witness . He said that Warne and Waugh 's actions " amounted to a breach of the players ' contract in that it brought the game of cricket into disrepute " . He said that it was normal for off @-@ field disciplinary breaches to be dealt with in private , while the fallout of on @-@ field incidents was made public . Compton parried Pakistani accusations that he had covered @-@ up the affair . He said that if the matter had been made public , it would have been confused with bribery . The front @-@ page headline in the Melbourne tabloid Herald Sun subsequently read " MATCH <unk> " , accompanied by pictures of Warne and Waugh . The players responded that " the matter [ of the headline ] was in the hands of their lawyers " . The next day , the headline read " <unk> " . 
 Following the public outcry over the suppression of the incident , the ACB appointed Rob O 'Regan QC to head up a Player Conduct Inquiry . His assistants conducted 60 preliminary interviews and O 'Regan made ten himself . O 'Regan released his report on 28 February 1999 . He described the fines as " inadequate " as their size " did not reflect the seriousness of what they had done " . He suggested that a " suspension for a significant time " was more appropriate . 
 They must have known that it is wrong to accept money from , and supply information to , a bookmaker whom they also knew as someone who <unk> on cricket . Otherwise they would have reported the incident to team management long ago before they were found out in February 1995 . In behaving as they did they failed lamentably to set the sort of example one might expect from senior players and role models for many young cricketers . 
 O 'Regan said that Australian players were not prepared for playing cricket in Asia , as they were not aware of the dangers of bookmakers and betting on the Indian subcontinent . He recommended that every new player should be warned of the dangers of becoming involved with bookmakers , and the penalties that it entails . The ICC announced that no further action would be taken against Waugh and Warne as they could not be tried twice for the same offence . 
 = Hurricane Ophelia ( 2005 ) = 
 Hurricane Ophelia was the fifteenth named tropical cyclone and the eighth hurricane of the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . It was a long @-@ lived storm that was most remembered for its very erratic and extremely slow track off the East Coast of the United States , alternating several times between tropical storm and hurricane intensity . 
 Ophelia caused some damage and beach erosion along the United States coastline from Florida to North Carolina , with its closest approach occurring on September 14 and 15 with its western eyewall crossing land and the eye remaining just offshore . Minimal damage and erosion was also reported in Atlantic Canada when Ophelia hit as a tropical storm in extratropical transition on September 17 and 18 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 6 a non @-@ tropical low over the northern Bahamas became more organized and formed into Tropical Depression Sixteen between Andros and Grand Bahama . Shortly after forming the depression moved over Grand Bahama and moved north parallel to the Florida coastline . The computer models initially predicted two distinct possibilities for the storm 's future with some models indicating the storm would cross over Florida and enter the Gulf of Mexico while others indicated that it would stay offshore and move to the northeast . The official forecast from the National Hurricane Center followed the first set of guidance , though with low confidence . The storm strengthened to become Tropical Storm Ophelia early on September 7 and became a hurricane briefly the next day . 
 From September 9 to September 11 , Ophelia fluctuated in strength , being downgraded to a tropical storm only to regain hurricane intensity three more times ; during this time it moved very slowly and erratically in a northeasterly direction . The NHC continued to struggle to predict Ophelia , with the forecasts generally calling for a landfall on the east coast of the United States . The forecasters indicated there was a possibility that Ophelia could strengthen further to Category 3 strength , though they felt this was unlikely . On September 12 the storm completed a clockwise loop , then adopted a more north @-@ westerly motion towards North Carolina , while still moving only slowly and fitfully . It dropped below hurricane strength again when the inner core of convection collapsed , possibly due to passing over cooler water that it upwelled earlier in its track . Ophelia then regained hurricane strength over the warm waters of the Gulf Stream . After the collapse of the inner core of convection , the hurricane acquired an unusually large eye over 115 miles ( 185 km ) across and soon reached its peak strength with 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) winds . The northern and western eyewall passed over the coastal areas of North Carolina throughout September 14 – 15 , but the strongest winds remained offshore . 
 As Hurricane Ophelia moved past Cape Hatteras it turned to the east . Wind shear increased on September 16 and weakened Ophelia into a tropical storm for the last time . Ophelia turned to the northeast and brushed past Nantucket Island , Massachusetts the next day . As it approached Nova Scotia on September 17 , the storm became extratropical but maintained its strength as it made landfall in the extreme eastern portion of the province . The extratropical storm passed over southern Newfoundland later that day and finally dissipated on September 23 in the North Sea . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 As soon as Tropical Depression Sixteen formed on September 6 , the government of the Bahamas issued a tropical storm warning for the northwestern Bahamas and the National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm warning for much of the east Florida coastline . On September 10 , with forecasts indicating that Ophelia would make landfall in South Carolina as a hurricane , the NHC issued a hurricane watch for much of the coastline of the Carolinas . As the storm neared the Outer Banks , the watch was upgraded to a warning for the areas closest to the predicted route of the storm . On Ocracoke Island , roughly 3 @,@ 000 tourists and 800 local residents were evacuated to inland shelters after a mandatory evacuation order was issued for the island . 
 As Ophelia was predicted to pass near southeast New England , the NHC issued tropical storm warnings for much of the south Massachusetts and Rhode Island coastlines . In Atlantic Canada , considerable preparations were taken for Ophelia , primarily because of memories of Hurricane Juan of the 2003 season , which had caught the authorities off @-@ guard . Ophelia prompted the Canadian Hurricane Centre 's first ever tropical storm warnings which were canceled when Ophelia became extratropical . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = Southeastern United States = = = 
 Before Ophelia made its closest approach to land near the Outer Banks on September 15 and 16 , it caused moderate beach erosion along the Florida , Georgia , and South Carolina . Average swells of 6 to 8 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) affected the region for several days as the storm meandered offshore . Squall lines associated with the storm brought moderate to heavy rains along with high winds , gusting to 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) in isolated thunderstorms . Along the northeastern coast of Florida , up to 5 @.@ 04 in ( 128 mm ) of rain fell ; some areas recorded 3 @.@ 5 in ( 89 mm ) in a six @-@ hour span on September 6 . Between September 6 and 9 , torrential rainfall , measured up to 15 @.@ 2 in ( 390 mm ) in Flagler County , led to moderate street flooding , especially along poorly drained secondary roads . At Flagler Beach , Florida , the erosion endangered the foundation of highway A1A , and 140 dump trucks were brought in to buttress the road with rocks and sand . In Palm Beach County , one man drowned after being caught in rough seas associated with Ophelia . 
 = = = North Carolina = = = 
 Ophelia moved extremely slowly in and around North Carolina , causing the storm to drop more than 10 inches ( 254 mm ) of rain on many coastal areas . The highest amount measured was from Oak Island , where 17 @.@ 5 inches ( 445 mm ) was registered . In addition , storm surges of 7 – 12 feet ( 2 – 4 m ) were recorded , particularly in low @-@ lying inlets of Pamlico Sound . At the storm 's peak , over 240 @,@ 000 customers were without power in coastal North Carolina . One indirect fatality was reported due to a traffic accident related to Ophelia , although no direct deaths were recorded . 
 Damage was heaviest in Salter Path , North Carolina and along the Outer Banks near that community , where ( despite being only a Category 1 storm ) many buildings suffered significant damage as a result of the storm surge , which has been described as worse than Hurricane Isabel in 2003 and even compared to Hurricane Hazel in 1954 . Nearly all of the significant damage occurred on the sound side , or the side facing the mainland . In addition , several piers and many boats were damaged or destroyed by Ophelia 's storm surge . Damage was generally lighter on the mainland , and overall structural damage was relatively light , although there was considerable flooding reported in the Wilmington area . Damage was initially estimated to be about $ 1 @.@ 6 billion , but in final analysis was dropped to only $ 70 million ( 2005 USD ; $ 77 @.@ 3 million 2008 USD ) . On October 7 , President George W. Bush declared a state of emergency for ten counties in North Carolina as a result of Ophelia . 
 = = = New England and Canada = = = 
 In New England and Canada , overall damage was minimal , and only brief , sporadic power outages were reported . One indirect storm @-@ related fatality was reported in Nova Scotia as a result of a person falling during minor roof repairs . In Newfoundland , over 1 @.@ 96 inches ( 50 millimeters ) of rain fell over parts of the eastern region of the province . 
 = 1951 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1951 Atlantic hurricane season was the first hurricane season in which tropical cyclones were officially named by the United States Weather Bureau . The season officially started on June 15 , when the United States Weather Bureau began its daily monitoring for tropical cyclone activity ; the season officially ended on November 15 . It was the first year since 1937 in which no hurricanes made landfall on the United States ; as Hurricane How was the only tropical storm to hit the nation , the season had the least tropical cyclone damage in the United States since the 1939 season . As in the 1950 season , names from the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet were used to name storms this season . 
 The first hurricane of the season , Able , formed prior to the official start of the season ; before reanalysis in 2015 , it was once listed as the earliest major hurricane on record in the Atlantic basin . It formed on May 16 and executed a counterclockwise loop over the Bahamas ; later it brushed the North Carolina coastline . Hurricane Charlie was a powerful Category 4 hurricane that struck Jamaica as a major hurricane , killing hundreds and becoming the worst disaster in over 50 years . The hurricane later struck Mexico twice as a major hurricane , producing deadly flooding outside of Tampico , Tamaulipas . The strongest hurricane , Easy , spent its duration over the open Atlantic Ocean , briefly threatening Bermuda , and was formerly listed as one of a relatively few Category 5 hurricanes on record over the Atlantic Ocean . It briefly neared Category 5 status and interacted with Hurricane Fox , marking the first known instance of a hurricane affecting another 's path . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 As the calendar entered the new year , cyclogenesis occurred with a non @-@ tropical frontal wave over the western North Atlantic Ocean due to a closed low forming in a mid @-@ level trough , which eventually produced a low @-@ pressure center at the surface by January 2 . Ships recorded moderate gales up to 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) in connection with the new surface low , which formed several hundred miles east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . While initially lacking tropical attributes , the cyclone headed southeast for two days before curving southwestward . As it did so , the temperature of the system warmed in its lower levels , causing the cyclone to evolve into a more barotropic system . Late on January 4 , the system shrunk in size and began developing an inner core ; reanalysis determined that the system became a tropical storm at this time , though it would have likely been considered subtropical beginning in the early 1970s . 
 = = = Hurricane Able = = = 
 The origins of the first hurricane of the season were from a trough that exited the East Coast of the United States on May 12 . A low @-@ pressure area developed on May 14 , and two days later it developed into a tropical cyclone about 300 miles ( 480 km ) south of Bermuda . It formed beneath an upper @-@ level low , and initially was not fully tropical . The depression followed the low , initially toward the northwest and later the southwest . Moving over the Gulf Stream , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Able on May 16 . The storm turned to the south , and Hurricane Hunters reported that Able strengthened to hurricane status on May 17 off the coast of Florida . 
 The outer rainbands of Able produced light rainfall and high seas along the Florida coastline . It later moved through the northern Bahamas early on May 18 , where it produced hurricane @-@ force winds of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) . The hurricane later turned to the north , gradually strengthening through May 21 . Shortly thereafter , Able passed about 70 miles ( 110 km ) east of Cape Hatteras before turning east and reaching its peak of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) early on May 22 . Along the coast , the hurricane produced high tides but little damage . Able maintained hurricane intensity for two more days before weakening to a tropical storm early on May 24 . Able rapidly dissipated that same day , though originally it was assessed as having transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on May 23 . 
 Until 2015 , Able was listed as having peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and was analyzed to have been the earliest major hurricane on record . Such a storm would be a Category 3 or greater on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , a system developed and introduced in the 1970s . Able was also the strongest hurricane outside of the current hurricane season ( June 1 through November 30 ) . However , reanalysis by scientists in 2015 determined that Able was in fact far weaker than originally listed in HURDAT , the official database containing information on storm tracks and intensities in the Atlantic and Eastern North Pacific regions . It also lost its distinction as the strongest preseason cyclone on record , the record being held by a Category 2 hurricane in March 1908 . The hurricane was one of four North Atlantic hurricanes on record to exist during the month of May , the others occurring in 1889 , 1908 , and 1970 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Baker = = = 
 On August 2 , an easterly wave spawned a tropical depression about 680 miles ( 1095 km ) northeast of Barbuda in the Lesser Antilles . It moved northwestward , quickly strengthening into Tropical Storm Baker . Early on August 3 , the storm attained peak winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , and the next day passed about 275 mi ( 443 km ) east of Bermuda . At its peak intensity , the gale force winds extended 100 miles ( 160 km ) to the north of the center . After attaining its peak , Baker quickly weakened on August 4 and turned to the northeast . Early the next day , it regained some of its former strength , peaking again at 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) before losing its identity . It never affected land . 
 = = = Hurricane Charlie = = = 
 The third tropical cyclone of the season developed on August 12 from a tropical wave , 930 miles ( 1 @,@ 495 km ) east @-@ southeast of Barbados . After a few days without further development , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Charlie on August 14 , and subsequently crossed through the Lesser Antilles a day later with winds of 70 mph ( 113 km / h ) . Shortly after entering the Caribbean Sea , the storm intensified to hurricane status early on August 16 . Passing south of Puerto Rico and Hispaniola , Charlie then underwent rapid deepening beginning late that day , its winds increasing 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) in 24 hours . As it neared the island of Jamaica early on August 18 , Charlie became a major hurricane and shortly afterward struck just south of Kingston with winds of 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) — equivalent to a strong Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale , making Charlie , along with Hurricane Gilbert in 1988 , the strongest ever to hit the island . On the island , the hurricane dropped heavy rainfall up to 17 in ( 430 mm ) . The combination of strong winds and the rains left around $ 50 million ( 1951 USD , $ 380 million 2005 USD ) in crop and property damage . Across the country there were 152 deaths , 2 @,@ 000 injuries , and 25 @,@ 000 people left homeless ; as a result , it was considered the worst disaster in the country in the 20th century until Hurricane Gilbert produced even costlier damage , though with fewer reported fatalities . 
 After making landfall , Charlie weakened in its passage over the mountainous center of Jamaica , and by the time it left the island , its winds had diminished to 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) . Charlie later passed south of the Cayman Islands , with Grand Cayman reporting peak wind gusts of 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) . As it did so , the storm began to undergo yet another period of rapid intensification beginning on August 19 . It re @-@ attained major hurricane status late that day , and early on August 20 Charlie peaked at 130 mph ( 209 km / h ) , equivalent to low @-@ end Category 4 status . Maintaining its strength , the hurricane then made landfall on the southern tip of Cozumel and hit the Mexican mainland near <unk> on the Yucatán Peninsula . The strong winds destroyed 70 % of the crops along its path , although no deaths were reported in the Yucatán Peninsula . Several homes were wrecked in the region . As it moved inland , Charlie weakened rapidly over land , reaching the Bay of Campeche as a minimal hurricane early on August 21 . Once over water , it failed to re @-@ intensify for a full day , but began doing so early on August 22 . As it did so , it rapidly re @-@ intensified for a third and final time , reaching peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) before striking near the city of Miramar , just north of Tampico .. It dissipated on August 23 . The hurricane dropped heavy rainfall in the region , flooding rivers and causing dams to burst . Hundreds of people were killed in the Mexican mainland , and across Charlie 's entire path , damage was estimated at over $ 75 million ( 1951 USD , $ 684 million 2016 USD ) . The outer fringes of the storm increased surf along the Texas coast . 
 = = = Hurricane Dog = = = 
 A tropical wave spawned a tropical depression on August 27 southwest of Cape Verde . It moved westward , eventually intensifying into a tropical storm early on August 31 . The next day , the storm was first observed by Hurricane Hunters , several hundred miles east of Barbados , and it was named " Dog " . By that time , its winds were around 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , and the storm continued intensifying as it approached the Lesser Antilles . On September 2 , Dog attained hurricane status , reaching its peak of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) as it passed between the islands of Saint Lucia and Martinique . The storm , then quite small in diameter , produced strong wind gusts of up to 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) at the airport in Fort @-@ de @-@ France on Martinique . However , this peak was short @-@ lived , for upon entering the eastern Caribbean Sea Dog began a slow but steady weakening trend . On September 4 , Dog weakened to tropical storm status to the south of Hispaniola , and the next day dissipated in the western Caribbean . 
 In northern Saint Lucia , the combination of flooding and high winds destroyed 70 % of the banana crop . Two sailing vessels were destroyed , and another one damaged . Across the island , Hurricane Dog killed two people from drownings . Damage was heavier on Martinique , located on the north side of the storm . The hurricane 's winds destroyed 1 @,@ 000 homes and the roofs of several others . Downed trees blocked roads and disrupted power lines . The winds also destroyed 90 % of the banana crop and 30 % of the sugar cane . Throughout Martinique , Dog left $ 3 million in damage ( 1951 USD , $ 27 @.@ 4 million 2016 USD ) and killed five people from drownings . It was considered the " most violent storm " in Martinique in 20 years . Initially the hurricane was expected to strike Jamaica , prompting hurricane warnings for the country , as well as along the southern coast of Hispaniola . Jamaica was earlier struck by Hurricane Charlie a few weeks prior , and the threat from Dog prompted coastal evacuations and the closure of an airport . Ultimately , Dog dissipated and produced only light rainfall on the island . 
 = = = Hurricane Easy = = = 
 Hurricane Easy , the strongest tropical cyclone of the season , was a powerful and long @-@ lived Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane that originated as a tropical depression on September 1 between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde . Moving generally west @-@ northwestward , the depression deepened into a tropical storm late that day , and further to hurricane status by September 3 . On September 5 , the cyclone reached its first peak of 110 mph ( 177 km / h ) , but failed to continue strengthening . Its winds fluctuated through the early morning on September 6 , but then resumed strengthening , reaching major hurricane status by that evening . During this period , Hurricane Hunters flew into the hurricane to monitor its progress , recording a minimum pressure of 957 millibars ( 28 @.@ 26 inHg ) on September 6 to the north of the Lesser Antilles . The next day , as the storm continued strengthening , an aircraft was unable to penetrate the center , estimating winds of 160 mph ( 257 km / h ) south of the eye . On this basis , Easy was once classified as a Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale ; early estimates of the winds by reconnaissance aircraft were often based on visual cues , such as the state of the sea surface , and were thus subjective and often unreliable . Subsequent reanalysis in 2015 lowered its peak winds to 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) on September 8 . This was based on the Hurricane Hunters reporting a pressure of 937 mb ( 27 @.@ 67 inHg ) on the previous day , and a ship reporting winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) . By the time Easy attained peak intensity , it had turned to the north and northeast while beginning a steady weakening trend . It interacted with the small Hurricane Fox to the east ; this was the first observed instance of a hurricane affecting another 's path . Easy then turned to the northeast , passing a short distance southeast of Bermuda on September 9 with winds of 110 mph ( 177 km / h ) . Easy transitioned into an extratropical cyclone late on September 11 , while still maintaining hurricane @-@ force winds . The remnants lost their hurricane @-@ force winds on September 12 , only to briefly regain them two days later . On September 14 , Easy lost its identity over the northern Atlantic Ocean after it was absorbed by another extratropical storm to the north . 
 The Weather Bureau advised the island to take precautionary measures in advance of the storm ; tourists and residents " worked feverishly " to complete preparations , and the United States Air Force issued " a formal warning at noon . " Numerous hotels and homes were shuttered . Heavy traffic snarled evacuations , and 100 tourists were stranded on the island without " roundtrip reservations . " Air Force aircraft returned to the United States , and personnel secured various facilities at the island 's base . On Bermuda , the hurricane produced winds of only 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , which downed a few banana trees . In addition to affecting Bermuda , the strong winds of the hurricane damaged a few ships along its path . 
 = = = Hurricane Fox = = = 
 Around the same time as Easy was forming , a new tropical depression developed in the far eastern Atlantic Ocean . Moving generally westward , it passed south of the Cape Verde islands , quickly strengthening into Tropical Storm Fox early on September 3 ; by that time , its motion turned to the west @-@ northwest . On September 5 , Fox attained hurricane status , around the same time as it was first observed by ships . Two days later , Hurricane Hunters reported peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , making it a major hurricane , albeit one of very small extent . Around that time , Fox interacted with Hurricane Easy to its northwest . After maintaining peak winds for 12 hours , Fox began a steady weakening trend , accelerating to the north and northeast ahead of Easy and passing to the east of Bermuda . On September 10 , Fox , while still of hurricane force , became extratropical between the Azores and Greenland in the far north Atlantic . It turned toward the north and dissipated on September 11 off the southwest coast of Iceland . Although a few ships were affected by the hurricane 's winds , there were no reports of any damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm George = = = 
 Tropical Storm George developed in the Bay of Campeche on September 19 . Moving west @-@ northwestward , it quickly attained peak winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) late on the next day , as reported by the Hurricane Hunters . George later made landfall on September 21 in Mexico about 55 mi ( 90 km ) south of Tampico as a moderate tropical storm . Before it moved ashore , the storm spread rainfall along the coast and increased waves , causing one drowning death . George quickly dissipated upon making landfall , and there were no reports of damage . 
 = = = Hurricane How = = = 
 An easterly wave spawned a tropical depression in the western Caribbean Sea on September 29 . It moved north @-@ northwestward for a few days before turning eastward in the central Gulf of Mexico . Based on Hurricane Hunter reports , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm How late on September 30 , and it continued to strengthen as it approached Southwest Florida . On October 2 , How attained its first peak of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) just before making landfall near Boca Grande , and within the day it crossed southern Florida . At the time , the storm was not well organized , and its strongest winds were confined to squalls in the Florida Keys and the southeast coast . Wind damage was minor , although heavy rainfall was reported , peaking at 15 @.@ 7 inches ( 40 cm ) near where it moved ashore . The precipitation caused significant street flooding , while about 7 @,@ 000 acres ( 28 km2 ) of tomato and bean fields were deluged . 
 The storm emerged into the Atlantic Ocean between Fort Pierce and Vero Beach , quickly intensifying to hurricane strength by October 3 . Turning northeastward , How reached its second and strongest peak of 100 mph ( 161 km / h ) on October 4 as it passed near the Outer Banks of North Carolina . Along the coast , the hurricane produced high tides and minor damage . Subsequently the hurricane briefly weakened , only to recover its peak of 100 mph ( 161 km / h ) on October 5 . It passed southeast of Cape Cod before turning more to the east @-@ northeast , causing road closures due to high tides . Offshore , the hurricane sank a ship , killing 17 people . While still of hurricane force , How became an extratropical storm on October 6 , and a few days later it curved to the northeast . The extratropical cyclone later struck Iceland near <unk> with winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) on October 9 . A couple of days later , the remnants of How dissipated in the far northern Atlantic . Overall , Hurricane How caused about $ 2 million ( 1951 USD , $ 18 @.@ 2 million 2016 USD ) in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Item = = = 
 A tropical depression formed southwest of Jamaica on October 12 . A small system , it moved northwestward and intensified into Tropical Storm Item on October 13 . It turned toward the north , and the next day attained peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) after moving through the Cayman Islands . Concurrently , the Hurricane Hunters observed peak winds of 80 mph ( 129 km / h ) , and on this basis , Item was operationally upgraded to a minimal hurricane . Although it retained this status in HURDAT for years , subsequent reanalysis in 2015 found the reconnaissance estimates to have been too high . Item maintained its peak for more than a day before weakening . It lost tropical storm status on October 16 as it drifted to the northwest . Continuing a slow weakening trend , it passed just east of the Isla de la Juventud before striking western Cuba as a tropical depression on October 17 . Later that day it dissipated in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico . 
 The threat of the hurricane prompted precautions to be made in portions of Cuba . Additionally , storm warnings were posted in the Florida Keys , southern mainland Florida , as well as the Bahamas . However , no damage was reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Jig = = = 
 One of the last tropical cyclones of the season formed on October 15 just northeast of the Bahamas . Although listed as a tropical storm , it would have likely been classified as a subtropical cyclone beginning in the 1970s , but was unable to be classified as such given the lack of satellite imagery to prove its status . Given the name " Jig " , it moved northeastward , quickly attaining hurricane status with winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) , which it maintained for a full day . On October 16 , Jig began a slow weakening trend , weakening below hurricane force and turning sharply northeastward . During this time , the storm made its closest approach to the southeastern United States while passing well southeast of Cape Hatteras . While offshore , the storm increased surf along the North Carolina and Virginia coastlines , prompting storm warnings . Early October 18 , Jig became extratropical with winds of 70 mph ( 113 km / h ) and began a counterclockwise loop over the western Atlantic . The next day it turned to the southeast before dissipating about 230 mi ( 370 km ) south of Bermuda on October 20 . 
 = = = Hurricane Twelve = = = 
 In early December , a cold front passed north of Bermuda . A disturbance along the front began rotating on December 2 , developing into a small but powerful extratropical storm on the next day . By late on December 3 , the storm attained hurricane @-@ force winds , and it increasingly became the dominant system within the broad frontal region . A ridge to the east turned this storm to the southwest . The winds diminished below hurricane @-@ intensity on December 5 , and concurrently the inner structure became more tropical as the frontal features dissipated . During this time , ships in the region reported strong winds , mostly to the north . Increasing water temperatures fueled atmospheric instability , likely causing an increase in convection , and the system was potentially a subtropical cyclone on December 6 , while located about 1 @,@ 015 mi ( 1 @,@ 635 km ) east @-@ northeast of Bermuda . A nearby ship recorded a minimum pressure of 987 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) around that time . After the storm turned to the southeast , a ship in the region reported winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) near the center and a pressure of 995 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) , while a weather station indicated that the system had a warm core . The data suggested that the system became a fully tropical hurricane by 12 : 00 UTC on December 7 , and that it likely had transitioned into a tropical storm six hours earlier . By 18 : 00 UTC that night , the hurricane attained peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . 
 On December 8 , the hurricane turned to the east and weakened into a tropical storm , steered by an approaching trough . Over the next day , the storm accelerated to the east @-@ northeast toward the Azores . Late on December 10 , the storm moved through the Azores as a tropical storm , although it was transitioning back into an extratropical storm at the time . By 06 : 00 UTC on December 11 , the system was extratropical again after it rejoined with a nearby cold front . It likely merged with another nontropical storm to its east on December 12 , although it is possible the former hurricane remained a distinct system . A building ridge near Spain forced the extratropical system to the southeast , eventually dissipating after moving ashore Morocco on December 15 . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 These names were used to name storms during the 1951 Atlantic hurricane season . As this season had the same names and was less active than 1950 , none of these names were used for the first time . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = K Foundation art award = 
 The 1994 K Foundation award was an award given by the K Foundation ( Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty ) to the " worst artist of the year " . The shortlist for the £ 40 @,@ 000 K Foundation award was identical to the shortlist for the well @-@ established but controversial £ 20 @,@ 000 Turner Prize for the best British contemporary artist . On the evening of 23 November 1993 , Rachel Whiteread was presented with the 1993 Turner Prize inside London 's Tate Gallery , and the 1994 K Foundation award on the street outside . 
 Prior to presenting their award , the K Foundation held a private exhibit of a collection of art works entitled Money - A Major Body of Cash . The award , the exhibition and the accompanying extravagant press junket were widely reported by the media . 
 = = Context = = 
 In June 1993 the newly formed K Foundation began taking out full page national press adverts . Initial advertisements were cryptic , referring to " K Time " and advising readers to " Kick out the clocks " . They mentioned five @-@ year journeys which included pop success and deep space travel and that " the sands of time are running in " . There was also an advert for the K Foundation 's single " K Cera Cera " which was " Available nowhere ... no formats " and which was not planned for release until world peace was established . 
 There was a change of direction with the fourth advert which appeared on 14 August 1993 , reading : " <unk> ALL ART NOW . Major rethink in progress . <unk> further announcements . " The next ad ( 28 August 1993 ) read : " It has come to our attention that you did not abandon all art now . Further direct action is thus necessary . The K Foundation announce the ' mutha of all awards ' , the 1994 K Foundation award for the worst artist of the year . " It then went on to detail how a shortlist of four artists had been chosen , and that they would be exhibited in the Tate Gallery . 
 One of the first newspaper pieces about the K Foundation appeared in The Guardian the following Monday , correctly pointing out that the shortlist and exhibition were actually for the 1993 Turner Prize , the controversial £ 20 @,@ 000 annual award given by the UK art establishment to the best young contemporary artist , but assuming that the K Foundation prize was a hoax . " As for the K Foundation " , the newspaper wrote , " it stands unmasked as the current performing face of those cherished old friends of pop <unk> , Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty " , formerly known as The KLF . In September , the organisers of the Turner Prize responded publicly that " It proves the validity of our prize that somebody would take so much trouble to set up this award " . 
 The Foundation 's next advert invited the general public to vote for the worst artist , either by going to the exhibition and using their critical faculties or by letting their inherent prejudices come to the fore . The final advert summarised the whole campaign , asked some questions back to the people that had written to them , and explained that the winner of the K Foundation award would be announced in a TV advert during the live Turner Prize coverage on Channel 4 television . 
 On 20 November 1993 , The Economist reported on the K Foundation prize and placed it in context . " Every autumn for the past ten years , an increasingly bad @-@ tempered squabble has raged between , on the one hand , many of Britain 's art critics and its popular media , and on the other , its avant @-@ garde " establishment , " the small <unk> of art historians , curators , and dealers who control the Turner prize . " Predicting that Rachel Whiteread , creator of the controversial sculpture , House , would win both awards , the magazine said that , if it were so , " the vast numbers of people who equate contemporary art with rubbish will , yet again , feel vindicated . " 
 The K Foundation 's television adverts on the evening of 23 November 1993 explained that the Foundation were currently " amending the history of art " at a secret location . No mention of the alternative award was made in the post @-@ Turner Prize studio discussion . The K Foundation reportedly pre @-@ announced Rachel Whiteread as their winner at 2pm or , at least , at some time before the Turner ; at 9.30pm , live on television , the Turner Prize was awarded to the same artist . Whiteread reluctantly collected her K Foundation winnings at just past 11pm , saying , " sarcastically , " What an honour . " " 
 Drummond claimed the advertising campaign cost £ 250 @,@ 000 . The television advertisements cost £ 20 @,@ 000 , an amount which Scotland on Sunday said was " carefully chosen to match the value of the Turner prize " , the newspaper adding that " Copies of the invoices were supplied as evidence . " Each press advert cost between £ 5 @,@ 000 and £ 15 @,@ 000 . 
 = = The Amending of Art History = = 
 25 witnesses - including art critics , journalists , music industry figures and artists - were invited to participate in the Foundation 's " Amending of art history " . They were driven in a convoy of white limousines , led by a gold limo , to Heston Service Station where they were handed a press release and £ 1650 in crisp new £ 50 notes . The accompanying press release stated that 25 x £ 1600 collectively made up the £ <unk> K Foundation prize , and that the extra £ 50 was for the witness to verify its authenticity by spending it . The witnesses were dressed in fluorescent orange hard hats and safety jackets . 
 The convoy proceeded to a field patrolled by two orange @-@ painted K Foundation Saracen armoured cars , driven by Drummond and Cauty , broadcasting the K Foundation 's K Cera Cera and ABBA 's " Money Money Money " . Silver @-@ bearded " Mr Ball " , the K Foundation 's compere , directed the witnesses to nail their wad of money to a board inside a gilt frame , to assemble the K Foundation 's prize . Some of the witnesses pocketed all or some of their wad , and the prize money was , according to Danny Kelly , some £ 9000 short . Mr Ball also directed the witnesses to " view the art " : One million pounds in £ 50 notes , nailed to a large framed board . This was the K Foundation 's first art work , Nailed To A Wall , " the first of a series of K Foundation art installations that will also include one million pounds in a skip , one million pounds on a table and several variants on the theme of Tremendous Amounts Of Folding " . 
 Collectively , the K Foundation 's money @-@ as @-@ art works were titled Money : A Major Body Of Cash , " seven pieces , all involving various amounts of cash nailed to , tied to or simply standing on inanimate objects " . Nailed To A Wall had a reserve price of £ 500 @,@ 000 , half the face value of the cash used in its construction , which Scotland on Sunday 's reporter Robert Dawson Scott was " fairly confident ... really was £ 1 million [ in cash ] " . The catalogue entry for the artwork stated : " Over the years the face value will be eroded by inflation , while the artistic value will rise and rise . The precise point at which the artistic value will overtake the face value is unknown . <unk> the work now and you double your money . Hang it on a wall and watch the face value erode , the market value fluctuate , and the artistic value soar . The choice is yours . " 
 Rachel Whiteread had already been notified of her " victory " but had refused to accept the prize or allow the K Foundation to use her name . The motorcade left the site of the amending of art @-@ history and headed back to London , for a showdown with Whiteread on the steps of the Tate . When she again refused to accept the money , the K Foundation explained that it would be burnt . With the crowd of now very drunk witnesses looking on , a masked K Foundation operative ( Gimpo ) fumbled with matches and lighter fluid . At the last moment Rachel Whiteread emerged from the Tate and accepted the money , stating that she would give it as grants to needy artists . 
 The next day , the K Foundation 's publicist , Mick Houghton , claimed that the voting for the K Foundation 's award was supposed to produce a tie , to illustrate the hypocrisy of the Turner award committee , but that strangely the result had been a huge margin of victory for Whiteread . He speculated that the few thousand voters had just liked or rather disliked the sound of her name . 
 Defending Whiteread , Lord Palumbo told The Guardian that : " Talent at the highest level attracts derision . We must let the artist fail . " 
 Whiteread 's sculpture , House , was demolished , as had been planned from its inception , on 11 January 1994 . 
 = = Media and art @-@ world reaction = = 
 A huge amount of press publicity ensued , with all the major newspapers and press organisations reporting that Whiteread had won both awards . Media reaction to the K Foundation award was mixed . David Mills wrote in The Times that The K Foundation 's campaign was " tiresome " , and he asked " Doesn 't it strike anyone as odd that a group of people who made their money with such artistic endeavours as a disco @-@ version of the Dr Who theme should be suggesting that contemporary art was somehow more fatuous than that ? " 
 Rachel Whiteread had an advertisement printed in the British magazine , Art Monthly , in which she outlined her plan to donate £ 10 @,@ 000 to Shelter and distribute the remainder in grants to 10 needy artists . In the advertisement she stated that she " does not agree with the K Foundation 's aims or methods " . Displaying perhaps a little humour , Whiteread 's advertisement was in a similar style to the K Foundation ads , with stark white text on a black background . 
 Scottish sculptor David Mach opined to Scotland on Sunday that " They 're just a bunch of silly buggers . It 's good to see money going from a bunch of silly buggers to an artist who is going to make good use of it . What 's that saying about a fool and his money ... ? " John Bellany , on the other hand , said that " The emotional , artistic side of [ his ] nature ... admire [ d ] the audacity and imagination , challenging art and the art manipulators . The rational side of me asks , is this the most expensive art publicity stunt this century , and for whom ? " 
 Whiteread 's agent Karsten Schubert said , " The whole affair was a non @-@ event . They achieved nothing and they were left looking like real <unk> . " Peter Chater , a director of Schubert 's agency concurred ; he called Drummond and Cauty " cowards " . " It was obviously a publicity stunt . What sort of statement they were trying to make I don 't know . If it was anything to do with the relationship between art and money it was pretty crass . The KLF made a fortune from a couple of successful singles . Artists aren 't in that position . Threatening to set light to £ 40 @,@ 000 is pretty obscene . " Former Factory Records boss Tony Wilson applauded the group , however . " The K Foundation is a very peculiar avant garde group whose ideas are as valid anything the Turner people do , " he told NME . " Since when has there been laws governing what constitutes art , or an artistic statement ? OK , so a lot of people don 't understand what Bill and Jimmy are trying to say , but how many people know exactly what Rachel Whiteread 's trying to say with her art ? " 
 Modern Review art critic John O 'Reilly , another of the K Foundation 's witnesses , said : " The whole point of the K Foundation is its anonymity . There 's no origin , just a Circulation of data and concepts . There is no master plan , no grand narrative . " O 'Reilly also " [ enjoyed the ] sense of waste and sacrifice involved " . 
 Miranda Sawyer , who attended the presentation , found special interest in a subsidiary incident during the evening of the prize ceremonies : the theft of money by several of the other invited witnesses : " All the feelings of power and powerlessness that money can bring were fairly summarised with these thefts - it must have turned out better than the K Foundation could have hoped if the examination of cash , art and associated feelings was their point . " Sawyer named " <unk> " figure Carl Freedman as one of those who had taken the money , and reported that " He found the event funny , not offensive ( you would too if you walked off with £ 1 @,@ 600 ! ) , but thought the point had been made before . " 
 Writer and " underground art historian " Stewart Home was viciously supportive of the K Foundation . " The avant @-@ garde wasn 't to be seen at the Turner Prize gathering , it was to be found among that select band of individuals who 'd organised the K Foundation 's attack on the smug complacency of the arts establishment .... ' dignitaries ' such as Lord Polumbo were revealed as buffoons . While Polumbo ranted about the dunces who attack cultural innovations , his rhetoric showed him to be a complete idiot — several people immediately pointed out that he was unable to correctly name Van Gogh 's art dealer brother . Likewise , Polumbo claimed that there are no monuments erected to critics and presented himself as a champion of progressive culture , while ignoring the fact that it was critics who picked the winner of the prize he was awarding . It is the K Foundation , rather than Whiteread , who represent a vital and innovative strand within contemporary culture . Their work is simultaneously a critique and a celebration of ' consumer capitalism ' . " 
 A New Musical Express piece on 20 November 1993 was also highly supportive of the K Foundation . " The nearest parallel to the K Foundation donation would be The Beatles ' grandiose plans for Apple Corps " , they said . " But where Apple handed out money willy @-@ nilly to little end and failed to achieve anything more than get some hippies stoned and put up some nice posters about war being over if you want it , Drummond and Cauty have found a specific target - the relationship between art , money and the critical <unk> and attacked it . By actually offering £ 40 @,@ 000 to the artist who produces the <unk> piece of work , they 've simultaneously sent up the whole thing and proved their integrity the hard way . " 
 The Face magazine 's witness wrote that " The accusation that this is a tiresome Situationist gag with a <unk> cushion pay @-@ off belittles the K Foundation 's distracted message . They are not mocking any of the artists involved in the Turner or their work so much as the whole tired institution of awards themselves .... By telling us to " use our critical faculties or our innate prejudice " to vote , the Ks are asking : " Who decides who decides ? " " 
 The Independent 's witness , David Lister , was less impressed . " Last night 's highly eccentric mystery tour by the K Foundation probably said more about the wealth that can be accumulated from two number one hit records than it did about any resurgence of Dadaism " , he said . 
 The Guardian said that Jimmy Cauty , " [ as the artist ] responsible for a best @-@ selling Athena poster of the Hobbit ... can justly say he has adorned more walls than any of the Turner nominees " ; and added : " A grand deflation of the pretensions of the wealthy art elite is an aim that has drawn approval from sections of the art world and philistines who find ' installations ' of knotted rope or beds covered in rice curiously unmoving .... The joke may yet prove to be at the expense of the Turner . " In a separate piece , the newspaper implied that the K Foundation had hit their perceived target with some success : 
 = = Later analysis = = 
 In a piece published in 2006 , The Sunday Times quoted author James F. English 's description of The K Foundation 's Art Award as " hostile philanthropy " . Sunday Times writer Bryan Appleyard added that the " K Foundation 's witty exploitations of artistic greed ... are essential aspects of the prize itself . They promote the prize , reassure the organisers that , culturally speaking , they are in the thick of it and console the artists with evidence that their work provokes strong reactions . More importantly , for English , such conflicts demonstrate the autonomous nature of the event . These prizes should not be seen as any real or lasting judgment about art , but rather as things in themselves . " 
 Some years after the award , Bill Drummond attempted to explain the K Foundation 's motives , as he now saw them : 
 = = Burning = = 
 The K Foundation 's art campaign , Money : A Major Body Of Cash , failed to attract major gallery interest so , on 23 August 1994 , Drummond and Cauty disposed of their one million pounds in an alternate fashion : they burnt it on the Scottish island of Jura . ( See : K Foundation Burn a Million Quid ) . In an interview with Drummond , Cauty and Gimpo , Gimpo admitted to harbouring guilt about the million pounds burning ; that if he 'd burnt Whiteread 's £ 40 @,@ 000 the million pounds burning would never have happened . " I should have burnt it . I had petrol all over the £ 40 @,@ 000 ... We were due to wait until eleven o 'clock until she came out , but we were told to wait another two minutes ... [ then ] Rachel Whiteread came running out . She just grabbed the money and dragged it over the fence . " Carl Freedman also wished they 'd burnt Whiteread 's money . " It would have been brilliant .... It would have been just totally outrageous . People would have been falling out of their @-@ chairs , saying . ' I can 't believe they just burned £ 40 @,@ 000 ' " . 
 = Battle of Lade = 
 For war between the navy of Rhodes and the navy of Macedon in 201 BC , see Battle of Lade ( 201 BC ) . 
 The Battle of Lade ( Greek : <unk> τῆς <unk> , <unk> tēs <unk> ) was a naval battle which occurred during the Ionian Revolt , in 494 BC . It was fought between an alliance of the Ionian cities ( joined by the Lesbians ) and the Persian Empire of Darius the Great , and resulted in a decisive victory for the Persians which all but ended the revolt . 
 The Ionian Revolt was triggered by the dissatisfaction of the Greek cities of Asia Minor with the tyrants appointed by Persia to rule them . In 499 BC , the then @-@ tyrant of Miletus , Aristagoras , launched a joint expedition with the Persian satrap Artaphernes to conquer Naxos , in an attempt to bolster his position in Miletus . The mission was a debacle , and sensing his imminent removal as tyrant , Aristagoras chose to incite the whole of Ionia into rebellion against the Persian king Darius the Great . Initially , in 498 BC , the Ionians went on the offensive , supported by troops from Athens and Eretria , capturing Sardis , before suffering defeat at the Battle of Ephesus . The revolt then spread to Caria and Cyprus . Three years of Persian campaigning across Asia Minor followed , with no decisive effect . By 494 BC the Persian army and navy had regrouped , and made straight for the epicentre of the rebellion at Miletus . 
 The Ionians sought to defend Miletus by sea , leaving the defense of Miletus to the Milesians . The Ionian fleet gathered at the island of Lade , off the coast of Miletus . The Persians were uncertain of victory at Lade , so attempted to persuade some of the Ionian contingents to defect . Although this was unsuccessful at first , when the Persians finally attacked the Ionians , the Samian fleet accepted the Persian offer . As the Persian and Ionian fleets met , the Samians sailed away from the battle , causing the collapse of the Ionian battle line . Although the Chian contingent and a few other ships remained and fought bravely against the Persians , the battle was lost . 
 With the defeat at Lade , the Ionian Revolt was all but ended . The next year , the Persians reduced the last rebel strongholds , and began the process of bringing peace to the region . The Ionian Revolt constituted the first major conflict between ancient Greece and Persia , and as such represents the first phase of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars . Although Asia Minor had been brought back into the Persian fold , Darius vowed to punish Athens and Eretria for their support of the revolt . Moreover , seeing that the myriad city states of Greece posed a continued threat to the stability of his empire , he decided to conquer the whole of Greece . In 492 BC , the first Persian invasion of Greece , the next phase of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars , would begin as a direct consequence of the Ionian Revolt . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the dark age that followed the collapse of the Mycenaean civilization , significant numbers of Greeks had emigrated to Asia Minor and settled there . These settlers were from three tribal groups : the Aeolians , Dorians and Ionians . The Ionians had settled about the coasts of Lydia and Caria , founding the twelve cities which made up Ionia . These cities were Miletus , Myus and Priene in Caria ; Ephesus , Colophon , Lebedos , Teos , Clazomenae , Phocaea and Erythrae in Lydia ; and the islands of Samos and Chios . The cities of Ionia had remained independent until they were conquered by the famous Lydian king Croesus , in around 560 BC . The Ionian cities then remained under Lydian rule until Lydia was in turn conquered by the nascent Achaemenid Empire of Cyrus the Great . The Persians found the Ionians difficult to rule . Elsewhere in the empire , Cyrus was able to identify elite native groups to help him rule his new subjects — such as the priesthood of Judea . No such group existed in Greek cities at this time ; while there was usually an aristocracy , this was inevitably divided into feuding factions . The Persians thus settled for the sponsoring a tyrant in each Ionian city , even though this drew them into the Ionians ' internal conflicts . Furthermore , a tyrant might develop an independent streak , and have to be replaced . The tyrants themselves faced a difficult task ; they had to deflect the worst of their fellow citizens ' hatred , while staying in the favour of the Persians . 
 About 40 years after the Persian conquest of Ionia , and in the reign of the fourth Persian king , Darius the Great , the stand @-@ in Milesian tyrant Aristagoras found himself in this familiar predicament . In 500 BC , Aristagoras was approached by some exiles from Naxos , who asked him to take control of the island . Seeing an opportunity to strengthen his position in Miletus by conquering Naxos , Aristagoras approached the satrap of Lydia , Artaphernes , proposing a joint attack on Naxos , to which Artaphernes assented . 
 The expedition sailed in the spring of 499 BC but quickly descended into a debacle The force laid siege to the Naxians for four months , but eventually the Persians and Aristagoras both ran out of money . The force therefore sailed despondently back to the mainland . Aristagoras found himself in dire straits and fully expected to be stripped of his position by Artaphernes . In a desperate attempt to save himself , Aristagoras chose to incite his own subjects , the Milesians , to revolt against their Persian masters , thereby beginning the Ionian Revolt . Although Herodotus presents the revolt as a consequence of Aristagoras 's personal motives , it is clear that Ionia must have been ripe for rebellion anyway , the primary grievance being the tyrants installed by the Persians . Aristagoras 's actions have thus been likened to tossing a flame into a kindling box ; they incited rebellion across Ionia ( and Aeolis and Doris ) , and tyrannies were everywhere abolished , and democracies established in their place . 
 Aristagoras had brought all of Hellenic Asia Minor into revolt , but evidently realised that the Greeks would need other allies in order to fight the Persians . In the winter of 499 BC , he sailed to mainland Greece to try to recruit allies . He failed to persuade the Spartans , but the cities of Athens and Eretria agreed to support the rebellion . In the spring of 498 BC , an Athenian force of twenty triremes , accompanied by five from Eretria , for a total of twenty @-@ five triremes set sail for Ionia . They joined up with the main Ionian force near Ephesus . This force was then guided by the Ephesians through mountains to Sardis , Artaphernes 's satrapal capital . The Greeks caught the Persians unawares , and were able to capture the lower city . However the lower city then caught fire , and the Greeks , demoralised , then retreated from the city , and began to make their way back to Ephesus . The Persians troops in Asia Minor followed the Greek force , catching them outside Ephesus . It is clear that the demoralised and tired Greeks were no match for the Persians , and were completely routed in the ensuing battle at Ephesus . The Ionians who escaped the battle made for their own cities , while the remaining Athenians and Eretrians managed to return to their ships , and sailed back to Greece . 
 Despite these setbacks , the revolt spread further . The Ionians sent men to the Hellespont and Propontis , and captured Byzantium and the other nearby cities . They also persuaded the Carians to join the rebellion . Furthermore , seeing the spread of the rebellion , the kingdoms of Cyprus also revolted against Persian rule without any outside persuasion . For the next three years , the Persian army and navy were fully occupied with fighting the rebellions in Caria and Cyprus , and Ionia seems to have had an uneasy peace during these years . At the height of the Persian counter @-@ offensive , Aristagoras , sensing the untenability of his position , decided to abandon his position as leader of Miletus , and of the revolt , and he left Miletus . Herodotus , who evidently has a rather negative view of him , suggests that Aristagoras simply lost his nerve and fled . 
 By the sixth year of the revolt ( 494 BC ) , the Persian forces had regrouped . The available land forces were gathered into one army , and were accompanied by a fleet supplied by the re @-@ subjugated Cypriots , and the Egyptians , Cilicians and Phoenicians . The Persians headed directly to Miletus , paying little attention to other strongholds , presumably intending to tackle the revolt at its epicentre . The Median general Datis , an expert on Greek affairs , was certainly dispatched to Ionia by Darius at this time . It is therefore possible that he was in overall command of this Persian offensive . Hearing of the approach of this force , the Ionians met at the Panionium ( the sacred meeting ground ) , and decided not to attempt to fight on land , leaving the Milesians to defend their walls . Instead , they opted to gather every ship they could , and make for the island of Lade , off the coast of Miletus , in order to " fight for Miletus at sea " . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 = = = Greeks = = = 
 The Ionian cities were joined in this battle by the Aeolians of Lesbos . Herodotus lists the number of ships provided by each state : 
 Herodotus gives the order of the Ionian battle line as being , from east to west ; Miletus — Priene — Myus — Teos — Chios — <unk> — Phocaea — Lesbos — Samos . 
 = = = Persians = = = 
 Herodotus says that there were 600 ships in the Persian fleet , provided by the Phoenicians ( who were most eager to fight ) , the Egyptians , Cilicians , and the Cypriots , whose own revolt had recently been subdued . The Persian fleet may have been commanded by the veteran Median general Datis ; Persian records seem to suggest that he was sent by Darius to Ionia at around about the time of Lade . However , Herodotus does not name any Persian commanders in this campaign . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 When the Persians arrived off the coast of Lade and learned the number of Ionian ships , they began to worry that they would not be able to defeat the Greeks , and feared Darius 's wrath should they fail . The Ionian tyrants who had been expelled at the beginning of the revolt were present , and according to Herodotus , they were now given instructions by the Persians : 
 " Men of Ionia , let each one of you now show that he has done good service to the king 's house ; let each one of you try to separate your own countrymen from the rest of the allied power . Set this promise before them : they will suffer no harm for their rebellion , neither their temples nor their houses will be burnt , nor will they in any way be treated more violently than before . But if they will not do so and are set on fighting , then utter a threat that will restrain them : if they are defeated in battle , they will be enslaved ; we will make eunuchs of their boys , and carry their maidens captive to <unk> , and hand over their land to others . " 
 The tyrants thus sent messages to their own kinsman , but the Ionians refused the offers . Critically , each group thought that only they had been approached — there does not seem to have been any discussion of this offer between the different contingents , and the possibility for treachery does not seem to have been realised . 
 The Ionians did however hold meetings to discuss the conduct of the battle . Dionysius , the <unk> general , offered to train and lead the Greek force : 
 " Our affairs , men of Ionia , stand on the edge of a razor , whether to be free men or slaves , and runaway slaves at that . If you now consent to endure hardships , you will have toil for the present time , but it will be in your power to overcome your enemies and gain freedom ; but if you will be weak and disorderly , I see nothing that can save you from paying the penalty to the king for your rebellion . Believe me and entrust yourselves to me ; I promise you that ( if the gods deal fairly with us ) either our enemies shall not meet us in battle , or if they do they shall be utterly vanquished . " 
 Dionysius thus began an intensive training program , leading the fleet out every day to train the rowers in ramming manoeuvers , and the marines in combat . For seven days the Ionians accepted this regime , but being unused to the hard work , they refused to obey thereafter , and stayed in camp instead . According to Herodotus , upon seeing the resultant discontent and division in the Ionian camp , the Samians decided to accept the Persian offer of lenience in return for desertion . However , some modern historians reject the notion of dissent in the Greek camp . Herodotus derived his account of Lade from the Samians themselves , and it is suggested that , seeking to excuse their treachery , they came up with this story . At any rate , the Samians remained with the other Greeks in the run up to the battle . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Soon after the rebellion against Dionysius , the Persian fleet moved to attack the Ionians , who sailed out to meet them . The ensuing battle was evidently confused , since Herodotus admits that " which of the Ionians were brave men or cowards then in that sea @-@ fight I cannot exactly say ; for they all blame each other " . It is nevertheless clear that very early on in the battle , the Samian contingent hoisted their sails , as had been agreed , and fled the battlefield . However , 11 Samian ships refused to desert the other Ionians , and remained at the battle . At some later date , the Samians erected a pillar in their marketplace commemorating the bravery and sacrifice of these crews . Seeing the Samians leave , their neighbours on the western wing , the Lesbians , also fled . The whole west @-@ wing of the Ionian battle line thus very quickly collapsed . Other Ionian contingents also fled as the situation became more desperate . 
 Only the large Chian navy seems to have stood their ground , perhaps accompanied by a few other ships . They fought valiantly , but had huge casualties . Eventually the remaining Chian ships sailed away back to Chios , thereby ending the battle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the defeat of the Ionian fleet , the revolt was effectively over . Miletus was closely invested , the Persians " mining the walls and using every device against it , until they utterly captured it " . According to Herodotus , most of the men were killed , and the women and children were enslaved . Archaeological evidence partially substantiates this , showing widespread signs of destruction , and abandonment of much of the city in the aftermath of Lade . However , some Milesians did remain in ( or quickly returned to ) Miletus , though the city would never recapture its former greatness . Miletus was thus notionally " left empty of Milesians " ; the Persians took the city and coastal land for themselves , and gave the rest of the Milesian territory to Carians from Pedasus . The captive Milesians were brought before Darius in Susa , who settled them on the coast of the Persian Gulf , near the mouth of the Tigris . 
 Many Samians were appalled by the actions of their generals at Lade , and resolved to emigrate before their old tyrant , <unk> , returned to rule them . They accepted an invitation from the people of Zancle to settle on the coast of Sicily , and took with them such Milesians as had escaped from the Persians . Samos itself was spared from destruction by the Persians because of the Samian defection at Lade . Meanwhile , Dionysius of Phocaea went to Sicily , and established himself as a pirate , preying on Carthaginian ships . 
 Most of Caria surrendered to the Persians in aftermath of Lade , although some strongholds had to be captured through force . The Persian fleet and army wintered at Miletus , before setting out in 493 BC to finally stamp out the last embers of the revolt . They attacked and captured the islands of Chios , Lesbos and Tenedos and then moved over to the mainland , and captured each of the remaining cities of Ionia . Although the cities of Ionia were undoubtedly harrowed in the aftermath , none seems to have suffered quite the fate of Miletus . The Persian army then re @-@ conquered the settlements on the Asian side of the Propontis , while the fleet sailed up the European coast of the Hellespont , taking each settlement in turn . With all of Asia Minor now firmly returned to Persian rule , the revolt was finally over . 
 For the Persians , the only unfinished business that remained by the end of 493 BC was to exact punishment on Athens and Eretria for supporting the revolt . The Ionian Revolt had severely threatened the stability of Darius 's empire , and the states of mainland Greece would continue to threaten that stability unless dealt with . Darius thus began to contemplate the complete conquest of Greece , beginning with the destruction of Athens and Eretria . The first Persian invasion of Greece thus began in the following year , 492 BC , when Mardonius was dispatched ( via Ionia ) to complete the pacification of the land approaches to Greece , and push on to Athens and Eretria if possible . Thrace was re @-@ subjugated , having broken loose from Persian rule during the revolts , and Macedon compelled to become a vassal of Persia . However , progress was halted by a naval disaster . A second expedition was launched in 490 BC under Datis and Artaphernes , son of the satrap Artaphernes . This amphibious force sailed across the Aegean , subjugating the Cyclades , before arriving off Euboea . Eretria was besieged , captured and destroyed , and the force then moved onto Attica . Landing at the Bay of Marathon , they were met by an Athenian army , and defeated in the famous Battle of Marathon , ending the first Persian attempt to subdue Greece . 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 Herodotus , The Histories 
 Thucydides , History of The Peloponnesian Wars 
 Diodorus Siculus , Library 
 Cicero , On the Laws 
 = Help Wanted ( SpongeBob SquarePants ) = 
 " Help Wanted " is the pilot episode of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . It was produced in 1997 and originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on May 1 , 1999 , following the television airing of the 1999 Kids ' Choice Awards . The episode follows the protagonist , an anthropomorphic sponge named SpongeBob SquarePants , attempting to get a job at the local restaurant called the Krusty Krab . However , he is tasked to find a seemingly non @-@ existent high @-@ caliber spatula because the owner , Mr. Krabs , considers him unqualified for the position . Eventually , crowds of ravenous anchovies stop by the Krusty Krab and demand meals . SpongeBob SquarePants returns from his errand , having fulfilled the request of Mr. Krabs and found a mechanical spatula . He utilizes the spatula to fulfill the anchovies ' hunger . SpongeBob is then welcomed by Mr. Krabs as a Krusty Krab employee . 
 Series creator Stephen Hillenburg initially conceived the show in 1994 and began to work on it shortly after the cancellation of Rocko 's Modern Life in 1996 . To voice the character of SpongeBob , Hillenburg approached Tom Kenny , who had worked with him on Rocko 's Modern Life . For the series pitch , Hillenburg originally wanted the idea of having SpongeBob and Squidward on a road trip , inspired by the 1989 film Powwow Highway . Hillenburg gave up the idea , and started anew with the idea he and Derek Drymon came up for " Help Wanted " based on an experience Hillenburg had in the Boy Scouts . 
 The episode was written by Hillenburg , Derek Drymon , and Tim Hill , and was directed by Alan Smart . " Help Wanted " features a posthumous musical performance from Tiny Tim singing his song called " Livin ' in the Sunlight , Lovin ' in the Moonlight " . " Help Wanted " was excluded in the series ' first season DVD release because Nickelodeon did not want to pay Tiny Tim 's estate for the DVD rights . It had since been released as a bonus feature to various series DVDs . " Help Wanted " gained an average of 6 @.@ 9 million views , receiving positive reviews from media critics . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The episode opens with an introductory glimpse of the aquatic community of Bikini Bottom . The audience is then introduced to SpongeBob SquarePants , an ecstatic , hyperactive , and anxious young sea sponge preparing to fulfill a lifelong dream and passion by applying for a fry cook job at the underwater fast food restaurant , the Krusty Krab , to the annoyance of the restaurant 's cashier and SpongeBob 's irritable neighbor Squidward Tentacles . Spongebob then gets nervous and almost decides not to get a job at the Krusty Krab until his best friend , Patrick Star the starfish , convinces him otherwise . <unk> with SpongeBob 's vulnerability , gullibility , and impenetrable enthusiasm and innocence , both Squidward and the restaurant 's proprietor , Mr. Eugene Krabs , decide to manipulate SpongeBob , whom they secretly consider unqualified for the position , by sending him on an impossible errand to purchase a seemingly non @-@ existent high @-@ caliber spatula . 
 Soon after his anxious departure , five buses containing crowds of ravenous tourist anchovies stop at the Krusty Krab , its abundance of passengers furiously demanding meals . Unable to satisfy the anchovies ' hunger and alarmed by the mob , Squidward and Mr. Krabs are left to helplessly deal with the unsatisfied crowd . Before long , SpongeBob SquarePants returns from his errand , having fulfilled the request of Mr. Krabs and found a mechanical spatula , which he uses in speedily whipping up bundles of Krabby Patties for the anchovies and satisfying their hunger . After the mob subsides , SpongeBob is welcomed as a Krusty Krab employee , much to Squidward 's dismay . After Mr. Krabs leaves , Patrick orders a Krabby Patty and is hurled from the establishment upon a mostly @-@ unseen , and audibly manic , reprise of SpongeBob 's cooking feat . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 " Help Wanted " was written by series creator Stephen Hillenburg , Derek Drymon , and Tim Hill , and was directed by Alan Smart . Hillenburg also functioned as storyboard director , and Drymon worked as storyboard artist . Hillenburg initially conceived the show in 1994 and began to work on it shortly after the cancellation of Rocko 's Modern Life in 1996 . 
 Hillenburg 's original idea for the pitch was that the writers would write a storyboard for a possible episode and pitch it to Nickelodeon . One of the original ideas was to write an episode with SpongeBob and Squidward on a road trip , inspired by the 1989 film Powwow Highway . Eventually , the idea developed while they were working on it but Hillenburg gave up on the storyboard idea for the initial pitch . The crew resurrected the road trip idea during the first season and used a lot of the ideas for an episode called " Pizza Delivery " . 
 Originally the character was to be named SpongeBoy and the show was to be called SpongeBoy Ahoy ! . However , the Nickelodeon legal department discovered that the name SpongeBoy was already in use for a mop product . This was discovered after voice acting for the original seven @-@ minute pilot was recorded in 1997 . Upon finding this out , Hillenburg decided that the character 's given name still had to contain " Sponge " so viewers would not mistake the character for a " Cheese Man . " Hillenburg decided to use the name " SpongeBob . " He chose " SquarePants " as a family name as it referred to the character 's square shape and it had a " nice ring to it " . 
 Hillenburg and Derek Drymon had dinner and came up with the idea for " Help Wanted " based on an experience Hillenburg had in the Boy Scouts . Hillenburg and writer Hill worked it into an outline . In 1997 , while pitching the cartoon to Nickelodeon executives , Hillenburg donned a Hawaiian shirt , brought along an " underwater terrarium with models of the characters , " and Hawaiian music to set the theme . The setup was described by Nickelodeon executive Eric Coleman as " pretty amazing " . When given money and two weeks to write the pilot episode , Drymon , <unk> and Jennings returned with what Nickelodeon official Albie Hecht described as " a performance [ I ] wish [ I ] had on tape " . Although described as stressful by executive producer Derek Drymon , the pitch went " very well " ; Kevin Kay and Hecht had to step outside because they were " exhausted from laughing , " making the cartoonists worried . With a help from Hill and art director Nick Jennings , Hillenburg finished the pitch and sold SpongeBob SquarePants to Nickelodeon . Drymon said " the network approved it — so we were ready to go . " 
 In an interview with Cyma Zarghami , she told " their [ Nickelodeon executives ' ] immediate reaction was to see it again , both because they liked it and it was unlike anything they 'd ever seen before . " Hillenburg said the character construction in the episode was loose . But the character development was already " pretty strong . " 
 = = = Design = = = 
 When the crew began production on the episode , they were tasked to design the stock locations where " the show would return to again and again , and in which most of the action would take place , such as the Krusty Krab and SpongeBob 's pineapple house . " Hillenburg had a " clear vision " of what he wanted the show to look like . The idea was " to keep everything nautical " so the crew used ropes , wooden planks , ships ' wheels , netting , anchors , and boilerplate and rivets . 
 The pilot and the rest of the series features the " sky flowers " as the main background . When series background designer Kenny Pittenger was asked " What are those things ? , " he answered " They function as clouds in a way , but since the show takes place underwater , they aren 't really clouds . " Since the show was influenced by tiki , the background painters have to use a lot of pattern . Pittenger said " So really , the sky flowers are mostly a whimsical design element that Steve [ Hillenburg ] came up with to evoke the look of a flower @-@ print Hawaiian shirt — or something like that . I don 't know what they are either . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 While Hillenburg , Drymon and Hill were writing the pilot , Hillenburg was also conducting auditions to find voices for the show characters . He had created the character of SpongeBob with Tom Kenny , in which he utilised Kenny 's and other people 's personalities to help create its personality . Drymon said , " Tom came in a few times so we could pitch him what we were working to help him find the right voice . Tom had already worked on lots of other animated shows , and Steve wanted to find an original sounding voice . " The voice of SpongeBob was originally used by Kenny for a very minor female alligator character named Al in Rocko 's Modern Life . Kenny forgot the voice initially as he created it only for that single use . Hillenburg , however , remembered it when he was coming up with SpongeBob and used a video clip of the episode to remind Kenny of the voice . Kenny says that SpongeBob 's high pitched laugh was specifically aimed at being unique , stating that they wanted an annoying laugh in the tradition of Popeye and Woody Woodpecker . 
 Kenny also provided the voice of Gary , SpongeBob 's meowing sea snail , and the narrator in the episode . According to him , " It was always Steve 's intention that the narrator be a nod to his beloved Jacques Cousteau . " Kenny described Cousteau 's voice as " very dispassionate , very removed , very flatline , even when he ’ s describing something miraculous and beautiful . " At first , they found that the narrator " just sounds bored , " so they decided that he " has to sound a little fun and playful . " Kenny said , " ' <unk> <unk> the most amazing thing I have ever seen I have ever seen in my life . ' We found that after a while we had to make the narrator a little more playful than that . " 
 Bill Fagerbakke voiced SpongeBob 's best friend , a starfish named Patrick Star in the episode . He auditioned for the role after Kenny had been cast as SpongeBob . Fagerbakke said , " Steve is such a lovely guy , and I had absolutely no feeling for the material whatsoever . " He described his experience in the audition , saying " I was just going in for another audition , and I had no idea what was in store there in terms of the remarkable visual wit and really the kind of endearing child @-@ like humanity in the show . I couldn 't pick that up from the audition material at all . I was just kind of perfunctorially trying to give the guy what he wanted . " For the part of Squidward , Hillenburg originally had Mr. Lawrence in mind for the role . Lawrence worked with Hillenburg and Drymon before on Rocko 's Modern Life , so while working on the episode , Hillenburg invited him to audition for all the characters . Drymon said , " We were showing Doug the storyboard , and he started reading back to us in his Tony the Tiger / Gregory Peck voice . It was really funny , and we wound up having SpongeBob use a deep voice when he entered the Krusty Krab for the first time . " Hillenburg decided to give Lawrence the part of the series villain , Plankton , instead . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The episode features the song called " Livin ' in the Sunlight , Lovin ' in the Moonlight " by Tiny Tim . At the point the pilot had already been completed , music editor Nick Carr was asked to retool the existing music on it . Carr said " When I first started on SpongeBob , my duties were mainly music editorial but would quickly thrust me into the composers / supervisor chair . " The production team had no budget and no music but they placed the budget on the song called " Livin ' in the Sunlight , Lovin ' in the Moonlight " . Carr said " [ It is ] a sadly familiar scenario with most cartoons for television . By the time it comes to consider the music , the budget is blown . " 
 The idea of using " Livin ' in the Sunlight , Lovin ' in the Moonlight " originated when an anonymous sent Hillenburg a tape with " a bunch of music . " While the writers were developing the show outside Nickelodeon , Hillenburg played the song for Drymon as an example of the enthusiasm he was looking for . When it came time to write the pilot , they had the idea to use the song in the third act . The crew eventually got the rights to use the song for the pilot , but all they had was " the crummy copy on Steve 's old tape . " The writers were able to use the music , as one of the women who worked at Nickelodeon at the time " knew somebody somewhere who had access to something , " and she brought in a copy of the song on CD . Drymon said " We were totally lucky that she had the contact , otherwise we wouldn 't have been able to use it . The sad part was Tiny Tim died right around the time we were writing the pilot , so he never knew we used his song . " 
 Jeff Hutchins was with Hillenburg in Rocko 's Modern Life working on animation sound . Hutchins was approached by Hillenburg to do music for the show . He was asked for " 20 things , like an ocean liner horn , " and Hutchins knew he had the music Hillenburg was looking for . Hutchins said " I offered him options and , in some cases , multiple choices . We agreed to meet at the Warner Bros. gate near the water tower in 20 minutes . " He recorded the sound to a tape and met Hillenburg by the gate . Hutchins said " He was about as happy as you could imagine , and off he went . Next thing you know , I am working on the show . " Hutchins became the regular series sound designer . 
 = = Release = = 
 SpongeBob SquarePants aired its first episode , " Help Wanted " , along with sister episodes " Reef Blower " and " Tea at the <unk> " , on May 1 , 1999 , following the television airing of the 1999 Kids ' Choice Awards . The series later made its " official " debut on July 17 , 1999 with the second episode " <unk> " and " Ripped Pants " . 
 " Help Wanted " was excluded in the SpongeBob SquarePants : The Complete 1st Season DVD , featuring the rest of the first season episodes , since its release on October 28 , 2003 . It was not included because Nickelodeon did not want to pay Tiny Tim 's estate for the DVD rights , because the music in the episode was copyrighted . Drymon said " ' Help Wanted ' had to be left off [ ... ] " " Help Wanted " was later released on the SpongeBob SquarePants : The Complete 3rd Season DVD as a bonus feature on September 27 , 2005 . It was also released on the SpongeBob SquarePants : The First 100 Episodes DVD , alongside all the episodes of seasons one through five . The DVD included a featurette called " Help Wanted " the Seven Seas Edition that featured " Help Wanted " in numerous languages . The episode was also a bonus feature in the series DVD called SpongeBob SquarePants : 10 Happiest Moments that was released on September 14 , 2010 . On April 29 , 2014 , " Help Wanted " was released on the " SpongeBob , You 're Fired ! " episode compilation DVD . 
 In 2013 , the series main cast members , including Tom Kenny , Clancy Brown , Rodger Bumpass and Bill Fagerbakke , performed a live read @-@ through of the episode during the SpongeBob event called " SpongeBob Fan <unk> " . The read @-@ through took place on a sound effects stage at the Universal Studios Hollywood on September 7 – 8 . The event also hosted the screening of the winning videos from the inaugural SpongeBob SquareShorts : Original Fan Tributes competition . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Help Wanted " scored a 6 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating , or 6 @.@ 9 million total viewers , including 3 @.@ 6 million children aged 2 – 11 . Furthermore , the episode received generally favorable reviews from media critics . Michael Cavna of The Washington Post ranked " Help Wanted " at No. 3 at his The Top Five SpongeBob Episodes : We Pick ' Em list . Other episodes in the list are " Band Geeks " , " Ripped Pants " , " Just One Bite " and " Idiot Box " . Cavna rewatched the episode in 2009 and said " so much of the style and polish are already in place . " Nancy Basile of the About.com said " [ The ] humor and optimistic essence of SpongeBob is evident even in this first episode . " Maxie Zeus of Toon Zone said the episode is a " winner " . In an Associated Press article , Frazier Moore lauded the featured song in the episode called " Livin ' in the Sunlight , Lovin ' in the Moonlight " calling it the " <unk> part . " 
 Kent Osborne , a member of the SpongeBob SquarePants writing crew , considers the episode " really good . " Eric Coleman , vice president of animation development and production at Nickelodeon , lauded the episode and calling it " one of the best pilots " because " it conveys a strong personality . " 
 In a DVD review of the first season , Jason Bovberg of the DVD Talk was disappointed on the set , saying " Where is it ? This is perhaps the only disappointment of the set . I was a little aggravated by the <unk> animated menus that introduce all the characters , one by one , but it 's really that missing episode that has me upset . " Bovberg described the set as " annoying " for missing the episode . Bill Treadway of the DVD Verdict , on the exclusion of the episode on the DVD , said " It 's a small flaw in an otherwise top notch package . " In a DVD review of the third season , Bryan Pope of the DVD Verdict , on the episode as a bonus feature , said " The most intriguing extra is the series ' pilot episode , ' Help Wanted ' . " He asked in his review " Why release it now instead of in its natural spot with the first season ? " At the end , he said " Regardless , SpongeBob completists will cherish its inclusion here . " 
 = Virginia @-@ class battleship = 
 The Virginia @-@ class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships were built for the United States Navy in the early 1900s . The class comprised five ships : Virginia , Nebraska , Georgia , New Jersey , and Rhode Island . The ships carried a mixed @-@ caliber offensive battery of four 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) and eight 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) guns ; these were mounted in an uncommon arrangement , with four of the 8 @-@ inch guns placed atop the 12 @-@ inch turrets . The arrangement proved to be a failure , as the 8 @-@ inch guns could not be fired independently of the 12 @-@ inch guns without interfering with them . Additionally , by the time the Virginias entered service , the first " all @-@ big @-@ gun " battleships — including the British HMS Dreadnought — were nearing completion , which would render mixed battery ships like the Virginia class obsolescent . 
 Nevertheless , the ships had active careers . All five ships took part in the cruise of the Great White Fleet in 1907 – 1909 . From 1909 onward , they served as the workhorses of the US Atlantic Fleet , conducting training exercises and showing the flag in Europe and Central America . As unrest broke out in several Central American countries in the 1910s , the ships became involved in police actions in the region . The most significant was the American intervention in the Mexican Revolution during the occupation of Veracruz in April 1914 . 
 During the American participation in World War I , the Virginia @-@ class ships were used to train sailors for an expanding wartime fleet . In September 1918 , they began to escort convoys to Europe , though Germany surrendered two months later , ending the conflict . After the war , they were used to bring American soldiers back from France and later as training ships . The 1922 Washington Naval Treaty , which mandated major reductions in naval weapons , cut the ships ' careers short . Virginia and New Jersey were sunk in bombing tests in 1923 , and the other three ships were broken up for scrap later that year . 
 = = Design = = 
 The United States ' victory in the Spanish – American War in 1898 had a dramatic impact on battleship design , as the question of the role of the fleet — namely , whether it should be focused on coastal defense or high seas operations — had been solved . The fleet 's ability to conduct offensive operations overseas showed the necessity of a powerful fleet of battleships . As a result , the US Congress was willing to authorize much larger ships ; the Virginias , three of which were authorized on 3 March 1899 , were the first of these new ships . Two more were authorized on 7 June 1900 , with the displacement for all five ships proposed at 13 @,@ 500 long tons ( 13 @,@ 700 t ) , a significant increase over previous designs . Initial design work , which began with a memorandum issued on 12 July 1898 , called for a battleship based on the Maine class , to be armed with four 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) guns , sixteen 6 in ( 150 mm ) guns , and ten 3 in ( 76 mm ) guns , protected with a 12 in belt of Krupp armor , and capable of steaming at 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ; 21 @.@ 3 mph ) . 
 Arguments over the projected displacement and armament prevented further work until October 1899 . Captain Charles O 'Neill argued for a mixed battery of 12 in and 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns with superposed turrets , while Phillip <unk> , the chief constructor at the Bureau of Construction and Repair , preferred a 13 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 13 @,@ 000 t ) design armed uniformly with 10 in ( 250 mm ) guns instead of the mixed battery . The decision was made to adopt the mixed battery , since the 8 in gun could penetrate the medium armor on foreign battleships that protected their secondary batteries . Captain Royal Bradford , the chief of the Bureau of Equipment , suggested that 18 @.@ 5 knots would be sufficient , though O 'Neill demanded 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) ; a compromise was found by requiring a minimum of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . These compromises produced two variants : " A " , which arranged the 8 in guns in four twin turrets amidships as with the Indiana class , and " B " , which placed two of the four turrets atop the 12 in turrets , as on the Kearsarge class . The " A " design included sixteen 6 in guns in casemates , while " B " had only twelve . 
 The Board on Construction initially favored " A " , though one officer on the board rejected the design so strongly that the Secretary of the Navy ordered a second , larger board to be formed to examine the two designs . Eight line officers were added to the board ; this group favored the superposed turrets of " B " . One of the members , Rear Admiral Albert Baker , suggested to build the first three ships to " A " and the last two to " B " . The board initially approved the idea , but the chief of the Bureau of Ordnance rejected it in favor of uniformity of design . The Secretary of the Navy convened a third board to settle the matter , and ten of the twelve members voted for " B " . The finalized design was approved on 5 February 1901 . 
 The superposed turrets ultimately proved to be very problematic ; the arrangement had been conceived initially to save weight and allow the much faster firing 8 in guns to shoot during the long reload time necessary for large caliber guns . By the time the Virginias entered service , smokeless propellant and rapid firing , large caliber guns had reduced the time between shots from 180 seconds to 20 . The 8 in guns could no longer fire at their maximum rate without interfering with the 12 in guns , since the concussion and hot gasses would disrupt the crew below . In addition , the British HMS Dreadnought — the first " all @-@ big @-@ gun " battleship to enter service — commissioned in late 1906 shortly after the Virginias and rendered them obsolescent at a single stroke . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The ships of the Virginia class were 435 feet ( 133 m ) long at the waterline and 441 feet 3 inches ( 134 @.@ 49 m ) long overall . They had a beam of 76 ft 3 in ( 23 @.@ 24 m ) and a draft of 23 ft 9 in ( 7 @.@ 24 m ) . They displaced 14 @,@ 948 long tons ( 15 @,@ 188 t ) as designed and up to 16 @,@ 094 long tons ( 16 @,@ 352 t ) at full load . The ships had a high metacentric height , which made them unstable even in moderate seas . Steering was controlled with a single rudder . As built , the ships were fitted with a pair of heavy military masts with fighting tops , but they were replaced by cage masts in 1909 . They had a crew of 40 officers and 772 enlisted men . 
 The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft triple @-@ expansion steam engines rated at 19 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 14 @,@ 000 kW ) . Steam was provided by coal @-@ fired water @-@ tube boilers ; in Virginia and Georgia , they were equipped with twenty @-@ four Niclausse boilers , while the other three ships received twelve Babcock & Wilcox boilers . These were trunked into three funnels amidships . The engines generated a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . By 1919 , Virginia and Georgia had their Niclausse boilers replaced with twelve Babcock & Wilcox boilers . The ships carried 1 @,@ 955 long tons ( 1 @,@ 986 t ) of coal , which allowed them to steam for a designed cruising radius of 3 @,@ 825 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 084 km ; 4 @,@ 402 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . In service , they could actually steam for 4 @,@ 860 nmi ( 9 @,@ 000 km ; 5 @,@ 590 mi ) . The ships were equipped with electricity generators with a combined output of 500 kilowatts ( 670 hp ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ships were armed with a main battery of four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) / 40 caliber guns in two twin gun turrets on the centerline , one forward and aft . The guns fired a 870 @-@ pound ( 390 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 400 feet per second ( 730 m / s ) . The turrets were Mark V mounts , which allowed for reloading at all angles of elevation . These mounts could elevate to 20 degrees and depress to -7 degrees . Each gun was supplied with sixty shells . 
 The secondary battery consisted of eight 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) / 45 guns and twelve 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) / 45 guns . The 8 @-@ inch guns were mounted in four twin turrets ; two of these were superposed atop the main battery turrets , with the other two turrets abreast the forward funnel . The 8 @-@ inch guns were the Mark VI type , and they fired 260 lb ( 120 kg ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 750 ft / s ( 840 m / s ) . They were supplied with 125 shells per gun . The 6 @-@ inch guns were placed in casemates in the hull . The 6 @-@ inch Mark VI guns fired a 105 lb ( 48 kg ) shell at 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ( 850 m / s ) . 
 For close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats , they carried twelve 3 @-@ inch / 50 guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull and twelve 3 @-@ pounder guns . As was standard for capital ships of the period , the Virginia class carried four 21 in ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes , submerged in her hull on the broadside . They were initially equipped with the Mark I Bliss @-@ Leavitt design , but these were quickly replaced with Mark II , designed in 1905 . The Mark II carried a 207 pounds ( 94 kg ) warhead and had a range of 3 @,@ 500 yards ( 3 @,@ 200 m ) at a speed of 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Virginia 's main armored belt was 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick over the magazines and the machinery spaces and 8 in ( 203 mm ) elsewhere . It extended 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above the waterline and 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) below . The main battery gun turrets ( and the secondary turrets on top of them ) had 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) thick faces and 2 in ( 51 mm ) thick roofs . For the main battery turrets , their sides were 8 in thick , while the superposed turrets had reduced protection on their sides , at 6 in of armor plating . The supporting barbettes had the 10 in ( 250 mm ) of armor plating . The two waist turrets had 6 @.@ 5 in ( 170 mm ) thick faces , 6 in thick sides , and 2 in thick roofs . Six inch thick armor plating protected the casemate guns . The conning tower had 9 in ( 230 mm ) thick sides and a 2 in thick roof . The ships ' decks ranged in thickness from 1 @.@ 5 to 3 inches ( 38 to 76 mm ) and they were sloped on the sides to connect with the lower edge of the main belt . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 All five ships of the class served with the Atlantic Fleet for the majority of their careers . In 1907 , Virginia , Georgia , and New Jersey took part in the Jamestown Exposition to commemorate the 300th anniversary of the founding of the Jamestown colony . The five ships took part in the cruise of the Great White Fleet in 1907 – 09 , though Nebraska , which had been built on the west coast of the United States , joined the fleet after it had reached California in 1908 . The fleet left Hampton Roads on 16 December 1907 and steamed south , around South America and back north to the US west coast . The ships then crossed the Pacific and stopped in Australia , the Philippines , and Japan before continuing on through the Indian Ocean . They transited the Suez Canal and toured the Mediterranean before crossing the Atlantic , arriving bank in Hampton Roads on 22 February 1909 for a naval review with President Theodore Roosevelt . 
 The ships then began a peacetime training routine off the east coast of the United States and the Caribbean , including gunnery training off the Virginia Capes , training cruises in the Atlantic , and winter exercises in Cuban waters . In late 1909 , Virginia , Georgia , and Rhode Island visited French and British ports . Throughout their careers , political unrest in several Central American countries prompted the United States to send the ships to protect American interests in the region . New Jersey was sent to Cuba to assist the Cuban Pacification in support of the government of President Tomás Estrada Palma . All five ships became involved in the Mexican Revolution as the United States intervened to protect its nationals living in the country , culminating in the occupation of Veracruz in April 1914 . New Jersey was also sent to protect American interests in Haiti and the Dominican unrest in 1914 . 
 In July 1914 , World War I broke out in Europe ; the United States remained neutral for the first three years of the war . Tensions with Germany came to a head in early 1917 following the German unrestricted submarine warfare campaign , which sank several American merchant ships in European waters . On 6 April 1917 , the United States declared war on Germany . The Virginia @-@ class ships initially were used for training gunners and engine room personnel that would be necessary for the rapidly expanding wartime fleet . Starting in September 1918 , the ships began to be used as escorts for convoys bringing soldiers to France , though this duty was cut short by the Armistice with Germany signed in November . With the war over , the Virginias were used to ferry American soldiers back from France through mid @-@ 1919 . 
 The ships — thoroughly obsolete by this time — were briefly retained in the post @-@ war period before being decommissioned . Nebraska , Georgia , and Rhode Island were transferred to the Pacific Fleet , with the latter serving as the flagship of the 1st Squadron , though they were all out of service by 1920 . Under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty , signed in 1922 , they were to be discarded as part of the naval armament limitation program . Virginia and New Jersey were sunk as target ships off Cape Hatteras by Army bombers under the supervision of Billy Mitchell in September 1923 . The other three ships were sold to ship breakers in November that year . 
 = If I Were a Boy = 
 " If I Were a Boy " is a song performed by American singer and songwriter Beyoncé from her third studio album I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . It was written by BC Jean and Toby Gad , who also handled its production alongside Beyoncé . Inspired by the difficult break @-@ up of a romantic relationship , the song was initially recorded by Jean , whose record company rejected it . Beyoncé then recorded her own version . Jean was upset when she learned that Beyoncé was releasing it as a single , but eventually they reached an agreement . " If I Were a Boy " was released by Columbia Records on October 12 , 2008 , as the album 's lead single alongside " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . The two songs showcased the contrast between Beyoncé 's personality and her aggressive onstage persona , Sasha Fierce . A Spanish version of the song , titled " Si Yo Fuera un Chico " , was digitally released in Mexico and Spain . 
 " If I Were a Boy " is a pop introspective ballad which draws influences from folk rock through its instrumentation of which includes acoustic guitars , drums and strings . The song 's lyrics lament the misunderstandings between the genders and indict the male side of relationships . " If I Were a Boy " was well received by critics , who complimented Beyoncé 's tormented and emotive vocal performance and called the song her best work to date . The single was a commercial success as it placed in the top ten on twenty @-@ five different singles charts . It topped the charts in more than eight European countries , including the United Kingdom , where it is Beyoncé 's best @-@ selling single . " If I Were a Boy " peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and earned multi @-@ platinum certifications in Australia , Canada , and the US . 
 The accompanying music video for " If I Were a Boy " was directed by Jake Nava and shot in black @-@ and @-@ white . With a theme of role reversal , it is conceptually similar to the American comedy film Freaky Friday ( 1976 ) . A video for the Spanish version of the ballad was edited from the original clip . Beyoncé promoted " If I Were a Boy " through live performances at venues including The Oprah Winfrey Show , the 52nd Grammy Awards , and the I Am ... World Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . The song has been covered several times on televised music competitions . American singer Reba McEntire sang a country version of the ballad on Country Music Television ( CMT ) , and a studio version was released as the second single from her 2010 album , All the Women I Am . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 " If I Were a Boy " was written by BC Jean and Toby Gad ; it is the opening ballad of the I Am ... disc of the double album I Am ... Sasha Fierce . It is the only song on either disc that Beyoncé did not co @-@ write . Most of the lyrics were written by Jean , who was inspired by the break @-@ up of a romantic relationship . One day Jean and Gad visited a pizzeria in Times Square in New York City . Although tempted , Jean refrained from eating pizza because she was dieting . She then thought that if she were a boy , she would have eaten without regret . After reflecting on the idea , she concluded that she would have been a better man than her past lover . Gad captured Jean 's ideas on a pocket recorder , and they went to the studio the same day . Once there , she wrote the lyrics and melody in about 15 minutes . She then recorded the song in less than half an hour , with Gad on the guitar . 
 After completing her version of " If I Were a Boy " , Jean presented it to her record company , which rejected the song . Gad and Jean had co @-@ written 12 songs , including " If I Were a Boy " , for the singer 's debut album . As the deal with Jean 's record company fell apart , Gad marketed the songs to established artists . Beyoncé liked " If I Were a Boy " and recorded her own version of it for her album I Am ... Sasha Fierce . Gad and Beyoncé produced the track in 2008 at Roc the Mic Studios and Strawberry Productions in New York City and at GAD Studios in Ibiza . Gad did the musical arrangements , assisted in recording the music , and played the instruments alongside his brother Jens Gad and Reggie <unk> Perry . Jim Caruana recorded Beyoncé 's vocals at Roc the Mic Studios . Mark " Spike " Stent mixed the track with assistance from Matt Green at The Record Plant in Los Angeles . " If I Were a Boy " was placed on the I Am ... disc of I Am ... Sasha Fierce , as it is a ballad that shows Beyoncé 's insecurities about love and the person she is " underneath all the makeup , underneath the lights and underneath all the exciting star drama " . 
 In an interview with Essence magazine , Beyoncé explained that " If I Were a Boy " is " broad " and different from her previous releases because it is not a traditional R & B song . She added , " I had to try it , because I remember Aretha Franklin said a great singer can sing anything and make it her own . " Beyoncé was also motivated by her audience 's strong expectations from her as a singer . While preparing her third solo album , Beyoncé wanted to experiment with stronger lyrics and record ballads like " If I Were a Boy " because , " the music and the emotion in the story is told [ sic ] so much better . It 's a better connection because you can hear it and it 's not all these other distractions . I really wanted people to hear my voice and hear what I had to say . " 
 = = = Jean 's response = = = 
 After Jean 's version of " If I Were a Boy " was rejected by her record company , she was upset that Beyoncé recorded and released the ballad . Roger Friedman of Fox News wrote that Jean was first informed that Beyoncé recorded the song by a stranger . The Daily Telegraph reported that Beyoncé 's father and then @-@ manager Mathew Knowles pursued the publishing rights of " If I Were a Boy " after realizing that it had the potential to become a big hit . Jean used her Myspace account to express her frustration : " I have been reading some of these comments and to set the record straight from the horse 's mouth – IF I <unk> A <unk> is my song ; YES , I wrote this song ; It is my story ; a painful one , and the song is very dear to me . You can hear the original version on my <unk> site . " Friedman later reported that Beyoncé and Jean had come to terms . The deal included a promise that Beyoncé would record a duet with Jean for her debut album . 
 In an interview with Eric R. Danton of Hartford Courant , Jean was asked about her reaction when she heard that Beyoncé was recording " If I Were a Boy " . She was initially surprised when people regarded her as a songwriter because she envisioned herself as " do [ ing ] the whole artist thing as well " . Jean added , " It 's an amazing compliment , but I was like , ' That 's great , but it 's going to be on my album ! ' And it can be on my album , too , I just didn 't realize how it worked ... At first when I got this , people didn 't know that I was an artist , so it was , like , ' Oh , this songwriter BC . ' " " If I Were a Boy " was the first song she ever recorded , and she initially did not intend to hand it to another singer . Jean said that the fact that Beyoncé recorded the ballad provided many opportunities , and she was approached by many people who wanted to purchase her lyrics . She refused their offers , desiring to use her songs for her own album . However , Jean still intends to write for other artists . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " If I Were a Boy " is a midtempo pop ballad with folk rock and soft rock influences . The song was composed using common time in the key of G ♭ major and has a moderate tempo of 90 beats per minute . It was written in the common verse @-@ chorus form ; the verses are supported by four chords and follow a vi @-@ IV @-@ I @-@ V chord progression in the form E ♭ m7 – B – G ♭ – D ♭ / F. Ed <unk> of The Arizona Republic noted that the progression is reminiscent of Nirvana 's 1991 song " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . Instrumentation is provided by a piano , acoustic guitars , live drums , and strings as well as hand claps which are used throughout the song . Beyoncé 's vocals span the range from a low of F ♯ 3 to the high of E5 . Her singing gets higher and louder as she employs melodic crescendos . Critics noted that Beyoncé delivers a tormented performance with unwavering sentiments . 
 The lyrics of " If I Were a Boy " are about a gender @-@ swapping thought experiment , through which Beyoncé analyses the ideologies of a tense relationship . As she sings about things she would do if she were a boy , Beyoncé highlights the vulnerability of a woman and ponders how things would be different if men had women 's sense of empathy . During the first part of the ballad , Beyoncé alternates between the role of her flawed partner and that of the better man she would be . In the first verse , she envisions herself impersonating her unfeeling love interest as she sings about consuming beer with other men , chasing after girls , and treating her lover cruelly , before adding that she would never be confronted for it . Beyoncé then sings the chorus , in which she gives her vision of life as a better man , " I think I could understand / How it feels to love a girl / I swear I 'd be a better man " , because she knows " how it hurts when you lose the one you wanted / ' cause he 's taken you for granted and everything you had got destroyed " . 
 In the second verse , Beyoncé resigns herself and continues to sing about cruelties that men often inflict on women . Still imagining herself impersonating the man who has wronged her , she highlights how some men switch off their phones to avoid ex @-@ lovers after having found another girl . Beyoncé continues , " I 'd put myself first / And make the rules as I go / ' Cause I know that she 'd be faithful / Waitin ' for me to come home " . She then repeats the chorus ; the intensity with which she sings gradually increases until she hits her upper register and seems close to crying . During the bridge , Beyoncé stops singing about the male behaviors she would indulge in if she were a man and addresses her callous lover directly . As Beyoncé emphasizes how it feels to be cheated on , she sings her vocal lines an octave higher than she did in the rest of the song . She finally tells him that it is too late to come back and apologize . In the last verse , Beyoncé concludes , " But you 're just a boy " . Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music notes that she " [ pushes ] her voice into a thin , pleading whine " at this point . With a squeak in her voice , she repeats the chorus for the final time as she fights to remain strong , not allowing her agony to bring her down . 
 = = Release = = 
 " If I Were a Boy " and " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " were released simultaneously as the double album 's two lead singles . The songs were taken from different discs of the album to demonstrate Beyoncé 's conflicting personalities , the album 's central theme . This motif was demonstrated by placing the ballads on a separate disc from the uptempo tracks . " If I Were a Boy " and " Single Ladies " were initially planned to debut on US radio stations on October 7 , 2008 , but both premiered the following day . " If I Were a Boy " debuted on Z100 's Elvis Duran and the Morning Show , while " Single Ladies " first aired on New York mainstream urban radio station Power 105 @.@ 1 . Both singles were added to rhythmic contemporary radio on October 13 , 2008 . That same day , " If I Were a Boy " was sent to contemporary hit radio , and " Single Ladies was sent to urban contemporary radio . On November 24 , 2008 , " If I Were a Boy " was sent to US urban radio . Two digital EPs , each containing seven dance remixes of " If I Were a Boy " were released on February 10 , 2009 in the US . 
 The ballad was first released internationally as a stand @-@ alone digital download in Oceania and most European countries on October 17 , 2008 . In France and the United Kingdom , " If I Were a Boy " was serviced digitally on October 26 , 2008 . On November 7 , 2008 , a two @-@ track CD single , including " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " as the B @-@ side , went on sale in all European countries , Oceania , and in Canada . In Canada two different digital EPs were made available on February 3 and 10 , 2009 . A Spanish version of " If I Were a Boy " was translated by Rudy Pérez and mixed by Andrés Bermúdez at The Beach House in Miami . Titled " Si Yo Fuera un Chico ( If I Were a Boy ) " , this version was only included on copies of I Am ... Sasha Fierce in Mexico as well as iTunes Stores in Latin America and Spain , where it was released as a stand @-@ alone single on February 3 , 2009 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " If I Were a Boy " was widely acclaimed by contemporary music critics , who applauded Beyoncé 's vocal performance and called the song her best yet . Billboard magazine 's critic Chuck Taylor wrote that " If I Were a Boy " is Beyoncé 's " most affecting offering " since " Listen " ( 2006 ) . He praised her vocals as " breathtaking , exquisitely emotive , mournful , and mature " and added that the song " exudes the fragrance of a Grammy Award " . According to Ann Powers of Los Angeles Times , " If I Were a Boy " is Beyoncé 's Streisand moment and " a tender , fairly simple ballad that [ she ] uses to prove she 's a great vocal actress " . Powers concluded , " This isn 't just another breakup song ; it 's an elegy for female empowerment , Beyoncé 's admission that no amount of money , fame or skill can solve the basic inequity between her man 's heart and her own . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine wrote that " If I Were a Boy " could become as commercially successful as " Irreplaceable " because of its radio @-@ friendly appeal . James Montgomery of MTV News complimented the " tear @-@ jerking power " of " If I Were a Boy " and noted that it reveals " sides of Beyoncé we never knew existed " . 
 Matos Michaelangelo of The A.V. Club remarked that " If I Were a Boy " has " boilerplate lyrics " that would fit perfectly in mature roles that English actress Hayley Mills played in the 1960s . Nick Levine of Digital Spy wrote in his review of the album that " If I Were a Boy " has the " most interesting lyrics " of the entire record . In a separate review of " If I Were a Boy " , Levine awarded it four stars out of five , writing that Beyoncé 's vocals on the song are passionate . He praised the lyrics for not being overwritten and commended their " emotional punch " and " very strong melody " which he said can make people feel that they have always known the song . Pitchfork Media 's Ryan Dombal called " If I Were a Boy " an " effective and affecting gender @-@ bender " . Allmusic writer Andy Kellman felt that though the ballad sounds like " the watery backdrop for a singing competition finale " , it is the most outstanding song on I Am ... Sasha Fierce thanks to its lyrics and Beyoncé 's tormented performance . Colin McGuire of PopMatters felt that " If I Were a Boy " was the highlight of the first disc of the double album . 
 Jon Caramanica of The New York Times described the song as one of the greatest pop songs of the last few years and one of Beyoncé 's most complicated vocal performances . Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle commented that " If I Were a Boy " is an " elegant new musical direction " for Beyoncé and praised it for being different from the songs played on Top 40 radio . By contrast , Stacey Anderson of Spin magazine was unimpressed with " If I Were a Boy " , calling it a glistening and boring ballad . Adam Mazmanian of The Washington Times noted that the musical composition of " If I Were a Boy " has " a spare [ and ] cinematic quality that [ Beyoncé ] fills with an expansive voice " , which nevertheless falters at times . A 2010 review of " well @-@ intended yet misguided feminist anthems " in The A.V. Club noted the song had both a " fresh perspective and a sense of self @-@ awareness " but cast is as " a soppy wallow in whiny self @-@ pity and broad stereotyping " . 
 Erika Ramirez and Jason Lipshutz of Billboard magazine placed " If I Were a Boy " at number 19 on a list of Beyoncé 's 30 biggest Billboard hits published for Beyoncé 's thirtieth birthday . They wrote that the song " found Beyoncé at her most honest , drawing in both women and men " . " If I Were a Boy " was nominated for the Best Foreign Song at the 2009 Porin Awards in Croatia . On The Village Voice 's year @-@ end Pazz & Jop singles list , " If I Were a Boy " was ranked at numbers 37 and 546 in 2008 and 2009 respectively . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 For the week ending October 25 , 2008 , " If I Were a Boy " debuted at number one @-@ hundred on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , based solely on airplay . In its third charting week , the song rose from number sixty eight to number three on the Hot 100 chart as its digital download counterpart debuted at the top of the US Hot Digital Songs chart , selling 190 @,@ 000 units . It became Beyoncé 's fourth number one on the Hot Digital Songs chart , following " Check on It " ( 2005 ) , " Irreplaceable " ( 2006 ) , and " Beautiful Liar " ( 2007 ) . " If I Were a Boy " also became her tenth top @-@ ten single on the Hot 100 as a solo artist . On November 15 , 2008 , the song fell to fifth , where it stayed for one further week . However , it regained its number three position on November 29 , 2008 , as it returned to the top spot of the Hot Digital Songs chart , selling 170 @,@ 000 units . " If I Were a Boy " sold 654 @,@ 000 digital downloads in four weeks . The following week , the song fell to number two on the Hot Digital Songs chart , selling 44 @,@ 000 less copies than " Single Ladies " , which debuted at number one . " If I Were a Boy " maintained its position at number three on the Hot 100 chart while " Single Ladies " soared to number two on the chart . Beyoncé became the seventh female to have two songs in the top five positions of the Hot 100 chart . On October 13 , 2009 , " If I Were a Boy " was certified triple @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping over two million copies . As of October 2012 , the song had sold 3 @,@ 014 @,@ 000 digital units in the US . 
 On November 2 , 2008 , " If I Were a Boy " was the highest debut of the week on the Australian Singles Chart , entering at number twelve . The song peaked at number three for three non @-@ consecutive weeks during the same month . It was certified triple @-@ platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for selling over 210 @,@ 000 copies . " If I Were a Boy " debuted at number eight in New Zealand on October 27 , 2008 , and peaked at number two for four non @-@ consecutive weeks in November and December 2008 . In its twelfth charting week , it was certified platinum after twelve weeks by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , representing shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies . The song debuted at number two on the UK Singles Chart , selling 64 @,@ 554 downloads on November 15 , 2008 . The following week , it fell to number three with sales of 57 @,@ 917 copies . On November 23 , 2008 , it rebounded to number one , selling 47 @,@ 949 copies , becoming Beyoncé 's fourth number @-@ one single in the UK as a solo artist ; it was her sixth including her career with Destiny 's Child . " If I Were a Boy " remained in the top five until the end of 2008 and was the 16th highest @-@ selling single of that year . The ballad was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for sales of over 600 @,@ 000 copies . It was the 68th highest selling single of the 2000s in the UK , where it is Beyoncé 's highest @-@ selling solo single , with sales of 746 @,@ 000 units as of November 2013 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and concept = = = 
 The music video for " If I Were a Boy " was directed by Jake Nava and was shot in black @-@ and @-@ white in New York City with the video for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . A Spanish version of the music video , titled " Si Yo Fuera Un Chico " , was released with the same concepts as the main one ; it was edited from the original with the Spanish version of the song dubbed over it . The music video for " If I Were a Boy " is reflective of the stance as an independent woman that Beyoncé has taken throughout her career . In an interview with Billboard magazine , Beyoncé revealed that the concept of the video is similar to the American comedy film Freaky Friday ( 1976 ) ; its theme is role reversal . She also said that it would depict things that men commonly do to hurt their partners , like not answering their phones , before adding that the video is about little things that mean a lot in relationships . Beyoncé explained : 
 In the beginning of the video , my husband makes me breakfast and he 's excited about it , and I kind of don 't have time to eat . As a police officer , I have a male partner and the video goes through our days . My husband 's at work and has attractive girls flirting with him but he declines their advances . I have a guy flirting with me , and I flirt back . 
 Beyoncé said that by the end of the video , viewers would realize the husband is a police officer and Beyoncé , as the female character , has been doing things her husband has done to her . MTV News writer Jennifer Vineyard 's analysis of the concept concluded , " When we first saw it from a different perspective , Beyoncé 's behavior seemed more abnormal . And when it 's the guy doing everything she just did in the previous scenes , it becomes all too familiar — which is Beyoncé 's point . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with Beyoncé and her husband saying a few words , including " intimacy " , " honesty " , and " commitment " , and then saying the words " you " , " me " , and " us " together . When the action starts , Beyoncé is seen working as a police officer . Her husband ( played by NFL player Eddie Goines ) is very supportive . He makes her breakfast , spends time at work looking for a present for her and forgoes socializing with attractive coworkers so he can be available when his wife arrives home . However , Beyoncé is not thinking about him at all . Instead , she spends her free time with other officers , particularly her male partner , whom she seems enamored with . Her husband calls her , but she ignores the phone . Later , when her husband gives her earrings , she puts them on to go dancing with her partner at a party . Her husband is upset when he sees them , and when he confronts her about this , she acts like he is making a big deal out of nothing . " When you act like that , I don 't think you realize how it makes me look or feel " , he tells her . Beyoncé then asks him in a condescending tone , " Why are you so jealous ? It 's not like I 'm sleeping with the guy . " Then the story reverses , and Beyoncé starts to cry . Her husband 's situation is actually her experience — he is a police officer who takes his supportive wife for granted . 
 = = = Reception and accolades = = = 
 Beyoncé premiered the video , alongside the video for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , on MTV 's Total Request Live show on October 13 , 2008 . It was included on Beyoncé 's 2009 remix album with videography , Above and Beyoncé . Jennifer Vineyard of MTV News described the video as a " meaningful one — and it comes with a twist that requires repeat viewing " . She noted that if the video did not exist , she would not have seen the tomboy side of Beyoncé . A writer for Rap @-@ Up commented , " Beyoncé delivers one of the year 's best videos with the black and white clip . " Jennifer Cady of E ! Online praised the video , writing that it has a " serious melodramatic storyline " . She further noted that it was " slow and everyone <unk> , but be sure to catch the end where a major twist will probably change your outlook on the dynamics of male – female relationships forever " . 
 The clip was ranked at number seventy @-@ two on BET : Notarized Top 100 Videos of 2008 countdown and at number twenty @-@ five on BET J 's Last Call 2008 ! Top 50 Countdown . It was nominated for Video of the Year at the 2009 BET Awards but lost to Beyoncé 's other video for " Single Ladies " . The video also received nominations for Best Female Video at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards Japan and for Outstanding Music Video at the 2009 NAACP Image Awards . In July 2009 , the video was certified gold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for shipping over 5 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé first performed " If I Were a Boy " on November 6 , 2008 , at the MTV Europe Music Awards . She later performed the song during the sixth series of the British television show Strictly Come Dancing and the 2008 World Music Awards in Monaco on November 9 , 2008 , which was followed by another performance on The Oprah Winfrey Show on November 13 , 2008 . On November 16 , 2008 , backed by a live band , Beyoncé sang a medley of " If I Were a Boy " , then switched to " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , and concluded with " Crazy in Love " during the final episode of Total Request Live . The song was sung again on November 26 , 2008 during her appearance on The Tyra Banks Show . During this performance , Beyoncé begins to cry nearing the end of the song . On December 12 , 2008 , a pre @-@ taped performance aired on the eighth season of the French show Star Academy as Beyoncé could not appear due to busy schedule . During the same day , Beyoncé performed " If I Were a Boy " on Los Premios 40 Principales in Spain . She also performed the ballad on December 13 , 2008 , live at the The X Factor finale in the UK . Beyoncé sang a medley of " If I Were a Boy " and Alanis Morissette 's 1995 song " You Oughta Know " on January 31 , 2010 , at the 52nd Grammy Awards ceremony . She wore a " futuristic , spiked black " outfit with matching shoes , and " pranced , spun and did the Dutty Wine while the crowd cheered in approval " , according to Jayson Rodriguez of MTV News . Beyoncé was also backed by 50 backup dancers dressed as a riot gear . Ben Sisario of The New York Times commented that Beyoncé " was elaborately staged and typically athletic " during the performance . William Goodman of Spin magazine noted that Beyoncé " owned " the night 's most powerful performance . Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine put the performance at number three on her list of " Beyoncé 's 5 Biggest TV Performances " . Beyoncé interpolated a verse from " You Oughta Know " into her performance of " If I Were a Boy " at the Glastonbury Festival on June 26 , 2011 . 
 In addition to her performances of the song on television and at award ceremonies , " If I Were a Boy " was included on the set lists of Beyoncé 's I Am ... World Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) and I Am ... Yours revue . It was subsequently included on her live albums , I Am ... World Tour and I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas . Prior to the performance of the song at the tour , outtakes of its music video were used . Beyoncé later appeared performing " If I Were a Boy " wearing Ray @-@ Bans , a leather breastplate , aviator shades and a bulletproof @-@ looking one @-@ piece further asking the crowd to sing along the track . During the bridge of the song , she included excerpts from Morissette 's " You Oughta Know " and Tupac Shakur 's " California Love " while imitating a male person with her moves . Alice Jones of The Independent wrote in her review that Beyoncé " whip [ s ] up a quasi @-@ feminist singalong . " Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone noted that the singer channeled her " ferocious onstage persona " , Sasha Fierce . Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times compared Beyoncé 's wardrobe and dancing with that of Ciara . In May 2012 , Beyoncé performed " If I Were a Boy " during her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue at Revel in Atlantic City , New Jersey . Before Beyoncé started to sing , she noted that " [ everyone knows ] how it feels to be hurt and lied to " . During the performance , she mashed Goo Goo Dolls ' " Iris " ( 1998 ) and reworked the rhythm of " If I Were a Boy " to fit with the cover . Elysa Gardner of USA Today noted that the ballad " became a jangly guitar @-@ pop number " during the show . Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " the most attention @-@ grabbing moments of the night ... came when she dipped into other artists ' catalogs " . In 2013 , " If I Were a Boy " was included in the set list of The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour where it featured the string motif from The Verve 's " Bitter Sweet Symphony " ( 1997 ) . 
 = = = Fake tape = = = 
 In January 2009 , Matthew <unk> , a 26 @-@ year @-@ old computer art student from Connecticut , used pitch @-@ correction software to make a clip that he claimed was the soundboard recording of " If I Were a Boy " from Beyoncé 's Today show appearance in November 2008 . In the tape , Beyoncé sang drastically off @-@ key . A corresponding video was leaked onto the internet , and it went viral . It was even played on American radio stations on April 21 , 2009 ; Howard Stern played the recording , describing it as " the unedited board mix " of Beyoncé 's live performance . According to Us Weekly , Mathew Knowles was the first to cast doubt on the recording 's authenticity , saying that the tape seemed to have been altered . He added that " at 12 years into Beyoncé 's career , the last thing someone should be questioning is her vocal ability . That would be like questioning if Kobe Bryant could shoot a jump shot . " 
 On April 22 , TMZ.com reported that the tape was a hoax . They revealed that they had spoken to the person who modified the soundboard tapes , and the alleged culprit told them , " It 's a little bit crazy . No one in their right mind would sound like that , and no one would cheer for someone singing like that . " The following day , Beyoncé spoke about the allegations to MTV News . She stated that the report was ridiculous and that the timing of the video would draw publicity to two of her upcoming television performances . In an interview with Chris Harris of Rolling Stone , <unk> said that he was surprised by how much attention the clip received and by Beyoncé 's reaction to it . He admitted that he had previously given the same treatment to Christina Aguilera and Britney Spears and that he did not feel he had to apologize for the hoax : 
 I was just trying to make a point . I wanted to show people how easy it is to manipulate someone 's voice . If I can do it with a clip I pulled off of TV , imagine what they are doing on records and during live performances . The entire industry has been so manipulated , because there 's such an emphasis on perfection , so when something like this happens , it causes such a stir . I knew something had to have happened to make it jump so fast . It 's wild how much the story 's been twisted . It 's just always been fun for me to manipulate artists , and make it sound crazy . It was just for a good laugh . It was a goof , just for fun . I do a lot of parodies on my YouTube channel , and it just so happens this one got a little out of hand . It was just what I 've learned in school , and it 's fun I could fool so many people and get away with it . A lot of people had a lot of laughs because of it , so why should I apologize ? If you can 't poke fun at yourself , I don 't know what kind of person you are . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Jamaican dancehall singer Althea Hewitt released a reggae cover of " If I Were a Boy " to iTunes Stores on December 19 , 2008 . Nicole Sullivan and Tisha Campbell @-@ Martin covered " If I Were a Boy " during the episode " The Shape of Things to Come " on the sitcom Rita Rocks which aired on October 13 , 2009 . During the finale of the tenth season of American Idol on May 25 , 2011 , the lady contestants joined together onstage to perform " If I Were a Boy " along with a medley of Beyoncé 's other singles . Caterina Torres covered the song during the second series of The Voice ( Australia ) on May 12 , 2013 . Torres ' version peaked at number 28 on the Australian Singles Chart on May 26 , 2013 . On June 8 , 2013 , singer <unk> covered the song during the final of the seventh series of Britain 's Got Talent . 
 Glee cast member Alex Newell covered the song for the fifth season episode " The End of <unk> " . The song was released in iTunes Store on November 11 , 2013 . Michael Slezak of TVLine praised his rendition of the song as " fantastic " and " flawless " . Lauren Hoffman from Vulture and Derek Chavis from The Baltimore Sun described his rendition as one of the best covers recorded for the series . Marc Snetiker of Entertainment Weekly praised the inclusion of the song in the episode and described Newell 's vocals as " incredible " while Billboard 's Rae Votta described the cover as " absolutely stunning " . 
 = = = The X Factor performances = = = 
 On October 6 , 2011 , during the first season of The X Factor US , 13 @-@ year @-@ old Rachel Crow covered the song during one of her auditions . She was backed by a piano and went sombre as she sang . Her performance brought judge Nicole Scherzinger to tears . Gil Kaufman of MTV News commented that the cover showed off " her preternaturally powerful [ and ] growly range " . Both Joe Berkowitz of Rolling Stone and Jennifer Still of Digital Spy noted that Crow 's performance was well executed despite her young age . Sarah Maloy of Billboard magazine commented that her performance was " sensational as always " . On December 3 , 2011 , during the eighth series of the British televised music competition The X Factor , girl band Little Mix covered the " If I Were a Boy " . Digital Spy 's Daniel Sperling noted that the cover contained " a little Amelia Lily @-@ esque shouting " . 
 On September 26 , 2012 , during the second season of the The X Factor in the United States , Dinah Jane Hansen covered " If I Were a Boy " . Annie Barrett of Entertainment Weekly praised Hansen 's singing , writing that she " stunned the crowd with a vocal so powerful " and " made the song her own " . Bruna Nessif of E ! Online praised her " powerful " rendition , and Peter Larsen of The Orange County Register wrote that she left the judges " speechless , [ and ] blown away by the power and beauty of her voice " . Then , on December 5 , 2012 , during the same show , Carly Rose <unk> also covered the song . Jennifer Still of Digital Spy noted that she sounded " effortless on those long , belting notes and shows a lot of restraint in the verses as well " . On August 18 , 2013 , during the fifth season of The X Factor Australia , Dami Im covered the song during the home visits round . Lorna Simpson also covered " If I Were a Boy " during the home visits round on the tenth season on The X Factor in the UK on October 4 , 2013 . 
 On December 4 , 2014 <unk> Santiago covered the song in week 6 of the third season for her Unplugged performance . 
 = = = Reba McEntire version = = = 
 The song was covered by American country singer Reba McEntire on the television program Unplugged on Country Music Television . The cover was accompanied by a music video that premiered on June 18 , 2010 , which depicted McEntire performing the song live . In late 2010 , she recorded a studio version , and it was added to country radio on January 24 , 2011 by Starstruck Entertainment and Valory Music Group as the second single from her studio album All the Women I Am ( 2010 ) . McEntire revealed that she originally wanted to only cover her own hits . However , her husband and manager , Narvel Blackstock wanted her to do a cover song . Blackstock finally came up with the idea that she should record her own version of Beyoncé 's " If I Were a Boy " . Speaking about her version of the song , McEntire said : 
 " When I got the song and the lyrics , I thought it was an incredible song ... And , to me , it turned out to be a country song , when we got our instrumentation on it and everything . And some people go , ' Well , why in the world would you do a pop song ? ' I just think music is music . You 've got good and you 've got bad , and I try to stay on the good side . " 
 McEntire 's cover has generally been met with positive reception . Jessica Phillips of Country Weekly magazine described her cover as a " soulful countrified look at love from a male perspective " . Steve Morse at The Boston Globe said that McEntire translated the song " artfully into country " . Billboard magazine 's Mikael Wood praised the cover , comparing it with McEntire 's other cover of Kelly Clarkson 's " Because of You " . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times noted that McEntire " sounds as if she 's already inhabiting the role " in the song . Allmusic critic Thom Jurek was less favorable , writing that it was unrecognizable to the original , before adding , " It contains none of the original 's drama ; in its place is a failed attempt at a soft rock power ballad . " Following McEntire 's live performance at the CMA awards , the song debuted at number 60 on the Hot Country Songs charts as an album cut dated for the week ending November 27 , 2010 . It re @-@ entered at number 60 on the chart dated for the week ending January 29 , 2011 , and peaked at number 22 in April 2011 . It also peaked at number 23 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart in April 2011 . 
 The official music video for the cover premiered on Oprah.com on February 28 at midnight , followed by an exclusive interview . It was directed by Peter Zavadil . After her first performance of the song on Unplugged on the Country Music Television , McEntire also performed the song at the Country Music Association ( CMA ) awards on November 10 , 2010 . Mawuse Ziegbe of MTV News praised her cover , writing , " Singing with no band onstage , donning a glittery black dress with her signature red hair flowing to her shoulders , the legendary vocalist 's performance scored a standing ovation . " Jillian Mapes and Megan Vick of Billboard praised the performance , writing , " As if Beyonce 's 2008 ballad ' If I Were a Boy ' wasn 't moving enough , country queen Reba McEntire 's smokey twang and solemn stance turned the song on its head . " They also noted that the simple and powerful performance " is enough to inspire tears , or at least goosebumps . " Country Music Television 's Chet Flippo felt that McEntire 's performance was " the musical highlight of the evening " and added that it was " a lesson of what country music should be striving for these days " . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times gave a mixed review of her performance , writing that " [ McEntire ] did something unexpected , softening her delivery and finding the creases in the song , as if Beyoncé were whispering to her from the wings . " However , Entertainment Weekly 's Mandi Bierly wrote that the lyrics were " just too young for [ McEntire ] , and when it comes to the chorus , I want someone to belt it " . 
 = SummerSlam ( 1992 ) = 
 SummerSlam ( 1992 ) was the fifth annual SummerSlam professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . It took place on August 29 , 1992 , at Wembley Stadium , London , England but was aired in the United States on August 31 . The buildup to the pay @-@ per @-@ view consisted of feuds scripted by the WWF 's writers . To date it is the only major WWF pay @-@ per @-@ view to take place outside North America . 
 The pay @-@ per @-@ view featured two main @-@ event matches . In the first , The Ultimate Warrior challenged Randy Savage for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship . The Warrior won the match by countout but did not win the title . In the other main event , The " British Bulldog " Davey Boy Smith pinned Bret Hart to win the WWF Intercontinental Championship . The WWF Tag Team Championship was also defended , as The Natural Disasters retained the championship belts in their match against the Beverly Brothers . One of the heavily promoted matches on the undercard was between Shawn Michaels and Rick Martel . The match , which had a special stipulation that the wrestlers could not hit each other in the face , ended in a double countout . 
 The WWE considers the crowd to be the fourth largest live audience ever to attend a WWF / E event , with 80 @,@ 355 in attendance ; WrestleMania 29 in 2013 is reported as having 80 @,@ 676 fans in attendance , WrestleMania III in 1987 is reported as having 93 @,@ 173 fans in attendance and WrestleMania 32 in 2016 is reported as having 101 @,@ 763 fans in attendance . Some writers believe that the WWF inflated the attendance figure for WrestleMania III , however , and that SummerSlam 1992 had a larger crowd . Between ticket prices and merchandise sales , the WWF made over $ 3 @,@ 650 @,@ 000 in revenue . Reviews of the event are almost all positive , and the Smith @-@ Hart match has been rated the best match in SummerSlam history . 
 = = Background = = 
 SummerSlam 1992 was originally intended to take place in Washington , D.C .. The WWF decided to move the event to Wembley Stadium in London , England due to the company 's growing popularity and the possibility of increasing the revenue from the event . Although the writers ' plans originally called for Shawn Michaels to win the Intercontinental Championship from Bret Hart , the storyline was adjusted due to the change of venue . As a result , " The British Bulldog " Davey Boy Smith , a native of Wigan , a working @-@ class town in the north of England , was chosen to win the belt . 
 Accordingly , one of the main events was the Intercontinental Championship match between Bret Hart and Davey Boy Smith , brothers @-@ in @-@ law in real life as Smith was married to Diana Hart , Bret 's sister . On television broadcasts leading up to SummerSlam , interviews with Diana and her mother Helen portrayed the family as being torn apart by the upcoming match . Bruce Hart publicly supported Smith , while Owen Hart sided with his brother Bret . Diana stated that she did not know who she wanted to win the match , as she had close ties to both men . She ultimately stated that she simply hoped that neither wrestler would get hurt . Prior to the match , Smith was hospitalized with a legitimate staph infection in his knee , which he suffered during a match with Mike Sharpe on July 20 in Worcester , Massachusetts ( the fact was revealed by his wife Diana years later on the Hart & Soul documentary ) ; despite the concerns about his health , he decided to wrestle the match as planned . Bret Hart later revealed in an interview that he doubted the legitimacy of the injury and that he believed Davey Boy in fact had a drug problem and that in the two months prior to their match he could not contact him to sort out what they were going to do at Wembley , and when they finally got to the stadium Smith revealed that he had not slept in over 48 hours . However , Hart also stated that as bad as Smith 's personal issues were , he " sucked it up " and hit every spot in the match . 
 The other main event was a WWF World Heavyweight Championship match between The Ultimate Warrior and Randy Savage . The storyline between them began in August 1990 , when Sensational Sherri , who was managing Savage , tried to arrange a match between Savage and the Warrior at SummerSlam 1990 . The Warrior refused to defend his WWF World Heavyweight Championship against Savage , and he ripped up a contract that Sherri had given him . Later that month , he ripped Sherri 's dress off after a match against Savage . They faced each other at house shows over the next six months , but Savage was unable to win the title . Savage then interfered in the title match at Royal Rumble 1991 , enabling Sgt. Slaughter to win the title . To settle the rivalry , Savage and the Warrior agreed to face each other in a retirement match at WrestleMania VII . The Warrior won the match , but Savage 's former valet Miss Elizabeth reunited with Savage after the match . Savage continued to wrestle for the WWF , but the feud with the Ultimate Warrior did not continue . The following year , the rivalry was rekindled when the Ultimate Warrior was granted a shot at the WWF World Heavyweight Championship , which Savage had won from Ric Flair at WrestleMania VIII on April 5 , 1992 . Flair and his manager , Mr. Perfect , were upset that Flair had not been granted a rematch . They decided to cause trouble between Savage and the Warrior , and Perfect announced on August 8 , 1992 that he was negotiating with Savage , his former rival , to appear in his corner during the WWF World Heavyweight Championship match at SummerSlam . The following week , Perfect claimed that the Ultimate Warrior had also been seeking his services . Perfect announced his intention to appear in one man 's corner but would not clarify which one . At the SummerSlam Spectacular , a show designed to promote the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Savage and the Warrior teamed up to face The Nasty Boys . Perfect and Ric Flair interfered in the match , but Savage and the Warrior chased them back to the locker room after the match . 
 Two tag team matches were also featured on the undercard . Money Inc . ( Ted DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster ) and the The Legion of Doom ( Hawk and Animal ) were feuding in 1992 over the WWF Tag Team Championship . The Legion of Doom held the championship belts until Hawk failed a drug test . As a result , the WWF suspended him and had the Legion of Doom drop the belts to Money Inc . Once Hawk 's suspension ended , a rematch was scheduled to take place at SummerSlam . The match was first announced as a title match but Money Inc. lost the championship to The Natural Disasters , transferring the title match status to another match . 
 Meanwhile , the Natural Disasters ( Earthquake and Typhoon ) and the Beverly Brothers ( Beau and Blake ) had a rivalry dating back to a WWF television taping on June 30 , 1992 . Typhoon attacked The Genius , who managed the Beverlys , while Earthquake brawled with both of the Beverlys . The match aired on WWF Prime Time Wrestling on July 20 ; the same day that it aired , the Disasters won the WWF Tag Team Championship from Money Inc . As a result of this win , the title was on the line in the match at SummerSlam . 
 In addition to the title defenses , the event also featured a match between Shawn Michaels and Rick Martel . Their rivalry focused on Martel 's attempts to steal Michaels ' valet Sensational Sherri . During one of Michaels ' matches televised on August 9 , 1992 , Martel came to ringside and <unk> at Sherri , who returned the gesture . At the SummerSlam Spectacular , Sherri came to the ring during one of Martel 's matches and <unk> at him . Both Michaels and Martel were " heel " wrestlers who bragged about their good looks , and Sherri had them agree not to hit each other in the face during their SummerSlam match . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Preliminary Matches = = = 
 Before the pay @-@ per @-@ view broadcast began , two matches were taped for later showings on WWF Prime Time Wrestling . These matches were never advertised on US television in the weeks leading up to SummerSlam . Vince McMahon , on commentary during these bouts , referred to them as ' Bonus Matches ' . The first match saw " Hacksaw " Jim Duggan and The Bushwhackers ( Luke Williams and Butch ) defeat The Mountie and The Nasty Boys ( Brian Knobs and Jerry Sags ) when Duggan pinned The Mountie . In the other match , Papa Shango defeated Tito Santana by pinfall . 
 In the opening match of the actual PPV telecast , the Legion of Doom ( Hawk and Animal ) faced Money Inc . ( Ted DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster ) . The Legion of Doom used their size and power to wear down their opponents in the opening minutes of the match . Money Inc. gained the advantage when Hawk missed a flying clothesline . Hawk tried to tag in his partner but was unable for several minutes because Money Inc. kept him away from the corner where Animal was standing . Eventually , Hawk and Schyster hit each other at the same time . Hawk tagged Animal in , and the Legion of Doom attempted to perform the Doomsday device , their signature move . Schyster stopped them , but Animal hit Schyster in retaliation , causing Schyster to run into DiBiase . Animal then powerslammed DiBiase and pinned him to get the victory . 
 The second match of the broadcast featured Nailz competing against Virgil . Nailz spent the majority of the match choking Virgil . Virgil recovered several times and performed several offensive maneuvers , but Nailz always regained the advantage . Ultimately , Nailz won the match by performing a sleeper hold . After the match , he attacked Virgil with a nightstick . 
 In the following match , competitors Shawn Michaels and Rick Martel were unable , due to a pre @-@ match stipulation , to hit each other in the face . The two men exchanged holds but were both preoccupied with looking to ringside for approval from Sensational Sherri . Martel gained the advantage by throwing Michaels to the outside of the ring and attacking him there . When the two returned to the ring , they took turns attempting to pin their opponent , pulling down their opponent 's wrestling tights to reveal their buttocks each time . Michaels then kicked Martel and tried to pin him , but the referee stopped the three @-@ count because Michaels ' feet were on the ropes . Both wrestlers broke the pre @-@ match stipulation by slapping each other in the face . Sherri pretended to faint , which drew the attention of both wrestlers . Michaels and Martel argued over who would carry Sherri backstage , with each man carrying her a few feet before being stopped by his opponent . Both wrestlers were counted out , but they continued to argue . Martel tried to revive Sherri by throwing water on her , but he hit Michaels as well . Michaels dropped Sherri and chased Martel backstage ; upset at being left behind by both men , Sherri screamed and cried as she walked backstage . 
 The tag team championship match came next , which saw the Beverly Brothers ( Beau and Blake ) attack the Natural Disasters ( Earthquake and Typhoon ) before the bell . The Disasters used their size and strength to gain the advantage , but Earthquake accidentally performed an avalanche on Typhoon . The Beverlys controlled the match for several minutes , with Blake executing a splash and a front facelock . Typhoon recovered and clotheslined both opponents but was unable to tag in Earthquake . Later , Typhoon attempted to make the tag again , but Beau distracted Earthquake ; while the referee 's back was turned , The Beverlys ' manager , The Genius handed Blake a metal scroll , which Blake used to hit Typhoon . Typhoon recovered , however , and Earthquake entered the ring and controlled the remainder of the match . He performed a powerslam on Beau before pinning him with an Earthquake splash . 
 The following match , which was not shown on the telecast in the United Kingdom , pitted Crush against the Repo Man . Crush used his size advantage to perform a Gorilla press slam on Repo Man . Repo Man performed a back suplex , but Crush showed no sign that the move affected him . Crush continued to dominate the match with such moves as a belly to belly suplex . Repo Man eventually tried to attack Crush by jumping off the top rope , but Crush caught him and performed the Cranium Crunch to win the match by submission . 
 = = = Main Event Matches = = = 
 One of the two main event matches came next , as Randy Savage defended The WWF World Heavyweight Championship against the Ultimate Warrior . Although Mr. Perfect had claimed that he would be in the corner of one of the competitors , he did not come to ringside for the beginning of the match . Savage and the Warrior traded the advantage back and forth , with Savage performing several clotheslines and punching his opponent and the Ultimate Warrior countering with atomic drops . Savage executed two double axe handles from the top rope , but the Warrior caught him when Savage attempted the move a third time . After the Warrior missed a move and fell outside the ring , Savage jumped from the top rope and performed another double axe handle . Once the wrestlers got back into the ring , Ric Flair and Mr. Perfect walked down the aisle and stood at ringside . The match continued as normal until Perfect reached into the ring and tripped Savage , who was running to gain momentum for a maneuver . The Ultimate Warrior accidentally threw Savage into referee Earl Hebner . As a result of the ref bump , Hebner was not able to make the three @-@ count when Savage pinned the Warrior after performing a diving elbow drop . Perfect and Flair revived the Ultimate Warrior , only to attack him when he stood up . The Warrior recovered and attempted to execute a running splash , but Flair hit him with a chair . Savage saw the Warrior injured and realized that Flair and Perfect were causing trouble rather than trying to help either man . In retaliation , Savage jumped off the top rope to attack Flair , but Flair hit him in the leg with a chair . Savage was unable to get back into the ring , so the Ultimate Warrior won the match via countout . Flair and Perfect continued to attack Savage until the Warrior chased them away . Savage and the Ultimate Warrior then hugged and walked backstage together . 
 The WWF World Heavyweight Championship match was followed by a bout pitting Tatanka defeating The Berzerker by pinfall . This match was originally announced on US television , in the weeks leading up to SummerSlam , as being part of the PPV telecast . Due to time constraints it was cut from the PPV lineup in post @-@ production . The match , however , later aired on WWF Prime Time Wrestling . 
 The next match was between the Undertaker and Kamala . Kamala , who was accompanied by his manager , Harvey Wippleman , and his handler , Kim Chee , attacked the Undertaker before the match . The Undertaker blocked the attack and punched Kamala repeatedly before performing a chop from the top rope on his opponent . The Undertaker attempted the same move again , but Wippleman knocked the Undertaker off the rope . Kamala knocked the Undertaker outside the ring , where the Undertaker attacked Wippleman and Kim Chee . Back inside the ring , the Undertaker gained the advantage by executing a chokeslam and a clothesline . When the Undertaker attempted to perform his signature move , the Tombstone Piledriver , Kim Chee ran into the ring and hit the Undertaker with a pith helmet . As a result , Kamala was disqualified and the Undertaker won the match . Kamala kept on attacking and hit Undertaker with a series of splashes and seemingly left his opponent unconscious . When the Undertaker suddenly sat up and looked directly at the Ugandan Giant , Kamala , <unk> and Kim Chee panicked and fled ringside with The Undertaker and Paul Bearer slowly walking in pursuit . 
 Up next , Rowdy Roddy Piper joined the Balmoral Highlanders in playing Scotland the Brave on the bagpipes . 
 The event concluded with the second main event , a contest for the Intercontinental Championship between champion Bret Hart and challenger " British Bulldog " Davey Boy Smith , who was accompanied by the reigning Commonwealth Heavyweight Boxing Champion , London native Lennox Lewis . In the opening minutes , Hart used his technical wrestling abilities and Smith relied on his power advantage . Hart got control of the match with a reverse atomic drop and a Samoan drop . Smith came back with a monkey flip , but Hart regained the advantage with a bulldog and a plancha . Smith eventually recovered and tried to pin Hart with a back slide . Hart escaped the pin attempt and wore Smith down with sleeper holds . Smith gained the advantage , however , and used power moves to control the match , including a powerslam and a variety of suplexes . Hart managed to place Smith in the Sharpshooter , Hart 's signature submission hold . Smith escaped the hold , however , and threw Hart against the ropes . While running back at Smith , Hart attempted a sunset flip . Smith countered the move and pinned Hart to win the Intercontinental Championship . Immediately after the match , Hart refused to shake Smith 's hand . He soon changed his mind , however , and hugged Smith as well as Diana Hart , who was celebrating with her husband . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Randy Savage , who continued to sell his supposedly injured leg , lost the title to Ric Flair at a television taping on September 1 , 1992 in Hershey , Pennsylvania . During the match Flair received help not only from Mr Perfect but also from newcomer Razor Ramon , igniting a feud between Savage and Ramon . Bret Hart claimed in a 2014 interview that WWF owner Vince McMahon had worked out the title @-@ change match with Flair and Savage before hand , and that he was angry when they returned to the dressing room after the match because they had failed to do much of what was agreed upon . McMahon was that angry that he actually made them go straight back out and re @-@ do the whole match . After producing much the same match that they had immediately prior , McMahon allegedly threw his headset onto the table and stormed off in frustration . 
 After plans by WWF writers to turn the Ultimate Warrior against Savage were scrapped due to the Warrior 's refusal to turn heel , the two were scheduled to face Flair and Ramon at Survivor Series 1992 . However , as the Warrior quit the promotion on November 21 , his spot was surprisingly offered to Mr. Perfect , who accepted it in spite of Flair , thereby turning face and initiating a feud with Flair which culminated in Flair leaving the WWF in January 1993 . 
 Shawn Michaels , who had originally been booked to win the Intercontinental Championship from Bret Hart at SummerSlam , won the title from Davey Boy Smith on October 27 ( the match would air on the November 14 , 1992 , episode of Saturday Night 's Main Event ) . Michaels and Sherri continued their on @-@ screen relationship after SummerSlam . Sherri claimed to have created the rivalry with Martel to test Michaels ' love for her . Their relationship deteriorated , though when Michaels pulled Sherri in front of him to protect himself from an attack by his former tag team partner , Marty Jannetty on the October 31 episode of WWF Superstars . This led to confrontations between Sherri and Michaels at Royal Rumble 1993 and WrestleMania IX . 
 The Undertaker continued to feud with Kamala and Harvey Wippleman . The two wrestlers faced each other again at Survivor Series 1992 in a coffin match , which the Undertaker won . Wippleman gained revenge by introducing Giant Gonzalez ( and later Mr. Hughes ) , with whom the Undertaker feuded through 1993 . 
 Upset about the amount of his pay for appearing at SummerSlam , Kevin Wacholz ( Nailz ) confronted WWF owner Vince McMahon after Survivor Series 1992 . According to reports , he legitimately attacked McMahon . As a result , Nailz was fired from the WWF . He briefly appeared in rival promotion World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) as the Prisoner but was released after the WWF sued WCW because of The Prisoner 's similarity to the Nailz character . The anger between Wacholz and McMahon spilled over into McMahon 's 1994 trial , in which McMahon was accused of distributing steroids to wrestlers . Although Wacholz testified against McMahon , his statements , which included , " I hate Vince McMahon 's guts " ultimately proved harmful to the prosecution 's case . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 According to the WWF , the 80 @,@ 355 people in attendance for SummerSlam 1992 is the fourth largest in the company 's history , behind only WrestleMania 29 , WrestleMania III and WrestleMania 32 , which is said to have attracted 101 @,@ 763 fans . 
 The event has received positive reviews from a variety of sources . RD Reynolds has called it " a huge success " . In particular , the Intercontinental Championship match has been called " one of the greatest matches of all time " . Pro Wrestling Illustrated named it the Match of the Year in the magazine 's year @-@ end issue , and WWE has called the match the greatest moment in SummerSlam history . Bret Hart has also named it as his favorite match of all time . 
 The WWF collected $ 2 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 in revenue from admissions , up from $ 445 @,@ 000 the previous year . The company also sold $ 1 @,@ 456 @,@ 203 in merchandise at SummerSlam , which is the largest amount of merchandise revenue at a WWF event . The buyrate for the event was 1 @.@ 5 , down from 2 @.@ 7 at SummerSlam 1991 but higher than the 1 @.@ 3 buyrate at SummerSlam 1993 . 
 SummerSlam 1992 was released on VHS format on September 24 , 1992 . While the US release only included the 8 matches that were shown on the PPV telecast , the UK release included all 11 matches including the three dark matches . On October 3 , 2005 in the United Kingdom , the event was released on DVD , packaged together with SummerSlam 1993 , as part of the WWE Tagged Classics line . The event was again later released as part of WWE 's SummerSlam Anthology boxed DVD set . The anthology was released on August 5 , 2008 in North America and was released on October 6 , 2008 in the United Kingdom . However , the version that is included with the Anthology is only the 8 match PPV broadcast version . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Sniper Wolf = 
 Sniper Wolf ( Japanese : <unk> ・ <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ' ) is a fictional character from Konami 's Metal Gear series . Created by Hideo Kojima and designed by Yoji Shinkawa , she appears in the 1998 stealth game Metal Gear Solid ( as well as its 2004 remake , Metal Gear Solid : The Twin Snakes ) as one of the game bosses opposing the protagonist Solid Snake and his ally Meryl Silverburgh . 
 The character is a ruthless and skilled sniper belonging to the renegade U.S. military special operations group FOXHOUND . " Sniper Wolf " is a nom de guerre pseudonym and her real name is undisclosed . She is of Iraqi Kurdish origin and her backstory is connected to the series ' chief protagonist / antagonist character Big Boss , who had rescued her in Iraq when she was a child . Sniper Wolf is widely regarded as one of the most popular and memorable characters in this game as well as in the entire Metal Gear series , as well as one of the top female antagonists in all video gaming . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Metal Gear Solid = = = 
 In Metal Gear Solid , Sniper Wolf is a member of FOXHOUND and an elite sniper capable of going without food and staying still for up to a week . She typically forms an emotional connection with her targets before killing them with her favoured weapon , the Heckler & Koch <unk> , and uses mercury @-@ tipped hollow @-@ point bullets to poison her victims . She is also addicted to the drug diazepam . 
 Born in the Iraqi Kurdistan in 1983 during the Iran – Iraq War , she witnessed the death of her family and thousands of others from a chemical attack by Saddam Hussein 's government troops against the rebellious Kurds when she was five years old . She was captured by Saddam 's forces and taken as an orphan by the Iraqi Ministry of Interior , who brainwashed her and brought a famed Gurkha sniper to train her to be a child combatant for the government . Three years later , during the 1991 uprisings in Iraq , she fled to a Kurdish refugee camp . There , the legendary U.S. Army Special Forces veteran known as Big Boss noticed her <unk> abilities and brought her with him to the United States , where she received counselling and deprogramming to remove her Iraqi brainwashing , leaving only her fighting abilities with her . Extremely grateful , she thought of Big Boss as a modern Saladin and followed him in whatever he did , until his mutiny and later death at the hands of FOXHOUND operative Solid Snake ( as depicted in Metal Gear 2 : Solid Snake ) . She was then found by Solid Snake 's brother Liquid Snake , who convinced her to join a FOXHOUND splinter cell under his command . 
 In the alternate year 2005 , during the Shadow Moses Island incident ( Metal Gear Solid ) , Sniper Wolf goes rogue along with the rest of Liquid Snake 's group when they take hostages and blackmail the U.S. government with a hijacked walking tank armed with nuclear weapons , demanding the corpse of Big Boss to be handed over to them . She cares for the <unk> that Liquid intended to kill , as she enjoys their company , and is impressed with the hostage scientist Hal " Otacon " Emmerich giving his scarce food supply to the dogs . When Solid Snake ( further referred to as Snake ) infiltrates the island , Sniper Wolf wounds Snake 's companion Meryl Silverburgh to lure him into a trap , capturing him so he could be tortured by another FOXHOUND member , Revolver Ocelot . Eventually , Snake defeats her in sniper duel in a snowy field by shooting her in the lung . After hearing Sniper Wolf 's story of her life , and at her request to be at last " set free " , Snake kills her over objections by Otacon , who professes his love for her . Solid Snake also uses her handkerchief to avoid attacks by her wolves by masking his scent with hers . Sniper Wolf 's ghost can be seen if the player uses the in @-@ game photo camera on her body . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Sniper Wolf was originally planned to make a voice @-@ over cameo appearance in Metal Gear Solid 2 : Sons of Liberty ( 2001 ) , during a conversation between Otacon and Olga " Ninja " <unk> , and appears in a short flashback sequence . Her spirit shows up as a wolf in Metal Gear Solid 4 : Guns of the Patriots ( 2008 ) , in which an unrelated character named Crying Wolf also appears to engage in a sniper duel against Solid Snake . Sniper Wolf 's costume can also be developed for the character Quiet in Metal Gear Solid V : The Phantom Pain . 
 A special Sniper Wolf character card appears in the non @-@ canon spin @-@ off game Metal Gear Acid 2 ( 2005 ) . Some other developers have also given homage type nods to the character , such as with an item " MGS Sniper Wulf Mk . II " in EA Montreal 's Army of Two ( 2008 ) and a weapon " MG @-@ S1 Sniper Wolfe " in the PlayStation 3 version of Visceral Games ' The Godfather II ( 2009 ) . 
 A 1 / 8 scale Sniper Wolf action figure was released by McFarlane Toys in 1998 . Two 1 / 6 scale figures were also released only in Japan by Yamato ( an action figure ) and Studio Saru <unk> ( a garage kit ) . In 2012 , Sniper Wolf was chosen by Konami as one of their 64 iconic characters to participate in the Konami E3 Battle event , where she lost against Metal Gear REX in the semi @-@ final fourth round . A <unk> statue designed by <unk> Yamashita was announced by Kotobukiya for 2016 . 
 = = Conception and design = = 
 According to the Metal Gear series character artist Yoji Shinkawa , the idea of creating Sniper Wolf came about when the series ' writer , director and producer Hideo Kojima originally asked him to draw " a guy " , but Shinkawa suggested that he should instead design " a young lady with a sniper rifle . " Shinkawa designed her with green hair , but she appears as a sandy blonde in the game ; he also made a topless picture of her . Kojima said a part of an inspiration for the character came from the female Viet Cong sniper scene in the film Full Metal Jacket and recalled he had a hard time " trying to explain the concept of MGS ' Sniper Wolf battle " to his staff . One of her lines is also a direct quote from the film Blue Velvet . 
 Asked about his favorite Metal Gear character in a 2003 interview , Solid Snake 's voice actor David Hayter said : " Wolf . Very hot . Very dangerous . She ’ d be Snake ’ s girl if she wasn ’ t so focused on killing him . " When he was asked in 2014 about his favourite Metal Gear moments , Kojima himself chose Wolf 's death as the first scene to talk about . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character was well received in part because of her sex appeal . For that reason , Sniper Wolf ranked as 37th " hottest babe in games " by GameDaily in 2008 and was included in UGO 's list of the 50 " hottest babes in games " in 2011 . She was ranked as the tenth sexiest PlayStation character by PlayStation Universe in 2010 , who added that " this character takes a special place in our hearts , " and in 2014 was included among the top 10 " hottest " female villains in gaming and " old school hotties that still got it " by Cheat Code Central 's Travis Huber , who stated that " she was so loved and talked about that Hideo Kijima and the gang have had to create yet another beautiful but deadly sniper character in the upcoming <unk> : The Phantom Pain . " 
 Sniper Wolf was also acclaimed as one of the best boss type and antagonist characters in the Metal Gear series or even in all video games . In 2006 , Ryan Stewart and Rich <unk> of The Boston Phoenix ranked the fight against Sniper Wolf as the 16th greatest boss battle in video game history , describing her as the best aspect of FOXHOUND and her death as " one of gaming 's most poignant scenes . " In 2008 , readers of IGN voted her at the top position on the list of the Metal Gear series villains , the staff commenting : " Who else could number one be but the incredibly beautiful , and impossibly deadly , Sniper Wolf ? " and adding that " it 's safe to say Wolf earned more votes than just about every other villain combined , a fact that doesn 't surprise us at all . " That same year , IGN PlayStation Team ranked the fight against her as the sixth best boss battle in the series , while the staff of GameSpy placed her seventh on their list . In 2010 , the staff of IGN ranked Sniper Wolf as the 92nd top video game villain of all time , stating that she " probably deserves to be higher on our list " and emphasizing the feeling of helplessness caused by her tactics in " an epic boss battle " . In 2015 , she was included on several lists of the best boss fights in the Metal Gear series , including by Sean <unk> of 411mania , Dustin <unk> of <unk> , and the staff of IGN , chosen by Zach Ryan . 
 Regarding her personality issues , sometimes perceived as complicated , Sniper Wolf was ranked as the 25th top " chick behaving badly " in all entertainment by IGN 's Scott Collura in 2008 , featured as one of nine " bad girls of videogame land " by Gelo Gonzales of FHM in 2009 , and ranked as the seventh top " bitch in games " by Gavin Mackenzie of PLAY in 2010 . Complex ranked her as the ninth " most diabolical video game she @-@ villain " in 2011 , describing her as " the exact type of woman that you wouldn ’ t marry for any rational reason . " In 2012 , Complex ranked her as ninth on the list of some of the most evil women in video games , commenting that even as Sniper Wolf " actually ends up being one of the more noble villains in the game , " she did exhibit " some next @-@ level psycho behavior . " 
 The scene of Sniper Wolf wounding Meryl to set a trap for Snake was included among the top ten cutscenes in the Metal Gear series by Jeremy M. Loss of Joystick Division in 2010 and ranked as the seventh most shocking surprise in video games ( " subverting the power fantasy " ) by George Reith of GamingBolt in 2012 . In Trigger Happy , Steven Poole noted how the " brillantly manipulative " Metal Gear Solid can make the player feel guilty , even as " it makes no sense to wish that you hadn 't killed Sniper Wolf — that is , properly to regret your actions — because it is a task that the game demands be fulfilled before you can progress . " In 2012 , Ryan King of PLAY included the character of Sniper Wolf among the six " things you didn ’ t want to kill ( but you did anyway ) " and Ian Dransfield from the same magazine included her among the top " bad guys you wanted to win " . In 2015 , Aleksander <unk> from VentureBeat included Sniper Wolf 's death among six most memorable Metal Gear moments opining it " still remains as one of the most poignant and beautiful scenes in the entire series . It also displays just how multilayered , benign , and well @-@ written Kojima ’ s characters ( both heroes and villains ) really are . " That same year , Javy Gwaltney from Paste had this scene top his list of the saddest moments in Metal Gear . 
 On the other hand , 1UP.com 's Scott Sharkey placed Otacon 's reaction to the death of Sniper Wolf second on his 2009 list of the series ' " most awkward " moments , calling it " the world 's most embarrassingly stupid case of Stockholm syndrome . " Shacknews ' Steve Watts wrote about the game 's GameCube remake Metal Gear Solid : The Twin Snakes : " While critically acclaimed thanks to its improved graphics and smarter AI , the addition of an MGS2 @-@ inspired first @-@ person mode was blamed for making the game too easy and ruining the Sniper Wolf boss battle entirely . " 
 = Catatonia ( band ) = 
 Catatonia were an alternative rock band from Wales who gained popularity in the mid- to late 1990s . The band formed in 1992 after Mark Roberts met Cerys Matthews . The first major lineup featured Dafydd Ieuan on drums , Clancy Pegg on keyboard , Owen Powell on guitar and Paul Jones on bass . They recorded two EPs , For Tinkerbell and Hooked . 
 Pegg was fired prior to work on their first studio album , Way Beyond Blue , while Ieuan was replaced with Aled Richards shortly afterwards . This new line @-@ up remained for the rest of the lifetime of the band . The single " You 've Got a Lot to Answer For " received radio airplay and became the band 's first top 40 single in the UK Singles Chart in September 1996 . Their breakout success came at the start of 1998 with the International Velvet album and the release of the single " Mulder and Scully " some two weeks apart . The album went to number one in the album chart , and sold more than 900 @,@ 000 copies being certified triple platinum by British Phonographic Industry , while the single reached number 3 in the singles chart , the highest any Catatonia single would chart . 
 The follow @-@ up release , " Road Rage " , reached number 5 in May , and was nominated for best song at the Brit Awards and the Ivor Novello Awards , winning at the Q Awards . The title track of the album International Velvet received additional attention , and the band performed it at the opening of the opening ceremony of the 1999 Rugby World Cup on 1 October in the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff . While in Catatonia , Matthews collaborated with Space on " The Ballad of Tom Jones " in March 1998 and with Tom Jones on a cover of " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " in December 1999 . Their final top ten single came in April 1999 with " Dead from the Waist Down " off the following album , Equally Cursed and Blessed . Rumours began to circulate about a breakup , but a further album , Paper Scissors Stone was released in 2001 following a two @-@ year break from live performances . 
 Matthews ' drinking had long been reported in the tabloids and gossip columns , and she entered rehab in mid @-@ 2001 for drinking and smoking . The tour to support Paper Scissors Stone was cancelled , and a month later , the band announced that they were breaking up . Matthews has subsequently released solo albums , while Powell has become a radio presenter and joined the supergroup The Stand to release a charity single . Critics have highlighted the use of metaphors in Catatonia 's work , and songs have been compared to poetry by critics . Writing duties had been shared across the band , although had been led by Matthews and Roberts . They disagreed with being labelled an indie band , with Powell saying they had only ever sought to write pop music . 
 = = History = = 
 The story that Catatonia were formed after Mark Roberts spotted Cerys Matthews busking in Cardiff in 1992 was an invention for the media in order to give the band a newsworthy biography . While the duo did go busking , they didn 't meet this way . Matthews had been a fan of Roberts ' previous band Y Cyrff . They began dating as well as writing songs together at the end of 1991 . For four years after this they remained in the relationship , many aspects of this being played out publicly in their lyrics . They took the name of the band from Matthews ' experience working in a mental health facility as well as the novel The Doors of Perception by Aldous Huxley . They believed it to mean a sense of extreme pleasure and sleep , and wrote the song " Sweet Catatonia " , subsequently naming the band after the song . As Sweet Catatonia , Matthews and Roberts recorded a series of demos at the city centre youth project in Cardiff , nicknamed " Grassroots " . 
 Roberts and Matthews routinely encountered Owen Powell during this time , who had been in Robert 's Y Cyrff and now had a band called Colour 45 . Both bands entered a band competition to play at the Cardiff Bay Music Fiesta , and while Colour 45 came tenth and was given a place on the bill , Sweet Catatonia placed 45th . Roberts and Matthews hired a drummer , Stephen " Frog " Jenkins from the band U Thant , and continued to record bilingual Welsh / English tracks . The band began to play live , with Matthews and Roberts busking to support their income . They were spotted by the girlfriend of the lead singer of the band The Pooh Sticks , who thought that Matthews would make a good female voice for the group . But after seeing Sweet Catatonia perform , the band members didn 't agree and so Matthews remained with Catatonia . Further recordings were made , with Guto Pryce joining the trio . This session included the track " Gyda Gwen " which attracted the attention of Rhys Mwyn at Crai Records . 
 = = = The Crai EPs , " Whale " and " Bleed " ( 1993 – 95 ) = = = 
 The band line up changed as they signed to Crai , with Jenkins and Pryce departing for other projects . Mwyn arranged for Matthews and Roberts to be joined by Dafydd Ieuan on drums ; Ieuan had previously played in bands who had performed alongside Robert 's Y Cyrff . Another member of the new shortened " Catatonia " was former Y Cyrff member Paul Jones on bass guitar . The final member was Londoner Clancy Pegg on keyboards , who had befriended Roberts and Matthews after moving to Cardiff . Mwyn used his contacts to get Catatonia onto Welsh language television , and strove to move their live performances away from Cardiff so that they weren 't simply playing in front of their regulars the entire time . They had their first overseas gigs in Germany , support Mwyn in his punk band <unk> . Catatonia were hired by political party Plaid Cymru to headline a Welsh language concert at Builth Wells in August 1993 , but they performed in both Welsh and English . 
 Despite being signed to Crai , this was more as promoter than as a record label itself . It was only when Roberts suggested that Catatonia record some extended plays ( EPs ) after two months with the label that <unk> made the arrangements . The first , entitled For Tinkerbell , had a cover photo taken by Roberts and Matthews ' housemate Roland <unk> . Mwyn successfully got the record on BBC Radio 1 after sending a copy to radio presenter Mark Radcliffe . After Iestyn George heard the release , the journalist named it as the record of the week for the magazine NME . For Tinkerbell contained some early tracks , including a version of " Sweet Catatonia " . Matthews later explained that while she had liked the songs on the EP , she felt that she wasn 't good at performing live at the time . They signed to Nursery Records to release the single " Bleed " . Catatonia 's first national interview was published following the release of " For Tinkerbell " , a 300 word piece appearing in Melody Maker . 
 They held their first London gigs in support of the EP , under the advice of George and The Pooh Sticks lead singer Huw Williams . After warm up gigs in Cardiff and Birmingham , the London performance took place at the Samuel Beckett pub in Stoke Newington on 13 November 1993 alongside <unk> and Margi Clarke . Further Welsh radio and television appearances followed , as did an interview for NME . When George arrived for the interview , Matthews asked if he 'd be interested in becoming the band 's manager . He politely declined , saying that he didn 't have the experience . On the 19 and 20 February 1994 , the band 's follow @-@ up EP , Hooked was recorded in <unk> , Gwynedd , and produced by Ken Nelson who they had met on Radio Wales . A performance was set up at the Falcon the Splash Club in London where several music executives were to be present . The band drove down from Cardiff in a Ford Transit with their equipment and then spent the afternoon drinking . Just prior to going out on stage , they began taking cocaine , the result of which was a terrible performance later lamented by Roberts . The trip became a sobering experience , as they made no money from it and were only paid £ 50 for a gig at Kingston University a day later . Matthews later recalled that they 'd needed to borrow money from a fan to pay the toll on the Severn Bridge on the way back to Cardiff . 
 The band returned to the Falcon , where they played a still shambolic , but better gig in front of record executives . Meanwhile , George had put the band in touch with their first manager , Richard Lowe from MRM management . They made further appearances on Welsh television to support the release of Hooked in May , but another drunken performance followed , this time in Newport . MRM sent them on a short tour in France during the second week of May , and then started their first UK wide support tour to the band Salad . When due to perform at the <unk> Music Festival in Wales on 2 July , the band ran into some difficulties . The security team refused to let Matthews in as they didn 't recognise her . It was only after the intervention of one of the fans of the band , actor Rhys Ifans , that she was allowed in . 
 Mwyn departed the band when the band 's time with Crai came to an end , and a few weeks later MRM sought to remove Pegg , leaving it to Matthews to tell her . Pegg was upset , and refused to discuss it with journalists . After her departure , the single " Whale " was published on the Rough Trade Records label . The band had rushed to record it , having only been given a month 's notice by the label that they would release on their songs in September 1994 . Unlike Hooked , " Whale " was named the NME single of the week akin to For Tinkerbell . The band appeared in the mainstream press for two incidents , the first was when they were thrown off a train at Swindon as they were travelling to London after arguing with a train guard about punk rock , and the other when they swore at the bouncers in Welsh at the Underworld club in Camden and were banned . A further single , " Bleed " was recorded the following November , and was released in February 1995 on Nursery Records . Geoff Travis , who had released " Whale " for his Rough Trade Records , offered the band £ 350 @,@ 000 to sign for Blanco y Negro Records , a subsidiary of Warner Bros. Records . They duly signed . 
 = = = Way Beyond Blue ( 1995 – 96 ) = = = 
 The band began work on a debut album , alongside producer Paul Sampson . Ieuan introduced Sampson to Aled Richards , who later replaced him as Catatonia 's drummer when Ieuan left to join the Super Furry Animals . The label wanted to market the band , and so at some expense , had a famed photographer <unk> Mankowitz conduct a photoshoot with Matthews . She , the band and their management all hated the photos , but the label wanted to use them in order not to write the cost off as a loss . In order to have some photos , a series of black and white photos of Matthews drinking a bottle of wine while wearing a Pepsi T @-@ shirt were taken by one of the press agency staff . Warner Bros liked the images and authorised their use . The band had a recording session at Sawmills Studios , Cornwall , which saw some disagreements during recording between Matthews and Roberts . Afterwards , Sampson was removed as producer following a row over the arrangement for " Sweet Catatonia " . 
 Music reviewers responded with surprise when the band began to perform live while sober . Meanwhile , the release of " Sweet Catatonia " as a single was pushed back to January 1996 due to the issues with finding a new producer . The first time he met the band was when they arrived to record at the Maison Rouge Studios in London . They found working with him far easier than Sampson , as Matthews later explained that he took their ideas into account . They returned to live performances after completing the recording of the album , and Ieuan left to join the Super Furry Animals , being replaced with Richards . They were actively looking for a second guitarist , and hired Powell , another member of Y Cyrff , who by this time was working as a music technician for the Super Furry Animals . 
 As they prepared for the album , they released a special release for the Catatonia fanclub which had formed after " Bleed " . Containing " Blow the Millenium , Blow " and " Beautiful Sailor " , the vinyl record was sent to all members . The following month , on 18 January 1996 , " Sweet Catatonia " was released . It became the first Catatonia single to reach the UK singles chart , peaking at 61st position . MRM sought to expand the profile of the band in Europe , publishing the compilation The Sublime Magic of Catatonia . The band toured the UK , supported by Liverpool @-@ based band Space , and while touring " Lost Cat " was released on 22 April . It just missed out on the top 40 , reaching 41st position . As part of the tour , they appeared at several music festivals that year including Reading , Phoenix and at Madstock ! 3 in London . 
 Catatonia began to get radio exposure with the single " You 've Got a Lot to Answer For " , which entered the top 40 for the first time in September 1996 . After several delays , the album Way Beyond Blue was released on 30 September . There were 12 tracks , several of which had appeared on previous EPs and as b @-@ sides to singles . On the background of the successful album , there were problems behind the scenes . Matthews and Roberts relationship broke down , with Roberts ending it and seeing someone else within days . The duo sought to keep the band together despite the problems , and they found a way to continue working together . Warner Bros. Records had intended to release " Lost Cat " from Way Beyond Blue in the United States , but due to problems at the record label this didn 't occur . 
 = = = International Velvet ( 1997 – 98 ) = = = 
 While Roberts sought to begin work on a second album , they began to tour with fellow Welsh band The Manic Street Preachers as a support act , and the label released the compilation Tourist EP in Japan . They began recording demos for a new album in Cardiff at the start of January 1997 . The subject matter was mostly based on the stories coming out of Roberts and Matthews ' breakup . They booked in a recording session for the second album in June , at the Monnow Valley Studio in Rockfield , Monmouthshire . In the run up to the recording , they performed for the first time in the United States , supporting The Boo Radleys in New York . They went on to perform in Austin , Texas and in Los Angeles during March . The following month , they conducted a ten night tour of the UK , in which songs such as " Mulder and Scully " made their first public appearances . 
 As they worked on the album , Catatonia feared that they were about to be dropped by their record label , which they summed up in the song " That 's All Folks " . Further references to difficulties with Warner Bros were included in " I Am The Mob " , but they preferred working with producer TommyD on the production than they had with those on Way Beyond Blue . The first single off the album had intended to be " Mulder and Scully " , but the label insisted that " I Am the Mob " was released instead . As with previous works , this was delayed , and Catatonia performed at festivals during the summer of 1997 while they waited for the release . They were booked for the Glastonbury Festival , but upon arriving they were told their spot had been cancelled . Matthews continued to get the band mentioned in the gossip columns of newspapers due to her drunken behaviour . One example followed an incident at a party celebrating the victory of the yes vote in the Welsh devolution referendum , 1997 , as when asked how she felt about the result , she responded " What we want to know is who is going to shag Siân Lloyd ? " Lloyd subsequently launched legal action , but accepted an apology from Matthews . 
 The new album was further delayed as Warner Bros ordered the removal of the six @-@ minute long anti @-@ Warner track " That 's All Folks " . Meanwhile , work continued on " I Am The Mob " with a video shoot directed by Kevin Allen . The single was released on 6 October and entered the top 40 for a single week in the 40th position . Catatonia found their roles reversed shortly afterwards , performing as the support act to Space after the Liverpudlians had a series of top 20 singles . They finished off the year with a tour of their own , originally aimed to support the new album , but this was still being held back by the label . Warners replaced " That 's All Folks " with " My Selfish Gene " , and agreed to release " Mulder and Scully " in January 1998 and International Velvet some two weeks later . 
 " Mulder and Scully " launched them into the mainstream public consciousness when it was released on 19 January 1998 . It entered the charts at number 3 ; the highest position a single by Catatonia would ever achieve . International Velvet became the breakout album for the band , charting at number one in the UK Album Charts . The album sold more than 900 @,@ 000 copies in 22 months , being certified triple platinum by the British Phonographic Industry . International Velvet was nominated for the Mercury Music Prize 1998 , which was awarded to Gomez for Bring It On . 
 Of the five singles released from the album , " Road Rage " became the most critically acclaimed , being nominated for best single at both the Ivor Novello Awards and the Brit Awards , while winning at the Q Awards . Despite this , it did not chart as high as " Mulder and Scully " , reaching number 5 on the UK Singles Charts . The subsequent releases " Strange Glue " and " Game On " did not get into the top ten , reaching number 11 and number 33 respectively . 
 The title track of the album , " International Velvet " , featuring the line " Everyday I wake up and thank the Lord I 'm Welsh " and Welsh language verses , received additional attention from the media . Matthews explained in an interview that she wanted to turn to invert the idea of being Welsh from an apparent negative into a positive , " We 're not seen to be very good at anything . Our football team is shit . The song is saying , despite all these things , I still wake up in the morning and thank the Lord that I 'm Welsh . Hopefully by now people realise that Wales is brimmed full of talent and we 're great people with massive brains . " In front of 70 @,@ 000 spectators , Catatonia performed " International Velvet " at the opening ceremony of the 1999 Rugby World Cup in the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff . The album became the first to be released for Catatonia in the United States , but failed to chart . The Washington Post called it " overlooked " . 
 = = = Equally Cursed and Blessed ( 1999 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Following the success of International Velvet , and the heavy touring that followed , the band were pleased to return to the Monnow Valley Studio to record a third studio album . On the recommendation of TommyD , the band had been recording sample tracks onto a <unk> hard disk recorder in their tour bus while on an American tour and they returned to Monnow Valley to record them properly . The band felt less pressure on them for the new album , due to the success of International Velvet and because they no longer feared being dropped by the label . 
 In January 1999 , the band announced their new album , Equally Cursed and Blessed . The title was taken from a line from " Storm the Palace " , a song on International Velvet . Preceded by the first single , " Dead from the Waist Down " on 22 March , Equally Cursed and Blessed was released on 12 April . The album , like International Velvet , reached the top spot in the UK charts . Catatonia were so popular at the time that in April 1999 , Way Beyond Blue , International Velvet and Equally Cursed and Blessed were all in the top 40 of the UK Albums Chart . But , the singles from Equally Cursed and Blessed didn 't repeat the success seen in the previous album . " Dead From The Waist Down " ended up becoming the final single by Catatonia to reach the top ten in the singles charts , getting to number seven in the UK singles charts . " Londinium " reached number 20 , while " Karaoke Queen " barely entered the top 40 at number 36 . 
 In April , they played two outdoor concerts at the Llangollen International Pavilion in front of 6 @,@ 000 people on successive days . This was a warm up to their largest concert so far , held at Margam Country Park near Port Talbot . Guitarist Powell stated the importance of the Llangollen performances , as North Wales was the first place where the crowd had sung along to their songs . Matthews added that Margam Park was chosen as no @-@ one had ever held a concert there before . 
 Catatonia supported R.E.M. on two European dates in June ; there was an incident at Kindl @-@ <unk> <unk> , Berlin , when Matthews ran on the stage during the R.E.M. performance to kiss bassist Mike Mills . It was later attributed to her having drunk a bottle of wine . The band had wanted to release " Karaoke Queen " as the second single off the album , but the record label forced them to release " Londinium " instead . Matthews was also equally angry that the cost for the video for the single was higher than the cost to produce the entire album . A month later , Barry Cawley , who had been a roadie for the band since it originally formed was killed in a road accident in North Wales . Cawley had been cycling when he was killed by a driver in a Fiat Punto . Roberts explained prior to the funeral that the roadie had helped keep Matthews ' " feet on the ground " . 
 The band attempted to break into the United States once more with Equally Cursed and Blessed . The album release included two tracks from International Velvet , including " Road Rage " . They had been scheduled to make appearances on American television shows such as The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and conduct interviews with the media . But after drummer Richards was taken to hospital in the UK with appendicitis , it was abandoned and the rest of the band returned to the UK . Richards had remained in the UK and was due to join them a day and a half later . Rumours began to appear in the press that the band was about to break up , but a band spokesmen stated that the intention was to return to the States later in the year . Performances did take place in Japan , Australia and New Zealand . 
 = = = Paper Scissors Stone and break @-@ up ( 2001 – present ) = = = 
 The band took a break from performing live between the <unk> charity concert in October 1999 and 2001 . They returned to the stage for a further charity gig on 28 April , in support of Unison 's campaign for a living wage at the Manchester Evening News Arena . Matthews said prior to the performance that " It 's a cause I think 's really important and it just seemed to be the right time for us to come back – it 's a long , long time since we played live . It should be really great . We 're really looking forward to what they ( the new songs ) are going to sound like live . It 'll be good to get back on the old live circuit again . " They played several tracks from their upcoming album , at that point entitled It 's What 's Not There That Makes What 's There What It Is . By May , it had been renamed to Paper Scissors Stone . Matthews was looking forward to the new releasing , explaining to NME that " I think it 's stronger than the last album , a bit more avant garde ! ... It 's a bit less stupid . [ Equally Cursed and Blessed ] was all over the shop stylistically , I think it 's a bit more focused . And I think it 's a bit more impassioned " . 
 Catatonia went on to headline the NME stage at the T in the Park festival on 7 July , having conducted a warm up concert at The Lighthouse , Glasgow . The lead single from the new album , " Stone by Stone , was poorly received by the media with NME giving it a score of one out of ten , calling it " lumpen , the voice grating " and that Catatonia are " fading from the public consciousness quicker than Shane Ritchie " and " awkwardly out of date " . 
 The media reported that Matthews entered drug rehabilitation for drinking and smoking in mid 2001 , with the singer stating that she was also suffering from depression . As a result , the tour to support Paper Scissors Stone was cancelled at the start of August . At the time this was because Matthews had not yet finished her " ongoing treatment for anxiety and exhaustion " . It was suggested that the band might split up in August , which was dismissed as " rubbish " by Catatonia . However , on 21 September it was announced that they were breaking up with the record label releasing a statement which said " Their decision has been made entirely amicably , and there are no details at present as to their future plan " . 
 Tributes came in for the band from a variety of sources , with BBC Radio 1 presenter Huw Stephens describing them as " international superstars " , and adding " I always thought they were one of the best Welsh bands . They were not just a throwaway pop band – they had real , meaningful songs . " Iestyn George , editor of the magazine Maxim at the time , praised the influence that Matthews had through Catatonia in the later 1990s , saying that " Around 1998 and 1999 , Cerys was in the papers every other day " . He also referenced that she had never intended this role as Catatonia had thought that they had already peaked prior to International Velvet . 
 Matthews went on to release her first solo album , <unk> , in May 2003 . Her second album Never Said Goodbye was released in August 2006 . In November 2007 she released a mini @-@ album of Welsh language songs <unk> = Aeroplane on the My Kung Fu label . Matthews returned in late 2009 as the first recording artist to release albums simultaneously in both Welsh and English ( Paid <unk> I <unk> and Don 't Look Down , respectively ) . Powell has gone on to write songs , including for Duffy , and from 2007 onwards has presented a Welsh language show on Radio Cymru . He also replaced drummer Stuart Cable from the Stereophonics , following his death , in the supergroup The Stand . They released a charity single in 2010 to fund construction of a statue of Welsh footballer Fred Keenor in Cardiff city centre . 
 = = Side projects and collaborations = = 
 While working on International Velvet , Matthews was approached by Tommy Scott of the Liverpool @-@ based band Space to perform on the single duet " The Ballad of Tom Jones " . They had met while on tour two years prior and had kept in touch . She joined them on tour for several dates to sing the duet live . Matthews said of the song , " It 's great . I feel like Nancy Sinatra because it 's a superb ballad . " She went on to duet with Tom Jones on a single for his album Reload . It was a cover of the song " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " , which was released as a Christmas single in 1999 . She was credited as " Cerys from Catatonia " . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Matthews said that they did not have any particular influences in their music . However , she said that her family had always been singing along to BBC Radio 2 . She held the ambition to have the band appear on Radio 2 , as due to poor levels of radio reception in Wales they had been unable to listen to other stations . She attributed the style of Welsh music as never attempting to be cool as they wouldn 't have been aware of what was in fashion at the time . Catatonia frequently used metaphors in their songwriting , such as " Road Rage " which references emotional anger . The line " If it turns to blue , what are we going to do ? " in the single " You 've Got A Lot To Answer For " from Way Beyond Blue references a pregnancy test . Other works from International Velvet were compared to poetry by Katharine Viner in The Guardian . 
 All members of the band were involved in the writing of songs , and there may have been more than one person 's set of lyrics appearing in a single release . Powell said that " It 's quite interesting to have two people 's viewpoints within the same song . I 'm not sure how many bands actually do that . In most bands , the guitarist writes the music and the singer writes the lyrics . We tend to share things out more evenly . " He also criticised the attachment of an indie pop label to the band , saying " We 're seen as one of the indie bands . But we 've always just tried to make pop music . Even if it is pop music with a hard edge and quite a twisted little view of life . We 've always seen ourselves as a little bigger than an indie band . " 
 The style of music played by Catatonia changed slightly over time . Adrian Thrills of the Daily Mail said that Way Beyond Blue was " guitar dominated " and showed them to be a " talented @-@ but @-@ typical alternative rock outfit " . But the songs on International Velvet showed that they had become " one of Britain 's most inventive pop bands " . An article in The People newspaper described International Velvet as the " purest pop " . By the time that Paper Scissors Stone was released , the band were using country music influences in some of their songs according to Fiona Shepherd at The Scotsman . She compared the music to that of the Scottish band Mogwai , while elements of " Nightfall " were compared to Arab Strap . Thrills compared some of the elements of the album to those of Roxy Music . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Compilation albums = = = 
 = = = Singles and EPs = = = 
 = = = Promotional releases = = = 
 " Christmas ' 95 " ( fan club vinyl record ) – 1995 
 " Tourist " ( Japan EP ) – 1996 
 " A 's & B 's of Catatonia " ( Promo EP ) – 1998 
 = Plutonium = 
 Plutonium is a transuranic radioactive chemical element with symbol Pu and atomic number 94 . It is an actinide metal of silvery @-@ gray appearance that tarnishes when exposed to air , and forms a dull coating when oxidized . The element normally exhibits six allotropes and four oxidation states . It reacts with carbon , halogens , nitrogen , silicon and hydrogen . When exposed to moist air , it forms oxides and hydrides that can expand the sample up to 70 % in volume , which in turn flake off as a powder that is pyrophoric . It is radioactive and can accumulate in bones , which makes the handling of plutonium dangerous . 
 Plutonium was first produced and isolated on December 14 , 1940 by Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg , Joseph W. Kennedy , Edwin M. McMillan , and Arthur C. Wahl by deuteron bombardment of uranium @-@ 238 in the 60 @-@ inch cyclotron at the University of California , Berkeley . They first synthesized neptunium @-@ 238 ( half @-@ life 2 @.@ 1 days ) which subsequently beta @-@ decayed to form a new heavier element with atomic number 94 and atomic weight 238 ( half @-@ life 87 @.@ 7 years ) . It was fitting that element 94 be named after the next planetoid , Pluto following the precedents that uranium was named after the planet Uranus and neptunium after the planet Neptune . Wartime secrecy prevented them from announcing the discovery until 1948 . Plutonium is the heaviest primordial element by virtue of its most stable isotope , plutonium @-@ 244 , whose half @-@ life of about 80 million years is just long enough for the element to be found in trace quantities in nature . Plutonium is much more common on Earth since 1945 as a product of neutron capture and beta decay , where some of the neutrons released by the fission process convert uranium @-@ 238 nuclei into plutonium @-@ 239 . 
 Both plutonium @-@ 239 and plutonium @-@ 241 are fissile , meaning that they can sustain a nuclear chain reaction , leading to applications in nuclear weapons and nuclear reactors . Plutonium @-@ 240 exhibits a high rate of spontaneous fission , raising the neutron flux of any sample containing it . The presence of plutonium @-@ 240 limits a plutonium sample 's usability for weapons or its quality as reactor fuel , and the percentage of plutonium @-@ 240 determines its grade ( weapons @-@ grade , fuel @-@ grade , or reactor @-@ grade ) . Plutonium @-@ 238 has a half @-@ life of 88 years and emits alpha particles . It is a heat source in radioisotope thermoelectric generators , which are used to power some spacecraft . Plutonium isotopes are expensive and inconvenient to separate , so particular isotopes are usually manufactured in specialized reactors . 
 Producing plutonium in useful quantities for the first time was a major part of the Manhattan Project during World War II that developed the first atomic bombs . The Fat Man bombs used in the Trinity nuclear test in July 1945 , and in the bombing of Nagasaki in August 1945 , had plutonium cores . Human radiation experiments studying plutonium were conducted without informed consent , and several criticality accidents , some lethal , occurred after the war . Disposal of plutonium waste from nuclear power plants and dismantled nuclear weapons built during the Cold War is a nuclear @-@ proliferation and environmental concern . Other sources of plutonium in the environment are fallout from numerous above @-@ ground nuclear tests , now banned . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical properties = = = 
 Plutonium , like most metals , has a bright silvery appearance at first , much like nickel , but it oxidizes very quickly to a dull gray , although yellow and olive green are also reported . At room temperature plutonium is in its α ( alpha ) form . This , the most common structural form of the element ( allotrope ) , is about as hard and brittle as gray cast iron unless it is alloyed with other metals to make it soft and ductile . Unlike most metals , it is not a good conductor of heat or electricity . It has a low melting point ( 640 ° C ) and an unusually high boiling point ( 3 @,@ 228 ° C ) . 
 Alpha decay , the release of a high @-@ energy helium nucleus , is the most common form of radioactive decay for plutonium . A 5 kg mass of 239Pu contains about 12 @.@ 5 × 1024 atoms . With a half @-@ life of 24 @,@ 100 years , about 11 @.@ 5 × 1012 of its atoms decay each second by emitting a 5 @.@ 157 MeV alpha particle . This amounts to 9 @.@ 68 watts of power . Heat produced by the deceleration of these alpha particles makes it warm to the touch . 
 Resistivity is a measure of how strongly a material opposes the flow of electric current . The resistivity of plutonium at room temperature is very high for a metal , and it gets even higher with lower temperatures , which is unusual for metals . This trend continues down to 100 K , below which resistivity rapidly decreases for fresh samples . Resistivity then begins to increase with time at around 20 K due to radiation damage , with the rate dictated by the isotopic composition of the sample . 
 Because of self @-@ irradiation , a sample of plutonium fatigues throughout its crystal structure , meaning the ordered arrangement of its atoms becomes disrupted by radiation with time . Self @-@ irradiation can also lead to annealing which counteracts some of the fatigue effects as temperature increases above 100 K. 
