 = = = College baseball = = = 
 The first collegiate baseball game at PNC Park was played on May 6 , 2003 , between the Pitt Panthers and the Duquesne Dukes , a rivalry that was referred to as the City Game . Duquesne won 2 – 1 . However , due to Duquesne 's decision to disband their baseball program following the 2010 season , the series between the two schools came to an end . The PNC Park City Game series ended in Pitt 's favor , four games to two , with the 2007 game canceled because of poor field conditions . 
 = = = Concerts = = = 
 PNC Park has also hosted various concerts , including Bruce Springsteen & The E Street Band on August 6 , 2003 , The Rolling Stones and Pearl Jam on September 28 , 2005 , Jimmy Buffett on June 26 , 2005 and Me First and the Gimme Gimmes on August 24 , 2006 and Dave Matthews Band with opening act , Zac Brown Band , on July 10 , 2010 . Jason Aldean 's Burn It Down Tour With Miranda Lambert , Florida Georgia Line & Tyler Farr as openers on July 26 , 2014 . 
 = = = Other events = = = 
 PNC Park has hosted various evacuation and response drills , which would be used in the event of a terrorist attack . Members of the United States Department of Homeland Security laid out the groundwork for the initial drill in February 2004 . In May 2005 , 5 @,@ 000 volunteers participated in the $ 1 million evacuation drill , which included mock explosions . A goal of the drill was to test the response of 49 western Pennsylvania emergency agencies . In April 2006 , the Department of Homeland Security worked in conjunction with the United States Coast Guard to develop a plan of response for the 2006 All @-@ Star Game . Similar exercises were conducted on the Allegheny River in 2007 . The park also served as one of the locations for the 2010 film She 's Out of My League and the 2011 film Abduction . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Playing surface and dimensions = = = 
 The playing surface of PNC Park is Tuckahoe Bluegrass , which is a mixture of various types of Kentucky Bluegrass . Installed prior to the 2009 season , the grass surface was selected for its " high quality pedigree that is ideal for Northern cities such as Pittsburgh " . The infield dirt is a mixture known as " Dura Edge All @-@ Star Infield Mix " and was designed solely for PNC Park . The 18 @-@ foot warning track is crushed lava rock . The drainage system underneath the field is capable of handling 14 inches ( 36 cm ) of rain per hour . The original playing surface consisted of sand @-@ based natural grass , and was replaced prior to the 2006 season . Unlike most ballparks , PNC Park 's home dugout is located along the third base line instead of the first base line ; giving the home team a view of the city skyline . The outfield fence ranges from a height of 6 feet ( 2 m ) in left field to 10 feet ( 3 m ) in center field and 21 feet ( 6 m ) in right field , a tribute to former Pirate right fielder Roberto Clemente , who wore number 21 . The distance from home plate to the outfield fence ranges from 320 feet ( 98 m ) in right field to 410 feet ( 125 m ) in left center ; the straightaway center field fence is set at 399 feet ( 122 m ) . At its closest point , the Allegheny River is 443 feet ( 135 m ) and 4 inches ( 10 cm ) from home plate . On July 6 , 2002 , Daryle Ward became the first player to hit the river " on the fly " . On June 2 , 2013 , Garrett Jones became only the second player to accomplish the feat , and was the first Pirate to do so . On May 19 , 2015 , Pirates first baseman Pedro Alvarez became the third person to do this , although the ball actually landed in a boat on the river rather than in the water . The longest home run in PNC Park history was 484 feet hit to left @-@ center field by Sammy Sosa on April 12 , 2002 . 
 = = = Seating and ticket prices = = = 
 During its opening season , PNC Park 's seating capacity of 38 @,@ 496 was the second @-@ smallest of any major league stadium — the smallest being Fenway Park . Seats are angled toward the field and aisles are lowered to give spectators improved views of the field . The majority of the seats , 26 @,@ 000 , are on the first level , and the highest seat in the stadium is 88 feet ( 27 m ) above the playing surface . At 51 feet ( 16 m ) , the batter is closer to the seats behind home plate than to the pitcher . At their closest point , seating along the baselines is 45 feet ( 14 m ) from the bases . The four @-@ level steel rotunda and a section above the out @-@ of @-@ town scoreboard offer standing @-@ room only space . With the exception of the bleacher sections , all seats in the park offer a view of Pittsburgh 's skyline . 
 In its opening season , PNC Park 's tickets were priced between $ 9 and $ 35 for general admission . For the 2014 season , prices range from $ 20 to $ 62 , depending on the location and game . The stadium includes 69 luxury suites and 5 @,@ 558 suite and club seats , with prices ranging from $ 55 to $ 250 per ticket throughout the 2014 season . One of only two teams not to increase ticket prices entering the 2009 season , PNC Park ranked as having the third @-@ cheapest average ticket prices in the league . The stadium 's average ticket price for 2013 was $ 17 @.@ 21 , again third from the bottom of MLB . Attendance throughout the 2013 season averaged 28 @,@ 210 spectators per game , 19th in the 30 @-@ team league . In previous years , attendance had been lower ; in the stadium 's first decade , average attendance dipped under 20 @,@ 000 fans per game four times . The low attendance has come as a result of the Pirates ' play ; as of 2013 , the Pirates have only had one winning record since 1992 . Through 2004 , 5 % of games played at PNC Park were sold out . The number of sellouts increased in 2012 and 2013 ; after filling PNC Park 17 times in 2012 , the team played to capacity crowds at 23 games in 2013 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 As with its predecessor , PNC Park 's concessions service provider is Aramark , while the premium seating areas ( The Lexus Club , PBC Level and Suites Level ) are serviced by Levy Restaurants . The main eating concourse , known as " Tastes of Pittsburgh " , features a wide range of options including traditional ballpark foods , hometown specialties , and more exotic fare like sushi . Pittsburgh 's hometown specialties include <unk> Brothers sandwiches , whose signature item consists of meat , cheese , hand @-@ cut French fries , tomatoes , and coleslaw between two slices of Italian bread . Other local eateries offered include Mrs. T 's <unk> , Quaker Steak & Lube , Augustine 's Pizza , and <unk> Seafood . Located behind center field seating is Manny 's BBQ , which offers various barbecue meals . It is named for former Pirates ' catcher Manny <unk> , who has been known to sign autographs for fans waiting in line . For the 2008 season , the Pirates created an all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat section in the right field corner . Fans seated in the section are allowed " unlimited <unk> , hamburgers , nachos , salads , popcorn , peanuts , ice cream and pop " for an entire game . In addition to the food offered , fans are free to bring their own food into the stadium , a rarity among the league 's ballparks . 
 For its first 13 years , PNC Park sold Pepsi products , a stark contrast from its predecessor Three Rivers Stadium , which sold Coca @-@ Cola products , as well as Heinz Field and Mellon Arena . This was shown in right field , where several versions of the Pepsi Globe as well as a Pepsi bottle were shown on posts behind the stands and lit up every time the Pirates hit a home run . In 2014 , the Pirates switched to Coca @-@ Cola . With Heinz Field having switched to Pepsi in 2012 and Consol Energy Center ( which opened in 2010 to replace the Mellon Arena ) having a contract with Dr Pepper Snapple Group , this marked the first time since 2012 that all three of Pittsburgh 's major sporting venues sold different soft drinks . There were initially conflicting reports as to whether or not Coke would replace the Pepsi signage in right field after it is taken down . The posts were converted into advertising by locally based health insurance company Highmark . 
 = = Transportation access = = 
 PNC Park is located at exit 1B of Interstate 279 and within 1 mile of both Interstate 376 and Interstate 579 . The park is also served by the North Side transit station of the Pittsburgh subway system . 
 = = Fictional portrayals = = 
 PNC Park has been featured in the following big budget films and TV series : 
 Smith ( 2006 ) 
 Chasing 3000 ( 2008 ) 
 Abduction ( 2011 ) 
 Jack Reacher ( 2012 ) 
 = Barrett ( album ) = 
 Barrett is the second and final studio album of new material released by former Pink Floyd frontman Syd Barrett . Recording began at Abbey Road Studios on 26 February 1970 , and lasted for 15 sessions until 21 July . The album was produced by Pink Floyd 's guitarist David Gilmour and keyboardist Richard Wright , who also contributed on bass guitar and keyboards respectively , along with previous Madcap contributor Jerry Shirley on drums . 
 Barrett was released in November 1970 on Harvest in the United Kingdom and Capitol in the United States , but failed to chart in both markets ; it was re @-@ released in 1974 as part of Syd Barrett . No singles were issued from the album . It was remastered and reissued in 1993 , along with Barrett 's other albums − The Madcap Laughs ( 1970 ) and Opel ( 1988 ) − independently and as part of the Crazy Diamond box set . A newly remastered version was released in 2010 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Initial sales and reaction of Barrett 's first solo album , The Madcap Laughs , were deemed sufficient by EMI to sanction a second solo album . On 24 February 1970 , a month after releasing Madcap , Barrett appeared on John Peel 's Top Gear radio show , where he performed only one song from the newly released album ( " Terrapin " ) , three that would later be recorded for Barrett ( " Gigolo Aunt " , " Baby Lemonade " and " Effervescing Elephant " ) and a one @-@ off ( " Two of a Kind " , possibly written by Richard Wright ) . The session producers had no verbal contact with Barrett , having only communication to him via Gilmour . For the radio session , Gilmour and Humble Pie drummer Jerry Shirley accompanied Barrett on bass and bongos , respectively . The version of " Gigolo Aunt " recorded for the radio session ( and later released on 1988 's The Peel Session ) was unfinished , as Barrett had sung the opening verse three times . Barrett played slide guitar on the radio version of " Baby Lemonade " , with Gilmour on organ . 
 Two days later , he began working on his second album in Abbey Road Studios , with Gilmour as producer , and a trio of musicians : Richard Wright , Shirley and Gilmour himself . The main aim for the Barrett sessions was to give Barrett the structure and focus many felt was missing during the long and unwieldy sessions for The Madcap Laughs . Thus , the sessions were more efficiently run and the album was finished in considerably less time than The Madcap Laughs ( six months , compared to Madcap 's one year ) . On 6 June 1970 , Barrett gave his one and only official solo performance , at the Olympia in Kensington , backed once more by Gilmour and Shirley . At the end of " Octopus " , the fourth number of the set , Barrett baffled the audience and his backing musicians by abruptly taking off his guitar and walking off stage . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The first session was on 26 February , three of the first songs — fully recorded — attempted during the session were " Baby Lemonade " , " Maisie " and " Gigolo Aunt " . However , Gilmour thought they were losing the " Barrett @-@ ness " . After " Baby Lemonade " was attempted , 2 takes of " Maisie " were recorded before Barrett went into 15 takes of " Gigolo Aunt " . The next day , two @-@ track demos of " Wolfpack " , " Waving My Arms in the Air " , " Living Alone " and " Bob Dylan Blues " , were recorded . The former two made it to the album ; the latter two didn 't . On the recording sheet , it lists Gilmour as having taken home a copy of the latter two , Gilmour later returned and took the master tapes too . Gilmour has since said " Those sessions were done so quickly . We were rushing to gigs every day and had to fit recording sessions in between . I probably took it away to have a listen and simply forgot to take it back . It wasn 't intended to be a final mix . Syd knocked it off , I took a tape home . " Despite some minor work made to " Gigolo Aunt " , Barrett wouldn 't return to Abbey Road Studios until 1 April , due to Pink Floyd working on their 1970 album , Atom Heart Mother . On various occasions , Barrett would " spy " on the band as they recorded the album . Again , Barrett recorded some work to a song , " Wolfpack , " on the 3rd , before the sessions were postponed until 5 June , this time due to Gilmour and Wright going on tour in the US with Pink Floyd . 
 On the session of 5 June , Barrett managed to record an unknown number of two @-@ track demos for three songs : " Rats " , " Wined and Dined " , and " Birdie Hop " . The " Rats " demo recorded here , became the basis for the album master , and would later be overdubbed by musicians , despite the changing tempos . Two days later , on the 7th , Barrett recorded " Milky Way " , " Millionaire " , before being rounded off with overdubs for " Rats " . " Millionaire " was originally titled " She Was a Millionaire " , and was originally recorded by Pink Floyd . Barrett recorded two attempts at a backing track before abandoning it , and adding vocals . Yet another break in recording occurred , until 14 July , where Barrett recorded several takes of " Effervescing Elephant " , while numerous overdubs were added to Barrett 's " Wined and Dined " demo by Gilmour . Three takes of " Dominoes " ensued , with an unknown number of takes of " Love Song " , " Dolly Rocker " and " Let 's Split " were recorded . " Love Song " and " Dolly Rocker " were both overdubbed , the former being overdubbed from 17 to 21 July , but overdubs for the latter were wiped . On 21 July , Barrett worked on another Untitled track ( later to be titled as " Word Song " ) , recording only one take , before recording 5 takes of the last new song to be recorded for Barrett : " It Is Obvious " . Barrett worked on remakes of two tracks : " Maisie " , and " Waving My Arms in the Air " ( the latter now <unk> into a new track , " I Never Lied to You " ) . 
 We really had basically three alternatives at that point , working with Syd . One , we could actually work with him in the studio , playing along as he put down his tracks – which was almost impossible , though we succeeded on ' Gigolo Aunt ' . The second was laying down some kind of track before and then having him play over it . The third was him putting his basic ideas down with just guitar and vocals and then we 'd try and make something out of it . 
 Shirley said of Barrett 's playing : " He would never play the same tune twice . Sometimes Syd couldn 't play anything that made sense ; other times what he 'd play was absolute magic . " Barrett 's direction to the other musicians were limited to pronouncements like " Perhaps we could make the middle darker and maybe the end a bit middle <unk> . At the moment it 's too windy and icy " . 
 = = Songs = = 
 = = = Side one = = = 
 " Baby Lemonade " is a blues folk tune , reminiscent of the Byrds . The intro was actually Barrett simply warming @-@ up on guitar , that Gilmour had managed to record and placed it at the start of the album , making it seem like an intro to the song . The lyrics that describe the way for a person to kill time ( such as the line " In the clock they sent / Through a washing machine " ) . The solo was performed by Barrett , not Gilmour as is often noted . A recurring theme in the album , starting with " Baby Lemonade " , is the weather . Barrett performed the song twice , both times for the BBC ( previously recorded on 24 February 1970 , for John Peel 's Top Gear , and later for Bob Harris ' show on 16 February 1971 ) . 
 " Love Song " tells the story of an ex @-@ girlfriend fondly remembered ( " I knew a girl and I like her still " ) . It is the first of two songs which feature dreamlike @-@ senses in the lyrics ( " I 'll lay my head down and see what I see " ) . Barrett performed the song for Bob Harris ' show in 1971 . 
 " Dominoes " features imagery of regret and recollection in the lyrics . The song features a backwards guitar solo by Barrett , and organ and Rhodes by Wright . The song 's " You and I " lyric hints to the Turtles ' " Happy Together " , which refers to the tail end relationship Barrett had with Lindsay . The first of three songs on the album which lyrics point to anguish ( " In my tears , my dreams " ) . Animals are also a recurring item in not only the album , but Barrett 's entire solo output , in " Dominoes " though , larks are mentioned ( " Overhead a lark today " ) . Barrett performed the song for Bob Harris ' show in 1971 . 
 " It Is Obvious " is the second of two songs which feature dreamlike @-@ senses in the lyrics ( " Creep into bed when your head 's on the ground " ) . It is also the second of three songs on the album which lyrics point to anguish ( " Remember those times I could call / Through the clear day time / And you would be there " ) . The theme of weather is referenced again ( " The softness , the warmth and the weather in suspense " ) . The song also references the Cambridge quarry pits , and the landscape . Animals are also a recurring item throughout the album , in " It Is Obvious " though , sparrows are mentioned . 
 " Rats " started off as a jam , but eventually evolved into a structured song . It contains taunting and maniacal lyrics ( " Rats rats lay down flat / We don 't need you we act like that " ) . Animals are also a recurring item throughout the album , in " Rats " though , rats and spiders are mentioned . 
 " Maisie " is a blues jam , with Barrett muttering the lyrics . The song was influenced by Howlin ' Wolf 's " Spoonful " . Animals are also a recurring item throughout the album ; in " Maisie " , bulls are mentioned ( " Bad luck , bride of a bull " ) . 
 = = = Side two = = = 
 " Gigolo Aunt " is based on Jeff Beck 's " Hi Ho Silver Lining " . Barrett performed the song for Top Gear in 1970 . For Barrett 's only solo performance , at the Kensington Olympia in 1970 , he played four songs , one of them being " Gigolo Aunt " . 
 " Waving My Arms in the Air " hints to the then @-@ recently released Rolling Stones song , " Midnight Rambler " . The song contains an echo of " Octopus " ( " Waving my arms in the air / Pressing my feet to the ground " ) . The lyrics refer to a hard @-@ learned experience . The song features a childlike section ( " No care / No no " ) . Animals are also a recurring item throughout the album , in " Waving My Arms in the Air " though , cats and dogs are mentioned . The song segues into " I Never Lied to You " with the aid of Wright 's organ . 
 " I Never Lied to You " is the final of three songs on the album which lyrics point to anguish ( " It 's been so hard to bear with you not there " ) . 
 " Wined and Dined " dated from Barrett 's Cambridge days , and is about the relationship between Barrett and his then @-@ girlfriend , Gayla Pinion , a model from Cambridge . The song reflects on about Mediterranean evenings ( " Musk winds blow " ) , and haunting 's of Barrett 's childhood ( " Chalk underfoot / Light ash of blue " ) . 
 " Wolfpack " had been mentioned by Barrett in an interview , he said the song was one of favourites , out of all his material . Animals are also a recurring item throughout the album , in " Wolfpack " though , wolves are mentioned . 
 " Effervescing Elephant " was pastiche of the verse form of Hilaire Belloc 's Cautionary Tales for Children . In contrast to " Dominoes " , " It Is Obvious " , " Rats " , " Waving My Arms in the Air " , and " Wolfpack " previously mentioning one or two animals , " Effervescing Elephant " contains references to a whole jungle full of animals . Barrett performed the song for Top Gear in 1970 . For Barrett 's only solo performance , at the Kensington Olympia in 1970 , he played four songs , one of them being " Effervescing Elephant " . 
 = = Release and aftermath = = 
 The cover of the album was designed by Barrett ; it was originally one of many drawings Barrett had done in Cambridge , years earlier . Barrett was released in November 1970 to less interest than had greeted The Madcap Laughs earlier in the year , and as a result , failed to reach the chart . Talks of more singles and a third album were rumoured over the following months . Barrett dismissed the album and Madcap , saying : " They 've got to reach a certain standard and that 's probably reached in Madcap once or twice and on the other one only a little – just an echo of that . Neither of them are much more than that . " Allmusic reviewer Ritchie Unterberger called the album " a bit fuller and smoother than the first album " , referring to " Baby Lemonade " , " Gigolo Aunt " , and " Effervescing Elephant " as " among his <unk> and best @-@ loved tunes " ; however , " the tone is darker and more meandering " in the rest of the album . In an overview of Barrett 's career , Rolling Stone referred to both Barrett 's solo albums as " entrancing " . 
 On 16 February 1971 , Barrett recorded a short set for BBC Radio 1 's Sound of the Seventies radio show ; in contrast to 1970s radio appearance where Barrett performed new material , this time he played songs from Barrett : " Baby Lemonade " , " Dominoes " and " Love Song " . Bored and directionless , Barrett headed back to his hometown of Cambridge and – but for a brief dalliance with a band called Stars in 1972 , and some abortive recording sessions in 1974 — left his music career behind for good . 
 Doing Syd 's record was interesting , but extremely difficult . Dave [ Gilmour ] and Roger [ Waters ] did the first one ( The Madcap Laughs ) and Dave and myself did the second one . But by then it was just trying to help Syd any way we could , rather than worrying about getting the best guitar sound . You could forget about that ! It was just going into the studio and trying to get him to sing . 
 The album was reissued in late 1974 with his first solo album The Madcap Laughs as record two of the two @-@ record set Syd Barrett in Harvest 's series of Harvest Heritage reissues . In 1993 , Barrett ( along with The Madcap Laughs and Opel ) was reissued both independently and as part of the Crazy Diamond Barrett box set , on 26 April 1993 . " Bob Dylan Blues " would later turn up on 2001 's The Best of Syd Barrett : Wouldn 't You Miss Me ? . A newly remastered version was released in 2010 . For release on An Introduction to Syd Barrett in 2010 , Gilmour laid down a new bass track to four songs , only one from Barrett : " Dominoes " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Syd Barrett . All track info taken from album booklet . 
 = = = Original release = = = 
 = = = 1993 reissue = = = 
 This reissue splits " Waving My Arms in the Air " and " I Never Lied to You " into tracks 8 and 9 respectively . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Syd Barrett – guitars , lead and backing vocals 
 David Gilmour – production , bass guitar , organ ( second organ on " It Is Obvious " and " Gigolo Aunt " , " Wined and Dined " ) , drums ( " Dominoes " ) , 12 @-@ string guitar 
 Richard Wright – piano , harmonium , Hammond organ 
 Vic <unk> – tuba 
 Jerry Shirley – drums and percussion 
 John " Willie " Wilson – drums , percussion 
 Peter Bown – engineering 
 Gareth Cousins – mixed Crazy Diamond bonus tracks 
 = James B. Weaver = 
 James Baird Weaver ( June 12 , 1833 – February 6 , 1912 ) was a member of the United States House of Representatives and two @-@ time candidate for President of the United States . Born in Ohio , he moved to Iowa as a boy when his family claimed a homestead on the frontier . He became politically active as a young man and was an advocate for farmers and laborers . He joined and quit several political parties in the furtherance of the progressive causes in which he believed . After serving in the Union Army in the American Civil War , Weaver returned to Iowa and worked for the election of Republican candidates . After several unsuccessful attempts at Republican nominations to various offices , and growing dissatisfied with the conservative wing of the party , in 1877 Weaver switched to the Greenback Party , which supported increasing the money supply and regulating big business . As a Greenbacker with Democratic support , Weaver won election to the House in 1878 . 
 The Greenbackers nominated Weaver for president in 1880 , but he received only 3 @.@ 3 percent of the popular vote . After several more attempts at elected office , he was again elected to the House in 1884 and 1886 . In Congress , he worked for expansion of the money supply and for the opening of Indian Territory to white settlement . As the Greenback Party fell apart , a new left @-@ wing third party , the Populists , arose . Weaver helped to organize the party and was their nominee for president in 1892 . This time he was more successful and gained 8 @.@ 5 percent of the popular vote and won five states , but still fell far short of victory . The Populists merged with the Democrats by the end of the 19th century , and Weaver went with them , promoting the candidacy of William Jennings Bryan for president in 1896 , 1900 , and 1908 . After serving as mayor of his home town , Colfax , Iowa , Weaver retired from his pursuit of elective office . He died in Iowa in 1912 . Most of Weaver 's political goals remained unfulfilled at his death , but many came to pass in the following decades . 
 = = Early years = = 
 James Baird Weaver was born in Dayton , Ohio , on June 12 , 1833 , the fifth of thirteen children of Abram Weaver and Susan Imlay Weaver . Weaver 's father was a farmer , also born in Ohio , and a descendant of Revolutionary War veterans . He married Weaver 's mother , who was from New Jersey , in 1824 . Shortly after Weaver 's birth , in 1835 , the family moved to a farm nine miles north of Cassopolis , Michigan . In 1842 , the family moved again to the Iowa Territory to await the opening of former Sac and Fox land to white settlement the following year . They claimed a homestead along the <unk> Creek in Davis County . Abram Weaver built a house and farmed his new land until 1848 , when the family moved to Bloomfield , the county seat . 
 Abram Weaver , a Democrat involved in local politics , was elected clerk of the district court in 1848 ; he often vied for election to other offices , usually unsuccessfully . Weaver 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Hosea Horn , a Whig , was appointed postmaster the following year , and through him James Weaver secured his first job , delivering mail to neighboring Jefferson County . In 1851 , Weaver quit the mail route to read law with Samuel G. <unk> , a local lawyer . Two years later , Weaver interrupted his legal career to accompany another brother @-@ in @-@ law , Dr. Calvin Phelps , on a cattle drive overland from Bloomfield to Sacramento , California . Weaver initially intended to stay and prospect for gold , but instead booked passage on a ship for Panama . He crossed the isthmus , boarded another ship to New York , and returned home to Iowa . 
 Upon his return , Weaver worked briefly as a store clerk before resuming the study of law . He enrolled at the Cincinnati Law School in 1855 , where he studied under Bellamy Storer . While in Cincinnati , Weaver began to question his support for the institution of slavery , a change biographers attribute to Storer 's influence . After graduating in 1856 , Weaver returned to Bloomfield and was admitted to the Iowa bar . By 1857 , he broke with the Democratic party of his father to join the growing coalition that opposed the expansion of slavery , which became the Republican Party . 
 Weaver traveled around southern Iowa in 1858 , giving speeches on behalf of his new party 's candidates . That summer , he married <unk> ( Clara ) Vinson , a schoolteacher from nearby Keosauqua , Iowa , whom he had courted since he returned from Cincinnati . The marriage lasted until Weaver 's death in 1912 and the couple had eight children . After the wedding , Weaver started a law firm with Hosea Horn and continued his involvement in Republican politics . He gave several speeches on behalf of Samuel J. Kirkwood for governor in 1859 in a campaign that focused heavily on the slavery debate ; although the Republicans lost Weaver 's Davis County , Kirkwood narrowly won the election . The next year , Weaver served as a delegate to the state convention and , although not a national delegate , traveled with the Iowa delegation to the 1860 Republican National Convention , where Abraham Lincoln was nominated . Lincoln carried Iowa and won the election , but Southern states responded to the Republican victory by seceding from the Union . By April 1861 , the American Civil War had begun . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 After the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter , Lincoln called for 75 @,@ 000 men to join the Union Army . Weaver enlisted in what became Company G of the 2nd Iowa Volunteer Infantry Regiment , and was elected the company 's first lieutenant . The 2nd Iowa , commanded by Colonel Samuel Ryan Curtis , a former Congressman , was ordered to Missouri in June 1861 to secure railroad lines in that border state . Weaver 's unit spent that summer in northern Missouri and did not see action . In the meantime , Clara gave birth to the couple 's second child and first son , named James Bellamy Weaver after his father and Bellamy Storer . 
 Weaver 's first chance at action came in February 1862 , when the 2nd Iowa joined Brigadier General Ulysses S. Grant 's army outside the Confederate Fort Donelson in Tennessee . Weaver 's company was in the thick of the fight , which he described as a " holocaust to the demon of battles " , and he took a minor wound in the arm . The rebels surrendered the next day , the most important Union victory of the war to date . The 2nd Iowa next joined other units in the area at Pittsburg Landing , Tennessee , to mass for a major assault deeper into the South . Confederate forces met them there , in the Battle of Shiloh . Weaver 's regiment was in the center of the Union lines , in the area later known as the " hornets ' nest " , and were forced to retreat amid fierce fighting . The next day , the Union forces turned the tide and forced the rebels off the field in what Weaver called a " perfect rout " . The carnage at Shiloh — 20 @,@ 000 killed and wounded — was on a scale never before seen in American warfare , and both sides learned that the war would end neither quickly nor easily . 
 After Shiloh , Weaver and the 2nd Iowa slowly advanced to Corinth , Mississippi , where he was promoted to major . Rebel forces attacked the Union armies there in the Second Battle of Corinth , where Weaver 's courage in that Union victory convinced his superiors to promote him to colonel after the regiment 's commanding officer was killed . After Corinth , Weaver 's unit took up garrison duty in northern Mississippi . In the summer of 1863 , they were redeployed to the Tennessee – Alabama border , again on occupation duty around Pulaski , Tennessee . They rejoined the action at the Battle of Resaca , a part of the Atlanta Campaign , then continued with Major General William Tecumseh Sherman 's march through Georgia to the sea in 1864 . Weaver 's enlistment ended in May 1864 , and he returned to his family in Iowa . After the war ended , Weaver received a promotion to brevet brigadier general , backdated to March 13 , 1865 . 
 = = Republican politics = = 
 Soon after returning from the war , Weaver became editor of a pro @-@ Republican Bloomfield newspaper , the Weekly Union Guard . At the 1865 Iowa Republican State Convention , he placed second for the nomination for lieutenant governor . The following year , Weaver was elected district attorney for the second judicial district , covering six counties in southern Iowa . In 1867 , President Andrew Johnson appointed him assessor of internal revenue in the first Congressional district , which extended across southeastern Iowa . The job came with a $ 1500 salary , plus a percentage of taxes collected over $ 100 @,@ 000 . Weaver held that lucrative position until 1872 , when Congress abolished it . He also became involved in the Methodist Episcopal Church , serving as a delegate to a church convention in Baltimore in 1876 . Membership in the Methodist church coincided with Weaver 's interest in the growing movement for prohibition of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages . His income and prestige grew along with his family , which included seven children by 1877 . Weaver 's success allowed him to build a large new home for his family , which still stands . 
 Weaver 's work for the party led many to support his nomination to represent Iowa 's 6th congressional district in the federal House of Representatives in 1874 . Many party insiders , however , were wary of Weaver 's association with the Prohibition movement and preferred to remain uncommitted on the divisive issue . At the convention , Weaver led on the first ballot , but ultimately lost the nomination by one vote to Ezekiel S. Sampson , a local judge . Weaver 's allies attributed his loss to " the meanest kind of wire pulling " , but Weaver shrugged off the defeat and aimed instead at the gubernatorial nomination in 1875 . He launched a vigorous effort , courted delegates around the state , and explicitly endorsed Prohibition and greater state control of railroad rates . Weaver attracted many delegates ' support , but alienated those who were friendly to the railroads and wished to avoid the liquor issue . Opposition was scattered among several lesser @-@ known candidates , mostly members of Senator William B. Allison 's conservative wing of the party . They united at the convention when a delegate unexpectedly nominated former governor Kirkwood . The nomination carried easily and , after Allison 's associates persuaded him to accept it , Kirkwood was nominated , and went on to win the election . In a further defeat , the delegates refused to endorse Prohibition in the party platform . Weaver had small consolation in a nomination to the state Senate , but he lost to his Democratic opponent in the election that fall . 
 = = Switch to the Greenback Party = = 
 After his defeats in 1875 , Weaver grew disenchanted with the Republican party , not only because it had spurned him , but also because of the policy choices of the dominant Allison faction . In May 1876 , he traveled to Indianapolis to attend the national convention of the newly formed Greenback Party . The new party had arisen , mostly in the West , as a response to the economic depression that followed the Panic of 1873 . During the Civil War , Congress had authorized " greenbacks " , a new form of fiat money that was redeemable not in gold but in government bonds . The greenbacks had helped to finance the war when the government 's gold supply did not keep pace with the expanding costs of maintaining the armies . When the crisis had passed , many in both parties , especially in the East , wanted to place the nation 's currency on a gold standard as soon as possible . The Specie Payment Resumption Act , passed in 1875 , ordered that greenbacks be gradually withdrawn and replaced with gold @-@ backed currency beginning in 1879 . At the same time , the depression had made it more expensive for debtors to pay debts they had contracted when currency was less valuable . Beyond their support for a larger money supply , Greenbackers also favored an eight @-@ hour work day , safety regulations in factories , and an end to child labor . As historian Herbert Clancy put it , they " anticipated by almost fifty years the progressive legislation of the first quarter of the twentieth century " . 
 In the 1876 presidential campaign , the Republicans nominated Rutherford B. Hayes and the Democrats chose Samuel J. Tilden . Both candidates opposed the issuance of more greenbacks ( candidates who favored the gold @-@ backed currency were called " hard money " supporters , while the Greenbackers ' policy of encouraging inflation was known as " soft money " . ) Weaver was impressed with the Greenbackers and their candidate , Peter Cooper , but while he advocated some soft @-@ money policies , he declined the Greenback nomination for Congress and remained a Republican ; he campaigned for Hayes in the election that year . In 1877 , Weaver attended the Republican state convention and saw the state party adopt a soft @-@ money platform that also favored Prohibition . The gubernatorial nominee , however , was John H. Gear , an opponent of Prohibition who had worked to defeat Weaver in his quest for the governorship two years earlier . After initially supporting Gear , Weaver joined the Greenback party in August . He gave speeches on behalf of his new party , debated former allies across the state , and establishing himself as a prominent advocate for the Greenback cause . 
 = = Congress = = 
 In May 1878 , Weaver accepted the Greenback nomination for the House of Representatives in the 6th district . Although Weaver 's political career up to then had been as a staunch Republican , Democrats in the 6th district thought that endorsing him was likely the only way to defeat Sampson , the incumbent Republican . Since the start of the Civil War , Democrats had been in the minority across Iowa ; electoral fusion with Greenbackers represented their best chance to get their candidates into office . Hard @-@ money Democrats objected to the idea , but some were reassured when Henry H. Trimble , a prominent Bloomfield Democrat , assured them that if elected Weaver would align with House Democrats on all issues other than the money question . Democrats declined to endorse any candidate at the 6th district convention , but soft @-@ money leaders in the party circulated their own slate of candidates that included Democrats and Greenbackers . The Greenback – Democrat ticket prevailed , and Weaver was elected with 16 @,@ 366 votes to Sampson 's 14 @,@ 307 . 
 Weaver entered the 46th Congress in March 1879 , one of thirteen Greenbackers elected in 1878 . Although the House was closely divided , neither major party included the Greenbackers in their caucus , leaving them few committee assignments and little input on legislation . Weaver gave his first speech in April 1879 , criticizing the use of the army to police Southern polling stations , while also decrying the violence against black Southerners that made such protection necessary ; he then described the Greenback platform , which he said would put an end to the sectional and economic strife . The next month , he spoke in favor of a bill calling for an increase in the money supply by allowing the unlimited coinage of silver , but the bill was easily defeated . Weaver 's oratorical skill drew praise , but he had no luck in advancing Greenback policy ideas . 
 In 1880 , Weaver prepared a resolution stating that the government , not banks , should issue currency and determine its volume , and that the federal debt should be repaid in whatever currency the government chose , not just gold as the law then required . The proposed resolution would never be allowed to emerge from committees dominated by Democrats and Republicans , so Weaver planned to introduce it directly to the whole House for debate , as members were permitted to do every Monday . Rather than debate a proposition that would expose the monetary divide in the Democratic Party , Speaker Samuel J. Randall refused to recognize Weaver when he rose to propose the resolution . Weaver returned to the floor each succeeding Monday , with the same result , and the press took notice of Randall 's obstruction . Eventually , Republican James A. Garfield of Ohio interceded with Randall to recognize Weaver , which he reluctantly did on April 5 , 1880 . The Republicans , mostly united behind hard money , largely voted against the measure , while many Democrats joined the Greenbackers voting in favor . Despite support by the soft @-@ money Democrats , the resolution was defeated 84 – 117 with many members abstaining . Although he lost the vote , Weaver had promoted the monetary issue in the national consciousness . 
 = = Presidential election of 1880 = = 
 By 1879 , the Greenback coalition had divided , with the faction most prominent in the South and West , led by Marcus M. " Brick " Pomeroy , splitting from the main party . Pomeroy 's faction , called the " Union Greenback Labor Party " , was more radical and emphasized its independence , and suggested that Eastern Greenbackers were likely to " sell out the party at any time to the Democrats " . Weaver remained with the rump Greenback party , often called the " National Greenback Party " , and the national reputation he had earned in Congress made him one of the party 's leading presidential hopefuls . 
 The Union Greenbackers held their convention first and nominated Stephen D. Dillaye of New Jersey for president and Barzillai J. Chambers of Texas for vice president , but also sent a delegation to the National Greenback convention in Chicago that June , with an eye toward reuniting the party . The two factions agreed to reunify , and also to admit a delegation from the Socialist Labor Party . Thus united , the convention turned to nominations . Weaver led on the first ballot , and on the second he secured a majority . Chambers won the convention 's vote for vice president . 
 In a departure from the political traditions of the day , Weaver himself campaigned , making speeches across the South in July and August . As the Greenbackers had the only ticket that included a Southerner , Weaver and Chambers hoped to make inroads in the South . As the campaign progressed , however , Weaver 's message of racial inclusion drew violent protests in the South , as the Greenbackers faced the same obstacles the Republicans did in the face of increasing black disenfranchisement . In the autumn , Weaver campaigned in the North , but the Greenbackers ' lack of support was compounded by Weaver 's refusal to run a fusion ticket in states where Democratic and Greenbacker strength might have combined to outvote the Republicans . 
 Weaver received 305 @,@ 997 votes and no electoral votes , compared to 4 @,@ 446 @,@ 158 for the winner , Republican James A. Garfield , and 4 @,@ 444 @,@ 260 for Democrat Winfield Scott Hancock . The party was strongest in the West and South , but in no state did Weaver receive more than 12 percent of the vote ( his best state was Texas , with 11 @.@ 7 percent ) ; his nationwide total was just 3 percent . That figure represented an improvement over the Greenback vote of 1876 , but to Weaver , who expected twice as many votes as he received , it was a disappointment . 
 = = Office @-@ seeker and party promoter = = 
 After the election , Weaver returned to the lame @-@ duck session of Congress and proposed an unsuccessful constitutional amendment that would have provided for the direct election of Senators . After his term expired in March , he resumed his speaking tour , promoting the Greenback Party across the nation . He and Edward H. Gillette , another Iowa Greenback Congressman , bought the Iowa Tribune in 1882 to help spread the Greenback message . That same year , Weaver ran for his old 6th district seat in the House against the incumbent Republican , <unk> E. Cutts . This time the Democrats and Greenbackers ran separate candidates , and Weaver finished a distant second . Cutts died before taking office , and the Republicans offered to let Weaver run unopposed in the special election if he rejoined their party ; he declined , and John C. Cook , a Democrat , won the seat . 
 In 1883 , Weaver was the Greenback nominee for governor of Iowa . Again , the Democrats ran a separate candidate and the incumbent Republican , Buren R. Sherman , was re @-@ elected with a plurality . Weaver was a delegate to the 1884 Greenback National Convention in Indianapolis and supported the eventual nominee , Benjamin Butler of Massachusetts . Back in Iowa , Weaver again ran for the House , this time with the Democrats ' support . Greenback fortunes declined nationally , as Butler received just over half as many votes for president as Weaver had four years earlier . Weaver 's House race bucked the trend : he defeated Republican Frank T. Campbell by just 67 votes . 
 = = Return to Congress = = 
 Unlike in his previous congressional term , when Weaver entered the 49th United States Congress , he was the only Greenback member . The new president , Democrat Grover Cleveland , was friendly to Weaver , and asked his advice on Iowa patronage . As it had been for years , Weaver 's chief concern was with the nation 's money and finance , and the relationship between labor and capital . 
 In 1885 , he proposed the creation of a Department of Labor , which he suggested would find a solution to disputes between labor and management . Labor tensions increased the following year as the Knights of Labor went on strike against Jay Gould 's rail empire , and a strike against the McCormick Harvesting Machine Company ended in the bloody Haymarket riot . Weaver believed the nation 's hard @-@ money policies were responsible for labor unrest , calling it " purely a question of money , and nothing else " and declaring , " If this Congress will not protect labor , it must protect itself " . He saw the triumph of one plank of the Greenback platform when Congress established the Interstate Commerce Commission to regulate the railroads . Weaver thought the bill should have given the government more power , including the ability to set rates directly , but he voted for the final bill . 
 Weaver also took up the issue of white settlement in Indian Territory . For several years , white settlers had been claiming homesteads in the Unassigned Lands in what is now Oklahoma . After the Civil War , the Five Civilized Tribes had been forced to cede their unused western lands to the federal government . The settlers , known as Boomers , believed that federal ownership made the lands open to settlement under the Homestead Acts . The federal government disagreed , as did the Cherokee Nation , which leased its neighboring Cherokee Outlet to Kansas cattle ranchers , and many Easterners , who believed the Boomers to be the tools of railroad interests . Weaver saw the issue as one between the landless poor homesteaders and wealthy cattlemen , and took the side of the former . He introduced a bill in December 1885 to organize Indian Territory and the neighboring Neutral Strip into a new Oklahoma Territory . The bill died in committee , but Weaver reintroduced it in February 1886 and gave a speech calling for the Indian reservations to be broken up into homesteads for individual Natives and the remaining land to be open to white settlement . 
 The Committee on Territories again rejected Weaver 's bill , but approved a compromise measure that opened the Unassigned Lands , Cherokee Outlet , and Neutral Strip to settlement . Congress debated the bill over several months , while the tribes announced their resistance to their lands becoming a territory ; according to an 1884 Supreme Court decision , Elk v. Wilkins , Native Americans were not citizens , and thus would have no voting rights in the new territory . When Weaver returned to Iowa to campaign for re @-@ election , the bill was still in limbo . Running again on a Democratic – Greenback fusion ticket , Weaver was re @-@ elected to the House in 1886 with a 618 @-@ vote majority . 
 In the lame @-@ duck session of 1887 , Congress passed the Dawes Act , which allowed the president to terminate tribal governments , and broke up Indian reservations into homesteads for individual natives . Although the Five Civilized Tribes were exempt from the Act , the spirit of the law encouraged Weaver and the Boomers to continue their own efforts to open western Indian Territory to white settlement . Weaver reintroduced his Oklahoma bill in the new Congress the following year , but again it stalled in committee . He returned to Iowa for another re @-@ election campaign in September 1888 , but the Greenback party had fallen apart , replaced by a new left @-@ wing third party , the Union Labor Party . In Iowa 's 6th district , the new party agreed to fuse with Democrats to nominate Weaver , but this time the Republicans were stronger . Their candidate , John F. Lacey , was elected with an 828 @-@ vote margin . The Union Laborites and their presidential candidate , <unk> Streeter , fared poorly nationally as well , and the new party soon dissolved . Weaver returned to Congress for the lame @-@ duck session and once more pushed to organize the Oklahoma Territory . This time he prevailed , as the House voted 147 – 102 to open the Unassigned Lands to homesteaders . The Senate followed suit and President Cleveland , who was about to leave office , signed the bill into law . 
 = = Farmers ' Alliance and a new party = = 
 The new president , Republican Benjamin Harrison , set April 22 , 1889 , as the date when the rush for the Unassigned Lands would begin . Weaver arrived at a railroad station in the territory in March with an eye toward relocating there . The would @-@ be homesteaders welcomed him with great acclaim . Although settlers were not allowed to stake claims before noon on April 22 , many scouted out the land ahead of time , and even marked off informal claims ; Weaver was among them . After the rush , settlers who had waited challenged the claims of the " Sooners " who had entered early . Weaver 's identification with the group harmed his popularity in the territory . His claim was ultimately denied , and he returned to Iowa in 1890 . 
 Weaver and his wife moved their household in 1890 from Bloomfield to Colfax , near Des Moines , as the former Congressman took up more active management of the Iowa Tribune . The Greenback and Union Labor parties were defunct , but he still proselytized for their ideals . In August 1890 , Weaver addressed a convention in Des Moines where former Greenbackers and Laborites gathered , although he declined their nomination for Congress . The economic conditions that had created the Greenback party had not gone away ; many farmers and laborers believed their situation had gotten worse since the Long Depression began in 1873 . Many farmers had joined the Farmers ' Alliance , which sought to promote soft @-@ money ideas on a non @-@ partisan basis ; rather than create a third party , they endorsed major party candidates who supported their ideas and hired speakers to educate the public . Alliance @-@ backed candidates did well in the 1890 elections , especially in the South , where Democrats endorsed by the Alliance won 44 seats . 
 Alliance members gathered that December in Ocala , Florida , and formulated a platform , later called the Ocala Demands , that called for looser money , government control of the railroads , a graduated income tax , and the direct election of senators . Weaver endorsed the message in the Tribune and corresponded with the group 's leader , Leonidas L. Polk . Weaver attended the group 's convention in Cincinnati in May 1891 , where he and Polk argued against forming a third party . Another delegate , Ignatius L. Donnelly , argued forcefully for a break from the two major parties , and his argument carried the day , although Weaver and Polk kept many of Donnelly 's more radical proposals out of the convention 's statement of principles . 
 = = Presidential election of 1892 = = 
 The following year , Weaver accepted the decision to form a new party ( called the People 's Party or Populist Party ) and published a book , A Call to Action , detailing the party 's principles and castigating the " few haughty millionaires who are gathering up the riches of the new world " . He attended their convention in Omaha , Nebraska , in July 1892 . After Polk 's sudden death in June , Weaver was considered the front @-@ runner for the nomination . He was nominated on the first ballot , easily besting his closest rival , Senator James H. Kyle of South Dakota . Weaver accepted the nomination and promised to " visit every state in the Union and carry the banner of the people into the enemy 's camp " . The vice presidential nomination went to James G. Field , a Confederate veteran and former Attorney General of Virginia . 
 The platform adopted in Omaha was ambitious for its time , calling for a graduated income tax , public ownership of the railroads , telegraph , and telephone systems , government @-@ issued currency , and the unlimited coinage of silver ( the idea that the United States would buy as much silver as miners could sell the government and strike it into coins ) at a favorable 16 @-@ to @-@ 1 ratio with gold . The Republicans nominated Harrison for re @-@ election , and the Democrats put forward ex @-@ President Cleveland ; as in 1880 , Weaver was confident of a good showing for the new party against their opponents . Harrison had shown some favor to the free silver cause , but his party largely supported the hard @-@ money gold standard ; Cleveland was solidly for gold , but his running mate , Adlai Stevenson of Illinois , was a silverite . Against these , the Populist Party stood alone as undisputed partisans of soft money , which Weaver hoped would lead to success in rural areas . Further , as labor disturbances broke out in Homestead , Pennsylvania , and elsewhere , Weaver hoped urban laborers would rally to the Populist cause . 
 Weaver embarked on a speaking tour across the northern plains and Pacific coast states . In late August , he turned South , hoping to break the Democrats ' grip on those states . As in 1880 , the issue of race hurt Weaver among white Southern voters , as he sought to attract black voters by urging cooperation between white and black farmers and calling for an end to lynchings . Weaver drew good crowds in the South , but he and his wife were also subjected to abuse from hecklers . Southern Democrats depicted Weaver as a threat to the conservative Democrats in power there ; with the increasing disenfranchisement of black voters , this was to prove fatal to the Populists ' hopes in the South . 
 On election day , Cleveland triumphed , carrying the entire South and many Northern states . Weaver 's performance was better than that of any post @-@ Civil War third party candidate to date , as he won over a million votes — 8 @.@ 5 percent of the total cast nationwide . In four states , he won a plurality , giving the Populists the electoral votes of Colorado , Idaho , Kansas , and Nevada along with two more votes from North Dakota and Oregon : twenty @-@ two in total . Weaver believed the performance " a surprising success " , and thought it portended good results in future elections . " Unaided by money , " he said afterward , " our grand young party has made an enviable record and achieved a surprising success at the polls . " 
 = = Populist elder statesman = = 
 Weaver believed that the Populists ' embrace of free silver would be the main issue to attract new members to the party . After the election , he attended a meeting of the American Bimetallic League , a pro @-@ silver group , and gave speeches advocating an <unk> monetary policy . In the meantime , the Panic of 1893 caused bank failures , factory closures , and general economic upheaval . As the federal gold reserves dwindled , President Cleveland convinced Congress to repeal the Sherman Silver Purchase Act , which ensured the government would purchase less silver for coining and which further disconcerted free silver supporters . While depletion of gold reserves slowed after the repeal , the country 's economy still floundered . 
 The next year , 1894 , saw pay cuts and labor disturbances , including a massive strike by the workers at the Pullman Company . A group of unemployed workers , known as Coxey 's Army , marched on Washington that spring . Weaver met with them in Iowa and expressed sympathy with the movement , so long as they refrained from lawbreaking . He then returned to the campaign trail , stumping for Populist candidates in the 1894 midterm elections . The election proved disastrous for the Democrats , but most of the gains went to the Republicans rather than to the Populists , who gained a few seats in the South but lost ground in the West . During the election , Weaver became friendly with William Jennings Bryan , a Democratic Congressman from Nebraska and a charismatic supporter of free silver . Bryan had lost his bid for the Senate in the election , but his reputation as an exciting speaker made him a presidential possibility in 1896 . 
 Weaver privately supported Bryan 's quest for the Democratic nomination in 1896 , which their convention awarded him on the fifth ballot . When the Populist convention gathered the next month in Chicago , they divided between endorsing the silverite Democrat and preserving their new party 's independence . Weaver backed the former course , holding the issues the party stood for to be of more importance than the party itself . A majority of delegates agreed , but without the enthusiasm that had marked their convention of four years earlier . At the same time , Weaver joined with anti @-@ fusionists to keep the Populist platform from deviating from the party 's ideological principles . Against the fusion candidate stood Republican William McKinley of Ohio , a hard @-@ money conservative . Bryan succeeded in uniting the South and West , Weaver 's longtime dream , but with the more populous North solidly behind McKinley , Bryan lost the election . 
 Despite the loss , Weaver still believed the Populist cause would triumph . He agreed to be nominated one last time for his old 6th district House seat on a Democratic @-@ Populist fusion ticket . As he had ten years earlier , Republican John Lacey defeated Weaver . In 1900 , Weaver attended a convention of fusionist Populists in Sioux Falls , South Dakota , the party having split on the issue of cooperation with the Democrats . The fusionists backed Bryan , the Democratic nominee , but he lost again to McKinley , this time by a greater margin . The following year , Weaver was elected to office for the last time as the mayor of his hometown , Colfax , Iowa . 
 = = Later years , death , and legacy = = 
 The Republican Party 's popularity after the victory in the Spanish – American War led Weaver , for the first time , to doubt that populist values would eventually prevail . With the demise of the Populist Party , Weaver became a Democrat and was a delegate to the 1904 Democratic National Convention . He was displeased at the party 's nominee , Alton B. Parker , whom he thought " plutocratic " , but Weaver supported his unsuccessful campaign nevertheless . He gave serious consideration to running for the House again that year , but decided against it . In 1908 , he supported Bryan 's third campaign as the Democratic nominee for president , but it , too , was unsuccessful . 
 That same year , Weaver and his wife , Clara , celebrated their fiftieth wedding anniversary , surrounded by six of their children . The Iowa legislature honored him in 1909 , and hung a portrait of him in the Iowa State Historical Building . He wrote a history of Jasper County , Iowa , where he lived , which was published in 1912 . Weaver planned to campaign on behalf of Democratic candidates that year , but did not have the chance . On February 6 , while visiting his daughter in Des Moines , he died . After a funeral at the First Methodist Church in Des Moines , Weaver was buried in that city 's Woodland Cemetery . 
 Many of Iowa 's leading statesmen , including Weaver 's former adversaries , praised him at his funeral and in the years thereafter . Fusion with the Democrats had brought Populist policy into the mainstream , and several of the policies for which Weaver fought became law after his death , including the direct election of Senators , a graduated income tax , and a monetary policy not based on the gold standard ; others , such as public ownership of the railroads and telephone companies , were never enacted . In a 2008 biography , Robert B. Mitchell wrote that " Weaver 's legacy cannot be assessed using conventional measures " as much of what he fought for did not come to pass until after his death . Even so , Mitchell credits Weaver for beginning the political effort that led to those changes : " Weaver 's most important legacy in national politics is not what he advocated , or how subsequent reforms worked , but his effect on America 's continuing political conversation . " 
 = Hear My Train A Comin ' = 
 " Hear My Train A Comin ' " ( alternatively titled " Get My Heart Back Together " ) is a blues @-@ inspired song written by Jimi Hendrix . It has been called " a powerful blues prayer based on the salvation @-@ train metaphor " of American folklore by biographer John McDermott . Hendrix recorded the song in live , studio , and impromptu settings several times between 1967 and 1970 , but never completed it to his satisfaction . 
 The documentary film Experience ( 1968 ) features the only version released during Hendrix 's lifetime . Hendrix played the song solo as an acoustic guitar country @-@ style blues and it is considered one of his most memorable performances . In 1973 , it was included in the film Jimi Hendrix and the accompanying soundtrack album . The song was also released as a single in the UK . 
 Hendrix often played " Hear My Train A Comin ' " in concert using a blues rock arrangement with accompaniment . He developed it into an extended improvisational guitar piece comparable to " Voodoo Child ( Slight Return ) " . There are several live performances in release ; according to music critics , the 1970 recording from the Berkeley Community Theatre is considered the definitive version . Recent Hendrix compilation albums , such as People , Hell and Angels and the Miami Pop Festival , include additional studio demo versions along with other live recordings . 
 = = Background and lyrics = = 
 " Hear My Train A Comin ' " is one of several blues @-@ oriented songs that were in Hendrix 's repertoire throughout his career . One of his earliest recordings with the Experience was his composition " Red House " , a blues song inspired by Albert King , which is included on the 1967 UK Are You Experienced debut album . In their early years , the Experience adapted and frequently performed other blues songs , including Howlin ' Wolf 's " Killing Floor " , B.B. King 's " Rock Me Baby " , Elmore James ' " Bleeding Heart " , and " Catfish Blues " , a medley of songs by Muddy Waters . They also played Muddy Waters ' " Hoochie Coochie Man " in 1967 with BBC Rhythm and Blues radio show host Alexis Korner accompanying the group on slide guitar . 
 Hendrix biographer Harry Shapiro describes " Hear My Train A Comin ' " as " <unk> [ ing ] deep into the well of blues history , recalling one of the classic motifs of the genre " and compares it to " Jim Crow Blues " and " Make My Getaway " , two earlier blues songs about " <unk> [ ing ] trouble , be it political , social or personal " . " Jim Crow Blues " , recorded in 1929 by Cow Cow Davenport , deals with getting away from racial segregation in an American town : 
 In " Make My Getaway " , recorded in 1951 , Big Bill Broonzy sings of leaving Arkansas to get over a broken relationship : 
 Biographer Steven Roby sees a parallel in Hendrix 's early life that is reflected in the lyrics for " Hear My Train A Comin ' " . When he left home at 18 , Hendrix departed by train for U.S. Army basic training in California . " Jimi 's confusion about leaving those he cared about coexisted with his eagerness to put his nightmarish existence in Seattle behind him " , writes Roby . Biographer John McDermott describes his lyrics as " a powerful blues prayer based on the salvation @-@ train metaphor running through American folklore of every color and faith " . Hendrix 's earliest recorded version in 1967 includes the verses 
 After an energetic guitar solo , Hendrix announces " Can you dig that , you see me gettin ' it together , I 'm tryin ' to get my heart together that 's all " and concludes by singing 
 He nearly always introduced the song as " Getting My Heart Back Together Again " or " Get My Heart Back Together " , the latter of which was used for the first release of the song in 1971 . In his August 1970 handwritten notes for the track listing of his proposed fourth studio album , Hendrix listed the song as " Getting My Heart Back Together " . It is unclear why it was renamed " Hear My Train A Comin ' " for subsequent releases , although Hendrix sometimes introduced songs in concert using alternate names . Occasionally he added a train reference to the song title , such as " Lonesome Train " , " I See My Train " , and " Waitin ' Down at the Train Station " . As Hendrix developed the song , he added to the lyrics and included " I 'm gonna be a voodoo child " , a reference to his 1968 composition " Voodoo Child ( Slight Return ) " . However , he stayed with the same theme and often prefaced his performances with a short commentary , such as at one of his best @-@ known performances in Berkeley , California , in 1970 : 
 Here 's a story that a lot of us have been through ... About a cat runnin ' around town and his old lady , she don 't want him around and a whole lot of people from across the tracks are puttin ' him down . And nobody don 't want to face up to it but the cat might have somethin ' , only everybody 's against him because the cat might be a little different . So he goes on the road to be a Voodoo Child , come back to be a Magic Boy . 
 = = Composition and early live releases = = 
 " Hear My Train A Comin ' " was usually performed at a slow to andante tempo ( 65 to 80 beats per minute ) centered on one chord with breaks . The first known recordings were made by the BBC on December 15 , 1967 , with Noel Redding on bass and Mitch Mitchell on drums . Redding and / or Mitchell also provide backing vocals during Hendrix 's vocal . In contrast to the subdued vocal sections , the middle section features highly charged guitar soloing and accompaniment . Two takes were recorded , both lasting about five minutes . The second take was broadcast on December 24 , 1967 , for the Top Gear radio program . The first take recorded was released in 1988 on the Radio One album ; both are included on BBC Sessions . 
 Around the same time , Peter Neal was making a short film documentary about the Experience , titled Experience ( also known as See My Music Talking ) . On December 19 , 1967 , he captured Hendrix playing an impromptu solo version of " Hear My Train A Comin ' " . The filming took place during a publicity photo session at the London studio of photographer Bruce Fleming , who had photographed the British album cover for Are You Experienced . For the shoot , a twelve @-@ string <unk> acoustic guitar <unk> for a left @-@ handed player was conveniently on hand . Hendrix , seated on a stool against a white backdrop , sang while playing the guitar . After a false start , he settles into the song , which biographer Keith Shadwick describes as " 100 percent country blues ... s [ ung ] with great feeling , however artificial the circumstances of the session may have been " . Hendrix 's acoustic guitar playing shows familiarity with the styles of Lead Belly , Robert Johnson , and Skip James . Music writer Michael Fairchild compares some of his guitar techniques to those found in 1928 recordings by Tommy Johnson , such as " Big Fat Mama " and " Big Road Blues " . The guitar was tuned down two whole steps ( C – F – B ♭ – E ♭ – G – C ) , perhaps influenced by Lead Belly 's twelve @-@ string style . At the end of the 3 : 05 performance , Hendrix laughs it off with " Did you think I could do that ? " In addition to the 1968 documentary , the " Hear My Train A Comin ' " performance is included in the 1973 film Jimi Hendrix and accompanying soundtrack album ( re @-@ released on Blues ) . In the UK , it was released by Reprise Records as a single in 1973 with the Experience 's adaptation of B.B. King 's " Rock Me Baby " recorded at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967 as the B @-@ side . 
 In March 1968 , Hendrix recorded another impromptu performance of the song with Paul Caruso on harmonica , a friend from Hendrix 's Greenwich Village days . It was recorded at Hendrix 's suite at the Drake Hotel in New York City , where he lived for a while during the recording of Electric Ladyland at the Record Plant . Caruso described it as " very simple , pure , like Lightnin ' Hopkins ' earlier work . " It is included on West Coast Seattle Boy : The Jimi Hendrix Anthology released in 2010 . For subsequent versions , Hendrix gradually developed " Hear My Train A Comin ' " from a shorter , blues @-@ oriented number into a longer , improvisational piece with extended guitar soloing as he had done with " Voodoo Child " . The transformation is apparent in three live recordings which were released in 1971 , which range from over nine to twelve minutes . Hendrix performed a nine @-@ minute version with the Gypsy Sun and Rainbows band at the Woodstock Festival on August 19 , 1969 . Shadwick describes Hendrix 's guitar solos as " fluently spectacular , stringing long , arching phrases together " . It was released on the Woodstock soundtrack follow @-@ up album Woodstock 2 , with the title " Get My Heart Back Together " ( reissued on Woodstock and Live at Woodstock ) . On May 30 , 1970 , during the Cry of Love tour , Hendrix with Mitchell and bassist Billy Cox were filmed performing the song at the Berkeley Community Theatre . Several writers consider this rendition to be definitive , including Shadwick : 
 He solos with a distinctive flavour , for the most part entirely melodic rather than the usual fusion of chords , melody and outright sonic manipulation . As with every great improviser he had his own distinctive melodic shapes , and a lot of them crop up here . But he makes them fresh by placing them in new contexts , either by using different registers or one of his electronic effects ( here wah @-@ wah or Uni @-@ Vibe ) to alter the timbre and texture , or by reordering them to create different continuities of phrasing . 
 His performance , edited down to over four minutes , appears in the film Jimi Plays Berkeley by Peter <unk> . The complete audio recording from Berkeley with different lengths of Hendrix 's introduction is included on the Rainbow Bridge album , Blues , and Voodoo Child : The Jimi Hendrix Collection . On July 30 , 1970 , Hendrix , Mitchell , and Cox performed outdoors in the upcountry region on the island of Maui , Hawaii . Manager Michael Jeffery had arranged for their concert as a contribution to another film , Rainbow Bridge , directed by Andy Warhol associate Chuck Wein . Due to technical problems , little of the concert footage was usable , although an edited " Hear My Train A Comin ' " is included in the movie ( although none of the performances from the film appear on the so @-@ called Rainbow Bridge soundtrack album ) . The complete audio recording is included on several bootleg albums of the Maui concerts . 
 = = Studio recordings = = 
 Hendrix recorded several studio demo versions of " Hear My Train A Comin ' " and some have appeared on various compilations over the years . Producer Alan Douglas issued the first version in 1975 on the second of his controversial albums , Midnight Lightning . It was fashioned from a demo recorded by the Experience on April 2 or 9 , 1969 . Douglas erased Redding 's bass part and overdubbed new bass , guitar , and percussion parts by musicians who had never recorded with Hendrix . Shadwick describes it as " painfully out of tune " and its release as " unfortunate " ; it has not been reissued . 
 At a February 17 , 1969 , rehearsal at the Olympic Studios before their upcoming London concerts , multiple takes of " Hear My Train A Comin ' " were recorded by the Experience . The first take was later included on the 2000 The Jimi Hendrix Experience box set ( re @-@ released on Martin Scorsese Presents the Blues : Jimi Hendrix ) . During their following appearances at the Royal Albert Hall on February 18 and 24 ( which turned out to be their last UK shows ) , the Experience were filmed and recorded performing the song . These have not been officially released because of contract disputes , but are frequently bootlegged . Two additional demos were recorded at the Record Plant in New York City in 1969 . One , recorded on April 7 by the Experience , is included on 2010s Valleys of Neptune . On May 21 , a second demo was recorded during Hendrix 's first recording session with Billy Cox on bass and Buddy Miles on drums , who later performed on the live Band of Gypsys album . It was issued on People , Hell and Angels in 2013 . 
 = = Additional live recordings = = 
 Previously unreleased recordings of " Hear My Train A Comin ' " continue to be issued along with re @-@ releases . Several amateur concert recordings are also free to stream from the Experience Hendrix official website . 
 5 / 18 / 68 Miami Pop Festival , Hallandale , Florida ( 7 : 58 ) – Miami Pop Festival ( released 2013 ) 
 10 / 10 / 68 Winterland Ballroom second show , San Francisco ( 11 : 33 ) – The Jimi Hendrix Concerts ( released 1982 , re @-@ released 2011 Winterland ) 
 4 / 27 / 69 Oakland Coliseum , Oakland , California ( 10 : 25 ) – Live at the Oakland Coliseum ( released 1998 ) 
 7 / 7 / 69 The Dick Cavett Show , New York City ( 2 : 26 ) – Jimi Hendrix : The Dick Cavett Show ( Hendrix is backed by the show 's Bob <unk> Orchestra , DVD released 2002 ) 
 12 / 31 / 69 Fillmore East first show , New York City ( 9 : 01 ) – Band of Gypsys 2 ( an early contender for the original Band of Gypsys album , released 1986 , re @-@ released 1999 Live at the Fillmore East ) 
 7 / 4 / 70 Atlanta International Pop Festival , Byron , Georgia ( 5 : 25 ) – Stages ( released 1991 ) 
 = 2 / 1st Machine Gun Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 1st Machine Gun Battalion was a battalion of the Australian Army that was raised for service during World War II as part of the 6th Division . When it was formed on 14 December 1939 , its component companies were spread across several Australian states , but it was later concentrated at Ingleburn , New South Wales , where it completed basic training in the early months of the war . In mid @-@ 1940 , the battalion embarked for overseas , bound initially for the Middle East , but following the Fall of France it was diverted to the United Kingdom . Along with a larger contingent of Australians , it helped to bolster the island 's garrison , undertaking defensive duties during a period when it was expected that the Germans might launch a cross @-@ Channel invasion . 
 The battalion was transferred to the Middle East in late 1940 , after the threat of invasion had passed . It underwent further training in Egypt , before taking part in fighting against the Germans in Greece and on Crete in mid @-@ 1941 . Having lost most of its equipment and suffering heavy casualties , the 2 / 1st was rebuilt in Palestine before undertaking garrison duties in Syria in 1941 – 42 . The battalion was withdrawn to Australia as a result of Japan 's entry into the war in December 1941 . During 1943 , the 2 / 1st fought a defensive role in the New Guinea campaign . Following its withdrawal to Australia in early 1944 , the battalion was re @-@ organised on the Atherton Tablelands and reassigned to the 7th Division . It was committed to its final campaign in mid @-@ 1945 , during the Borneo campaign . After the war , the battalion was disbanded in early 1946 . One of its mascots , Horrie the Wog Dog , became the subject of a book by Ion Idriess . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The 2 / 1st Machine Gun Battalion was formed on 14 December 1939 , as part of the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) . It was raised following a reorganisation of the 6th Division 's infantry battalions , which saw the removal of the machine gun platoons that had previously existed within each battalion and their centralisation in a single unit . Three other machine gun battalions were subsequently raised as part of the 2nd AIF during the war to support its four infantry divisions . Developed by the British Army , the concept within the Australian Army had its genesis during the Gallipoli Campaign in 1915 , when the machine guns assigned to the infantry battalions – initially two and then , later , four – had been grouped together and co @-@ ordinated at brigade level to help compensate for the lack of artillery support . Over the course of the war on the Western Front , the concept had evolved through the establishment of machine gun companies in 1916 to the establishment of machine gun battalions in 1918 . Similar formations had also been established amongst the Australian Light Horse units serving in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign . During the inter @-@ war years , the machine gun battalions had been deemed unnecessary . When the Army was reorganised in 1921 , they were not re @-@ raised , but in 1937 , when the Army looked to expand as fears of war in Europe loomed , four such units were raised within the part @-@ time Militia by converting light horse units and motorising them . When the Second World War broke out , the decision was made to raise several machine gun battalions within the 2nd AIF , one allocated to each division . 
 Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Claude Prior , the 2 / 1st Machine Gun Battalion was formed with four machine gun companies , a headquarters company – consisting of an anti @-@ aircraft platoon , a signals platoon and a transport platoon – and a battalion headquarters . Australian machine gun battalions were established with an authorised strength of around 800 to 900 personnel , and like the others , the 2 / 1st was a motorised infantry unit with both wheeled motor vehicles and tracked carriers . Equipped with 48 Vickers medium machine guns , the battalion 's four machine gun companies – designated ' A ' to ' D ' and each consisting of three four @-@ gun platoons – were initially formed separately , with ' A ' Company forming at Ingleburn , in New South Wales , ' B ' Company forming at Puckapunyal , in Victoria , ' C ' in South Australia , and ' D ' at Rutherford , in New South Wales . At the end of the month , ' B ' and ' C ' Companies concentrated at Rutherford , before moving to Ingleburn with ' D ' Company in January 1940 . An intense period of training followed , with range shoots at Liverpool , and field exercises in the Green Hills and <unk> areas , the latter being conducted in conjunction with the infantry battalions of the 18th Brigade . This period concluded in early May 1940 , when the battalion was moved by train to Darling Harbour and embarked upon the Queen Mary . 
 = = = Defence of Britain = = = 
 The men aboard Queen Mary were originally destined for the Middle East but a decision was made mid @-@ voyage to divert them to the United Kingdom , as part of a larger contingent of Australians that were sent to help bolster the garrison there . After making the long passage via Fremantle , Cape Town , and Freetown , the battalion landed in Gourock , Scotland , in mid @-@ June . France had just fallen , and Britain was preparing for a potential cross @-@ Channel invasion . The Australian troops from the 18th Brigade and , eventually , the 25th Brigade , along with various supporting arms , had been despatched to help bolster the island 's defences . From Gourock , they entrained and moved south to Tidworth Camp on Salisbury Plain . They remained in Britain throughout the rest of the year , undertaking training , mounting guard , conducting patrols and exercises . A move to Colchester took place in October to afford the Australians a more permanent barracks for the coming winter , as they were mainly under canvas at Tidworth . The following month , as the threat of invasion seemingly passed , they received orders to move to Glasgow to embark on the transport <unk> , bound for the Middle East where they were to rejoin the rest of the 6th Division . 
 = = = Middle East , Greece , and Crete = = = 
 Sailing around the west coast of Africa to avoid the threat of air attack in the Mediterranean , the <unk> carried the battalion to Egypt , which was reached at the end of December , following stops at Freetown and Durban . After docking at Kantara , the battalion moved by rail over 225 miles ( 362 km ) to Ikingi Maryut , west of Alexandria in the Western Desert . There they received a new commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Gooch , after Prior was promoted and transferred to divisional headquarters , and they began training to acclimatise to the new conditions . The rest of the 6th Division had gone into action in the Western Desert but the 2 / 1st , still waiting on the majority of its equipment to arrive , was not committed , its place being taken by a British machine gun battalion from the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers . The Australian battalion remained at Ikingi Maryut until late March and early April , when it was despatched , along with the rest of the 6th Division , to Greece , where a German invasion was expected . 
 Spread across several different transport vessels , after completing the crossing – during which the battalion ’ s machine guns were employed for anti @-@ aircraft defence – the 2 / 1st 's companies were split up : ' A ' Company , supported the Australian 2 / 4th Battalion , while two companies – ' B ' and ' C ' – supported the New Zealand 4th Brigade , and another – ' D ' Company – was assigned to the Australian 17th Brigade . The campaign proved to be short @-@ lived , as the Allies were quickly pushed back by the advancing Germans , and the battalion was subsequently withdrawn around the end of April and early May , having fought major actions around the Aliakmon River , Servia Pass , Lamia and Mount Olympus . During the evacuation , elements of three companies were taken aboard the transport Costa Rica , which was later attacked by German aircraft . As the vessel was sinking , the troops on board were evacuated by Royal Navy destroyers and landed on Crete , minus the majority of their equipment which was lost at sea . 
 On Crete , the battalion 's companies were once again separated ; ' D ' Company , the only company in possession of all of its equipment , was assigned to support the Australian 19th Brigade around <unk> , while the other three companies went into camp around Suda . A single platoon from ' B ' Company was later sent to reinforce ' D ' Company ; however , on 14 May , the remainder of the battalion – a total of 432 personnel – was evacuated from the island on the transport <unk> , sailing back to Egypt and subsequently missing the German invasion of Crete , which was launched a week later . A short but sharp campaign followed , which saw the machine gunners that remained – 170 personnel , including six officers – take part in fighting around Canea and Retimo before the island 's garrison was finally defeated at the end of May . By the end of the fighting , the 2 / 1st had lost 104 men killed , wounded or captured in either Greece or on Crete ; of these , two later escaped , while one died in captivity . 
 After arriving in Egypt , the remainder of the battalion was transported to Palestine , where it was subsequently rebuilt . The 2 / 1st Machine Gun Battalion remained stationed around Gaza until October , when it was sent to Syria to bolster the garrison that had been established there following the defeat of Vichy French forces . At this time , the 2 / 1st effectively became assigned to the 7th Division , and received a new commanding officer , as Lieutenant Colonel Cyril Fidock , a World War I veteran , replaced Gooch . The battalion was subsequently stationed in Damascus and at <unk> , remaining there until early 1942 , when it was moved back to Gaza as part of the draw @-@ down of Australian forces in the Middle East and their return to Australia in response to Japan 's entry into the war . The battalion embarked upon an American troop transport , USS West Point , in mid @-@ March 1942 , completing the voyage to Port Adelaide , via Fremantle , in just 19 days . 
 = = = New Guinea and Borneo = = = 
 Following the battalion 's arrival in Adelaide , the men were billeted by locals in the city 's suburbs while leave drafts were despatched throughout April . In early May , the 2 / 1st was reconstituted at Ingleburn , where it remained until June 1942 , when the order came to move to Queensland . Moving up the coast via train , the battalion established a camp near <unk> , in the Sunshine Coast hinterland . Jungle training was undertaken there until September , when the 2 / 1st moved to another camp closer to the coast at Deception Bay . At the end of October , ' A ' and ' B ' Companies embarked in Brisbane , bound for New Guinea , to reinforce the troops fighting around Buna ; en route they were diverted to Townsville , where they were unloaded . ' B ' Company later re @-@ embarked and arrived in Port Moresby in late November on the transport Both , before moving to Oro Bay , where it was deployed defensively around the US base and the mission at <unk> . ' A ' Company also deployed in December , and the following month also moved to Oro Bay . The rest of the battalion remained at Deception Bay in Queensland and did not link up with the other companies until May 1943 , landing in Port Moresby from the Duntroon . In the intervening period , the two deployed companies were temporarily detached to the Militia 7th Machine Gun Battalion , and ' A ' Company went into action in the Pacific for the first time , fighting around Wau , before marching to Nassau Bay to support the 3rd Division during the Salamaua – Lae campaign . 
 The battalion was withdrawn back to Australia in early 1944 for rest and reorganisation . During this period it was stationed at Tenterfield , where the soldiers experienced a bitterly cold winter , before moving to Petrie and then <unk> on the Atherton Tablelands . The battalion was reorganised to conform with the requirements of the jungle divisional establishment , and as a result its vehicles were changed to include jeeps and trailers , instead of trucks , which were considered impractical in the jungle . A change of commanding officer also took place in this time , with Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Haupt – who had previously served as battalion second @-@ in @-@ command before leaving to take over command of the 62nd Battalion in January 1943 – returning to take over from Fidock . A long period of training , which included courses in amphibious warfare and various jungle exercises followed , as the focus of the fighting in the Pacific shifted away from Australian forces towards the US military . Consequently , it was not until close to the end of the war that the battalion went into action again . Before this , the battalion contributed to an Australian contingent that was sent to India to lecture British Army officers on the lessons of jungle warfare . 
 In May 1945 , the battalion was transported to Morotai Island in preparation for Operation Oboe , the recapture of Borneo and the Netherlands East Indies . The 2 / 1st was assigned to support the 7th Division 's landing on Balikpapan in July . Now largely being used as a divisional asset , the battalion provided a company to each of the division 's component brigades – the 18th , 21st and 25th – while one company remained in reserve with the headquarters . Coming ashore aboard several landing craft , the two companies taking part in the initial assault – ' B ' and ' D ' – helped to secure the high ground overlooking the beachhead , while ' C ' Company remained a floating reserve along with the 25th Brigade . The battalion 's reserve company , ' A ' Company , and headquarters element came ashore in a later wave to set up a secure base . During the subsequent advance inland , the battalion 's main focus was progressing through what the Australians dubbed the " Vasey Highway " , which ran east – west along the island 's southern shore , as the Australians fought to take the oil pipeline and the airfield at Manggar , and the " Milford Highway " , which ran north – south through the centre into the more mountainous hinterland . During the fighting on Borneo , the 2 / 1st lost 17 men killed or wounded . 
 Following the conclusion of hostilities , the battalion 's personnel were returned to Australia in small drafts , as the 2 / 1st undertook garrison duties in the Balikpapan area . The longer @-@ serving men were repatriated and discharged early , while volunteers were transferred to other units that were being raised as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force that would be deployed to Japan . In November , a batch of men were transferred to the 21st Brigade for occupation duties in the Celebes as the Australian forces began preparing to hand over the territories to Dutch authorities . By December , the battalion consisted of less than fifty personnel , and at the end of the month this cadre embarked upon the transport Kings Point Victory to make the journey back to Australia . The battalion was subsequently disbanded on 26 January 1946 . 
 When they had been formed , it was intended that the machine gun battalions would provide highly mobile fire support ; however , Phillip Hocking , author of The Long Carry , highlights that throughout the war the utility of the machine gun battalions was largely misunderstood by commanders , particularly after the focus of the Australian Army 's operations shifted to the Pacific . Some commanders used the machine guns largely in a static defensive capacity against short and medium range targets , rather than as offensive fire support weapons that could be employed to provide long range fire support . The medium machine guns were also largely utilised in the same manner as light machine guns , such as the Bren . Other reasons identified for the concept 's limited use include distrust of overhead fire by some commanders , a preference for organic fire support over attached sub @-@ units , over @-@ estimating the difficulty of transporting Vickers guns in the jungle , and a tendency to ignore targets that could not be seen . After their disbandment , the machine gun battalion concept was not used in the post @-@ war Australian Army , as the function became nested within the structure of a standard infantry battalion . 
 One of the 2 / 1st Machine Gun Battalion 's mascots , Horrie the Wog Dog , was the subject of a book by Ion Idriess ; the book was based on stories recounted by the dog 's owner , Jim Moody , who served as a machine gunner in the 2 / 1st . Over 2 @,@ 000 personnel served in the 2 / 1st throughout the war , and 34 members of the battalion were killed in action , died of wounds or died from accident . Decorations awarded included two Military Crosses , four Military Medals , one British Empire Medal and 16 Mentions in Despatches . 
 = = Commanders = = 
 The following officers served as commanding officer of the 2 / 1st Machine Gun Battalion : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Claude Esdaile Prior ( 1939 – 40 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Neil Gooch ( 1941 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Cyril Henwood Fidock ( 1941 – 44 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Graham Keith Haupt ( 1944 – 45 ) . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 2 / 1st received the following battle honours for their involvement in the war : 
 Greece 1941 , Mount Olympus , Servia Pass , Middle East 1941 , Crete , South West Pacific 1945 , Borneo , Balikpapan , and Milford Highway . 
 = Sucker Punch ( soundtrack ) = 
 Sucker Punch is the soundtrack for the film of the same name . It was released on March 22 , 2011 by WaterTower Music . The album consists of covered songs , mainly by the film 's stars . Emily Browning sings three songs , and Carla Gugino and Oscar Isaac performs a cover of " Love Is the Drug " as a duet . Recording artists Björk , Skunk Anansie , Emilíana Torrini , Queen , Carla Azar , Alison Mosshart and Yoav also have songs on the soundtrack . 
 All of the covers on the album were produced by Marius de Vries and Tyler Bates , who utilized orchestral and rock sounds . Director Zack Snyder wanted the songs to add depth , dimension and meaning to the fantasy aspects of the film . The recording sessions began in September 2009 . Part of Browning 's audition for her role in the film included recording herself while singing . Snyder liked her voice and offered her to sing The Smiths ' song " Asleep " . The crew and Smiths ' frontman Morrissey were happy with the result , and Browning recorded two more songs for the soundtrack , including the Eurythmics ' " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " which is played during the film 's opening sequence . 
 The album received generally positive reviews and critics considered it one of the best soundtracks of the year , especially when compared to their panning of the film . Browning was praised for her performance throughout the album , mainly on " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " . Sucker Punch reached number twenty @-@ two on the Billboard 200 , and the top of the Top Soundtracks chart . Internationally , the album reached the top fifty in Australia , New Zealand , Austria and Germany . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 As with the soundtrack for Watchmen , director Zack Snyder decided to go with covers instead of original songs , saying " If you go with the original song , you just get the moment . But if you go with covers you also get all of the baggage you bring to it , [ ... ] I like the baggage . It kind of resonates and rings across time , it 's not just of the moment . " The soundtrack was produced by composer Tyler Bates and musical producer Marius de Vries . While Bates ' job was initially only writing a musical score and helping the song transitions , the composer ended working closely with de Vries as " the songs and the score just began bleeding into one another " - the only track in which de Vries worked alone was the remix of " Army of Me " . 
 Snyder wanted the songs to add depth , dimension and " meaning to the sequences they exist within " , as the film includes " multiple levels of reality " . de Vries noted the director tried to use songs instead of an original score " so that the lyrics could help navigate the way through the complex scenes and illuminate Babydoll ’ s state of mind . " Bates said " the songs serve as the link to the conscious world of Babydoll " while the score " was designed to simply underscore the sense of reality in the various alternate realities / action " . On the song selection , Snyder said that the tracks were chosen to " resonate " and give the viewer " sort of a nostalgic feeling " , and de Vries added that the compositions had to fit the film 's " themes of escape and hope , and redemption through the imagination . " 
 The original script of the film included parts where the characters sang , but it did not make the final cut , and de Vries said , " It was never going to be an opera , or even going to be a musical . It was very unlikely even to have any ' break into song ' moments within it , but the fact that we designed it so that it could I think gives it that sort of strange , music @-@ driven resonance . " References to both Roxy Music 's " Love is the Drug " and Jefferson Airplane 's " White Rabbit " were seen in the original script , with the former being used in a musical sequence performed by actors Carla Gugino and Oscar Isaac " in the style of a Bob Fosse / Moulin Rouge kind of vibe " , and the latter being picked by Snyder for his belief that it was " perfect for our World War I [ action sequence ] " . Bates considers Emilíana Torrini 's cover of " White Rabbit " to be the soundtrack 's standout . Nine songs are featured in the soundtrack , with Bates saying others were considered and discarded for among other reasons , veto from the original artists and " lyrics too on the nose " . 
 Carla Gugino revealed in August 2009 that she had begun taking singing lessons for her part in the film . One month later , Jamie Chung announced in an interview with E ! Entertainment that recording for the soundtrack had begun . When Emily Browning auditioned for her role as Babydoll , Snyder asked her to sing because of the musical element in the film . He told her to record herself while singing , and the actress did a version of " Killing Me Softly with His Song " . Browning later said , " I was terrified , of course . But he liked it . I have no idea why , but he thought me capable of carrying a tune on the screen . " The crew liked the result and offered her to sing more songs . At first it was just a cover of " Where Is My Mind ? " by Pixies , which ended up becoming a duet with Yoav , but the producers extended to three songs . One , a version by " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " by Eurythmics , is used to open the movie , and Bates noted that " [ Emily 's ] first line of dialogue is actually 27 minutes into the film so it is an interesting way to introduce her character . " The other came up when during a discussion on her favorite music with Snyder , Browning said that The Smiths was her favorite band . Several weeks later , Snyder informed her that he had acquired the rights to The Smiths ' song " Asleep " , and asked her if she would like to perform the lead vocals . At first , she hesitated , saying that " The offer was flattering , but there was so much pressure " . However , she recorded the song and according to Snyder , The Smiths ' frontman Morrissey was happy with the result . Regarding Browning 's performance , de Vries considered that " having Emily sing — essentially commenting in song on her character ’ s situation in the film — provided an interesting texture , real resonance and depth , and tied the music to the visuals in a way that might otherwise not have been so clearly defined " , and Snyder found the actress ' " emotional delivery " to " make the songs even more poignant " . To work with Browning between takes , de Vries used a portable recording rig on a room with a piano - " a very distressed , out @-@ of @-@ tune , almost @-@ unusable instrument ( ... ) which turned out to have real charm in it . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , the songs on Sucker Punch are highlighted with orchestrations and a rock edge . De Vries said that during the songs ' production " there was a substantial amount of reinvention , in several different directions " , helped by Snyder giving the composers free reins . Bates added that there was an attempt to " expand the scope of the songs in a way they were never heard before " , with " crazy electronic " and " alternative guitar work " - " it 's a bit over the top , but so is everything on screen . " The versions of the songs tried to match the action on @-@ screen : Bates detailed that " White Rabbit " " starts out very ethereal , getting [ Baby Doll ] into the mindset of the dance , and once the girls have their assignment , once they delve in with machineguns and other weapons , the song starts to bloom into this epic , rich , full orchestral choral fanfare . " This correspondence lead to the tracks getting longer and alternating between the songs themselves and " a score that is reminiscent of songs sometimes " , which Bates described as " playing in the consciousness of the characters [ i.e. in the same way most people sometimes keep a song ‘ playing ’ in their heads for an extended period of time ] . " For instance , " White Rabbit " features a choir of 150 voices playing the vocal melody of the first verse of the song , and tracks such as " Search & Destroy " have " moments where Zach really wanted to blow it up into [ a ] huge orchestra " . 
 Heather Phares of Allmusic noted that " The setting for [ the film ] may be a ‘ 50s mental institution , but the film ’ s soundtrack feels like it ’ s straight out of the ‘ 90s . " The writer also noted that " Nearly every track here [ ... ] pits female vocals against massive , mechanical instrumentation , underscoring the plight from which the film ’ s characters must rescue themselves . " The fourth track , a mash @-@ up of Queen 's " I Want It All " and " We Will Rock You " , includes rap verses by Armageddon , formerly a member of Terror Squad . Torrini 's take on " White Rabbit " includes a Middle Eastern @-@ style outro with guitars and an orchestral pomp . According to Rick Florino of Artistdirect , the " Sucker Punch Remix " of Björk 's " Army of Me " is based upon a trip hop production and " repeatedly pummels via the psychedelic vocal delivery and careening , crushing guitars " . de Vries considered emblematic of the film 's theme of female empowerment having women covering songs originally performed by male singers - " Search & Destroy " , and " Tomorrow Never Knows " - during the action scenes for the concept of " the female voice telling the story through song ( ... ) where the iconic original performance is a very strong male performance ” . The artists who would perform the covers were chosen for having " female voices with enough authority and panache and just cultural presence to come out from under the shadow of those performances , and to make this about songs which both comment on the tone of the scene and also help navigate us across the sort of boundaries of these individual worlds which are part of Emily ’ s imagination . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received generally positive reviews from critics . Rick Florino of Artistdirect was very positive on the album , writing that the film " hearkens back to the good old days , and the film 's soundtrack is not only one of the best soundtracks this year , it 's also bound to be remembered as a classic . " The writer praised Browning 's take on " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " , writing that it " adds a lush darkness and vibrant vulnerability to the song reminiscent of Portishead 's Beth Gibbons but with a flair all her own . " Florino awarded the album four and a half stars out of five , and concluded his review , writing , " This is the kind of soundtrack that needs to be listened to from front to back , and if it 's any indication , the film is destined to be one of the most mind @-@ blowing and magnificent screen event this year , perhaps even the decade . " Allmusic 's Heather Phares reviewed the album positively , praising Browning for " deliver [ ing ] the soundtrack ’ s most affecting performances " . Phares concluded her review with " Sucker Punch is elaborate and sometimes overwrought , but it ’ s absolutely true to the film ’ s aesthetic . " Billboard reviewer Phil Gallo described the soundtrack as " a rush of male @-@ targeted female power " which de Vries and Bates scored with " dark , eerie and violent soundscapes " . Gallo found Yoav 's contribution to " Where Is My Mind " to be " the soundtrack 's most tender moment " . Writing for Empire , Danny Graydon highlighted Browning 's songs as " seductive takes " , and praised both Gugino and Isaac for " an exuberant version of Roxy Music ’ s ' Love Is The Drug ' " and considering Björk 's collaboration " magnificently reversions ' Army Of Me ' with Skunk Anansie " . Jon M. Gilbertson of Milwaukee Journal Sentinel was not very fond of the album , writing that " Maybe these covers make more sense in filmic context , but on their own they exude an air of pointlessness . They are , like Snyder 's movies , stylish but curiously hollow . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Sucker Punch sold 16 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release in the United States , debuting at number thirty @-@ six on the Billboard 200 on the issue dated April 9 , 2011 . In its second week , the album rose nine positions to number twenty @-@ two , with sales of 20 @,@ 000 copies . The same week , it reached the summit of the Top Soundtracks chart , having debuted at number two one week earlier . In Australia , the album debuted at number eighteen and spent two weeks on the chart . With over 117 @,@ 000 units sold in the United States , Sucker Punch finished the year as the best @-@ selling 2011 film soundtrack . In France , it debuted at number eighty @-@ nine and reached its peak of seventy @-@ nine the following week . In New Zealand , the album entered the chart at number thirty @-@ six and managed to reach thirty @-@ three the next week . Sucker Punch also reached number thirty @-@ seven in Austria , forty @-@ two in Germany and fifty @-@ seven in Switzerland . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Serpin = 
 Serpins are a superfamily of proteins with similar structures that were first identified for their protease inhibition activity and are found in all kingdoms of life . The acronym serpin was originally coined because the first serpins to be identified act on chymotrypsin @-@ like serine proteases ( serine protease inhibitors ) . They are notable for their unusual mechanism of action , in which they irreversibly inhibit their target protease by undergoing a large conformational change to disrupt its active site . This contrasts with the more common competitive mechanism for protease inhibitors that bind to and block access to the protease active site . 
 Protease inhibition by serpins controls an array of biological processes , including coagulation and inflammation , and consequently these proteins are the target of medical research . Their unique conformational change also makes them of interest to the structural biology and protein folding research communities . The conformational @-@ change mechanism confers certain advantages , but it also has drawbacks : serpins are vulnerable to mutations that can result in serpinopathies such as protein misfolding and the formation of inactive long @-@ chain polymers . Serpin polymerisation not only reduces the amount of active inhibitor , but also leads to accumulation of the polymers , causing cell death and organ failure . 
 Although most serpins control proteolytic cascades , some proteins with a serpin structure are not enzyme inhibitors , but instead perform diverse functions such as storage ( as in egg white — ovalbumin ) , transport as in hormone carriage proteins ( thyroxine @-@ binding globulin , cortisol @-@ binding globulin ) and molecular chaperoning ( HSP47 ) . The term serpin is used to describe these members as well , despite their non @-@ inhibitory function , since they are evolutionarily related . 
 = = History = = 
 Protease inhibitory activity in blood plasma was first reported in the late 1800s , but it was not until the 1950s that the serpins antithrombin and alpha 1 @-@ antitrypsin were isolated . Initial research focused on their role in human disease : alpha 1 @-@ antitrypsin deficiency is one of the most common genetic disorders , causing emphysema , and antithrombin deficiency results in thrombosis . 
 In the 1980s , it became clear that these inhibitors were part of superfamily of related proteins that included both protease inhibitors ( e.g. alpha 1 @-@ antitrypsin ) and non @-@ inhibitory members ( e.g. ovalbumin ) . The name " serpin " was coined based on the most common activity of the superfamily ( serine protease inhibitors ) . Around the same time , the first structures were solved for serpin proteins ( first in the relaxed , and later in the stressed conformation ) . The structures indicated that the inhibitory mechanism involved an unusual conformational change and prompted the subsequent structural focus of serpin studies . 
 Over 1000 serpins have now been identified , including 36 human proteins , as well as molecules in all kingdoms of life — animals , plants , fungi , bacteria , and archaea — and some viruses . In the 2000s , a systematic nomenclature was introduced in order to categorise members of the serpin superfamily based on their evolutionary relationships . Serpins are therefore the largest and most diverse superfamily of protease inhibitors . 
 = = Activity = = 
 Most serpins are protease inhibitors , targeting extracellular , chymotrypsin @-@ like serine proteases . These proteases possess a nucleophilic serine residue in a catalytic triad in their active site . Examples include thrombin , trypsin , and human neutrophil elastase . Serpins act as irreversible , suicide inhibitors by trapping an intermediate of the protease 's catalytic mechanism . 
 Some serpins inhibit other protease classes , typically cysteine proteases , and are termed " cross @-@ class inhibitors " . These enzymes differ from <unk> in that they use a nucleophilic cysteine residue , rather than a serine , in their active site . Nonetheless , the enzymatic chemistry is similar , and the mechanism of inhibition by serpins is the same for both classes of protease . Examples of cross @-@ class inhibitory serpins include serpin B4 a squamous cell carcinoma antigen 1 ( SCCA @-@ 1 ) and the avian serpin myeloid and <unk> nuclear termination stage @-@ specific protein ( MENT ) , which both inhibit papain @-@ like cysteine proteases . 
 = = Biological function and localization = = 
 = = = Protease inhibition = = = 
 Approximately two @-@ thirds of human serpins perform extracellular roles , inhibiting proteases in the bloodstream in order to modulate their activities . For example , extracellular serpins regulate the proteolytic cascades central to blood clotting ( antithrombin ) , the inflammatory and immune responses ( antitrypsin , antichymotrypsin , and C1 @-@ inhibitor ) and tissue remodelling ( PAI @-@ 1 ) . By inhibiting signalling cascade proteases , they can also affect development . The table of human serpins ( below ) provides examples of the range of functions performed by human serpin , as well as some of the diseases that result from serpin deficiency . 
 The protease targets of intracellular inhibitory serpins have been difficult to identify , since many of these molecules appear to perform overlapping roles . Further , many human serpins lack precise functional equivalents in model organisms such as the mouse . Nevertheless , an important function of intracellular serpins may be to protect against the inappropriate activity of proteases inside the cell . For example , one of the best @-@ characterised human intracellular serpins is Serpin B9 , which inhibits the cytotoxic granule protease granzyme B. In doing so , Serpin B9 may protect against inadvertent release of granzyme B and premature or unwanted activation of cell death pathways . 
 Some viruses use serpins to disrupt protease functions in their host . The cowpox viral serpin CrmA ( cytokine response modifier A ) is used in order to avoid inflammatory and apoptotic responses of infected host cells . CrmA increases infectivity by suppressing its host 's inflammatory response through inhibition of IL @-@ 1 and L @-@ 18 processing by the cysteine protease caspase @-@ 1 . In eukaryotes , a plant serpin inhibits both <unk> and a papain @-@ like cysteine protease . 
 = = = Non @-@ inhibitory roles = = = 
 Non @-@ inhibitory extracellular serpins also perform a wide array of important roles . Thyroxine @-@ binding globulin and transcortin transport the hormones thyroxine and cortisol , respectively . The non @-@ inhibitory serpin ovalbumin is the most abundant protein in egg white . Its exact function is unknown , but it is thought to be a storage protein for the developing foetus . Heat shock serpin 47 is a chaperone , essential for proper folding of collagen . It acts by stabilising collagen 's triple helix whilst it is being processed in the endoplasmic reticulum . 
 Some serpins are both protease inhibitors and perform additional roles . For example , the nuclear cysteine protease inhibitor MENT , in birds also acts as a chromatin remodelling molecule in a bird 's red blood cells . 
 = = Structure = = 
 All serpins share a common structure ( or fold ) , despite their varied functions . All typically have three β @-@ sheets ( named A , B and C ) and eight or nine α @-@ helices ( named <unk> – <unk> ) . The most significant regions to serpin function are the A @-@ sheet and the reactive centre loop ( RCL ) . The A @-@ sheet includes two β @-@ strands that are in a parallel orientation with a region between them called the ' shutter ' , and upper region called the ' breach ' . The RCL forms the initial interaction with the target protease in inhibitory molecules . Structures have been solved showing the RCL either fully exposed or partially inserted into the A @-@ sheet , and serpins are thought to be in dynamic equilibrium between these two states . The RCL also only makes temporary interactions with the rest of the structure , and is therefore highly flexible and exposed to the solvent . 
 The serpin structures that have been determined cover several different conformations , which has been necessary for the understanding of their multiple @-@ step mechanism of action . Structural biology has therefore played a central role in the understanding of serpin function and biology . 
 = = Conformational change and inhibitory mechanism = = 
 Inhibitory serpins do not inhibit their target proteases by the typical competitive ( lock @-@ and @-@ key ) mechanism used by most small protease inhibitors ( e.g. Kunitz @-@ type inhibitors ) . Instead , serpins use an unusual conformational change , which disrupts the structure of the protease and prevents it from completing catalysis . The conformational change involves the RCL moving to the opposite end of the protein and inserting into β @-@ sheet A , forming an extra antiparallel β @-@ strand . This converts the serpin from a stressed state , to a lower @-@ energy relaxed state ( S to R transition ) . 
 Serine and cysteine proteases catalyse peptide bond cleavage by a two @-@ step process . Initially , the catalytic residue of the active site triad performs a nucleophilic attack on the peptide bond of the substrate . This releases the new N @-@ terminus and forms a covalent ester @-@ bond between the enzyme and the substrate . This covalent complex between enzyme and substrate is called an acyl @-@ enzyme intermediate . For standard substrates , the ester bond is hydrolysed and the new C @-@ terminus is released to complete catalysis . However , when a serpin is cleaved by a protease , it rapidly undergoes the S to R transition before the acyl @-@ enzyme intermediate is hydrolysed . The efficiency of inhibition depends on fact that the relative kinetic rate of the conformational change is several orders of magnitude faster than hydrolysis by the protease . 
 Since the RCL is still covalently attached to the protease via the ester bond , the S to R transition pulls protease from the top to the bottom of the serpin and distorts the catalytic triad . The distorted protease can only hydrolyse the acyl enzyme intermediate extremely slowly and so the protease remains covalently attached for days to weeks . Serpins are classed as irreversible inhibitors and as suicide inhibitors since each serpin protein permanently inactivates a single protease , and can only function once . 
 = = = Allosteric activation = = = 
 The conformational mobility of serpins provides a key advantage over static lock @-@ and @-@ key protease inhibitors . In particular , the function of inhibitory serpins can be regulated by allosteric interactions with specific cofactors . The X @-@ ray crystal structures of antithrombin , heparin cofactor II , MENT and murine antichymotrypsin reveal that these serpins adopt a conformation wherein the first two amino acids of the RCL are inserted into the top of the A β @-@ sheet . The partially inserted conformation is important because co @-@ factors are able to conformationally switch certain partially inserted serpins into a fully expelled form . This conformational rearrangement makes the serpin a more effective inhibitor . 
 The archetypal example of this situation is antithrombin , which circulates in plasma in a partially inserted relatively inactive state . The primary specificity determining residue ( the P1 arginine ) points toward the body of the serpin and is unavailable to the protease . Upon binding a high @-@ affinity pentasaccharide sequence within long @-@ chain heparin , antithrombin undergoes a conformational change , RCL expulsion , and exposure of the P1 arginine . The heparin pentasaccharide @-@ bound form of antithrombin is , thus , a more effective inhibitor of thrombin and factor Xa . Furthermore , both of these coagulation proteases also contain binding sites ( called <unk> ) for heparin . Heparin , therefore , also acts as a template for binding of both protease and serpin , further dramatically accelerating the interaction between the two parties . After the initial interaction , the final serpin complex is formed and the heparin moiety is released . This interaction is physiologically important . For example , after injury to the blood vessel wall , heparin is exposed , and antithrombin is activated to control the clotting response . Understanding of the molecular basis of this interaction enabled the development of Fondaparinux , a synthetic form of Heparin pentasaccharide used as an anti @-@ clotting drug . 
 = = = Latent conformation = = = 
 Certain serpins spontaneously undergo the S to R transition without having been cleaved by a protease , to form a conformation termed the latent state . Latent serpins are unable to interact with proteases and so are no longer protease inhibitors . The conformational change to latency is not exactly the same as the S to R transition of a cleaved serpin . Since the RCL is still intact , the first strand of the C @-@ sheet has to peel off to allow full RCL insertion . 
 Regulation of the latency transition can act as a control mechanism in some serpins , such as PAI @-@ 1 . Although PAI @-@ 1 is produced in the inhibitory S conformation , it " auto @-@ inactivates " by changing to the latent state unless it is bound to the cofactor <unk> . Similarly , antithrombin can also spontaneously convert to the latent state , as an additional modulation mechanism to its allosteric activation by heparin . Finally , the N @-@ terminus of <unk> , a serpin from <unk> <unk> , is required to lock the molecule in the native inhibitory state . Disruption of interactions made by the N @-@ terminal region results in spontaneous conformational change of this serpin to the latent conformation . 
 = = = Conformational change in non @-@ inhibitory functions = = = 
 Certain non @-@ inhibitory serpins also use the serpin conformational change as part of their function . For example , the native ( S ) form of thyroxine @-@ binding globulin has high affinity for thyroxine , whereas the cleaved ( R ) form has low affinity . Similarly , transcortin has higher affinity for cortisol when in its native ( S ) state , than its cleaved ( R ) state . Thus , in these serpins , RCL cleavage and the S to R transition has been commandeered to allow for ligand release , rather than protease inhibition . 
 In some serpins , the S to R transition can activate cell signalling events . In these cases , a serpin that has formed a complex with its target protease , is then recognised by a receptor . The binding event then leads to downstream signalling by the receptor . The S to R transition is therefore used to alert cells to the presence of protease activity . This differs from the usual mechanism whereby serpins affect signalling simply by inhibiting proteases involved in a signalling cascade . 
 = = Degradation = = 
 When a serpin inhibits a target protease , it forms a permanent complex , which needs to be disposed of . For extracellular serpins , the final serpin @-@ enzyme complexes are rapidly cleared from circulation . One mechanism by which this occurs in mammals is via the low @-@ density lipoprotein receptor @-@ related protein ( LRP ) , which binds to inhibitory complexes made by antithrombin , <unk> @-@ 1 , and neuroserpin , causing cellular uptake . Similarly , the Drosophila serpin , necrotic , is degraded in the lysosome after being trafficked into the cell by the <unk> Receptor @-@ 1 ( homologous to the mammalian LDL receptor family ) . 
 = = Disease and serpinopathies = = 
 Serpins are involved in a wide array of physiological functions , and so mutations in genes encoding them can cause a range of diseases . Mutations that change the activity , specificity or aggregation properties of serpins all affect how they function . The majority of serpin @-@ related diseases are the result of serpin polymerisation into aggregates , though several other types of disease @-@ linked mutations also occur . The disorder α @-@ Antitrypsin deficiency is one of the most common hereditary diseases . 
 = = = Inactivity or absence = = = 
 Since the stressed serpin fold is high @-@ energy , mutations can cause them to incorrectly change into their lower @-@ energy conformations ( e.g. relaxed or latent ) before they have correctly performed their inhibitory role . 
 Mutations that affect the rate or the extent of RCL insertion into the A @-@ sheet can cause the serpin to undergo its S to R conformational change before having engaged a protease . Since a serpin can only make this conformational change once , the resulting misfired serpin is inactive and unable to properly control its target protease . Similarly , mutations that promote inappropriate transition to the monomeric latent state cause disease by reducing the amount of active inhibitory serpin . For example , the disease @-@ linked antithrombin variants <unk> and wobble , both promote formation of the latent state . 
 The structure of the disease @-@ linked mutant of antichymotrypsin ( <unk> ) revealed another , inactive " δ @-@ conformation " . In the δ @-@ conformation , four residues of the RCL are inserted into the top of β @-@ sheet A. The bottom half of the sheet is filled as a result of one of the α @-@ helices ( the F @-@ helix ) partially switching to a β @-@ strand conformation , completing the β @-@ sheet hydrogen bonding . It is unclear whether other serpins can adopt this conformer , and whether this conformation has a functional role , but it is speculated that the δ @-@ conformation may be adopted by Thyroxine @-@ binding globulin during thyroxine release . The non @-@ inhibitory proteins related to serpins can also cause diseases when mutated . For example , mutations in <unk> cause osteogenesis imperfecta type VI in humans . 
 In the absence of a required serpin , the protease that it normally would regulate is over @-@ active , leading to pathologies . Consequently , simple deficiency of a serpin ( e.g. a null mutation ) can result in disease . Gene knockouts , particularly in mice , are used experimentally to determine the normal functions of serpins by the effect of their absence . 
 = = = Specificity change = = = 
 In some rare cases , a single amino acid change in a serpin 's RCL alters its specificity to target the wrong protease . For example , the Antitrypsin @-@ Pittsburgh mutation ( <unk> ) causes the α1 @-@ antitrypsin serpin to inhibit thrombin , causing a bleeding disorder . 
 = = = <unk> and aggregation = = = 
 The majority of serpin diseases are due to protein aggregation and are termed " serpinopathies " . Serpins are vulnerable to disease @-@ causing mutations that promote formation of misfolded polymers due to their inherently unstable structures . Well @-@ characterised serpinopathies include α1 @-@ antitrypsin deficiency ( alpha @-@ 1 ) , which may cause familial emphysema and sometimes liver cirrhosis , certain familial forms of thrombosis related to antithrombin deficiency , types 1 and 2 hereditary angioedema ( <unk> ) related to deficiency of C1 @-@ inhibitor , and familial encephalopathy with neuroserpin inclusion bodies ( <unk> ; a rare type of dementia caused by neuroserpin polymerisation ) . 
 Each monomer of the serpin aggregate exists in the inactive , relaxed conformation ( with the RCL inserted into the A @-@ sheet ) . The polymers are therefore hyperstable to temperature and unable to inhibit proteases . <unk> therefore cause pathologies similarly to other <unk> ( e.g. prion diseases ) via two main mechanisms . First , the lack of active serpin results in uncontrolled protease activity and tissue destruction . Second , the hyperstable polymers themselves clog up the endoplasmic reticulum of cells that synthesize serpins , eventually resulting in cell death and tissue damage . In the case of antitrypsin deficiency , antitrypsin polymers cause the death of liver cells , sometimes resulting in liver damage and cirrhosis . Within the cell , serpin polymers are slowly removed via degradation in the endoplasmic reticulum . However , the details of how serpin polymers cause cell death remains to be fully understood . 
 Physiological serpin polymers are thought to form via domain swapping events , where a segment of one serpin protein inserts into another . Domain @-@ swaps occur when mutations or environmental factors interfere with the final stages of serpin folding to the native state , causing high @-@ energy intermediates to misfold . Both dimer and trimer domain @-@ swap structures have been solved . In the dimer ( of antithrombin ) , the RCL and part of the A @-@ sheet incorporates into the A @-@ sheet of another serpin molecule . The domain @-@ swapped trimer ( of antitrypsin ) forms via the exchange of an entirely different region of the structure , the B @-@ sheet ( with each molecule 's RCL inserted into its own A @-@ sheet ) . It has also been proposed that serpins may form domain @-@ swaps by inserting the RCL of one protein into the A @-@ sheet of another ( A @-@ sheet polymerisation ) . These domain @-@ swapped dimer and trimer structures are though to be the building blocks of the disease @-@ causing polymer aggregates , but the exact mechanism is still unclear . 
 = = = = Therapeutic strategies = = = = 
 Several therapeutic approaches are in use or under investigation to treat the most common <unk> : antitrypsin deficiency . Antitrypsin augmentation therapy is approved for severe antitrypsin deficiency @-@ related pulmonary emphysema . In this therapy , antitrypsin is purified from the plasma of blood donors and administered intravenously ( first marketed as <unk> ) . To treat severe antitrypsin deficiency @-@ related disease , lung and liver transplantation has proven effective . In animal models , gene targeting in induced pluripotent stem cells has been successfully used to correct an antitrypsin polymerisation defect and to restore the ability of the mammalian liver to secrete active antitrypsin . Small molecules have also been developed that block antitrypsin polymerisation in vitro . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Serpins are the most widely distributed and largest superfamily of protease inhibitors . They were initially believed to be restricted to eukaryote organisms , but have since been found in bacteria , archaea and some viruses . It remains unclear whether prokaryote genes are the descendants of an ancestral prokaryotic serpin or the product of horizontal gene transfer from eukaryotes . Most intracellular serpins belong to a single phylogenetic clade , whether they come from plants or animals , indicating that the intracellular and extracellular serpins may have diverged before the plants and animals . Exceptions include the intracellular heat shock serpin HSP47 , which is a chaperone essential for proper folding of collagen , and cycles between the cis @-@ Golgi and the endoplasmic reticulum . 
 Protease @-@ inhibition is thought to be the ancestral function , with non @-@ inhibitory members the results of evolutionary <unk> of the structure . The S to R conformational change has also been adapted by some binding serpins to regulate affinity for their targets . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = Animal = = = 
 = = = = Human = = = = 
 The human genome encodes 16 serpin clades , termed <unk> through <unk> , including 29 inhibitory and 7 non @-@ inhibitory serpin proteins . The human serpin naming system is based upon a phylogenetic analysis of approximately 500 serpins from 2001 , with proteins named <unk> , where X is the clade of the protein and Y the number of the protein within that clade . The functions of human serpins have been determined by a combination of biochemical studies , human genetic disorders , and knockout mouse models . 
 = = = = Specialised mammalian serpins = = = = 
 Many mammalian serpins have been identified that share no obvious <unk> with a human serpin counterpart . Examples include numerous rodent serpins ( particularly some of the murine intracellular serpins ) as well as the uterine serpins . The term uterine serpin refers to members of the serpin A clade that are encoded by the <unk> gene . Uterine serpins are produced by the endometrium of a restricted group of mammals in the Laurasiatheria clade under the influence of progesterone or estrogen . They are probably not functional proteinase inhibitors and may function during pregnancy to inhibit maternal immune responses against the <unk> or to participate in <unk> transport . 
 = = = Insect = = = 
 The Drosophila melanogaster genome contains 29 serpin encoding genes . Amino acid sequence analysis has placed 14 of these serpins in serpin clade Q and three in serpin clade K with the remaining twelve classified as orphan serpins not belonging to any clade . The clade classification system is difficult to use for Drosophila serpins and instead a nomenclature system has been adopted that is based on the position of serpin genes on the Drosophila chromosomes . Thirteen of the Drosophila serpins occur as isolated genes in the genome ( including Serpin @-@ 27A , see below ) , with the remaining 16 organised into five gene clusters that occur at chromosome positions <unk> ( 2 serpins ) , <unk> ( 5 serpins ) , 43A ( 4 serpins ) , 77B ( 3 serpins ) and <unk> ( 2 serpins ) . 
 Studies on Drosophila serpins reveal that Serpin @-@ 27A inhibits the Easter protease ( the final protease in the Nudel , <unk> Defective , Snake and Easter proteolytic cascade ) and thus controls dorsoventral patterning . Easter functions to cleave <unk> ( a chemokine @-@ type ligand ) , which results in toll @-@ mediated signaling . As well as its central role in embryonic patterning , toll signaling is also important for the innate immune response in insects . Accordingly , serpin @-@ 27A also functions to control the insect immune response . In Tenebrio molitor ( a large beetle ) , a protein ( <unk> ) comprising two discrete tandem serpin domains functions to regulate the toll proteolytic cascade . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The genome of the nematode worm C. elegans contains 9 serpins , all of which lack signal sequences and so are likely intracellular . However , only 5 of these serpins appear to function as protease inhibitors . One , SRP @-@ 6 , performs a protective function and guards against stress @-@ induced <unk> @-@ associated lysosomal disruption . Further , SRP @-@ 6 inhibits lysosomal cysteine proteases released after lysosomal rupture . Accordingly , worms lacking SRP @-@ 6 are sensitive to stress . Most notably , SRP @-@ 6 knockout worms die when placed in water ( the hypo @-@ osmotic stress lethal phenotype or <unk> ) . It has therefore been suggested that lysosomes play a general and controllable role in determining cell fate . 
 = = = Plant = = = 
 Plant serpins were amongst the first members of the superfamily that were identified . The serpin barley protein Z is highly abundant in barley grain , and one of the major protein components in beer . The genome of the model plant , Arabidopsis thaliana contain 18 serpin @-@ like genes , although only 8 of these are full @-@ length serpin sequences . 
 Plant serpins are potent inhibitors of mammalian chymotrypsin @-@ like serine proteases in vitro , the best @-@ studied example being barley serpin <unk> ( <unk> ) , which is able to inhibit trypsin and chymotrypsin as well as several blood coagulation factors . However , close relatives of chymotrypsin @-@ like serine proteases are absent in plants . The RCL of several serpins from wheat grain and rye contain poly @-@ Q repeat sequences similar to those present in the prolamin storage proteins of the endosperm . It has therefore been suggested that plant serpins may function to inhibit proteases from insects or microbes that would otherwise digest grain storage proteins . In support of this hypothesis , specific plant serpins have been identified in the phloem sap of pumpkin ( CmPS @-@ 1 ) and cucumber plants . Although an inverse correlation between up @-@ regulation of CmPS @-@ 1 expression and aphid survival was observed , in vitro feeding experiments revealed that recombinant CmPS @-@ 1 did not appear to affect insect survival . 
 Alternative roles and protease targets for plant serpins have been proposed . The Arabidopsis serpin , AtSerpin1 ( <unk> ; <unk> ​ ) , mediates set @-@ point control over programmed cell death by targeting the ' Responsive to <unk> @-@ 21 ' ( <unk> ) papain @-@ like cysteine protease . AtSerpin1 also inhibits <unk> @-@ like proteases in vitro . Two other Arabidopsis serpins , <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) appear to be involved in responses to DNA damage . 
 = = = Fungal = = = 
 A single fungal serpin has been characterized to date : celpin from Piromyces spp. strain E2 . Piromyces is a genus of anaerobic fungi found in the gut of ruminants and is important for digesting plant material . <unk> is predicted to be inhibitory and contains two N @-@ terminal <unk> domains in addition to its serpin domain . <unk> are commonly found in proteins that localise to the fungal cellulosome , a large extracellular multiprotein complex that breaks down cellulose . It is therefore suggested that celpin may protect the cellulosome against plant proteases . Certain bacterial serpins similarly localize to the cellulosome . 
 = = = Prokaryotic = = = 
 Predicted serpin genes are sporadically distributed in prokaryotes . In vitro studies on some of these molecules have revealed that they are able to inhibit proteases , and it is suggested that they function as inhibitors in vivo . Several prokaryote serpins are found in extremophiles . Accordingly , and in contrast to mammalian serpins , these molecules possess elevated resistance to heat denaturation . The precise role of most bacterial serpins remains obscure , although Clostridium <unk> serpin <unk> to the cellulosome . It is suggested that the role of cellulosome @-@ associated serpins may be to prevent unwanted protease activity against the cellulosome . 
 = = = Viral = = = 
 Serpins are also expressed by viruses as a way to evade the host 's immune defense . In particular , serpins expressed by pox viruses , including cow pox ( vaccinia ) and rabbit pox ( <unk> ) , are of interest because of their potential use as novel therapeutics for immune and inflammatory disorders as well as transplant therapy . <unk> suppresses the TLR @-@ mediated innate immune response and allows indefinite cardiac allograft survival in rats . <unk> and <unk> are both cross @-@ class inhibitors and target both serine ( granzyme B ; albeit weakly ) and cysteine proteases ( caspase 1 and caspase 8 ) . In comparison to their mammalian counterparts , viral serpins contain significant deletions of elements of secondary structure . Specifically , <unk> lacks the D @-@ helix as well as significant portions of the A- and E @-@ helices . 
 = Crown Duel = 
 Crown Duel is a 2002 young adult fantasy novel written by American author Sherwood Smith , originally published as two separate books , Crown Duel ( 1997 ) and Court Duel ( 1998 ) . Both stories take place in the fictional land of Sartorias @-@ deles , a fantasy world Smith has written about since her youth . The first book follows the adventures of young Countess Meliara " Mel " <unk> of Tlanth as she and her small group of forces rebel against the greed of King Galdran ; along the way the mysterious Marquis of Shevraeth aids her , though she distrusts him . With the king now dead , the second part focuses on Mel 's journey to the court in Remalna @-@ city , where she must navigate court intrigues surrounding Shevraeth 's rise to power as king . In 2008 Smith also published a prequel about Shevraeth : A Stranger to Command . 
 Smith invented Sartorias @-@ deles as a fantasy world that gradually became populated by humans over a number of centuries ; these new arrivals were influenced by the world 's indigenous beings enough to better themselves , largely eradicating societal problems like disease and overpopulation . She originally wrote Crown Duel as a twenty @-@ year @-@ old , and when she returned to rewrite the story later in life , she sought to maintain the story from Mel 's young perspective . As a result , the novel 's intended audience are young adults . As Smith 's most popular YA novel , both parts of Crown Duel received generally positive reviews . Reviews of the 1997 publication of Crown Duel highlight the character of Mel and Smith 's <unk> as positive elements . Critics assessed Court Duel as generally the lesser of the two . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 While Sherwood Smith originally wrote Crown Duel as two separate books entitled Crown Duel ( 1997 ) and Court Duel ( 1998 ) , she considered them as " one story . " Both novels explore the fictional land of Sartorias @-@ deles , the world she has been writing about since her youth . Smith grew up wondering why " [ her surroundings were ] the way [ they were ] " for instance observing , " Why were the cities so clean , I wondered when I was a kid . I knew about sewers , etc . Why is it safe to drink from a stream there , and not here ? " . She conceived Sartorias @-@ deles as a world where , over the course of several centuries , humans of many different races entered through " <unk> " and were influenced by the culture of its indigenous beings . According to Smith , while her invented world was not perfect , it contains fewer problems than Earth has endured , such as disease and overpopulation . She wrote , 
 " basically , the indigenous life forms , appalled by these things that came through and started multiplying and spreading out , carrying their diseases and wars , tried to fix things for the humans ... Their history is not all happy , it 's very strange , and humans still have many human problems , but in other ways they are somewhat different from [ Earth ] . " 
 According to Smith , Sartorias @-@ deles most resembles New Zealand . Smith 's stories set in the world of Sartorias @-@ deles have " <unk> [ d on ] a generation of kids with remarkable abilities who are born into extraordinary times . " Meliara ( " Mel " ) is the protagonist of Crown Duel , which is set in the fictional country of Remalna . Remalna 's human population lives alongside the mysterious Hill Folk , sentient beings that reside in the land 's forests and with whom Mel has a special affinity . Smith wrote the first part as a twenty @-@ year @-@ old , and sought to keep it set in Mel 's teenage point of view when typing it out as someone older than forty . Smith describes the stories ' primary audience as " middle grade or YA , because I was young and writing from the kid 's eye view . " At the same time , she made some changes to the original story based on her experience , such as providing motivations for the adult characters and " nail [ ing ] down place and time more thoroughly than I did . " When Smith learned as a teenager that " anyone could write a book , " she tried to write stories that would please potential publishers , as she assumed that they would never approve of " real stuff " like Crown Duel . Several decades before Crown Duel 's release , Smith " began the laborious process of consolidating " her notes on Sartorias @-@ deles . As part of her development of the novel , she drew inspiration from European history ; for example , details like the novel 's fan language and changing fashions were inspired by the fashions at the Palace of Versailles court of Louis XIV of France . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Part One – Crown Duel = = = 
 The novel begins in the fictional country of Remalna in Sartorias @-@ deles , where seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Countess Meliara " Mel " <unk> of Tlanth makes an oath to her dying father . She swears in that oath that she and her older brother Count <unk> " Bran " ( 21 ) will defend their people from the growing greed of King Galdran . Galdran covets the Tlanth lands for his cruel cousin , Baron <unk> Debegri , and also seeks to break the Covenant – an ancient pact between humans and the Hill Folk – by resuming the harvest of their valuable " <unk> " . When Mel and Bran learn of these plans , they feel compelled to fulfill their promise and enter into a war ill @-@ prepared and severely outnumbered . 
 Debegri attempts to subdue Tlanth under the pretense of unpaid taxes and for conspiring to break the Covenant . Mel and Bran and their small group of forces – mostly farmers and tradespeople – initially succeed at foiling <unk> with guerilla tactics , such as blockading a stream to flood the enemy 's camp . However , the war changes for the worse when the capable Marquis of Shevraeth ( 25 ) , the heir to the nearby principality of <unk> , takes command from <unk> . Shevraeth soon captures Mel and takes her to the capitol of Remalna @-@ city , imprisoning her . Shevraeth tells her that the king orders her to surrender Tlanth 's forces or face execution . Mel refuses , and soon escapes imprisonment with the help of their family spy , Azmus . 
 Mel tries to return to Tlanth , with Debegri , Shevraeth and ( ostensibly ) his cousin the Duke of Savona in pursuit . Along the way people of the countryside assist her , but Debegri eventually captures Mel , furious about the months of trouble she caused . Taken to Debegri 's nearby fortress , Shevraeth unexpectedly frees her and takes her to <unk> where she finds Bran . Shevraeth and his father reveal that they had been secretly fighting Galdran for years , wish to form an alliance with the <unk> , and plan for Shevraeth to take the throne . However , Mel refuses their help still deeply distrustful of Shevraeth and thinking of the promise made by Bran herself to their father : to become Remalna 's rulers . Mel also thinks of Shevraeth as insincere , having been taught by her father to distrust of anyone who resides at court . 
 On the journey back to Tlanth , unknown forces assault Mel and Bran , and , believing her brother dead , Mel escapes to continue on alone . She thinks that Shevraeth betrayed her , and begins rallying her forces to attack him . Recognizing the misunderstanding , Shevraeth responds by using hostages to force Mel to surrender and brings her to her brother , injured but alive . Soon Shevraeth openly opposes King Galdran , and accompanies the <unk> to fight the royal forces . They kill Galdran , ending the war and creating opportunity for a change in power in Remalna . Bran , who has gradually befriended Shevraeth , goes to court with him while Mel returns to Tlanth . 
 = = = Part Two – Court Duel = = = 
 Victorious after defeating the King in the war , Meliara returns to Tlanth to improve its dilapidated castle with the family 's new riches . One day , Bran visits her , accompanied by his new fiance Lady <unk> <unk> and the Marquis of Shevraeth , who is preparing to take the throne of Remalna . Now accustomed to the fine fashions of court , Bran expresses dismay at finding Mel dressed in old clothes - she never before cared about her appearance . Mel becomes shy and embarrassed about her lack of courtly finesse and grace , and avoids the visitors , especially Shevraeth , who she fears looks down on her . <unk> convinces Mel to return with them to court , and begins to teach her the essential of life there , including its customs , clothing styles , and hand fan language . 
 Once in Remalna @-@ city , Mel finds herself popular in part because of her now legendary rebellion against the unpopular King Galdran . She acquires many male admirers , and is friendly but dismissive towards their romantic attentions . Mel avoids Shevraeth when possible , though when she often unexpectedly encounters him , Mel fights to remain cordial while he remains inscrutable but polite . Meanwhile , Galdran 's sister , the Marquise of Merindar , attempts to manipulate Mel into distracting Shevraeth from her covert plans to take the throne for herself , though this is largely unsuccessful . 
 While at court , Mel begins exchanging letters and tokens with a secret admirer . She gradually opens up her feelings of ignorance and being out of her depth at court ; they also discuss court politics and academic subjects , with her admirer offering advice and encouragement about her growing knowledge . Meanwhile , Mel meets Merindar 's reclusive son Flauvic and pursues a brief relationship with him before realizing that she has no real feelings for him . Through this relationship experience , she begins to realize her exchange of letters has become a courtship , though she does not know her admirer 's identity . 
 Mel learns from her spy Azmus that northern mercenaries have been seen near the border – allies of the Marquise of Merindar – and that other allied forces are planning on eradicating the Hill Folk to take their <unk> for payment . Mel sends Azmus to tell Shevraeth and rides out to warn the Hill Folk , but is shocked to encounter Shevraeth already on the road . Initially , he assumes she is plotting with Merindar against him , but lets her go when she tells him about the plans against the Hill Folk . An outnumbered Mel bravely tries to stop a group of mercenaries marching towards nearby forests , and is only saved by forces sent by Shevraeth . The Hill Folk now safe , Mel returns to Shevraeth , where she learns that he successfully put down Merindar 's revolt . She also learns that he has been her secret admirer . After finally calling him by his first name , Vidanric , they kiss . The two return to Remalna @-@ city , and find that Flauvic has secretly bewitched the entire capitol . As Flauvic prepares to complete his victory , the Hill Folk come to Mel 's rescue and turn him into a tree . With the realm now secure , Shevraeth and Mel marry and are crowned as king and queen . 
 = = Style and genre = = 
 Crown Duel has been labeled a coming @-@ of @-@ age story . According to The ALAN Review , Mel 's " journey from captivity to freedom parallels her coming of age , " in which she " comes to realize that she has led a very sheltered life and that people are often not what they seem . " This teenage perspective affects how the reader views the novel 's events – Smith has commented that if she " see [ s ] a story from a kid 's eye view , then what shapes that story is how kids look at the world . " In Brigham Young University 's Children 's Book and Play Review , Leah Hanson wrote that as a result , " we view the happenings at court with her same confusion and suspicion . " Writing for the same publication , Lillian H. Heil added that " the reader learns to expect that she will plunge into every situation with minimal thought about the consequences . " 
 Crown Duel deviates from the typical rebellion story by treating its success as another problem to be dealt with . Comparing this to the George Orwell story Animal Farm , Leigh Kimmel wrote that by defeating " the wicked king at midpoint , the second half involv [ es ] court intrigues of the provisional government as the next king is decided upon , " thus increasing the challenges for the protagonist . Rather than face armies and weapons , Mel must contend with a court where " war is just as intense and bewildering as on the <unk> swords have been traded for fans and armor discarded for elaborate dresses . " 
 = = Publication = = 
 In the United States , Harcourt published Crown Duel in April 1997 , and followed it with a sequel , Court Duel , in March of the following year . According to Smith , this split was made because her original novel was " already ' too long ' for production costs . " Firebird Books combined the two into one edition , also entitled Crown Duel , in 2002 . Rich Horton , writing in Locus magazine , attributes this republication to the growing popularity of YA fantasy , as writers and publishers observed the success of Harry Potter and other fantasy stories . 
 In 2008 , Smith released a prequel to Crown Duel entitled A Stranger to Command , which follows the Marquis of Shevraeth 's early life learning military command . In 2010 , Book View Cafe released another edition of Crown Duel as an e @-@ book , which combined the two main stories in tandem with a new short story entitled " Vidanric 's Birthday Surprise , " in addition to six scenes from Vidanric 's point of view . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jim C. Hines , co @-@ editor of the fantasy anthology Heroes in Training , considers the combined volume of Crown Duel to be Smith 's most popular YA book . Reviews for the first 1997 edition of Crown Duel have been generally positive , with reviewers highlighting Smith 's <unk> ability and Mel 's worthiness as a protagonist . Booklist reviewer Carolyn Phelan stated that Smith " tells a fast @-@ moving tale of adventure , intrigue , and honor , with Mel a likable heroine and a lively narrator . " Phelan added that " characters and setting are well realized , but the novel seems plot driven from its midpoint almost to the book 's end . " Lillian H. Heil of Brigham Young University also found favor with the novel 's heroine , noting in her review that Mel 's " fortitude in the face of enormous difficulties , her willingness to admit her mistakes , and her concern for others make her an appealing , if stubborn , young woman . " Author Jo Walton , contributing to Tor.com , wrote that the first book " has a fairly predictable plot , " but a " terrific YA heroine " redeems its flaws . Walton thought that the story drew strength from its teenage perspective , because " we get immersed in the world and the problems of the world and see [ Mel ] grow up from the inside , in the best traditions of YA fiction . " 
 In another review of the first book , Publishers Weekly noted that Smith " create [ s ] a fantasy world fit for the most discriminating medieval partisan . It cleverly walks just this side of parody , getting away with lines like , ' I wished I could personally flout him and his busy searchers , and make him look the fool he was . ' " In a similar vein , Kirkus Reviews praised the first novel as " Smith 's lush descriptions evoke a fantastic yet credible world , where magic spells and enchanted stones are everyday facts of life . " M. Jean Greenlaw , contributing to The ALAN Review , lauded Smith for her " language and imagery " as well as " her deft plotting [ to ] keep the reader glued to the pages . " Writing for the School Library Journal , Patricia Lothrop @-@ Green , however , gave a largely negative review to the first part , highlighting " huge logical leaps , " an " utterly predictable plot , " and a heroine whom " many readers will be thoroughly tired of " by the end of the story . 
 Reviewers generally have found less to favor in Smith 's second book , Court Duel , though reviews have still been mainly positive . It was noted by Carolyn Phelan of Booklist to be " different in setting , structure , and tone " from its predecessor , who added that " readers who loved Crown Duel for its strongly realized fantasy world , adventurous characters , and scenes of action may find the sequel disappointing , " though she found Meliara to be " as compelling as ever . " Ruth Cox of Emergency Librarian observed " a flicker of the love / hate relationship often found in adult romance novels between Meliara and Shevraeth . " Contributing to Brigham Young 's Children 's Book and Play Review , Leah Hanson called the second part " fast paced and intriguing , " and said it could " stand on its own as an enthralling story . " Jo Walton believed that the second story 's changing fashions and fan customs were " done very well , " and added that the court 's culture of terror felt real . She opined that " Mel 's eruption into their midst has in it something of the stranger coming to Versailles , and it 's fascinating , " but called " Mel 's continued obliviousness to the identity of her mysterious Unknown correspondent " " slightly implausible . " Walton concluded that the combined volume Crown Duel is " a charming book with a solid background and a great first person voice . Give it to your twelve year old friends , and read it with your inner twelve @-@ year @-@ old eyes . " The publication Voice of Youth Advocates included Crown Duel in its list of " fantasy for people who don 't like fantasy , " and wrote that the novel " ha [ s ] few fantastical creatures , and readers will relate easily to the main characters . " 
 = British airborne operations in North Africa = 
 The British airborne operations in North Africa were conducted by British paratroopers of the 1st Parachute Brigade , commanded by Brigadier Edwin Flavell , as part of the Tunisia Campaign of World War II , over the period between November 1942 and April 1943 . 
 When planning began for Operation Torch , the Allied invasion of North Africa in 1942 , it was decided to attach the 1st Parachute Brigade , part of the 1st Airborne Division , to the Allied forces taking part , as an American airborne unit , the 2nd Battalion , 509th Parachute Infantry Regiment , was also to be used during the invasion . After a short period of training and being brought up to operational strength , mainly with men from the 2nd Parachute Brigade , the brigade was deployed to North Africa in November 1942 . 
 Units from the brigade dropped near Bône on 12 November , then near Souk el @-@ Arba and Béja on 13 November , and at Pont Du Fahs on 29 November , seizing airfields , fighting as infantry after each action and linking up with an Allied armoured force , supporting it until December . Due to the inability of units of the British First Army to link up with the Pont Du Fahs force , the 2nd Parachute Battalion , under Lieutenant Colonel John D. Frost , was forced to retreat over fifty miles towards the nearest Allied units ; it was attacked several times during the retreat , and although it reached Allied lines safely it had taken more than 250 casualties . 
 For the next four months the 1st Parachute Brigade was used in a ground role , serving under several formations and advancing with Allied ground forces ; it suffered heavy casualties on several occasions but also took large numbers of Axis prisoners . The brigade was transferred out of the front in mid @-@ April 1943 and left to rejoin the rest of the 1st Airborne Division to train for Operation Husky , the Allied invasion of Sicily . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The German military was one of the pioneers of the use of airborne formations , conducting several successful airborne operations during the Battle of France in 1940 , including the Battle of Fort Eben @-@ Emael . Impressed by the success of German airborne operations , the Allied governments decided to form their own airborne formations . This decision would eventually lead to the creation of two British airborne divisions , as well as a number of smaller units . The British airborne establishment began development on 22 June 1940 , when the Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , directed the War Office in a memorandum to investigate the possibility of creating a corps of 5 @,@ 000 parachute troops . Despite the Prime Minister 's desire to have 5 @,@ 000 airborne troops within a short period , a number of problems were rapidly encountered by the War Office . Very few military gliders existed in Britain in 1940 , and these were too light for military purposes , and there was also a shortage of suitable transport aircraft to tow gliders and carry paratroopers . On 10 August , Churchill was informed that although 3 @,@ 500 volunteers had been selected to train as airborne troops , only 500 could currently begin training because of limitations in equipment and aircraft . The War Office stated in a memorandum to the Prime Minister in December 1940 that 500 parachute troops could probably be trained and be ready for operations by the spring of 1941 , but this figure was purely arbitrary ; the actual number that could be trained and prepared by that period would rely entirely on the creation of a training establishment and the provision of required equipment . 
 A training establishment for parachute troops was set up at RAF Ringway , near Manchester , on 21 June 1940 and named the Central Landing Establishment , and the initial 500 volunteers began training for airborne operations . A number of gliders were being designed and constructed by the Royal Air Force , which had also provided a number of Armstrong Whitworth Whitley medium bombers for conversion into transport aircraft . Organizational plans were also being laid down , with the War Office calling for two parachute brigades to be operational by 1943 . However , the immediate development of any further airborne formations , as well as the initial 500 volunteers already training , was hampered by three problems . With the threat of invasion in 1940 , many War Office officials and senior British Army officers did not believe that sufficient men could be spared from the effort to the rebuild the Army after the Battle of France to create an effective airborne force ; many believed that such a force would only have a nuisance raiding value and would not affect the conflict in any useful way . There were also material problems ; all three of the armed services were expanding and rebuilding , particularly the Army , and British industry had not yet been organised to a sufficient war footing to support all three services as well as the fledgling airborne force . Finally , the airborne forces lacked a single , coherent policy , with no clear idea as to how they should be organised , or whether they should come under the command of the Army or the RAF ; inter organizational rivalry between the War Office and the Air Ministry , in charge of the RAF , was a major factor in delaying the further expansion of British airborne forces . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 However , despite these difficulties , by mid 1941 the fledgling airborne establishment was able to form the first British airborne unit . This was No. 11 Special Air Service Battalion , which numbered approximately 350 officers and other ranks , and had been formed by converting and retraining No. 2 Commando . On 10 February 1941 thirty eight men from the battalion conducted the first British airborne operation , Operation Colossus , a raid against an aqueduct in southern Italy ; it was hoped that the destruction of the aqueduct would deprive Italian civilian and military installations of their water supply , damage Italian morale and the Italian war effort in North Africa . The raid was a failure , with all but one of the airborne troops being captured by Italian military forces , but it did help provide the British airborne establishment with vital lessons for future operations . Shortly after the operation had been conducted , a memorandum was circulated through the War Office by the Chiefs of Staff of the Army and Royal Air Force requiring that No. 11 Special Air Service Battalion be expanded into a Parachute Brigade . In July , after a period of discussion about the problems of creating such a formation , the Chief of the Imperial General Staff authorised the raising of a brigade headquarters , 1st , 2nd , 3rd and 4th Parachute Battalions and an air troop of sappers from the Royal Engineers . Given the title of 1st Parachute Brigade , volunteers from infantry units were recruited for the new formation from 31 August . Initially commanded by Brigadier Richard Nelson Gale , who was replaced in mid 1942 by Brigadier Edwin Flavell , the brigade began an extensive training regime , which included conducting trials and tests of new airborne equipment . On 10 October it was joined by 1 Airlanding Brigade , which had been formed from 31 Independent Brigade Group , a formation recently returned from India . This was shortly followed , on 29 October , by the formation of Headquarters 1st Airborne Division under the command of Brigadier <unk> Browning , who would have under his control 1st Parachute Brigade , 1st Airlanding Brigade , and the glider units currently training with the two brigades . 
 Browning was shortly after promoted to the rank of Major General , and he then supervised the newly formed division as it underwent a prolonged of expansion and intensive training , with new brigades being raised and then assigned to the division and even more new equipment being tested . By mid April 1942 the division was able to conduct a small scale airborne exercise for the benefit of the Prime Minister , in which twenty one transport aircraft and nine gliders participated , and by late December the division had been brought up to full strength . In mid September , as the division was coming close to reaching full strength , Browning was informed that Operation Torch , the Allied invasion of North Africa , would take place in November . After being informed that the 2nd Battalion of the American 503rd Parachute Infantry Regiment was to take part in the campaign , he argued that a larger airborne force should be utilised during the invasion , as the large distances and comparatively light opposition would provide a number of opportunities for airborne operations . The War Office and Commander in Chief , Home Forces were won over by the argument , and agreed to detach 1st Parachute Brigade from 1st Airborne Division and place it under the command of General Dwight D. Eisenhower , who would command all Allied troops participating in the invasion . The Air Ministry was unable to provide transport aircraft or aircrews to operate with the brigade , so the United States Army Air Forces took over this responsibility , providing 60 Group of 51 Wing which flew Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas . A practice drop was conducted with a unit from the brigade on 9 October , although a lack of American familiarity with British airborne equipment and parachuting technique , as well a lack of British familiarity with the Dakota , led to three men being killed ; this meant a delay in training whilst new techniques were developed , which in turn resulted in the majority of the brigade 's personnel travelling to North Africa without having conducted a training drop from a Dakota . After it had been brought to full operational strength , partly by cross posting personnel from the newly formed 2nd Parachute Brigade , and had been provided with sufficient equipment and resources , the brigade departed for North Africa at the beginning of November . 
 = = Bône = = 
 As an insufficient number of transport aircraft were allocated to the brigade , it was only possible to transport 3rd Parachute Battalion by air , with the battalion 's strength consisting of its headquarters staff and ' B ' and ' C ' companies . The battalion landed at Gibraltar at dawn on 10 November , and its commander , Lieutenant Colonel Geoffrey Pine Coffin , was informed that the battalion was scheduled to conduct an airborne operation the next day . Pine Coffin was briefed by Lt. Gen. Kenneth Anderson , commander of the British First Army , on the mission ; it was to take off from the airfield at Maison Blanche and conduct a parachute drop to capture an airfield near the port of Bône , which bordered both Tunisia and Algeria . It was known by Allied intelligence that a battalion of German Fallschirmjaeger were currently stationed at Tunis , and that they were likely to be given the same task ; as such , it was vital that the two companies capture the airfield first . Once this had been achieved , it would then hold the airfield until relieved by No. 6 Commando , which would conduct an amphibious landing , capture Bône itself and link up with the battalion . This was a challenging task for Pine Coffin , as the battalion had arrived in fewer Dakotas than it would need to conduct a parachute drop , and two aircraft had failed to arrive at Gibraltar ; however , sufficient aircraft were found and at 04 : 30 on 11 November they took off from Gibraltar , landing at Maison Blanche at 09 : 00 . However , since the American pilots flying the Dakotas had no experience with night drops , and locating drop zones in darkness was extremely difficult , it was decided to delay the mission until dawn on 12 November . 
 The day before the operation , Pine Coffin and his staff began to plan for the mission . The twenty nine Dakotas that were to transport the battalion would take off from Maison Blanche and follow the coast until they reached the harbour at Bône . The leading Dakota would then turn south east and fly low over the airfield to ascertain its status . If it was unoccupied the paratroopers would be dropped onto the airfield , but if the Fallschirmjaeger were present then the Dakotas would drop the companies a mile away ; there they would form up and launch an attack on the airfield . The planning was completed by 16 : 30 , and at 20 : 00 the American pilots were briefed on the operation , which was briefly interrupted when a German aircraft flew over the area and dropped a stick of bombs . The aircraft took off at 08 : 30 the next day and experienced an uneventful flight to the airfield , although two aircraft experienced mechanical problems and ditched into the ocean , causing three casualties . The lead Dakota flew over the airfield , and after observing the airfield to be unoccupied , dropped its paratroopers , followed in succession by the remaining transport aircraft . The drop was reasonably accurate , with a few containers and paratroopers being dropped three miles from the airfield . Thirteen men were injured during the drop , primarily when they landed , and one was killed when he accidentally shot himself with his Sten gun . One officer was knocked unconscious during landing and remained so for the next four days , on occasion being heard to murmur " I 'll have a little more of the turbot , waiter ! " . Unknown to the British force , their drop had been observed by a flight of German Junkers Ju 52 transport aircraft , carrying the battalion of <unk> ; having seen that the airfield was already occupied , the aircraft turned back towards Tunis . When it had secured the airfield , the battalion came under attack from Stuka divebombers , and was initially defenceless . However , once No.6 Commando had secured Bône a number of Oerlikon anti aircraft guns were salvaged from sunken vessels in the port 's harbour and these , in combination with a squadron of Spitfires that arrived on the evening of 11 November , were used to fend off future attacks . The battalion held the airfield in conjunction with No.6 Commando until 15 November , when it withdrew and linked up with ' A ' Company and the rest of 1st Parachute Brigade at Maison Blanche . 
 = = Béja and Souk el Arba = = 
 1st Parachute Brigade , less 3rd Parachute Battalion , arrived at Algiers on 12 November , with some of its stores arriving slightly later . By the evening , reconnaissance parties had travelled to the airfield at Maison Blanche , with the remainder of the brigade following on the morning of 13 November ; it was quartered in Maison Blanche , Maison @-@ Carrée and <unk> . On the same day , the brigade was joined by 2nd Battalion of the American 509th Parachute Infantry Regiment , which was forthwith attached to the brigade ; the battalion had arrived in North Africa on 8 November , and been supporting the advance of the United States Fifth Army . The original intentions of Lieutenant General Kenneth Anderson , commander of the British First Army , had been to have the brigade , minus 3rd Parachute Battalion , conduct a parachute drop against the port of Tunis , approximately five hundred miles behind German lines . The brigade had been issued with briefing materials for the operation , which it studied as it sailed to North Africa , but the plan had been abandoned by the time it arrived ; Allied intelligence reported that between 7 @,@ 000 10 @,@ 000 German troops had recently been airlanded in Tunis , which ensured that an airborne operation out of the question . With this ambitious plan cancelled , on 14 November First Army directed that a single parachute battalion would be dropped the next day near Souk el @-@ Arba and Béja ; the battalion was to contact French forces at Beja to ascertain whether they would remain neutral , or support the Allies ; secure and guard the cross roads and airfield at Soul el Arba ; and patrol eastwards to harass German forces . The 2nd Battalion of the 509th PIR would drop at the same time , with the objective of capturing the airfields at Tebessa and <unk> el @-@ Bain . 1st Parachute Battalion , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel James Hill , was selected for the task , to which Hill objected . The battalion had been forced to unload the vessel carrying its supplies and equipment itself , and had also to arrange its own transportation to Maison Blanche as no drivers were provided at Algiers ; when it had arrived at Maison Blanche , it had been subjected to several Luftwaffe air raids that targeted the airfield . Hill argued that as a result his men were exhausted , and he did not believe all of the battalion 's equipment could be sorted out within twenty four hours ; as such he asked for the operation to be postponed for a short period , but this was denied . 
 Hill faced further problems as he planned for the operation . The American pilots of the Dakota transport aircraft that would transport the battalion were inexperienced and had never conducted a parachute drop before , and there was no time for any training or exercises . There was also no photos of the airfield or the surrounding areas , and only a single , small scale map available for navigation . To ensure that the aircraft found the drop zone and delivered the battalion accurately , Hill decided that he would sit in the cockpit of the leading Dakota and assist the pilot . Despite the battalion 's parachutes only arriving at 16 : 30 on 14 November , and were packed twelve to a container which meant they had to be removed and individually <unk> , the battalion was prepared by 15 November and took off at 07 : 30 . The Dakotas were escorted by four American P @-@ 38 Lightning fighters , which engaged and drove off two roving German fighters , but as the Dakotas approached the Tunisian border , they encountered thick clouds and were forced to turn back , landing at Maison Blanche at 11 : 00 . It was decided that the battalion would conduct the operation the next day , which allowed the paratroopers to rest for a night . At the same time , 2nd Battalion of the 509th PIR successfully conducted a drop at Tebessa , capturing its objectives and securing the area ; it then passed from the control of 1st Parachute Brigade and remained in the area for some time . 1st Parachute Battalion took off on the morning of 16 November , and encountered excellent weather which allowed the transport aircraft to drop the battalion accurately around the airfield at Souk el Arba . Most of the paratroopers landed successfully , but one man was killed when his rigging line twisted around his neck mid drop , throttling him ; one officer broke his leg on landing , and four men were wounded when a Sten gun was accidentally fired . The battalion 's second in command , Major Pearson , remained at the airfield with a small detachment which collected airborne equipment and supervised the burial of the casualty . 
 Meanwhile , Lieutenant Colonel Hill led the rest of the battalion , approximately 525 strong , in some commandeered trucks towards the town of Béja , an important road and railway centre approximately forty miles from the airfield . The battalion arrived around 18 : 00 and was welcomed by the local French garrison , 3 @,@ 000 strong , which Hill managed to persuaded to cooperate with the paratroopers ; in order to give the garrison and any German observers the impression that he possessed a larger force than he actually did , Hill arranged for the battalion to march through the town several times , wearing different headgear and holding different equipment each time . A short time after the battalion entered Béja , several German aircraft arrived and bombed the town , although they caused little damage and no casualties . The next day , ' S ' Company was sent with a detachment of engineers to the village of Sidi N 'Sir , about twenty miles away ; they were to contact the local French forces , believed to be pro British , and harass German forces . The detachment found the village and made contact with the French , who allowed them to pass through towards the town of Mateur ; by nightfall the force had not reached the town , and decided to encamp for the night . At dawn a German convoy of armoured cars passed the detachment , and it was decided to set an ambush for the convoy if it returned , with anti @-@ tank mines being laid on the road and a mortar and Bren guns being set up in concealed positions . When the convoy returned at approximately 10 : 00 the leading vehicle struck a mine and exploded , blocking the road , and the other vehicles were disabled with mortar fire , Gammon bombs and the remaining anti tank mines . A number of Germans were killed and the rest taken prisoner , with two paratroopers being slightly wounded . The detachment returned to Béja with prisoners and several slightly damaged armoured cars . After the success of the ambush , Hill sent a second patrol to harass local German forces , but it was withdrawn after it encountered a larger German force that inflicted several British casualties ; Béja was also bombed by Stuka divebombers , inflicting civilian casualties and destroying a number of houses . 
 On 19 November , Hill visited the commanding officer of the French forces guarding a vital bridge at Medjez el Bab , and warned him that any attempt by German forces to cross the bridge would be opposed by the battalion . Hill attached ' R ' Company to the French forces to ensure the bridge was not captured . German forces soon arrived at the bridge , and their commanding officer demanded that they be allowed to take control of the bridge and cross it to attack the British positions . The French rejected the German demands , and in conjunction with ' R ' Company repelled subsequent German attacks that lasted several hours . The battalion was reinforced with the American 175th Field Artillery Battalion and elements of the Derbyshire Yeomanry , but despite fierce resistance the German forces proved to be too strong , and by 04 : 30 on 20 November the Allied forces had yielded the bridge and the surrounding area to the Germans . Two days later , Hill received information that a strong Italian force , which included a number of tanks , was stationed at Gue Hill . Hill decided to attack the force and attempt to disable the tanks , and the following night moved the battalion , less a small guard detachment which remained at Béja , to Sidi N 'Sir where it linked up with a force of French Senegalese infantry . Hill decided that the battalion 's section of 3 inch mortars would cover ' R ' and ' S ' Companies as they advanced up Gue Hill and attacked the Italian force , while a small force of sappers would mine the road at the rear of the hill to ensure the Italian tanks could not retreat . 
 The battalion arrived at the hill without incident and began to prepare for the attack ; however , just prior to the beginning of the attack there were several loud explosions from the rear of the hill . The anti tank grenades carried by the sappers had accidentally detonated , killing all but two of them . The battalion lost the element of surprise , and Hill immediately ordered the two companies to advance up the hill . The force reached the top of the hill and engaged a mixed force of German and Italian soldiers , who were assisted by three Italian light tanks . Hill drew his revolver , and with his adjutant and a small group of paratroopers advanced on the tanks , firing shots through their observation ports in an attempt to persuade the crews to surrender . The tactic worked on two tanks , but upon reaching the third tank Hill and his men were fired upon by the tanks crew ; Hill was shot three times in the chest and his adjutant wounded , and the tank crew swiftly dispatched with small arms fire . Hill survived because of prompt medical treatment , and was replaced as commander of the battalion by Major Pearson , who supervised the routing of the rest of the German and Italian soldiers . Two days later the battalion moved from Beja to an area south of Mateur , where it linked up with Allied ground forces and came under the command of an armoured regimental group known as ' Blade Force ' ; the battalion remained in the area in conjunction with ' Blade Force ' until it was withdrawn on 11 December . 
 = = Depienne and Oudna = = 
 On 18 November , 1st Parachute Brigade was ordered by British First Army to prepare 2nd Parachute Battalion , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel John Frost , to drop near the coastal city of Sousse in order to deny the nearby port and airfield to the Axis . There being a limited number of transport aircraft available to the brigade , it was decided that two companies would take off from Maison Blanche at 11 : 00 on 19 November , with the remainder of the battalion following the next day ; the length of the operation was estimated to be ten days . However , the operation was delayed for twenty four hours on 18 November , and again on 19 November for a further period ; during this period , 3rd Parachute Battalion arrived at Maison Blanche , which was itself subjected to several Axis air raids which inflicted several casualties on the airborne troops and damaged several aircraft . Finally on 27 November the brigade was ordered to prepare 2nd Parachute Battalion for a parachute drop near the town of Pont du Fahs , in order to deny its use to the Axis ; it would also raid airfields at Depienne and Oudna in order to destroy any enemy aircraft stationed there . The battalion would then link up with ground forces from the British First Army , who would be advancing towards the battalion 's position at the time of the parachute drop . At 23 : 00 on 27 November the operation was delayed for 48 hours , and on the night of 28 November the brigade was informed that Pont du Fahs had been occupied by advance elements of 78th Infantry Division . Despite this , and difficulties in procuring aerial photographs of the proposed landing zones , the brigade was ordered to have 2nd Battalion drop at the airfield at Depienne ; the battalion was to destroy all aircraft stationed there and at the Oudna airfield , spread ' fear and despondency ' amongst nearby Axis troops , and then link up with ground forces from British First Army advancing towards Tunis . 
 On the morning of 29 November , the 530 strong battalion boarded 44 transport aircraft and took off , bound for Oudna . Because there had been insufficient time to conduct an aerial reconnaissance of the airfield , Lieutenant Colonel Frost was forced to choose a landing zone for the battalion from his position in the lead aircraft , fortunately locating a clear , open space near the airfield . The airfield had been abandoned by the Germans , and the landing for the battalion was scattered but unopposed , although it incurred seven casualties during the drop , one of which was fatal . The airfield was secured after the battalion had rallied ; a platoon from ' C ' Company remained at the airfield to guard the wounded and the discarded parachutes , and at midnight the rest of the battalion moved out towards Oudna . As the battalion advanced the only transport available to it were a few hand drawn mule carts , which made the unit look , in the words of one paratrooper , " like a fucking travelling circus rather than a parachute battalion . " By 11 : 00 on 30 November the battalion had reached a position that allowed it to overlook the Oudna airfield , and at 14 : 30 it began to advance and reached the airfield , only to find that it , too , had been abandoned . The battalion was then counter attacked by a number of German tanks supported by fighters and Stuka divebombers . The Germans were repelled , but at dusk Frost pulled the battalion back westwards to a more defensible position , hoping to await the arrival of advance units from British First Army . These , however , were not to arrive ; in a wireless message received at dawn on 1 December , Frost was informed that the Allied drive towards Tunis had been postponed . 
 A short while later a German armoured column was seen advancing from Oudna , and Frost decided to set an ambush to try to destroy it ; the leading elements of the column , however , surprised a group of paratroopers filling water bottles at a nearby well , the ambush was sprung too early , inflicting only a single casualty . The battalion was understrength , having taken casualties at Oudna , and was running low on ammunition , but it managed to drive off the column with mortar fire ; however , this was only a brief respite . Two armoured cars and a tank was seen to be moving towards the battalion from a different direction , reportedly sporting recognition signals of British First Army ; Frost sent a party out to greet the vehicles , only for them to be taken prisoner and it to be revealed that the vehicles were German with captured equipment . The German commander sent one of the captured paratroopers with a message demanding Frost surrender , but he refused to comply ; instead he ordered that the radios and mortars were to be destroyed and the battalion would evacuate westwards towards Allied lines , approximately fifty miles away . The battalion managed to withdraw to higher ground , but suffered a number of casualties from the German armour as it did so . Now positioned on the high ground , which consisted of a ridge crowned by two small hills , the paratroopers were attacked by tanks and infantry supported by heavy mortar fire . The battalion suffered a number of casualties but was saved by the unexpected intervention of German aircraft ; mistaking their troops for the paratroopers , they knocked out several tanks and inflicted heavy casualties . 
 The battalion had by now suffered approximately 150 casualties , and as such Frost took the decision for the battalion to retreat westwards again , with the wounded to be left behind and guarded by a small detachment ; at nightfall each company would attempt to make its way to the village of <unk> . On the night of 31 November / 1 December , the battalion began its retreat , moving as quickly as possible , but a number of paratroopers became disorientated and were captured by German forces pursuing the battalion . By 2 December Battalion Headquarters , the Support Company and attached sappers , commanded by Frost , had reached an Arab farm , where they linked up with ' A ' Company and formed a group about 200 strong ; however , a large number of paratroopers were still missing . German forces soon located and surrounded Frost and his men and a fierce battle began ; because the paratroopers were so low on ammunition Frost realised the farm could not be held , and during the night he led a charge through the weakest part of the German defences . Once they had broken through , Frost used his hunting horn to rally the remaining paratroopers , and they then marched for the Allied held town of Medjez el Bab ; after stopping at one last farm for supplies , the group reached the town on 3 December and linked up with American patrols . Stragglers continued to reach Allied lines over the next few days , aided by units from the 56th Reconnaissance Regiment , but the battalion ultimately suffered sixteen officers and 250 other ranks killed , captured or wounded during the mission . Several historians have commented on the operation . Rick Atkinson has labelled the mission " a foolish , wanton mistake " let down by inadequate intelligence ; and Peter <unk> makes a similar argument , writing that the mission was " a disastrous episode , badly planned and based on faulty intelligence . " For Otway , the mission " suffered from a lack of information , and from a lack of adequate arrangements for a link up between the ground forces and too lightly armed and comparatively immobile airborne troops . " 
 = = Ground role = = 
 Reinforcements for 2nd Parachute Battalion arrived from Britain to make good the battalion 's losses , and on 11 December it moved to Souk el <unk> , linking up with the rest of the Brigade . As Frost and his men retreated from Oudna , the Brigade had been informed it would be used in an infantry role , and on 11 December it came under the operational control of British V Corps and moved to positions near Beda ; when it arrived No. 1 Commando and a French unit , 2e Bataillon 9e Regiment de Tirailleurs <unk> , were assigned to its command . The brigade took up defensive positions around Beda and deployed patrols around the immediate vicinity , but remained in a static role ; on 21 December it was placed under the command of 78th Infantry Division to participate in an attack towards Tunis , but heavy rain caused this operation to be cancelled . When it was decided that continuing poor weather made any further assault towards Tunis impractical , Brigadier Flavell asked that the brigade be transferred to the rear so that it could be used in an airborne role . His request was denied , however , as V Corps stated that there were insufficient troops to replace the brigade ; as such it remained in its positions , defending the entire Beda area . 
 The brigade subsequently became heavily involved in fighting throughout the front it occupied , especially 3rd Parachute Battalion , which launched several attacks on a geographical feature known as ' Green Hill ' ; during multiple attacks , several companies from the battalion were able to gain the crest of the hill , only to be driven back by enemy counter attacks . On the night of 7 8 January the brigade was relieved from the frontline and transported to Algiers , with the exception of 2nd Parachute Battalion , which remained under the command of 78th Infantry Division because of a lack of troops to replace it . Plans were made to use the brigade in conjunction with US II Corps to cut Axis lines of communications around Sfax and <unk> , but these were never finalised . On 24 January it was transferred back to V Corps and came under the command of 6th Armoured Division , but did not remain there for long ; two days later it came under the command of XIX French Corps , located in area around Bou <unk> . There it was given command of several French units and stationed between 36th Infantry Brigade and 1st Guards Brigade . On 2 February 1 Parachute Battalion was ordered to mount an attack on the massifs of Djebel Mansour and Djebel <unk> , supported by a company belonging to the French Foreign Legion . The battalion launched its attack during the night and by the next morning had captured both features against fierce opposition ; however , heavy casualties meant that the battalion was forced to retreat from Djebel <unk> and concentrate on Djebel Mansour . There they were cut off from supplies and almost all reinforcements , and counter attacks by 6th Armoured Division failed to reach the battalion . A battalion from the Grenadier Guards was able to capture most of Djebel <unk> on 4 February , but both battalions came under increasingly heavy attack , and by 11 : 00 the next day it was decided to withdraw both battalions . 
 On 8 February 2 Parachute Battalion was transferred back to 1st Parachute Brigade , and the entire formation came under the command of 6th Armoured Division and then British Y Division , an ad hoc division which relieved 6th Armoured Division in the middle of February . The brigade remained in static positions for the rest of February , repelling several minor enemy attacks and then a major offensive which took place on 26 February , during which it inflicted some 400 casualties and took 200 prisoners at a cost of 18 killed and 54 wounded paratroopers . On 3 March the brigade was relieved by 26 US Regimental Combat Team and marched to new positions located astride the road that ran between Tamara and <unk> . The brigade then held those positions against several attacks that took place between 8 9 March , taking almost 200 prisoners . On 10 March Brigadier Flavell was given command of all forces in the brigade 's sector including 139th Brigade and No. 1 Commando and the entire force repelled several more attacks . On the night of 17 March , however , the entire force was compelled to retreat several miles to new positions after a particularly strong attack broke through the positions held by 139th Brigade and several French battalions . These new positions were held against several more enemy attacks , and secured by 19 March . 2nd and 3rd Parachute Battalions were placed in reserve on 20 March on the request of Brigadier Flavell , who argued that the brigade as a whole was exhausted and required rest . However , 3rd Parachute Battalion was ordered back to the front on 21 March and tasked with attacking a feature known as ' The Pimple ' after a previous attack had failed with heavy casualties . It launched an attack on the feature that night , but was forced to withdraw by dawn the next day after exhausting its ammunition and taking numerous casualties . Because ' The Pimple ' was regarded as a vital position from which a general Allied offensive could be launched , however , the brigade was ordered to attack it again . 1st Parachute Battalion did so on the night of 23 March and successfully seized it after several hours of fighting . 
 On 27 March , the entire brigade participated in a general Allied offensive aimed at taking control of the area around Tamera . 1st and 2nd Parachute Battalions launched an attack at 23 : 00 the same day , taking numerous prisoners and securing their objectives and then repulsed a German counterattack , albeit with heavy losses . Further heavy and often confusing fighting continued , with several companies of 3rd Parachute Battalion having to be attached to 2nd Parachute Battalion to reinforce it . 1st Parachute Battalion also seized its own objectives , and by the end of 29 March the brigade had secured all of its objectives and taken 770 German and Italian troops as prisoners . On 31 March the brigade then took up positions covering the left flank of 46th Division , and for the next two weeks it remained in the area , conducting numerous patrols but encountering little opposition . On 15 March the brigade was relieved by 39 US Regimental Combat Team and moved to the rear . It then travelled to Algiers on 18 April and remained there ; Brigadier Flavell left for England to take up a new command , and was replaced by Brigadier Gerald Lathbury . Shortly afterwards the brigade rejoined 1st Airborne Division and began training for the airborne landings that would take place during Operation Husky , the Allied invasion of Sicily . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During its time in North Africa , the 1st Para Brigade had captured more than 3 @,@ 500 enemies as prisoners of war and suffered 1 @,@ 700 casualties . To take the 2nd Parachute Battalion as an example , it had entered North Africa with 24 officers and 588 other ranks , absorbed some 230 replacements in January 1943 , and left in April with 14 officers and 346 other ranks , an overall casualty percentage of eighty percent . In 1st Parachute Battalion , only four officers had remained with the battalion throughout the entire Tunisia Campaign without being killed or sufficiently wounded to be sent to the rear . The brigade had also been given the title of ' Rote Teufel ' or ' Red Devils ' by the German troops they had fought ; this was a distinct honour as the 1st Airborne Division commander , Major @-@ General Frederick Arthur Montague Browning , pointed out in a signal to the brigade , as " Such distinctions given by the enemy are seldom won in battle except by the finest fighting troops . " This title was later officially confirmed by General Sir Harold Alexander , commanding 18th Army Group , and applied henceforth to all British airborne troops . Lieutenant Colonel Terence Otway , who compiled the official history of the British Army 's airborne forces during the Second World War , analysed the brigades ' actions throughout the campaign . In terms of the brigades airborne operations , he stated that the missions conducted by 1st and 2nd Parachute Battalions were " severely handicapped " by a lack of aerial photography and a shortage of maps , as well as the lack of experience on the part of the American air crews who dropped both battalions at the beginning of their missions , causing highly inaccurate and dispersed drops . He also believed that a " lack of an expert in airborne matters at either Allied Forces Headquarters or First Army " ensured that the brigade was not used as efficiently as they might have been , and that this lack of expertise meant that logistical and planning arrangements before each mission could have been better . 
 He also argued that the brigade suffered from a lack of light anti tank weapons , as well as there being no fourth company in a battalion ; the absence of the latter was a " serious handicap " to each battalion , especially when surrounded by enemy forces . In terms of the brigade 's ground role , Otway considered it to have done well in terms of patrolling and night patrols , but was unaccustomed to cooperating with other arms , particularly artillery and armour , because of a lack of training and was forced to learn these skills during combat . It also suffered from a lack of reinforcements , as high physical and mental standards during airborne training led to a small pool of reinforcements that was easily depleted , as well as the absence of its own transport , forcing the brigade to rely on captured enemy vehicles and pack animals . Finally , Otway argued that " it was most uneconomical and inefficient to employ a parachute brigade in ground operations " unless it was expanded with sufficient transport and extra personnel , as well as possessing a superior officer who understood the specialised role the brigade played and could advise on how to effectively use it . 
 = Flag of Armenia = 
 The national flag of Armenia , the Armenian Tricolour ( Armenian : <unk> , <unk> ) , consists of three horizontal bands of equal width , red on the top , blue in the middle , and orange ( also described as " colour of apricot " ) on the bottom . The Armenian Supreme Soviet adopted the current flag on 24 August 1990 . On 15 June 2006 , the Law on the National Flag of Armenia , governing its usage , was passed by the National Assembly of Armenia . 
 Throughout history , there have been many variations of the Armenian flag . In ancient times , Armenian dynasties were represented by different symbolic animals displayed on their flags . In the twentieth century , various Soviet flags represented the Armenian SSR . 
 The meanings of the colors are interpreted in many different ways . For example , red stands for the blood of the 1 @.@ 5 million Armenians killed in the Armenian Genocide , blue is for the Armenian pure sky , and orange represents the country 's courage . 
 The official definition of the colors , as stated in the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia , is : 
 The red emblematizes the Armenian Highland , the Armenian people 's continued struggle for survival , maintenance of the Christian faith , Armenia 's independence and freedom . The blue emblematizes the will of the people of Armenia to live beneath peaceful skies . The orange emblematizes the creative talent and hard @-@ working nature of the people of Armenia . 
 = = Design = = 
 In 2012 , the Armenian National Institute of Standards ( SARM ) issued specifications about the construction and colors on the national flag . : 
 = = History = = 
 Today 's tricolor flag bears little resemblance to the earliest Armenian ' flags ' . In ancient times , armies went into battle behind carvings mounted on poles . The carvings might represent a dragon , an eagle , a lion or " some mysterious object of the gods " . With the advent of Christianity , the Armenian empire adopted many different flags representing various dynasties . The <unk> Dynasty 's flag , for instance , consisted of a red cloth displaying two eagles gazing at each other , separated by a flower . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 After Armenia was split between the Persian and the Ottoman Empires , the idea of an Armenian flag ceased to exist for some time . The Armenian Catholic priest Father <unk> Alishan created a new flag for Armenia in 1885 , after the Armenian Students Association of Paris requested one for the funeral of the French writer Victor Hugo . Alishan 's first design was very similar to today 's Armenian flag : a horizontal tricolor . However , it looked more like an upside @-@ down variation of the current flag of Bulgaria . The top band was red , symbolizing the first Sunday of Easter ( called " Red " Sunday ) , followed by a green band to represent the " Green " Sunday of Easter , and finally an arbitrary color , white , was chosen to complete the combination . While in France , Alishan also designed a second flag , identified today as the " Nationalist Armenian Flag " . It too was a tricolor , but unlike the previous design , this one was a vertical tricolor similar to the French flag . Its colors were red , green , and blue , from left to right , representing the rainbow that Noah saw after landing on Mount Ararat . 
 = = = Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic = = = 
 In 1828 , Persian Armenia was annexed to the Russian Empire after the last Russo @-@ Persian War , and became known as Russian Armenia . When the Russian Empire collapsed , Russian Armenia declared its independence and joined the short @-@ lived Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic , together with Georgia and Azerbaijan . This unified state hardly lasted a year and was soon dissolved . Since the Republic was short @-@ lived , it did not use any flags or symbols . Nevertheless , some historians consider a horizontal gold , black , and red tricolor , similar to that of the German flag but arranged differently , to have been the flag of Transcaucasia . The federation was dissolved on May 26 , 1918 , when Georgia declared its independence as the Democratic Republic of Georgia . Both Armenia and Azerbaijan declared their independence two days later , on May 28 , 1918 , as the First Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic , respectively . 
 = = = First Republic of Armenia = = = 
 After gaining independence , the First Republic of Armenia adopted the modern Armenian tricolor . Upon Stepan <unk> 's appearance in the Armenian National Council , the independent Armenian government selected the colors used during the Lusignan period : red , blue and yellow . An earlier prototype , which was eventually rejected , was the rainbow flag . This prototype can be seen at the Martiros Saryan House Museum in Yerevan , Armenia . They chose to replace the yellow with orange " because it merged better with the other two colors , presenting a more pleasing composition " . The flag of independent Armenia then had a ratio of 2 : 3 , but on August 24 , 1990 , when the Armenian Supreme Soviet adopted it as the flag of the Republic of Armenia , the ratio was changed to 1 : 2 . 
 = = = Early Soviet Armenia and the Transcaucasian SFSR = = = 
 On November 29 , 1920 Bolsheviks established the Armenian SSR . A new flag was introduced and fixed in the Constitution , accepted on February 2 , 1922 by the First Congress of Soviets of the Armenian SSR . That flag existed only for a month , because on March 12 the Armenian SSR united with the Georgian SSR and the Azerbaijan SSR under the Transcaucasian SFSR ( TSFSR ) . On December 30 , 1922 the Transcaucasian SFSR became one of the four Soviet republics that united to form the USSR . The flag of the republic had a hammer and sickle inserted into a star with initials " <unk> " ( <unk> ) written in Russian sans @-@ serif script . These letters stand for <unk> Советская <unk> <unk> Республика ( <unk> Sovetskaya <unk> <unk> Respublika , " Transcaucasian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic " ) . In 1936 , the TSFSR was broken up into its three constituent regions , which were named the Georgian SSR , the Armenian SSR , and the Azerbaijan SSR . 
 = = = Armenian SSR = = = 
 As a republic of the USSR , the Armenian SSR introduced its first flag in 1936 . Very similar to the flag of the Soviet Union , it was red and featured a yellow hammer and sickle in the corner . Underneath that , there were " H @-@ Kh @-@ S @-@ H " initials written in Armenian serif script . These initials , in the Western Armenian language , stand for <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , or the " Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic " . In the 1940s , the flag was altered to use the Eastern Armenian language spoken in the Republic . The initials were changed to " H @-@ S @-@ S @-@ R " meaning " <unk> Sovetakan <unk> Respublika " in the Eastern Armenian pronunciation . In 1952 , a new flag was introduced . The initials were removed completely and in their place a horizontal blue stripe was added . 
 In late May 1988 , amid rising nationalist tensions , Armenia 's new Communist party leader allowed the banned tricolour of the DRA to fly in Yerevan for the first time in over sixty years . A year later , following a Nagorno @-@ Karabakh @-@ themed mass demonstration where the tricolour was flown , he urged its official recognition . This came on August 24 , 1990 , a day after the Armenian Supreme Soviet declared the republic 's sovereignty and renamed the country the Republic of Armenia . At that point , just over a year before Armenia declared its formal independence from the USSR , the tricolour replaced the 1952 flag . 
 = = Usage = = 
 The 2006 law on the National Flag of Armenia states that the flag has to be raised on the following public buildings : 
 Residence of the President 
 Parliament 
 Government 
 Constitutional Court 
 Office of Public Prosecutor 
 Central Bank of Armenia 
 Other governmental buildings 
 The law requires the lowering of the flag to the midpoint of the flagpole on the days of mourning or during mourning ceremonies . A black ribbon needs to be placed at the top of the flag ; the length of the ribbon should be equal to the length of the flag . The flying flag has to be raised in its entirety , clean , and <unk> ; moreover , the lower part of the flag should be at least 2 @.@ 5 m off the ground . 
 = = = National flag days = = = 
 The day of the National Flag of Armenia is marked on 15 June every year . The day is chosen for the reason that the Armenian law on the National Flag of Armenia was passed on 15 June 2006 . The day of the Armenian tricolour was celebrated for the first time on 15 June 2010 in Yerevan . 
 The daily display of the Armenian flag is encouraged , but legally required only on the following days : 
 January 1 , January 2 – New Year 
 January 6 – Christmas 
 March 8 – International Women 's Day 
 April 7 – Motherhood and Beauty Day 
 May 1 – International Worker 's Solidarity Day 
 May 9 – Victory and Peace Day 
 May 28 – First Armenian Republic Day , 1918 
 July 5 – Constitution Day , 1995 
 September 21 – Independence Day , 1991 
 December 7 – Spitak Earthquake Memorial Day , 1988 
 = = Influence = = 
 The national flag is also mentioned in the song " Mer <unk> " ( Our Fatherland ) , the national anthem of Armenia . Specifically , the second and third stanzas sing about the creation of the national flag : 
 = = = Flag of Nagorno @-@ Karabakh = = = 
 On June 2 , 1992 , the self @-@ proclaimed Republic of Nagorno @-@ Karabakh , a de facto independent republic in South Caucasus claimed by Azerbaijan , adopted a flag derived from the flag of Armenia , with only a white pattern added . A white , five @-@ toothed , stepped carpet pattern was added to the flag , beginning at the two verges of the cloth 's right side and connecting at a point equal to one @-@ third of the distance from that side . The white pattern symbolizes the current separation of Artsakh ( Nagorno @-@ Karabakh ) from Armenia proper and its aspiration for eventual union with " the Fatherland " . This symbolises the Armenian heritage , culture and population of the area and represents Nagorno @-@ Karabakh as being a separated region of Armenia by the triangular shape and the zigzag cutting through the flag . The pattern is also similar to the designs used on rugs . The ratio of the flag 's breadth to its length is 1 : 2 , same as the Armenian Tricolor . 
 = = = Flag of the Pan @-@ Armenian Games = = = 
 In addition to the flag of Nagorno @-@ Karabakh , the Armenian flag colors influenced the design of the Pan @-@ Armenian Games flag . In the center of the light blue flag are six interlocking rings , derived from the Olympic rings . The sixth , orange @-@ colored ring , interlocks with the blue and red rings , which symbolize Armenia . Above the rings is a flame in the colors of the Armenian flag . 
 = Cow Tower , Norwich = 
 The Cow Tower is an artillery tower by the River Wensum in Norwich , Norfolk , England . Built between 1398 and 1399 by the city authorities in response to the threat from France and indigenous English rebels , the tower was intended to defend the north @-@ eastern approach to Norwich with hand cannons and bombards . It stood apart from the main city walls , close to the river where its height would have allowed it to fire onto the higher ground opposite the city . The tower was designed to hold a garrison when required and was well furnished , probably using different floors for dining and sleeping . 
 It was maintained throughout the 15th century , and played a role in Kett 's Rebellion of 1549 , when the rebels attacked Norwich , deploying artillery and damaging the tower 's parapets . Repairs to the tower 's walls in the late 19th century inadvertently caused long @-@ term damage , and in 1953 it was taken into the guardianship of the Ministry of Works , who stabilised its condition in a five @-@ year conservation project . In the 21st century , Cow Tower is managed by English Heritage and Norwich City Council ; the tower is now only a shell , however , as the floors and the roof of the building have been lost . 
 The circular tower is 11 @.@ 2 metres ( 37 ft ) across , 14 @.@ 6 metres ( 48 ft ) high and divided into three storeys . Its walls are 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 ft 11 in ) thick at the base , with a core of flint stone , faced on the inside and outside with brick ; the archaeologist T. P. Smith considers it to feature some " of the finest medieval brickwork " in England . The walls have gunports for the smaller pieces of artillery and the roof would have supported the heavier bombards , with wide embrasures giving the weapons adequate firing space . The Cow Tower was specially designed to support the use of gunpowder artillery , making it a very rare structure in England for this period : the only close equivalents are God 's House Tower in Southampton , and the West Gate at Canterbury . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 Cow Tower is an artillery tower that was built in the city of Norwich , Norfolk , England , between 1398 and 1399 . Norwich was a prosperous city in the late 14th century , with a population of around 5 @,@ 000 involved in key medieval industries and forming a centre for international trade . Between 1297 and 1350 the city had erected a circuit of defensive stone walls and ditches , both to impress upon outsiders the status of Norwich as a great city , but also to defend against invasion or civil disorder . 
 Fears grew about the threat of French raids across England from the 1380s onward . The citizens of Norwich were particularly concerned about the potential of a French raid on the city , drawing parallels between the position of Norwich and the experience of Southampton , another trading city that had been devastated by a French attack in 1338 . This threat , combined with the recent events of the Peasant Revolt of 1381 when the rebels had looted the city , encouraged the local government to improve the city 's defences . 
 Gunpowder weapons had begun to be introduced into England in the early 14th century , initially being used as offensive siege weapons but rapidly being adapted for defensive purposes during the 1360s . Although they were expensive , by the 1380s their potential value in defending castles and city walls was well understood and specialised facilities had begun to be built . Norwich had acquired gunpowder weapons and a team of gunners by 1355 , and by 1385 had fifty gunpowder pieces for use along its city walls . Typically , these would have been small guns called hand cannons , rather than the heavier pieces termed bombards . 
 The tower was built on one of the approaches to Norwich in a bend in the River Wensum , in a meadow called <unk> , from where it acquired its current name . When first built , however , it was initially called the Dungeon , and then the " tower in the Hospital meadows " , as the surrounding land was part of the St Giles Hospital . It was intended to function as a specialised artillery tower , housing gunpowder weaponry capable of suppressing attackers on the far side of the river . The Wensum was quite narrow at this point , however , and the tower 's defences would have been of relatively limited value if the enemy successfully crossed over . 
 There are fragmentary historical references to an earlier tower in the area , responsible for collecting tolls and acting as a prison , but it is unclear if this was on the same site as the Cow Tower , or refers to a different tower in the area . The Cow Tower was one of several fortifications along this stretch of the river , with the gatehouse of Bishop Bridge lying just to the south , followed by two boom towers that controlled access to the waterway a further 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) down @-@ river , and with another tower positioned 300 metres ( 980 ft ) up @-@ river to the north . Although the Cow Tower was not directly part of the city walls , a protective timber palisade linked the tower with the line of the city wall to the north @-@ west , and ran south to meet Bishop Bridge . 
 The city 's accounts show the details of the payments for the construction of the tower between 1398 and 1399 , including charges for 36 @,@ 850 bricks , stone , sand , lime , a hoist and various equipment . At least 170 cartloads of stone are mentioned , and the bricks may have been brought to the site along the river by boat , while some of the timber was brought from Great Yarmouth . The total cost of the building from these records , including labour , came to around £ 36 . The number of bricks used in the tower , however , was probably twice the listed number purchased , and the city may therefore already have stockpiled some bricks on the location before the build . 
 = = = 15th – 16th centuries = = = 
 Cow Tower formed part of the city defences during the 15th century , with the Crown occasionally issuing instructions that it should be repaired . In 1450 St Giles Hospital formally transferred any rights they had to the tower and the immediately surrounding land to the city . The population of Norwich grew significantly from 1500 onwards and the city continued to maintain the urban defences ; like other towers and gatehouses belonging to the city , however , by this period the Cow Tower was probably leased out to a merchant or craftsman when not in military use . 
 In 1549 , Robert Kett led an uprising in Norfolk ; marching on Norwich , his army camped on the north @-@ east side of the river , overlooking Cow Tower . Two rebel attacks were then made across the river into the Hospital meadows , in an attempt to take Bishop Bridge , which would have given them access to the city . Kett had brought artillery , which he turned on the Cow Tower , damaging the latter 's parapets . The rebellion failed , and the tower does not seem to have required extensive repairs . 
 = = = 17th – 21st centuries = = = 
 Most of Norwich 's city walls , and all of the gatehouses , were demolished in the late 18th and 19th century as the city industrialised , but the Cow Tower avoided destruction . The tower was now owned by the Trustees of the Great Hospital , who carried out repairs to the structure in the late 19th century , and in 1904 , the British Army considered repairing the tower for use as an ammunition depot . The repairs in the 19th century had used modern concrete when patching the walls , and this , combined with erosion from the river , soon caused extensive damage : wide splits formed up and down the tower along its northern side . 
 The Ministry of Works took the tower into its guardianship in 1953 to address the problems , and promptly undertook an extensive sequence of repairs that lasted until 1958 . No archaeological investigation was carried out during these works , however , and a full architectural survey of the building was only carried out between 1985 and 1986 , by the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission . In the 21st century , Cow Tower is managed by English Heritage and Norwich City Council ; the tower is now only a shell , however , as the floors and the roof have been lost . The tower is protected under UK law as a scheduled monument . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Cow Tower is a three @-@ story circular building with a protruding turret , the main building being 11 @.@ 2 metres ( 37 ft ) across and 14 @.@ 6 metres ( 48 ft ) tall , tapering towards the top . Its walls , 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 ft 11 in ) thick at the base , are made of a core of flint stone , faced on the inside and outside with brick , and various putlog holes can still be seen in the walls . The turret , which contained a spiral staircase , would originally have been higher than the parapets , forming a look @-@ out position . The walls rest on a stone plinth and several layers of mortared flint . 
 The bricks were probably made at the St Benet 's Abbey in Norfolk , with the stone coming from chalk pits near Norwich 's southern <unk> Gates . The brickwork , particularly on the stairwell , is particularly well executed , and archaeologist T. P. Smith considers the tower to feature some " of the finest medieval brickwork " in England . It is the earliest known use of brick in an external load @-@ capacity in Norwich . The use of brick in this sort of fortification was both prestigious and practical , as brick absorbed the impact of artillery fire better than stone . The river bends around about 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) from the bottom of the tower , and its base may have been underpinned with timber piles during its original construction . 
 The Cow Tower was deliberately designed to house gunpowder artillery when it was first built , making it a very rare form of defensive structure for its time : the only equivalents in England are God 's House Tower in Southampton , and the West Gate at Canterbury . The historians Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham go so far as to consider the building to be unique within Britain , as God 's House was an extension of an existing building , and the West Gate part of the city 's walled circuit . The concept of an isolated artillery tower was more common in France , where they were used as temporary and permanent defensive features during the Hundred Years War between the English and the French kings . 
 The quatrefoil gunports in the lower levels could have been used for both hand cannons and crossbows , with overlapping fields of fire . The roof was reinforced with large timber joints , and could have supported heavier bombards , possibly on wheeled carriages ; the tower 's considerable height would have allowed the bombards to reach across the river onto the higher ground overlooking the city . Getting the bombards onto the roof may have required them to be hoisted up on a winch ; one such hoist formed part of the accounts for the tower 's construction in 1398 and 1399 . 
 The tower 's gun installations were intended to be used to deal with an external threat approaching from the far side of the river . The parapet of the roof was crenellated with nine wide embrasures , and the embrasures facing out across the river were constructed flush with the floor of the roof , giving the bombards plenty of room to fire . The embrasures facing away from the river , however , had sloping <unk> rather than open positions , and the windows in the tower facing towards the city were rectangular and relatively unprotected . The entrance to the tower itself was not fortified , as the tower was not expected to be defended from a direct attack by land . 
 The tower was designed to be able to maintain a garrison when required and was well furnished . The ground floor and second floor had fireplaces , with the first and second floors also having garderobes . The ground floor may have formed a dining area , with the floors above being used for military purposes and sleeping accommodation . The walls of the ground floor have chasing and sockets cut into them . It is unclear what these were : theories include that they contained timbers to support brickwork that in turn supported the first floor ; that they were held timbers that supported the joists of the first floor ; or they are the remains of an ammunition store , retrofitted in the tower in the 16th century . 
 = Cobra ( manga ) = 
 Cobra ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> ) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Buichi Terasawa . Set in the far future , the series tells the story of Cobra , who lives an adventurous life until his enemies begin to hunt him down . Cobra surgically alters his face and erases his own memory to hide from his foes and have a normal life . Eventually , he regains his memories and reunites with his former partner Lady Armaroid . Terasawa devised it as a mix of spaghetti western and samurai stories , and aspects of films , varying from James Bond to Disney . 
 The manga was originally serialized in Shueisha 's Weekly Shōnen Jump from November 1978 to November 1984 . Later , Shueisha collected the chapters and published them in 18 tankōbon volumes . The Cobra manga spawned various sequel manga series , one @-@ shots , a feature @-@ length anime film , two anime series — a 31 @-@ episode series in 1982 , and a 13 @-@ episode series in 2010 — , two original video animations ( OVAs ) , audio albums , video games , and other merchandise . In 2010 , Alexandre Aja announced that a live @-@ action film was in production . 
 In the United States , portions of the manga were published by Viz Media in 1990 . The feature film was licensed by Tara for its release in American theaters and by Manga Entertainment in British theaters in 1995 . Urban Vision and Discotek Media released it for home video market , while Madman Entertainment acquired it for the Australasian region 's release . The anime series was licensed in the Northern American region by Nozomi Entertainment . 
 In Japan , the Cobra manga has sold 40 million copies , making it one of Weekly Shōnen Jump 's best @-@ selling manga series of all time . Publications for manga , anime and other media have comparing the series to Star Wars and Barbarella , and the main character 's attitude to James Bond . Its film adaptation received mixed reviews , and the original anime series as well as Cobra the Animation has been well received by reviewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the far future , an office worker named Johnson leads a dull and mundane life . One Sunday morning , his robotic servant Ben suggests that he go to the Trip Movie Corporation — a company that enables its customers to experience a dream as though it were a reality . Johnson asks to be a king of a harem , and to command a <unk> . 
 In his dream , however , Johnson instead becomes " Cobra " , an adventurer who explores space with his android partner Lady Armaroid . Cobra wields the Psychogun , a cybernetic arm @-@ laser gun , to fight monsters and the Pirate Guild , an organized crime syndicate of pirates . After a battle with the Guild , Cobra allows its leader Captain Vaiken to escape . Vaiken distributes Cobra 's picture to other pirates , making him a wanted man . After the dream ends , Johnson describes the fantasy to an attendant , who is surprised because Johnson 's dream should not have any reference to pirates or to Cobra . 
 On his way back home , Johnson crashes into a speeding car whose driver looks like Captain Vaiken . When Johnson mentions the resemblance , the driver reveals himself as Vaiken . He asks Johnson about " Cobra " and threatens to kill Johnson if he does not answer . Johnson unconsciously lifts his arm and a ray shoots out of his hand , killing Vaiken . The shot explodes Johnson 's arm , revealing the Psychogun embedded in it . 
 Johnson rushes home , where Ben notices the weapon on his arm . Johnson then realizes that he remembers nothing from before the last three years . After looking into a mirror , he finds a knob and turns it to reveal a secret room . There , he finds the revolver which he used in his dream . At that moment , armed intruders break into the house and address him as " Cobra " . A battle ensues , and Ben 's robot shell breaks to reveal Lady Armaroid , with whom Johnson kills the intruders . 
 Johnson starts to remember his previous existence as Cobra . Hunted by the Pirate Guild for meddling in their criminal enterprises and tired of life on the run , Cobra surgically altered his face and had his memories erased . Lady Armaroid tells Cobra that the Trip Movie has triggered his subconscious to regain access to the memories of his former life . Cobra and Lady <unk> resume their adventurous life together . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Cobra ( <unk> ) is the main protagonist and eponymous character of the series . Cobra 's signature weapon is the Psychogun , which can target putative enemies without having a line @-@ of @-@ sight . Using the Psychogun drains Cobra 's mental energy , but his superhuman stamina compensates for it . He also carries a Python 77 Magnum revolver as a backup weapon . Cobra was voiced by Shigeru Matsuzaki in the film adaptation , by Nachi Nozawa in the first anime , and by Naoya Uchida in Cobra the Animation . Dan <unk> voiced him in the Streamline Pictures release , while John Guerrasio voiced him in Manga Entertainment version . 
 Lady Armaroid ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Redi , originally " Armaroid Lady " ) is Cobra 's long @-@ time partner and is the serious half of the duo . She and Cobra share a deep , unspoken trust ; in times of need they always help each other . Lady is a top @-@ class Armaroid — a mechanical cyborg — derived from advanced technology recovered from an ancient , lost civilization on Mars . She possesses superhuman strength but does not carry a weapon and is rarely involved in physical combat . When Cobra is away on an adventure , Lady supports Cobra by piloting their spaceship , the Tortuga . In the Manga Entertainment dub , Lady Armaroid is renamed Andromeda . Yoshiko Sakakibara voiced Lady in the film , in the first anime , and in Cobra the Animation . In the Streamline Pictures release , Joan @-@ Carol O 'Connell voiced her , and she was voiced by Tamsin <unk> in the Manga Entertainment dubbing . 
 Jane Royal ( <unk> ・ ロイヤル , <unk> Roiyaru ) is the first of the triplet daughters of Captain Nelson that Cobra meets . Each sister has a unique tattoo on her back which , once assembled in a chromatic sequence , form a map leading to hidden gold , diamonds , and the fabled Ultimate Weapon . In the Manga Entertainment dub , Jane Royal is renamed Jane Flower . Jane was voiced by Akiko Nakamura in the film , and by Toshiko Fujita in the first anime . Barbara Goodson voiced her in the Streamline Pictures release , while Lorelei King voiced her in the Manga Entertainment version . 
 Catherine Royal ( <unk> ・ ロイヤル , <unk> Roiyaru ) is the second of the triplets whom Cobra meets after Jane asks him to rescue Catherine from the Sidoh Penitentiary . Catherine is a timid school teacher , and is the only sister who is not involved in a violent occupation . In the Manga Entertainment dub , Catherine Royal is renamed Catherine Flower . She is voiced by Toshiko Fujita in the film , and by Yuko Sasaki in the first anime . In the Streamline Pictures release , Mari Devon voiced her , while she was voiced by Lorelei King in the Manga Entertainment dubbing . 
 Dominique Royal ( <unk> ・ ロイヤル , <unk> Roiyaru ) serves as an officer in the Milky Way patrol . Dominique possesses great strength and co @-@ operates well with Cobra , often looking the other way when her professional duties would require her to arrest him . She hires him to resolve an unpleasant matter of drug trafficking involving the Rugball Federation at the Rand Stadium . In the Manga Entertainment dub , Dominique Royal is renamed Dominique Flower . Dominique was voiced by Jun Fubuki in the film , and by Gara Takashima in the first anime . Wendee Lee voiced her in the Streamline Pictures release , while Lorelei King voiced her in Manga Entertainment version . 
 Crystal Boy ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Kurisutaru Bōi , originally " Crystal Bowie " ) is Cobra 's arch @-@ enemy who regards Cobra as the only man worthy of becoming his adversary . Crystal Boy is a humanoid cyborg with a golden skeleton and a body made from indestructible , polarizing glass . He works for the Pirate Guild led by Lord Salamander . Crystal Boy 's signature weapon is a claw which he can attach to his right hand . The claw can crush anything , and he also uses it for slitting his victims ' throats . The claw has a built @-@ in laser gun which can also be used as a grappling hook or fired as a projectile . In the Manga Entertainment dub , Crystal Boy is renamed Lord <unk> . Crystal Boy was voiced by Gorō Mutsumi in the film , and by Kiyoshi Kobayashi in the two anime adaptations . In the Streamline Pictures release , Jeff <unk> voiced him , while he was voiced by David McAlister in the Manga Entertainment dubbing . 
 Sandra ( <unk> , <unk> ) first serves as the ruthless and cold @-@ hearted leader of the Snow Gorillas — the local branch of the Pirate Guild on her home planet . Later , Sandra hounds Cobra and tracks him to the planet on which the Ultimate Weapon is hidden . Sandra was originally ordered to retrieve the Weapon and hand it over to the emissaries of the Guild , but she uses it for her own ends and turns against the Guild until Cobra stops her . In the Manga Entertainment dub , Sandra is renamed Nadia . Sandra was voiced by Reiko Tajima in the film and in the first anime . Catherine <unk> voiced her in the Streamline Pictures release , while Lesley Martin voiced her in Manga Entertainment version . 
 Lord Salamander ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Rōdo <unk> ) is a mysterious , deep @-@ voiced man dressed in samurai armor . After he unites the Pirate Guild under his command , Salamander 's <unk> ambitions lead him to seek absolute control over the galaxy . Lord Salamander rarely appears in person , but demonstrates a powerful telekinetic ability when he does . He can also teleport , incinerate an enemy by will alone and make his enemies think they see someone else . He uses this trick and his other powers to dispose of Doug , Pumpkin and Bud . In the final episode , he is revealed as the spirit of Adolf Hitler , which was revived 3000 years after his defeat . Lord Salamander was voiced by <unk> Shibata in the anime . 
 = = Production = = 
 Cobra is Buichi Terasawa 's debut manga series . Previously he had written and illustrated between twenty and thirty science @-@ fiction shōjo ( targeted towards girls ) short stories for manga contests held by manga magazines , with one of them earning an honorable mention . Terasawa created Cobra by combining the spaghetti western subgenre and Japanese stories featuring a " wandering <unk> " . The Psychogun was created before the titular character , and Terasawa wanted to create a hero who would be able to carry a concealed weapon . According to Terasawa , his concept of a hero has been greatly influenced by " spaghetti westerns with a James Bond @-@ type spin to them . " He also drew inspiration from the French actor Jean @-@ Paul Belmondo . In general , Terasawa has been influenced by films , including the James Bond film series , Akira Kurosawa 's films , and Disney films prior to The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) . For example , Jane Fonda 's performance in the cult science @-@ fiction film Barbarella ( 1968 ) served as a direct model for his character Jane , whose hairstyle was also inspired by Princess Aurora 's in the Disney animated film Sleeping Beauty ( 1959 ) . For his storytelling , panel layout , and narrative pacing in general , he draws influence from manga artist Osamu Tezuka , who mentored him . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Written and illustrated by Buichi Terasawa , Cobra was first published in 1977 in Shueisha 's Japanese shōnen manga magazine Weekly Shōnen Jump as a one @-@ shot edition . It was later serialized , running from the November 6 , 1978 issue to the November 12 , 1984 issue of Weekly Shōnen Jump , and released under the magazine 's Jump Comics line in eighteen tankōbon volumes between August 15 , 1979 and August 15 , 1985 . Cobra was re @-@ published from February 10 , 1988 to November 10 , 1998 in a ten @-@ volume <unk> edition under Jump Comics Deluxe entitled Space Adventure Cobra . 
 The manga series was only partially released in the United States by Viz Communications in 1990 in a series of twelve books . This English @-@ language publication covered the origin story and the Royal Sisters ' saga , with dialogue adapted by the American comic book writer Marv Wolfman and published under Viz Communications ' Viz Select Comics line . The complete manga was published in several other countries . In France , the manga was first published by Dynamic Visions , and later reprinted by <unk> Comics . Its first volume was released in the 1990s Brazil by Dealer , being one of the first manga to be published in the country . The manga was also published in Italy by Play Press , in Taiwan by Tong Li , in Hong Kong by Culturecom , and in Thailand by <unk> . 
 Shueisha released Cobra in kanzenban form with the title Space Adventure Cobra : Handy Edition — which included volumes one through ten — from October 19 , 2001 to February 4 , 2002 . Shueisha later created three kanzenban magazine series based on the Cobra manga under their Shueisha Jump Remix line . <unk> no Onna Hen , , which spanned two volumes , was published on October 7 , 2002 , and on October 21 , 2002 ; Rugball Hen , which spanned two volumes , was published on November 2 , 2002 , and on November 18 , 2002 ; and Shido no Megami Hen , which spanned three volumes , was published from June 9 , 2003 to July 7 , 2003 . Media Factory also published Cobra in a kanzenban edition ; it was simply called Cobra <unk> , and spawned twelve volumes released between August 23 , 2005 , and June 23 , 2006 . Cobra was also sold as an e @-@ book , Space Adventure Cobra : Galaxy Knights for a limited time . 
 = = = Sequels and spin @-@ offs = = = 
 The seinen manga magazine Super Jump published several Cobra sequel or spin @-@ off series . The first was titled Cobra : Legend of the Holy Knight , , which was serialized in 1986 in a special issue of Weekly Shōnen Jump . It was then published in a single tankōbon by Shueisha in 1988 under the magazine 's Jump Comics Deluxe line . Space Adventure Cobra : The Psychogun , a fully colored " computer graphics " manga , was serialized in Super Jump in 1995 . A " computer graphics " sequel called Space Adventure Cobra : Magic Doll was serialized in Super Jump from 2000 to 2002 . Along with several other series serialized in Super Jump , they were published from 1995 to 2002 in Jump Comics Deluxe under the title Space Adventure Cobra . 
 Space Adventure Cobra : Magic Doll was re @-@ serialized in the Monthly Comic Flapper magazine by Media Factory , and was published under its MF Comics line as Cobra the Space Pirate : Magic Doll Zenpen and Cobra the Space Pirate : Magic Doll Kōhen on February 23 , 2006 , and September 22 , 2006 , respectively . In addition , Media Factory published six Cobra one @-@ shots ; the first one , Cobra the Space Pirate : Kokuryū Ō , on March 23 , 2006 , and the last one , Cobra the Space Pirate : Time Drive , on April 23 , 2009 , all of which were also under MF Comics . To celebrate the series ' 30th anniversary , sixteen manga were reprinted and released by Media Factory ; on May 23 , 2008 , Cobra <unk> and <unk> no <unk> were released , and Magic Doll concluded it , with its release on July 7 , 2009 . From October 25 , 2014 to June 13 , 2015 , Media Factory is republishing Cobra the Space Pirate through its MFR Series . 
 = = Anime adaptations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 TMS Entertainment adapted the manga into a film titled Space Adventure Cobra , which was released on July 23 , 1982 , in Japan . It was directed by Osamu Dezaki , with screenplay by Terasawa and <unk> Yamazaki , and retold the Cobra involvement with the Royal Sisters , and his fight against Crystal Boy . Manga Entertainment released the film in British theaters in 1995 . An American dub was created by Carl <unk> 's Streamline Pictures , and was released in American theaters on August 20 , 1995 , by Tara , and was later distributed by Urban Vision on VHS format on June 16 , 1998 . 
 = = = Space Cobra = = = 
 Cobra was adapted into an anime series titled Space Cobra directed by Dezaki that aired on Fuji Television between October 7 , 1982 , and May 19 , 1983 . The episodes were released in eight DVDs and a DVD box set on October 25 , 2000 by Digital Site in Japan . The series was released in Northern America by Nozomi Entertainment in two parts ; the first was released on March 4 , 2014 , and the second one is available since May 6 , 2014 . In November 2015 , the series was added to the Crunchyroll streaming service to be broadcast in the United States and Canada with English <unk> . 
 = = = Cobra the Animation = = = 
 Cobra was adapted into two OVAs and a television series that were created by Guild Project and animated by Magic Bus under the Cobra the Animation line for the series ' 30th anniversary . The first of the series was The Psychogun , which was released direct @-@ to @-@ DVD between August 29 , 2008 , and February 27 , 2009 . It was written , storyboarded , and directed by Terasawa . Its sequel OVA , Time Drive , was released between April 24 , 2009 , and June 26 , 2009 . It was co @-@ directed by Terasawa and Kenichi <unk> . Both OVA series were later released in Blu @-@ ray box set on February 19 , 2010 . The anime television series Rokunin no Yūshi , directed by Keizo Shimizu , aired on BS 11 between January 2 , 2010 and March 27 , 2010 . Crunchyroll streamed the first OVA series between December 18 , 2009 to on January 8 , 2010 . The two episodes of Time Drive were uploaded on January 1 , 2008 , and Rokunin no Yūshi was simulcasted as it aired in Japan . During the 2016 Anime Boston , the series was licensed by Sentai Filmworks to be released in the North American home video market . 
 = = = Cobra : Return of Joe Gillian = = = 
 Monaco @-@ based Shibuya Productions will adapt the Rugball arc of the series into an " original animated series " called Cobra : Return of Joe Gillian . In collaboration with Terasawa 's A @-@ Girl Rights , the series will be directed by Hervé <unk> , produced by Cédric Biscay and Rinko Itoh , and written by <unk> and Biscay . The announcement of the series was through a promotional teaser released on February 27 , 2016 . The arc choice was based on the fact that it is a favorite of Cobra fans and it will incorporate classic characters and elements of the Cobra universe and " a rendering that will not disappoint fans of Cobra " , according to Biscay . However , they hope to attract more people because of economic reasons ; as such , it will have a new story and modern style of animation . The target audience of the series is primarily adolescents of over 12 years and it is slated to premiere in 2018 . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The soundtrack of the film was composed by Osamu Shōji . It used a single opening theme and a single ending theme , and its lyrics were written by Tetsuya Chiaki and composed by Saburo Suzuki . " Daydream Romance " by Shigeru Matsuzaki was used as the opening music and " Stay " by Eve was used at the end . The subsequent anime 's music was scored by Kentarō Haneda . The lyrics for " Cobra " and " Secret Desire " , the opening and the ending themes respectively , were written by <unk> <unk> and composed by Yuji Ohno ; both were sung by Yoko Maeno . The anime 's music was compiled into two albums ; Space Cobra : Original Soundtrack and Space Cobra : Complete Soundtrack were released by Nippon Columbia on September 25 , 2003 , and April 21 , 2004 , respectively . 
 The musical score for Cobra the Animation was composed by Yoshihiro Ike . The opening theme from The Psychogun is " <unk> no Yume " by Yoko Takahashi and it ending theme is " Wanderer " by Shigeru Matsuzaki . Both were released as singles on August 27 , 2008 , by Nippon Columbia . The second OVA used " Time Drive " by <unk> <unk> as its opening theme and " Kimi ga bi <unk> " by Shigeru Matsuzaki as its closing theme . " Cobra the Space Pirate " by <unk> <unk> and " Kimi no Uta " respectively were used as opening theme and closing theme for Rokunin no Yūshi . On March 24 , 2010 , both were released as singles by Nippon Columbia . A soundtrack containing music from both OVAs and a compilation of music from the anime series were released on January 20 , 2010 , and April 14 , 2010 , respectively . Cobra Song Collection , which encompassed music from the soundtracks of the film , two OVAs and two anime series was released on March 31 , 2010 by Nippon Columbia . 
 = = Live @-@ action film = = 
 In 2008 , Buichi Terasawa said he received a Hollywood offer to purchase the rights to a live @-@ action film adaptation of the series . He stated it was " off @-@ the @-@ record " , and that if it happened it would be partly standalone and separate from his original manga . However , in 2010 , Alexandre Aja announced he had purchased its rights , and that he planned to direct a live @-@ action film adaptation of Cobra . Aja was inspired to create this film adaptation because the original manga was one of his childhood favorites . Aja said he wanted to create a " tent pole @-@ sized live action franchise " . 
 In 2011 , Aja wrote a script with Gregory Levasseur , and production was held by <unk> <unk> and Dimitri <unk> under Onyx Films and Studio 37 with a budget of more than $ 100 million . Later , a teaser poster depicting promotional concept art for Cobra : The Space Pirate , along with a release date scheduled for mid @-@ 2013 , was unveiled . In September 2013 , however , Aja admitted that making the film will be " very hard " since " to do a new kind of Star Wars , [ is ] expensive " though he stated " we are trying everything , we will make it . " In July 2014 , Aja revealed it was estimated that the project would require a budget of over $ 150 million , and that he was seeking to have an A @-@ list actor to help attract a funder . One of his main difficulties , Aja said in 2015 , was to decide who would star the film : " When I think ' who the heck is going to play that Cobra ? ' , I become unable to move forward . " After the release of Guardians of the Galaxy in 2014 , Aja had to change several aspects of the film to differentiate it . 
 = = Related media = = 
 The Cobra manga has become the basis of two artbooks ; the first focusing on the female characters of the series was released as Cobra Girls on February 1 , 1988 . Concept designs of the manga were added to a Cobra artbook titled Cobra Wonder : Concept Design Arts of Cobra World , which was released in July 17 , 1997 , and included two Cobra 's side stories — Bara and Mahō no <unk> — first published in Super Jump in 1988 . <unk> and Bandai included Cobra 's ground vehicle , the <unk> , in the Japanese Machine Robo toyline , where it gained the ability to transform into a robot . Japan later exported this idea to the United States as part of the Super <unk> toyline under the name " Psycho " , designed by Murakami <unk> . In Japan , action figures , T @-@ shirts , <unk> dolls , Cobra 's Psychogun and Crystal Boy 's claw replicas , stamps , and limited @-@ edition whiskey bottles were sold as merchandise for the series . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 In 1982 , <unk> Electronics created the hand @-@ held games Space Cobra Professional and Space Cobra the Psychogun . It was followed by Cobra : Kokuryū Ō no Densetsu , released in 1989 for the PC Engine , and Cobra 2 : Densetsu no Otoko , released for the PC Engine in 1990 , which was released in North America and Europe for the Sega CD as The Space Adventure - Cobra : The Legendary Bandit . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Approximately 40 million copies on Cobra have been sold , making it one of Weekly Shōnen Jump 's best @-@ selling manga series of all time . Cobra made Terasawa , who at the time was 22 and was little known , famous . The English version of Cobra was named as one of the " The Top 25 Translated @-@ To @-@ English Manga of All Time " by Wizard magazine . <unk> Upatkoon of EX online magazine praised it as a " rich fantasy " that was unmatched by any other . She said the main character took " after James Bond , albeit somewhat on the silly side , and the costumes and bizarre worlds are but a shade shy of plagiarizing Barbarella " . She was impressed that the series " is surprisingly devoid of the sexual innuendo and exploitation that anime fans have come to associate with decorative female characters " ; it avoids the stereotypical , beautiful women , and instead creates its own " extreme " world . Upatkoon also said that modern readers might find the manga dated and would be discouraged from reading it , despite the improvement in artistic quality as the series progresses . Writing for Anime News Network ( ANN ) , Jason Thompson described Cobra as " a significant piece of manga history " . Thompson wrote that the women of the series have a " realistic physique and not some moe jailbait or grotesque <unk> explosion " . Thompson deemed Cobra as a parody of both Western action heroes and Star Wars and 1970s shōjo science fiction and its concept of beauty " . The titular character also inspired video game designer Hideki Kamiya to create the character of Dante from the Devil May Cry series . 
 The anime television series received mostly praise . Pedro Cortes from Japanator asserted , " Space Adventure Cobra is interesting in that it takes a shard of an idea from a classic and then spins it out into its own epic . " Cortes praised its " charming " designs , while criticized the main character lack of development as " the only negative thing . " He added , " There isn 't a ton of depth , but the show doesn 't pretend to be anything but a fun , sci @-@ fi romp around the galaxy . " ANN 's Theron Martin praised its " surprisingly solid " art " for a series of its era " and affirmed , " it does stand up well as high @-@ spirited , fun @-@ loving action fare with occasional darker overtones . " Chris Beveridge of The Fandom Post said , " It 's simple but full of adventure , interesting characters and locations and a sense of fun that definitely makes it work in a very good way " and has " a solid visual design . " Washington , in a review for Otaku USA , commended that it " is entertaining overall " and has " an overall fun vibe " because of it " smooth " art ; he , however , criticized what he called " serious misogynistic tendencies . " 
 Cobra the Animation : The Psychogun and Rokunin no Yūshi have been well received by fans ; the OVA was among the best @-@ selling for two weeks , and the sixth volume of the anime series was one of the best @-@ selling DVDs for one week . Chris Beveridge from Mania.com praised the anime series and its visual design , comparing to the The Psychogun ones , but said it is not for those who are unaware the original series . He said the anime has " a healthy dose of action , the kind of sexuality that 's a trademark of the series ... as well as a good bit of silly fun " . In the second episode review , Beveridge said it " seems to be following much the same kind of pace and structure " as the OVAs . Its animation was compared with the Darkside Blues ; ANN 's Erin Finnegan said it was a " gritty " animation , but that from episode five , the animation quality looks more modern and much less gritty . Beveridge said the anime 's idea is simple , but added it is " also not a show you see often since it doesn 't center around teenagers , schools or the harem concept " . He said it is not " a great show " , but that " it gives us something different than the usual " — the reason it is " enjoyable " . 
 = The Lord of the Rings ( 1978 film ) = 
 The Lord of the Rings is a 1978 American high fantasy animated film directed by Ralph Bakshi . It is an adaptation of J. R. R. Tolkien 's high fantasy epic The Lord of the Rings , comprising The Fellowship of the Ring and the first half of The Two Towers . Set in Middle @-@ earth , the film follows a group of hobbits , elves , men , dwarves , and wizards who form a fellowship . They embark on a quest to destroy the One Ring made by the Dark Lord Sauron , and ensure his destruction . 
 Ralph Bakshi encountered Tolkien 's writing early in his career , and had made several attempts to produce The Lord of the Rings as an animated film before being given funding by producer Saul Zaentz and distributor United Artists . The film is notable for its extensive use of rotoscoping , a technique in which scenes are first shot in live @-@ action , then traced onto animation cels . It uses a hybrid of traditional cel animation and rotoscoped live action footage . The film features the voices of William Squire , John Hurt , Michael Graham Cox , and Anthony Daniels , and was one of the first animated films to be presented theatrically in the Dolby Stereo sound system . The screenplay was written by Peter S. Beagle , based on an earlier draft by Chris Conkling . 
 Although Bakshi 's The Lord of the Rings was a financial success , it received mixed reactions from critics , and there was no official sequel to cover the remainder of the story . Nonetheless , the film instantly became a cult classic that continued to run as matinees and midnight movies for nearly two decades , and was an undeniable influence on Peter Jackson 's trilogy as was detailed in the DVD extras of The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Early in the Second Age of Middle @-@ earth , elven smiths forge nine Rings of Power for mortal men , seven for the Dwarf @-@ Lords , and three for the Elf @-@ Kings . Soon after , the Dark Lord Sauron makes the One Ring , and uses it to attempt to conquer Middle @-@ earth . Following the Last Alliance of Elves and Men 's fall , the Ring is seized by Prince Isildur ; and after Isildur was killed by orcs , the Ring lies at the bottom of the river Anduin for over 2500 years . Over time , Sauron captures the Nine Rings and creates the Ringwraiths . The One Ring is discovered by <unk> , whose friend , Sméagol , kills him and takes the Ring for himself . The Ring twists his body and mind , and he becomes the creature Gollum ( Peter Woodthorpe ) . Hundreds of years later , Bilbo Baggins ( Norman Bird ) finds the Ring in Gollum 's cave and takes it back to the Shire . 
 Years later , during Bilbo 's birthday celebration , the wizard Gandalf ( William Squire ) tells him to leave the Ring for his relative Frodo ( Christopher Guard ) . Bilbo reluctantly agrees , and leaves the Shire . Seventeen years pass , during which Gandalf learns that evil forces have discovered that the Ring is in the possession of a Baggins . Gandalf meets with Frodo to explain the Ring 's history and the danger it poses ; and Frodo leaves his home , taking the Ring with him . He is accompanied by three hobbit friends , Pippin ( Dominic Guard ) , Merry ( Simon Chandler ) , and Sam ( Michael Scholes ) . After a narrow escape from the Ringwraiths , the hobbits eventually come to Bree , from which Aragorn ( John Hurt ) leads them to Rivendell . Frodo is stabbed atop <unk> mountain by the chief of the Ringwraiths , and becomes sickened as the journey progresses . The Ringwraiths catch up with them shortly after they meet the elf Legolas ( Anthony Daniels ) ; and at a standoff at the ford of Rivendell , the Ringwraiths are swept away by the river . 
 At Rivendell , Frodo is healed by Elrond ( André Morell ) . He meets Gandalf again , after the latter escapes Saruman ( Fraser Kerr ) , who plans to ally with Sauron but also wants the Ring for himself . At a council , Bilbo , Gandalf , and others debate the One Ring , and Frodo volunteers to go to Mordor , where the Ring can be destroyed . Thereafter Frodo sets off from Rivendell with eight companions : Gandalf ; Aragorn ; Boromir ( Michael Graham Cox ) , son of the Steward of Gondor ; Legolas ; Gimli ( David Buck ) the dwarf ; and Frodo 's three hobbit companions . 
 Their attempt to cross the Misty Mountains is foiled by heavy snow , and they are forced into Moria . There , they are attacked by orcs , and Gandalf falls into an abyss while battling a <unk> . The remaining Fellowship continue through the elf @-@ haven Lothlórien , where they meet the elf queen Galadriel ( Annette Crosbie ) . Boromir tries to take the Ring from Frodo , and Frodo continue his quest alone ; but Sam insists on accompanying him . Boromir is killed by orcs while trying to defend Merry and Pippin . They are captured by the orcs , who intend to take them to Isengard through the land of Rohan . The hobbits escape and flee into Fangorn Forest , where they meet Treebeard ( John Westbrook ) . Aragorn , Gimli , and Legolas track <unk> and Pippin into the forest , where they are re @-@ united with Gandalf , who was reborn after destroying the <unk> . 
 The four then ride to Rohan 's capital , <unk> , where Gandalf persuades King Théoden ( Philip Stone ) that his people are in danger . Aragorn , Gimli , and Legolas then travel to the Helm 's Deep . Frodo and Sam discover Gollum stalking them in an attempt to reclaim the ring , and capture him ; but spare his life in return for guidance to Mount Doom . Gollum eventually begins plotting against them , and wonders if " she " might help . At Helm 's Deep , Théoden 's forces resist the orcs sent by Saruman , until Gandalf arrives with the absent Riders of Rohan , destroying the orc army . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 Christopher Guard – Frodo 
 William Squire – Gandalf 
 Michael Scholes – Sam 
 John Hurt – Aragorn 
 Simon Chandler – Merry 
 Dominic Guard – Pippin 
 Norman Bird – Bilbo 
 Michael Graham Cox – Boromir 
 Anthony Daniels – Legolas 
 David Buck – Gimli 
 Peter Woodthorpe – Gollum 
 Fraser Kerr – Saruman 
 Philip Stone – Théoden 
 Michael Deacon – Wormtongue 
 André Morell – Elrond 
 Alan <unk> – Innkeeper 
 Annette Crosbie – Galadriel 
 John Westbrook – Treebeard 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Director Ralph Bakshi was introduced to The Lord of the Rings during the mid @-@ 1950s while working as an animator for Terrytoons . In 1957 , the young animator started trying to convince people that the story could be told in animation . In 1969 , the rights were passed to United Artists , where filmmakers Stanley Kubrick and John Boorman each tried to adapt the story . ( Contrary to an urban legend , Disney never owned the rights to The Lord of the Rings . ) 
 In the mid @-@ 1970s , Bakshi , who had since achieved box office success producing adult @-@ oriented animated films such as Fritz the Cat , learned of UA and Boorman 's attempts to adapt the story . He was told that Boorman had planned to produce all three parts of The Lord of the Rings as a single film , and commented , " I thought that was madness , certainly a lack of character on Boorman 's part . Why would you want to tamper with anything Tolkien did ? " When Boorman 's proposed adaptation fell apart , Bakshi approached the studio and proposed that he direct a three @-@ part animated film adaptation of the book : 
 " They said fine , because Boorman handed in this 700 @-@ page script , and do I want to read it ? I said , ' Well , is it all three books in one ? ' They said , ' Yes , but he 's changed a lot of the characters , and he 's added characters . He 's got some sneakers he 's merchandising in the middle . ' I said , ' No , I 'd rather not read it . I 'd rather do the books as close as we can , using Tolkien 's exact dialogue and scenes . ' They said , ' Fine , ' which knocked me down , ' because we don 't understand a word Boorman wrote . We never read the books . [ ... ] We ain 't got time to read it . You understand it , Ralph , so go do it . ' " 
 The Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer office was located in the same building , and Bakshi spoke to then @-@ president Dan Melnick . " I thought he would understand what The Rings meant , because UA did not . " Bakshi and Melnick made a deal with Mike Medavoy at United Artists to buy the Boorman script . " The Boorman script cost $ 3 million , so Boorman was happy by the pool , screaming and laughing and drinking , ' cause he got $ 3 million for his script to be thrown out . " However , after Melnick was fired from MGM , the deal fell through . Bakshi then contacted Saul Zaentz ( who had helped finance Fritz the Cat ) to ask him to produce The Lord of the Rings , and Zaentz agreed . Before the production started , the original three @-@ part adaptation was negotiated down to two parts at United Artists , and Bakshi met with Tolkien 's daughter Priscilla to discuss how the film would be made . She showed him the room where her father did his writing and drawing . Bakshi says , " My promise to Tolkien 's daughter was to be pure to the book . I wasn 't going to say , ' Hey , throw out Gollum and change these two characters . ' My job was to say , ' This is what the genius said . ' " 
 = = = Directing = = = 
 Bakshi said that one of the problems with the production was that the film was an epic , because " epics tend to drag . The biggest challenge was to be true to the book . " When asked what he was trying to accomplish with the film , Bakshi stated " The goal was to bring as much quality as possible to the work . I wanted real illustration as opposed to cartoons . " Bakshi said that descriptions of the characters were not included because they are seen in the film : 
 " It 's not that important to me how a hobbit looks . Everyone has their own idea of what the characters look like . It 's important to me that the energy of Tolkien survives . It 's important that the quality of animation matches the quality of Tolkien . Who cares how big Gandalf 's nose is ? The tendency of animation is just to worry about the drawing . If the movie works , whether you agree about Bilbo 's face or not , the rest becomes inconsequential . " 
 Bakshi 's major artistic influences on the film were classical illustrators such as Howard Pyle and N. C. Wyeth ; he stated that no contemporary illustrators were an influence on the style of the film . 
 " The film is a clash of a lot of styles like in all my films . I like moody backgrounds . I like drama . I like a lot of saturated color . Of course , a big problem was controlling the artists so they drew alike . How do you have 600 people draw one character alike ? The tendency is to want to let the artist have some freedom but then someone would leave off a hat or horn on a hat on a character . [ ... ] I think we 've achieved real illustration as opposed to cartoons . Artistically , we can do anything we want . " 
 = = = Screenwriting and development = = = 
 An early draft of the screenplay was written by Chris Conkling , who told the bulk of the story in flashback , from Merry <unk> 's point of view . After Bakshi and Zaentz saw Conkling 's first draft , fantasy author Peter S. Beagle was called in for a rewrite . According to the website of publisher Conlan Press , Beagle wrote multiple drafts of the script for only $ 5 @,@ 000 , on the strength of promises from Saul Zaentz to hire him for other , better @-@ paying projects afterward . Zaentz later reneged on these promises . 
 = = = Differences from the book = = = 
 The film makes some deviations from the book , but overall follows Tolkien 's narrative quite closely . Of the adaptation process , Bakshi stated that elements of the story " had to be left out but nothing in the story was really altered . " The film greatly condenses Frodo 's journey from Bag End to Bree . Stop @-@ overs at Farmer Maggot 's house , Frodo 's home in Buckland , and the house of the mysterious Tom Bombadil deep in the Old Forest are omitted . Maggot and his family and Bombadil and his wife <unk> are thus all omitted , along with Fatty Bolger , a hobbit who accompanied Frodo at the beginning . According to Bakshi , the character of Tom Bombadil was " dropped " because " he didn 't move the story along . " 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Publicity for the film announced that Bakshi had created " the first movie painting " by utilizing " an entirely new technique in filmmaking . " Much of the film used live @-@ action footage which was then rotoscoped to produce an animated look . This saved production costs and gave the animated characters a more realistic look . In animation historian Jerry Beck 's The Animated Movie Guide , reviewer <unk> Boylan writes that " up to that point , animated films had not depicted extensive battle scenes with hundreds of characters . By using the rotoscope , Bakshi could trace highly complex scenes from live @-@ action footage and transform them into animation , thereby taking advantage of the complexity live @-@ action film can capture without incurring the exorbitant costs of producing a live @-@ action film . " 
 " I was told that at Disney the actor was told to play it like a cartoon with all that exaggeration . In Lord of the Rings , I had the actors play it straight . The rotoscope in the past has been used in scenes and then exaggerated . The action becomes cartoony . The question then comes up that if you 're not going to be cartoony , why animate ? [ ... ] It is the traditional method of rotoscoping but the approach is untraditional . It 's a rotoscope realism unlike anything that 's been seen . It really is a unique thing for animation . The number of characters moving in a scene is staggering . In The Lord of the Rings , you have hundreds of people in the scene . We have cels with a thousand people on them . It was so complex sometimes we 'd only get one cel a week from an artist . It turned out that the simple shots were the ones that only had four people in them . " 
 For the live @-@ action portion of the production , Bakshi and his cast and crew went to Spain , where the rotoscope models acted out their parts in costume . During the middle of a large shoot , union bosses called for a lunch break , and Bakshi secretly shot footage of actors in Orc costumes moving toward the craft service table , and used the footage in the film . Many of the actors who contributed voices to this production also acted out their parts for rotoscoped scenes . The actions of Bilbo Baggins and Samwise Gamgee were performed by Billy Barty , while Sharon Baird served as the performance model for Frodo Baggins . Other performers used on the rotoscoping session included John A. Neris as Gandalf , Walt Robles as Aragorn , Felix Silla as Gollum , Jeri Lea Ray as Galadriel and Aesop Aquarian as Gimli . Although some cel animation was produced and shot for the film , very little of it appears in the final film . Most of the film 's crowd and battle scenes use a different technique , in which live @-@ action footage is solarized ( per an interview with the film 's cinematographer , Timothy <unk> , in the documentary Forging Through the Darkness : the Ralph Bakshi Vision for The Lord of the Rings ) to produce a more three @-@ dimensional look . In a few shots the two techniques are combined . 
 Bakshi claimed he " didn 't start thinking about shooting the film totally in live action until I saw it really start to work so well . I learned lots of things about the process , like rippling . One scene , some figures were standing on a hill and a big gust of wind came up and the shadows moved back and forth on the clothes and it was unbelievable in animation . I don 't think I could get the feeling of cold on the screen without showing snow or an icicle on some guy 's nose . The characters have weight and they move correctly . " After the Spanish film development lab discovered that telephone lines , helicopters , and cars could be seen in the footage Bakshi had shot , they tried to incinerate the footage , telling Bakshi 's first assistant director that " if that kind of sloppy cinematography got out , no one from Hollywood would ever come back to Spain to shoot again . " 
 Following the live @-@ action shoot , each frame of the live footage was printed out , and placed behind an animation cel . The details of each frame were copied and painted onto the cel . Both the live @-@ action and animated sequences were storyboarded . Of the production , Bakshi is quoted as saying , 
 " Making two pictures [ The live action reference and the actual animated feature . ] in two years is crazy . Most directors when they finish editing , they are finished ; we were just starting . I got more than I expected . The crew is young . The crew loves it . If the crew loves it , it 's usually a great sign . They aren 't older animators trying to snow me for jobs next year . " 
 Although he continued to use rotoscoping in American Pop , Hey Good Lookin ' , and Fire and Ice , Bakshi later regretted his use of rotoscoping , stating that he felt that it was a mistake to trace the source footage rather than using it as a guide . 
 Mike Ploog ( co @-@ creator of Werewolf by Night ) was one of numerous staff taking a role in animation on this film . Ploog also was involved in other Ralph Bakshi animations , notably Wizards and Hey Good Lookin ' . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film score was composed by Leonard Rosenman . Bakshi wanted to include music by Led Zeppelin but producer Saul Zaentz insisted upon an orchestral score because he would not be able to release the band 's music on his Fantasy Records label . Bakshi later stated that he hated Rosenman 's score , which he found to be too cliché . In Lord of the Rings : Popular Culture in Global Context , Ernest Mathijs writes that Rosenman 's score " is a middle ground between his more sonorous but dissonant earlier scores and his more traditional ( and less challenging ) sounding music [ ... ] In the final analysis , Rosenman 's score has little that marks it out as distinctively about Middle Earth , relying on traditions of music ( including film music ) more than any specific attempt to paint a musical picture of the different lands and peoples of Tolkien 's imagination . " The film 's score was issued as a double @-@ LP soundtrack album in 1978 . A limited collector edition was created by Fantasy Records as a picture disc double LP featuring four scenes : The Hobbits leaving Hobbiton , The Ringwraiths at Bree , Gandalf and the Balrog , Journey with the Orcs . In 2001 , the album was reissued on compact disc , with bonus tracks . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 The film was originally intended to be distributed as The Lord of the Rings Part I. According to Bakshi , when he completed the film , United Artists executives told him that they were planning to release the film without indicating that a sequel would follow , because they felt that audiences would not pay to see half of a film : 
 " I told them they can 't drop the Part One , because people are going to come in thinking they 'll see the whole film , and it 's not there . We had a huge fight , and they released it as Lord of the Rings . So when it came to the end , people were stunned in the theater , even worse than I ever realized they would be , because they were expecting to see the whole film . People keep telling me I never finished the film . And I keep saying , ' That 's right ! ' " 
 " Had it said ' Part One , ' I think everyone would have respected it . But because it didn 't say ' Part One , ' everyone came in expecting to see the entire three books , and that 's where the confusion comes in . " 
 The Film Book of J.R.R. Tolkien 's the Lord of the Rings , published by Ballantine Books on October 12 , 1978 , still referred to the sequel in the book 's inside cover jacket . Bakshi states that he would never have made the film if he had known what would happen during the production . He is quoted as saying that the reason he made the film was " to save it for Tolkien , because I loved the Rings very much . " 
 Bakshi also stated that he felt that the film " took more out of me than I got back . " 
 " [ The film ] made me realize that I 'm not interested in [ adapting another writer 's story ] . That the thing that seemed to interest me the most was shooting off my big mouth , or sitting in a room and thinking about how do you feel about this issue or that issue and how do you get that over to an audience , was the most exciting part of my life . " 
 Eventually , the Rankin @-@ Bass studio , the company behind the 1977 animated adaptation of The Hobbit , released The Return of the King in 1980 as a sequel to The Hobbit , but also completing the story begun in Bakshi 's film by adapting the final novel , though the Rankin @-@ Bass production offers no stylistic continuation from the earlier film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Lord of the Rings was a financial success . The film grossed $ 30 @.@ 5 million at the box office , based on a $ 4 million budget . 
 The film 's distribution rights were transferred to Warner Bros. in 2001 . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The film was nominated for both the Hugo and Saturn Awards for Best Dramatic Presentation and Best Fantasy Film , respectively . Leonard Rosenman 's score was nominated for a Golden Globe for Best Original Motion Picture Score , and Bakshi won a Golden Gryphon award for the film at the Giffoni Film Festival . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critics were generally mixed in their responses to the film , but generally considered it to be a " flawed but inspired interpretation " . Review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes , which compiles reviews from a wide range of critics , gives the film a score of 50 % . 
 Frank Barrow of The Hollywood Reporter wrote that the film was " daring and unusual in concept . " Joseph Gelmis of Newsday wrote that " the film 's principal reward is a visual experience unlike anything that other animated features are doing at the moment . " Roger Ebert called Bakshi 's effort a " mixed blessing " and " an entirely respectable , occasionally impressive job ... [ which ] still falls far short of the charm and sweep of the original story . " Vincent Canby of The New York Times called the film " both numbing and impressive . " 
 David Denby of New York magazine felt that the film would not make sense to viewers who had not previously read the book . Denby wrote that the film was too dark and lacked humor , concluding that " The lurid , meaningless violence of this movie left me exhausted and sickened by the end . " Michael Barrier , an animation historian , described The Lord of The Rings as one of two films that demonstrated " that Bakshi was utterly lacking in the artistic self @-@ discipline that might have permitted him to outgrow his limitations . " 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 The film has been cited as an influence on director Peter Jackson 's The Lord of the Rings film trilogy . After initially denying having seen Bakshi 's film , Jackson admitted to having first encountered The Lord of the Rings via Bakshi 's film , stating that the film was a " brave and ambitious attempt . " In another interview , Jackson stated that he " enjoyed [ the film ] and wanted to know more . " Bakshi is quoted as saying " Peter Jackson did say that the first film inspired him to go on and do the series , but that happened after I was bitching and moaning to a lot of interviewers that he said at the beginning that he never saw the movie . I thought that was kind of fucked up . " On the audio commentary for the DVD release of The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring , Jackson acknowledges one shot , a low angle of a hobbit at Bilbo 's birthday party shouting " <unk> ! " , as an intentional homage to Bakshi 's film . 
 Bakshi is quoted as saying that he had " mixed feeling [ s ] " about Jackson 's adaptations , although he had not seen the films . " In some respects I feel good that Peter Jackson continued and went on , and in some respects I feel bad that Saul Zaentz , the producer , and various people never called me , thanked me , or asked my permission to do the movie . [ ... ] [ Nor ] has anyone sent me a bottle of wine , on the tremendous success . [ ... ] But I have more feelings on the business side of that than I do on the creative side . I 'm glad Peter Jackson had a movie to look at — I never did . And certainly there 's a lot to learn from watching any movie , both its mistakes and when it works . So he had a little easier time than I did , and a lot better budget . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The film was adapted into comic book form with artwork by Spanish artist Luis Bermejo , under license from Tolkien Enterprises . Three issues were published for the European market , starting in 1979 , and were not published in the United States or translated into English due to copyright problems . 
 Bakshi 's film sparked enough interest in Tolkien 's work to provoke not only an animated TV special produced by the Rankin @-@ Bass animation studio based on The Return of the King , but a complete adaptation of The Lord of the Rings on BBC Radio . For this broadcast , Michael Graham Cox and Peter Woodthorpe reprised their roles of Boromir and Gollum , respectively . 
 Warner Bros. ( the rights holder to the post @-@ 1973 Rankin @-@ Bass library and the pre @-@ 1990 Saul Zaentz theatrical library ) has released The Hobbit , The Lord of the Rings and The Return of the King on VHS and DVD , both packaged separately and as a boxed @-@ set " trilogy " of films . While the VHS version ends with the narrator saying " Here ends the first part of the history of the War of the Ring . " , the DVD version has an alternate narration : " The forces of darkness were driven forever from the face of Middle @-@ Earth by the valiant friends of Frodo . As their gallant battle ended , so , too , ends the first great tale of The Lord of the Rings . " The Lord of the Rings was released in a deluxe edition on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on April 6 , 2010 . The Lord of the Rings was selected as the 36th greatest animated film by Time Out magazine , and ranked as the 90th greatest animated film of all time by the Online Film Critics Society . 
 = South Bend , Indiana = 
 South Bend is a city in and the county seat of St. Joseph County , Indiana , United States , on the St. Joseph River near its southernmost bend , from which it derives its name . As of the 2010 census , the city had a total of 101 @,@ 168 residents ; its Metropolitan Statistical Area had a population of 318 @,@ 586 and Combined Statistical Area of 721 @,@ 296 . It is the fourth @-@ largest city in Indiana , serving as the economic and cultural hub of Northern Indiana . The highly ranked University of Notre Dame is located just to the north in unincorporated Notre Dame , Indiana and is an integral contributor to the region 's economy . 
 The area was originally settled in the early 19th century by fur traders and was established as a city in 1865 . The St. Joseph River shaped South Bend 's economy through the mid @-@ 20th century . River access assisted heavy industrial development such as that of the Studebaker Corporation , the Oliver Chilled Plow Company , and other large corporations . 
 The population of South Bend declined after 1960 , when it had a peak population of 132 @,@ 445 . This was chiefly due to migration to suburban areas as well as the demise of Studebaker and other heavy industry . Today , the largest industries in South Bend are health care , education , small business , and tourism . Remaining large corporations include Crowe Horwath , Honeywell , and AM General . 
 Recently , the city population has started to grow for the first time in nearly fifty years . The old Studebaker plant and surrounding area , now called Ignition Park , is being redeveloped as a technology center to attract new industry . 
 The city has also been featured in national news coverage for Mayor Pete Buttigieg , who has achieved recognition for his various economic development projects within the city , his position as the youngest mayor to be elected in a city of more than 100 @,@ 000 residents , and his essay in which he came out as the first openly gay executive in the state of Indiana . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The St. Joseph Valley was long occupied by Native Americans . One of the earliest known groups to occupy what would later become northern Indiana was the Miami tribe . Later , the Potawatomi moved into the region , utilizing the rich food and natural resources found along the river . The Potawatomi occupied this region of Indiana until most of them were forcibly removed in the 1840s . The South Bend area was so popular because its portage was the shortest overland route from the St. Joseph River to the Kankakee River . This route was used for centuries , first by the Native Americans , then by French explorers , missionaries and traders . The French explorer René @-@ Robert Cavelier , Sieur de La Salle , the first white European to set foot in what is now South Bend , used this portage between the St. Joseph River and the Kankakee River in December 1679 . 
 = = = First settlements = = = 
 The first permanent white settlers of South Bend were fur traders who established trading posts in the area . In 1820 , Pierre <unk> Navarre arrived , representing the American Fur Company ( AFC ) of John Jacob Astor . He settled near what is now downtown South Bend . Alexis <unk> , another agent of the AFC , established a trading post known as the Big St. Joseph Station . In 1827 , Lathrop Minor Taylor established a post for Samuel Hanna and Company , in whose records the name St. Joseph 's , Indiana was used . By 1829 , the town was growing , with <unk> and Taylor emerging as leaders . They applied for a post office . Taylor was appointed postmaster , and the post office was designated as Southold , Allen County , Indiana . The following year , the name was changed to South Bend , probably to ease confusion , as several other communities were named Southold at the time . 
 In 1831 , South Bend was laid out as the county seat and as one of the four original townships of St. Joseph County with 128 residents . Soon after , design began on what would become the town of South Bend . The town was formally established in 1835 and rapidly grew . In 1856 , attorney Andrew Anderson founded May <unk> Lorber , the oldest business in St. Joseph County . He compiled a complete index of South Bend ’ s real estate records . 
 In 1841 , Schuyler Colfax was appointed St. Joseph County deputy auditor . Colfax purchased the South Bend Free Press and then turned it into the pro @-@ Whig newspaper , the St. Joseph Valley Register . He was a member of the state constitutional convention of 1850 where he opposed the barring of African American migration to Indiana . He joined the Republican party , like many Whigs of his day , and was elected to Congress in 1855 and became Speaker of the House in 1863 under Abraham Lincoln . In 1868 , he was elected Vice President under Ulysses S. Grant . Colfax returned to South Bend after his stint in Washington and was buried in the City Cemetery . 
 = = = Early business = = = 
 During the late 1830s through the 1850s , much of South Bend 's development centered on the industrial complex of factories located on the two races ( man @-@ made canals along the St. Joseph River in South Bend ) . Several dams were created , and factories were built on each side of the river . On October 4 , 1851 , the first steam locomotive entered South Bend . This led to a general shift of businesses from the river toward the railroad . In 1852 , Henry Studebaker set up Studebaker wagon shop , later becoming the world 's largest wagon builder and the only one to later succeed as an automobile manufacturer . The Singer Sewing Company and the Oliver Chilled Plow Company were among other companies that made manufacturing the driving force in the South Bend economy until the mid @-@ 20th century . Another important economic act was the dredging of the Kankakee River in 1884 to create farmland . During this time period there was a great immigration of Europeans , such as Polish , Hungarian , Irish , German , Italian , and Swedish people to South Bend because the rise of area factories . 
 South Bend benefited from its location on the Michigan Road , the main north – south artery of northern Indiana in the 19th century . Another significant development occurred near South Bend in 1842 , when Father Edward Sorin founded the University of Notre Dame just north of the town . It became a major factor in the area 's economy and culture . 
 = = = Establishment and Early History = = = 
 On May 22 , 1865 , South Bend was incorporated as a city , and its first elections were held on June 5 , 1865 , with William <unk> elected as its first mayor 
 Olivet AME was founded in South Bend in March 1870 , making it the first African @-@ American church in the city . Olivet AME is still an active African Methodist Episcopal Church , and celebrated its 145th anniversary in 2015 . 
 A sergeant from South Bend fired the first American shells against Germany in World War I. 
 = = = = History with Ku Klux Klan = = = = 
 In 1923 , the African @-@ American owner of a soda fountain received a letter signed KKK threatening to kill an African @-@ American man held in the city 's jail and harm the rest of the city 's African @-@ American population . Within a few days over a thousand African @-@ Americans fled the city . 
 In 1924 , the Ku Klux Klan held a conference and planned a parade from its local headquarters at 230 S. Michigan St. In preparation , Klan members were posted around town to direct traffic . Notre Dame students , well aware of the anti @-@ Catholic nature of the Klan , did not take kindly to this state of affairs , and before noon all of the Klansmen @-@ cum @-@ traffic directors had been " unmasked and <unk> . " Notre Dame students continued the fight , with several hundred gathering outside of the Klan headquarters , throwing rocks and smashing windows in protest . Local police as well as Notre Dame officials eventually managed to convince them to return to campus . Apparently even legendary football coach Knute Rockne became involved in the struggle to calm down the students . 
 = = = Later business = = = 
 Other industries developed in South Bend in the early 20th century , including Birdsell Manufacturing Company , the Bendix Corporation , Honeywell , <unk> , South Bend Lathe Works , the O 'Brien Paint Corp. , the South Bend Toy Company , South Bend Range , South Bend Bait Company , and South Bend Watch Company . Workers at the Bendix Corporation actually staged the first sit @-@ in strike in American history in 1936 . Fast development led to the creation of electric rail transportation throughout the area and , in 1925 , the South Shore interurban streetcar service was established from downtown South Bend to downtown Chicago . South Bend was the first community in the United States to have an electrified trolley system ( even though it was a few years before it was usable and profitable ) . 
 On June 30 , 1934 , the Merchants National Bank in South Bend was the last bank to be robbed by the notorious " Dillinger gang " . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 In 1949 , legendary percussionist Lionel Hampton was informed that his concert at South Bend 's Palais du Royale would be a blacks only event ; he threatened to call for a boycott of the venue , and the affair proceeded as an integrated evening , which newspapers said led to all attendees breaking out in " paroxysms of ecstasy . " 
 By 1950 , more than half of all employment was in the manufacturing sector . Due to economic difficulties , Studebaker closed its automotive manufacturing plants in South Bend in December 1963 . A general decline in manufacturing soon followed as industry was being restructured nationwide . By the year 2000 , manufacturing was only 16 percent of the local economy . Due to the severe loss of jobs , the city 's population decreased by nearly 30 @,@ 000 people during that period . 
 In 1984 , South Bend community leaders began seeking a minor @-@ league baseball team for the city . A stadium was constructed in 1986 and a 10 @-@ year player @-@ development contract was signed with the Chicago White Sox . The team would be known as the South Bend White Sox . In 1994 , the team 's name was changed to the South Bend Silver Hawks . The Silver Hawks changed their name to The South Bend Cubs in 2015 . They are a Class A minor league affiliate of the Chicago Cubs in the Midwest League . 
 In 2015 , the City of South Bend celebrated its 150th birthday . The celebration , lasting a year long , culminated with a celebration along the St. Joseph River with the lighting of the first River Lights . Mayor Pete Buttigieg welcomed the coming of the next 150 years of South Bend ’ s heritage accompanied by five previous South Bend mayors : Steve <unk> , Joe Kernan , Roger Parent , Peter Nemeth and Jerry Miller . 
 As of 2015 , the city began seeing modest population growth of 286 for the first time in nearly fifty years . The old Studebaker plant in South Bend is currently a new tech center , as the city is trying to attract the new industry . The area where the plants were abandoned is now called Ignition Park and is attracting new businesses . 
 = = Geography = = 
 South Bend is located at 41 ° 40 ′ 21 ″ N 86 ° 15 ′ 19 ″ W ( 41 @.@ <unk> , − 86 @.@ <unk> ) , 5 mi ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from the Michigan border and approximately equidistant from Illinois and Ohio . The city is 93 mi ( 150 km ) from Chicago . The nearest shore of Lake Michigan is 20 mi ( 32 km ) away . 
 According to the 2010 census , South Bend has a total area of 41 @.@ 877 square miles ( 108 @.@ 46 km2 ) , of which 41 @.@ 46 square miles ( 107 @.@ 38 km2 ) ( or 99 % ) is land and 0 @.@ 417 square miles ( 1 @.@ 08 km2 ) ( or 1 % ) is water . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 The St. Joseph River flows from the east end of the city turning north near the city center , giving South Bend its name at the bend in the river . South Bend is located on the North @-@ South continental divide , and the river flows northwest into Lake Michigan . The downtown area is located in the north @-@ central part of the city along the St. Joseph River . Notre Dame , Indiana , is directly adjacent to the north . The city extends further north on the west side , mainly with manufacturing and distribution facilities near the South Bend International Airport . Mishawaka , Indiana , is adjacent to South Bend 's east side . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 South Bend has a humid continental climate , with a Köppen climate classification of Dfa . Lake Michigan exerts a great influence on the climate of South Bend , including lake effect snow in winter and a tendency to moderate temperatures year round . June through August are the warmest months , with average temperatures above 69 ° F ( 21 ° C ) . Normally , 42 days with thunderstorms occur each year . The snowiest month is usually January , with snow fall normally recorded from October through April . On average , South Bend receives 81 @.@ 8 inches ( 208 cm ) of snow per year . Spring and fall can be mild and overcast , but also severely stormy at times with 293 partly cloudy to cloudy days each year . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = 2010 census = = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 101 @,@ 168 people , 39 @,@ 760 households , and 23 @,@ 526 families residing in the city . The population density was 2 @,@ 440 @.@ 1 inhabitants per square mile ( 942 @.@ 1 / km2 ) . There were 46 @,@ 324 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 117 @.@ 3 per square mile ( 431 @.@ 4 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 60 @.@ 5 % White , 26 @.@ 6 % African American , 0 @.@ 5 % Native American , 1 @.@ 3 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 6 @.@ 9 % from other races , and 4 @.@ 2 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 13 @.@ 0 % of the population . 
 There were 39 @,@ 760 households of which 33 @.@ 1 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 34 @.@ 9 % were married couples living together , 18 @.@ 9 % had a female householder with no husband present , 5 @.@ 4 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 40 @.@ 8 % were non @-@ families . 33 @.@ 3 % Of all households were made up of individuals and 11 @.@ 4 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 48 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 19 . 
 The median age in the city was 33 @.@ 3 years . 27 @.@ 3 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 10 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 27 @.@ 1 % were from 25 to 44 ; 23 @.@ 1 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 12 @.@ 5 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 48 @.@ 4 % male and 51 @.@ 6 % female . 
 = = = 2000 census = = = 
 As of the 2000 census , there were 107 @,@ 789 people , 42 @,@ 908 households , and 25 @,@ 959 families residing in the city . The population density was 2 @,@ 786 @.@ 4 people per square mile ( 1 @,@ 075 @.@ 9 / km ² ) . There were 46 @,@ 349 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 198 @.@ 1 per square mile ( 462 @.@ 7 / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the city was 66 @.@ 1 % White , 24 @.@ 6 % African American , 0 @.@ 4 % Native American , 1 @.@ 2 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 4 @.@ 9 % from other races , and 2 @.@ 8 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8 @.@ 5 % of the population . 
 Major ancestry groups reported by residents : Black or African American - 25 % , German - 17 % , Polish - 10 % , Irish - 10 % , Mexican - 7 % , English - 6 % , " United States / American " - 4 % , Hungarian - 3 % , Italian - 3 % , French ( except Basque ) - 2 % . 
 There were 42 @,@ 908 households out of which 30 @.@ 5 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 39 @.@ 0 % were married couples living together , 17 @.@ 0 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 39 @.@ 5 % were non @-@ families . Of all households , 32 @.@ 5 % were made up of individuals and 12 @.@ 7 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 45 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 12 . 
 The city 's population was distributed across all age groups , with 27 @.@ 3 % under the age of 18 , 10 @.@ 4 % from 18 to 24 , 29 @.@ 3 % from 25 to 44 , 18 @.@ 2 % from 45 to 64 , and 14 @.@ 8 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 33 years . For every 100 females there were 91 @.@ 1 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 86 @.@ 7 males . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 32 @,@ 439 , and the median income for a family was $ 39 @,@ 046 . Males had a median income of $ 31 @,@ 958 versus $ 23 @,@ 744 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 17 @,@ 121 . About 13 @.@ 6 % of families and 16 @.@ 7 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 24 @.@ 0 % of those under age 18 and 9 @.@ 1 % of those age 65 or over . 
 = = = Ethnicity = = = 
 Per the 2013 American Community Survey of the U.S. Census Bureau , the following ancestries were reported : African @-@ American - 26 % , German - 14 @.@ 8 % , Irish - 10 @.@ 4 % , Polish - 8 @.@ 2 % , English - 5 @.@ 0 % , American - 3 @.@ 3 % , Italian - 2 @.@ 6 % , Hungarian - 2 @.@ 4 % , French - 2 @.@ 0 % , Dutch - 1 @.@ 4 % , Swedish - 1 @.@ 1 % , Belgian - 0 @.@ 9 % . 
 = = Economy = = 
 South Bend 's location on the St. Joseph River led to an industrial @-@ based economy in the late 19th century and early @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ 20th century . In 1923 , industrialist and entrepreneur Vincent H. Bendix selected South Bend as the site of his new manufacturing plant for automotive parts . He chose South Bend primarily because it was on a rail line midway between Chicago and Detroit , the two automotive manufacturing centers of the United States at the time . Eventually , the Bendix corporation built a vast manufacturing complex on its South Bend acreage served by the major railroads , including a huge shipping and receiving building where railroad cars could enter at one end , unload , and depart at the opposite end . 
 By the end of World War II , manufacturing began to diminish . The Studebaker plant , which had at one time employed 45 @,@ 000 citizens , closed in 1963 ; its engine block plant shuttered the following year . Parts of the Bendix factory complex were later acquired and subdivided between Honeywell Corporation and Bosch Corporation respectively . Honeywell Aerospace continues to manufacture aviation products at its former Bendix facility . In 2010 , Bosch announced that it would cease all operations at its Bendix plant location in South Bend by the end of 2011 . Bosch vacated the building entirely in October 2012 . Curtis Products of South Bend moved into the building in May 2013 . 
 = = = Employers = = = 
 Since the 1960s , education , health care , and small business have come to the forefront of South Bend 's economy , though the city has never regained the level of prosperity it enjoyed before that time . Nearby University of Notre Dame is a large contributor to the local economy . The university is the largest employer in St. Joseph County , employing 5 @,@ 590 people . 
 Health care is another major contributor to the South Bend economy . In 2012 , Memorial Health System announced that it was merging with Elkhart General Hospital , located in Elkhart County , to form Beacon Health System . Beacon is the second largest employer in the city , employing 3 @,@ 450 people . Other notable businesses include Honeywell , Bosch , and PEI Genesis . AM General , Crowe Horwath , Martin 's Super Markets , and Schurz Communications all have corporate headquarters in South Bend . 
 According to the 2013 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report , the city 's top employers are : 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 Efforts are under way to spur economic growth in South Bend . The St. Joe Valley Metronet is a 50 @-@ mile dark , fiber optic network that encircles South Bend and Mishawaka that allows for strong telecommunications connectivity . The South Bend Metronet , named Zing , is bringing more high @-@ tech firms to the city and surrounding area . This telecommunications network has allowed for the advent of various data centers in South Bend , which serves as a hub between Chicago , Indianapolis , Detroit , and Cincinnati . The City of South Bend recently announced it will provide free wireless internet access via the Metronet in the city 's downtown and East Bank areas . 
 The Union Station Technology Center was bought from the city in 1979 and is currently Northern Indiana 's largest data center . It is also home to <unk> , a fellowship program that began in 2012 which employs local graduates who work on local projects with a focus on innovation and social entrepreneurship . There are currently plans to extend the data center into a fully operating high tech data hub in the old Studebaker " Ivy Tower " assembly plant next door , creating what will be called the Renaissance District . This project is set to break ground in 2015 and could take more than a decade to fully complete . 
 = = = = Innovation park and Ignition park = = = = 
 Innovation Park and Ignition Park , dual @-@ certified technology parks , have already attracted technology businesses to South Bend . Located across the street from the University of Notre Dame , Innovation Park was completed in 2009 and houses innovative researchers from companies and the university . Ignition Park , located just south of the downtown area , is planned to become home to 3 million square feet of high tech space on 140 acres of land previously owned by the Studebaker Corporation . The first tenant , Data Realty , moved into the location in the fall of 2012 . The second building in the new park will be used as a research and testing facility for massive turbo machinery as part of a partnership between the city , General Electric , Great Lakes Capital , Indiana Michigan Power , University of Notre Dame , and the state of Indiana . This project began construction in 2015 and is expected to have an economic impact of $ 15 million annually . 
 = = = Redevelopment = = = 
 Redevelopment is underway for some of the abandoned industrial facilities , with the abandoned Oliver Corporation buildings being the most recent example of reclaimed property . The city also faced programs with large swaths of vacant housing after the decline of the manufacturing industry . In 2013 , 1 @,@ 347 homes were vacant or abandoned . However , the city created the Vacant and Abandoned Properties Initiative in February 2013 , which aimed to take care of 1 @,@ 000 vacant or abandoned homes in 1 @,@ 000 days , either through demolition , repairing , or some other satisfactory means . As of June 2015 , 828 homes have been demolished , repaired , or handed off to partners . 
 The Smart Street Initiative , a 20 @-@ year plan to make the city safer for pedestrians , bicyclists , and motorists , began in 2013 with the conversion of one @-@ way streets to two @-@ way streets . The hope is to bring more businesses to the area , create shorter travel routes , and a reduce in speeding . This phase of the project is expected to be completed in 2016 . The other part of the initiative is the West Side Main Streets Plan , which is a revitalization plan for the Lincoln Way West and Western Avenue corridor focusing on guiding business owners , residents , and developers to improve the street front by offering a reimbursement on exterior improvements from the city and the Urban Enterprise Association . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 In 2012 , Kiplinger 's Personal Finance ranked South Bend eighth in the " Ten Best Cities for <unk> " . South Bend was also ranked among the 40 hottest real estate markets for business by Expansion Management magazine , and Smart + Connected Communities Institute featured South Bend as one of the top ten cities worldwide that is reinventing themselves through technology . 
 = = Arts and culture = = 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 South Bend was influenced by a large influx of Polish Catholic immigrants in the late 19th century . <unk> Day is widely celebrated on the Monday after Easter and is the beginning of the city elections campaign season . Fat Tuesday is also celebrated in South Bend , with <unk> being a staple food product in the city for the day . The city and surrounding county have 23 Catholic churches , 11 Catholic schools and three Catholic universities ( the University of Notre Dame , Holy Cross College , and Saint Mary 's College , all located in the adjacent city of Notre Dame ) . 
 = = = Music Festivals = = = 
 The city has several annual festivals . The South Bend International Festival began ten years ago as the South Bend Reggae Festival and now features local and international musical artists who perform in African , Latino , and American cultural styles . Proceeds from the festival are given to the Pangani Foundation of South Bend , which provides medical supplies to hospitals in Malawi . 
 <unk> FM - B100 ( Country Station ) hosts an Annual All Day Country Concert , with over 37 @,@ 000 free tickets in early September . 
 The World Pulse Festival , broadcast by <unk> Broadcasting network , is held annually in South Bend . It is hosted by Pulse FM , a local Christian music radio station . The event is an annual Contemporary Christian music festival , attracting more than 50 @,@ 000 visitors each year . 
 In 2013 , a new annual festival began in South Bend called South by South Bend , named after the famous South By Southwest of Austin , TX . The festival is a celebration of the local music scene , with local bands and artists performing on the park grounds and other public venues around the city . The goals of the festival include strengthening the bond between the communities of South Bend and Notre Dame , supporting local artistic expression , and promoting local business . In 2015 , the festival was renamed Sounds by South Bend , to avoid confusion with the Austin festival and more accurately represent the purpose of the event . 
 = = = Museums , arts and entertainment = = = 
 The South Bend Museum of Art is located in Century Center in downtown South Bend . The museum was opened to the public in March 1996 , and features a variety of artists from South Bend and the Michiana region . Currently , over 850 works are featured in the permanent collection . The museum also offers several classes and workshops for adults and children . 
 = = = = The History Museum = = = = 
 The History Museum is the public name of the Northern Indiana Historical Society , the second @-@ oldest historical society in Indiana , which was established in 1867 to collect and interpret the history of the northern Indiana region by St. Joseph County 's leading citizens . The Oliver Mansion ( also known by its original name , <unk> ) is one of the central features of the museum . The 38 @-@ room mansion was built in 1895 and is currently listed in the National Register of Historic Places . The home was built by Joseph Doty Oliver , the son of James Oliver , the founder of the Oliver Farm Equipment Company , once the largest plow manufacturer in the United States . In addition to the Oliver Mansion and the Workers Home ( a 1920s Polish @-@ American family home ) , and museum includes areas dedicated to the history of the St. Joseph River Valley , the University of Notre Dame , the All @-@ American Girls Professional Baseball League , and the <unk> Children 's Museum . 
 = = = = Studebaker National Museum = = = = 
 The Studebaker National Museum holds a large collection of wagons and automobiles from the 150 @-@ year history of the Studebaker Corporation . The museum began as a collection of wagons and automobiles produced by Studebaker , including the presidential carriages of Lincoln , McKinley , Harrison , and Grant . The company donated the collection to the city of South Bend in 1966 . The collection was housed in various locations from Century Center to its current location in downtown South Bend , adjacent to The History Museum . The two museums share one campus , and together form The Museums at Washington and Chapin . The former South Bend mansion of Clement Studebaker , named Tippecanoe Place , is now a restaurant . 
 = = = = <unk> buildings = = = = 
 The Morris Performing Arts Center , built in 1922 , included the Palace Theater , a venue for vaudeville . The theatre 's heyday was in 1940 with the premiere of Knute Rockne , All American , starring Ronald Reagan . A crowd estimated at 24 @,@ 000 gathered outside . The theater was scheduled for demolition in 1959 , when E. M. Morris purchased the facility and sold it to the city for one dollar , after which it was renamed the Morris Civic Auditorium . A total renovation was completed in 2000 . The Morris Performing Arts Center also includes the Palais Royale Ballroom , on which restoration was recently <unk> center houses the Broadway Theater League and the South Bend Symphony Orchestra . The orchestra 's Shanghai @-@ born conductor , Tsung Yeh , was the first conductor ever to hold music directorships of both a western symphony orchestra and a major Chinese orchestra . Marian High School holds its graduation ceremony at the theater . 
 South Bend is also home to The South Bend Hot <unk> , a group that performs a <unk> of The Rocky Horror Picture Show . The group has performed at various South Bend venues including the State Theater , Legends of Notre Dame , The Potawatomi Conservatories , and the historic Birdsell Mansion . 
