 Near the end of the season , the Pac @-@ 10 Conference named its award winners . Reggie Bush was named as the conference player of the year and Pete Carroll was named as the conference coach of the year . In addition , twelve players were named to the All @-@ Conference team . Bush , Matt Leinart , Dwayne Jarrett , <unk> <unk> , Sam Baker , Ryan Kalil , Darnell Bing , Lawrence Jackson , and <unk> Rucker were named to the first team while LenDale White , Fred Matua , and Scott Ware were named to the second team . Nine others were also named as honorable mentions . 
 = = = = National = = = = 
 After the season , a number of Trojans were named as national award winners and finalists . Reggie Bush became USC 's seventh Heisman Trophy winner with the second largest margin of victory ever . However , after the aforementioned NCAA investigation , USC would return its copy of Bush 's Heisman Trophy , considering that Bush was determined to be ineligible to play by the NCAA . On September 14 , 2010 , Bush announced that he would forfeit the Heisman and return his copy of the trophy . Bush also won the Doak Walker Award . Despite not winning the Maxwell Award , he won two other Player of the Year awards . Leinart , who was voted third in the Heisman Trophy ballot , was named as a finalist for the Davey O 'Brien Award and the Maxwell Award , won the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award , and was named by The Sporting News as their Sportsman of the Year . In addition , Pete Carroll was named a finalist for the Eddie Robinson Coach of the Year award , and Jarrett was named a finalist for the Biletnikoff Award , though neither won . 
 In addition to the individual awards , ten players were named to All @-@ America teams . On first teams , Bush was named by nine different publications , Leinart was named by two , Jarrett was named by seven , <unk> was named by six , Bing was named by two , and Blake was named by one publication . Besides the first teams , Kalil was named to a second team along with White and Matua , while Lawrence Jackson was named to a third team . 
 = = = Roster changes = = = 
 A week after the loss in the Rose Bowl , Reggie Bush announced his plans to skip his senior season and declare for the 2006 NFL Draft . Along with Bush , ten other Trojans were drafted . Bush was the first Trojan selected and the second overall pick by New Orleans , while 2004 Heisman @-@ winner , Matt Leinart , was taken tenth overall by Arizona . Three players were taken in the second round , Winston Justice by Philadelphia , <unk> <unk> by Arizona , and LenDale White by Tennessee , and two more were taken in the third round , <unk> Rucker to Cincinnati and Dominique Byrd by St. Louis to end the first day of the draft . On the second day , Darnell Bing was taken in the fourth round by Oakland , David <unk> taken in the fifth round by Seattle , <unk> Ramsey taken in the sixth by Philadelphia , and , finally , Fred Matua was taken in the seventh by Detroit to end the Trojans ' draft day . 
 = Washington State Route 225 = 
 State Route 225 ( SR 225 ) is an 11 @.@ 32 @-@ mile ( 18 @.@ 22 km ) long two @-@ lane state highway located entirely in Benton County , Washington , United States . The highway travels over the Benton City – Kiona Bridge , which is listed on the Washington Heritage Register and National Register of Historic Places , over the Yakima River . After turning through Benton City , the highway parallels the river for the remainder of the route . Several different proposals have been introduced to alleviate traffic flow issues at the SR 224 / SR 225 interchange . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 225 starts at a t @-@ intersection with SR 224 just north of the Interstate 82 / U.S. Route 12 interchange in south Benton City . The highway passes over the Yakima River on the Benton City – Kiona Bridge , which is listed on the Washington Heritage Register and the National Register of Historic Places . After a brief turn to the west , the highway resumes northerly into Benton City , serving as the main street through town . The Yakima River continues to parallel the highway as it exits town , passing between a hill on the west side and the river , followed by Horn Rapids County Park on the east until the highways terminus at SR 240 . 
 Every year the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2009 , WSDOT calculated that as few as 1 @,@ 000 cars used the highway at the terminus at SR 240 , and as many as 7 @,@ 800 cars at the interchange with SR 224 . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 225 was added to the highway logs during the 1991 legislative session , and since then the only major changes to the highway have been the replacement of the bridge over a drainage canal about 0 @.@ 27 miles ( 0 @.@ 43 km ) from the western terminus of the highway . 
 WSDOT is studying several different proposed changes to the SR 224 / SR 225 interchange to improve traffic flow , including <unk> the intersection , moving the off ramp from I @-@ 84 and making a 5 @-@ way stop , and multiple different roundabout solutions , which are the WSDOT preferred methods of improving the intersection . Costs are estimated to be between $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and $ 7 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Benton County . 
 = São Tomé and Príncipe at the 2012 Summer Olympics = 
 The African island nation of São Tomé and Príncipe competed at the 2012 Summer Olympic Games in London , United Kingdom from 27 July to 12 August 2012 . This was the nation 's fifth appearance at the Olympics since its debut in 1996 . Two track and field athletes , Christopher Lima da Costa and Lecabela Quaresma were selected to the team by wildcard places , without having qualified at any sporting event . Quaresma was selected as flag bearer for the opening and closing ceremonies . Neither of the two athletes progressed beyond the first round of their respective events . 
 = = Background = = 
 São Tomé and Príncipe participated in five Summer Olympic games between its debut in the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta and the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . The highest number of São Tomé and Príncipe athletes participating in a summer games is three in the 2008 games in Beijing , China . No São Tomé and Príncipe athlete has ever won a medal at the Olympics . Two track and field athletes from São Tomé and Príncipe were selected to compete in the London games : Christopher Lima da Costa in the men 's 100 m and Lecabela Quaresma in the women 's 100 m hurdles . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Christopher Lima da Costa was the only male athlete representing São Tomé and Príncipe at the London Olympics . He had not previously competed in any Olympic games . He competed in the men 's 100 metres race on August 4 , competing against six other athletes in the first heat . He finished the race in 11 @.@ 56 seconds ( his personal best ) , finishing last of the seven entrants . <unk> <unk> of Laos placed directly ahead of da Costa ( 11 @.@ 30 seconds ) in a heat led by Bruno Rojas of Bolivia ( 10 @.@ 62 seconds ) . The <unk> athlete placed 73rd of the 75 athletes , and therefore did not advance to later rounds . 
 Lecabela Quaresma competed on behalf of São Tomé and Príncipe at the London Olympic games in the women 's 100 metre hurdles . Quaresma became affiliated with sports organizations in Portugal and was 22 years old at the time of her competition at the London Olympics . She had not previously competed at any Olympic games . Quaresma competed against seven other athletes in the second heat on August 6 . Quaresma finished the race in 14 @.@ 54 seconds , finishing last out of the six finishing athletes . She ranked behind <unk> <unk> of Kazakhstan ( 13 @.@ 77 seconds ) in a heat led by Beate <unk> of Austria ( 13 @.@ 09 seconds ) and Eline <unk> of Belgium ( 13 @.@ 46 seconds ) . Of the 46 finishing athletes , Quaresma placed 42nd and did not advance to later rounds . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 = Da Boom = 
 " Da Boom " is the third episode of the second season of the animated comedy series Family Guy and the tenth episode of the series . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on December 26 , 1999 . The episode features the Griffin family after a nuclear holocaust occurs , due to Y2K on New Year 's Eve . The family then travels in search of food , and eventually decide to establish a town around a Twinkie factory . Peter then takes over the town , establishing himself as mayor , but eventually becomes power hungry , and is overthrown . 
 The episode was written by Neil Goldman and Garrett Donovan and directed by Bob Jaques . The episode featured guest performances by Patrick Duffy , Victoria Principal , Jack Perkins , Will Sasso , and Joey Slotnick along with several recurring voice actors for the series . This is the first episode that aired to feature Mila Kunis as the voice of Meg Griffin . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On December 31 , 1999 , Quahog prepares for New Year 's Day ( which is the last New Year 's Day of the millennium ) , and the family has been invited to Joe 's millennium party . At a store , a man in a chicken suit asks Peter if he wants a coupon , but Peter refuses , recalling the time he got a bad coupon from Ernie the Giant Chicken and started a massive fistfight . The man warns Peter that the world will end because of the Y2K problem , so Peter locks himself and the family in their basement in hazmat suits . Just after midnight a nuclear holocaust occurs , destroying much of the world and mutating , injuring , and killing many people . The Griffins remain unharmed , and as they look for survivors , they discover that Joe has been melted into his driveway , his son Kevin has been vaporized , and Quagmire and Cleveland have fused together and are now called " <unk> " ( or " <unk> " ) , and Tom Tucker and Diane Simmons have eaten Tricia Takanawa . Starving , Peter immediately eats all the dehydrated meals , without adding water . 
 Peter recalls that the <unk> Twinkies are the only food that can survive a nuclear holocaust , so the family travels to Natick , Massachusetts in hopes that the Twinkie factory has survived . On the way , Stewie is exposed to nuclear waste and mutates into an octopus @-@ like creature . Upon their arrival at Natick , they discover the factory is still standing and in perfect condition . Expecting to be able to live off of the <unk> , they establish the town of New Quahog around the factory . Peter proclaims himself mayor , and Joe and <unk> join him to form a ruling council . One year later , New Quahog has become a fresh new community , complete with houses and wells . Peter has successfully reigned as mayor despite many mistakes , such as giving people jobs picked out of a hat rather than based on the person 's skills . However , when Brian points out how New Quahog is a peaceful place with no violence , Peter realises that they are completely defenseless and uses the pipes from the city 's water irrigation system to make guns and other weapons , outraging the citizens . Meanwhile , Stewie , who has continued to transform into an octopus , suddenly lays hundreds of eggs in the basement of their house . 
 Despite Peter 's insistence that he is fit to continue to be the leader of the new community , the townspeople run him out of New Quahog , and his family follows him . The citizens proceed to burn the guns Peter had made with the pipes in the middle of the town square , but as the final gun in thrown onto the pile , hundreds of newly spawned Octopus @-@ Stewies hatch and begin to destroy the city , with the townspeople unable to protect themselves from the mutants . As the family walks away , oblivious to the town 's destruction , they decide to continue to a Carvel factory in Framingham . 
 The episode ends with a live @-@ action parody of Dallas , in which Pam Ewing ( Victoria Principal ) wakes up and tells her husband Bobby ( Patrick Duffy ) about a dream she had of a strange episode of Family Guy . Bobby comforts her , but pauses and then asks " What 's Family Guy ? " , and the two turn and look with confusion into the camera . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Da Boom " was the third episode of the second season of Family Guy , and the first for director Bob Jaques . It first aired on December 26 , 1999 . The episode was written by writing team Neil Goldman and Garrett Donovan , who had written episodes for the show in the first season including " Mind Over Murder " . 
 This was the first episode to have Mila Kunis providing the voice of Meg . Lacey Chabert , the original voice of Meg , left the series due to time constraints with her acting role in Party of Five , as well as schoolwork . Kunis won the role after auditions and a slight rewrite of the character , in part due to her performance on That ' 70s Show . Seth MacFarlane , the show 's creator , called Kunis back after her first audition , instructing her to speak slower , and then told her to come back another time and enunciate more . Once she claimed that she had it under control , MacFarlane hired her . 
 Ernie the Giant Chicken was introduced in this episode . He is an anthropomorphic chicken who serves as a rival to Peter . He has a long , unexpected fight with Peter , which interrupts the main storyline . This has become a running gag , having reappeared in episodes such as " Blind Ambition " , " Internal Affairs " , " No Chris Left Behind " and " Meet the Quagmires " . He is voiced by regular show writer Danny Smith . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actress Victoria Principal , comedian and actor Will Sasso , reporter , commentator , war correspondent , anchorman Jack Perkins , voice actor Joey Slotnick , and character actor Patrick Duffy guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actress Lori Alan , writer Danny Smith , and actor Patrick Warburton also made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The live @-@ action sequence in the episode is a reference to the episode of the CBS soap opera Dallas that erased the death of Bobby Ewing ( Patrick Duffy ) , which turns out to be a dream of Pamela Ewing ( Victoria Principal ) . Randy Newman appears singing everything he sees in a musical moment . The plot includes references to the Y2K bug . Peter takes away Trix from the Rabbit , which is a reference to commercials for Trix cereal . Chris tells E.T. to run when he thinks Peter is the government coming for him . When travelling to find food they are stopped and there 's a reference to Family Feud . Stewie 's line , " Game over man ! Game over ! " is a nod to the science fiction film Aliens . Arriving at the Twinkie factory , Peter uses the same words to describe what he sees that Dr. Ellie Arroway used in Contact when witnessing a celestial event in a foreign galaxy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode received positive reviews . Ahsan Haque of IGN rated the episode a 10 / 10 , saying " Overall , this episode easily ranks as one of the best episodes in the series . Almost every joke succeeds , and the far @-@ fetched alternate reality storyline thoroughly entertains . Despite the fact that all of the events in the episode are revealed to be a dream , it doesn 't take away from the high degree of amusement provided . " 
 = Great Raid of 1840 = 
 The Great Raid of 1840 was the largest raid ever mounted by Native Americans on white cities in what is now the United States . It followed the Council House Fight , in which Republic of Texas officials attempted to capture and take prisoner 33 Comanche chiefs who had come to negotiate a peace treaty , killing them together with two dozen of their family and followers . The Texas Officials were determined to force the Comanche to release all white captives among them . To avenge what the Comanche viewed as a bitter betrayal by the Texans , the Comanche war chief Buffalo Hump raised a huge war party of many of the bands of the Comanche , and raided deep into white @-@ settled areas of Southeast Texas . 
 = = Buffalo Hump gathers the tribes = = 
 Main article Buffalo Hump . 
 Comanche War Chief Buffalo Hump was determined to do more than merely complain about what the Comanches viewed as a bitter betrayal . Spreading word to the other bands of Comanches that he was raiding the white settlements in revenge , Buffalo Hump led the Great Raid of 1840 . Buffalo Hump gathered a huge raiding party , at least 400 warriors , with wives and young boys along to provide comfort and do the work . Altogether as many as a thousand Comanche may have set out from West Texas on the Great Raid . On this raid the Comanches went all the way from the plains of west Texas to the cities of Victoria and Linnville on the Texas coast . In what may have been the largest organized raid by the Comanches to that point , they raided and burned these towns and plundered at will . 
 = = Victoria is the first town attacked = = 
 The huge war party crossed into central Texas and first attacked the town of Victoria , August 6 . Although rangers had found the tracks of a gigantic war party coming out of West Texas , and were shadowing the onrushing Comanches , part of the war party broke off and attacked Victoria before the citizens could be warned . One resident wrote , " We of Victoria were startled by the apparitions presented by the sudden appearance of six hundred mounted Comanches in the immediate outskirts of the village . " The citizens of Victoria hid in the buildings , and the Comanches , after killing a dozen or so townspeople and riding up and down , departed Victoria when rifle fire from the buildings began to make the riding dangerous . The war party intended to gather horses and loot the coastal towns , which were not as prepared for the Comanches as the central Texas cities . After the attack on Victoria , the Comanches camped the night of August 6 on nearby Spring Creek . 
 = = The Sack of Linnville = = 
 Leaving Victoria August 7 , the Comanches continued on toward Linnville camping the night on Placido ( now <unk> ) Creek on the ranch of Plácido Benavides , about twelve miles from Linnville . 
 Early August 8 , 1840 , the Comanches surrounded the small port of Linnville , Texas , which was the second largest port in the Republic of Texas at the time , and began pillaging the stores and houses . Linnville , which is now a ghost town , was located 3 @.@ 5 miles northeast of present @-@ day Port Lavaca . The Comanches reportedly killed three whites , including customs officer Hugh Oran Watts , who had delayed his escape to retrieve a gold watch at his home ( reportedly a family heirloom ) . After killing Watts , the Comanche captured his wife of only three weeks , the former Juliet Constance , and a black woman and child . 
 Realizing that the plains Indians would have no experience on water , the townspeople fled prudently from the Comanche raiders to the safety of the water . They were saved by remaining aboard small boats and a schooner captained by William G. Marshall , which was at anchor in the bay . While safe in the water , the refugees witnessed the destruction and looting of their town , unable to do a thing except curse impotently . 
 For that entire day the Comanches plundered and burned buildings , draping themselves grandly in top hats and stolen linens . They tied feather beds and bolts of cloth to their horses , and dragged them . They herded large numbers of cattle into pens and slaughtered them . One outraged citizen , Judge John Hays , grabbed a gun and waded ashore through the shallow water , and roared at the bemused warriors , but the Indians chose to spare him , believing him mad . He later found that he had waded ashore to face nearly a thousand Indians with an unloaded pistol , as if that one weapon could have made a difference . 
 At the time of the Great Raid , many trade goods were en route from overseas to New Orleans , Louisiana to San Antonio , Texas and Austin , Texas ; a total inventory valued at over $ 300 @,@ 000 was reported to be at Linnville at that moment , including an undisclosed amount of silver bullion . Linn noted that in addition to the cloth and other trade goods usually present in his warehouse at that time were several cases of hats and umbrellas belonging to James Robinson , a San Antonio merchant . " These the Indians made free with , and went dashing about the blazing village , amid their screeching squaws and <unk> <unk> , ' like demons in a drunken <unk> , with Robinson 's hats on their heads and Robinson 's umbrellas bobbing about on every side like tipsy young balloons . " After loading loot onto pack mules , the raiders , grandly attired in their booty , finally began their retreat on the afternoon on August 8 , 1840 . 
 = = The Battle of Plum Creek = = 
 Main article Battle of Plum Creek 
 The Rangers had been trailing the war party for some time , unable to engage them because of their sheer numbers . But the three days of looting at Linnville gave the militia and Ranger companies a chance to gather . Volunteers from Gonzales , Texas under Mathew Caldwell and from Bastrop under Ed Burleson , with all the ranger companies of east and central Texas , moved to intercept the Indians . They made contact at Plum Creek , near the city of Lockhart , Texas , on August 12 , 1840 . The Comanches , who normally fared about as a fast and deadly light cavalry , were detained considerably by the captive , slower pack mules . The normal Comanche tactic was to ride as fast as possible away from the scene of a victory , but on this occasion they slowed to a gentler pace acceptable to the heavily laden pack mules . Thus , the militia and rangers caught the raiders , which normally they found impossible . The battle of Plum Creek was really a running gun battle , where the Texans attempted to kill the raiders and recover loot , and the Indians simply attempted to get away . Although only a dozen bodies were recovered , the Texans reported killing 80 Comanches , and the war party losses were probably higher than normal . But greed saved the Comanches in turn ; when the militia discovered the stolen bullion , they abandoned the fight , divided their loot , and went home . 
 = = Conclusion = = 
 The Great Raid of 1840 was the largest Indian raid on white cities in the history of what is now the United States — though technically when it occurred it was in the Republic of Texas and not in the United States . The war party literally burned one city to the ground . They took over 3 @,@ 000 horses and mules , and hundreds of thousands of dollars of other plunder , ranging from silver to cloth and mirrors . Unfortunately for the war party , the sheer volume of loot slowed them down , and made them vulnerable to attack from a militia that otherwise would never have caught them . Equally , the militia missed an opportunity to destroy the bulk of the raiding party when they concentrated on recovering and dividing the recovered bullion and other plunder . 
 = = = Online sources = = = 
 Handbook of Texas Online . 
 Dawn <unk> , Buffalo Hump . < <unk> link , February 2016 . 
 = Chocobo Racing = 
 Chocobo Racing , known in Japan as Chocobo Racing : Genkai e no Rōdo ( <unk> 〜 <unk> 〜 , lit . " Chocobo Racing : Road to the Spirit World " ) is a racing game for the PlayStation game console . The game was developed by Square Co . , creators of the Final Fantasy series of video games . The game was first released in Japan in March 1999 . North American and European releases followed that year . 
 As a formulaic kart racer , Chocobo Racing is often compared to Mario Kart and Crash Team Racing . The game 's star and namesake is the Chocobo , the mascot of the Final Fantasy series . Other figures from the game series , such as Mog the Moogle , the Black Mage , and Cid , fill out the all @-@ Final Fantasy cast . Most of the game 's soundtrack is composed using tunes from previous Final Fantasy titles . 
 The game was later released in Japan alongside Chocobo Stallion and Dice de Chocobo as part of the Chocobo Collection . On December 20 , 2001 , the game was re @-@ released individually as part of the PSone Books series . The game received generally average reviews , citing its low quality in several aspects of gameplay . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Chocobo Racing , the player controls Final Fantasy @-@ inspired characters , most of whom race in go @-@ karts . Other characters fly , drive scooters , ride magic carpets , or even run . Players have five different racing modes to choose from : Story Mode , Versus Mode , Grand Prix , Relay Race , and Time Attack . In the Story Mode , players are guided through the story of Chocobo Racing , which is narrated by Cid , in the form of an onscreen version of a pop @-@ up book . Players who complete the Story Mode are given the chance to customize their own racer ; completing the Story Mode also unlocks secret character racers . In the Versus Mode , two players can race each other on a horizontally split screen , where one player races viewing the top half of the screen and the other player races viewing the bottom half . In Grand Prix ( GP ) Mode , the player races computer @-@ controlled opponents in four selected tracks of his or her choice . In Relay Race Mode , the player chooses three racers to compete in a relay match . In Time Attack Mode , the player can select any stage and try to beat the fastest time record set there . There are ten track options : Cid 's Test Track , Moogle Forest , The Ancient Gate , <unk> Mines , The Black Manor , Floating Gardens , Gingerbread Land , Vulcan @-@ O Valley , Fantasia , and <unk> Circuit . 
 While racing , the player can accelerate , brake , reverse , activate Magic Stones , or use a " special ability " using the game controller 's analog stick and buttons . An additional move is the skid , which is executed by simultaneously braking and accelerating into a turn ; as the game 's cornering technique , the skid can be used to take sharp turns quickly . If the player skids too sharply , however , a spin out will occur . Before the start of any race , the player 's character receives a speed boost if the player accelerates at the correct time during the countdown . 
 In the world of Chocobo Racing , Magic Stones are scattered throughout each course , and can be picked up by the player by driving through them . Magic Stones can also be stolen from opponent players by bumping into another player . The player can then activate the Magic Stone for some special effect . Activating a Haste Stone , for example , gives the character a short speed boost . In some Magic Stones , the power of the stone increases if more than one of the same stone is picked up by the player . Each stone is represented by a corresponding symbol on the racetrack , while stones marked with question marks represent random Magic Stones , which grant the player either a Haste Stone , Fire Stone , Ice Stone , Thunder Stone , <unk> Stone , Reflect Stone , Doom Stone , or Ultima Stone . 
 Special abilities are another important aspect of Chocobo Racing . Before each race , the player is prompted to assign a special ability to the selected character . During a race , the player can only activate the chosen special ability when the meter in the upper left @-@ hand corner of the screen is full . After using the special ability , the player must wait for the meter to recharge to use it again . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Chocobo Racing borrows themes and elements from Final Fantasy I to Final Fantasy VI . The Story Mode is narrated by Cid and includes nine chapters in a pop @-@ up book fashion with FMVs . To progress , the player needs to defeat the chapter 's respective challenger . Before each chapter begins , the player is given the option of viewing the story or skipping to the race except when playing the Story Mode for the first time . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The cast of Chocobo Racing is drawn from recurring creatures and characters from the Chocobo 's Dungeon and Final Fantasy series . Eight characters -- Chocobo , Mog , Golem , Goblin , Black Magician , White Mage , Chubby Chocobo , and Behemoth — are immediately available , and additional , secret characters such as Cactuar , Bahamut , Cloud , Aya , and Squall may be unlocked after completing Story Mode . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Chapter one , titled " Gadgets a go @-@ go , " begins with the inventor Cid presenting Chocobo with a pair of " Jet @-@ Blades " and offers Chocobo a chance to take a test @-@ run with them on the racetrack behind his lab . After the race , Mog the Moogle drops in and asks Cid about the progress of the racing machine he 'd commissioned . Cid promises to bring the machine by tomorrow , but later confides to Chocobo he 'd forgotten it . The next day , after presenting the doubtful Mog with his scooter , Chocobo and Mog race . After Chocobo wins , Mog confronts Cid over his vehicle 's poor performance , but Cid replies that Chocobo won because of the differences in their abilities ( i.e. , Chocobo 's " Dash " ) . He explains that the secret of Chocobo 's " Dash " ability is the Blue Crystal on his leg @-@ ring . Mog mulls over his inferior " Flap " ability and decides he wants a Blue Crystal as well , so Cid recommends that the two go on an adventure to find out the secret of the Blue Crystal . 
 The two head out to discover the secret behind the Blue Crystal , meeting ( and racing ) many along the way . When they reach Mysidia , the village of mages , a White Mage there notices that all the companions have Magicite , which the companions had previously referred to as " Blue Crystals . " The companions want to know the legend behind the Magicite shards ; the White Mage agrees to tell them on the condition that they race her in the Floating Gardens , with the story as the winner 's prize . Upon winning , she tells them of the legend : " There are Magicite Shards scattered all over the world . It used to be one large Magicite Crystal ... But people kept fighting each other over it . So the founder of Mysidia , the great magician Ming @-@ Wu , broke the Crystal into eight pieces . He then scattered the shards to the four winds . He did so to assure later restoration of the Magicite Crystal ... when all eight pieces are brought together again . " 
 After this discovery , the companions continue to search for other racers in possession of the crystal shards . Upon defeating Behemoth in a race , the monster joins their ranks , bringing the party 's number to eight . The companions then notice that their Magicite shards begin to glow , and Mog discovers that he possessed Magicite all along . The convergence of all eight shards of the Magicite crystal fulfills Ming @-@ Wu 's prophecy , and the gate to Fantasia , the Land of the Espers , opens . When the companions arrive in Fantasia , they are greeted by Bahamut , King of the Espers . Bahamut decides to test their worth with a final trial , and welcomes their attempts to defeat him in a race . After the race , Bahamut acknowledges the powers of the group . He goes on to rhetorically ask if the companions knew why Ming @-@ Wu broke up the Magicite , and explains the legend once more . Bahamut is pleased with the companions , noting that humans , moogles , chocobos , and monsters all came together in goodwill . In celebration , he decides to leave the portal between the world and Fantasia open , declaring that " Fantasia shall exist in harmony with your world from this day on . " 
 Upon completion of the Story Mode , players are assigned a number of points determined by their performance , with a maximum of one hundred . Using those points , the player is given the option of creating a racer with customized color and performance . The point value is distributed among five parameters : Max Speed , Acceleration , Grip , Drift , and <unk> , which determines how fast the racer 's ability gauge charges . A maximum of twenty points can be assigned to each of the five racing parameters . Customized racers can be used in all of the game 's modes except for the Story Mode , and only the main characters and Bahamut are open to customization . 
 = = Development = = 
 The first demonstration of Chocobo Racing was at the Fall Tokyo Game Show ' 98 ; it was then unclear if there would be a North American release . IGN editors noted its striking similarities to Mario Kart . In the release of Chocobo 's Dungeon 2 , a bonus CD included a video clip of the game . Originally slated to be released in late September / October , the release date was moved to August 1999 because " It was done early , and is now ready to go " . 
 On September 30 , 1999 , Square announced a " Chocobo Racing Grand Prix " contest . The contest was sponsored by Square Electronic Arts L.L.C. ( Square EA ) and ran from September 30 , 1999 to December 8 , 1999 . The contest 's title was a misnomer , because participants entered by playing through the game 's Story Mode ( rather than Grand Prix Mode ) and sending in their scores ( either through taking a photograph of the score screen or saving the score to a memory card and sending it ) . 
 Contest entries were divided into five age groups : seven years old and younger , eight to eleven years old , twelve to fifteen years old , sixteen to eighteen years old , and nineteen years old and older . Square EA then determined the three highest scores per week in each age group . The three participants with the highest scores of the week in their respective age group received a Chocobo Piggy Bank . 
 At the end of the contest , Square EA determined the three highest scorers overall in each age group . Each participant with the highest score in the contest overall in his or her respective age group received one free copy of each Square title released in the calendar year 2000 for the PlayStation game console ( SaGa Frontier 2 , Front Mission 3 , Vagrant Story , Legend of Mana , Threads of Fate , Chrono Cross , Parasite Eve 2 , and Final Fantasy IX ) and a Chocobo Watch . Each second @-@ highest scoring participant received a free copy of Chocobo 's Dungeon 2 and a Chocobo Watch . Each third highest scoring participant received a Chocobo Watch . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Chocobo Racing Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album produced by Square . It was released exclusively in Japan on March 25 , 1999 by DigiCube , and sold roughly 35 @,@ 000 units . The soundtrack bears the catalog number SSCX @-@ <unk> and spans a duration of 57 : 17 . Almost all of the tracks are arrangements of music Nobuo Uematsu composed for Final Fantasy games , arranged by Kenji Ito . The only exception is the song played during the final song , " Treasure Chest In The Heart " , which is a vocal track orchestrated by Shirō Hamaguchi and performed by Hiromi Ohta . In the English version of the game , it is performed by Vicki Bell . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chocobo Racing sold 300 @,@ 000 units in Japan . Doug Perry of IGN said the game was an attempt by Square to " cash in " on the popular kart racer genre created by Nintendo 's successful Mario Kart . Other reviewers agreed , calling it “ a tired rehash ” due to its colorful but unpolished graphics , crude track designs , and poor controls . 
 1UP.com 's Final Fantasy Retro Roundup stated that it was a “ decent game ” ruined by the necessity of steering with a D @-@ pad , and was rated " Not Worth It " . Many similarities were noted with Mario Kart such as similar course themes and the need to " power slide " . It was also called too easy , with story mode lasting only two hours and there being limited replay value except for the unlocking of secret characters and courses . Other critiques included a lack of a battle mode and limited customization . The music was thought to be average , though the last song of the story mode was “ strikingly beautiful ” . 
 = = Cancelled sequel = = 
 At Nintendo 's E3 2010 press conference on June 15 , 2010 , a new Chocobo Racing title , tentatively titled Codename : Chocobo Racing 3D , was announced for the Nintendo 3DS handheld system . However , on October 10 , 2013 , Takashi Tokita , director of the original Chocobo Racing , confirmed that the project had been cancelled , noting that had he been part of its development process , he " would have made sure that it came out . " 
 = Early life of Samuel Johnson = 
 Samuel Johnson ( 18 September 1709 [ O.S. 7 September ] – 13 December 1784 ) was an English author born in Lichfield , Staffordshire . He was a sickly infant who early on began to exhibit the tics that would influence how people viewed him in his later years . From childhood he displayed great intelligence and an eagerness for learning , but his early years were dominated by his family 's financial strain and his efforts to establish himself as a school teacher . 
 After a year spent studying at Pembroke College , Oxford , Johnson was forced to leave by lack of financial support . He tried to find employment as a teacher , but was unable to secure a long @-@ term position . In 1735 he married Elizabeth " Tetty " Porter , a widow 20 years older than himself , and the responsibilities of this marriage made him determined to succeed as an educator . He established his own school , but the venture was unsuccessful . Thereafter , leaving his wife behind in Lichfield , he moved to London , where he spent the rest of his life . In London he began writing essays for The Gentleman 's Magazine , and also befriended Richard Savage , a notorious rake and aspiring poet who claimed to be the disavowed son of a nobleman . Eventually he wrote the Life of Mr Richard Savage , his first successful literary biography . He also wrote the powerful poem London , an 18th @-@ century version of Juvenal 's Third Satire , as well as the tragic drama Irene , which was not produced until 1749 , and even then was not successful . 
 Johnson began his literary career as a minor Grub Street hack writer , but he went on to make lasting contributions to English literature as a poet , essayist , moralist , novelist , literary critic , biographer , editor and lexicographer . His early works , especially London and Life of Mr Richard Savage , contain Johnson 's emerging views on biography , morality , and literature in general . 
 = = Parents = = 
 Johnson 's parents were Michael Johnson , a bookseller , and his wife , Sarah Ford . Michael was the first bookseller of reputation in the Staffordshire community of Lichfield . He also owned a parchment factory , which allowed him to produce his own books . Little is known of his background , except that he and his brothers were apprenticed as booksellers . Michael 's father , William Johnson , was described as a " yeoman " and a " gentleman " in the Stationers ' Company records , but there is little evidence to suggest that he was from a noble family . William was the first Johnson to move to Lichfield and died shortly thereafter . Michael Johnson , after leaving his apprenticeship at 24 , followed in his father 's footsteps and took up a job selling books on Sadler Street , Lichfield . Three years later Michael Johnson became warden of a charity known as the Conduit Lands Trust , and shortly afterwards was made churchwarden of St Mary 's church . 
 At the age of 29 , Michael Johnson was engaged to be married to a local woman , Mary Neild , but she cancelled the engagement . Twenty years later , in 1706 , he married Sarah Ford . She came from a middle @-@ class milling and farming family and was twelve years his junior , daughter of Cornelius Ford . Although both families had money , Samuel Johnson often claimed that he grew up in poverty . It is uncertain what happened between the marriage of his parents and Samuel 's birth three years later to provoke a decline in the family 's fortunes , but Michael Johnson quickly became overwhelmed with debt from which he was never able to recover . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Johnson was born in Lichfield at 4 : 00 pm on Wednesday , 18 September 1709 at the family home above his father 's bookshop , near Market Square , across from St Mary 's Church . His mother was 40 when she gave birth , a matter for sufficient concern that George Hector , a " man @-@ midwife " and a surgeon of " great reputation " , was brought in to assist during the birth . The baby was named Samuel , after Sarah 's brother Samuel Ford . He did not cry and , with doubts surrounding the newborn 's health , his aunt claimed " that she would not have picked such a poor creature up in the street " . As it was feared the baby might die , the vicar of St Mary 's was summoned to perform a baptism . Two godfathers were chosen : Samuel Swynfen , a physician and graduate of Pembroke College , and Richard Wakefield , a lawyer , coroner , and Lichfield town clerk . 
 Johnson 's health improved and he was placed in the nursing care of Joan <unk> . During this period he contracted what is believed to have been scrofula , known at that time as the " King 's Evil " . Sir John <unk> , a former physician to King Charles II , recommended that the young Johnson should receive the " royal touch " , which he received from Queen Anne on 30 March 1712 at St James 's Palace . Johnson was given a ribbon in memory of the event , which he claimed to have worn for the rest of his life . However , the ritual was ineffective and an operation was performed that left him with permanent scarring across his face and body . Sarah later gave birth to a second boy , Nathaniel . Having two children put financial strain on the family ; Michael was unable to keep on top of the debts he had accumulated over the years , and his family was no longer able to maintain the lifestyle it had previously enjoyed . 
 Johnson demonstrated signs of great intelligence as a child , and his parents , to his later disgust , took pleasure in showing off his " newly acquired accomplishments " . His education began at the age of three , when his mother had him memorise and recite passages from the Book of Common Prayer . When Johnson turned four , he was sent to a nearby " school " on Dam Street , where " Dame " Anne Oliver , the proprietor , gave lessons to young children in the living @-@ room of a cottage . Johnson especially enjoyed his time with Dame Oliver , later remembering her fondly . At the age of six he was sent to a retired shoemaker to continue his education , and a year later was enrolled at Lichfield Grammar School ; he excelled in Latin under Humphrey Hawkins , his teacher in the lower school . 
 During this time Johnson began exhibiting the tics that would influence how others viewed him in his later years , and which formed the basis for his posthumous diagnosis of Tourette syndrome ( TS ) . TS develops in childhood ; it follows a fairly reliable course in terms of the age of onset and the history of the severity of symptoms . Tics may appear up to the age of eighteen , but the most typical age of onset is from five to seven . Johnson 's tics and gesticulations manifested after his childhood scrofula ; studies suggest that environmental and infectious factors — while not causing Tourette 's — can affect the severity of the disorder . Pearce describes Johnson 's birth as a " very difficult and dangerous labour " , and adds that Johnson had many illnesses throughout his life : he " suffered from bouts of melancholy , crushing guilt , habitual insomnia , and he endured a morbid fear of loneliness and of dying . " He also was " disturbed by scruples of infidelity " from the age of 10 . 
 Although TS caused problems in his private and public life , it lent Johnson " great verbal and vocal energy " . He excelled in his education and was promoted to the upper school at the age of nine , to be tutored by Edward Holbrooke . The school was directed by the Reverend John Hunter , a man known for his scholarship and , like Holbrooke , his brutality , which caused Johnson to become dissatisfied with his education . However , during this time he did befriend Edmund Hector , nephew of his " man @-@ midwife " George Hector , and John Taylor , both of whom he remained in contact with throughout his life . 
 = = = Cornelius Ford = = = 
 At the age of 16 , Johnson was given the opportunity to stay with his cousins , the Fords , at Pedmore , Worcestershire . There he bonded with Cornelius Ford , the son of his mother 's brother , and Ford employed his knowledge of the classics to tutor Johnson while he was not attending school . Johnson enjoyed his time with Ford , who encouraged Johnson to pursue his studies and to become a man of letters . Johnson remembered one moment of Ford 's teachings : Ford told him to " grasp the leading <unk> of all things ... grasps the trunk hard only , and you will shake all the branches " . Ford was a successful , well @-@ connected academic , familiar with many society figures such as Alexander Pope . 
 Ford was also a notorious alcoholic whose excesses contributed to his death six years after Johnson 's visit . This event deeply affected Johnson , and he remembered Ford in his Life of Fenton , saying that Ford 's abilities , " instead of furnishing convivial <unk> to the voluptuous and dissolute , might have enabled him to excel among the virtuous and the wise " . Having spent six months with his cousins , Johnson returned to Lichfield , but Hunter , " angered by the impertinence of this long absence " , refused to allow him to continue at the grammar school . 
 Unable to return to Lichfield Grammar School , Johnson was enrolled , with the help of Ford and his half @-@ brother Gregory Hickman , into the King Edward VI grammar school at Stourbridge . The headmaster was John Wentworth , and he took care to work with Johnson on his translation exercises . Because the school was located near Pedmore , Johnson was able to spend more time with the Fords and get to know his other relatives in the area . During this time he began writing poems and produced many verse translations . However , he spent only six months at Stourbridge before returning once again to his parents ' home in 1727 . When Boswell was writing his Life of Samuel Johnson , he was told by Johnson 's school friend Edmund Hector Johnson 's leaving the Stourbridge school was due in part to a fight Johnson and Wentworth had over Latin grammar . For companionship , Johnson spent time with Hector and John Taylor , two of his schoolfriends , and he soon fell in love with Hector 's younger sister , Ann . This first love was not to last , and Johnson later claimed to Boswell , " She was the first woman with whom I was in love . It dropped out of my head imperceptibly , but she and I shall always have a kindness for each other . " 
 Johnson 's future now began to look uncertain , as his father was deeply in debt . To earn money , Johnson stitched books for his father , although poor eyesight — a result of his childhood illness — meant he eschewed the work involved . It is possible that Johnson spent most of his time in his father 's bookshop reading various works and building his literary knowledge . During this time , Johnson met Gilbert Walmesley , the Registrar of the Ecclesiastical Court and a frequent visitor to the bookshop . Walmesley took a liking to Johnson , and the two discussed various intellectual topics during the two years Johnson spent working in the shop . Their relationship was soon put on hold ; Sarah Johnson 's cousin , Elizabeth <unk> , died in February 1728 and left her £ 40 ( about £ 4 @,@ 900 as of 2016 ) , which was used to send Johnson back to school . 
 = = = College = = = 
 On 31 October 1728 , a few weeks after he turned 19 , Johnson entered Pembroke College , Oxford as a fellow @-@ commoner . The inheritance did not cover all of his expenses at Pembroke , but Andrew Corbet , a friend and student at Pembroke , offered to make up the deficit . Corbet left Pembroke soon after Johnson arrived , so this source of aid disappeared . To meet the expenses , Michael Johnson allowed his son to borrow a hundred books from his bookshop , at a great cost to himself , and these books were not fully returned to Michael until many years later . 
 On the day of Johnson 's entrance interview for Pembroke , his anxious father introduced him to his future tutor , William Jorden , hoping to make an impression . During the interview , his father was " very full of the merits of his son , and told the company he was a good scholar , and a poet , and wrote Latin verses " , which caused Johnson significant embarrassment . Michael 's praise was unnecessary ; Johnson 's interview went so well that one of the interviewers , a 26 @-@ year @-@ old William Adams ( Jorden 's cousin , later Master of Pembroke ) , claimed that Johnson was " the best qualified for the University that he had ever known come there " . Throughout the interview , Johnson sat quietly while listening to his father and the interviewers , until he interrupted and quoted Macrobius . The interviewers were surprised that " a School @-@ boy should know Macrobius " , and he was accepted immediately . 
 At Pembroke , Johnson made many friends , but neglected many of the mandatory lectures , and ignored calls for poems . He did complete one poem , the first of his tutorial exercises , on which he spent comparable time , and which provoked surprise and applause . He was later asked by his tutor to produce a Latin translation of Alexander Pope 's Messiah as a Christmas exercise . Johnson completed half of the translation in one afternoon and the rest the following morning . Although the poem brought him praise , it did not bring the material benefit he had hoped for . The poem was brought to Pope 's attention ; according to Sir John Hawkins , Pope claimed that he could not tell if it was the original or not . However , Johnson 's friend John Taylor dismissed this " praise " because Johnson 's father had already published the translation before Johnson sent a copy to Pope , and Pope could have been remarking about it being a duplication of the published edition . 
 Regardless , Pope remarked that the work was very finely done , but that did not prevent Johnson from being violently angry at his father 's actions in preempting his sending Pope a copy of the poem . The poem later appeared in Miscellany of Poems ( 1731 ) , edited by John Husbands , a Pembroke tutor , and is the earliest surviving publication of any of Johnson 's writings . Johnson spent the rest of his time studying , even over the Christmas vacation . He drafted a " plan of study " called " Adversaria " , which was left unfinished , and used his time to learn French while working on his knowledge of Greek . 
 Although he later praised Jorden , Johnson came to odds with him over what he considered to be Jorden 's " meanness " of abilities . He discouraged his friend Taylor , who came to Pembroke in March , from having Jorden as his tutor , and Taylor was soon encouraged to go to Christ Church to be taught by Edmund Bateman . Johnson appreciated Bateman 's skill as a lecturer , and he would often travel to meet Taylor to discuss the lectures . However , Johnson lacked the funds to even replace his shoes , and so he started to make the journey barefoot . In response , those of Christ Church began to mock Johnson , and he soon kept to his own room for the rest of his time at Pembroke , with Taylor visiting him instead . 
 After thirteen months , poverty forced Johnson to leave Oxford without taking a degree , and he returned to Lichfield . During his last weeks at Oxford , Jorden left Pembroke , and Johnson was given William Adams as a tutor in his place . He enjoyed Adams as a tutor , but by December , Johnson was already a quarter behind in his student fees , and he was forced to return home . He left behind many of the books that his father had previously lent him , both because he could not afford the expense of transporting all of them and as a symbolic gesture that he hoped to return to the school soon . 
 = = Early career = = 
 There is little record of Johnson 's life between the end of 1729 and 1731 ; he most likely lived with his parents when experiencing bouts of mental anguish and physical pains . After these years of illness , his tics and gesticulations associated with TS became more noticeable and were " commented on by many observers " . To further complicate Johnson 's life , his father was deeply in debt by 1731 and had lost much of his standing in Lichfield . An usher 's position became available at Stourbridge Grammar School , but Johnson 's lack of a degree saw him passed over , on 6 September 1731 . Instead , he stayed at the home of Gregory Hickman , Cornelius Ford 's half brother , writing poetry . It was there that he heard the devastating news that Cornelius had died in London , on 22 August 1731 ; later , in his personal " Annales " , he pointed to that moment as one of the most important of his life . 
 At about the same time , Johnson 's father became ill ; he developed an " inflammatory fever " by the end of the year . He died in December 1731 and was buried at St. Michael 's Church on 7 December 1731 . He left no will , and Johnson received only £ 20 from Michael 's estate of £ 60 ( £ 8 @.@ 9 thousand as of 2016 ) . In an act " almost like religious penance " , Johnson honoured his father 's memory 50 years later by returning to his bookstall in Uttoxeter to make amends for his refusal to work the stall while his father lay dying . Richard Warner kept Johnson 's account of the scene : 
 ... a <unk> to Uttoxeter , and going into the market at the time of high business , uncovered my head , and stood with it bare an hour before the stall which my father had formerly used , exposed to the sneers of the standers @-@ by and the <unk> of the weather . 
 Johnson eventually found employment as <unk> at a school in Market Bosworth , Leicestershire . He was paid £ 20 a year ( £ 3 thousand as of 2016 ) , enough to support himself . The school was run by Sir <unk> Dixie , who allowed Johnson to teach even though he did not have a degree . The unconventional Dixie allowed Johnson to live in his own mansion , Bosworth Hall . Although the arrangement may seem congenial , Johnson was treated as " a kind of <unk> chaplain , so far , at least , as to say grace at table , but was treated with what he represented as intolerable harshness ; and , after suffering for a few months such complicated misery , he relinquished a situation which all his life afterwards he recollected with the strongest aversion , and even a degree of <unk> " . Still , Johnson found pleasure in teaching even though he thought it boring . By June 1732 , he had returned home , and , after a fight with Dixie , quit the school . 
 Johnson spent the rest of his time at Lichfield looking for a position at the other local schools , and , after being turned down for a position in Ashbourne , Derbyshire , he spent his time with his friend , Hector . Hector lived in the home of Thomas Warren , on High Street , Birmingham , and Johnson was invited to stay there as a guest in the autumn of 1732 . Warren was at that time starting his Birmingham Journal , and he enlisted Johnson 's help , although no copies of the essays he wrote for the paper now survive . His stay with Hector and Warren was not to last , and Johnson moved into the house of a man named Jarvis on 1 June 1733 . During this time , Johnson started to slip into a " state of ' absence ' " and he began to treat his friends with " abuse " . 
 His connection with Warren continued to grow , and Johnson proposed to translate Jeronimo Lobo 's account of the Abyssinians . Johnson read Abbe Joachim Le Grand 's French translations , and he thought that a shorter version might be " useful and profitable " . He began work on the edition and a finished section was taken to be printed during the winter of 1733 – 1734 . Johnson 's nerves got the best of him , and after a breakdown he was unable to continue working , but felt obligated to meet his contract . To finish the rest , Johnson dictated directly to Hector , who then took the copy to the printer and made any corrections . It amounted to a month 's work , and , a year later , his A Voyage to Abyssinia was finally published . 
 Johnson returned to Lichfield in February 1734 , where he began an annotated edition of Poliziano 's Latin poems , along with a history of Latin poetry from Petrarch to Poliziano . The work was designed to fill 480 pages and provide a detailed commentary and corresponding notes . By completing such a work as this , Johnson hoped to become known as a scholar @-@ poet similar to Julius Caesar Scaliger , Daniel and <unk> Heinsius , Desiderius Erasmus , and Poliziano , all of whom Johnson admired . Johnson began on 15 June 1743 and printed a Proposal for the work on 5 August 1734 . However , the project did not receive enough funds and it was soon brought to an end . Although the project failed , it shows that Johnson identified himself with neo @-@ Latin humanism . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Johnson identified himself as a poet and , in November 1734 , applied to Edward Cave to work on the poetry reviews for The Gentleman 's Magazine . In a letter written under the name S. Smith , Johnson said , " As You appear no less sensible than Your Readers of the defects of your Poetical Article , You will not be displeased , if , in order to the improvement of it , I communicate to You the sentiments of a person , who will undertake on reasonable terms sometimes to fill a column " . In particular , Johnson suggested removing the magazine 's " low <unk> " and " awkward Buffoonery " and then replacing them with poems , inscriptions , and " short literary Dissertations in Latin or English " written by himself . Cave did not accept Johnson 's proposal to write a column , but he did employ Johnson occasionally to work on minor aspects of the periodical . 
 Around this time , Johnson became close to a man named Harry Porter , and remained with him during his terminal illness . Porter died on 3 September 1734 , leaving his wife Elizabeth ( née Jervis , and nicknamed " Tetty " ) widowed at the age of 45 , with three children . Months later , Johnson began to court the widow ; Reverend William Shaw claims that " the first advances probably proceeded from her , as her attachment to Johnson was in opposition to the advice and desire of all her relations " . Johnson and Elizabeth became close , and they quickly fell in love . She admired Johnson greatly and claimed that he was " the most sensible man that I ever saw in my life " . 
 Johnson was inexperienced in relationships , but the well @-@ to @-@ do widow encouraged him and provided for him with her substantial savings . The two were married on 9 July 1735 , at St. Werburgh 's Church in Derby . The Porter family did not approve of the match , partly because Johnson was 25 and Elizabeth was 21 years his elder . His mother 's marriage to Johnson so disgusted her son Jervis that he stopped talking to her . Her other son Joseph later accepted the marriage , and her daughter , Lucy , accepted Johnson from the start . 
 = = = Edial Hall = = = 
 During the previous June while working as a tutor for Thomas Whitby 's children , Johnson had applied for the position of headmaster at Solihull School . Walmesley lent his support to Johnson 's application , but Johnson was passed over because the school 's directors thought he was " a very haughty , ill @-@ natured gent . , and that he has such a way of distorting his face ( which though he can 't help ) the gent [ s ] think it may affect some lads " . He was also rejected for a position at a school in <unk> for similar reasons . Johnson did not give up his ambition to teach ; with Walmesley 's encouragement , he decided to set up his own school . 
 In the autumn of 1735 , Johnson opened a private academy at Edial , near Lichfield . The building , Edial Hall , was a large house with a pyramid @-@ shaped roof and a unique design ; a back room served as the schoolroom while the rest housed Johnson 's family . He had only three pupils , David Garrick , George Garrick and Lawrence Offley ; David Garrick — 18 at the time — went on to become one of the most famous actors of his day . Johnson designed a curriculum that focused on the reading of classical literature , starting with what he considered to be easier works , such as those by <unk> and Erasmus , before slowly progressing to Cornelius Nepos and finally onto Ovid , Vergil , and Horace . The school was advertised in the June and July 1736 editions of The Gentleman 's Magazine : " At Edial , near Litchfield , in Staffordshire , Young Gentlemen are <unk> , and Taught the Latin and Greek Languages , by Samuel Johnson " . 
 After being open for little more than a year , the school failed in February 1737 , gaining Johnson a reputation as a failed schoolmaster . He slowly abandoned his desire to teach to focus more on writing his first major work , the historical tragedy Irene . The play did not earn him the money he had hoped for , though , until Garrick produced it in 1749 . 
 On 2 March 1737 , penniless , Johnson left for London with his former pupil David Garrick . To make things worse , Johnson received word that his brother had died on the day they left . However , their prospects were not completely hopeless , as Garrick was set to inherit a large sum the next year . Also , Garrick had connections in London , and the two would stay with his distant relative , Richard Norris , who lived on Exeter Street . Johnson did not stay there long , and set out for Greenwich near the Golden Hart Tavern to finish Irene . During that time , he wrote to Cave on 12 July 1737 and proposed a translation for Paolo Sarpi 's The History of the Council of Trent ( 1619 ) , which Cave did not accept until months later . 
 Johnson started working on the translation of Sarpi before Cave approved , and he returned home to his wife during this time . In all , he managed to write between four hundred and eight hundred pages of text with corresponding commentary before he stopped working on it in April 1739 . In October 1737 , Johnson brought his wife to London ; they first lived at Woodstock Street and then moved to 6 Castle Street . Soon , Johnson found employment with Cave , and wrote for his The Gentleman 's Magazine . His work for the magazine and other publishers during this time " is almost unparalleled in range and variety " , and " so numerous , so varied and scattered " that " Johnson himself could not make a complete list " . 
 In May 1738 , his first major work , a poem called London , was published anonymously . The work was based on Juvenal 's Third Satire and describes the character Thales 's leaving for Wales to escape the problems of London . In particular , the poem describes how London is a place of crime , corruption , and the neglect of the poor . Johnson could not bring himself to regard the poem as granting him any merit as a poet ; however , Alexander Pope claimed that the author " will soon be <unk> " ( brought to light , become well known ) , although it did not immediately happen . 
 In August , Johnson was denied a position as master of the Appleby Grammar School because a master 's degree from Oxford or Cambridge was required . To ensure that he would not suffer rejection again , Pope asked John Gower , a man with influence in the Appleby community , to have a degree awarded to Johnson . Gower attempted to have a degree awarded to Johnson from Oxford , but he was told that it was " too much to be asked . " Gower then wrote to a friend of Jonathan Swift to persuade him to use his influence at the University of Dublin to have a masters awarded to Johnson , which could then be used to justify a masters awarded to Johnson from Oxford . However , Swift refused to act on Johnson 's behalf . Regardless of Swift 's motivation in not acting on Johnson 's behalf , or how Johnson reacted to Swift 's actions , it is known that Johnson then after refused to appreciate Swift as a poet , writer , or a satirist , with one exception : Swift 's Tale of a Tub , of which Johnson doubted Swift 's authorship . 
 Between 1737 and 1739 , Johnson became close to Richard Savage . Feeling guilty for his own poverty , Johnson stopped living with his wife and spent time with Savage . Together , they would roam the streets at night without enough money to stay in taverns or sleep in " night @-@ cellars " . Savage was both a poet and a playwright , and Johnson was reported to enjoy spending time and discussing various topics with him , along with drinking and other merriment . However , poverty eventually caught up with Savage , and Pope , along with Savage 's other friends , gave him an " annual pension " in return for him agreeing to move to Wales . Savage ended up in Bristol however , and once again fell into debt by reliving his former London lifestyle . He was soon in debtors ' prison and died in 1743 . A year later , Johnson wrote Life of Mr Richard Savage ( 1744 ) at Cave 's prompting , and this work formed the beginning of Johnson 's long @-@ lasting success . The biography was a " moving " work that , according to Walter Jackson Bate , " remains one of the innovative works in the history of biography " . 
 = = Early works = = 
 Johnson 's early works and early life have been neglected topics within Johnson scholarship . As a result , he is primarily known for the events surrounding his later life and later works like A Dictionary of the English Language . This imbalance originates in the failure of James Boswell , Johnson 's friend and companion , to discuss in great detail Johnson 's childhood and the beginning of his career within the Life of Samuel Johnson , the most famous biography on Johnson . In particular , Boswell ignored Johnson 's early politics and political writings which show a concern with Sir Robert Walpole 's political administration . 
 His first major work , the poem London , contains an early version of Johnson 's ethics and morality system . Within the poem , he combined attacks on the politics of Walpole and the British government with the immoral actions of the common Londoner to form a general satire of 18th @-@ century London society . Johnson compares London to the Roman Empire in its decline and blames moral and political corruption for its fall . Although Johnson did not start his literary criticism career until later , London is an example of what Johnson thought poetry should be : it is youthful and joyous , but it also relies on simple language and easy to understand imagery . 
 Johnson 's first major success came with Life of Savage , but it was not his first biography ; Savage was the fourth in a series which also included biographies of Jean @-@ Philippe Baratier , Robert Blake and Francis Drake . Although it was not the only biography that appeared immediately after Savage 's death , it became the most popular , and it embodied Johnson 's ideas on what a biography should be . 
 The book did contain some inaccuracies , particularly those surrounding Savage 's claim that he was the illegitimate child of a nobleman . It was successful in its partial analysis of Savage 's poetry and in portraying insights into Savage 's personality , but for all of its literary achievements it did not bring immediate fame or income to Johnson or to Cave ; it did , though , provide Johnson with a welcome small income at an opportune time in his life . More importantly , the work helped to mould Johnson into a biographical career ; it was included in his later Lives of the Most Eminent English Poets series . 
 = Stichometry = 
 Stichometry refers to the practice of counting lines in texts : Ancient Greeks and Romans measured the length of their books in lines , just as modern books are measured in pages . This practice was rediscovered by German and French scholars in the 19th century . <unk> is the Greek word for a ' line ' of prose or poetry and the suffix ' <unk> ' is derived from the Greek word for measurement . 
 The length of each line in the Iliad and Odyssey , which may have been among the first long , Greek texts written down , became the standard unit for ancient stichometry . This standard line ( <unk> , in German ) was thus as long as an epic hexameter and contained about 15 syllables or 35 Greek letters . 
 Stichometry existed for several reasons . Scribes were paid by the line and their fee per line was sometimes fixed by legal decree . Authors occasionally cited passages in the works of other authors by giving their approximate line number . Book buyers used total line counts to check that copied texts were complete . Library catalogs listed the total number of lines in each work along with the title and author . 
 Scholars believe that stichometry became established in Athens sometime during the 5th century BCE when copying prose works became common . Stichometry is mentioned briefly in Plato 's Laws ( c . 347 BCE ) , several times in Isocrates ( early to mid @-@ 4th century ) , and in Theopompus ( late 4th to early 3rd century ) , but these casual references suggest the practice was already routine . The same standard line was used for stichometry among the Greeks and Romans for about a thousand years until stichometry apparently fell out of use among the Byzantine Greeks in the Middle Ages as page numbers became more common . 
 The standard work on stichometry is Kurt Ohly 's 1928 <unk> Untersuchungen which collects together the results of some fifty years of scholarly debate and research . Today , stichometry plays a small but useful role in research in fields as diverse as the history of the ancient book , <unk> , and Christian hermeneutics . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 There are two kinds of stichometry . Total stichometry is the practice of reporting the total number of lines in a work . Partial stichometry is the practice of including a series of numerals in the margins of a text , usually to mark every hundredth line . 
 Stichometry was sometimes confused with <unk> , the practice of some Christian authors in late antiquity of writing texts broken into rhetorical phrases to aid delivery . Some modern Jewish and Christian scholars use ‘ stichometry ’ as a synonym for ‘ <unk> , ’ which is the occasional practice in ancient scriptures of laying out texts so that each biblical or poetic verse begins on a new line . 
 = = Evidence for Stichometry = = 
 The libraries of Europe contain many medieval copies of ancient Greek and Latin texts . Many of these contain short notes or ' subscriptions ' on the final page that , in hundreds of cases , give the total number of lines in the work . In texts of classical authors such as Herodotus and Demosthenes , these totals are expressed in the older , <unk> numerals that were used in Athens during the classical period but abandoned sometime during the Hellenistic period . Thus these stichometric totals are thought to descend , along with the content of the texts , from very early editions . 
 Many ancient authors mention stichometry . Galen complains about the verbosity of a rival and says he can offer a description in fewer lines . In the 1st century BCE , a philosopher criticized Zeno of Citium and cited particular passages by giving their line number to the nearest hundredth line . Diogenes Laertius probably draws on the <unk> , the published catalogue of the Library of Alexandria , when he reports the total number of lines in the oeuvres of various authors . He says , for example , that <unk> wrote 43 @,@ 475 , Aristotle wrote 445 @,@ 270 , and Theophrastus wrote 232 @,@ 808 lines . The Cheltenham Canon lists line totals for books in the Christian Bible and concludes with an anonymous note apparently written by a book dealer in the 4th century CE when the practice of stichometry was perhaps becoming less familiar : 
 Since the list of line totals [ of the books in the Bible available ] in the city of Rome is not reliable , and elsewhere because of greed is not complete , I have gone through each individual book , counting 16 syllables to the line ( as used in Virgil ) , and recorded the number for each book in all of them . 
 Beginning in the 19th century , archaeologists discovered a large number of more or less fragmentary Greek scrolls in Egypt . Ohly describes and analyzes some fifty <unk> which provide direct , ancient evidence for total and partial stichometry . 
 = = The Modern Rediscovery of Stichometry = = 
 Friedrich <unk> , a leading German classicist in the mid @-@ 19th century , stimulated interest in the mysterious numerals found at the end of medieval manuscripts by discussing them in several of his essays . 
 In an 1878 article that Ohly called ‘ epoch @-@ making , ’ Charles Graux proved that the numerals at the end of the medieval manuscripts were proportional to the length of each work and in fact gave the total number of a fixed unit equal to a Homeric line . This discovery established the concept of the standard line . 
 While studying the Clarke Codex of Plato 's dialogues at Oxford , Martin <unk> noticed that isolated letters in the margins of two dialogues formed an alphabetic series and marked every hundredth standard line ( alpha 
 = 100 , beta = 
 200 , etc . ) . He was able to show that other manuscripts had similar marginal markings . His 1881 article named this kind of line @-@ counting ' partial stichometry ' and contrasted it to ' total stichometry ' studied by Graux . 
 Theodor Birt 's well @-@ known The Nature of the Ancient Book ( 1882 ) substantially widened research on stichometry . Birt saw that Graux 's breakthrough led to a cascade of insights about scribal practices and publishing , citations and intertextuality , and the kinds of formats and editions used in antiquity . Stichometry thus led to a broader study of the spatial organization of ancient books and their social , economic , and intellectual roles . As Hermann Diels said , 
 The investigations of the recently deceased Charles Graux , taken all too prematurely from the world of scholarship , have made it henceforth <unk> certain that the standard line ( the <unk> ) of the ancients was a unit of spatial length equal to the hexameter . Theodor Birt has rightly erected his shrewd and persuasive The Nature of the Ancient Book upon this foundation . 
 Birt 's 550 @-@ page work was stimulated by practical questions about the ancient culture of books but grew into a broad reevaluation and reorganization of our knowledge of ancient literature and intellectual life . His introduction argued : 
 The nature of the literature of antiquity and the form of the ancient book reciprocally conditioned each other . The context of publication enveloped and modified literary creativity . The dividends of these investigations will thereby far exceed the satisfaction of merely antiquarian pleasures . 
 Many of Birt 's theories and interpretations are dated and have been superseded by later research , but he permanently broadened and deepened the methodologies used in histories of the ancient book and connected stichometry to a broad range of intellectual and literary issues . 
 In 1893 , James Rendel Harris ' book Stichometry extended these new developments to an analysis of the stichometric data found in many early manuscripts of the Christian Bible and other Christian texts . 
 In 1909 , Domenico Bassi published a survey of the stichometric notations found on the papyri excavated at Herculaneum . 
 At the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries , archaeologists discovered a large number of fragmentary , Greek scrolls in Egyptian tombs , mummies , and city dumps . Some of these contained stichometric notations , and <unk> became interested in the question of whether this data provided clues that would aid in reassembling the fragments . Kurt Ohly studied the stichometry found in many of the scrolls excavated at Herculaneum in Italy but his 1929 book <unk> Untersuchungen contained a complete survey of the treasure trove of newly discovered Greco @-@ Egyptian papyri with stichometric notations . It is regarded as the standard work on stichometry . Ohly discusses the length of the standard line , the evidence for syllable counting , the various number systems used in stichometric reports , and the aims and history of stichometry among the Greeks , Romans , and Byzantines . Ohly 's catalog of ancient papyri with stichometry together with Bassi 's survey and the line reports in medieval manuscripts collected by Graux provide a wide range of evidence for ancient stichometric practices and their evolution through the centuries . 
 = = Recent Research and Applications = = 
 Rudolf Blum summarized research on stichometry in the catalog of Callimachus at the Library of Alexandria . 
 Holger Essler ( University of Würzburg ) discussed stichometry 's role in the ongoing efforts to reconstruct the papyri excavated at Herculaneum . 
 Dirk <unk> ( Oxford University ) used stichometry in his restoration of <unk> ' On Piety . 
 Jay Kennedy ( Manchester University ) claimed in several articles and a book , The Musical Structure of Plato 's Dialogues , that Plato counted the lines in his dialogues in order to insert symbolic passages at regular intervals and thereby formed various musical and Pythagorean patterns . 
 Rachel Yuen @-@ Collingridge and Malcolm <unk> ( Macquarie University ) used stichometry along with other kinds of evidence to make inferences about scribal practice and copying techniques . 
 Mirko <unk> ( Durham University ) argued that the stichometric totals in the Demosthenes manuscripts descended from the earliest editions . He used these totals to show that the supposed excerpts of documentary evidence inserted in the speeches were not present in those early editions and were thus late forgeries . His book , The Documents in the Attic Orators , includes an introduction to stichometry . 
 = Bedtime Story ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Bedtime Story " is a song recorded by American singer Madonna for her sixth studio album , Bedtime Stories ( 1994 ) . It was released as the third single from the album on February 13 , 1995 , by Maverick Records , and it also appears on Madonna 's compilation album GHV2 ( 2001 ) . " Bedtime Story " was written by Björk , Nellee Hooper and Marius De Vries ; it was the only time Björk wrote a song for a Madonna album . She re @-@ wrote a demo of the song to the current version , which was then produced by Madonna and Hooper . A mid @-@ tempo electronic and house song with acid , ambient and techno influences , " Bedtime Story " has an underlying skeletal synth melody influenced by minimal trance music . The track was a departure from Madonna 's pop @-@ R & B @-@ based outputs in favor of unconventional and electronic music . Lyrically it talks about the joys of the unconscious world . 
 " Bedtime Story " received favorable reviews from music critics , who praised the song 's hypnotic and electronic style , and deemed it an underrated song which could have had great potential . The song was a moderate success , reaching the top ten in the record charts of United Kingdom , Italy and Australia , but missed the top 40 in United States , while peaking at number one on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart . The music video for " Bedtime Story " was directed by Mark Romanek and is listed as one of the most expensive music videos of all time with a cost of $ 5 million ( $ 7 @.@ 76 million in 2016 dollars ) . It features surrealistic and new age imagery , with influences from artists such as Remedios Varo , Frida Kahlo and Leonora Carrington . The video received acclaim from critics and is permanently displayed at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City . 
 " Bedtime Story " was performed at the 1995 Brit Awards in London with Madonna wearing a white Versace dress and long hair extensions , becoming one of the 30 best moments of the awards show history according to Marie Claire . A remixed version of the track was also used as a video interlude on her Re @-@ Invention World Tour in 2004 . Critics and scholars noted that the song foreshadowed Madonna 's move towards electronic music in her future work . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 According to Lucy O 'Brien in her book Madonna : Like an Icon , Madonna wanted to " make an impact " on the soul music scene , and started working with prominent producers from the R & B market . Madonna also wanted to explore British club music scene , where genres such as dub had been growing in popularity . She decided to work with several European producers and composers from the electronic scene , including Nellee Hooper , who pleased Madonna due to his " very European sensibility " . Inviting Hooper over to Los Angeles , writing sessions started taking place in Chappell Studios , Encino , California . 
 " Bedtime Story " was written by Icelandic singer @-@ songwriter Björk , Marius De Vries and Hooper , and co @-@ produced by Madonna and Hooper . According to author Mark Pytlik in his book Björk : Wow and Flutter , Madonna was inspired at that time by Björk 's second studio album , Debut ( 1993 ) . Through her connections with De Vries and Hooper , Madonna got in touch with Björk and offered her a chance to write a track for Bedtime Stories . Björk did not consider herself a fan of Madonna 's music , but she was intrigued by the offer and she accepted it . She wrote a song initially named " Let 's Get Unconscious " , with the opening lyrics " Today is the last day , That I 'm using words " — the lines being born out of Björk 's own criticism of Madonna 's aesthetic . The singer clarified , " When I was offered to write a song for [ Madonna ] , I couldn 't really picture me doing a song that would suit her ... But on second thought , I decided to do this to write the things I have always wanted to hear her say that she 's never said . " 
 Once the song demo had been finished , De Vries and Hooper rearranged the track and the final version was called " Bedtime Story " . The song was eventually released as the third single from the parent album , Bedtime Stories , on February 13 , 1995 . Björk later confessed that Madonna had got few of the lyrics wrong , like instead of the original " learning logic and reason " Madonna included it as " leaving logic and reason " . The original demo was later re @-@ worked and released as " Sweet Intuition " , which appeared as a B @-@ side on Björk 's " Army of Me " single and remixed on the " It 's Oh So Quiet " single . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Bedtime Story " is an electronic song , a notable departure from the other tracks on its parent album , which are more R & B and new jack swing @-@ driven . Unlike Madonna 's more up @-@ tempo , melodic work , the song is slower and has less melody but a more complex rhythmic structure . It has an ambient @-@ influenced tone , with a " pulsating " and a " deep , bubbling " house beat . There are stylistic comparisons to acid house music with its " skeletal " synth arrangement , influences of minimal trance , as well as techno . The song 's instrumentation is synthesized , consisting of drum machine loops , organs , strings , gurgles , handclaps , as well as a digitally @-@ altered " homophonic " choir . According to sheet music published by Musicnotes.com , " Bedtime Story " is written in the key of G minor and has a moderate tempo of 108 beats per minute . Madonna 's vocals span from the nodes of A3 to G ♭ 5 and <unk> a basic sequence of <unk> – Dm – E – A – G as its chord progression . The song is linked to the ending of the previous album track , " Sanctuary " , and starts with its chords . The ending of the track has a pulsating beat and a mix of the lead synth , with Madonna 's voice whimpering and uttering " Ha @-@ ha @-@ <unk> " . It ends abruptly saying " And all that you 've ever learned , try to forget , I 'll never explain again " making the listener believe that it was all the part of a dream . 
 According to Victor Amaro Vicente in his book The aesthetics of motion in musics for the <unk> <unk> ed @-@ Din Rumi , the song 's music bears many resemblances to new age @-@ era music and different forms of Sufi music . Its slow atmospheric qualities have drawn comparison to " <unk> @-@ Sufi Relaxation " and the song 's intricate , " steady and continuous " rhythmic structure has also drawn comparison to the <unk> ceremony . Björk , one of the song 's writers , has been credited for giving the song its particular style and according to De Vries , the track 's architecture is " distinctly <unk> " and she " has such a particular and idiosyncratic approach to the construction of lyrics and phrasing " . In a chapter of Music and <unk> written by Charity Marsh and Melissa West , it is stated that one can hear the influence of Björk in Madonna 's vocals during the song . 
 Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , noted that the lyrics of " Bedtime Story " are an hymn to the joys of unconsciousness and a rejection of the supposed constraints of reason and language , hence the line " Words are useless , especially sentences , They don 't stand for anything , How could they explain how I feel ? " Lyrically , despite being a song about a trip to the unconscious , scholars have noticed subtexts within the song 's meaning . Vicente noted that postmodernism and new age themes are prevalent within the lyrics , especially with regards to their incapability of articulating the concept of the truth , as well as the song 's theme of meditation and relax . Islamic mystic and sexual themes have also been noted within the song 's lyrics . Vicente further found that the cliché references to " honey " , " longing and yearning " , and the sexual connotations of being " wet on the inside " does not relate to " secular " love , but to " ecstatic " Sufi poetry . The lyrics allude to concepts of movement which are " central " to Sufi philosophy : " It indicates achieving fana through sema ( getting ' lost ' and ' leaving logic and reason to the arms of unconsciousness ' ) " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Bedtime Story " has received positive reviews from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic , in a review for the parent album , wrote that " Bedtime Story " was among the " best songs on the album " and that it " slowly works [ its ] melodies into the subconscious as the bass pulses " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine praised the song , claiming that it had unfulfilled potential and that it " could have been the next ' Vogue ' " . In a review for her GHV2 album , he also described the song as a " trippy follow @-@ up to the mainstream hit ' Take a Bow ' " and gave it an " A " rating . Larry Flick from Billboard noted that " It is easily among [ Madonna 's ] boldest and most experimental pop singles to date " with " trippy and cutting @-@ edge trance dance rhythms " . He finished his review praising its " ingratiating " hook and " it is an affecting plea for unconscious bliss and escape , voiced with underplayed angst and resolve " . Peter Galvin from The Advocate found that the song " calls to mind the Ecstasy anthem ' Rescue Me ' " . 
 O 'Brien wrote that " ' Bedtime Story ' was a vivid track that foreshadowed Madonna 's move towards electronica " . Author Victor Amaro Vicente wrote in his book , The Aesthetics of Motion in Musics for the <unk> <unk> Ed @-@ Din Rumi , that the song 's " complex rhythmic texture " made it a " dance hall favorite in the mid @-@ 1990s " . Rikky <unk> in The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , that the track was similar to the music of English alternative band Everything but the Girl , and claimed that " in contrast to most other songs of the album , this is one track that could have been longer and more trippy than it is " . Writing for Idolator , Bianca Gracie <unk> d " Bedtime Story " the highlight of the album , adding that " It sucks you in with its quivering drum patterns taken directly from trance music , which creates an ethereal ambiance " . Gracie commended the influence of UK dance music and Madonna 's provocative vocals , finding the song to be a direct inspiration for singer Britney Spears ' " Breathe on Me " , from her fourth studio album In the Zone ( 2003 ) . 
 Matthew Rettenmund wrote in his Encyclopedia Madonnica that the song was a " total curveball " because of its inclusion on the album . He also believed that releasing it as a follow @-@ up single to the commercially successful " Take a Bow " diminished its potential . However , Rettenmund praised it as one of Madonna 's most " uncharacteristic " songs , describing as a " hypnotic , almost hallucinogenic , ride through an idealized state of mind . " This was echoed by author Chris Wade , who wrote in the book The Music of Madonna that although written by Björk , Madonna made the song her own by " adding a druggy , sleepiness [ to it ] that makes it one of her most unusual , quirky and challenging tracks . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , the song debuted at number 72 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , on the issue dated April 22 , 1995 . One week later , the song peaked at number 42 , becoming the first Madonna single since " Burning Up " ( 1983 ) not to reach the top 40 . If " Bedtime Story " would have been able to reach the top 40 , Madonna could have become the third woman in the " rock era " with the most top 40 hits , behind Aretha Franklin and Connie Francis . She would have achieved a consecutive string of 33 top 40 hits , starting from her single " Holiday " ( 1983 ) . Fred Bronson from Billboard explained that the song 's loss of radio airplay and sales prevented it from peaking within the US top 40 . " Bedtime Story " spent a total of seven weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 . However , it was successful on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart , where it peaked at number one and spent 16 weeks on the charts . Furthermore , it also charted on various Billboard genre charts , including the Rhythmic Top 40 at number 40 , and the Top 40 Mainstream at number 38 . On the Canadian RPM Top Singles chart , it reached a peak of number 46 . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song entered the charts at its peak of number four on the week of February 25 , 1995 . It left the top 20 two weeks later , eventually spending nine weeks on the charts . In other European countries , the song also found some success . It peaked at number 38 in Belgium for one week only . On the Dutch Single Top 100 chart , it entered and peaked at number 46 on April 15 , 1995 , and stayed on the same position the next week , with a total run of two weeks . " Bedtime Story " debuted at number nine in Finland , and peaked at number four the next week . In Australia , the song debuted and peaked at number five on April 9 , 1995 , where it stayed in that position for three weeks . It fell out of the top ten in the fifth week , and eventually exited the charts after a total run of nine weeks , falling to 44 on its last week in the charts . In New Zealand , it debuted at number 40 on May 7 , 1995 , moving up two positions to 38 which was its peak , and leaving the charts the next week . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 The music video for " Bedtime Story " was directed by Mark Romanek over a course of six days at Universal Studios , Universal City , California . Madonna had first approached Romanek to direct the music video of her Erotica single , " Bad Girl " ( 1993 ) . Romanek recalled in the DVD , The Work of Director Mark Romanek , that " Bad Girl " was ultimately directed by David Fincher , but he got later approached by the singer 's team for " Bedtime Story " . Romanek contacted storyboard artist Grant Shaffer to create the storyboards for the video . He met with Romanek the next day , who played " Bedtime Story " for Shaffer and also showed him some photographs of Madonna , which were supposed to be used as the album cover . The surrealism inspired images portrayed a mystical looking Madonna , with white hair billowing behind her . Romanek wanted to have the music video capture the same look . Madonna called from Florida and together with Romanek they described to Shaffer every aspect of the video , including budget and their concepts . For the next few days , Shaffer sketched the storyboards and faxed them to Romanek for review . About 20 days later , Shaffer dropped the final sketches at Propaganda Films , who were producing the video . 
 Production started from December 5 , 1994 , at Universal Studios . When Shaffer arrived there , he found that his storyboards were glued on a giant blackboard along with the schedule for each shot . He also observed that many of his storyboard ideas had evolved , but they retained the core concepts . The preliminary shots used a Madonna body double and the singer arrived afterwards , proceeding with the shots in a water tank . Filming stopped for few hours when a minor earthquake shook the film studio . Few complications were encountered like Madonna getting dyed in blue color from sitting in the water tank , as well as technical difficulties leading to cancellation of a storyboard showing the singer opening her chest cavity . One shot involving Madonna laying in the lap of a skeleton had to be postponed since the skeleton was too small for the singer , and had to be rebuilt from scratch . The last scene filmed was the one involving the laboratory where Madonna was shown sleeping in a futuristic dress . At a reputed cost of $ 5 million ( $ 7 @.@ 76 million in 2016 dollars ) , " Bedtime Story " became one of the most expensive music videos of all time , and the most expensive at that time alongside the music video for her single " Express Yourself " ( 1989 ) , which was also reported to have cost $ 5 million . Tom Foden was the video 's production designer and it was shot by cinematographer Harris Savides , on 35 mm film lens . Due to the vast number of digital effects required for the video , post @-@ production lasted for weeks . In an interview with Aperture magazine , Madonna revealed the inspiration for the music video : 
 My " Bedtime Story " video was completely inspired by all the female surrealist painters like Leonora Carrington and Remedios Varo . There 's that one shot where my hands are up in the air and stars are spinning around me . And me flying through the hallway with my hair trailing behind me , the birds flying out of my open robe – all of those images were an homage to female surrealist painters ; there 's a little bit of Frida Kahlo in there , too . 
 = = = Release and synopsis = = = 
 On March 10 , 1995 , the video was given a cinematic release at three different Odeon Cineplex film theaters ; in Santa Monica , California at the Broadway Cinemas , in Manhattan , New York at the Chelsea Theater , and in Chicago , Illinois at the Biograph Theater . In order to promote the video , Madonna did a special known as Madonna 's Pajama Party on March 18 , 1995 @.@ where the singer could be seen reading a bedtime story in Webster Hall in New York City . Unlike most of Madonna 's videos which debuted on either MTV or VH1 television channels , " Bedtime Story " was first put into circulation on radio station Z100 following the singer 's " pajama party " on March 18 . According to Maverick GM Abbey Konowitch , they first aligned with Odeon Cineplex so that they could assure that the music video would be viewed in an innovative way . However , Konowitch and his team were aware that such an event could not be organized for every release because it would cause problems with investments . Odeon VP Freeman Fisher explained that since it was a slow theatrical season , allowing the video 's release enabled them to sell more tickets , " for four minutes the audience sees astounding cinematic images in a first class feature @-@ like production . It 's not just another artist lip @-@ syncing to a track . " 
 The music video starts off with a blue monitor screen with an eye showing the inscription " Welcome " . The video progresses inside a blue space ship @-@ style room with Madonna lying prostrate in what seems to be a scientific experiment . The imagery cast in this section of the video have drawn comparisons to hermeticism . The video progresses into a sequence of dreams , containing varied surrealistic , mystic , new age , Sufi and Egyptian imagery and symbolism . Such include a scene in which Madonna lies on a rotating sunflower , and images of a woman with long hair , an alchemist @-@ type man holding a cube with Madonna 's face on each side as well as rotating Sufi dancers . The dream sequence progresses with unusual clips , including Madonna in a pool with half @-@ visible skulls . A scene in which Madonna , dressed in a light dressing gown , gives birth to doves , can also be seen ; the image has been compared to the work of René Magritte and Kahlo 's 1932 painting My Birth . Suddenly , she floats down a corridor in a white gown and appears in a black @-@ and @-@ white projection in a cinema @-@ like room . As the music gets more dramatic , the dream grows intense , with images of skulls and scars appearing , and the singer can be seen wading through space . A scene in which Madonna 's eyes are replaced with her mouth and her mouth with an eye precedes the ending , influenced by the work of Kahlo ; the final shots show Madonna waking up and looking out . 
 = = = Reception and analysis = = = 
 The music video for " Bedtime Story " has received generally positive reviews from critics ever since its release . It was exhibited and permanently kept in different art galleries and museums , including the Museum of Modern Art as well the School of Visual Arts in New York City . O 'Brien praised the video , calling it " one of [ Madonna ] ' s most experimental " music videos and a " Dali @-@ esque epic " , causing it to enter " the portals of high art " . MTV News ' James Montgomery , while writing an article on the pop culture references of Britney Spears ' " Hold It Against Me " music video ( 2011 ) , claimed that " Bedtime Story " was an ultra artistic video , influencing Spears ' one . Corinna Herr wrote in the book Madonna 's Drowned Worlds that " Visual references to surreal paintings seem to be a key to Madonna 's world of images " and listed " Bedtime Story " as one of these videos . In the same book , author Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández added that videos like Bedtime Story " included alchemical and <unk> traditions , in particular the concepts of androgyny and masquerade . Herr also wrote regarding the video 's new age influences and concept of an idealised world , one " which she is not necessarily a part , but to which she nevertheless seems to be attracted " . Rettenmund commented that the video was rife with mystical and Sufi traditions , and described it as a " singular creation in Madonna 's oeuvre " . 
 The music video has also drawn comparisons to Tarsem Singh 's films , The Cell ( 2000 ) and The Fall ( 2006 ) , in the sense that they both incorporate elements of Islamic mystic imagery , such as in the scene where the Sufi dance is executed , as well as the floating cube . According to writer Brad Brevet , who observed the similarities , deduced that both the video and the films deal with tapping into the subconscious of the human mind and hence the resulting strange visuals were directly an influence from " Bedtime Story " . James Steffen , author of The Cinema of Sergei <unk> , found that some of the imagery in the video were directly lifted from the 1969 Soviet film , The Color of Pomegranates , including the scenes showing a bare foot crushing grapes over a slab inscribed with Arabic , and a scene showing a bishop 's <unk> falling into hand . Steffen also noted that Romanek 's influences for the video included the works of Russian film director Andrei Tarkovsky , including Stalker ( 1979 ) and Nostalghia ( 1983 ) . Jake Hall from Dazed declared " Bedtime story " as the blueprint for " 90s brand of futurism " , adding that the video " eschews the obvious and instead relies on undulating CGI " . 
 = = Live performances and legacy = = 
 A Junior Vasquez remix of the song was performed at the 1995 Brit Awards . Madonna wore a white Versace dress and had long hair extensions , her look being similar to the Versace advertisement campaign she was promoting . She even invited Björk to feature in the performance ; the singer turned it down , saying " I was supposed to get [ Madonna 's ] personal number and call her up , but it just didn 't feel right . I 'd love to meet her accidentally , really drunk in a bar . It 's just all that formality that confuses me " . The performance was ranked number four on Marie Claire 's " 30 Best Brit Award Moments " list . It was described by the magazine as the " best opening performance " at the Brits . A writer described that " [ Madonna ] pulled out all the stops , treating the audience to a light show and trio of satin @-@ clad male dancers " . 
 Madonna has only featured the song on one of her concert tours , the 2004 Re @-@ Invention World Tour , where the Orbital remix was used as a video interlude . As the video played , three acrobatic dancers dropped from the ceiling on swings . Madonna appeared in the video wearing a white costume while singing in front of a mirror and lying down on a big scanner . A white horse can be seen with her during the video riding on a white desert and running through white sheets . As the interlude ended , Madonna appeared on stage again to sing " Nothing Fails " . 
 " Bedtime Story " has frequently been cited as one of the songs with the most unfulfilled potential in Madonna 's career , nonetheless , the song did enjoy some success , being a club " favorite " in the mid @-@ 1990s . It has been described as the record that foreshadowed Madonna 's usage of electronic music in her later work , <unk> Ray of Light ( 1998 ) , which according to Vicente , owes " its contemplative and electronic techno rave character to ' Bedtime Story ' " . O 'Brien wrote in Madonna : Like an Icon , that the song " foreshadowed [ the singer 's ] move towards electronica " and labelled it an " embryonic moment that went a lot further on the next few albums " . De Vries recalled that tackling the song " seemed to set something free in Madonna . She was straining at the leash a little bit , to find some other languages to speak , and ' Bedtime Story ' was an embryonic moment that went a lot further on to the next few albums . " In a review for the Bedtime Stories album on a whole , Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine wrote that the song was " the germ that would later inspire Madonna to seek out and conquer electronica with the likes of William Orbit and Mirwais " . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Bedtime Stories album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = SM U @-@ 2 ( Austria @-@ Hungary ) = 
 SM U @-@ 2 or U @-@ II was a U @-@ 1 @-@ class submarine or U @-@ boat built for and operated by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) . U @-@ 2 was designed by American Simon Lake 's Lake Torpedo Boat Company and built at the navy yard in Pola . She was one of two Lake @-@ designed submarines purchased as part of a competitive evaluation of three foreign submarine designs . 
 U @-@ 2 was launched in April 1909 and was 100 feet ( 30 m ) long and displaced almost 230 tonnes ( 250 short tons ) surfaced and just under 249 tonnes ( 274 short tons ) when submerged . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy conducted trials for U @-@ 2 through 1910 . The U @-@ boat was originally powered by two gasoline engines for surface running , and two electric motors when submerged , but during her evaluation period , the gasoline engines were found to be incapable of reaching the contracted speed . U @-@ 2 was commissioned in June 1911 and served as a training boat for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy through 1914 . 
 At the beginning of World War I , U @-@ 2 was not operational because she was in drydock awaiting replacement diesel engines . With her new engines and a new conning tower installed by June 1915 , U @-@ 2 conducted reconnaissance cruises out of Trieste but was declared obsolete in early 1918 . U @-@ 2 remained in service as a training boat at the submarine base on Brioni , but was at Pola at the end of the war . She was ceded to Italy as a war reparation in 1920 and scrapped at Pola . U @-@ 2 did not sink any ships during the war . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 U @-@ 2 was built as part of a plan by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy to competitively evaluate foreign submarine designs from Simon Lake , Germaniawerft , and John Philip Holland . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ordered plans for U @-@ 2 ( and sister ship U @-@ 1 ) in 1906 from the Lake Torpedo Boat Company of Bridgeport , Connecticut . U @-@ 2 was built at the Pola Navy Yard and was launched on 3 April 1909 . 
 U @-@ 2 had several features typical of Lake 's designs , including a diving chamber under the bow and two variable pitch propellers . Lake 's design also called for two retractable wheels that allowed travel over the seabed . The design also placed the diving tanks above the waterline of the single , cylindrical hull , which necessitated a heavy ballast keel for vertical stability . This arrangement required mechanical pumping , a procedure that took 8 minutes . U @-@ 2 's propulsion system consisted of two gasoline engines for surface running and two electric motors for running while submerged . 
 The boat was 100 feet ( 30 m ) long by 15 feet 9 inches ( 4 @.@ 80 m ) abeam and had a draft of 12 feet 8 inches ( 3 @.@ 86 m ) . As designed , her displacement was 229 @.@ 7 long tons ( 233 @.@ 4 t ) surfaced and 248 @.@ 9 long tons ( 252 @.@ 9 t ) submerged . She was outfitted with three 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes — two in the bow , one in the stern — and could carry up to five torpedoes , but typically carried three . U @-@ 2 was also armed with a 3 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) deck gun . 
 = = Service career = = 
 Upon U @-@ 2 's completion , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy conducted trials of the submarine throughout most of 1910 . U @-@ 2 's gasoline engines were never able to meet the speed called for in the contract during the Navy evaluations , and were considered not suitable for wartime use . As a result , the Navy only paid for U @-@ 2 's hull and armament , and arranged a lease of the gasoline engines while replacement diesel engines were ordered from the Austrian firm Maschinenfabrik <unk> . Despite the engine problems , U @-@ 2 and her sister ship had the best performance in diving and steering amongst the U @-@ boats under evaluation by the Navy . 
 U @-@ 2 was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy on 22 June 1911 under the command of Linienschiffsleutnant Klemens Ritter von Bézard . U @-@ 2 served as a training boat through 1915 , conducting up to ten training cruises per month . At the outbreak of World War I , she was in drydock awaiting the installation of her new diesel engines . To accommodate the new engines , she was lengthened by about 11 inches ( 28 cm ) . The modifications and new engines lowered her surface displacement to 223 @.@ 0 tonnes ( 245 @.@ 8 short tons ) but increased her submerged displacement to 277 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 305 @.@ 9 short tons ) . 
 From January to June 1915 , U @-@ 2 underwent a refit and received a new conning tower . She was stationed at Trieste in mid July and conducted reconnaissance cruises from that port . On 11 January 1918 , she was declared obsolete , but was retained as a training boat at the submarine base on Brioni . U @-@ 2 was at Pola at the war 's end , and was scrapped after her cession to Italy as a war reparation in 1920 . U @-@ 2 did not sink any ships during the war . 
 = The Years of Rice and Salt = 
 The Years of Rice and Salt is an alternate history novel written by science fiction author Kim Stanley Robinson and published in 2002 . The novel explores how subsequent world history might have been different if the Black Death plague had killed 99 % of Europe 's population , instead of a third . Divided into ten parts , the story spans hundreds of years , from the army of the Muslim conqueror Timur to the 21st century , with Europe being re @-@ populated by Muslim pioneers , the indigenous peoples of the Americas forming a league to resist Chinese and Muslim invaders , and a 67 @-@ year @-@ long world war being fought primarily between Muslim states and the Chinese and their allies . While the ten parts take place in different times and places , they are connected by a group of characters that are reincarnated into each time but are identified to the reader by the first letter of their name being consistent in each life . 
 The novel explores themes of history , religion , and social movements . The historical narrative is guided more by social history than political or military history . Critics found the book to be rich in detail , realistic , and thoughtful . Robinson had previously published several other science fiction novels and short stories which had won him several Nebula , Hugo and Locus Awards . The Years of Rice and Salt won the Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel in 2003 . In the same year it was nominated for the Arthur C. Clarke Award , a Hugo Award , and a British Science Fiction Award . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the time of publication , in 2002 , science fiction author Kim Stanley Robinson was 49 years old and living in Davis , California . He had conceived of the premise for The Years of Rice and Salt in the 1970s while thinking about what alternate history scenario would result in " the biggest change that would still work in terms of comparison to our history " . He subsequently developed an interest in China and in Buddhism which he would study for this project . Robinson 's only other alternate history story prior to this project was the short story " The Lucky Strike " ( 1984 ) , where the Enola Gay crashes in a training exercise and the secondary crew must complete the Hiroshima bombing . Robinson also wrote an essay titled " A Sensitive Dependence on Initial Conditions " ( 1991 ) , comparing different theories of history and laws of science , such as the covering law model , to explain how alternate histories can be arrived at , using " The Lucky Strike " as an example . He explored the idea of non @-@ Western influences creating a new culture while working on his Mars trilogy , which involved a heavy Muslim influence in a Martian colony . The Mars trilogy gave Robinson a reputation for quality of writing and a richness of detail comparable to James Michener , as well as winning him a Nebula Award for Red Mars ( 1993 ) and two Hugo and Locus Awards for Green Mars ( 1994 ) and Blue Mars ( 1996 ) . Robinson followed the Mars trilogy with the novel Antarctica ( 1997 ) , which won an Alex Award , and two short story collections , The Martians ( 1999 ) and Vinland the Dream ( 2001 ) , before publishing The Years of Rice and Salt . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story is divided into ten parts . 
 = = = Book One = = = 
 Book One , Awake to Emptiness , begins with Bold and <unk> , scouts in Timur 's army , discovering a Magyar village where all the inhabitants have died from a plague . Timur turns his army around and orders the scouting party executed to avoid the plague , but Bold escapes and wanders through the dead lands of Eastern Europe ( encountering only one lone native ) . Upon reaching the sea he is captured by Turkish Muslim slave @-@ traders and sold into Zheng He 's Chinese treasure fleet . Bold befriends a young African slave , named Kyu , whom he cares for after the Chinese castrate him . In China , they are kept as kitchen slaves until escaping and eventually making their way north to Beijing where they find work at the palace of Zhu <unk> , heir to the Yongle Emperor . The vengeful Kyu hates the Chinese for what they have done to him and he incites violence between the eunuchs and the Confucian administrative officials . 
 = = = Book Two = = = 
 Book Two , The Haj in the Heart , begins in Mughal India where a Hindu girl named Kokila poisons her husband 's father and brother after discovering their plot to defraud the village . She is executed for her crime , but is reborn as a tiger that befriends a man named Bistami , a Sufi mystic of Persian origin . Bistami goes on to become a judge for Mughal Emperor Akbar , but later falls into his disfavour , being exiled to Mecca . Bistami spends one year in Mecca before travelling overland to the Maghreb and Iberia ( Al @-@ Andalus ) . Bistami then joins a caravan led by Sultan <unk> and his wife , Katima , who seek to leave Al @-@ Andalus and found a new city on the other side of the Pyrenees , beyond the control of the Caliph of Al @-@ Andalus . They build the city of Baraka ( on the abandoned former site of Bayonne , France ) and create a model society in which Sultana Katima is highly influential . Katima seeks to change the Islamic religion to create equality between men and women , by rejecting the <unk> and relying only on her interpretation of the Quran . She rules the community after her husband dies ( something not allowed in normal Islamic practice ) , but the Caliph of Al @-@ Andalus eventually hears of their " heresy " and sends an army against them . The community flees further to the north . 
 = = = Book Three = = = 
 In Book Three , Ocean Continents , the Wanli Emperor launches an invasion against Nippon ( Japan ) but the huge fleet is swept out to sea by the Kuroshio Current and they are set adrift on the unexplored Pacific Ocean . The fleet hopes to be brought back to China eventually by the great circular currents of the Pacific , but they accidentally discover the New World . The sailors make landfall on the West coast of North America and make contact with the indigenous population ( the peaceful Miwok people ) , but quickly leave once Admiral <unk> discovers they have inadvertently infected the indigenous people with devastating diseases . They take a small girl with them ( who they have taught Chinese and named " Butterfly " ) and sail south where they meet another civilization rich in gold . There they narrowly escape being ritually sacrificed by using their flintlock firearms , something the natives have never seen before . They eventually return to China and tell the Emperor that he could easily conquer this new land and gain its great wealth . 
 = = = Book Four = = = 
 Book Four , The Alchemist , takes place in Samarkand , in the 17th century . An alchemist named Khalid , attempts to fool the Khan into believing that he has discovered the Philosopher 's stone ( which supposedly can turn Lead into Gold ) , but his fraud is uncovered and his hand is chopped off as punishment . Khalid becomes depressed and disenchanted with Alchemy ( the prevailing belief of the scholars of the time ) and decides to destroy all his Alchemical books ( which come to Samarkand via the trade routes from all over the known world ) . However , his friends <unk> ( a Tibetan Buddhist mathematician ) and Bahram ( a Sufi blacksmith ) instead convince him to test the veracity of the claims in the books and thus see if there is any true wisdom to be gained . They devote themselves to practical demonstrations and experiments that greatly improve knowledge of various aspects of physics , chemistry , mathematics , biology , and weaponry , and in the process create the scientific method . Their discoveries create interest ( and alarm ) amongst the religious madrasahs of the city , many of whom also go along with the new fashion of building and testing scientific apparatuses . But most of all , they catch the eye of the Khan 's powerful advisor , who sees in their inventions the possibility of great military technology , to fight the rising Chinese threat to the East . 
 = = = Book Five = = = 
 Book Five , Warp and <unk> , describes how a former Samurai , fleeing from Japan ( which was conquered by China along with most of the rest of East Asia ) to the New World , travels all the way across the continent to meet the Iroquois people . They name him " From West " and make him a chief of their confederacy . He helps organize their society into a larger defensive alliance of all the North American tribes ( the Hodenosaunee League ) and shows them how to make their own guns with which to resist the Chinese coming from the West and the Muslims coming from the East . 
 = = = Book Six = = = 
 Book Six , Widow Kang , follows the life of Chinese widow Kang <unk> during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor . She takes in a poor Buddhist monk , Bao Ssu , and his son whom she finds scavenging , but the monk is wrongly implicated in a series of queue cuttings and is killed by Qing magistrates . Later , Kang meets a Hui Muslim scholar named Ibrahim ibn <unk> and together they discover it is possible to remember their past lives . They marry and move to Lanzhou in western China , where they undertake work to try to reconcile Islamic and Confucian beliefs . Kang creates and collects works of proto @-@ feminist poetry and becomes a known writer . There is a Muslim rebellion in the region due to the Qing intolerance of new Islamic sects coming from the west , but the revolt is crushed with massive force . 
 = = = Book Seven = = = 
 Book Seven , The Age of Great Progress , is set during the 19th century and begins during a war between the Ottoman Empire and the Indian state of Travancore . The Indians have previously defeated the Mughals and the Safavids and have developed more modern forms of warfare , emphasising surprise and mobility , they have also invented Steam engines and Ironclad warships which they sail straight to the city of <unk> and capture it with the aid of military balloons . The Ottomans are defeated easily . A Muslim Armenian doctor named Ismail ibn Mani al @-@ Dir , who had served the Ottoman Sultan , is captured and sent to Travancore where he learns of the amazing advancements that have been made on the sub @-@ continent such as railways and factories . He happily joins the hospital of Travancore and begins work in anatomy and physiology . Ismail eventually meets their ruler , the Kerala of Travancore , who pursues scientific and philosophical advancement ( a kind of Enlightened Despot ) . The Kerala 's aim is to drive the Muslim invaders away and peacefully unify India into a kind of democratic confederation . Later , during the <unk> Emperor 's reign , in the Chinese colony known as Gold Mountain , major flooding in the Central Valley of California forces the evacuation of Chinese colonial towns and Japanese settlers alike . The Japanese had originally fled to the new world to escape Chinese oppression in their homeland , but find themselves once again under the Chinese yoke . A displaced Japanese slave , <unk> , and a pregnant Chinese refugee , Peng @-@ ti , manage to flee to the great coastal city of <unk> . There <unk> joins a secret Japanese freedom movement which is being aided by Travancore , with Ismail acting as a go @-@ between agent . 
 = = = Book Eight = = = 
 Book Eight , War of the Asuras , is set in the 20th century , during the " Long War " . The world has become divided into three large alliances , the Chinese Empire and its colonies , the fractured Muslim world ( Dar al @-@ Islam ) , and the democratic Indian and Hodenosaunee Leagues . At the outbreak of war the Muslim states put aside their differences and unite to flight the larger threat of China ( whom they fear will soon achieve global hegemony ) . The Indian and Hodenosaunee Leagues stay neutral at first , but eventually ally with China , as they see the Muslims as their greater enemy , however the Muslims invade northern India all the way down to Burma to stop the Indians and Chinese from linking up . The war drags on for decades causing major changes in the societies involved , with rapid industrialisation , mass conscription and mass casualties ( both sides are forced to use women in the fighting to make up for manpower losses ) . Being the first industrial war , new devastating weapons and methods are employed , such as trench warfare , poison gas and aerial bombing . The story follows Chinese officers , Kuo , Bai and Iwa as they desperately fight in the trenches of the Gansu Corridor , where the ground has been blasted down to bedrock by sixty years of bombardments ( the latest massive artillery pieces lob shells into space on ballistic trajectories ) . The new Chinese government , the " Fourth Assemblage of Military Talent " ( the Qing Dynasty having been overthrown by a military coup during the war ) orders a new offensive against the Muslim lines in Gansu . Kuo , Bai and Iwa are told to use poison gas and then frontally assault the enemy trenches . They do this successfully , but are then beaten back by the second line of Muslim defences , losing tens of thousands of soldiers and gaining nothing . However they are then told that their attack was merely a diversion for the real offensive which is being conducted by the Japanese ( who have recently been freed by China in exchange for alliance in the war ) through Siberia . The Muslims are in retreat but the Japanese get bogged down at the Ural Mountains . In the meantime , Kuo is killed by a shell which penetrates their bunker , Bai and Iwa are then ordered to move with their company south through Tibet to support their Indian allies . At a pass in the Himalayas they witness the Muslim artillery blasting the top of Mount Everest down so that the tallest mountain in the world will be in Muslim lands . After extreme difficulties they manage to breach the Muslim defences at the pass and the Chinese army pours through to meet up with the Indians , turning the course of the war in their favour . However Bai is plagued by visions of his dead friend Kuo , who tells him that none of this is happening and that he is already dead , killed by the shell earlier . Bai does not know whether he is indeed living real life or is already in the afterlife . 
 = = = Book Nine = = = 
 Book Nine , Nsara , follows the life of a young Muslim woman named Budur and her aunt Idelba in Europe , in the aftermath of the Long War . Budur 's family is highly traditional and as there are not enough men left after the war for marriage prospects , she is forced to live in seclusion with her female cousins in the family 's compound in Turi , a city in one of the Alpine Emirates . Idelba is an educated woman and was involved in physics research in <unk> before her husband 's death , she is just as unhappy in Turi as Budur and wishes to return to her former work . One night , Idelba escapes and Budur follows her . Together they leave the life of captivity in the Alps and move to the more liberal and cosmopolitan city of Nsara ( Saint @-@ Nazaire in France ) . There they stay at a <unk> , a refuge for women , Idelba restarts her work in physics and Budur enrols in university where she studies history . The history class is presided over by Kirana , a radical feminist lecturer who questions everything about Muslim society . Budur becomes close to Kirana who opens her eyes to the injustices that women face and how they can seek emancipation and liberation ( the two have a brief affair ) . Life at the university allows for open debate about all issues and Kirana focuses on the nature of history and contemporary events , such as the Muslim defeat in the Long War , which she blames on the failure of the Islamic countries to properly mobilize women for the war effort ( something which the Chinese did almost totally ) . There is also a newfound interest in ancient history as the field of archaeology is taking off ( theories about how and why the plague killed off the Europeans centuries before are a popular topic ) . 
 Life in Nsara ( and all the Muslim nations ) becomes increasingly difficult as they face the effects of defeat in the war . Since casualties were so massive , there is a great shortage of men over women and many men who survived the fighting returned as disabled veterans ( Budur volunteers to help veterans blinded by gas at a hospital by reading to them ) . The Muslims were forced to pay reparations to the victorious countries and to make various humiliating concessions such as allowing Buddhist monasteries to open in their cities . There is a general depression and malaise in post @-@ war Muslim society , made worse by the economic difficulties ; hyperinflation , food shortages and strikes . In many counties this leads to governments being overthrown in coups of various kinds . In Nsara itself , order begins to break down as people are near starvation and the military attempts to overthrow the government and impose a police state . However many liberals , including Budur and Kirana start mass street protests against this reactionary dictatorship . Eventually the Hodenosaunee League ( who have become very powerful after their victory in the war ) intervene by sending a fleet ( from their naval base at Orkney ) to Nsara , insisting that the military relinquish power , which they do . After this , things slowly start to improve , but most of the Muslim states continue to suffer grave problems . Even in China , a victorious country , there is unrest which turns into a civil war . 
 Throughout this , Idelba has been secretly working on atomic physics and she and her fellow researchers have made some disturbing discoveries . They conclude that it would be possible to make a devastating weapon from nuclear chain reactions and fear that the military will try to create such bombs and restart the war . In order to prevent this , Idelba tries desperately to hide all evidence about her research and contacts concerned scientists in other parts of the world . The government learns of her work however and raids the <unk> to get hold of her papers , but Budur manages to hide them . Idelba eventually dies of radiation poisoning from the materials she was working with and leaves all her research to Budur , who keeps her secret and eventually manages to organize an international conference of scientists to discuss the nuclear issue . The meeting is held in Isfahan in Iran ( one of the few Islamic nations which has prospered since the war ) and scientists from all over the world attend . They agree that none of them will work on the creation of nuclear weapons for their respective countries , no matter what pressure they are put under by their governments and also start a new international scientific movement to break down barriers between cultures in a spirit of reconciliation and friendship ( they even create a new scientific calendar to be used by the whole world , with its year zero set from the time of the conference ) . 
 = = = Book Ten = = = 
 Book Ten , The First Years , follows Bao Xinhua who moves to the west coast of <unk> after witnessing the assassination of his friend , and revolutionary , Kung <unk> . He marries and raises two children before accepting a diplomatic post in Bangladesh . In his later years , he moves back to <unk> to teach history and the philosophy of history . 
 = = Style , themes and genre = = 
 The novel is divided into ten chapters which each act as a short story , linked by the use of a group of people who appear in each story . After spending time in <unk> , the group ( or <unk> ) are reincarnated into different times and places . While characters in each story are unique , they share some characteristics with their previous incarnations and are linked , for convenience , by the first letter of their name . The characters whose names begin with the letter K are " combative , imprudent and prone to getting himself ( or herself ) killed " and " striking blows against injustice that typically lead to more suffering " . The B characters are " more comfortable in the world , <unk> and optimistic " and " survivors , nurturing friends and family through bad times and patiently waiting for something better " . The I characters are " the ones who care , who follow the other two , and may be necessary if their works are to flourish , but who tend to the domestic and always find the world worth loving . " The style of writing also changes every chapter to reflect the style of writing associated with the culture being depicted . For example , the first chapter is written similarly to Monkey 's Journey to the West and a later chapter incorporates postmodernism . Also , later chapters take on metafictional elements , with characters discussing the nature of history , whether it is cyclical or linear , whether they believe in reincarnation , and feelings that some people are intrinsically linked . 
 Robinson incorporated utopian themes in his previous works but reviewers were divided on whether The Years of Rice and Salt qualified as a utopian story . Those that did call the world described in the story as utopian cited the story 's illustration of progress . However , those that wrote The Years of Rice and Salt was not a utopian story say that the world history presented is not necessarily better or worse than the real history , just different . Robinson calls himself a " utopian novelist " in that he claims " all science fiction has a utopian element , in that it tends to say that what we do now matters and will have consequences " . Several other themes were identified by reviewers . Robinson had previously used the theme of memory ( or identity ) and incorporates it into this story with characters who are reincarnated versions of previous characters and who only recognize each other while in the <unk> , but sometimes feel a connection between themselves while on earth . The reviewer in The Globe and Mail identified feminism and " struggles over the nature of Islam " as recurring themes . 
 = = = Alternate history = = = 
 The Years of Rice and Salt belongs to the alternate history subgenre of speculative fiction . The novel starts at the point of divergence with Timur turning his army away from Europe where the Black Death killed 99 % of Europe 's population , instead of a third . Robinson explores world history from that point in AD 1405 ( 807 AH ) to about AD 2045 ( 1467 AH ) with Mughal Emperor Akbar being the last character with a real @-@ world counterpart . Robinson 's take on alternate history is that because it " is set in the same lawful universe as ours , its science must be the same [ and ] because its people have the same basic human needs , their societies resemble ours . " Therefore , despite the difference in who specifically is there , " the great majority of humanity [ is ] doing their work , and that work would tend to forge along at a certain pace as people tried to solve the problems of making themselves more comfortable in this world . " While most alternate histories use the Great Man theory of history , focusing on leaders , wars , and big events , Robinson writes more about social history , similar to the Annales School of history theory and Marxist historiography , focusing on the lives of ordinary people living in their time and place . This is reflected in the title of the novel , The Years of Rice and Salt , which refers to the everyday chores of raising a family , often performed by women , despite the politics and wars of men . Reviewers noted this allows for the " history [ to be ] experienced by readers on a human scale " and " an implicit but thorough rebuke to the kind of war @-@ gaming determinism that most alternate histories embody . " The novel has characters that explore subjects like philosophy , theology , history , and scientific theory . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 Released in March 2002 , the book was published in North America by Bantam Books and in the United Kingdom by HarperCollins . The paperback was released in 2003 along with a Spanish translation . In the subsequent years , other translated versions were published , in French , Polish , Chinese , and Hungarian . It won the 2003 Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel and was nominated for the Hugo Award , the Arthur C. Clarke Award , and the British Science Fiction Award . 
 The novel was well received by critics who variously called it " thoughtful " , " realistic " , and " rich " . In Publishers Weekly , the reviewers called it a " highly realistic and credible alternate history " , and in the School Library Journal , Christine Menefee called it " an addictive , surprising , and suspenseful novel " . The Library Journal " highly recommended " it , saying that its " superb storytelling and imaginative historic speculation make [ it ] a priority choice for all SF and general fiction collections " . The critic at Kirkus Reviews found it " overlong , but blessed with moments of wry and gentle beauty " . Likewise , Roz Kaveney stated that " if there is a weakness in Robinson 's work , it is perhaps this ; his characters are so intelligent that they never shut up " . For The Globe and Mail , Sol Chrom lauded the epic scope , calling it a " magnificent achievement " , and for The Belfast News Letter , the reviewer called the novel " extraordinary , ambitious , poetic and powerful " . Science fiction critic Paul Kincaid concluded that it is " a huge , complex and highly enjoyable book " . 
 = Zino 's petrel = 
 The Zino 's petrel or <unk> ( Pterodroma madeira ) is a small seabird in the gadfly petrel genus which is endemic to the island of Madeira . This long @-@ winged petrel has a grey back and wings , with a dark " W " marking across the wings , and a grey upper tail . The undersides of the wings are blackish apart from a triangle of white at the front edge near the body , and the belly is white with grey flanks . It is very similar in appearance to the slightly larger Fea 's petrel , and separating these two Macaronesian species at sea is very challenging . Zino 's was formerly considered to be a subspecies of the soft @-@ plumaged petrel , P. mollis , but they are not closely related , and Zino 's was raised to species status because of differences in morphology , calls , breeding behaviour and mitochondrial DNA . It is Europe 's most endangered seabird , with breeding areas restricted to a few ledges high in the central mountains of Madeira . 
 Zino 's petrel nests in burrows which are visited only at night , to the accompaniment of their haunting calls . The single white egg is incubated by both adults , one sitting during the day while the other feeds on fish and squid at sea . Eggs , chicks and adults have been subject to predation by introduced cats and rats , and in the past have been taken for food by local shepherds . Predator control , and other measures such as the removal of grazing animals which trample the burrows , has enabled the population to recover to 65 – 80 breeding pairs ; it remains endangered on the IUCN Red List . However , conservation efforts had a major setback in August 2010 when fires killed three adults and 65 % of the chicks . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The gadfly petrels in the genus Pterodroma are seabirds of temperate and tropical oceans . Many are little @-@ known , and their often similar appearance have caused the taxonomy of the group to be rather fluid . The forms breeding in Macaronesia on Madeira , Bugio in the Desertas Islands , and in the Cape Verde archipelago were long considered to be subspecies of the Southern Hemisphere soft @-@ plumaged petrel , P. mollis , but mitochondrial DNA analysis , and differences in size , vocalisations , breeding behaviour , showed that the northern birds are not closely related to P. mollis , and that the Bermuda petrel or <unk> may be the closest relative of the Macaronesian birds . Sangster recommended establishing Zino 's petrel on Madeira and Fea 's petrel on the Desertas and Cape Verde as full species , and the species split was accepted by the Association of European Rarities Committees ( AERC ) in 2003 . 
 Nunn and Zino estimated that the two Macaronesian species diverged at the end of the Early Pleistocene , 850 @,@ 000 years ago . An analysis of feather lice taken from Fea 's petrels , Pterodroma feae deserti , from Bugio Island , and from Zino 's petrels from the Madeiran mainland showed that there were marked differences between the two seabirds in terms of the parasites they carried , suggesting that they have long been isolated , since lice can normally only be transferred through physical contact in the nest . The species on Zino 's petrel are most similar to those of the Bermuda petrel , whereas Fea 's petrel 's lice are like those of Caribbean and Pacific Pterodroma species . This suggests that despite the close physical proximity of the two species of gadfly petrel found in the Madeiran archipelago , they may have arisen from separate colonisations of mainland Madeira and , later , the Desertas Islands . Although their reproductive isolation has allowed the separate evolutionary development of the two species , genetic evidence shows the three Macaronesian petrels are each other 's closest relatives . 
 The petrels breeding in the high central mountains of Madeira were first recorded in 1903 by German naturalist and priest Ernst Johann Schmitz , who failed to realise that they were different from the Fea 's petrels he had seen in the Desertas . The species was formally described as a race of soft @-@ plumaged petrel by Australian amateur ornithologist Gregory Mathews in 1934 . Following the recognition of the Madeiran birds as a full species , they were named after the Portuguese ornithologist , Paul Alexander Zino , who was instrumental in their conservation during the latter half of the twentieth century . The genus name Pterodroma is derived from Greek <unk> , pteron , " a wing " , and <unk> , <unk> , " running " , and refers to the bird 's swift erratic flight . The specific madeira refers to the island on which it breeds . The Portuguese name Freira means " nun " ; the inhabitants of <unk> das <unk> ( Nun 's Valley ) near the breeding site claimed that the nocturnal wailing of the petrels in the breeding season were the calls of the suffering souls of the nuns . The sisters had taken refuge in the valley from attacks on the island by French pirates in 1566 that lasted for 15 days . 
 Pterodroma petrel remains dated at between 60 @,@ 000 and 25 @,@ 000 years BP were found in two cave sites in Gibraltar . They consist of a more abundant form similar in size to Zino 's , and a larger , less common type . It is uncertain whether they represent the site of a former breeding colony , or are the result of a seabird wreck in which storms blow birds inland . They do suggest , however , that members of the genus were formerly more widespread . 
 = = Description = = 
 This long @-@ winged petrel is 32 – 34 cm ( 13 – 13 in ) long with an 80 – 86 cm ( 31 – 34 in ) wingspan , and an average weight of 290 g ( 10 @.@ 3 in ) . It has a grey back , grey wings with a dark " W " marking across them , and a grey upper tail . The undersides of the wings are blackish apart from a triangle of white at the front edge near the body , and the belly is white with grey flanks . The head has a mottled whitish @-@ brown forehead , a dark cap , and a dark spot below and behind the brown eye . The bill is black and the legs are flesh pink , the colour continuing onto the first third of the feet , the rest of the toes and webs being black @-@ brown . It gives the general impression of a small Cory 's or great shearwater , with a fast flight ; in strong winds it shears high above the surface with angled wings . Nothing is known of the fresh juvenile plumage or the moult sequence , and ageing birds is currently not feasible . 
 This species is very similar in appearance to the Fea 's petrel , but is smaller . The size difference and lighter flight may not be apparent at sea , especially with lone birds , but a recent study helped to clarify other useful features . Zino 's has a <unk> small , delicate , often rather long and slender bill , which may be obvious in the most slender @-@ billed examples , which are probably mostly females , but can be difficult to determine in larger @-@ billed , probably adult male , birds . Another useful feature is a large whitish panel on the underwing . The wing panel is exclusive to Zino 's but is only shown by 15 % of the birds . Zino 's has a more rounded wing tip , but P. feae deserti sometimes shows a rounded wing tip , so this feature is not diagnostic . Previously suggested criteria such as head , upperwing and flank patterns were found to be inconclusive . Off the eastern United States and the Azores , both <unk> petrels are easily distinguished from the larger Bermuda petrel by that species ' upperparts , which are uniformly dark but for a pale grey rump . 
 This species at its breeding sites gives a long mournful call like the hooting of a tawny owl , and a much less frequent sound like the whimpering of a pup . It is silent at sea . The breeding calls are very similar to those of Fea 's petrel , and <unk> 's analysis of the calls of the soft @-@ plumaged petrel complex led him to suggest in 1995 only a two @-@ way species split , with the northern forms madeira , feae and deserti all as subspecies of Fea 's petrel . 
 = = = " Snowy @-@ winged petrel " = = = 
 The <unk> <unk> expeditions to the Madeira archipelago in 2008 , 2009 and 2010 each had sightings of a Pterodroma petrel ( possibly the same bird ) with largely white underwings , but upperwings like Zino 's or Fea 's . This plumage does not correspond to any known Pterodroma species . It may have been an unusual variant of Zino 's but this is unlikely since no similar bird has been seen amongst the more than 100 caught at the nest . It may alternatively be a single aberrant individual , a hybrid or an unknown taxon from Madeira or elsewhere . No conclusion is possible on current knowledge . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Zino 's petrel is endemic to the main island of Madeira , where it breeds on inaccessible and well @-@ vegetated ledges in the central mountains between Pico do <unk> and Pico <unk> . The typical ledge plants are endemic <unk> and <unk> , but grasses may also be present . It nests at heights above 1 @,@ 650 m ( 5 @,@ 410 ft ) . It was formerly more widespread , since subfossil remains have been found in a cave in eastern Madeira , and on nearby Porto Santo Island . The breeding ledges have to be inaccessible to introduced goats so that they remain rich in endemic flora . The vegetation ensures that there is sufficient earth on the ledges to allow the birds to burrow and make their nests , and trampling by grazing animals reduces the soil cover . 
 This petrel is only present in Madeiran waters during the breeding season . Its distribution at sea during the rest of the year is poorly known due to the rarity of the species and the difficulty of separating it from other Pterodroma petrels at sea . Birds identified as either Zino 's or Fea 's have been recorded from both sides of the North Atlantic , and in Ireland and Britain there has been a large increase in the number of reports , perhaps because global warming brings increasing numbers of tropical species into temperate waters . The timing of the reports , mainly in late spring and summer in the western North Atlantic , and in late summer and early autumn in the east , has suggested that birds follow a clockwise route around the North Atlantic after leaving their breeding sites . However , the few birds that have been identified with certainty have all been Fea 's . Zino 's petrel may have a similar strategy , since preliminary results from geolocation studies indicate widespread dispersal over the North Atlantic central ridge during the breeding season , and migration towards the Brazilian coast in the non @-@ breeding period . Pterodroma petrels have been recorded in the Canary Islands and the Azores on surprisingly few occasions ; a claim of possible Zino 's from South Africa is now thought to be erroneous . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Zino 's petrel breeds two months earlier than the Fea 's petrel 's on Bugio , only 50 km ( 31 mi ) away . The birds return from sea to their breeding grounds in late March or early April and courting occurs over the main breeding area during the late evening and early morning hours . The nest is a shallow burrow or old rabbit tunnel up to 140 cm ( 55 in ) long in thick soil on vegetated ledges . The length of the burrow is related to the age of the pair that uses it , young birds making shorter tunnels , which are extended in subsequent years . The oval white egg is laid from mid @-@ May to mid @-@ June in a chamber at the end of the burrow and incubated for 51 – 54 days , each parent alternating between sitting on the nest and feeding at sea . The young fledge about 85 days later in late September and October . This petrel is strictly nocturnal at the breeding sites to avoid predation by gulls . It stays 3 – 5 km ( 1 @.@ 9 – 3 @.@ 1 mi ) offshore during the day , coming to land in darkness . It calls from about 30 minutes after nightfall until dawn , including on moonlit nights . 
 This species mates for life , and pairs return to the same burrow year after year . The single egg is not replaced if lost . This is a long @-@ lived species : one bird has returned to its burrow for ten consecutive years , and the lifespan is estimated to be about 16 years . The age of first breeding is unknown , but assumed to be four or more years . Despite the proximity of the breeding sites , Zino 's and Fea 's petrels have never been found at each other 's nesting areas , and Zino 's is not known to hybridise with any other species . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Zino 's petrel , like its relatives , feeds on small squid and fish . The vomited stomach contents of one bird contained cephalopods , the <unk> fish <unk> <unk> and small crustaceans . Like other small petrels , Zino 's does not normally follow ships . 
 = = = Predators and parasites = = = 
 Their nocturnal approach to the breeding sites means that Zino 's petrels avoid the attentions of gulls or diurnal raptors , and the only owl on the island , the barn owl , is a rodent hunter . Other than bats , there are no native land mammals on Madeira , although there are a number of introduced species , two of which will take birds or chicks . These are brown rats and feral domestic cats . Even the high mountain nest sites of the Zino 's petrel are not safe from these adaptable predators , ten adults being killed by cats in 1990 . Feather lice found on Zino 's petrels include <unk> <unk> , <unk> species and an unnamed species of <unk> . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Zino 's petrel has a very restricted range on the mountaintops of a single island , and is the most endangered European seabird . The birds , already confined to a limited area when discovered , were thought to be extinct by the mid @-@ twentieth century . Two freshly fledged juveniles were found within the walls of the governor 's palace in Funchal in the early 1940s , presumably attracted there by lights , but the species was not seen again until 1969 . In 1969 , Paul Zino played a tape of Fea 's petrel from Bugio to a shepherd from <unk> das <unk> ; he immediately recognised the call , and led the researchers to the remaining nesting area . Predation by introduced rats meant that breeding success in the small population was low , and no young at all fledged in 1985 . The Freira Conservation Project was founded in 1986 with the aim of increasing the population of Zino 's petrel by controlling rats and human interference ; the control was extended to cats after the mass predation of 1990 . 
 There are now 130 – 160 known individuals ( 65 – 80 breeding pairs ) confirmed to breed on just six ledges . There may be some disturbance from visitors at night and from the construction of a NATO radar station on the summit of Mount <unk> , and in the longer term climate change may have an adverse effect , since all nests are within 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) of the top of the highest mountain in the breeding area . Formerly , shepherds collected nestlings for food , and egg collectors have raided burrows . Currently , the main threats continue to be predation of eggs and chicks by rats , and of nesting adults by feral cats , although at much reduced levels due to trapping . 
 Zino 's petrel is protected under the EU 's Wild Birds Directive , and its breeding sites lie within the Parque Natural da Madeira national park . Following the purchase of about 300 hectares ( 740 acres ) of land around the main breeding site , all livestock has been removed from the breeding areas , allowing the vegetation to recover , although breeding still only occurs on ledges that were never accessible to grazing animals . The research and predator control by the Freira Conservation Project and the national park which started in 1986 was expanded in 2001 with additional EU funding . The increase in productivity ( 29 chicks fledged in 2004 ) meant that this species was downgraded from critically endangered to endangered on the IUCN Red List in 2004 . Its population appeared to be stable or increasing slightly up to the summer of 2010 . 
 A disaster struck the colony on 13 August 2010 , when a forest fire swept through the breeding site killing three adults and 25 of the 38 chicks . The fire destroyed the vegetation and several nesting burrows . Conservation action to protect the 13 remaining chicks included removing dead birds and burnt vegetation , reinforcing the surviving nests , and setting poison bait for rats around the now exposed nest sites . In the longer term , the action plan includes the provision of artificial burrows , seed dispersal to help the vegetation recover , and the use of anti @-@ erosion materials . 
 = Hong Kong Airlines = 
 Hong Kong Airlines Ltd ( Chinese : <unk> ) , IATA : HX is a Hong Kong @-@ based airline , with its corporate headquarters in Tung Chung and its main hub at Hong Kong International Airport . It was established in 2006 . 
 Based in Hong Kong , Hong Kong Airlines ’ network currently covers almost 30 cities regionally , including Beijing , Shanghai , Sanya , Bangkok , Bali , and Okinawa . The current passenger fleet has 28 aircraft , which includes five Airbus A330 @-@ 300s , nine Airbus A330 @-@ 200s and nine A320s , with up @-@ to @-@ date inflight entertainment system and an average age of around 3 years as of February 2015 . The cargo fleet consists of five Airbus A330 @-@ 200Fs . 
 = = History = = 
 Robert Yip , the chairman of China Rich Holdings , with business interests in Chinese medicine , internet portal , construction and property development , established CR Airways in Hong Kong on 28 March 2001 . The airline received its Air Operator 's Certificate ( AOC ) from the Hong Kong Civil Aviation Department ( CAD ) with a 285 kilometres per hour ( 177 mph ) 12 passenger Sikorsky S @-@ 76C + helicopter in early 2002 . It was Hong Kong 's third commercial helicopter operator and the first helicopter operator to receive an AOC since Hong Kong became a Special Administrative Region of People 's Republic of China . 
 On 27 June 2003 , CR Airways became Hong Kong 's third passenger airline after receiving a revised AOC from the Director of Civil Aviation Albert Lam and operated its first passenger flight on the next day . It started passenger charter operations to Laoag , Philippines on 5 July 2003 , with a Bombardier <unk> leased from GE Capital Aviation Services . In September 2003 , the airline applied for traffic rights to operate scheduled passenger services to Laoag and Chinese cities of Jinan , <unk> , <unk> and Wenzhou . In addition , Robert Yip sold 40 percent of the airline to his company , China Rich Holdings , for HK $ 180 million . By March 2004 , the airline had added Siem Reap , Cambodia to its charter network . 
 In April 2005 , the Hong Kong Air Transport Licensing Authority ( ATLA ) granted a five @-@ year licence to transport passengers , cargo and mail to China ; the airline was free to apply for traffic rights to 10 cities in China . On 5 July 2005 , the airline announced the purchase of two Bombardier <unk> from Danish carrier Maersk Air , scheduled to arrive in July and mid @-@ August , respectively . In addition , the airline had signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Boeing for the purchase of 10 Boeing 787 Dreamliners and 30 Boeing 737 – 800s on 20 December 2005 at a listed price of US $ 3 @.@ 28 billion . An executive of the airline had told reporters that some of the Boeing aircraft was from Hainan Airlines ' order . 
 On 27 June 2006 , Hainan Airlines purchased a 45 percent holdings of the airline and the holdings would be transferred to Grand China Air , a new holding company of Hainan Airlines . Two months later , Mr <unk> Kin Keung acquired the remaining 55 percent of the airline and became the controlling shareholder on 7 August ; and its director on 13 August . On 22 September 2006 , CR Airways Limited officially changed its name to Hong Kong Airlines Limited and a launch ceremony took place on 28 November 2006 . The airline also introduced a new logo , which represents a <unk> flower , the symbol of Hong Kong where the airline is anchored . The new logo also represents the close relationship between the airline and Hong Kong and its new era in the civil aviation industry . The airline made the biggest aircraft order in its young history on 21 June 2007 , by ordering 51 <unk> and wide @-@ body aircraft from European plane maker , Airbus , at an estimated value of US $ 5 @.@ 6 billion . The airline 's IATA code was changed from N8 to HX on 27 May 2007 . 
 On 24 October 2008 , the airline announced plans in preparation for the arrival of the Airbus A330 @-@ 200 wide @-@ body aircraft , which included personnel and fleet composition . The new aircraft will provide medium haul passenger and cargo services to the Middle East and Australia . 
 On 8 June 2010 , Hong Kong Airlines successfully completed their proving flight from Hong Kong to Beijing and return earning their Air Operating 's Certificate for the Airbus A330 operations from <unk> . 
 On 28 June 2010 , schedule flight to Moscow was launched . 
 In September 2010 , Hong Kong Airlines introduced its first <unk> <unk> cargo freighter , launched the first full cargo route from Hong Kong to Hangzhou . 
 On 22 October 2010 , Hong Kong Airlines officially joined the IATA . 
 In 2011 , Hong Kong Airlines awarded 4 @-@ star rating by Skytrax . Passenger traffic exceeded one million , serving 19 destinations . 
 On 8 March 2012 , Hong Kong Airlines launched a daily Hong Kong – London Gatwick service with an Airbus A330 @-@ 200 aircraft . The aircraft on this route was operating as an all Club Class service , featuring 34 " Club Premier " ( business class lie @-@ flat beds ) and 82 " Club Classic " ( cradle style recliner business class ) seats . However , this route ended on September 10 . Meanwhile , Manchester City F.C. chose Hong Kong Airlines for domestic transportation as <unk> / <unk> from Gatwick to Manchester 
 In 2013 , Hong Kong Airlines launched new passenger route between Hong Kong and Maldives , passenger traffic exceeded four million . All Hong Kong Airlines ' Boeing aircraft were replaced by homogenous Airbus fleet . 
 In 2014 , Hong Kong Airlines launched new passenger routes between Hong Kong and Ho Chi Minh , Tianjin and Kagoshima , and increased to four flights to Beijing and five flights to Shanghai daily . The brand new Hong Kong Airlines Lounge " Club Bauhinia " has started operations on June 27 , 2014 , replacing the existing lounge to provide our premium passengers with a more spacious and comfortable space before their flights . In July , the company was recognized the winner of " World ’ s Most Improved Airline " by <unk> . 
 In February 2015 , Hong Kong Airlines signed an agreement for sub @-@ lease with the Airport Authority Hong Kong to develop a flight training centre on a plot of land of 0 @.@ 6 hectare located at the southeast edge of the Hong Kong International Airport . 
 In March 2015 , Hong Kong Airlines joined the Executive Committee of the Board of Airline Representatives in Hong Kong ( BAR HK ) , holding hands with another almost 80 airlines to improve the commercial and operational conditions for airlines active in Hong Kong . 
 On 28 December 2015 , Hong Kong Airlines flight <unk> bound for Okinawa became the first departure from the HKIA <unk> Concourse ( MFC ) . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 = = = Codeshare agreements = = = 
 Hong Kong Airlines has codeshare agreements with the following airlines ( as of January 2013 ) : 
 = = Fleet = = 
 As of March 2016 , Hong Kong Airlines operated the following : 
 = = = Aircraft orders = = = 
 On 20 December 2005 , the airline signed a Memorandum of Understanding ( MOU ) with Boeing to acquire 30 Boeing 737 – 800 aircraft and 10 Boeing 787 aircraft . However , according to the airline 's website , there is only a firm order of four Boeing 737 – 800 aircraft , with no mention of a firm order for the Boeing 787 aircraft . 
 On 21 June 2007 , the airline signed an MOU with Airbus to acquire 30 Airbus A320s , 20 Airbus A330 @-@ 200s powered by Rolls @-@ Royce Trent 700 engines and one Airbus Corporate Jet . The order was subsequently confirmed with the signing of a firm contract with Airbus on 12 September 2007 and it will be shared between the airline and its sister airline Hong Kong Express Airways . In December 2008 , three of the original orders for 20 A330 @-@ 200s were converted to A330 @-@ 300s and transferred to Hong Kong International Aviation Leasing . They will be operated by Hong Kong Airlines . 
 On 4 February 2010 , Airbus announced another MOU signed with Hong Kong Airlines to acquire 6 more Airbus A330 @-@ 200s . These will have Pratt & Whitney PW4000 engines and were originally ordered by Grupo <unk> . At the same time , one of the A330 @-@ <unk> on order was converted to a − 343 . 
 At the Farnborough Air Show in July 2010 , Airbus announced that Hong Kong Airlines had signed a MOU to convert orders for 15 A330s to A350s and place an additional order for 10 A330 @-@ 200s . The airline converted an existing order for 15 A330s to the A350 XWB which will be delivered in 2018 . No engine selection for the additional A330s was announced . 
 In early 2011 , there were rumours that Hong Kong Airlines had ordered 15 <unk> @-@ 8 aircraft , but such an order never materialized . 
 < 
 At the Paris Air Show in June 2011 , Hong Kong Airlines had announced a signed contract for 10 Airbus A380 's however due to China 's anger with the European Union over plans to force all airlines to take part in its carbon @-@ trading scheme , the Chinese government has blocked progress on Airbus ’ s sale of 10 A380s to Hong Kong Airlines . Normally , airlines in Hong Kong are not required to seek approval from the Chinese government to proceed with aircraft orders . The A380 cancellation became an issue as Hong Kong Airlines ' parent , Hainan Airlines , is registered in mainland China , not Hong Kong SAR . In early January 2012 , HKA 's corporate governance head Kenneth Thong stated in a TV interview that the order was going ahead . 
 In December 2012 , CEO Yang <unk> told Bloomberg that " We won ’ t resume long haul routes in the short term . The carrier is discussing changing at least some of its 10 on @-@ order A380s for A330s , and delaying deliveries . " 
 = = Corporate Image and Affairs = = 
 = = = Corporate logo = = = 
 Hong Kong Airlines adopts sharp red and purple colour as the dominant colours and utilized in its uniforms and passenger cabin . 
 = = = Subsidiary company = = = 
 Hong Kong Airlines holds a number of subsidiary companies to manage its business : 
 Hong Kong Aviation Ground Services Limited ( <unk> ) Provide passenger self @-@ handling services at Hong Kong International Airport 
 HKA Holidays Limited ( HKA Holidays ) Sell different kinds of travel products , including fixed charter flights tickets , package and hotel accommodation . 
 = = = Promotions = = = 
 Under the brand positioning of " Fresh and Very Hong Kong " , Hong Kong Airlines carried out a series of promotional campaigns : 
 = = = TVC = = = 
 2013 : TV Commercial " Bringing the Best Sky High 
 Under the brand positioning of " Fresh and Very Hong Kong " , the new TVC depicted flight attendants practising Wing Chun , gymnastics and cycling respectively following Rose Chan , the Aviation Service Ambassador , Teng <unk> and Zhang Nan , the Olympic Champions , and Kenji Leung , the Cycling <unk> with an aim to showcase the fresh , energetic and proactive image of Hong Kong Airlines ’ flight attendants . 
 = = = Movie and Media = = = 
 The airline was the aviation sponsor for the 2013 TVB drama Triumph In The Skies 2 ( <unk> ) . 
 The airline was the aviation sponsor for the 2014 Triumph in the Skies Movie ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Hong Kong Airlines is selected as the Official Carrier for Hong Kong Paralympic Committee and Sports Association for the Physically Disabled . 
 = = = Education and Community = = = 
 Hong Kong Airlines has actively engaged in community affairs , including joining the Caritas Fund Raising Bazaars for six consecutive years since 2009 and sponsored the " World Diabetes Day 2012 " Hong Kong events . 
 As part of an approach to nurture aviation talents and encourage students to join the aviation industry the airline has a number of student sponsorship and aviation education programmes , such as " Triumph Sky High " Junior Programme , " Embrace the World " Student Sponsorship Programme and School Sharing Workshops . 
 = = Loyalty programmes = = 
 The Fortune Wings Club is a global frequent flyer programme designed for Hong Kong Airlines and its sister airlines , including Grand China Air , Grand China Express , Hainan Airlines , Hong Kong Express Airways and Lucky Air . Membership benefits include air ticket redemption and upgrade ; VIP members have additional privileges of dedicated First or Business Class check in counters , lounge access , bonus mileage and extra baggage allowance . 
 = = Services = = 
 = = = Ground Services = = = 
 Hong Kong Airlines provides a wide variety of customer services at airports all over the world . At Hong Kong International Airport ( HKIA ) , the check @-@ in counter located at Aisle K of Terminal 1 . 
 = = = = Priority Check @-@ in = = = = 
 Hong Kong Airlines provides different priority check @-@ in services for its passengers . In @-@ town check @-@ in stations of Hong Kong Airlines are located at both Hong Kong and Kowloon Station of the Airport Express Line for passengers to proceed check @-@ in one day before boarding . Moreover , Hong Kong Airlines provides through check @-@ in service . Passengers with flight connections on the following carriers can obtain their boarding passes for their onward flights upon checking in on their departure city . 
 = = = = Electronic Check @-@ in = = = = 
 Hong Kong Airlines passengers can use electronic check @-@ in service at the Hong Kong International Airport , and flights depart from Taipei , Bangkok , Beijing , Shanghai <unk> , Shanghai Pudong and Bali prior to boarding . Electronic check @-@ in service include : Hong Kong Airlines Mobile Apps , Hong Kong Airlines <unk> , HTML5 apps and Hong Kong Airlines website . 
 = = = = Airport VIP Lounge = = = = 
 The brand new Hong Kong Airlines Lounge " Club Bauhinia " has started operations on June 27 , 2014 . 
 Located near Gate 23 , Terminal One at Hong Kong International Airport , the 506 square @-@ meter lounge accommodates up to 120 passengers . 
 = = = Cabin Service = = = 
 All the aircraft in the fleet are equipped with WiFi service and an AVOD in @-@ flight entertainment system . An In @-@ flight Magazine " Aspire " is available to passengers with travel and lifestyle <unk> @-@ flight shopping is provided through its <unk> magazine that is renewed every quarter . Pre @-@ flight order can also be made on line via http : / / <unk> from 72 hours prior to departure date . Members of its Fortune Wing Club ( Gold or Silver Card ) can enjoy a 5 % discount on the net purchase price of all Duty Free items . 
 = Passionate Journey = 
 Passionate Journey , or My Book of Hours ( French : Mon livre d <unk> ) , is a wordless novel of 1919 by Flemish artist Frans Masereel . The story is told in 167 captionless prints , and is the longest and best @-@ selling of the wordless novels Masereel made . It tells of the experiences of an early 20th @-@ century everyman in a modern city . 
 Masereel 's medium is the woodcut , and the images are in an emotional , allegorical style inspired by Expressionism . The book followed Masereel 's first wordless novel , 25 Images of a Man 's Passion ( 1918 ) ; both were published in Switzerland , where Masereel spent much of World War I. German publisher Kurt Wolff released an inexpensive " people 's edition " of the book in Germany with an introduction by German novelist Thomas Mann , and the book went on to sell over 100 @,@ 000 copies in Europe . Its success encouraged other publishers to print wordless novels , and the genre flourished in the interwar years . 
 Masereel followed the book with dozens of others , beginning with The Sun later in 1919 . Masereel 's work was lauded in the art world in the earlier half of the 20th century , but has since been neglected outside of Western comics circles , where Masereel 's wordless novels are seen as anticipating the development of the graphic novel . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The story follows the life of a prototypical early 20th @-@ century everyman after he enters a city . It is by turns comic and tragic : a sick woman cared for by the man loses her life ; the man breaks wind at a group of businessmen ; the man is rejected by a prostitute with whom he has fallen in love . He also takes trips to different locales around the world . In the end , the man leaves the city for the woods , raises his arms in praise of nature , and dies . His spirit rises from him , stomps on the heart of his dead body , and waves to the reader as it sets off across the universe . 
 = = Background = = 
 Frans Masereel ( 1889 – 1972 ) was born into a French @-@ speaking family in Blankenberge , Belgium . At five his father died , and his mother remarried to a doctor in Ghent , whose political beliefs left an impression on the young Masereel . He often accompanied his stepfather in socialist demonstrations . After a year at the Ghent Academy of Fine Arts in 1907 , Masereel left to study art on his own in Paris . During World War I he volunteered as a translator for the Red Cross in Geneva , drew newspaper political cartoons , and copublished a magazine Les <unk> , in which he published his first woodcut prints . 
 In the early 20th century there was a revival in interest in mediaeval woodcuts , particularly in religious books such as the Biblia pauperum . The woodcut is a less refined medium than the wood engraving that replaced it — artists of the time took to the rougher woodcut to express angst and frustration . From 1917 Masereel began publishing books of woodcut prints , using similar imagery to make political statements on the strife of the common people rather than to illustrate the lives of Christ and the saints . In 1918 he created the first such book to feature a narrative , 25 Images of a Man 's Passion . He followed its success in 1919 with Passionate Journey , which remained his favourite of his own works . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The black @-@ and @-@ white woodcut images in the book were each 9 by 7 centimetres ( 3 1 ⁄ 2 in × 2 3 ⁄ 4 in ) . Masereel self @-@ published the book in Geneva on credit from Swiss printer Albert <unk> in 1919 as Mon livre d <unk> in an edition of 200 copies . It was printed directly from the original woodblocks . 
 German publisher Kurt Wolff sent Hans <unk> to Masereel to arrange German publication in 1920 . It was printed from the original woodblocks in an edition of 700 copies under the title Mein <unk> : 165 <unk> , Wolff thereafter continued to publish German editions of Masereel 's books , later in inexpensive " people 's editions " using electrotype reproduction . The 1926 edition had an introduction by German writer Thomas Mann : 
 Look at these powerful black @-@ and @-@ white figures , their features etched in light and shadow . You will be captivated from beginning to end : from the first pictured showing the train plunging through the dense smoke and bearing the hero toward life , to the very last picture showing the skeleton @-@ faced figure among the stars . Has not this passionate journey had an incomparably deeper and purer impact on you than you have ever felt before ? 
 The German edition was particularly popular , and went through several editions in the 1920s with sales surpassing 100 @,@ 000 copies . Its success prompted other publishers and artists to produce wordless novels . 
 The book won an English @-@ speaking audience after its 1922 US publication under the title My Book of <unk> printed from the original woodblocks in an edition of 600 copies with a foreword by French writer Romain Rolland . English @-@ language editions took the title Passionate Journey after publication in a popular edition in the US in 1948 . An edition did not see print in England until Redstone Press published one in the 1980s . It has also appeared in many other languages , including Chinese popular editions in 1933 and 1957 . Some editions since 1928 have cut two pages from the book : the 24th , in which the protogonist has sex with a prostitute ; and the 149th , in which the protagonist , giant @-@ sized , urinates on the city . Dover Publications restored the pages in a 1971 edition , and American editions since then have kept them . 
 = = Style and analysis = = 
 I believe that it contained the essence of what I wanted to say ; I expressed my philosophy , and perhaps My Book of Hours with its 167 woodcuts contains everything I have created since , because I have developed a number of themes from it in my later work . 
 Masereel uses an emotional , Expressionistic style to create a narrative replete with allegory , satire , and social criticism — a visual style he continued with throughout his career . He expresses a broad variety of emotions through understated , <unk> gestures . Most characters are given simple , passive expressions , which provides emphatic contrast with characters expressing more explicit emotion — love , despair , ecstasy . He considered Passionate Journey partly autobiographical , which he emphasized with a pair of self @-@ portraits that open the book — in the first , Masereel sits at his desk with his woodcutting tools , and in the second appears the protagonist , dressed in identical fashion with the first . Literature scholar Martin S. Cohen wrote that it expressed themes that were to become universal in the wordless novel genre . 
 The original titles of Masereel 's first two wordless novels allude to religious works : 25 Images of a Man 's Passion to the Passion of Christ , and My Book of Hours to the mediaeval devotional book of hours . These religious books made frequent use of allegory , also prominent in Masereel 's works — though Masereel replaces the religious archetypes of mediaeval morality plays with those from socialist ideology . The book derives some of its visual vocabulary — framing , sequencing , and viewpoints — from silent film . Thomas Mann named the book his favourite film . 
 Wordless novel scholar David Beronä saw the work as a catalogue of human activity , and in this regard compared it to Walt Whitman 's Leaves of Grass and Allen Ginsberg 's Howl . Austrian writer Stefan Zweig remarked , " If everything were to perish , all the books , monuments , photographs and memoirs , and only the woodcuts that [ Masereel ] has executed in ten years were spared , our whole present @-@ day world could be reconstructed from them . " Critic Chris Lanier attributes the protagonist 's appeal to readers to Masereel 's avoiding a preaching tone in the work ; " rather " , Lanier states , " he gives us a story as a device through which we can examine ourselves " . This openness in the images invites individual interpretation , according to Beronä . 
 In contrast to the works of Masereel 's imitators , the images do not form an unfolding sequence of actions but are rather like individual snapshots of events in the protagonist 's life . The book opens with a pair of literary quotations : 
 Behold ! I do not give lectures , or a little charity : When I give , I give myself . 
 ... des <unk> et des <unk> , des <unk> , <unk> , <unk> et <unk> , de la <unk> et du <unk> , des <unk> et du raisin , des fruits <unk> , des fruits doux , des roses et des <unk> @-@ culs , des choses <unk> , et <unk> , et sues , et <unk> , <unk> ! 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Impressed by the book , German publisher Kurt Wolff arranged for its German publication and continued to publish German editions of Masereel 's books . Wolf 's edition of Passionate Journey went through multiple printings , and the book was popular throughout Europe , where it sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies . Soon other publishers also engaged in the publication of wordless novels , though none matched the success of Masereel 's , which Beronä has called " perhaps the most seminal work in the genre " . 
 While not as successful at first in the United States , American reviewers recognized Masereel as father of the wordless novel at least as early as the 1930s . A revival in publishing interest in wordless novels in the 1970s saw Passionate Journey the most frequently reprinted . 
 While the graphic narrative bears strong similarities to the comics that were proliferating in the early 20th century , Masereel 's book emerged from a fine arts environment and was aimed at such an audience . Its influence was felt not in comics but in the worlds of literature , film , music , and advertising . Masereel 's work was widely recognized with awards and exhibitions in the early 20th century , but has since been mostly forgotten outside of Western comics circles , where his wordless novels , and Passionate Journey in particular , are seen as precursors to the graphic novel . 
 = Shawn Lonsdale = 
 Shawn Lonsdale ( 1969 – February 16 , 2008 ) was a videographer and prominent critic of the Church of Scientology . He resided in Clearwater , Florida , and regularly videotaped members of Scientology coming and going from church activities in Clearwater . Lonsdale had initially intended to do a photography project on homeless people in Clearwater , but after an experience at a City Council meeting , he began to research Scientology . Lonsdale got into an argument with a Scientologist at the City Council meeting , and the Scientologist followed him home and the next day Lonsdale observed a van waiting for two hours outside his home . After researching the Church of Scientology on critical websites , he decided to expose information about the organization . He established a website , and filmed video footage of Scientologists going about activities in Clearwater , and aired edited footage on a local Public @-@ access television cable TV station . After getting into a physical altercation with a Scientologist while filming , the Scientologist was arrested and charged with misdemeanor battery , but was later released and the charges were dropped . 
 The Church of Scientology hired private investigators and discovered a criminal record on Lonsdale , and this was subsequently publicized by a Scientologist on fliers and on a website . Lonsdale was subpoenaed by the Church of Scientology in 2006 , and they accused him of being affiliated with the Lisa McPherson Trust , a group critical of Scientology which was restricted in where it could protest in Clearwater . In 2007 , Lonsdale appeared on the BBC Panorama program Scientology and Me and was interviewed by journalist John Sweeney . Later in the program , Sweeney lost his temper and shouted at a Scientology representative when he was accused of giving Lonsdale a " soft interview " . Lonsdale died suddenly on February 16 , 2008 , and a Clearwater police spokeswoman stated that the death appears to be due to suicide . 
 = = Critic of Scientology = = 
 Lonsdale , never a Scientologist himself , became critical of the Church of Scientology in mid @-@ 2006 , and often stood outside in downtown Clearwater near Scientology 's spiritual headquarters wearing a sandwich board sign that read " Cult Watch " . Lonsdale became interested in Scientology after getting into a fight with a Scientologist over redevelopment issues while at a City Council meeting . After the Scientologist followed Lonsdale 's car home and Lonsdale noticed a van parked in front of his home for two hours the following day , he began to research the background of Scientology on anti @-@ Scientology sites on the Internet and in the library . He taped hours of footage of Scientology staffers , security guards , and verbal confrontations with Scientologists , and edited clips into a pseudo @-@ documentary which aired on local public @-@ access television . Lonsdale dropped fliers outside downtown businesses and picked through trash from a Scientology @-@ owned business and posted documents online . He parked outside a Scientology cafeteria with posters in his car window which stated that key Scientology texts were available for free on the Internet : " OT I @-@ VIII for free at <unk> " 
 On July 8 , 2006 , Lonsdale got into a physical altercation with a Scientologist while filming the Church of Scientology in Clearwater . A spokeswoman for the Church of Scientology told Bay News 9 that Lonsdale had been harassing their staff members , and that the fight was not related to the church . Lonsdale stated " Basically , I 'm filming a pseudo @-@ documentary for one of our free @-@ access Pinellas web channels , " and said that while filming a Scientologist came out of a coffee shop and yelled that Lonsdale was a religious bigot . Lonsdale stated " I picked up the camera again and started filming him ... He went right for my face and my head , backed me up into a pole to which I had no other choice but to defend myself . " The Scientologist was arrested by Clearwater police and charged with battery , but the State Attorney 's Office of Florida decided not to pursue charges . After the incident the Clearwater police Deputy Chief viewed a videotape of the altercation , and concluded that Lonsdale was the victim and that his police officers made the right decision in arresting the Scientologist . After viewing the videotape , the Assistant State Attorney stated " it is just not going to be a prosecutable case , " and said that the video shows " pretty much mutual aggression " between Lonsdale and the Scientologist . The Assistant State Attorney stated that the video showed aggression on both sides , and that Lonsdale 's criticism of Scientology on the internet made the case " <unk> " . Lonsdale 's attorney Luke Lirot stated " It is another example of the State Attorney 's Office 's historical reluctance to tangle with Scientology . " Scientology spokeswoman Pat Harney said that church members had been told to avoid Lonsdale , and told the St. Petersburg Times that Scientologists had complained to police that they felt Lonsdale was stalking them . The police did not charge Lonsdale , stating that he had the right to take photos and video in public places . 
 = = = Response by Church of Scientology = = = 
 The Church of Scientology responded to Lonsdale 's activities by hiring a private investigator to investigate him . The private investigator discovered that Lonsdale had two misdemeanor convictions for lewd and lascivious conduct dating back to 1999 and 2000 , both related to public sex with men . In mid @-@ July 2006 , Posters with a mug shot of Lonsdale appeared in store windows warning that he had been arrested for sex crimes and was dangerous . The Church of Scientology told Bay News 9 that it did not hand out the fliers , but that they came from an organization calling the " Cleveland Street Safety League " . The St. Petersburg Times reported that the man behind the " Cleveland Street Safety League " is " a longtime Scientologist known for confronting critics " . The Scientologist behind the Cleveland Street Safety League created a website about Lonsdale and posted his arrest record and comments Lonsdale had made on a swinger site , and also called Lonsdale 's family in New England claiming that Lonsdale needed mental help . 
 Lonsdale 's employer and landlord received phone calls from Scientology representatives who claimed that he was a religious bigot and dangerous . Lonsdale was subpoenaed by the Church of Scientology for a deposition in the fall of 2006 , and the Church claimed that he belonged to an anti @-@ Scientology group which had previously been barred from protesting in certain areas in downtown Clearwater , the Lisa McPherson Trust . Luke Lirot , the lawyer who defended Lonsdale in the matter , told the St. Petersburg Times : " I found him to be quite affable and truly a very intelligent man ... I certainly hope that a very thorough investigation is conducted . " In his deposition , Lonsdale stated he was unemployed and began to educate himself about Scientology while working on a photography project on homeless people in Clearwater . After reading more about Scientology , he decided to shed light on the organization and irritate Scientologists . Of the claims Scientology made that Lonsdale was affiliated with the Lisa McPherson Trust , Lirot commented : " It was obvious to everybody he had nothing to do with the trust , and the trust had been disbanded and dissolved many years prior ... They just wanted to try to come up with a way to preclude him from exercising his right to picket in downtown Clearwater , and they were unsuccessful in doing that . " 
 = = Scientology and Me = = 
 In May 2007 , Lonsdale appeared on BBC 's Panorama program in a piece titled " Scientology and Me " , and was interviewed about his experiences as a critic of Scientology by journalist John Sweeney . When Sweeney asked Lonsdale why the Church of Scientology was publicizing derogatory things about him , Lonsdale replied : " They are trying to embarrass me . They try to paint you as crazy , so that no one will listen to you . " During their interview , Tommy Davis arrived , opened a folder , and began to read out loud Lonsdale 's criminal record . Later in the program , Sweeney was accused by Scientologist Tommy Davis of giving " convicted sexual pervert Shawn Lonsdale " a " soft interview " . Sweeney yelled at Davis and lost his temper , with both men shouting at each other back and forth . A Scientology @-@ produced video of the incident was uploaded to YouTube and viewed over 856 @,@ 000 times . 
 = = Death = = 
 In 2007 , Lonsdale let his Scientology critique website lapse , and posted less frequently on his blogs and anti @-@ Scientology message boards and chat forums . Spokeswoman Pat Harney stated that the Church had not heard from Lonsdale for months before his death . Former Scientologist Randy Payne told the St. Petersburg Times that Lonsdale " found it impossible " to make a living while spending the majority of his time as a critic of Scientology . Payne stated that in December 2007 Lonsdale had found steady work , and had planned to go back to school in order to get a private investigator 's license . 
 Clearwater police discovered Lonsdale 's body after they were alerted by neighbors and found a garden hose connecting the exhaust pipe of Lonsdale 's car with one of the windows of his home . Clearwater police spokeswoman Elizabeth Daly @-@ Watts stated that there were no signs of foul play involved , and that police found what they believed to be a suicide note . Daly @-@ Watts said that " It does appear to be a suicide . " Police officially ruled Lonsdale 's death as suicide on May 2 , 2008 . 
 Scientology spokeswoman Pat Harney called Lonsdale 's apparent suicide " awful " and stated " It 's just unfortunate anybody feels they have to go to that length ... I wouldn 't wish that on anybody . " Jerald Rowlett , a fellow Scientology critic and friend from Michigan , told The Tampa Tribune : " In many ways Shawn was a hero to me ... He had a hard life and a history he knew Scientology would use to hurt him . And yet he still felt strongly enough to try to inform the public about the actions of Scientology . " On March 1 , 2008 , John Sweeney remembered Lonsdale and spoke about him on the BBC Radio 4 program , From Our Own Correspondent . Sweeney stated : " Clearwater got that little bit more creepy recently , with the death - the police are treating it as suicide - of Shawn . When alive a Scientology spokesman said of him : ' He has no redeeming value to anyone , anywhere . ' Well , he was a bit of a hero to me ... I for one mourn the loss - of a brave and singular American " . 
 = Baltimore Steam Packet Company = 
 The Baltimore Steam Packet Company , nicknamed the Old Bay Line , was an American steamship line from 1840 to 1962 that provided overnight steamboat service on the Chesapeake Bay , primarily between Baltimore , Maryland , and Norfolk , Virginia . Called a " packet " for the mail packets carried on government mail contracts , the term in the 19th century came to mean a steamer line operating on a regular , fixed daily schedule between two or more cities . When it closed in 1962 after 122 years of existence , it was the last surviving overnight steamship passenger service in the United States . 
 In addition to regularly calling on Baltimore and Norfolk , the Baltimore Steam Packet Company at various times provided freight , passenger and vehicle transport to Washington , D.C. , Old Point Comfort , and Richmond , Virginia . The Old Bay Line , as it came to be known by the 1860s , was acclaimed for its genteel service and fine dining , serving Chesapeake Bay specialties . Walter Lord , famed author of A Night to Remember ( and whose grandfather had been the packet line 's president from 1893 to 1899 ) , mused that its reputation for excellent service was attributable to " ... some magical blending of the best in the North and the South , made possible by the Company 's unique role in ' bridging ' the two sections ... the North contributed its tradition of mechanical proficiency , making the ships so reliable ; while the South contributed its gracious ease " . 
 One of the Old Bay Line 's steamers , the former President Warfield , later became famous as the Exodus ship of book and movie fame , when Jewish refugees from war @-@ torn Europe sailed aboard her in 1947 in an unsuccessful attempt to emigrate to Palestine . 
 = = History = = 
 Just seven years after Robert Fulton proved the commercial viability of steam @-@ powered ships with his North River Steamboat ( more commonly known today as Clermont ) in 1807 , small wood @-@ burning steamers began to ply the Chesapeake Bay . Before the arrival of railroads and river steamboats in the early 19th century , overland travel was exceedingly slow and tedious . Rivers were the main means of transportation and most cities were founded on them . This was especially so in North America , where journeys over vast distances of hundreds or even thousands of miles required months of hazardous , uncomfortable travel by stagecoach or wagon on rutted , unpaved trails . In the 1830s , railroads were being built , but the technology was crude and average passenger train speed was only 12 miles per hour ( 19 km / h ) . Perhaps more importantly , most early railroads did not connect . It would be many years before the various lines were knitted together to make intercity rail travel in the U.S. a reality . Not until 1863 , for example , was it possible to travel between New York City and Washington , D. C. , without changing trains en route . 
 In this period , steamships on rivers such as the Ohio and Mississippi or large inland bodies of water such as the Great Lakes and the Chesapeake Bay offered a comfortable and relatively fast mode of transportation . The first steamboat to serve Baltimore was the locally built Chesapeake , constructed in 1813 to link Baltimore with Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . Operated by the Union Line , the boat connected with a stagecoach for the overland portion of the journey . Two years later , the Briscoe @-@ Partridge Line 's Eagle was the first steamboat to sail the length of Chesapeake Bay . 
 The direct ancestor of the Baltimore Steam Packet Company was the Maryland & Virginia Steam Boat Company formed in 1828 to link Baltimore , Richmond , and Norfolk , traversing the Chesapeake Bay and the James River . By 1839 , the Maryland & Virginia was heavily in debt from the purchase of two new , large ships the year before : the 210 @-@ foot ( 64 m ) long Alabama and the 173 @-@ foot ( 53 m ) Jewess . The Alabama was expensive to operate and proved impractical for Chesapeake Bay operations , causing the bankruptcy of the Maryland & Virginia later that year . 
 = = = 1840s – 1850s = = = 
 When the Maryland & Virginia collapsed in late 1839 , the Maryland legislature convened to grant a charter to the Baltimore Steam Packet Company , organized in Baltimore to provide overnight steamship service on the Chesapeake Bay . The company 's incorporators were Benjamin Bush , Andrew F. Henderson ( who became the line 's first president ) , John B. Howell , Thomas Kelso ( who would become a director of the line ) , John S. McKim , Samuel McDonald , Gen. William McDonald , Robert A. Taylor , and Joel Vickers , all of Baltimore . 
 The company was granted a 20 @-@ year charter on March 18 , 1840 , by the Maryland legislature and then acquired three of the former Maryland & Virginia 's steamboats : Pocahontas , Georgia , and Jewess . The company began overnight paddlewheel steamship passenger and freight service daily except Sundays between Baltimore and Norfolk . By 1848 , the company 's steamship Herald was making the trip in less than 12 hours , a time which the line would maintain until the end in 1962 . An affiliate , the Powhatan Line , started service between Norfolk and Richmond in 1845 , interchanging freight and passengers with the Old Bay Line . 
 By the 1850s , competition was keen as steamships grew in size and efficiency to serve the fast @-@ growing nation . The Old Bay Line , in particular , served as a link between the antebellum South and northern markets , hauling large quantities of cotton north and manufactured goods south , along with a thriving passenger business between Baltimore and Norfolk . Railroads also began acquiring steamship lines in the 1850s , and the Seaboard & Roanoke Railroad , a predecessor of the Richmond , Fredericksburg and Potomac Railroad ( RF & P ) , acquired a controlling interest in the Baltimore Steam Packet Company in 1851 . As competitors entered the field , each line vied to outdo its competitors in the luxurious appointments of their ships ' staterooms and dining service . The company acquired newer and larger ships in the 1850s , such as the North Carolina in 1852 and the Louisiana in 1854 , the latter at 266 feet ( 81 m ) in length being the largest wooden vessel the company would own . A passenger on the Baltimore Steam Packet Company 's Georgia , carried away by delight over his travel experience in 1853 , was effusive in his description of an overnight trip : 
 I know of no more delightful trip from Baltimore down the Chesapeake ... upon the broad blue waters with an exquisite breeze , which came up with invigorating freshness from the silver waves . Night came on , and her azure curtain gemmed with myriad stars was drawn over the expanse above . 
 The North Carolina similarly impressed a Baltimore Patriot reporter in 1852 , who described the ship 's dining saloon as " having imported Belgian carpets , velvet chairs with marble @-@ topped tables , and white panelling with gilded mouldings " . 
 On February 20 , 1858 , the northbound steamer Louisiana collided with a sailing vessel , the William K. Perrin , causing the sailboat to founder near the mouth of the Rappahannock River . In a case that reached all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court , Haney et al. v Baltimore Steam Packet Company , the Louisiana was found to be at fault . The high court considered the rules of the sea pertaining to steamers and sailing ships approaching one another and concluded ( with Chief Justice Roger B. Taney dissenting ) that " entire disregard of these rules of navigation by the steamer " caused the collision , reversing a Circuit Court ruling . 
 The North Carolina burned on January 29 , 1859 , when a fire started in a passenger stateroom . She sank the following day with the loss of two lives . The following month , the line acquired the Adelaide to replace the lost steamer . 
 = = = 1860s – 1910s = = = 
 The outbreak of the Civil War in April 1861 immediately affected the Baltimore Steam Packet Company . On April 19 , two days after Virginia 's secession , a violently pro @-@ Southern mob in Baltimore attacked Union soldiers en route to Washington , D.C. as the troops marched through the city 's streets between railroad stations . Thereafter known as the Baltimore riot of 1861 , the resulting loss of life and local unrest also threatened the USS Allegheny , a U.S. Navy ship in Baltimore at the time . Later that same day , the Baltimore Steam Packet Company declined to transport Union forces from Baltimore to the beleaguered Union naval yard facility at Portsmouth , Virginia . 
 Two weeks later , on May 7 , the Adelaide was chartered by the U.S. Navy and attached to the Atlantic Blockading Squadron . In that role , she was used to transport Federal troops in support of operations in North Carolina 's Outer Banks , directed against the Confederate @-@ held forts guarding Hatteras Inlet . Later that year , the Adelaide was returned to the Baltimore Steam Packet Company . 
 As a steamship line connecting northern cities and the south , the Old Bay Line hauled a considerable volume of freight between the two regions and their ships ' cargo holds were filled with bales of cotton , produce , and other goods . When hostilities commenced , Southern ports were blockaded by the Federal Navy and the Old Bay Line was unable to serve Norfolk for the duration of the war , going no further south than Old Point Comfort . Passenger traffic as well as cargo shipping declined significantly . The Powhatan Line discontinued operations altogether between Norfolk and Richmond until the war 's end . 
 As soon as the war ended in 1865 , the Leary Line of New York briefly challenged the Baltimore Steam Packet Company on the Chesapeake , starting its own Baltimore @-@ Norfolk steamship service . A fare war ensued , with one @-@ way prices reduced to $ 3 @.@ 00 . Emphasizing the longevity of its service compared to their upstart rival , the Baltimore Steam Packet Company began referring to itself as the " Old Established Bay Line " in advertising , a moniker that would soon become simply the Old Bay Line for the next century . 
 The Leary Line withdrew in January 1867 , selling its George Leary to the Old Bay Line . Two years later , the Norfolk Journal of August 2 , 1869 , described the vessel as having a " gorgeous style of furniture and elegant fittings ... magnificently furnished with upholstered sofas and lounges of rich red velvet ... " . Another competitor , the Chesapeake Steamship Company , began directly competing on the Baltimore @-@ Norfolk route in 1874 . Controlled by the Southern Railway , a rival of the RF & P , it would be a formidable competitor until 1941 , when the two steamship lines merged . Cargo traffic was also booming in the 1870s as the South recovered from the Civil War , resulting in the Old Bay Line 's freight revenue surpassing passenger revenue by the end of the decade . 
 By the time of John Moncure Robinson 's retirement as president of the company in 1893 , the Old Bay Line had upgraded its fleet with propeller @-@ driven , steel @-@ hulled steamers equipped with modern conveniences such as electric lighting and staterooms with private baths . The Georgia introduced in 1887 was the first Old Bay Line boat to have a modern screw propeller instead of old @-@ fashioned side <unk> and the Alabama launched in 1893 was the company 's first steel @-@ hulled vessel . Robinson served the Old Bay Line as president for 26 years ( 1867 – 1893 ) , longer than any other person in the company 's history . 
 The halcyon days of the 1890s were the company 's heyday , under president Richard Curzon Hoffman ( the grandfather of noted author Walter Lord ) , when the prosperous line 's gleaming steamships were heavily patronized by passengers enjoying the well @-@ appointed staterooms and Chesapeake Bay culinary delights while dining to the accompaniment of live music . The nightly menu on board included oyster fritters , diamondback terrapin , duck , and turkey . 
 The company built a new terminal and headquarters in Baltimore on Light Street in 1898 to accommodate the increasing traffic . Rebuilt after the Great Baltimore Fire of 1904 , the building with its four @-@ sided clocktower would be a landmark for decades on Baltimore 's Inner Harbor waterfront . ( The location of the now @-@ demolished terminal is between the present <unk> and Maryland Science Center . ) 
 The Richmond , Fredericksburg and Potomac Railroad , which had first acquired a controlling interest in the Baltimore Steam Packet Company in 1851 , gained total control of the company 's stock on September 5 , 1901 . The Old Bay Line continued to be managed separately from the RF & P , however . 
 = = = = World War I and aftermath = = = = 
 In contrast to the Civil War , when hostilities sharply curtailed business on the Old Bay Line , World War I doubled freight and passenger business on the line to the busy ports of Norfolk and the Hampton Roads area , with 107 @,@ 664 passengers using the line in 1917 . As a result of congestion on the nation 's railroads and ports when the U.S. entered the war in April 1917 , the Federal government established the wartime U.S. Railroad Administration ( USRA ) to take charge of railroads and steamship companies , including the Baltimore Steam Packet Company . The USRA directed the operations of the Old Bay Line and the rival Chesapeake line for the duration of the war and more than a year thereafter , until March 1 , 1920 . 
 Baltimore @-@ native John Roberts Sherwood , who had joined the Old Bay Line as a 22 @-@ year @-@ old engineer in 1868 and became president in 1907 , retired in October 1918 after 49 years with the company . The Baltimore Sun extolled Sherwood 's distinguished half @-@ century of service to the steamer line when he retired , noting approvingly that his oft @-@ expressed philosophy was , " Stand up for your home city wherever you may go . " ( His son , John W. Sherwood , founded Baltimore 's celebrated Sherwood Gardens in the mid @-@ 1920s . ) Sherwood was succeeded by S. Davies Warfield as president ( 1918 – 1927 ) . 
 Catastrophe struck the Old Bay Line on May 24 , 1919 , when the Virginia II caught fire shortly after midnight in the middle of Chesapeake Bay with 156 passengers and a crew of 82 on board . The ship burned completely as many passengers jumped overboard and a lifeboat capsized . The Chesapeake Line 's City of Norfolk and other vessels came to the rescue and pulled people from the water to safety . The Virginia 's captain , Walter Lane , remained with his ship to the end and suffered burns . 
 = = = 1920s – 1930s = = = 
 The corporate ownership of the Baltimore Steam Packet Company changed again in 1922 , when the Seaboard Air Line Railroad ( SAL ) formed the Seaboard – Bay Line Company , which owned all of the outstanding shares of the Baltimore Steam Packet Company , making the steamship company a wholly owned subsidiary of the SAL on February 6 , 1922 . In addition to the infusion of capital from the SAL , the Old Bay Line also obtained a $ 4 @.@ 4 million Federal loan to build two new steamers for the Old Bay Line : the State of Maryland and the State of Virginia . The Old Bay Line 's president , S. Davies Warfield , was named president of SAL railroad as well as the Old Bay Line in 1922 . 
 In 1928 , the Baltimore Steam Packet Company took delivery of two more new ships – the President Warfield and the Yorktown . The President Warfield , built by Pusey and Jones Corp. in Wilmington , Delaware , was named for the Old Bay Line 's president of the time , S. Davies Warfield . She would be the last new ship built for the Old Bay Line . 
 As the new @-@ fangled Ford Model Ts and other early automobiles increasingly took to the roads in the 1920s , inland steamship lines in the U.S. initially resisted carrying automobiles on their boats . By the Depression @-@ ravaged 1930s , however , the Old Bay Line became one of the first inland steamship companies to promote the carriage of automobiles as a means of filling its ships ' empty cargo holds . The Depression and loss of business to improved highways took an increasing toll of many U.S. steamship lines in the 1930s , as historic companies such as the Fall River Line ceased operation in 1937 , preceded by the Lake Champlain company , which was the oldest steamboat line in the U.S. at its demise in 1932 . 
 Fortunately for the Old Bay Line , its freight and passenger traffic remained relatively strong in the 1930s and the company embarked on a modernization program for its main boats of the line . The President Warfield and State of Maryland were converted from coal to oil burning in 1933 and had sprinkler systems installed in 1938 . In 1939 , the State of Virginia was converted to oil burning and all three ships were equipped with radio direction finders and ship @-@ to @-@ shore telephones . 
 = = = 1940s = = = 
 As the Old Bay Line celebrated its centennial in 1940 with parades and other events in Baltimore , the company 's future seemed bright . Business was steady and the company 's facilities were in sound condition . Commemorative dinner plates in blue and pink decorated with a map of the Chesapeake Bay were introduced . 
 On June 14 , 1941 , the Baltimore Steam Packet Company 's owner , the Seaboard Air Line Railroad , entered into an agreement with a consortium of railroads and steamship companies to merge the Chesapeake Steamship Company into the Old Bay Line . The railroad group , consisting of the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad , Southern Railway , and the SAL , together controlled the Baltimore Steam Packet Company and the Chesapeake Steamship Company . As a result , the Old Bay Line took over the Chesapeake Line 's business and assets and became the sole operator of passenger and freight steamship transportation between the important ports of Baltimore and Norfolk . As part of this agreement , half of the outstanding shares of the Baltimore Steam Packet Company was assigned to Chesapeake Steamship Company , which was one @-@ third owned by Southern Railway and two @-@ thirds owned by the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad . With the amalgamation , two of the Chesapeake Line 's steamboats , the City of Norfolk and City of Richmond , were transferred to the Old Bay Line . As it turned out , these would be the last two vessels operated by the Old Bay Line when it went out of business in 1962 . Robert E. Dunn was named president of the Old Bay Line in 1941 , remaining at the helm of the company to the end of service in 1962 . 
 = = = = World War II = = = = 
 After the United States entered World War II on December 7 , 1941 , the Federal government set up the War Shipping Administration to manage the vitally important maritime shipping and Naval support needs of the U.S. and its Allies , including the power to expropriate civilian @-@ owned boats . On April 1 , 1942 , the government acquired the Old Bay Line 's State of Virginia and State of Maryland . On July 13 , the President Warfield and Yorktown were also taken over . Thus , by mid @-@ 1942 , four of the Old Bay Line 's six ships had become government property , leaving the company only the two oldest and smallest ships in its fleet for the duration of the war , the City of Norfolk and City of Richmond . 
 = = = = Postwar and the Exodus = = = = 
 After World War II , the line promoted its automobile service to Florida @-@ bound motorists , advertising the elimination of 230 miles ( 370 km ) of driving by taking the family car on an overnight cruise down the Chesapeake to Virginia , while enjoying a sumptuous dinner and relaxing stateroom aboard an Old Bay Line steamer instead of a roadside motel . In March 1946 , the Old Bay Line installed radar on the City of Richmond and City of Norfolk , the first commercial passenger ships to be equipped with radar . 
 After the President Warfield was expropriated in 1942 by the War Shipping Administration for national defense as a transport during World War II , it was transferred to the United Kingdom on September 21 , 1942 . Later in the war , it was returned to the U.S. Navy and commissioned as the USS President Warfield ( IX @-@ 169 ) on May 21 , 1944 . Following the end of World War II , the President Warfield was decommissioned and returned to the War Shipping Administration for disposal as surplus . After inspecting the President Warfield , Old Bay Line officials decided that the expense for reconditioning the badly deteriorated ship was excessive , and accepted a cash settlement from the War Shipping Administration instead of taking back the war surplus vessel . 
 The old President Warfield was eventually acquired in early 1947 by Mossad Le <unk> Bet , a Jewish organization helping Holocaust survivors illegally reach Palestine , then under British mandate . The former Baltimore Steam Packet and U.S. Navy steamship was renamed Exodus when she embarked from France for Palestine on July 11 , 1947 , carrying 4 @,@ 515 passengers . Two Royal Navy destroyers rammed the Exodus as she entered Palestinian waters near Haifa on July 18 . British forces boarded the damaged ship and eventually deported the passengers . The Exodus remained in Haifa harbor until 1952 , when the derelict caught fire and burned completely . The 1960 film Exodus depicted the refugees ' odyssey aboard the former President Warfield . 
 = = = 1950s and demise = = = 
 The Bay Line 's Light Street terminal and headquarters building in Baltimore , where it had been located since 1898 , were sold to the city in October 1950 for the widening of Light Street and later development as the acclaimed Inner Harbor waterfront festival marketplace . The company relocated to a pier on Pratt Street at the foot of Gay Street , where it remained until it went out of business in 1962 . 
 Various travel writers in the 1950s extolled the pleasures of the nightly cruises and meals on the Old Bay Line 's antique steamers . By the mid @-@ 1950s , however , improved highways and the increase in air travel meant that the Old Bay Line 's 12 @-@ hour transit time between Baltimore and Norfolk was a comparatively slow means of transportation . Old Bay Line officials hoped that the steamship line 's unique service might continue to appeal to travellers seeking the pleasures of a cruise on the scenic Chesapeake with fine dining en route and a well @-@ furnished , private stateroom . The Sunday travel section of The New York Times in 1954 featured the " long established , more leisurely water route across Chesapeake Bay " , as the writer described the Old Bay Line , recommending " the boat trip can be made comfortably and comparatively inexpensively every night between Baltimore , Old Point Comfort and Norfolk , and on alternate nights between Washington , D. C. , and the Virginia communities " . 
 In the end too few people opted for this leisurely form of travel and passenger volume steadily declined . As deficits rose during the 1950s , the Old Bay Line began cutting back . On September 30 , 1957 , it abandoned service to Washington , D.C. , discontinuing its Washington – Norfolk overnight service on the Potomac River . By 1960 , the Old Bay Line reduced operation of its mainstay Baltimore – Norfolk route to freight service only during the lightly travelled winter months of October – April , eliminating all passenger service on the Chesapeake Bay during those months . In October 1961 , the company announced that its passenger service was " temporarily suspended until further notice " , indicating that resumption of passenger service was expected the following summer season beginning in April 1962 . Finally , on April 14 , 1962 , the venerable Old Bay Line discontinued all operations entirely , ending one of the very last remaining overnight steamship passenger services in the United States ( The Georgian Bay Line still operated out of Georgian Bay along with Canadian Pacific and Canada Steamship Lines but those companies engaged in purely cruising and all were out of service by 1967 ) . The following month , the stockholders of the Baltimore Steam Packet Company formally voted on May 25 , 1962 to liquidate the 122 @-@ year @-@ old corporation , ending forever the melodious whistles of Old Bay Line steamboats on the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries . 
 = = Routes operated = = 
 The routes over which the Baltimore Steam Packet Company operated passenger , mail , and freight service on a scheduled basis were : 
 = = Old Bay Line fleet = = 
 The company owned 54 ships during its 122 years of existence , many being small cargo vessels . Originally , all of the line 's steamboats were of wooden construction with side <unk> and used wood logs for fuel . The first boat with an iron hull acquired by the Old Bay Line was the <unk> , in 1860 . By the late 1870s , the company had acquired its last paddlewheel steamers : Florida , Carolina , and Virginia . Later , ships would use coal for fuel until the 1930s , when oil began to be used . Beginning with the Georgia built in 1887 , their ships used the more modern propeller or " screw " design . The Georgia also was the first Old Bay Line vessel to be equipped with electric lighting and steam heating . Passenger ships of the line provided large , lavishly furnished staterooms to accommodate passengers on the overnight trip . The Alabama built in 1892 represented the inception of modern shipbuilding and design for the Old Bay Line : the first vessel to have a steel hull instead of iron or wood and propelled by a four @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion reciprocating engine , the same type engine that all of the line 's later steamers would have . Notable Old Bay Line passenger vessels used in scheduled overnight service , with dates acquired and gross tonnages , were : 
 Key : paddlewheel propulsion ( ‡ ) steel @-@ hull construction ( ¶ ) 
 At the time of the Old Bay Line 's dissolution in April 1962 , three ships remained docked at the Pratt Street pier : the District of Columbia , which had been kept as a spare since the Washington – Norfolk service ended in 1957 , was scrapped soon afterwards . The City of Richmond was sold for use as a floating restaurant in the Virgin Islands , but sank in the Atlantic Ocean off Georgetown , South Carolina , while under tow to her new home . The City of Norfolk was idled in Norfolk until 1966 , when it was towed to <unk> , New Jersey on the Delaware River and scrapped . 
 = Ann Arbor , Michigan = 
 Ann Arbor is a city in the U.S. state of Michigan and the county seat of Washtenaw County . The 2010 census recorded its population to be 113 @,@ 934 , making it the sixth largest city in Michigan . The Ann Arbor Metropolitan Statistical Area ( MSA ) includes all of Washtenaw County , which had a population of 344 @,@ 791 as of 2010 . The city is also part of the larger Detroit – Ann Arbor – Flint , MI Combined Statistical Area ( CSA ) with a population of 5 @,@ 318 @,@ 744 . 
 Ann Arbor was founded in 1824 , named for wives of the village 's founders and the stands of Bur Oak trees . The University of Michigan moved from Detroit to Ann Arbor in 1837 , and the city grew at a rapid rate in the early to mid @-@ 20th century . During the 1960s and 1970s , the city gained a reputation as a center for left @-@ wing politics . Ann Arbor became a focal point for political activism and served as a hub for the civil @-@ rights movement and anti @-@ Vietnam War movement , as well as various student movements . 
 Ann Arbor is home to the University of Michigan , one of the foremost research universities in the United States . The university shapes Ann Arbor 's economy significantly as it employs about 30 @,@ 000 workers , including about 12 @,@ 000 in the medical center . The city 's economy is also centered on high technology , with several companies drawn to the area by the university 's research and development money , and by its graduates . 
 = = History = = 
 Ann Arbor was founded in 1824 by land speculators John Allen and Elisha Walker Rumsey . On 25 May 1824 , the town plat was registered with Wayne County as " <unk> ; " this represents the earliest known use of the town 's name . Allen and Rumsey decided to name it for their wives , both named Ann , and for the stands of Bur Oak in the 640 acres ( 260 ha ) of land they purchased for $ 800 from the federal government at $ 1 @.@ 25 per acre . The local Ojibwa named the settlement kaw @-@ <unk> @-@ kaw @-@ nick , after the sound of Allen 's sawmill . 
 Ann Arbor became the seat of Washtenaw County in 1827 , and was incorporated as a village in 1833 . The Ann Arbor Land Company , a group of speculators , set aside 40 acres ( 16 ha ) of undeveloped land and offered it to the state of Michigan as the site of the state capital , but lost the bid to Lansing . In 1837 , the property was accepted instead as the site of the University of Michigan , which moved from Detroit . 
 Since the university 's establishment in the city in 1837 , the histories of the University of Michigan and Ann Arbor have been closely linked . The town became a regional transportation hub in 1839 with the arrival of the Michigan Central Railroad , and a north — south railway connecting Ann Arbor to Toledo and other markets to the south was established in 1878 . Throughout the 1840s and the 1850s settlers continued to come to Ann Arbor . While the earlier settlers were primarily of British ancestry , the newer settlers also consisted of Germans , Irish , and African @-@ Americans . In 1851 , Ann Arbor was chartered as a city , though the city showed a drop in population during the Depression of 1873 . It was not until the early 1880s that Ann Arbor again saw robust growth , with new immigrants coming from Greece , Italy , Russia , and Poland . Ann Arbor saw increased growth in manufacturing , particularly in milling . Ann Arbor 's Jewish community also grew after the turn of the 20th century , and its first and oldest synagogue , Beth Israel Congregation , was established in 1916 . 
 During the 1960s and 1970s , the city gained a reputation as an important center for liberal politics . Ann Arbor also became a locus for left @-@ wing activism and served as a hub for the civil @-@ rights movement and anti @-@ Vietnam War movement , as well as the student movement . The first major meetings of the national left @-@ wing campus group Students for a Democratic Society took place in Ann Arbor in 1960 ; in 1965 , the city was home to the first U.S. teach @-@ in against the Vietnam War . During the ensuing 15 years , many countercultural and New Left enterprises sprang up and developed large constituencies within the city . These influences washed into municipal politics during the early and mid @-@ 1970s when three members of the Human Rights Party ( HRP ) won city council seats on the strength of the student vote . During their time on the council , HRP representatives fought for measures including pioneering <unk> ordinances , measures <unk> marijuana possession , and a rent @-@ control ordinance ; many of these remain in effect in modified form . Alongside these liberal and left @-@ wing efforts , a small group of conservative institutions were born in Ann Arbor . These include Word of God ( established in 1967 ) , a charismatic inter @-@ denominational movement ; and the Thomas More Law Center ( established in 1999 ) , a religious @-@ conservative advocacy group . 
 Following a 1956 @-@ vote , the city of East Ann Arbor merged with Ann Arbor to encompass the eastern sections of the city . 
 In the past several decades , Ann Arbor has grappled with the effects of sharply rising land values , gentrification , and urban sprawl stretching into outlying countryside . On 4 November 2003 , voters approved a greenbelt plan under which the city government bought development rights on agricultural parcels of land adjacent to Ann Arbor to preserve them from sprawling development . Since then , a vociferous local debate has hinged on how and whether to accommodate and guide development within city limits . Ann Arbor consistently ranks in the " top places to live " lists published by various mainstream media outlets every year . In 2008 , it was ranked by CNNMoney.com 27th out of 100 " America 's best small cities " . And in the year 2010 , Forbes listed Ann Arbor as one of the most liveable cities in the United States of America . 
 = = Geography and cityscape = = 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 28 @.@ 70 square miles ( 74 @.@ 33 km2 ) , of which , 27 @.@ 83 square miles ( 72 @.@ 08 km2 ) of it is land and 0 @.@ 87 square miles ( 2 @.@ 25 km2 ) is water , much of which is part of the Huron River . Ann Arbor is about 35 miles ( 56 km ) west of Detroit . Ann Arbor Charter Township adjoins the city 's north and east sides . Ann Arbor is situated on the Huron River in a productive agricultural and fruit @-@ growing region . The landscape of Ann Arbor consists of hills and valleys , with the terrain becoming steeper near the Huron River . The elevation ranges from about 750 feet ( 230 m ) along the Huron River to 1 @,@ 015 feet ( 309 m ) on the city 's west side , near the intersection of Maple Road and Pauline Blvd . Generally , the west @-@ central and northwestern parts of the city and U @-@ M 's North Campus are the highest parts of the city ; the lowest parts are along the Huron River and in the southeast . Ann Arbor Municipal Airport , which is south of the city at 42 ° 13 @.@ 38 ′ N 83 ° 44 @.@ 74 ′ W , has an elevation of 839 feet ( 256 m ) . 
 Ann Arbor 's " Tree Town " nickname stems from the dense forestation of its parks and residential areas . The city contains more than 50 @,@ 000 trees along its streets and an equal number in parks . In recent years , the emerald ash borer has destroyed many of the city 's approximately 10 @,@ 500 ash trees . The city contains 157 municipal parks ranging from small neighborhood green spots to large recreation areas . Several large city parks and a university park border sections of the Huron River . Fuller Recreation Area , near the University Hospital complex , contains sports fields , pedestrian and bike paths , and swimming pools . The Nichols Arboretum , owned by the University of Michigan , is a 123 @-@ acre ( 50 ha ) arboretum that contains hundreds of plant and tree species . It is on the city 's east side , near the university 's Central Campus . Located across the Huron River just beyond the university 's North Campus is the university 's Matthaei Botanical Gardens , which contains 300 acres of gardens and a large tropical conservatory . 
 The <unk> Shops , Main Street Business District , the State Street Business District , and the South University Business District are commercial areas in downtown Ann Arbor . Three commercial areas south of downtown include the areas near I @-@ 94 and Ann Arbor @-@ Saline Road , Briarwood Mall , and the South Industrial area . Other commercial areas include the <unk> / Washtenaw Avenue and Packard Road merchants on the east side , the Plymouth Road area in the northeast , and the Westgate / West Stadium areas on the west side . Downtown contains a mix of 19th- and early @-@ 20th @-@ century structures and modern @-@ style buildings , as well as a farmers ' market in the <unk> district . The city 's commercial districts are composed mostly of two- to four @-@ story structures , although downtown and the area near Briarwood Mall contain a small number of high @-@ rise buildings . 
 Ann Arbor 's residential neighborhoods contain architectural styles ranging from classic 19th @-@ century and early @-@ 20th @-@ century designs to ranch @-@ style houses . Among these homes are a number of kit houses built in the early 20th century . Contemporary @-@ style houses are farther from the downtown district . Surrounding the University of Michigan campus are houses and apartment complexes occupied primarily by student renters . Tower Plaza , a 26 @-@ story condominium building located between the University of Michigan campus and downtown , is the tallest building in Ann Arbor . The 19th @-@ century buildings and streetscape of the Old West Side neighborhood have been preserved virtually intact ; in 1972 , the district was listed on the National Register of Historic Places , and it is further protected by city ordinances and a nonprofit preservation group . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Ann Arbor has a typically Midwestern humid continental climate ( Köppen Dfa ) , which is influenced by the Great Lakes . There are four distinct seasons : winters are the coldest time of year , with average highs around 34 ° F ( 1 ° C ) ; however , summers have average highs around 81 ° F ( 27 ° C ) with slightly more precipitation . Spring and autumn are transitional between the two . The area experiences lake effect weather , primarily in the form of increased cloudiness during late fall and early winter . The monthly daily average temperature in July is 72 @.@ 6 ° F ( 22 @.@ 6 ° C ) , while the same figure for January is 24 @.@ 5 ° F ( − 4 @.@ 2 ° C ) . Temperatures reach or exceed 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) on 10 days , and drop to or below 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) on 4 @.@ 6 nights . Precipitation tends to be the heaviest during the summer months , but most frequent during winter . Snowfall , which normally occurs from November to April but occasionally starts in October , averages 58 inches ( 147 cm ) per season . The lowest recorded temperature was − 23 ° F ( − 31 ° C ) on 11 February 1885 and the highest recorded temperature was 105 ° F ( 41 ° C ) on 24 July 1934 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the 2010 U.S. Census , there were 113 @,@ 394 people , 45 @,@ 634 households , and 21 @,@ 704 families residing in the city . The population density was 4 @,@ 270 @.@ 33 people per square mile ( <unk> @.@ 47 / km ² ) . There were 49 @,@ 982 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 748 @.@ 0 per square mile ( 675 @.@ 0 / km ² ) , making it less densely populated than inner @-@ ring Detroit suburbs like Oak Park and Ferndale ( and than Detroit proper ) , but more densely populated than outer @-@ ring suburbs like Livonia or Troy . The racial makeup of the city was 73 @.@ 0 % White ( 70 @.@ 4 % non @-@ Hispanic White ) , 7 @.@ 7 % Black or African American , 0 @.@ 3 % Native American , 14 @.@ 4 % Asian , 0 @.@ 0 % Pacific Islander , 1 @.@ 0 % from other races , and 3 @.@ 6 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 4 @.@ 1 % of the population . 
 In 2013 , Ann Arbor had the second @-@ largest community of Japanese citizens in the state of Michigan , numbering 1 @,@ 541 ; this figure trailed only that of Novi , which had 2 @,@ 666 Japanese nationals . In addition , as of 2005 , Ann Arbor has a small population of Arab Americans , including several students as well as local Lebanese and Palestinians . 
 In 2000 , out of 45 @,@ 693 households , 23 @.@ 0 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 37 @.@ 8 % were married couples living together , 7 @.@ 5 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 52 @.@ 5 % were <unk> . 35 @.@ 5 % of households were made up of individuals and 6 @.@ 6 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 22 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 90 . The age distribution was 16 @.@ 8 % under 18 , 26 @.@ 8 % from 18 to 24 , 31 @.@ 2 % from 25 to 44 , 17 @.@ 3 % from 45 to 64 , and 7 @.@ 9 % were 65 or older . The median age was 28 years . For every 100 females there were 97 @.@ 7 males ; while for every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 96 @.@ 4 males . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 46 @,@ 299 , and the median income for a family was $ 71 @,@ 293 ( these figures had risen to $ 51 @,@ 232 and $ 82 @,@ 293 respectively as of a 2007 estimate ) . Males had a median income of $ 48 @,@ 880 versus $ 36 @,@ 561 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 26 @,@ 419 . About 4 @.@ 6 % of families and 16 @.@ 6 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 7 @.@ 3 % of those under age 18 and 5 @.@ 1 % of those age 65 or over . 
 Ann Arbor 's crime rate was below the national average in 2000 . The violent crime rate was further below the national average than the property crime rate ; the two rates were 48 % and 11 % lower than the U.S. average , respectively . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The University of Michigan shapes Ann Arbor 's economy significantly . It employs about 30 @,@ 000 workers , including about 12 @,@ 000 in the medical center . Other employers are drawn to the area by the university 's research and development money , and by its graduates . High tech , health services and biotechnology are other major components of the city 's economy ; numerous medical offices , laboratories , and associated companies are located in the city . Automobile manufacturers , such as General Motors and <unk> , also employ residents . 
 High tech companies have located in the area since the 1930s , when International Radio Corporation introduced the first mass @-@ produced AC / DC radio ( the <unk> , in 1931 ) as well as the first pocket radio ( the <unk> Jr . , in 1933 ) . The Argus camera company , originally a subsidiary of International Radio , manufactured cameras in Ann Arbor from 1936 to the 1960s . Current firms include Arbor Networks ( provider of Internet traffic engineering and security systems ) , <unk> ( provider of XML @-@ based publishing software ) , JSTOR ( the digital scholarly journal archive ) , <unk> ( provider of software and online services for the media industries ) , <unk> Health Analytics , and <unk> , which includes <unk> . Ann Arbor Terminals manufactured a video @-@ display terminal called the Ann Arbor Ambassador during the 1980s . Barracuda Networks , which provides networking , security , and storage products based on network appliances and cloud services , opened an engineering office in Ann Arbor in 2008 on Depot St. and recently announced it will move downtown to occupy the building previously used as the Borders headquarters . 
 Websites and online media companies in or near the city include All Media Guide , the Weather Underground , and <unk> . Ann Arbor is the home to <unk> and the Merit Network , a not @-@ for @-@ profit research and education computer network . Both are located in the South State Commons 2 building on South State Street , which once housed the Michigan Information Technology Center Foundation . The city is also home to the headquarters of Google 's <unk> program — the company 's primary revenue stream . The recent surge in companies operating in Ann Arbor has led to a decrease in its office and flex space vacancy rates . As of 31 December 2012 , the total market vacancy rate for office and flex space is 11 @.@ 80 % , a 1 @.@ 40 % decrease in vacancy from one year previous , and the lowest overall vacancy level since 2003 . The office vacancy rate decreased to 10 @.@ 65 % in 2012 from 12 @.@ 08 % in 2011 , while the flex vacancy rate decreased slightly more , with a drop from 16 @.@ 50 % to 15 @.@ 02 % . 
 Pfizer , once the city 's second largest employer , operated a large pharmaceutical research facility on the northeast side of Ann Arbor . On 22 January 2007 , Pfizer announced it would close operations in Ann Arbor by the end of 2008 . The facility was previously operated by Warner @-@ Lambert and , before that , Parke @-@ Davis . In December 2008 , the University of Michigan Board of Regents approved the purchase of the facilities , and the university anticipates hiring 2 @,@ 000 researchers and staff during the next 10 years . The city is the home of other research and engineering centers , including those of Lotus Engineering , General Dynamics and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) . Other research centers sited in the city are the United States Environmental Protection Agency 's National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory and the Toyota Technical Center . The city is also home to National Sanitation Foundation International ( NSF International ) , the nonprofit non @-@ governmental organization that develops generally accepted standards for a variety of public health related industries and subject areas . 
 Borders Books , started in Ann Arbor , was opened by brothers Tom and Louis Borders in 1971 with a stock of used books . The Borders chain was based in the city , as was its flagship store until it closed in September 2011 . Domino 's Pizza 's headquarters is near Ann Arbor on Domino 's Farms , a 271 @-@ acre ( 110 ha ) Frank Lloyd Wright @-@ inspired complex just northeast of the city . Another Ann Arbor @-@ based company is <unk> 's Delicatessen , which serves sandwiches and has developed businesses under a variety of brand names . <unk> 's has grown into a family of companies which offers a variety of products ( bake shop , mail order , creamery , coffee ) and services ( business education ) . Flint Ink Corp. , another Ann Arbor @-@ based company , was the world 's largest privately held ink manufacturer until it was acquired by Stuttgart @-@ based <unk> Print Solutions in October 2005 . <unk> , a global supplier of aviation fuels and services , is also headquartered in Ann Arbor . <unk> Biosciences , a publicly traded company that develops stem cell treatments for cardiovascular diseases , is headquartered in Ann Arbor . 
 Many cooperative enterprises were founded in the city ; among those that remain are the People 's Food Co @-@ op and the Inter @-@ Cooperative Council at the University of Michigan , a student housing cooperative founded in 1937 . There are also three <unk> communities — <unk> , Great Oak , and Touchstone — located immediately to the west of the city limits . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Several performing arts groups and facilities are on the University of Michigan 's campus , as are museums dedicated to art , archaeology , and natural history and sciences . Founded in 1879 , the University Musical Society is an independent performing arts organization that presents over 60 events each year , bringing international artists in music , dance , and theater . Since 2001 Shakespeare in the <unk> has presented one play by Shakespeare each June , in a large park near downtown . Regional and local performing arts groups not associated with the university include the Ann Arbor Civic Theatre , the Arbor Opera Theater , the Ann Arbor Symphony Orchestra , the Ann Arbor Ballet Theater , the Ann Arbor Civic Ballet ( established in 1954 as Michigan 's first chartered ballet company ) , The Ark , and Performance Network Theatre . Another unique piece of artistic expression in Ann Arbor is the fairy doors . These small portals are examples of installation art and can be found throughout the downtown area . 
 The Ann Arbor Hands @-@ On Museum is located in a renovated and expanded historic downtown fire station . Multiple art galleries exist in the city , notably in the downtown area and around the University of Michigan campus . Aside from a large restaurant scene in the Main Street , South State Street , and South University Avenue areas , Ann Arbor ranks first among U.S. cities in the number of booksellers and books sold per capita . The Ann Arbor District Library maintains four branch outlets in addition to its main downtown building . The city is also home to the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library . 
 Several annual events — many of them centered on performing and visual arts — draw visitors to Ann Arbor . One such event is the Ann Arbor Art Fairs , a set of four concurrent juried fairs held on downtown streets . Scheduled on Thursday through Sunday of the third week of July , the fairs draw upward of half a million visitors . Another is the Ann Arbor Film Festival , held during the third week of March , which receives more than 2 @,@ 500 submissions annually from more than 40 countries and serves as one of a handful of Academy Award – qualifying festivals in the United States . 
 Ann Arbor has a long history of openness to marijuana , given Ann Arbor 's decriminalization of cannabis , the large number of medical marijuana dispensaries in the city ( one dispensary , called People 's Co @-@ op , was directly across the street from Michigan Stadium until zoning forced it to move one mile to the west ) , the large number of pro @-@ marijuana residents , and the annual Hash Bash : an event that is held on the first Saturday of April . Until ( at least ) the successful passage of Michigan 's medical marijuana law , the event had arguably strayed from its initial intent , although for years , a number of attendees have received serious legal responses due to marijuana use on University of Michigan property , which does not fall under the City 's progressive and compassionate ticketing program . 
 Ann Arbor is a major scene of college sports , most notably at the University of Michigan , a member of the Big Ten Conference . Several well @-@ known college sports facilities exist in the city , including Michigan Stadium , the largest American football stadium in the world . The stadium was completed in 1927 and cost more than $ 950 @,@ 000 to build . It has a 107 @,@ 601 seating capacity after multiple renovations were made . The stadium is colloquially known as " The Big House " . Crisler Center and Yost Ice Arena play host to the school 's basketball ( both men 's and women 's ) and ice hockey teams , respectively . Concordia University , a member of the NAIA , also fields sports teams . 
 Ann Arbor is represented in the <unk> by semi @-@ pro soccer team AFC Ann Arbor , a club founded in 2014 who call themselves The Mighty Oak . 
 A person from Ann Arbor is called an " Ann <unk> " , and many long @-@ time residents call themselves " <unk> " . The city itself is often called " A ² " ( " A @-@ squared " ) or " A2 " ( " A two " ) or " AA " , " The Deuce " ( mainly by Chicagoans ) , and " Tree Town " . With tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek reference to the city 's liberal political leanings , some occasionally refer to Ann Arbor as " The People 's Republic of Ann Arbor " or " 25 square miles surrounded by reality " , the latter phrase being adapted from Wisconsin Governor Lee Dreyfus 's description of Madison , Wisconsin . In A Prairie Home Companion broadcast from Ann Arbor , Garrison Keillor described Ann Arbor as " a city where people discuss socialism , but only in the fanciest restaurants . " Ann Arbor sometimes appears on citation indexes as an author , instead of a location , often with the academic degree MI , a misunderstanding of the abbreviation for Michigan . Ann Arbor has become increasingly gentrified in recent years . 
 = = Law and government = = 
 Ann Arbor has a council @-@ manager form of government . The City Council has 11 voting members : the mayor and 10 city council members . The mayor and city council members serve two @-@ year terms : the mayor is elected every even @-@ numbered year , while half of the city council members are up for election annually ( five in even @-@ numbered and five in odd @-@ numbered years ) . Two council members are elected from each of the city 's five wards . The mayor is elected citywide . The mayor is the presiding officer of the City Council and has the power to appoint all Council committee members as well as board and commission members , with the approval of the City Council . The current mayor of Ann Arbor is Christopher Taylor , a Democrat who was elected as mayor in 2014 . Day @-@ to @-@ day city operations are managed by a city administrator chosen by the city council . 
 In 1960 , Ann Arbor voters approved a $ 2 @.@ 3 million bond issue to build the current city hall , which was designed by architect Alden B. Dow . The City Hall opened in 1963 . In 1995 , the building was renamed the Guy C. Larcom , Jr . Municipal Building in honor of the longtime city administrator who championed the building 's construction . 
 Ann Arbor is part of Michigan 's 12th congressional district , represented in Congress by Representative Debbie Dingell , a Democrat . On the state level , the city is part of the 18th district in the Michigan Senate , represented by Democrat Rebekah Warren . In the Michigan House of Representatives , representation is split between the 55th district ( northern Ann Arbor , part of Ann Arbor Township , and other surrounding areas , represented by Democrat Adam <unk> ) , the 53rd district ( most of downtown and the southern half of the city , represented by Democrat Jeff Irwin ) and the 52nd district ( southwestern areas outside Ann Arbor proper and western Washtenaw County , represented by Democrat Gretchen Driskell ) . 
 As the county seat of Washtenaw County , the Washtenaw County Trial Court ( 22nd Circuit Court ) is located in Ann Arbor at the Washtenaw County Courthouse on Main Street . This court has countywide general jurisdiction and has two divisions : the Civil / Criminal ( criminal and civil matters ) and the Family Division ( which includes Juvenile Court , Friend of the Court , and Probate Court sections ) . Seven judges serve on the court . 
 Ann Arbor also has a local state district court ( 15th District Court ) , which serves only the City of Ann Arbor . In Michigan , the state district courts are limited jurisdiction courts which handle traffic violations , civil cases with claims under $ 25 @,@ 000 , landlord @-@ tenant matters , and misdemeanor crimes . 
 The Ann Arbor Federal Building ( attached to a post office ) on Liberty Street serves as one of the courthouses for the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan and Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Left @-@ wing politics have been particularly strong in municipal government since the 1960s . Voters approved charter amendments that have lessened the penalties for possession of marijuana ( 1974 ) , and that aim to protect access to abortion in the city should it ever become illegal in the State of Michigan ( 1990 ) . In 1974 , Kathy <unk> 's victory in an Ann Arbor city @-@ council race made her the country 's first openly homosexual candidate to win public office . In 1975 , Ann Arbor became the first U.S. city to use instant @-@ runoff voting for a mayoral race . Adopted through a ballot initiative sponsored by the local Human Rights Party , which feared a splintering of the liberal vote , the process was repealed in 1976 after use in only one election . As of May 2016 , Democrats hold the mayorship and nine out of the ten council seats . Nationally , Ann Arbor is located in Michigan 's 12th congressional district , represented by Democrat Debbie Dingell . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Primary and secondary education = = = 
 Public schools are part of the Ann Arbor Public Schools ( AAPS ) district . AAPS has one of the country 's leading music programs . In September 2008 , 16 @,@ 539 students had been enrolled in the Ann Arbor Public Schools . There were 21 elementary schools , five middle schools ( Forsythe , Slauson , Tappan , Scarlett , and Clague ) three traditional high schools ( Pioneer , Huron , and Skyline ) , and three alternative high schools ( Community High , Stone School , and Roberto Clemente ) in the district . The district also operates a K @-@ 8 open school program , Ann Arbor Open School , out of the former Mack School . This program is open to all families who live within the district . Ann Arbor Public Schools also operates a preschool and family center , with programs for at @-@ risk infants and children before kindergarten . The district has a preschool center with both free and tuition @-@ based programs for preschoolers in the district . 
 Ann Arbor is home to several private schools , including the Rudolf Steiner School of Ann Arbor , Clonlara School , Michigan Islamic Academy , and <unk> School , a prep school . The city is also home to several charter schools such as Central Academy ( PreK @-@ 12 ) of the Global Educational Excellence ( GEE ) charter school company , and Honey Creek Community School . 
 = = = Higher education = = = 
 The University of Michigan dominates the city of Ann Arbor , providing the city with its distinctive college @-@ town character . 
 Other local colleges and universities include Concordia University Ann Arbor , a Lutheran liberal @-@ arts institution ; a campus of the University of Phoenix ; and Cleary University , a private business school . Washtenaw Community College is located in neighboring Ann Arbor Township . In 2000 , the Ave Maria School of Law , a Roman Catholic law school established by Domino 's Pizza founder Tom Monaghan , opened in northeastern Ann Arbor , but the school moved to Ave Maria , Florida in 2009 , and the Thomas M. Cooley Law School acquired the former Ave Maria buildings for use as a branch campus . 
 = = Media = = 
 The Ann Arbor News , owned by the Michigan @-@ based Booth Newspapers chain , is the major daily newspaper serving Ann Arbor and the rest of Washtenaw County . The newspaper ended its 174 @-@ year print run in 2009 , due to economic difficulties . It was replaced by AnnArbor.com , but returned to a limited print publication under its former name in 2013 . Another Ann Arbor @-@ based publication that has ceased production was the Ann Arbor Paper , a free monthly . Ann Arbor has been said to be the first significant city to lose its only daily paper . The Ann Arbor Chronicle , an online newspaper , covered local news , including meetings of the library board , county commission , and DDA until September 3 , 2014 . 
 Current publications in the city include the Ann Arbor Journal ( A2 Journal ) , a weekly community newspaper ; the Ann Arbor Observer , a free monthly local magazine ; the Ann Arbor Independent , a locally owned , independent weekly ; and Current , a free entertainment @-@ focused alt @-@ weekly . The Ann Arbor Business Review covers local business in the area . Car and Driver magazine and Automobile Magazine are also based in Ann Arbor . The University of Michigan is served by many student publications , including the independent Michigan Daily student newspaper , which reports on local , state , and regional issues in addition to campus news . 
 Four major AM radio stations based in or near Ann Arbor are <unk> 1600 , a conservative news and talk station ; <unk> 1290 , a business news and talk station ; <unk> 990 , Catholic radio ; and <unk> 1050 , which is primarily a sports station . The city 's FM stations include NPR affiliate <unk> 91 @.@ 7 ; country station WWWW 102 @.@ 9 ; and adult @-@ alternative station <unk> 107 @.@ 1 . Freeform station <unk> @-@ FM 88 @.@ 3 is a local community radio / college radio station operated by the students of the University of Michigan featuring noncommercial , eclectic music and public @-@ affairs programming . The city is also served by public and commercial radio broadcasters in Ypsilanti , the Lansing / Jackson area , Detroit , Windsor , and Toledo . 
 <unk> channel 31 , an affiliate of the ION Television network , is licensed to the city . <unk> channel 18 , a MyNetworkTV @-@ affiliated station for the Lansing market , broadcasts from a transmitter in Lyndon Township , west of Ann Arbor . Community Television Network ( <unk> ) is a city @-@ provided cable television channel with production facilities open to city residents and nonprofit organizations . Detroit and Toledo @-@ area radio and television stations also serve Ann Arbor , and stations from Lansing and Windsor , Ontario , can be heard in parts of the area . 
 = = Health and utilities = = 
 The University of Michigan Medical Center , the only teaching hospital in the city , took the number 1 slot in U.S. News & World Report for best hospital in the state of Michigan , as of 2015 . The University of Michigan Health System ( <unk> ) includes University Hospital , C.S. Mott Children 's Hospital and Women 's Hospital in its core complex . <unk> also operates out @-@ patient clinics and facilities throughout the city . The area 's other major medical centers include a large facility operated by the Department of Veterans Affairs in Ann Arbor , and Saint Joseph Mercy Hospital in nearby Superior Township . 
 The city provides sewage disposal and water supply services , with water coming from the Huron River and groundwater sources . There are two water @-@ treatment plants , one main and three outlying reservoirs , four pump stations , and two water towers . These facilities serve the city , which is divided into five water districts . The city 's water department also operates four dams along the Huron River , two of which provide hydroelectric power . The city also offers waste management services , with Recycle Ann Arbor handling recycling service . Other utilities are provided by private entities . Electrical power and gas are provided by DTE Energy . AT & T Inc. is the primary wired telephone service provider for the area . Cable TV service is primarily provided by Comcast . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 = = = Surface roads and paths = = = 
 The streets in downtown Ann Arbor conform to a grid pattern , though this pattern is less common in the surrounding areas . Major roads branch out from the downtown district like spokes on a wheel to the highways surrounding the city . The city is belted by three freeways : I @-@ 94 , which runs along the southern portion of the city ; U.S. Highway 23 ( US 23 ) , which primarily runs along the eastern edge of Ann Arbor ; and M @-@ 14 , which runs along the northern edge of the city . Other nearby highways include US 12 , M @-@ 17 , and M @-@ 153 . Several of the major surface arteries lead to the I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 14 interchange in the west , US 23 in the east , and the city 's southern areas . The city also has a system of bike routes and paths and includes the nearly complete Washtenaw County Border @-@ to @-@ Border Trail . 
 = = = Bus service = = = 
 The Ann Arbor Area Transportation Authority ( <unk> ) , which brands itself as " The Ride " , operates public bus services throughout the city and nearby Ypsilanti . A separate zero @-@ fare bus service operates within and between the University of Michigan campuses . Since April 2012 , route 787 ( the " <unk> " ) connects to Detroit Metro Airport a dozen times a day . There are also limited @-@ stop bus services between Ann Arbor and Chelsea as well as Canton . These two routes , 710 and 711 respectively , are known as the " <unk> " . The Michigan Flyer , a service operated by Indian Trails , cooperates with <unk> for their <unk> and additionally offers bus service to East Lansing . 
 Greyhound Lines provides out @-@ of @-@ town bus service from 115 E. William , across the street from the Blake Transit Center . Megabus has twice daily direct service to Chicago , Illinois , while a bus service is provided by Amtrak for rail passengers making connections to services in East Lansing and Toledo , Ohio . 
 = = = Airports = = = 
 Ann Arbor Municipal Airport is a small , city @-@ run general aviation airport located south of I @-@ 94 . Detroit Metropolitan Airport , the area 's large international airport , is about 25 miles ( 40 km ) east of the city , in Romulus . Willow Run Airport east of the city near Ypsilanti serves freight , corporate , and general aviation clients . 
 = = = Railroads = = = 
 The city was a major rail hub , notably for freight traffic between Toledo and ports north of Chicago , Illinois , from 1878 to 1982 ; however , the Ann Arbor Railroad also provided passenger service from 1878 to 1950 . The city was served by the Michigan Central Railroad starting in 1837 . The Ann Arbor and Ypsilanti Street Railway , Michigan 's first interurban , served the city from 1891 to 1929 . 
 Amtrak , which provides service to the city at the Ann Arbor Train Station , operates the Wolverine train between Chicago and Pontiac , via Detroit . The present @-@ day train station neighbors the city 's old Michigan Central Depot , which was renovated as a restaurant in 1970 . 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Ann Arbor has seven sister cities : 
 Tübingen , Germany ( since 1965 ) 
 Belize City , Belize ( since 1967 ) 
 Hikone , Shiga , Japan ( since 1969 ) 
 The schools in Ann Arbor and Hikone have regular exchanges . 
 Peterborough , Ontario , Canada ( since 1983 ) 
 <unk> , <unk> , Nicaragua ( since 1986 ) 
 Dakar , Senegal ( since 1997 ) 
 Remedios , Cuba ( since 2003 ) 
 = Sava = 
 The Sava ( Slovene pronunciation : [ <unk> ] , Serbo @-@ Croatian : [ <unk> ] , Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> ) is a river in Central Europe , a right side tributary of the Danube . It flows through Slovenia , Croatia , along the northern border of Bosnia and Herzegovina , through Serbia , discharging into the Danube in Belgrade . Its central part is a natural border of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina and Croatia . The Sava forms the northern border of the Balkan Peninsula , and southern edge of the Pannonian Plain . 
 The Sava is 990 kilometres ( 615 miles ) long , including the 45 @-@ kilometre ( 28 mi ) Sava Dolinka headwater rising in Zelenci , Slovenia . It is the greatest tributary of the Danube by volume of water , and second @-@ largest after Tisza in terms of catchment area ( 97 @,@ 713 square kilometres ( 37 @,@ 727 square miles ) ) and length . It drains a significant portion of the Dinaric Alps region , through the major tributaries of Drina , Bosna , Kupa , Una , Vrbas , Lonja , Kolubara , Bosut and Krka . The Sava is one of the longest rivers in Europe and among a handful of European rivers of that length that do not drain directly into a sea . 
 The population in the Sava River basin is estimated at 8 @,@ 176 @,@ 000 , and it connects three national capitals — Ljubljana , Zagreb and Belgrade . The Sava is navigable for larger vessels from the confluence of the Kupa River in Sisak , Croatia , approximately two @-@ thirds of its length . 
 = = Course = = 
 The Sava is located in Southeast Europe , flowing through Slovenia , Croatia , Serbia and along the Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina border . Its total length is 990 kilometres ( 615 miles ) , including the 45 @-@ kilometre ( 28 mi ) Sava Dolinka and the 945 @-@ kilometre ( 587 mi ) Sava proper . As a right tributary of the Danube , the river belongs to the Black Sea drainage basin . The Sava River is the third longest tributary of the Danube , slightly shorter than the 966 @-@ kilometre ( 600 mi ) Tisza and the 950 @-@ kilometre ( 590 mi ) Prut — the Danube 's two longest tributaries — when the Sava Dolinka headwater is excluded from its course . It is also the largest tributary of the Danube by discharge . The river course is sometimes used to describe the northern boundary of the Balkans , and the southern border of the Central Europe . Before the breakup of Yugoslavia in 1991 , the river was located completely inside Yugoslav borders and it was the longest river with its entire course within the country . 
 = = = From source to the Sutla = = = 
 The Sava Dolinka rises in the Zelenci Pools , west of <unk> in the Upper Carniola region of Slovenia at 833 metres ( 2 @,@ 733 feet ) above sea level ( a.s.l. ) , and flows east , past <unk> Gora to Jesenice , where it turns southeast . At <unk> , the river enters the Ljubljana Basin and encounters the first hydroelectric dam — <unk> plant — before proceeding to the east of the glacial Lake Bled towards Radovljica and confluence of the Sava Bohinjka , at 411 metres ( 1 @,@ 348 feet ) a.s.l. Downstream of Radovljica , the Sava proceeds southeast towards Kranj . Between Kranj and Medvode , its course comprises the Lake <unk> and the Lake <unk> reservoirs , built for the <unk> and the Medvode power plants . 
 The Sava then flows through the capital of Slovenia , Ljubljana , where another reservoir is located on the river , adjacent to the Tacen Whitewater Course . There the river course turns east and leaves the Ljubljana Basin via <unk> , at 261 metres ( 856 feet ) a.s.l. ( at confluence of the Ljubljanica and the Kamnik Bistrica ) . The course continues through the Sava Hills , where it passes the <unk> Basin with the mining and industrial town of <unk> , the Central Sava Valley with the mining towns of Zagorje ob Savi , <unk> , and <unk> , turns to the southeast and runs through the Lower Sava Valley with the towns of <unk> , <unk> , and Krško . The course through the Sava Hills forms the boundary of traditional regions of Lower Carniola and Styria , At <unk> , the Vrhovo hydroelectric dam reservoir is located . The latter is site of the Krško Nuclear Power Plant , which uses the Sava River water to dissipate excess heat . The easternmost stretch of the Sava River course in Slovenia runs to the south of Brežice , where it is joined by the Krka , and the river ultimately becomes a border river between Slovenia and Croatia , marking 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 miles ) of their border near confluence of the Sutla ( Slovene : <unk> ) . At that point , the Sava reaches 132 metres ( 433 feet ) a.s.l. after flowing 221 kilometres ( 137 miles ) through Slovenia and along its border . 
 = = = From the Sutla to the Una = = = 
 The westernmost part of the 562 @-@ kilometre ( 349 mi ) Sava River course in Croatia , takes the river east , through the western part of the Zagreb County , between Samobor and Zaprešić . The area encompasses forests interspersed by marshes and lakes formed in gravel pits . As the Sava approaches the capital of Croatia , Zagreb , the marshes give way to urban landscape , but there are surviving examples of the gravel pit lakes , such as the <unk> , and the <unk> within the city . At the western outskirts of Zagreb , there is the western terminus of the 32 @-@ kilometre ( 20 mi ) Sava – Odra flood @-@ relief canal connecting the Sava to the Odra River plain which is intended to act as flood control retention basin . The canal has been built in response to the most destructive flooding of the river that occurred in Zagreb in 1964 , when one third of the city was flooded and 17 people were killed . The city itself marks the western extent of the Sava River basin area especially prone to flooding , spanning from Zagreb to confluence of the river in Belgrade , Serbia . 
 East of Zagreb , the river turns southeast again further through the Central Croatia , to the Sisak @-@ Moslavina County , the city of Sisak , reaching 91 @.@ 3 metres ( 300 feet ) a.s.l. The city of Sisak marks the westernmost extent of the Sava River navigable to larger vessels . Navigation conditions on the river are poor due to limited draft and fairway width , meandering of the river , bridge clearance restrictions , poor fairway markings as well as presence of sunken vessels and other objects , including unexploded ordnance . The ordnance is left over from various conflicts including the World War II , Croatian War of Independence , Bosnian War , and the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia . Before reaching confluence of Una at Jasenovac and 86 @.@ 8 metres ( 285 feet ) a.s.l , the Sava River traces Lonjsko polje Nature Park , encompassing marshes frequently flooded by the Sava and its tributaries in the area . 
 = = = From the Una to the Drina = = = 
 Downstream of confluence of the Una River , the Sava is once again tracing an international border — between Croatia and Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . Its meandering course turns generally eastwards along Gradiška , and Slavonski Brod to Županja , where it turns south to Brčko . There , the river resumes its predominantly eastward course towards Sremska Rača and confluence of the Drina River . The right bank of the Sava , in this segment of its course , belongs to Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina ( with Bosnia 's all three administrative entities , Republika Srpska , Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Brčko District , having gateway to the river ) , while the opposite bank belongs to Croatia and its Sisak @-@ Moslavina , Brod @-@ Posavina and Vukovar @-@ Srijem counties , except in the area of Jamena and further downstream — which belongs to Serbia and the province of Vojvodina . No cities in this segment of the course span the river as it represents an international frontier , but there are adjacent settlements located in two different countries , divided by the Sava . Those include Gradiška , Brod and Brčko in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina and Stara Gradiška , Slavonski Brod and Gunja in Croatia opposite them . 
 The 337 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometre ( 209 @.@ 5 mi ) segment between the Una and the Drina confluences , marking corresponding to the entire length of the Sava flowing along the border of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , exhibits small change of elevation — from 86 @.@ 8 metres ( 285 feet ) a.s.l at Jasenovac to 76 @.@ 6 metres ( 251 feet ) a.s.l. at Brčko gauges , over 287 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 178 @.@ 6 miles ) of the river between them . The entire course of the river downstream from Zagreb flows down 0 @.@ 4 ‰ slope on average , significantly less steep than the course in Slovenia , where the average slope exceeds 0 @.@ 7 ‰ — resulting in the Sava 's meandering course running through a wide plain bordered by wetlands . 
 = = = From the Drina to the Danube = = = 
 Downstream from confluence of the Drina , the Sava River changes its eastward course to northeast , until it reaches Sremska Mitrovica , from where it flows to the southeast and then south to Šabac , before finally turning east towards Belgrade . Most of the river 's course in Serbia represents a border between province of Vojvodina , on the left bank , and Central Serbia , on the right bank . Exceptions to that are in area around Sremska Mitrovica , where both banks are in Vojvodina , and downstream of <unk> suburb of Belgrade where both banks are in Central Serbia . The river meanders and forms wetlands in there as well — the most significant wetland among them centering on <unk> bara oxbow lake . The Sava River forms several large islands in this segment of the course , with the largest among them — 800 @-@ hectare ( 2 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ) Ada Ciganlija in Belgrade — connected to the right bank by a pair of artificial embankment dams forming Lake Sava since 1967 . 
 The Sava discharges into the Danube , after reaching 68 @.@ 3 metres ( 224 feet ) a.s.l. as its right tributary at the Great War Island off the easternmost tip of Syrmia in Belgrade , 1 @,@ 169 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 726 @.@ 9 miles ) away from the Danube 's confluence and the Black Sea . 
 = = = Settlements = = = 
 Population in the Sava River basin is estimated at 8 @,@ 176 @,@ 000 , and it includes four capitals — Belgrade , Ljubljana , Sarajevo and Zagreb . All of them , except Sarajevo , are also located directly on the river banks and represent the three largest settlements found along the Sava River course . Belgrade , located at the confluence of the river , is the largest city in the basin with urban population of 1 @,@ 135 @,@ 502 . Ten municipalities where the city is situated have combined population of 1 @,@ 283 @,@ 783 as suburban settlements are added , while the Belgrade metropolitan area encompasses population of 1 @,@ 639 @,@ 121 . Zagreb is the second largest city on the river , comprising population of 688 @,@ 163 living in the city itself , and 790 @,@ 017 in the city @-@ administered area . Together with the Zagreb County , largely corresponding to various definitions of the city 's metropolitan area , it has a combined population of 1 @,@ 110 @,@ 517 . Ljubljana is the third @-@ largest city on the banks of the Sava , encompassing population of 258 @,@ 873 living in the city itself and 265 @,@ 881 in the city @-@ governed area . 
 The largest city in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina situated on the Sava River course is Brčko , whose urban population is estimated at 40 @,@ 000 . Other cities along the river , with populations of 20 @,@ 000 and larger , are Slavonski Brod ( 53 @,@ 473 ) , Šabac ( 52 @,@ 822 ) , Sremska Mitrovica ( 37 @,@ 586 ) , Kranj ( 35 @,@ 587 ) , Sisak ( 33 @,@ 049 ) , Obrenovac ( 24 @,@ 568 ) , and Gradiška ( est . 20 @,@ 000 ) . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The Sava River basin covers a total area of 97 @,@ 713 @.@ 2 square kilometres ( 37 @,@ 727 @.@ 3 square miles ) making it the second largest Danube tributary catchment by area size , surpassed only by the Tisza basin , and it encompasses 12 % of the Danube basin , draining into the Black Sea . The Sava represents the third longest tributary of the Danube and its largest tributary by discharge . The catchment area borders the remainder of the Danube basin to the north and east , and the Adriatic Sea basin to the west and south . The river basin generally consists of parts of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , Croatia , Montenegro , Serbia and Slovenia , with a very small part of the catchment area belonging to Albania . Topography of the basin varies significantly . Upstream portion of the basin is more rugged than downstream one , but asymmetry of the basin topography is particularly apparent when comparing right and left bank areas — the former dominated by the Alps and the Dinarides reaching elevations in excess of 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 feet ) a.s.l , while the latter is dominated by the Pannonian Plain . The mean elevation of the basin is 545 metres ( 1 @,@ 788 feet ) a.s.l. 
 = = = Major tributaries = = = 
 The most important tributaries of the Sava River found in its upper basin are characterized by relatively steep grades of flow , high flow velocities and rapids . Those are left tributaries : the <unk> , the Kamnik Bistrica and the Savinja ; and right tributaries : the Sora , the Ljubljanica and the Krka ( Sava ) . Further downstream larger rivers empty into the Sava , as the right bank of the basin grows steadily . Right tributaries in this lower segment of the basin start as fast flowing courses , only to slow down as they enter the Pannonian Basin . They include the Kupa , the Una , the Vrbas , the <unk> , the Bosna , the <unk> , the <unk> , the Drina and the Kolubara . Left tributaries in the lower segment drain plains consequently exhibiting less steep course grades , lower flow rates and meandering . They include the Sutla , the Krapina , the Lonja , the <unk> , the <unk> and the Bosut . 
 The 346 @-@ kilometre ( 215 mi ) Drina is the largest tributary of the Sava , flowing in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina and along border of the country and Serbia . It is formed by the headwaters of the Tara and the Piva at the border of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina and Montenegro , near <unk> Polje . Its 20 @,@ 319 @.@ 9 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 7 @,@ 845 @.@ 6 sq mi ) catchment extends across parts of four countries — reaching as far south as Albania . The Bosna and the Kupa river basins are the second and third largest catchments of the Sava tributaries , each surpassing 10 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 3 @,@ 900 square miles ) in size . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 The average annual flow rate of the Sava River at Radovljica , immediately downstream of the Sava Dolinka and the Sava Bohinjka confluence , stands at 44 @.@ 9 cubic metres ( 1 @,@ 590 cubic feet ) per second . Downstream of the Krka confluence the average flow rate reaches 317 cubic metres ( 11 @,@ 200 cubic feet ) per second , gradually increasing as tributaries discharge along the course — 340 cubic metres ( 12 @,@ 000 cubic feet ) per second downstream of the Sutla , 880 cubic metres ( 31 @,@ 000 cubic feet ) per second following discharge of the Kupa and the Una , 990 cubic metres ( 35 @,@ 000 cubic feet ) per second downstream of the Vrbas confluence , 1 @,@ 180 cubic metres ( 42 @,@ 000 cubic feet ) per second after the Bosna river empties into the Sava , and finally of 1 @,@ 564 cubic metres ( 55 @,@ 200 cubic feet ) per second at confluence of the Sava in Belgrade . The highest flow rate of 6 @,@ 007 cubic metres ( 212 @,@ 100 cubic feet ) per second was recorded by Slavonski Šamac gauging station in May 2014 . 
 Seven out of eight largest reservoirs in the Sava River basin are located in the Drina catchment , the largest among them being the 0 @.@ 88 @-@ cubic @-@ kilometre ( 0 @.@ 21 cu mi ) Lake Piva on the eponymous river in Montenegro , created after construction of <unk> Dam . Overall , there are 22 reservoirs holding more than 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 180 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic feet ) of water in the basin , with only four of them situated directly on the Sava , including one on the Sava Dolinka . Most of the reservoirs are used primarily , or even exclusively , for electricity generation , but they are also used as supply of drinking water , industrial water source , for irrigation and food production . 
 Groundwater is a very important resource in the Sava River basin , generally used for public water supply of potable water , as a source of water for industrial use , but also as the mainstay of aquatic ecosystems . There are 41 identified significant groundwater bodies in the Sava River basin of basin @-@ wide importance , ranging in area size from 97 to 5 @,@ 186 square kilometres ( 37 to 2 @,@ 002 square miles ) , as well as numerous minor ground water bodies . Even though most of them are <unk> waters , eleven are considered to be largely located in Slovenia , fourteen in Croatia , seven in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , five in Serbia and four in Montenegro . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The course of the Sava River runs through several diverse geological units and orographic regions . The uppermost course of the river and its headwaters in the <unk> area , is situated in the Southern Alps , tracing the Sava Fault — itself running parallel to the <unk> <unk> . Mesozoic and Upper Triassic rocks are exposed in the region . The Ljubljana Basin represents the boundary of the Southern Alps and the Dinarides . Valleys of the Sava Dolinka and the Sava Bohinjka are glacial valleys , carved out by the Sava Dolinka and <unk> glaciers advancing down <unk> range to vicinity of present @-@ day Radovljica . In the late Pleistocene , <unk> Glacier was the largest glacier in the territory of present @-@ day Slovenia , up to 900 metres ( 3 @,@ 000 feet ) thick . Sava Folds , southeast and east of the Ljubljana Basin are thought of as a part of the Dinarides , separating the Ljubljana and Krško Basins , and forming the Sava Hills . The east – west oriented folds are younger than the Miocene and the folding is considered to had taken place in the Pliocene and the Quaternary , but it is possible that the tectonic activity continues in the present day . The Sava Folds largely exhibit Paleozoic and Triassic rocks , and clastic sediments . 
 The lower course of the Sava River is located in the Pannonian Basin — first reached by the Sava River in the Krško Basin on the western rim of the Pannonian Basin . The Pannonian Basin took shape through Miocenian thinning and subsidence of crust structures formed during Late Paleozoic Variscan orogeny . The Paleozoic and Mesozoic structures are visible in Papuk and other Slavonian mountains . The processes also led to the formation of a stratovolcanic chain in the basin 17 – 12 Mya ( million years ago ) and intensified subsidence observed until 5 Mya as well as flood basalts about 7 @.@ 5 Mya . Contemporary uplift of the Carpathian Mountains prevented water flowing to the Black Sea , and the Pannonian Sea formed in the basin . Sediments were transported to the basin from uplifting Carpathian and Dinaric mountains , with particularly deep fluvial sediments being deposited in the Pleistocene during the uplift of the Transdanubian Mountains . Ultimately , up to 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 feet ) of the sediment was deposited in the basin , and the Pannonian sea eventually drained through the Iron Gate gorge . In the southern Pannonian Basin , the Neogene to Quaternary sediment depth is normally lower , averaging 500 to 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 to 4 @,@ 900 feet ) , except in central parts of depressions formed by subduction . A subduction zone formed in the present @-@ day Sava River valley , and approximately 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 000 feet ) deep sediments were deposited in the Slavonia @-@ Syrmia depression and 5 @,@ 500 metres ( 18 @,@ 000 feet ) in the Sava depression . The results of those processes are large plains in the Sava River valley and the Kupa River valley . The plains are interspersed by the horst and graben structures , believed to have broken the Pannonian Sea surface as islands , which became watershed between Drava and Sava River basins extending along <unk> – <unk> – Bilogora – Papuk mountain chain . The Papuk Mountain is flanked by the Krndija and the Dilj Hills on the eastern rim of the Požega Valley . The Bilogora , Papuk and Krndija Mountains consist mostly of Paleozoic rocks which are 300 – 350 million years old , while the Dilj consists of much more recent Neogene rocks , 2 – 18 million years old . Further east of the chain , the watershed runs through the Đakovo – Vinkovci and Vukovar Plateau . The loess plateau , extending eastward from Dilj and representing the watershed between the Vuka and Bosut rivers , gradually rises to the Fruška Gora south of Ilok . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Electric power generation = = = 
 There are 18 hydroelectric power plants with power generation capacity exceeding 10 Megawatts in the Sava River basin . In Slovenia , most of them are located on the Sava itself . In other countries , the hydroelectric power plants are situated on its tributaries . Total power generation capacity of the 18 power plants , and additional smaller plants largely found in Slovenia , amounts to 41 @,@ 542 Megawatts , and their annual production capacity stands at 2 @,@ 497 Gigawatt @-@ hours . Approximately 3 @.@ 3 cubic kilometres ( 0 @.@ 79 cubic miles ) of water per year in the river 's basin is used to cool thermoelectric and nuclear power plants . Power plant cooling represents the main type of use of the Sava River waters . 
 As of October 2012 , there are six existing hydroelectric power plants built along the Sava River . Upstream of Ljubljana there are <unk> , <unk> and Medvode power plants , while Vrhovo , <unk> and Blanca are located downstream of the capital . There is one additional plant under construction near Krško . The Krško hydroelectric power plant , as well as two additional plants planned on the Sava River course downstream of Ljubljana — Brežice and <unk> — should be completed by 2018 . The power plants downstream of Ljubljana , except Vrhovo , are developed as a chain of five Slovenia 's Lower Sava Valley plants since 2002 . They will have production capacity of 2 @,@ 000 Gigawatt @-@ hours per year and 570 Megawatts of installed capacity . Completion of the five power plants is expected to cost 700 million Euros . There are also plans for construction of ten new powerplants in the middle Sava valley HE <unk> , HE <unk> , HE <unk> , HE <unk> , HE <unk> , HE <unk> , HE <unk> , HE <unk> , HE <unk> and HE Tacen . Croatia is planning construction of four hydroelectric power plants on the Sava River in Zagreb area . The four plants — Podsused , <unk> , Zagreb and <unk> — are scheduled to be completed by 2021 at a cost of 800 million Euros . The four power plants will have installed capacity of 122 Megawatts and annual production capacity of 610 Gigawatt @-@ hours . 
 = = = Water supply and food production = = = 
 Use of water for public water supply in the Sava River basin is estimated at 783 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 2 @.@ 77 × 1010 cubic feet ) per year , and another 289 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 1 @.@ 02 × 1010 cubic feet ) of water per year is used for industrial production purposes . Use of water for agriculture in the Sava River basin is relatively high , but most of it is applied in non @-@ consumptive uses , such as fish farming . Use of water for irrigation is relatively low , estimated at 30 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 1 @.@ 1 × 109 cubic feet ) per year . Commercial fishing on the Sava River is in decline since the middle of the 20th century . In 1978 , there were only 97 commercial fishermen there , while recreational fishing became dominant . The decline became more rapid during the wars in Croatia and Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , reducing quantity of fish caught in the river to approximately one third of the pre @-@ war catches which ranged from 719 to 988 tonnes ( 708 to 972 long tons ; 793 to 1 @,@ 089 short tons ) between 1979 and 1990 . The International Sava River Basin Commission ( <unk> ) , a cooperative body established by Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , Croatia , Slovenia and Serbia and Montenegro in 2005 , is tasked with establishment of sustainable management of surface water and groundwater resources in the Sava River basin . 
 = = = Navigation and ports = = = 
 The Sava is navigable to larger vessels for 593 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 369 @.@ 0 miles ) between its confluence with the Danube in Belgrade , Serbia and Galdovo Bridge in Sisak , Croatia , 2 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 7 miles ) upstream from confluence of Sava and Kupa rivers . The confluence marks the westernmost point of the river course designated as a Class IV international waterway in compliance with the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 's European Agreement on Main Inland Waterways of International Importance ( AGN ) . The classification means that the river course between Sisak and Belgrade is navigable to ships of the maximum length of 80 to 85 metres ( 262 to 279 feet ) , the maximum beam of 9 @.@ 5 metres ( 31 feet ) , the maximum draught of 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 feet 2 inches ) and tonnage up to 1 @,@ 500 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 500 long tons ; 1 @,@ 700 short tons ) . The Sava River downstream of Sisak , is designated as European waterway E 80 @-@ 12 , branching off from the E 80 waterway spanning the Danube and Le Havre via the Rhine . The largest ports on the Sava River are Brčko and Šamac in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , Sisak and Slavonski Brod in Croatia , and Šabac and Sremska Mitrovica in Serbia . 
 As of 2008 , 24 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 15 @.@ 2 miles ) of the river course between Slavonski Šamac and Oprisavci , as well as additional 219 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 136 @.@ 6 miles ) between Slavonski Brod and Sisak , are considered by Croatia 's Ministry of Maritime Affairs , Transport and Infrastructure to fail the Class IV criteria , permitting navigation of vessels up to 1 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 980 long tons ; 1 @,@ 100 short tons ) only , complying with the AGN 's Category III . The Slavonski Šamac – Oprisavci section is especially troublesome for navigation as it offers 250 centimetres ( 98 inches ) draught in less than 50 % of an average hydrological year , causing navigation to cease each summer . Similar interruptions are less frequent elsewhere on the river , occurring 30 days a year on average upstream from Oprisavci , and even more rarely downstream from Slavonski Šamac . 
 The restricted draft and fairway is compounded with meandering of the river 's course — limiting length of vessels — and low bridge clearance . Further problems are incurred through poor transport infrastructure along the route , including poor navigation markings , and presence of sunken vessels and unexploded munitions . Navigation along further 68 kilometres ( 42 miles ) of the river upstream to Rugvica near Zagreb is possible for vessels with tonnage below 1 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 980 long tons ; 1 @,@ 100 short tons ) , and the section of the river belongs to the AGN 's Category II . There are plans for restoration of the Category IV compliant waterway downstream of Sisak and betterment of navigation infrastructure between Sisak and Rugvica , as well as upgrading of the waterway between Brčko and Belgrade to Category Va , matching that of the Danube , with uninterrupted navigation through the year . The plan is planned to be supported by the European Union and as of October 2012 , an agreement to implement the plan was signed by Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina and Croatia , while Serbia is invited to join the project . The plan aims to increase safety and volume of river transport , which declined by about 70 % since the breakup of Yugoslavia , largely because of poor maintenance of the route . The <unk> is tasked with establishment of an international regime of navigation on the river since 2005 . 
 = = = Road , rail and pipeline transport = = = 
 The Sava River valley is also a route for road and rail traffic . The river valley routes are a part of the Pan @-@ European Corridor X , and forming junctions with Pan @-@ European Corridors V , Vb , Vc , Xa and <unk> in area of Ljubljana ( V ) , Zagreb ( Vb , Xa ) , Slavonski Šamac ( Vc ) , and Belgrade ( <unk> ) . The motorways forming the Pan @-@ European Corridor X in the area — Slovenia 's A2 , Croatia 's A3 and Serbia 's A1 motorways — represent a part of European route E70 Bordeaux – Turin – Ljubljana – Zagreb – Belgrade – Bucharest , and the European route E61 Villach – Ljubljana – Trieste – Rijeka . A largely double track railroad with a railway electrification system is also a part of the Corridor X. The railroad was a part of the Simplon @-@ Orient @-@ Express and Direct @-@ Orient @-@ Express routes . The navigable river course between Belgrade and Galdovo north of Sisak is spanned by 25 bridges . The Sava River valley east of Sisak is also used as a route for the Jadranski naftovod , a crude oil pipeline . The system connects the Port of Rijeka oil terminal to oil refineries in Rijeka and Sisak , to Brod in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , as well as Novi Sad and Pančevo in Serbia . 
 = = Environment = = 
 = = = Pollution = = = 
 The main pressure on the Sava River basin environment is generated by activities of urban population in the basin . Even though nearly all population centres generating pollution above 10 @,@ 000 population equivalent ( PE ) have some sort of sewage treatment in place , less than a quarter of them are adequate . Wastewater from 86 % of Sava River basin settlements , generating more than 2 @,@ 000 PE , goes untreated . Pollution levels vary along the river . The best conditions in terms of the wastewater treatment are found in Slovenia , although the existing facilities are inadequate . 
 In Serbia , on the other hand , 68 % of population centres have no wastewater treatment facilities at all . Population centres exceeding 2 @,@ 000 PE directly discharge into the Sava River basin 's surface waters 11 @,@ 112 tonnes of nitrogen and 2 @,@ 642 tonnes of phosphorus . 
 Agriculture is another significant source of the Sava River basin surface water pollution , specifically through livestock manure production . It is estimated that the nutrient pollution levels generated by manure production equal 32 @,@ 394 tonnes of nitrogen and 3 @,@ 784 tonnes of phosphorus per year . As a consequence , the Sava River is <unk> polluted in areas affected by the nutrient pollution . One such part of the river is the lowermost part of its course between Šabac and Belgrade , where acceptable freshwater bacterial counts are exceeded . 
 Levels of industrial pollution vary significantly throughout the basin . In 2007 , significant sources of industrial pollution were identified in Slovenia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , and Serbia . Levels of lead , cadmium and arsenic measured in the Sava River at Zagreb in 2003 did not exceed permitted concentrations , but measured levels of mercury exceeded permitted levels in four out of 216 samples . Levels of heavy metals , specifically zinc , copper , lead and cadmium , measured in sediments in the Sava River near Belgrade were assessed as representing little to no risk , and the conclusion drawn was that in order to " reduce the existing bacterial contamination of the Sava River it is necessary to control faecal discharge near cities like Belgrade . " The two countries ( Croatia and Montenegro ) with greatest direct access to the Adriatic showed by far the least polluted basin surface waters , although other factors , such as demography , agricultural / environmental development and , especially , investment ( internal and external ) , play a role . 
 = = = Protected areas = = = 
 The Sava River basin is very significant because of its biological diversity , and it contains large alluvial wetlands and lowland forests . This led to designation of six protected areas under provisions of the Ramsar Convention by the countries in the basin . Those are Lake <unk> in Slovenia , Lonjsko Polje and Crna <unk> in Croatia , Lake <unk> in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , and <unk> and <unk> bogs in Serbia . 
 = = Sport and recreation = = 
 There are several sports and recreational grounds located on the river course or gravel pit and artificial lakes adjacent to the Sava . Tacen Whitewater Course , located on the right bank of the Sava in Tacen suburb of Ljubljana , was built as a permanent kayaking course in 1948 . It hosts a major international competition almost every year , examples being the ICF Canoe Slalom World Championships in 1955 , 1991 , and 2010 . In Zagreb , <unk> complex of lakes along the river course offers a range of facilities for swimming , water sports and cycling . The island of Ada Ciganlija in Belgrade is the major recreational zone of the city , gathering as much as 100 @,@ 000 visitors daily in summer months . 
 The Sava River is the site of several regattas . Those include the International Sava Tour rowing regatta taking place between Zagreb and Brčko , and the Belgrade Regatta ( sailing regatta ) . 
 The river is also the site of the Šabac Swimming Marathon — an open water swimming competition , running on an 18 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometre ( 11 @.@ 7 mi ) course between the village of Jarak and the city of Šabac in Serbia . The competition is held annually since 1970 , and was included in FINA international calendar from 1984 to 2012 . 
 Recreational and sport fishing is a popular activity along the Sava River course . There is a 700 metres ( 2 @,@ 300 feet ) long sport fishing competition ground near <unk> , Slovenia . 
 = = Tradition = = 
 Even though the name Sava became very common among ( and not only South ) Slavs , especially as a form of personal name , either male or female , and has a " Slavic tone , " the river 's name is not Slavic but Celtic and Roman in origin ; the Latin name was Savus . Another name , used for Sava in entirety or its lower part by Strabo , is <unk> . 
 <unk> of various river gods in the area is traced back to the Late Bronze Age , when the first settlements were founded along the Sava River . <unk> associated their river goddess <unk> with the Savus . Altars or inscriptions dedicated to the river god Savus were found at a number of locations along the river course , including at the Zelenci Pools where the Sava Dolinka rises , and a number of Roman settlements and castra built along the Via Pannonia , Roman road spanning from Aquileia to the Danube . The settlements include Emona , <unk> and Siscia ( near modern @-@ day Ljubljana , Velika Gorica and Sisak respectively ) upstream of the Kupa River confluence , and <unk> , itself built atop a prehistoric settlement , Cibalae , Sirmium and Singidunum ( in modern @-@ day Slavonski Brod , Vinkovci , Sremska Mitrovica and Belgrade ) downstream of the Kupa . Besides the altar found at the Zelenci Pools , inscriptions and sites dedicated to Savus were found in remains of Emona , <unk> and Siscia . Several years after 1751 completion of the <unk> Fountain in Ljubljana , the three male figures sculpted as parts of the fountain were identified as statues of the river gods of Sava , Krka and Ljubljanica . In the early 20th century , the fountain was named the Fountain of Three <unk> Rivers . 
 The Baptism on the <unk> ( Slovene : <unk> pri <unk> ) , the Slovene national epic written by the Romantic poet France <unk> in 1835 . The poem , referring in its title to a headwater of the Sava River , inspired design of the coat of arms of Slovenia of 1991 . However , the two wavy lines at the base of the blazon represent rivers of Slovenia and the Adriatic Sea rather than the <unk> or the Sava specifically . 
 The Sava River is represented in the coat of arms of the former Kingdom of Slavonia . The design , approved by the Vladislaus II of Bohemia and Hungary in 1496 , incorporates two bars symbolising the Sava and the Drava rivers tracing the borders of the kingdom . The design inspired arms of several present @-@ day counties of Croatia in the region of Slavonia and it is itself a part of the coat of arms of Croatia . The Sava River is also referred to by the poem <unk> <unk> , written by Antun <unk> in 1835 , as a national symbol of Croatia . Modified lyrics of the poem later became the Croatian anthem . 
 = Pretty Hurts ( song ) = 
 " Pretty Hurts " is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé for her eponymous fifth studio album ( 2013 ) . It impacted mainstream radio in the United States on June 10 , 2014 , as the fourth single from the album . The song was written by Ammo , Beyoncé and Sia , and its production was handled by the former two . " Pretty Hurts " was initially written for Katy Perry and then offered to Rihanna ; both artists failed to record the track and as a result it was sent to Beyoncé instead . It is a power pop , soul ballad , instrumentally complete with a sparse background honed with the use of synths , minor chords and a " booming " drum beat . The track 's lyrical content deals with subjects of third @-@ wave feminism , self @-@ empowerment and body image . Additionally , the song 's lyrics deal with the consequences of society 's high standards of beauty , and in " Pretty Hurts " eating disorders are depicted as one of the subjected results . 
 The song generally received acclaim from music critics who commended Beyoncé 's vocal performance and the track 's lyrical content . " Pretty Hurts " won in the category for Best Song with a Social Message at the 2014 MTV Europe Music Awards and was named the best track of 2014 by the Associated Press . Following the release of Beyoncé , the track charted in the lower regions internationally , and when released as a single , " Pretty Hurts " attained limited success commercially . It failed to enter the Billboard Hot 100 and peaked at number 63 on the UK Singles Chart . However , the song became Beyoncé 's 21st number one on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart , and was placed at number four on its 2014 year @-@ end chart . 
 The accompanying music video for " Pretty Hurts " was directed by Melina Matsoukas , and features Beyoncé competing in a beauty pageant . The clip was made available at iTunes Stores as part of the album 's release on December 13 , 2013 . The video was positively reviewed by critics who complimented Beyoncé 's acting and the cohesion between the clip and the song 's message . It won in the categories for Best Video with a Message and Best Cinematography at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards . Rolling Stone included the clip in their year @-@ end list of the 10 best music videos of 2014 . Beyoncé performed " Pretty Hurts " during her co @-@ headlining On the Run Tour ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 " Pretty Hurts " was initially written by Australian musician Sia Furler at her apartment in Angelino Heights , Los Angeles . She completed the song with American musician Ammo on the same day she recorded French disc jockey David Guetta 's " Titanium " in 2011 . Sia wrote " Pretty Hurts " with American singer Katy Perry in mind , and later e @-@ mailed the song to her . However , Perry failed to read the email , and in what Sia described as an " awkward situation , " she then sent the track to the management of Beyoncé and Bajan singer Rihanna . The song was put on hold for eight months by Rihanna 's management , who failed to pay the track 's fee , and as a result Beyoncé " slid into home base and threw the money down " to secure " Pretty Hurts " for herself . Rihanna later decided to record another composition by Sia , " Diamonds " , instead . In 2012 , American producer Dr. Luke received Beyoncé 's cut of " Pretty Hurts " and played it to Perry , who later text messaged Sia , saying , " I 'm pretty hurt you never sent me this song " . Sia then responded , stating , " Check your e @-@ mail , " to which Perry replied , " It was meant to be with Beyoncé of course " . 
 During an interview with iTunes Radio in December 2013 , Beyoncé said , " The second I heard the song , I 'm like , ' I have to sing this song , I don 't care how hard I have to fight for this song , this is my song ' ! " The singer also decided to record " Pretty Hurts " because she wanted to shift her focus to the beauty industry , which she felt was " the most humiliating , judgmental place you can be as a woman " . She saw the track 's theme as representation of " finding that thing in the world that makes you truly happy , " and felt that the song was in line with the album 's theme of " finding beauty in imperfections " . Speaking to iTunes Radio , Beyoncé explained : " I feel like sometimes the world is a big contest , we 're all being judged . I wanted to capture how humiliating and insecure that makes you feel . " 
 Sia later mentioned online , in reply to a fan lamenting that her song " Elastic Heart " would have been a good single for Beyoncé , that she gave the singer " Pretty Hurts " , her " other best song " . The final version of the song was written by Sia , Beyoncé and Ammo , and its production was handled by the latter two . Rob Suchecki engineered and recorded the song 's instrumental and intro synthesizer with Derek Dixie . Beyoncé 's vocals were recorded by Stuart White who also handled the mixing of the song . " Pretty Hurts " was recorded in three studios : Kings Landing in Bridgehampton , and Jungle City Studios and Oven Studios in New York City . In the United Kingdom , the song was added to the playlist of BBC Radio 1 on June 2 , 2014 , and later impacted mainstream radio in the country on June 23 . In the United States , " Pretty Hurts " impacted rhythmic radio on June 10 , 2014 , as the fourth single from Beyoncé . 
 = = Composition = = 
 A power pop , soul ballad , " Pretty Hurts " runs for a duration of four minutes and 17 seconds ( 4 : 17 ) . It contains " mellow " R & B undertones , and a hip hop groove . Musically , the track 's sparse background is honed with the use of synths , minor chords , and a " booming " drum beat . " Pretty Hurts " is set in the time signature of common time , with a slow tempo of 65 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of B major , with Beyoncé 's vocals spanning the tonal nodes of F ♯ 3 to E5 . The song follows a basic sequence of B @-@ C ♯ m @-@ G ♯ m @-@ F ♯ as its chord progression . Beyoncé 's vocal performance in " Pretty Hurts " was likened by music critics to that of her 2008 single , " Halo " . Una Mullally of The Irish Times commented that the track 's sound recalled the works of American singer Pink . Writing for New York Magazine , Jody Rosen felt that " Pretty Hurts " was reminiscent of a more " robust " Barbra Streisand song . Jed Gottlieb of the Boston Herald likened the track 's beat to the works of New Zealand singer Lorde . Chris Bosman from Consequence of Sound described " Pretty Hurts " as a " cinematic reach of modern Top 40 pop with the patience and melancholy of post @-@ 808s & Heartbreaks hip @-@ hop . " USA Today writer <unk> Lopez opined that the song showcased a " darker side " to the singer . 
 The lyrics in " Pretty Hurts " are related to third @-@ wave feminism and self @-@ empowerment . It confronts society 's standards and stereotypes with regard to female beauty . The song opens with a recorded snippet of a beauty pageant judge questioning Beyoncé on her life aspirations , to which she replies , " My aspiration in life would be ... to be happy " . The sample is used to frame the song in the context of the singer 's childhood . According to Michael Cragg from The Guardian , the snippets were used to question the singer 's " drive and desire that 's got her to where she is today , and whether the struggle was entirely worth it " . The song then transcends into a depiction of Beyoncé as a beauty pageant contest awaiting judgment in the lyrics , " Mama said , ' You 're a pretty girl , what 's in your head , it doesn 't matter . Brush your hair , fix your teeth . What you wear is all that matters " . The lyrical content in the second verse of " Pretty Hurts " — " Blonder hair , flat chest / TV says bigger is better / South Beach , sugar free / Vogue says thinner is better " — serve as an analysis of female body image and society 's obsession with physical perfection . 
 According to Tris McCall of The Star @-@ Ledger , the song implicates that " American women are flung from their cradles into competition with each other , and are coached to disguise their flaws and distrust any gesture toward solidarity . " Additionally , the track 's lyrics deal with the consequences of society 's high standards of beauty , and in " Pretty Hurts " eating disorders are depicted as one of the subjected results . The track also sees Beyoncé denouncing " plastic smiles , " and during the last verses she demands to " strip away the <unk> " . Critics observed that " Pretty Hurts " promoted its listener 's ambition for fame and personal growth . The song 's lyrical content garnered comparisons to TLC 's " Unpretty " ( 1999 ) , and Christina Aguilera 's " Beautiful " ( 2002 ) . Marc Hogan of Spin opined that " Pretty Hurts " resembled a speech accompanied by music and felt that it served as a political statement addressed to the beauty industry . Hogan 's view was echoed by McCall of The Star @-@ Ledger who wrote that had the song been performed by Phil Ochs in 1995 , it " would have instantly recognized it as a protest number " . McCall went on to opine that " Pretty Hurts " served a response to the criticism Beyoncé received for her performance of the The Star @-@ Spangled Banner during American president Barack Obama 's second inauguration in 2013 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
