 " Pretty Hurts " received acclaim from most music critics . Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph felt it was " a great opening track " for Beyoncé and lauded its " anthemic " chorus . Mesfin Fekadu of the Associated Press deemed the song " a supreme way " to open the album. musicOMH 's Philip Matusavage wrote that " Pretty Hurts " manifested Beyoncé as a " definitive personal statement rather than just another Beyoncé album " . The Guardian reviewer Michael Cragg listed the track as an " immediate " single choice on the album . Julia Leconte of Now opined that the song was " classic Beyoncé feminism " and quipped , " and if you 're a sucker for girl @-@ power hits like ' Irreplaceable ' , you 'll have this one on repeat , too " . While Claire <unk> of Complex stated , " What sounds like a classic Beyoncé female empowerment ballad cuts even deeper . " Tim Finney of the same publication deemed the song a " heavy @-@ handed future concert staple " . Writing for the Los Angeles Times , Mikael Wood felt that with " Pretty Hurts , " Beyoncé created " razzle @-@ dazzle pop out of small @-@ scale sentiments that might 've seemed on paper like fodder for hushed ballads " . Drowned in Sound writer Robert Leedham stated the track was " impeccably sung " . 
 Tris McCall of The Star @-@ Ledger commended the track 's production and complimented Beyoncé for sounding " on the verge of tears " with her " vulnerable " vocal delivery . Newsday writer Glenn Gamboa felt the song was " dynamic musically and bold lyrically " . " Pretty Hurts " was lauded as the " best thing on the album " and an " undeniably noble attempt to boost female morale " by Andy Gill of The Independent . Gill 's view was shared by Consequence of Sound 's Chris Bosman who felt the song 's " dramatic and painful exploration of female beauty " made it a highlight on Beyoncé . Billboard journalists Andrew Hampp and Erika Ramirez commented , " Unlike [ singers such as Celine Dion , Christina Aguilera and Rihanna ] , Beyoncé doesn ’ t just re @-@ sing a Sia demo – she fully makes this self @-@ empowerment anthem fully her own , with a powerhouse ' Halo ' -esque vocal , and a bridge that could take you from Houston to Brooklyn in five seconds flat " . The lyric , " It 's my soul that needs surgery , " was dubbed an " admittedly catchy slogan " by Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani . Writing for Slate , Dee Lockett called the track 's introduction the " album 's most empowering line " . Jem Aswad of Spin called " Pretty Hurts " the pièce de résistance of Beyoncé and described it as " a shimmering , melancholy @-@ yet @-@ radio @-@ friendly landscape that perfectly suits the song 's heavy subject matter " . 
 Entertainment Weekly reviewer Nick Catucci called the track a " mild album opener " . The placement of " Pretty Hurts " was criticized by AbsolutePunk writer Ryan Dennehy , who went on to call the song " too safe at this point in her [ Beyoncé 's ] career " . Dennehy 's view was echoed by Emily Mackay of NME who went on to deem the track " inauspicious " and felt its lyrical content was reminiscent of " a City banker lecturing you on the need for spiritual rather than material wealth " . Philip Cosores of Paste commented , " ' Pretty Hurts ' opens the album with didactic rhetoric without the grace of subtlety , with its repeated conclusion that the ' soul needs surgery , ' hardly a poetic payoff that listeners deserve " . Under the Radar writer Ryan E.C. Hamm dismissed " Pretty Hurts " as a " flaw " on Beyoncé . 
 " Pretty Hurts " topped the Associated Press ' top songs of 2014 list , in which they complimented the track 's " heavy , deeply felt , emotional — but most important , beautiful " qualities , and felt that Beyoncé 's " rising vocals " brought Sia 's words to life . In the 2013 Pazz and Jop Music Critics Poll , the song was ranked at number 424 . The song won in the category for Best Song with a Social Message at the 2014 MTV Europe Music Awards . At the 2014 Soul Train Music Awards , " Pretty Hurts " was nominated for The Ashford and Simpson Songwriter 's Award . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Following the release of Beyoncé , " Pretty Hurts " charted in the lower regions internationally , and when released as a single , attained limited success commercially . The song failed to enter the US Billboard Hot 100 , but peaked at number 13 on Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles on January 11 , 2014 . The song bowed at number 38 on US Rhythmic Songs for the week ending July 5 , 2014 , and went on to peak at number 33 . " Pretty Hurts was more successful on US Hot Dance Club Songs where it reached number 16 by July 12 , 2014 . The following week , it entered the top ten , setting a new peak of number nine . On August 30 , 2014 , " Pretty Hurts " topped US Hot Dance Club Songs and became Beyoncé 's 21st number one hit on the chart . The song ended 2014 as the year 's fourth most successful entry on US Hot Dance Club Songs . " Pretty Hurts " peaked at number 36 on US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , and at number 78 on the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 In Australia , " Pretty Hurts " bowed at number 68 on the Australian Singles Chart for the week ending May 31 , 2014 . The following week , it climbed 21 positions to its peak of number 47 , before falling off the chart the week after . In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number 123 on the UK Singles Chart and number 12 on the UK R & B Chart on December 28 , 2013 . The following week , it climbed to number 93 on the singles chart . It went on to peak at number 63 on May 17 , 2014 , and became a top ten hit on the UK R & B Chart where it peaked at number eight on July 5 , 2014 . " Pretty Hurts " initially entered the Irish Singles Chart at number 82 on the chart issued for December 26 , 2013 , before dropping out the following week . On May 8 , 2014 , the song re @-@ entered the chart at a new peak position of 56 . Elsewhere , " Pretty Hurts " attained peaks of number 68 in Switzerland , number 83 in Germany , and number 87 in the Netherlands . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and release = = = 
 The music video for " Pretty Hurts " was directed by Melina Matsoukas . It was filmed at Bishop Loughlin Memorial High School in Fort Greene , Brooklyn , between August 11 and August 13 , 2013 . The filming of the clip saw an extended schedule surface with a variety scenes and concepts being developed during the ongoing shoot . As a result , several members of the crew quit the shoot , leaving Matsoukas with a limited team to work with . The small school in which the video 's filming took place was intended to showcase " a small @-@ town kind of pageant " . According to Matsoukas , the location created a 1980s atmosphere combined with pin @-@ up themes inspired by Blake Lively 's character in the film The Town ( 2010 ) . Several of the actresses portraying the beauty contestants in the video were models professionally , and shared their expertise for the clip 's premise . The visual also sees a cameo appearance from American actor Harvey Keitel . Speaking about Keitel 's involvement in an interview with New York Magazine , Matsoukas said that she wanted to use a " greasy , Vegas @-@ type pageant character , " and felt Keitel was well @-@ suited for the role . 
 Beyoncé stated that she wanted to film the video to showcase the correlation of physical beauty and happiness in life , which serves as one of the song 's themes . Speaking to MTV News , the singer mentioned : " It represents all of the things women go through to keep up with the pressure that society puts on us . I wanted to tap into the world of competition . Some of the things young women go through is just really heartbreaking for me . " Matsoukas wanted " Pretty Hurts " to follow a premise reminiscent to that of a documentary , with most of its filming occurring organically and unplanned . In an interview with MTV News , Matsoukas commented on the music video 's theme : 
 " Well I think we definitely wanted to speak to as many women as we could and all the pain and struggle that we go through as women to maintain this impossible standard of beauty . We wanted to give it a darker edge and take it there and not give you the Disney version of that struggle . And Beyoncé was more than willing to go that far with it . And I applaud her for that . " 
 The music video for " Pretty Hurts " was released on December 13 , 2013 , to iTunes Stores , as part of the release of Beyoncé . On April 24 , 2014 , it was made available for viewing on the website of Time , to coincide with Beyoncé 's cover feature on their Time 100 issue . To further promote the release , Beyoncé launched a website campaign — " What Is Pretty " — which asked fans to post photos and videos on Instagram , explaining their definition of beauty . The music video was released on Beyoncé 's Vevo account on the same day as her Time feature and " What Is Pretty " launch . A behind the scenes segment of the music video was premiered on MTV and Vevo , also on April 24 . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The music video 's beauty contest concept was proposed by Beyoncé . In an interview with New York Magazine , Matsoukas explained her response to Beyoncé 's proposal : " I was like , ' Let 's get into the toxic world and what we really do that is so damaging to ourselves , and use it as a microcosm for our society ' . Obviously , those ideas don 't just live in the pageant world ; they live in our world . And that 's what the song is about . And it felt like we had to take it there to make it have meaning , because otherwise it would be a superficial , preachy kind of song and visual . " A scene from the clip which depicts Beyoncé preparing plastic surgery , consuming diet pills and vomiting , was initially excluded from the video 's final cut . However , Beyoncé decided to include the scene to fulfill her role in the clip 's premise . Another scene featuring Beyoncé drowning in water while the beauty contest 's host questions her life aspirations , was originally intended to depict her falling onstage . However , the scene failed to surface because of time constraints . 
 Matsoukas initially planned the music video to visualize Beyoncé winning the contest , where she would realize that it was meaningless to her . However , Beyoncé suggested that an albino should serve as the contest 's winner instead . Speaking to MTV News , Matsoukas elaborated : " We thought it was really important and interesting to break those ideas of what the classic beauty standards would be and to do this with this beautiful albino woman , I thought was really great . And to show ' Yeah she 's not perfect , she doesn 't always win and you put your best foot forward and you may still lose . ' " The video 's ending was originally intended to depict archival footage of American actresses Halle Berry and Vanessa A. Williams , to promote beauty for African @-@ American women . However , Beyoncé sent a note to Matsoukas suggesting that footage from her childhood should be interpolated at the end of the song in order to connect it to the second music video from the album , " Ghost " . 
 The scene where Beyoncé is pictured wrecking a shelf of trophies " represent [ s ] knocking down ... beauty standards and falling into a victim of that " . The scene was <unk> by Matsoukas obtaining an image of Beyoncé , during her youth , pictured afront a shelf of her personal trophies . Matsoukas opined that " [ trophies ] don 't bring you happiness , and don 't move you forward in life " . Jake Reed of The Daily Collegian interpreted the scene as a realization that the pressure of sustaining beauty is unworthy of the time and dedication spent on it . Beyoncé was styled by B. Akerlund for the music video . Her wardrobe included a 1920s rabbit ear headpiece as a means of innocence for her character in the clip . Her look was honed with a " We Are Handsome " <unk> bodysuit and a Dolce & Gabbana gold brace corset , as well as a tiara and sash during other scenes . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The seven @-@ minute long video depicts Beyoncé playing a beauty pageant contest representing Third Ward , Houston , the area in which she grew up . It opens with the sound of a poignant piano and shots of Beyoncé sporting short hair , looking at herself in the mirror . It transitions to a segment of her fellow contestants preparing for the pageant backstage , combing their hair , fitting their dresses and analyzing their bodies ; one scene during the preparations shows Beyoncé arguing with another contestant over a hair dryer . Multiple shots of the singer follow , of which depict her sitting on a floor and leaving a bathroom after vomiting . The clip then sees contestants looking tired and distressed backstage . 
 Beyoncé is then announced by the contest 's host as " Miss 3rd Ward " , and she then appears on stage , smiling and singing the first verse of the song a capella . An applause follows from the crowd while the contest 's judges write notes about her . The song then begins during a depiction of Beyoncé in the preparations for the show , in which she combs and sprays her hair , <unk> her face and <unk> her teeth . The scene transitions to a judge , played by the fashion model Shaun Ross , directing the contestants , during which Beyoncé is seen consuming diet pills . He measures her abdomen with tape and hits her thighs as an indication of preferred onstage behaviour . The second verse follows , during which Beyoncé is pictured exercising at her home and measuring her weight to her own dissatisfaction . 
 As the second verse finishes , the host calls Beyoncé on the stage and praises her for her performance at the competition , asking the crowd to applaud to the " beautiful and poised " in the contest . He then asks , " Miss 3rd Ward , your first question . What is your aspiration in life ? " , to which Beyoncé replies : " Oh , my aspiration in life ? That 's a great question . I wasn 't expecting that question " . During her reply , her voice is echoed repeating the question , and she is then pictured drowning in water and looking unhappy backstage . After the pause , Beyoncé answers , " My aspiration in life would be to be happy " . The chorus then restarts with Beyoncé wrecking a shelf containing her personal trophies . She is also shown backstage , smearing her make @-@ up , and vomiting in the bathroom . Another contestant is pictured eating cotton . 
 During the bridge of the song , the contestant is then visible at a hospital where a plastic surgeon injects botox into her face . In the scene , Beyoncé is pictured in a white straight jacket . She is then shown in another segment , being spray tanned in a bikini . At the end of the music video , Beyoncé loses the contest to an albino woman after which she happily congratulates her . The last scene depicts the singer looking happy and smiling with little make @-@ up on her face . The final 30 seconds of the clip are intercepted into footage of Beyoncé , as a child , winning an award for Female Pop Vocalist on a television show . She appears onstage saying : " I would like to thank the judges for picking me , my parents who I love . I love you Houston " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 According to Dan Crane of the New York Times , " Pretty Hurts " was the music video that garnered the most attention following the release of Beyoncé . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani commented that the song sounded more " immersive " accompanied by its music video . Similarly , NME 's Emily Mackay who gave a mixed review for the song , felt that its visual " [ saved ] the day " , and deemed the scene where Beyoncé wrecks her trophy shelf as " powerful " . Jon Blistein of Rolling Stone called the video " intense " and " touching , " wrote that the " shots of her bashing her trophy shelf prove way more cathartic than any pageant victory " . Kitty Empire of The Observer commented that the video contained perspective in the scenes depicting " painful <unk> , pill @-@ popping and toilet @-@ hugging details " . Vanity writer Michelle Collins felt that the singer managed to make exercising look difficult and uncomfortable , and praised the scene where Beyoncé responds to the pageant judge questioning her life aspirations . Spin 's Philip Sherburne alluded that the video was emotional and wrote that it offered " a story line that opens up a wealth of readings about race , skin tone , beauty standards , and her [ Beyoncé 's ] own mutable image . " Whitney Phaneuf from the website HitFix praised Beyoncé 's acting in the video and added that the vulnerability in the character she portrayed was " palpable " . Phaneuf went on to opine that the footage of Beyoncé competing in a talent show as a child made the clip look more realistic . Ryan B. Patrick of Exclaim ! wrote that the video allowed Beyoncé to showcase her acting abilities . The editors of Out magazine likened the clip to the films Magic Mike ( 2012 ) and American Hustle ( 2013 ) . 
 The cohesion of the track 's lyrics with the video was commended by critics , with Evan Rytlewski of The A.V. Club noting that it allowed Beyoncé to " [ open ] herself up in ways she 's resisted before " . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune who lauded the song as a " soaring critique of the beauty industry " , added that it was " enhanced by its troubling video " . Marc Hogan of Spin magazine commented that the visual expanded on the message of the song , and deemed it a " powerful piece of work " . Tris McCall of The Star @-@ Ledger wrote in his review of the song that its " brutal " music video took the critique of perfection and physical beauty further than what the track did . Brandon <unk> of the magazine Vice called the visual the best on Beyoncé and opined that it was " an incredibly affecting mini @-@ melodrama that underlines to Beyoncé 's painful awareness that being black and female means you 're never enough of something or other for mainstream America " . However , Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph felt that the video sent mixed messages . Brent DiCrescenzo from Time Out complimented Keitel 's appearance in the clip , but criticized the visual 's message because he felt that it came from " one of the most beautiful women in the world " . 
 Questions raised by critics mainly concerned the irony and hypocrisy of the lyrics of the song and its video . Philip Cosores of Paste felt that with the music video , Beyoncé disrespected the message she sent through the song and felt that it was notable enough to stand on its own . Similarly , Shannon Kelley for <unk> said that the song " offers an honest commentary on an important reality " , but highlighted the irony of its music video and felt that it manifested that " [ Beyoncé is ] not immune to the disease " . Randal Roberts of the Los Angeles Times quipped , " She makes a convincing case , were it not for the string of nearly soft @-@ core fashion shoots that follow [ on the album ] ... As a first song on an album , ' Pretty Hurts ' works . But as thematic opener to such a relentless visual seduction , the hypocrisy is hard to ignore . " Although Daisy Buchanan of The Daily Telegraph praised the message of the song and its video , she wrote in her review that the clip was " pure hypocrisy " because she opined that Beyoncé had promoted " heavily sexualised and unattainable standards " with her body throughout her career . 
 = = = Awards and recognition = = = 
 Michael Cragg of The Guardian ranked the video for " Pretty Hurts " in the ten best of Beyoncé 's career . Cragg deemed the clip " gorgeously shot " and opined that its magazine shoot style " slightly subverted by barely veiled sadness and tight rictus grins " . At the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards , the clip was nominated in four categories : Best Editing , Best Direction , Best Cinematography Best Video with a Message , ultimately winning the latter two . Jessica Suarez of Rolling Stone included the clip in her year @-@ end list of the ten best music videos of 2014 . 
 = = Live performances and other versions = = 
 " Pretty Hurts " was part of the set list for Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z 's co @-@ headlining On the Run Tour ( 2014 ) . For the performances of the song , Beyoncé sports a leather @-@ studded jacket with the word , Texas , capitalized and emblazoned across its back , along with denim short pants . The outfits were designed by Nicola Formichetti who took inspiration from Beyoncé 's music video for " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " , outlaw motorcycle clubs , and included references to her daughter Blue Ivy . Billboard editor Leila Cobo felt that the inclusion of the song in the set list served as a " stab " at feminism for her audience . In a review of one of the tour 's concerts , Houston Chronicle writer Joey Guerra opined the song was oddly placed in the set list , but wrote that it " somehow worked perfectly as a late @-@ set crescendo " . The Times @-@ Picayune editor , Keith <unk> , felt that the singer " lofted " the song in its live renditions . 
 On January 14 , 2014 American singer Sam Tsui released an acoustic cover version of " Pretty Hurts " on the iTunes Store . An early instrumental of " Pretty Hurts " was used for Gucci 's Chime for Change campaign in 2013 , before the song 's official release . At the time , it served as an audio accompaniment for the campaign 's films . On June 3 , Dutch disc jockey R3hab released an uptempo electro house remix of the song during a concert for Gucci 's Chime for Change , in honor of the one @-@ year anniversary of its launching . Idolator 's Mike Wass praised the remix 's " killer drop " and called it " on @-@ point from beginning to end " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Song 
 Beyoncé – songwriter , vocals , production , vocal production 
 Sia Furler – songwriter , background vocals 
 Ammo – songwriter , production 
 Stuart White – recording , mixing 
 Ramon Rivas – second engineering 
 Rob Suchecki – second engineering 
 Derek Dixie – intro additional synth and SFX 
 James Krausse – mastering 
 Video 
 Credits adapted from Beyoncé 's website . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = River Irwell = 
 The River Irwell ( / <unk> / UR @-@ well ) is a 39 @-@ mile ( 63 km ) long river which flows through the Irwell Valley in North West England . Its source is at Irwell Springs on <unk> Moor , approximately 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of Bacup . It forms the boundary between Manchester and Salford and empties into the River Mersey near Irlam . 
 In the 17th and 18th centuries , the Irwell 's lower reaches were a trading route that became part of the Mersey and Irwell Navigation . In the 19th century , the river 's course downstream of Manchester was permanently altered by the construction of the Manchester Ship Canal which opened in 1896 . The canal turned Manchester and Salford into a major inland seaport and led to the development of Trafford Park which became the largest industrial estate in Europe . Further changes were made in the 20th and 21st centuries to prevent flooding in Manchester and Salford , such as the Anaconda Cut in 1970 and the River Irwell Flood Defence Scheme in 2014 . 
 The river became severely polluted by industrial waste in the Industrial Revolution , but in the second half of the 20th century a number of initiatives were implemented to improve water quality , restock it with fish and create a diverse environment for wildlife . Stretches of the river flowing through Manchester and Salford have attracted large @-@ scale investment in business and residential developments , such as Salford Quays , and other parts have become important wildlife havens . The Irwell is used for recreational activities , such as pleasure cruising , rowing , racing and fishing . 
 = = Course = = 
 From its source to the confluence with the River Mersey the Irwell is about 39 miles ( 63 km ) long . Rising on the moors above <unk> , it flows south through Bacup , Rawtenstall , Ramsbottom and Bury before merging with the River Roch near Radcliffe . Turning west , it joins the River Croal near Farnworth before turning southeast through Kearsley , Clifton and the Agecroft area of Pendlebury . It then meanders around Lower Kersal and Lower Broughton . It bisects Salford and Manchester , joining the rivers Irk and Medlock , and then turns west toward Irlam , as part of the Manchester Ship Canal . Its course ends just east of Irlam , where it empties into the Mersey . 
 = = Natural history = = 
 Until the early 19th century the Irwell was well stocked with fish and other wildlife , with people living near Manchester Cathedral using its water for drinking and other domestic purposes . However , during the Industrial Revolution , increasing levels of pollution caused by waste products discharged into the river by local industries proved fatal to wildlife , with fish stocks disappearing completely by about 1850 . This situation abated somewhat during the 20th century , with a slow improvement in water quality leading to fresh populations of roach , bream and chub , and sightings of brown trout have become increasingly common . 
 Problems with water quality in some of the former Manchester Docks basins became apparent with the redevelopment of Salford Quays . Years of runoff from sewers and roads had accumulated in the slow running waters of this area and decomposition of organic matter was causing oxygen depletion . In 2001 , a compressed air injection system was introduced . This raised the oxygen levels in the water by up to 300 % , improving the water quality to such an extent that the number of invertebrate species present , like freshwater shrimp , increased by more than 30 . Spawning and growth rates of fish species such as roach and perch have also increased , and are now amongst the highest in England . 
 Two Sites of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSIs ) are located close to the banks of the Irwell , near to its confluence with the River Croal at Moses Gate Country Park near Bolton . The first is at Nob End , a 88 800 m ² site which has been designated because of its biological interest , based on the predominance of flora typical of limestone grassland including some nationally rare herbs and orchids . Nob End is also designated as a Local Nature Reserve ( LNR ) . The second site is Ashclough , which is a site of geological interest . These two SSSIs are among the 21 found in Greater Manchester . In Salford the river flows through Clifton Country Park and Kersal Dale Country Park , both of which have been designated as <unk> . 
 Herons , cormorants , mute swans , kingfishers and many species of geese and ducks are regularly sighted on the river . The Manchester Ship Canal near Salford Quays is one of the top ten sites in Britain for diving ducks , providing a winter home to approximately 3 @,@ 000 common pochard and 2 @,@ 000 tufted ducks . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Irwell is all that remains of the shallow seas that covered most of south @-@ east Lancashire in the Late Carboniferous period , when deposits of mud and sand were laid down . During the Permian and Triassic periods , red sandstones were deposited under arid , desert conditions and these became compressed into beds of shales , New Red Sandstone and Manchester marls , alternating with layers of gritstone . The glaciers of the Pleistocene period radically re @-@ shaped the landscape and then retreated , leaving behind deposits of sand , pebbles and boulder clay that formed the <unk> ridges of the lower Irwell Valley . Ashclough , a 50 800 m ² site which comprises the steep banks of the river between Prestolee and Little Lever , has been designated an SSSI because of its geological interest , primarily because it is the best site in the area displaying the Ashclough marine band and its associated strata . Ashclough is a site of national importance for interpreting the coal measure <unk> of Great Britain . 
 = = River Irwell catchment area = = 
 The River Irwell catchment area extends from the moors above Bacup to the Manchester Ship Canal . The climate of the catchment area is wetter than the UK average , with rainfall of 1 @,@ 456 millimetres ( 57 @.@ 3 in ) per annum compared to 1 @,@ 231 millimetres ( 48 @.@ 5 in ) per annum , and the rivers quickly respond to rainfall . The topography varies considerably , with the upper reaches dominated by the Pennine moors at an altitude of between 350 metres ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) and 450 metres ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) AOD and the bottom of the catchment consisting of relatively flat land , which lies between 20 metres ( 66 ft ) and 150 metres ( 490 ft ) AOD . The watercourses are characterised by steep narrow valleys , which contributes to high rates of run @-@ off , as does the underlying solid geology . This comprises Lower Coal Measures overlying Millstone Grit , both of which are classified as minor aquifers which will only hold relatively small amounts of water . The Millstone Grit is , in turn , underlain by limestone rocks from the lower Carboniferous period . The surface deposits comprise thick peat in the upper reaches , with glacial boulder clay and glacial sand and gravel in the lower parts . The sand and gravel are also classified as a minor aquifer , whilst the boulder clay is a non @-@ aquifer . The higher , steeper slopes of the upper part of the catchment provide a large source of erodible material and debris which is transported downstream to the lower , flatter parts of the catchment . Where the channel is constricted , this material is then deposited and can contribute to a reduction in channel capacity . 
 = = History = = 
 The origins of the name " Irwell " are uncertain but many accept the Anglo @-@ Saxon origin , ere @-@ well , meaning " hoar or white spring " . Flint scrapers , knives and other materials associated with neolithic man were discovered on Kersal Moor in the late 19th century and early 20th century . There have been isolated finds of artefacts characteristic of this period along the Irwell valley , and a possible hunting site was excavated at Prestwich Golf Course in 1982 , which produced a quantity of Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age flints . Neolithic tools have also been found in the River Roch near Bury and in Radcliffe , and Bronze Age burial sites have been found in Bury and Shuttleworth . The first recorded human settlements were those of the Celtic tribe , the Brigantes , who farmed the uplands and lower reaches of the river in the late iron age . In AD 79 the Roman Empire conquered these tribes , building forts at the confluences of the Irwell and the rivers Irk and Medlock and naming the town Mamucium . They also built a ford with rectangular stone blocks at Cornbrook , which is thought to be the first man @-@ made structure to span the river . For four hundred years the Pax Romana brought peace , but their withdrawal in AD 410 left the tribes at the mercy of the Saxons , who renamed the town <unk> . The Danes later seized , and all @-@ but destroyed <unk> , and absorbed what was left of the tribes . The Danelaw ruled until AD 920 when the Norsemen were expelled by Edward the Elder . 
 In the Middle Ages the town , which was now known as <unk> ( later to become Manchester ) , grew and prospered , and trading vessels plied along the river . The hamlet of Kersal , which now forms part of the City of Salford , was gifted to the Cluniac Priory of Lenton , near Nottingham , in 1142 . The most important part of the gift was the fishing rights on the River Irwell , and even in the 18th century , the salmon rights on the rivers of Lancashire were let every year for many hundreds of pounds . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 During the Industrial Revolution factories , mills and terraced hovels grew up along the river banks . Edward Corbett , the Borough Engineer of Salford , wrote in his 1907 book The River Irwell of his father 's experiences around 1819 , of seeing " large shoals of fish , chiefly gudgeon but also other fish , rising to the flies " from a vantage point on New Bailey bridge , ( now Albert Bridge ) in Manchester . Local industry dumped toxic chemicals into the river , such as gas @-@ tar , gas @-@ lime and ammonia water , and by 1850 fish stocks had all but disappeared . In 1860 the Irwell was described as " almost proverbial for the <unk> of its waters ; receiving the refuse of cotton factories , coal mines , print works , bleach works , dye works , chemical works , paper works , almost every kind of industry . " In 1862 the Scottish geologist Hugh Miller wrote about the Irwell , in his book First Impressions : The English People , describing it as : 
 The hapless river — a pretty enough stream a few miles higher up , with trees overhanging its banks , and fringes of green sedge set thick along its edges — loses caste as it gets among the mills and the printworks . There are myriads of dirty things given it to wash , and whole waggon @-@ loads of poisons from dye @-@ houses and <unk> thrown into it to carry away ; steam @-@ boilers discharge into it their seething contents , and drains and sewers their fetid impurities ; till at length it rolls on — here between tall dingy walls , there under precipices of red sandstone — considerably less a river than a flood of liquid manure , in which all life dies , whether animal or vegetable , and which resembles nothing in nature , except , perhaps , the stream thrown out in eruption by some mud @-@ volcano . 
 In the Victorian era passenger boat trips were popular but cut @-@ short by the foul smells from the river . In 1862 the Corporation of Salford promoted an Act of Parliament enabling them to establish a River Conservancy Committee ; they appointed a river inspector , and had to power to take action against anyone polluting the river . The Rivers Pollution Prevention Act 1876 was designed to solve the problems of river pollution , but it was largely ineffective . It did , however , lay the groundwork for the more draconian legislation which followed , and in 1891 the Mersey and Irwell Joint Committee was formed . Local authorities were ordered to provide sewage treatment facilities , and industrial concerns were told to use the best practical means of preventing pollution . Salford was one of the first authorities in the Irwell watershed to install intercepting sewers and sewage treatment works at Mode Wheel Sewage works . 
 One of the most famous characters associated with the river during this time was Mark Addy , who was born in a tenement on The Parsonage near Blackfriars Bridge in Manchester in 1838 . Whenever anyone was in difficulty in the river , the cry would go up " Bring Mark Addy ! " and he would race to the rescue . He was awarded a number of medals including the gold and silver medals from the Humane Society for the Hundred of Salford , and the Royal Humane Society 's bronze medal . In 1878 he became the only civilian ever to be awarded the Albert Medal ( first class ) , His final rescue was on Whit Monday in 1889 , when he saved a young boy from a particularly sewage @-@ laden section of the river . After this he became ill , and died of tuberculosis in 1890 aged 51 . He had rescued over 50 people from the river during his lifetime . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 In 1939 , the Mersey and Irwell Joint Committee was superseded by the Lancashire Rivers Board , but wartime conditions brought about further deterioration of the river . In 1951 , the Rivers ( Prevention of Pollution ) Act was passed and this board disappeared to be replaced by the Mersey River Board , which was replaced in turn by the Mersey and Weaver River Authority in 1965 . 
 In 1946 , there was serious flooding in Salford , caused by a bottleneck at a bend in the river at Strangeways , on the border with Manchester . Flooding had been a problem for hundreds of years , and , in 1946 , the decision was made to straighten and widen the river to increase its capacity . Work started in 1951 but it was not until September 1970 that water first flowed through the Anaconda Cut . The total cost of the project was £ 2m . 
 In a question to the House of Commons in 1950 the Member of Parliament for Rossendale , Mr. Anthony Greenwood , highlighted the lamentable condition of the Irwell and one of its main tributaries , the River Roch : 
 Today I am afraid that fish in most of those rivers are virtually extinct . Anybody who stands today in the City of Manchester outside the Exchange Station and looks down at the noisome black water which flows beneath him would find it difficult to believe that any fish , or any other living creature , could ever have lived in what the Manchester Guardian has so rightly called that " melancholy stream " ... I have had my differences with the British Field Sports Society , but I have nothing but admiration for the excellent series of reports on river pollution which have been prepared for that Society ... and ventured to suggest that they should make a similar survey of the Rivers Irwell and Roach . These two rivers were covered by the third report ; and very sorry reading it made . There are two passages in that report which I should like to read . The first says : " The banks are lined with factories , large and small , many of which take their water from the drainage of the hills forming the slopes of the river 's valley , and discharge it as a polluted effluent , either into the small feeders , or the main river itself , so it may be said that no natural water normally enters the river from its cradle in the moors to its grave in the Manchester Ship Canal . " The second quotation is one which I find still more appalling than the first . It is : " There are no fish in these rivers ( apart from a very occasional tributary ) , no insects , no weeds , no life of any kind except sewage fungus , nothing but chemicals and any dirt which cannot be put to profitable use . Sewage effluents ( and , being usually very good , they are the most encouraging feature of the appalling situation ) are hailed with delight as being the purest water which the rivers hold . " The full importance of that statement will be realised when I remind hon . Members of the frequency with which residents in Bacup , Ramsbottom , Manchester and Salford are subjected to flooding from the waters of the Irwell . 
 In 1951 , it was announced that flood defence works were to be carried out on the stretch of the river passing through Lower Broughton between Cromwell Bridge and Gerald Road Bridge , although local property owners and shopkeepers were outraged at being asked to bear part of the cost . Work on the 8 @-@ foot @-@ thick ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) concrete wall did not get underway until June 1952 and was still only nearing completion when , in August 1957 , nearby homes were threatened by flooding during heavy rain . 
 = = = = 1970s = = = = 
 A report in the Manchester Evening News in 1971 stated that Bury Angling Society had signed an agreement with Bury Corporation giving them fishing rights along four miles ( 6 km ) of the river between <unk> and Radcliffe . The secretary of the society was quoted as saying : 
 Extensive tests have been carried out on fish we put in the river and we are satisfied that the water will support fish life . Roach and perch have already been caught and we have had no reports of any ill @-@ effects . There is no doubt the pollution is clearing . It will be a long job , but we are sure there is a future for angling in the river . 
 The report went on to state that the society " intends to carry out stocking operations soon " . In 1972 the newspaper reported that " <unk> " ( small fish ) had been seen swimming in the " notorious inky Irwell " near Peel Park , Salford . The Deputy chief water quality officer for Salford , Mr. Eric Harper , said : 
 Ten years ago , any fish getting as far down as Salford would have been killed almost immediately by the pollution in the water . Although the river there is now a great deal better than it has been for 100 years , fish will probably not be able to live long . These had probably got into the main river from small streams flowing into the Irwell . But I think it is real progress . 
 Mr Harper went on to say that the Irwell had been well stocked with fish along its whole length 100 years ago but refused to guess when it would reach the same state again . In 1974 all of the river authorities were merged into the Regional Water Authorities . In the 1974 annual report of the North West Water Authority ( NWWA ) , it was said that the river " once internationally famous , or infamous as the epitome of river pollution , is now in a much better state as compared with its condition at the time of a special survey carried out nine years ago . " This was reported in an article in The Manchester Evening News on 26 October of that year which stated that : 
 During nine years of pollution control work reviewed by the North West Water Authority , the biggest improvement had been in the Bolton District , where effluent from five dilapidated sewage plants and two paper mills were now being treated at the Ringley Fold Works [ but ] there has been little reduction in pollution from the river Roch . At Bacup the headwater of the Irwell is discoloured by ochre deposits from a disused mine but work is being done to stop the ochre seepage . Fish do exist in the stretch between Rossendale and Bury and fish are to be introduced in stretches between Radcliffe and Manchester . However , it is feared that it will be many years before fish will be able to breed freely in the river . 
 = = = = 1980s = = = = 
 In 1980 , a scheme for improving a section of the river between Littleton Road and Adelphi Weir in Salford for boating purposes was included in Greater Manchester Policy Committee 's capital programme for 1981 / 82 . County Councillors at a recent committee meeting had criticised the condition of the river , with the councillor for the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham calling it " quite revolting and horrible " . A spokesperson for the NWWA said that , although the river had a reputation for being polluted , it was getting much better but still had not reached a state where they would be satisfied . She added that tests were being carried out to show the improved cleanliness of the Irwell and that 600 trout had recently been put in the river at <unk> , near Bury . The proposals were welcomed by both Salford University and Agecroft Rowing Club , with the university stating that they wished to use that section for their boat race . Later that year it was reported that hundreds of trees and shrubs were to be planted along the banks of the Irwell between Broughton and Pomona Dock in a £ 650 @,@ 000 " green finger " scheme to " bring the countryside into the heart of industrial Salford " . The dossier outlining the scheme , prepared by Salford 's Technical Services Officer , emphasised the " bleak character " of the Irwell Valley with " many constructions by the river that are decaying and rotting " and said " the main problems are caused by an excess of ammonia and a high organic content from sewage effluents which discharge into the water upstream . " The report recommended that " even more support should be given to the NWWA in their pollution control of the River Irwell . " 
 Throughout the 1980s , sightings of fish as far downstream as Manchester city centre were reported in local newspapers . In February 1981 the Manchester Evening News reported that " ten <unk> [ sticklebacks ] , about two inches long " had been spotted by a site manager working on the Mark Addy public house , which was then being built on the disused New Bailey Landing Stage , below New Bailey Street , on the border of Manchester and Salford . Plans for developing the river for recreational use were also coming to fruition as it was reported in 1982 that , over the May bank holiday , the first pleasure cruise on the river in the 20th century would leave from the Mark Addy as part of a three @-@ day experiment to see whether river cruises could be a success . In 1983 over 100 canal and river boats rode the flooded river for the Greater Manchester Waterways Festival , an event aimed at demonstrating how pleasure boating could " transform the bleak waterway in the heart of Manchester " . By 1984 two local men felt the waters were clean enough for them to brave a ten @-@ mile ( 16 km ) charity fund @-@ raising swim from Clifton to Manchester , although they were warned by a spokesman for the North West Water Authority that the cocktail of effluent and occasional untreated sewage meant that the Irwell was still " a class 4 river – top of the pollution chart " . During 1985 the Croal – Irwell Valley local plan was launched , listing 187 proposals for the improvement of the valley and in 1986 the Mersey Basin Campaign was announced . The campaign was to cover a large area , from Rossendale in the north to Crewe in the south , and it was promised that £ <unk> would be made available in the first three years for water- and land @-@ based projects . In September 1987 plans were revealed for a mile @-@ long landscaped walkway in Manchester city centre and developers announced plans to develop three bricked @-@ up railway arches on the side of the river , opposite Manchester Cathedral , into a wine bar and restaurant . In 1988 Manchester 's first water bus made its maiden voyage from the New Bailey Landing Stage , then known as the Mark Addy Quay , on a five @-@ mile ( 8 km ) inaugural round trip to Salford Quays By the end of the 1980s ambitious plans had been announced to turn Manchester into a top international tourist centre " mainly based on the derelict areas around the waterways of Manchester , Salford and Trafford – the Irwell , the Irk , the ship canal and the Bridgewater Canal ... bringing £ 500m of investment and 13 @,@ 000 new jobs over the next 10 years " . The Manchester Ship Canal Company also announced a £ 70 million redevelopment scheme for Pomona Docks in Salford , to include a marina , homes , offices and other commercial developments . 
 = = = = 1990s = = = = 
 In 1990 , the newly formed Mersey and Irwell Packet Company launched regular tourist trips along the river from a landing stage opposite the Granada Studios Tour entrance in Quay Street , taking in the stretch from Castlefield to Salford Quays . This was not universally welcomed as , by September of that year , a retired chemical engineer claimed that the pleasure boat was " leaving clouds of methane in its wake as it disturbed sediment on the river bed " . However , in 1991 a feature article appeared in the magazine Lancashire Life extolling the virtues of the cruise , and stating that the Irwell " once thought a liability is in fact a major asset to urban regeneration ... now the twin cities compete to befriend her , to dress her in finery and proudly introduce her back into society . And the public are cordially invited back onto her waters . " During 1994 , construction work began on a new £ 1.3M footbridge to link Manchester and Salford , to be known as Trinity Bridge . The box @-@ girder and steel cable construction was designed by Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava to represent a ship in full sail as the centrepiece of the £ 50M Chapel Wharf Regeneration Scheme , which was expected to breathe new life into a run @-@ down area of Salford and to create up to 8 @,@ 000 new jobs . In May 1995 a new 30 @-@ mile ( 48 km ) long multimillion @-@ pound arts trail , to be known as the Irwell Sculpture Trail , was reported in the Manchester Evening News and in June 1997 work began on the £ 10 million Lower Irwell Valley Flood Defence Scheme in Lower Kersal . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 In July 2000 there was a setback for the clean @-@ up programme when a pollution incident affected approximately 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) of the river between Rawtenstall and Ramsbottom , causing the death of more than 36 @,@ 000 fish . The large number of fish killed , however , did serve to illustrate how much the river had improved from the lifeless , " melancholy stream " of the 1950s . In 2005 a £ 1M project to make the river " the cleanest it has been for decades " was announced by United Utilities . The improvements included fitting filters on sewers in Lower Broughton to ensure litter was not washed into the river , as part of a scheme to improve overflows across Adlington , Wigan , Chorley , Rochdale and Bury . Then in October 2008 United Utilities announced that work on the Ringley Fold Wastewater Works in Stoneclough , to be completed by the end of the year , should increase the number of fish in the river and " massively improve the environment locally so walkers , canoeists and anglers will all reap the benefits . " The company said that this was to be the biggest scheme that they had undertaken in the region , and the project manager was quoted as saying : 
 " Reducing the amount of phosphate in the water is the main driver behind the scheme . New legislation states that the amount of phosphate in waste water should be one milligram per litre because it causes water to clog with algae and reduces the amount of oxygen in the water , which results in less aquatic life and fish . " 
 The treatment plant , which was built in the 1930s and last updated in the 1970s , treats waste water from a population of half a million , from Bolton , Prestwich , Whitefield and Clifton . 
 There was another pollution incident in March 2008 when twenty miles of the river turned orange . Iron oxide from old mine workings near the source at Irwell Springs had polluted the water since 1969 and in 1997 a Coal Authority survey identified the stretch as having the fourth worst case of <unk> pollution in the country . A treatment plant was built in 1999 to remove the pollution at a cost of £ 1M ; however , it is thought that there was a collapse in the mine after heavy rains in the spring of 2008 . Although the water was stained with ochre , no damage to wildlife was reported . 
 = = Commerce = = 
 = = = Mersey and Irwell Navigation = = = 
 In the late 17th century , the Warrington businessman Thomas Patten had made the River Mersey navigable as far as Warrington and suggested that there would be significant commercial value in extending this along the Irwell as far as Manchester . In 1721 , Parliament authorised the alteration with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Act , and by 1736 work had been completed by creating eight canal locks along the 20 @-@ mile ( 32 km ) route from Warrington to Manchester , allowing access to boats of up to 51 tonnes . The waterway , which became known as the Mersey & Irwell Navigation , played a central role in the cotton industry of the 18th century that spearheaded the Industrial Revolution . 
 = = = Bridgewater Canal = = = 
 When Francis Egerton , 3rd Duke of Bridgewater built the Bridgewater Canal , the task of crossing the Irwell was one of the main obstacles he faced . The solution was to build a canal @-@ carrying bridge across the river , the first barge aqueduct in England . The aqueduct , which opened in 1761 , measured 12 metres ( 39 ft ) high and 200 metres ( 656 ft ) long , and became one of the wonders or the age . The Mersey and Irwell Navigation and the Bridgewater Canal competed for trade to and from Manchester for the next 120 years and specially designed barges with a shallow draft , known as " Mersey flats " , were used on both waterways . Over the years both trade and rivalry continued to grow with each company offering reduced freight charges or special rates and concessions to gain business from the other . The most important cargo carried was raw cotton from Liverpool to Manchester but timber , <unk> , pig iron , lead , copper , nails , tar , sand , grain and flour were also carried . Passenger services had been operating on the Bridgewater Canal for some years and in 1807 the Irwell and Mersey Navigation Company began to compete with daily services between Runcorn and Manchester . In 1816 they began to use packet steamers . However , in 1830 the Liverpool and Manchester Railway opened ; packet boat services went into decline , and ceased to operate completely in the 1860s . In Manchester two other canals used the Irwell as a point of access : the Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal from 1809 , and the Manchester and Salford Junction Canal from 1839 . The previous year , the short Hulme Locks Branch Canal had also connected the Irwell to the Bridgewater Canal at Castlefield . All are now non @-@ navigable , although the first is under restoration . 
 = = = Manchester Ship Canal = = = 
 As the 19th century progressed , the increasing need for large freight carriers led to Liverpool 's dominance as a port . Manchester became increasingly reliant on its Merseyside neighbour for its imports and exports , but the handling charges and dues charged by the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board made goods from Manchester uncompetitive . A solution was to build the Manchester Ship Canal . In 1887 the Bridgewater Navigation Company was purchased by the Manchester Ship Canal Company with a cheque for £ 1 @,@ 710 @,@ 000 , which was at the time the largest cheque ever written , and the building of the Manchester Ship Canal began . The canal , which was made by greatly deepening and widening the eastern section of the Mersey and Irwell Navigation , opened on 1 January 1894 . It reduced the shipping costs of raw cotton to the mills and the dispatching the finished cloth overseas . The canal had helped the region to become the centre of the Industrial Revolution , and it had transformed Manchester into England 's third largest port , despite being 40 miles ( 64 km ) inland . As the canal was built , it became clear that Brindley 's famous aqueduct would have to be demolished , as it allowed insufficient headroom for the freighters that the canal would carry . Fortunately , in 1896 the councillors of Eccles paid to have the aqueduct moved to the spot it occupies today , alongside the canal . The Bridgewater Canal is now carried over the Manchester Ship Canal by the equally celebrated Barton Swing Aqueduct , which was completed in 1893 with the novel idea of " opening " by rotating 90 degrees to allow ships to pass . 
 The construction of the Manchester Ship Canal and the Manchester Docks led to the development of Trafford Park as the largest industrial estate in Europe , and brought employment to the area for the next eighty years . By the 1960s however , the UK had begun to lose its position as an industrial world power . By the mid @-@ 20th century , the UK cotton industry had gone into decline because of low @-@ cost competition from Asian manufacturers . The decline of heavy industry in the area , the increasing size of freight @-@ carrying ships , and competition from road transport , brought about the decline of the terminal docks at Salford , which closed in 1982 . 
 = = River Irwell Flood Defence Scheme = = 
 The lower reaches of the Irwell have flooded many times in its history , the most well documented being the floods of 1866 , 1946 , 1954 , 1980 , and 2007 . In December 1816 rapidly thawing snow caused the river to flood , sweeping away a considerable amount of property including building materials and livestock . Locals reported the height of the river to have been almost as great as a more serious flood of 1768 . A local public house , the Black Boy , suffered extensive damage as the water caused the rear wall to collapse , a local brewery was flooded with the loss of all its stock , and a Mersey Flat came free of its moorings , hitting Regent Bridge . In 1866 , the " year of the great Flood " , rain fell for three continuous days commencing on Tuesday 13 November . By the end of the first day , the river had risen 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) above normal at Peel Park , street lamps could not be lit and mills were brought to a stop . In all , £ 1 million of property was damaged , 450 hectares of land was flooded , 700 people had to be rescued from wrecked homes , but only one man died by drowning . The height of the flood was marked by an obelisk erected in Peel Park . The construction of the ship canal is said to have reduced the risk of flooding , by providing a larger outlet below Regent bridge . In 1946 in Salford 5 @,@ 300 properties were flooded , and 600 were flooded in 1954 . 
 To alleviate such problems two flood storage basins with a capacity of 650 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 850 @,@ 000 cu yd ) have been constructed to the west of Littleton Road , Kersal , at a cost of around £ 11 million . As part of the River Irwell Flood Defence Scheme , the defences help to protect some 3 @,@ 000 properties in Kersal and Lower Broughton against a 1 in 75 year flood . Concerns have been raised that a 1 in a 100 @-@ year flood would breach these defences and cause some £ 55 million damage to property . The defences proved successful on 22 January 2008 , when the worst flooding to hit the region in thirty years caused the Irwell to burst its banks further downstream in the centre of Manchester . 
 In March 2015 work began on a £ 12m upgrade to the flood defence scheme to upgrade the protection to cope with a 100 @-@ year flood . The scheme , which was due to be completed in December 2015 , involves creating a flood storage basin to the north of the Castle Irwell student village . An area of 29 hectares will be excavated and the material will be used to construct a 3 metre high embankment around the site . 
 = = Regeneration = = 
 A large urban regeneration project , The Salford Quays Development Plan , was published in 1985 and work began a few years later to redevelop the site for residential , business and leisure purposes . The Salford Quays waterside development has made living by the Irwell , and the Manchester Ship Canal into which it flows , fashionable once again . 
 There are further plans to " turn the tide on the years of neglect and once again embrace the River Irwell as a fundamental part of Manchester and Salford 's heritage and future economic and social growth . The vision is to reinvent the central Manchester conurbation as the major waterfront destination in Northern England . " A number of key stakeholders are involved in the development of this regeneration vision . These include Manchester , Salford and Trafford councils , Manchester Ship Canal Company , Environment Agency , Mersey Basin Campaign , local businesses , landowners , community groups and the wider Manchester , Salford and Trafford communities . 
 = = = Irwell City Park = = = 
 In 2007 Manchester City Council , Salford City Council and Trafford Metropolitan Borough Council prepared planning guidance to support the delivery of a project for the restoration of the river and creation of a new urban park , to be called Irwell City Park . The intention is to develop 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) of riverside between The Meadows and Peel Park in the north , through Salford and Manchester city centres , Ordsall and Pomona Dock areas , around to Salford Quays and Trafford Wharfside . The three authorities formally adopted the draft Planning Guidance in March 2008 . The Guidance sets out the guidelines that the councils will use as a material consideration in determining applications for planning permission and other matters in the Irwell City Park area . It also establishes a set of principles to ensure the provision of a continuous riverside cycle / walkway , and the high quality design of new public open spaces and other infrastructure . An application is to be made to the North West Development Agency in October 2008 to support pre @-@ project implementation work , including design and technical feasibility work . 
 = = Sport on the Irwell = = 
 Rowing has existed along the river in Manchester and Salford since 1823 . A regatta was inaugurated on 12 September 1842 on a straight course from Throstle 's Nest Weir to Regent Road Bridge . Racing continued in Manchester with events such as Agecroft Regatta and Warburton Regatta . At the turn of the 20th century , rowing was very popular in the area with many local clubs such as Nemesis , Prince of Wales , Minerva , Didsbury and Agecroft all competing regularly . With the decline in the condition of the water , by the Second World War only Agecroft and Broughton rowing clubs were still active . 
 Agecroft Rowing Club was formed in 1861 , making it one of the oldest open membership rowing clubs in the world . The club was originally based in the grounds of Agecroft Hall and then a short distance downstream at Littleton Road . However , the river became impossible for eight 's and fours to pass due to the encroachment of weeds and river life following the clean up of the environment . The club now operates from a boat house next to the Salford Watersports Centre at Salford Quays , which it has shared with the University of Salford Boat Club since 2004 . The boat house , which the sport 's governing body , British Rowing , has nominated as the North West Centre of Excellence , also hosts the Two Cities Boat Race , which has been held on the river since 1972 . 
 This river is home to the Salford Friendly Anglers ' Society , the oldest angling society in the world , founded in 1817 . 
 = = Tributaries = = 
 = County Route 41 ( Onondaga County , New York ) = 
 County Route 41 ( CR 41 ) in Onondaga County , New York is a 6 @.@ 20 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 98 km ) highway in the Finger Lakes towns of Skaneateles and Marcellus . The route is unsigned , like most of Onondaga County 's routes , serving as a connector between the villages . The route begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) in Skaneateles and heads northeast for most of its length . Route 41 does not intersect with another state @-@ maintained highway , but does follow the former alignment of two . The highway ends at an intersection with CR 83 ( South Street ) and CR 150 ( Platt Road ) . 
 Route 41 was once part of a realignment of a 19th @-@ century turnpike , the Seneca Turnpike . Being a newer alignment , the signs along the highway read " New Seneca Turnpike " . The route , when the 1930 New York State Route renumbering occurred , was designated as part of New York State Route 175 ( NY 175 ) from US 20 to NY 174 , which is now part of CR 41 . The highway then followed an older alignment of Route 174 southward , out of Marcellus . Route 175 was decommissioned and realigned several times along that alignment , and the Route 174 alignment came in the 1970s . By 1989 , Route 41 was assigned along its entire alignment . 
 = = Route description = = 
 CR 41 begins at an intersection with US 20 ( East Genesee Street ) in the village of Skaneateles . Route 41 heads to the northeast through the densely populated community , passing homes and trees . The highway then intersects with the northern terminus of East Lake Street , the continuation of NY 41 . The county route , however , continues to the northeast , leaving the village portion of Skaneateles at an intersection with Highland Avenue , losing its Onondaga Street moniker . The highway , now known as the New Seneca Turnpike , parallels US 20 in a less dense area of Skaneateles . 
 The highway continues , leaving Skaneateles for the town of Marcellus . After a while , the dense housing becomes farmland and fields , with the highway continuing towards downtown Marcellus . However , as the route progresses farther , this reverts itself , and houses follow along the highway once again . Route 41 then intersects with Gully Road and the Old Seneca Turnpike , a realignment of itself . The real " Old Seneca Turnpike " is intersected farther north . After passing a large farm , Route 41 intersects with the northern terminus of CR <unk> ( Richard Road ) . 
 Route 41 passes to the south of a pond , making a swing to the north . The route then makes a swing to the east , and soon after a straight path to the northeast . The highway intersects with CR 211A ( Lawrence Road ) , which heads eastward towards NY 174 . After the county route , the population around Route 41 quickly dips , and fields surround the highway . A local road , CR 202 ( Murphy Road ) , starts to the west after a short distance . The northeast curving begins to straighten into a northward track , until intersecting with the southern terminus of CR 236 ( Gypsy Road ) . A short distance after , Route 41 intersects with CR 133 , the old alignment of the Seneca Turnpike , and the two highways merge . 
 The county highway then follows the Old Seneca Turnpike along East Main Street , entering the village of Marcellus . Route 41 then makes a turn to the south along an old alignment of NY 174 . The population becomes dense once again , as Route 41 follows South Street towards its eastern terminus . Paralleling Marcellus County Park , the highway continues southward . Route 41 finally terminates at an intersection with CR 83 ( South Street ) and CR 150 ( Platt Road ) . South Street continues towards an intersection with NY 174 and NY 175 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old roads = = = 
 Route 41 from US 20 to South Street , is a realignment of the Seneca Turnpike , which was assigned in 1800 . Originally chartered as Genesee Road , the Seneca Turnpike consisted of a highway from Canandaigua to Utica . The turnpike had a long track in Onondaga County , running along CR 133 , NY 174 , NY 175 , NY 173 , and NY 92 . The turnpike was realigned in 1806 onto CR 41 instead of CR 133 . After CR 41 , it continued along the same track . The Seneca Turnpike Corporation , which maintained the turnpike , closed its doors in 1852 . As of 2008 , County Routes 41 and 133 still retain the Seneca Turnpike moniker . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 In 1930 , during a massive State Route renumbering , the Skaneateles – South Street alignment of CR 41 was assigned as NY 175 . The rest was portioned as an alignment of NY 174 . The NY 174 alignment remained intact for many years , while NY 175 went through several different alignments . NY 175 was truncated off the CR 41 alignment by 1936 , until being realigned back onto the highway in the 1960s . However , this time , the highway was maintained by the Onondaga County Department of Transportation . NY 175 was realigned by 1989 onto CR 73 ( the Lee Mulroy Highway ) south of CR 41 . The alignment of CR 41 in Marcellus was established as a county highway in the 1970s and 1980s , when NY 174 was realigned onto a different highway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Onondaga County . 
 = Amber Merritt = 
 Amber Merritt ( born 17 February 1993 ) is a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ point wheelchair basketball player who plays forward . She represented Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , where she won a silver medal . 
 Born in England , Merritt moved to Australia when she was ten years old . She was originally a swimmer , but was recruited into basketball by the Paralympic Hall of Fame coach Frank Ponta in 2007 . She started playing top level club wheelchair basketball in Australia for the Perth Western Stars in the Women 's National Wheelchair Basketball League ( WNWBL ) in 2008 . In 2013 , she captained the team , and it to its first WNWBL championship . She was the league 's top scorer , and the Most Valuable Player 4 pointer in its All Star Five , in 2011 , 2012 and 2013 . 
 Merritt made her debut with the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , in 2009 . She has played for the Gliders in a number of international series including the 2010 U23 World Championship , 2011 U25 World Championship , 2011 , 2012 and 2013 Osaka Cups , the 2012 BT Paralympic World Cup , and 2012 Gliders and Rollers World Challenge in Sydney . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Nicknamed Bambi , Merritt was born on 17 February 1993 in Portsmouth , England , with a club foot . She moved to Perth in Western Australia when she was ten after her parents decided they wanted to see what else the world had to offer , and graduated from high school there in 2010 . As of 2013 , she lives in Wanneroo , Western Australia . 
 = = Wheelchair basketball = = 
 Merritt is a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ point wheelchair basketball who plays forward . She started playing in 2007 . She was originally a swimmer , but was recruited into basketball by the Paralympic Hall of Fame coach Frank Ponta . 
 In financial year 2012 / 13 , the Australian Sports Commission gave Merritt a A $ 20 @,@ 000 grant as part of their Direct Athlete Support ( DAS ) program . She received $ 17 @,@ 000 in 2011 / 12 and 2010 / 11 and $ 5 @,@ 571 @.@ 42 in 2009 / 10 . 
 Wearing jersey number 14 , Merritt started playing top level club wheelchair basketball in Australia for the Perth Western Stars in the Women 's National Wheelchair Basketball League in 2008 . In the second round of that season , the Western Stars defeated the Hills Hornets 52 – 44 . Playing for the Stars , she scored 10 points in her team 's victory . 
 In the 2012 season during the first game loss , Merritt scored eight points , had five rebounds , and two assists . In the league 's third game and her team 's second game , a loss to the Dandenong Rangers , she scored 26 points , and had 14 rebounds . In her team 's third game victory against the Sydney Uni Flames , she scored 18 points , while having 10 rebounds . In the Western Stars ' 56 – 36 semifinal victory against the Sydney Uni Flames , she played an important role . The Western Stars played in the league 's third place match , where she led it in scoring with 34 points as they defeated Sydney 63 – 54 . She finished the season as the WNWBL Season Top Scorer , 
 Merritt was the Western Stars ' captain for the 2013 season , and led the team to its first WNWBL championship , defeating the Sachs <unk> Bears in the final 43 – 40 despite being 11 points down at three @-@ quarter time . She was the league 's top scorer , and the Most Valuable Player 4 pointer in its All Star Five , as she had previously been in 2011 and 2012 . 
 Merritt made her debut with the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , in 2009 , playing in several different competitions that year including the Japan Friendly Series , Four Nations in Canada and the Under 23 World Championship where her team finished fourth . As the youngest member of the Australian team at the 2010 World Championships , she finished fourth . She competed in the 2011 Asia Oceania Regional Championships , scoring ten points for her team as the third leading scorer in the final game of a competition where her did not lose a single match . That year , she also represented Australia at the 2011 Under 25 World Championships , where she wore shirt number 7 and was a key blocker for her team . Merritt played in the 2011 Osaka Cup , and the 2012 BT Paralympic World Cup . She competed at the 2012 Gliders and Rollers World Challenge in Sydney , scoring the winning points in the first place match against the Germany women 's national wheelchair basketball team , and was named the women 's MVP for the competition , having averaged 17 @.@ 8 points per game . 
 Merritt was selected to represent Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in wheelchair basketball . The London Games were her first . In the group stage , the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team at the 2012 Summer Paralympics posted wins against Brazil , Great Britain , and the Netherlands , but lost to the Canada . This was enough to advance the Gliders to the quarter @-@ finals , where they beat Mexico . The Gliders then defeated the United States by a point to set up a final clash with Germany . The Gliders lost 44 – 58 , and earned a silver medal . 
 Since the London games , Merritt has participated in the 2013 Osaka Cup , where the Gliders successfully defended the title they had won in 2008 , 2009 , 2010 and 2012 . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = Mud Creek ( Chillisquaque Creek ) = 
 Mud Creek is a tributary of Chillisquaque Creek in Columbia County and Montour County in Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 8 @.@ 3 miles ( 13 @.@ 4 km ) long and flows through Madison Township , Columbia County and Derry Township , Montour County . The main tributaries of the creek are unnamed tributaries . The creek 's watershed has an area of 17 @.@ 70 square miles and is in West Hemlock Township , Montour County as well as the two townships it flows through . The watershed is mostly agricultural and forested and the main developed areas are Washingtonville and Jerseytown . 
 As of 2011 , the daily load of sediment in Mud Creek is 24 @,@ 165 @.@ 59 pounds ( 10 @,@ 961 @.@ 33 kg ) and the daily load of phosphorus is 16 @.@ 64 pounds ( 7 @.@ 55 kg ) . Various other compounds and metals are also found in the creek . The main rock formations in the watershed include the Hamilton Group , the Trimmers Rock Formation , and the Onondaga and Old Port Formations . The main soil series are the Watson @-@ Berks @-@ Alvira series , the Chenango @-@ Pope @-@ Holly series , and the Berks @-@ Weikert @-@ Bedington series . The watershed is in the ridge and valley region of the Appalachian Mountains . 
 Mud Creek is named for its muddiness . An area near it was settled as early as 1772 and several bridges were built across it and its tributaries in the 20th century . The creek is designated as a warm @-@ water fishery . 
 = = Course = = 
 Mud Creek begins in central Madison Township , Columbia County . It flows south for a short distance before turning southwest and passing through Jerseytown , where it crosses Pennsylvania Route 44 . The creek then continues to flow southwest , parallel to Pennsylvania Route 254 . Over the next several miles , its direction gradually changes from southwest to west and it exits Madison Township . Mud Creek then enters Derry Township , Montour County . It turns southwest again , continuing to follow Pennsylvania Route 254 . Over the next few miles , the creek receives several unnamed tributaries . It then crosses Pennsylvania Route 54 and enters Chillisquaque Creek 16 @.@ 79 miles ( 27 @.@ 02 km ) upstream of its mouth , immediately south of Washingtonville . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 As of 2011 , a total of 54 @.@ 78 miles ( 88 @.@ 16 km ) of streams in the watershed of Mud Creek were affected by organic enrichment , low concentrations of dissolved oxygen , and heavy loads of sediment . The entirety of every stream in the creek 's watershed was considered by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to be impaired as of 2011 . 
 The daily load of sediment in Mud Creek was 24 @,@ 165 pounds ( 10 @,@ 961 kg ) as of 2011 , but the total maximum daily load , above which water quality is considered impaired , is only 11 @,@ 371 @.@ 58 pounds ( 5 @,@ 158 @.@ 06 kg ) . The largest contributor of sediment to the creek was cropland , which contributed 19 @,@ 538 @.@ 46 pounds ( 8 @,@ 862 @.@ 50 kg ) per day . 3 @,@ 188 @.@ 05 pounds ( 1 @,@ 446 @.@ 08 kg ) of sediment per day came from stream banks and 1 @,@ 016 @.@ 05 pounds ( 460 @.@ 87 kg ) came from hay and pastures . 229 @.@ 80 pounds ( 104 @.@ 24 kg ) came from land classified by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection as " transition " , 115 @.@ 78 pounds ( 52 @.@ 52 kg ) per day came from forest , and 77 @.@ 36 pounds ( 35 @.@ 09 kg ) from land classified by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection as " low @-@ intensity development " . 0 @.@ 05 pounds ( 0 @.@ 023 kg ) came from wetlands . Many of the streams in the watershed can be muddy for a number of days after thunderstorms . A United States Geological Survey report from the 1960s observed a total of 1 @.@ 5 tons of dissolved solids flowing through the creek daily . 
 As of 2011 , the load of phosphorus in Mud Creek was 16 @.@ 64 pounds ( 7 @.@ 55 kg ) per day , but the total maximum daily load is 6 @.@ 71 pounds ( 3 @.@ 04 kg ) . 12 @.@ 92 pounds ( 5 @.@ 86 kg ) per day came from cropland , 2 @.@ 18 pounds ( 0 @.@ 99 kg ) from groundwater , and 1 @.@ 10 pounds ( 0 @.@ 50 kg ) from hay and pastures . An average of 0 @.@ 14 pounds ( 64 g ) per day of phosphorus came from land classified by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection as " transition " . 0 @.@ 07 pounds ( 32 g ) came from forest , 0 @.@ 07 pounds ( 32 g ) from land classified by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection as " low @-@ intensity development " , and 0 @.@ 07 pounds ( 32 g ) from stream banks . Septic systems contributed 0 @.@ 06 pounds ( 27 g ) of phosphorus per day to the creek and wetlands contributed 0 @.@ 0002 pounds ( 0 @.@ 091 g ) . 
 The discharge of Mud Creek ranges from 0 @.@ 1 to 13 cubic feet per second and averages 5 @.@ 8 cubic feet per second . Its pH ranges from 6 @.@ 3 to 7 @.@ 9 and the specific conductance is between 162 and 312 micro @-@ siemens per centimeter at 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) . 
 A United States Geological Survey report in the 1960s measured the concentration of bicarbonate in Mud Creek to range from 41 to 109 milligrams per liter , but there were no carbonates in the water . The creek 's nitrate concentration ranged from 3 @.@ 3 to 6 @.@ 3 milligrams per liter for filtered water and the concentration of sulfates ranged from 23 to 29 milligrams per liter , again for filtered water . The concentration of chlorides in the creek 's filtered waters ranged from 7 to 23 milligrams per liter . The calcium and magnesium concentrations in filtered water were 20 to 44 and 4 @.@ 4 to 6 milligrams per liter , respectively . 
 Mud Creek experiences nonpoint source pollution . The Montour County Natural Areas Inventory recommended remedying this pollution . 
 = = Geography , geology , and climate = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Mud Creek is 502 feet ( 153 m ) above sea level . The elevation of the creek 's source is approximately 760 feet ( 230 m ) above sea level . The highest areas of the watershed are in its southeastern portion . The watershed of Mud Creek is in the ridge and valley physiographic region of the Appalachian Mountains . 
 The main rock type in the watershed is shale , mainly that of the Hamilton Group . <unk> and sandstone are also found in the watershed , in the Trimmers Rock Formation and the Onondaga and Old Port Formations . The Trimmers Rock Formation occurs on the southern side of the watershed and also in the northeastern corner of it . The Onondaga and Old Port Formations occur in the lowest reaches of the watershed and the Hamilton Group occurs everywhere else . 80 percent of the watershed 's rock is of the Hamilton Group , 15 percent is of the Trimmers Rock Formation , and 5 percent is of the Onondaga and Old Port Formations . 
 The Lower Helderberg Limestone occurs a small distance north of Mud Creek , where it is quarried . It is a <unk> and blue @-@ colored limestone that is 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) thick and dips at an angle of six to eight degrees . There are small pieces of the Oriskany sandstone close to the confluence of the creek with Chillisquaque Creek . 
 The most common soil series in the watershed of Mud Creek is the Watson @-@ Berks @-@ Alvira series . It is a shaly silt loam that mostly occurs in the watershed 's plains and highlands . Other soil series in the watershed include the Berks @-@ Weikert @-@ Bedington series and the Chenango @-@ Pope @-@ Holly series . The Chenango @-@ Pope @-@ Holly occupies areas near the creek itself in its lower reaches and the Berks @-@ Weikert @-@ Bedington series occurs throughout most of the southern edge of the watershed . All other parts of the watershed lie over soil of the Berks @-@ Weikert @-@ Bedington series . 80 percent of the soil is of the Watson @-@ Berks @-@ Alvira series , 12 percent is of the Berks @-@ Weikert @-@ Bedington series , and 8 percent is of the Chenango @-@ Pope @-@ Holly series . The Holly @-@ <unk> @-@ Basher soil association is found in the floodplain of the creek . 
 On average , 44 @.@ 5 inches ( 113 cm ) of precipitation fall in the watershed of Mud Creek annually . The annual level of runoff in the watershed is 0 @.@ 13 inches ( 0 @.@ 33 cm ) on average . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Mud Creek has an area of 17 @.@ 70 square miles . It is mainly in Madison Township , Columbia County and Derry Township , Montour County , but a small part of it is in West Hemlock Township , Montour County . The watershed of the creek is in the Washingtonville and Millville United States Geological Survey 7 @.@ 5 minute quadrangles . It is on the eastern edge of the West Branch Susquehanna River watershed . The creek 's major tributaries include several unnamed tributaries . 
 The main land use in the watershed of Mud Creek is agricultural land , which accounts for 62 @.@ 97 percent of the total area . 31 @.@ 49 percent of the watershed is forested and 5 @.@ 54 percent is developed land . Most of the forested land is on the watershed 's southern and eastern edges , but there are some patches of it elsewhere , most of which are fairly small . Most of the developed land is near Jerseytown and Washingtonville , but there are several other small areas of development in the watershed 's lower reaches and a few other areas in its upper reaches . 
 The major communities in the Mud Creek watershed are Jerseytown and Washingtonville . Major roads in the watershed include Pennsylvania Route 254 . There are also a number of township roads that go to the creek and its tributaries . 
 = = History and etymology = = 
 An early settler in the area was George <unk> , who built a cabin in the valley of Mud Creek at Jerseytown in 1772 . The Mud Creek Bridge was built over Mud Creek in 1907 . It is a Pratt pony truss bridge that was built in 1907 and is 40 feet ( 12 m ) . The bridge is near to collapse and is closed to traffic . Another eight bridges also cross the creek . Four were built in the 1930s , one in 1946 , two in 1962 , and the most recent in 1984 . An additional four bridges were built over its tributaries in the 1940s . 
 John Gosse Freeze gives the name Mud Creek as the east branch of Chillisquaque Creek in his 1888 book A History of Columbia County , Pennsylvania : From the Earliest Times , but adds that the creek 's name is more correctly the East Branch of the Chillisquaque . Mud Creek is named for its muddiness , which is especially pronounced following storms . 
 = = Biology = = 
 There are few or no riparian buffers along Mud Creek where it flows through agricultural land . However , the Montour County Natural Areas Inventory has recommended restoring the riparian buffers in Derry Township . A wet meadow is located along the creek north of Washingtonville . Plant types typically found in wet meadows include various ferns , sedges , grasses , and red maples . Mud Creek is designated as a warm @-@ water fishery . 
 = Be All My Sins Remember 'd = 
 " Be All My Sins Remember 'd " is the 71st episode of the science fiction television series Stargate Atlantis , and the eleventh episode of the series ' fourth season . The episode was written by Atlantis co @-@ executive producer , Martin Gero , his third script of the season , and directed by Andy Mikita . The episode originally aired on the Sci Fi Channel in the United States on January 4 , 2008 , and aired on Sky One in the United Kingdom on January 8 . The episode 's title is derived from the line , " The fair Ophelia ! Nymph , in thy <unk> / Be all my sins remember 'd " from the famous " To be or not to be " soliloquy in William Shakespeare 's Hamlet . 
 The episode is the second installment of a three @-@ episode arc that began with the mid @-@ season finale " This Mortal Coil " ( also taken from Hamlet 's soliloquy ) , in which <unk> @-@ created copies of Lieutenant Colonel John Sheppard and his team give their real counterparts on Atlantis a device that reveals the presence of over thirty Asuran battleships in the Pegasus galaxy . The episode resolves the main Asuran storyline with their permanent defeat at the hands of the Atlantis Expedition . The episode received generally positive critical reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Earth ships Apollo and Daedalus , which have been upgraded with Asgard plasma beam weapons , arrive in the Pegasus galaxy to battle the Asurans . After some initial successes against their enemy , they learn that the Asurans have retreated back to the safety of their homeworld to rebuild their numbers . Rodney McKay ( David Hewlett ) works with Todd , a Wraith prisoner ( Brendan Penny , Christopher Heyerdahl ) to create a computer virus to deactivate the Asurans , but they do not succeed . However , McKay develops an alternate plan to enhance the attractive forces between the Asuran nanites , pulling them together into a <unk> mass that the Expedition can then implode by overloading <unk> around it . To carry out this plan , he creates another humanoid Replicator to serve as a nucleus , later dubbed " FRAN " ( " Friendly Replicator Android " , played by Michelle Morgan ) . 
 For the plan to be successful , the Expedition must also prevent the Asuran ships from escaping into hyperspace . The Wraith prisoner convinces seven Wraith hive ships to join the Earth ships ' attack . Concerned about the Asuran threat , the Travelers under Larrin contribute some of their ships as well . Back on Atlantis , Teyla ( Rachel Luttrell ) is forced to admit that she is pregnant , and is pulled off duty . The combined fleet arrives over the Asuran homeworld and engages the enemy fleet , while Fran beams down to the surface and begins to pull the other nanites towards her . However , the <unk> mass collapses the power grid , meaning that the <unk> cannot be overloaded . McKay and Colonel Carter ( Amanda Tapping ) determine that , if they increase the mass 's attraction to the ultra @-@ dense <unk> in the planet 's crust , the additional mass will cause it to sink into the core of the planet . The pressure and heat in the core initiates a fusion reaction so that the planet explodes , shortly after the allied fleet escapes . One Asuran ship survives at the end of the episode , revealing its commander as Elizabeth Weir ( Torri Higginson ) , who notes that their " work " can now begin without interference . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Martin Gero completed the script of " Be All My Sins Remember 'd " by May 7 , 2007 . The script included a conversation between Carter and Colonel Caldwell ( Mitch Pileggi ) , where he talks to her as an " equal " , but the filmed scene was cut when the episode was longer than anticipated . The production crew felt the scene was not important enough , but Gero also noticed with surprise that Mitch Pileggi acted it out as if it were a " romance scene " . 
 Mitch Pileggi returned as Colonel Caldwell , who has not appeared in the series since season three 's twelfth episode , " Echoes " , due to Pileggi 's commitments in The Batman animated series . He also appeared alongside Michael Beach , who last played Colonel Abe Ellis in " Lifeline " . Christopher Heyerdahl returned as the Wraith character who would be named " Todd " in the next episode . However , Heyerdahl was unavailable to appear for " Be All My Sins Remember 'd " , so Brendan Penny filled in for the part . Penny was made to look like Heyerdahl as convincingly as possible , but Heyerdahl was asked to provide the voice for the character since the producers feared that the audience would later pick up on Penny 's voice otherwise . 
 Michelle Morgan played " FRAN " , the " Friendly Replicator Android " . Morgan was originally set to play <unk> , Davos ' daughter from a previous episode , " The Seer " . However , the role was given to Kimberley <unk> when Morgan had to participate in a reshoot of her role in Diary of the Dead . Morgan was disappointed that she did not get the role of <unk> , but stated after her casting as FRAN that it was fun to play a character that is highly dangerous and yet completely innocent . Jill Wagner returned as Larrin for this episode , after her debut appearance in " Travelers " . Torri Higginson returned as Elizabeth Weir in her fourth appearance in the season , at the very end of the episode . The script intended her to have two lines of dialog in the episode , but producers knew that the audience would recognize Higginson 's voice and hence used a stand @-@ in to say the first line instead . 
 The visual effects were done by the Vancouver @-@ based Image Engine . Before the broadcasting , Atlantis visual effects supervisor Mark Savela revealed that the episode would have the " biggest effects sequence viewers will ever have seen , " which involved the epic space battle in the climax of the episode . Savela intended the visual effects to top the minute @-@ long sequence of the Horizon missiles firing to the Asuran homeworld in the season three finale " First Strike " . The sequence was reportedly so complicated that for the first time in the series , models were used to physically map out the action before creating the initial animatics . Gero later stated that the episode had a battle sequence that " we will not be able to top . It is the greatest special effects sequence that the show has ever done . " The episode used an extent of special effects and had one of the highest budgets in the entire series , comparable with the series ' pilot episode " Rising " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When " Be All My Sins Remember 'd " aired on the Sci Fi Channel on January 4 , 2008 , the episode received a total household ratings of 1 @.@ 4 , a ratings record for the series ' fourth season , and the highest in the series since the 1 @.@ 5 rating of the season three finale , " First Strike " . " Be All My Sins Remember 'd " made Stargate Atlantis SCI FI 's highest rated original series of the week , and the second most viewed broadcasting in total , second to the Television movie " Beyond Loch Ness " , which starred Stargate veterans Don S. Davis and Paul McGillion and had a rating of 1 @.@ 7 . In its UK airing on Sky One on January 8 , 2008 , the episode was watched by approximately 485 @,@ 000 viewers , making the series the most @-@ watched series of the week , even beating The Simpsons . 
 IGN 's Tory Ireland Mell gave the episode an " incredible " rating of 9 @.@ 6 out of 10 , praising the return of Larrin and the introduction of " FRAN " . He described the space battle against the Replicators as " legendary " , but did not feel that the visual effects were as good as Battlestar Galactica . GateWorld rated the episode with four stars ( out of a possible four ) , only one of two episodes in the season to do so . " Be All My Sins Remember 'd " achieved 9 @.@ 52 out of 10 from the GateWorld fan rating , making it one of only seven episodes in the Stargate franchise to have a fan rating higher than 9 @.@ 5 at the time . The space battle earned the visual effects team a nomination for " Best Visual Effects " in the 23rd Annual Gemini Awards , but they lost to The Tudors . Four days after the episode 's first broadcast , Stargate Atlantis won a People 's Choice Award for " Best Sci @-@ Fi Show " , beating Battlestar Galactica and Doctor Who . 
 = John Parkinson ( botanist ) = 
 John Parkinson ( 1567 – 1650 ; buried 6 August 1650 ) was the last of the great English herbalists and one of the first of the great English botanists . He was apothecary to James I and a founding member of the Worshipful Society of Apothecaries in December 1617 , and was later Royal Botanist to Charles I. He is known for two monumental works , Paradisi in Sole Paradisus Terrestris ( Park @-@ in @-@ Sun 's Terrestrial Paradise , 1629 ) , which generally describes the proper cultivation of plants ; and Theatrum Botanicum ( The Botanical Theatre or Theatre of Plants , 1640 ) , the most complete and beautifully presented English treatise on plants of its time . One of the most eminent gardeners of his day , he kept a botanical garden at Long Acre in Covent Garden , today close to Trafalgar Square , and maintained close relations with other important English and Continental botanists , herbalists and plantsmen . 
 = = Life = = 
 Parkinson , born in 1567 , spent his early life in Yorkshire . He moved to London at the age of 14 years to become an apprentice apothecary . Rising through the ranks , he eventually achieved the position of apothecary to James I , and a founding member of the Worshipful Society of Apothecaries in December 1617 ; until 1622 he also served on the Court of Assistants , the Society 's governing body . In addition , he assisted the Society in obtaining a grant of arms and in preparing a list of all medicines that should be stocked by an apothecary . He was on the committee that published their <unk> Londinensis ( London <unk> ) in 1618 . 
 Then , on the cusp of a new science , he became botanist to Charles I. Anna Parkinson , a " distant descendant " of Parkinson and the author of a new popular biography of him , asserts that in 1625 when Charles I 's bride , Henrietta Maria of France , came at the age of 15 years to live at St. James 's Palace , " he took on the role of introducing the young queen to <unk> sophisticated circles . " When he summed up his experience in writing Paradisi in Sole Paradisus Terrestris ( Park @-@ in @-@ Sun 's Terrestrial Paradise , 1629 – " Park @-@ in @-@ Sun " is a pun on " Parkinson " ) , with the explanatory subtitle A Garden of all sorts of pleasant flowers which our English ayre will permit to be <unk> up , it was natural that he dedicated this work , which he called his " Speaking Garden " , to the queen . Blanche <unk> called the work the " earliest important treatise on horticulture published in England " , while the Hunt catalogue described it as " a very complete picture of the English garden at the beginning of the seventeenth century , and in such delightful , homely , literary style that gardeners cherish it even to the present day . " 
 Parkinson actively sought new varieties of plants through his contacts abroad and by financing William <unk> 's plant @-@ hunting expedition to Iberia and North Africa in 1607 – 1608 . He introduced seven new plants into England and was the first gardener in England to grow the great double yellow Spanish daffodil ( Pseudonarcissus aureus <unk> flore <unk> or Parkinson 's Daffodil , see illustration ) . ( " I thinke none ever had this kind before myselfe nor did I myself ever see it before the year 1618 for it is of mine own raising and flowering first in my own garden " . ) 
 His piety as a Roman Catholic is evident from Paradisi in Sole . In his introduction , Parkinson saw the botanical world as an expression of divine creation , and believed that through gardens man could recapture something of Eden . Nonetheless , a short French poem at the foot of the title page warned the gardener against hubris and in having excessive regard for his efforts , for whoever tries to compare Art with Nature and gardens with Eden " measures the stride of the elephant by the stride of the mite and the flight of the eagle by that of the gnat " . However , struggles between Protestants and Catholics compelled Parkinson to keep a low profile . He did not attend any parish church . At the height of his success , the English Civil War ( 1642 – 1651 ) tore his family apart . 
 Parkinson 's London house was in Ludgate Hill , but his botanical garden was in suburban Long Acre in Covent Garden , a district of market @-@ gardens , today close to Trafalgar Square . Not much is known about the garden , but based on a study of the writings of Parkinson and others , John Riddell has suggested that it was at least 2 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 m2 ) in size and probably surrounded by a wall . Four hundred and eighty @-@ four types of plant are recorded as having been grown in the garden . Thomas Johnson and the Hampshire botanist , John <unk> , both gathered seeds there . 
 Parkinson has been called one of the most eminent gardeners of his day . He maintained close relations with other important English and Continental botanists , herbalists and plantsmen such as William <unk> , John Gerard , John Tradescant the elder ( who was a close friend ) , Vespasian Robin , and the Frenchman Matthias de Lobel ( also known as Matthias de L 'Obel or Matthaeus <unk> ) . Together , they belonged to the generation that began to see extraordinary new plants coming from the Levant and from Virginia , broadly speaking . In his writings , de Lobel frequently mentioned the Long Acre garden and praised Parkinson 's abilities . Parkinson , on his part , edited and presented in Theatrum Botanicum the papers of de Lobel , who had spent the final years of his life in Highgate supervising the gardens of Edward la Zouche , the 11th Baron Zouche . 
 Parkinson died in the summer of 1650 , and was buried at St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields , London , on 6 August . He is commemorated in the Central American genus of leguminous trees <unk> . Paradisi in Sole also inspired the children 's writer Juliana Horatia Ewing ( 1841 – 1885 ) to write the story Mary 's Meadow , which was first published from November 1883 to March 1884 in Aunt Judy 's Magazine ( 1866 – 1885 ) , produced by her mother Margaret Gatty . In the story , some children read Paradisi in Sole and are inspired to create their own garden . The magazine received much favourable correspondence about the story , and in July 1884 it was suggested that a Parkinson Society should be formed . The objects of the society were to " search out and cultivate old garden flowers which have become scarce ; to exchange seeds and plants ; to plant waste places with hardy flowers ; to circulate books on gardening amongst the Members ... [ and ] to try to prevent the extermination of rare wild flowers , as well as of garden treasures . " 
 = = Work = = 
 Paradisi in Sole Paradisus Terrestris describes the proper cultivation of plants in general , and is in three sections : the flower garden , the kitchen garden , and the orchard garden . It does not include specific growing instructions for each type of plant , but at the start of each main section Parkinson provides instructions on " ordering " each type of garden , advising on situating and laying out a garden , tools , soil improvement , grafting , planting and sowing and the types of plants that should be included in each type of garden . It contains illustrations of almost 800 plants in 108 full @-@ page plates . Most of these were original woodcuts made by the German artist Christopher Switzer , but others appear to have been copied from the works of Matthias de Lobel , Charles de l <unk> and the Hortus <unk> of <unk> van de Passe the Elder . 
 In Paradisi in Sole Parkinson hinted that he hoped to add a fourth section , a garden of simples ( medicinal herbs ) . He delivered the promise in his other great book , the monumental Theatrum Botanicum ( The Botanical Theatre or Theatre of Plants ) which he published in 1640 at the age of 73 years . The release of this work was delayed due to the popularity of Thomas Johnson 's edition of John Gerard 's book The Herball or Generall Historie of Plantes ( 1597 ) . Theatrum Botanicum , with 1 @,@ 688 pages of text , describes over 3 @,@ 800 plants and was the most complete and beautifully presented English treatise on plants of its day . It was the first work to describe 33 native plants , 13 of which grew near Parkinson 's Middlesex home . Some of these plants , such as the Welsh poppy , the Strawberry Tree and the Lady 's Slipper , were very common but had gone unnoticed or at least unrecorded . He intended the book to be a reliable guide for apothecaries , and it remained so for more than a hundred years after his death . Parkinson presented the work to Charles I , who conferred on him the title " Botanicus Regis <unk> " ( " Royal Botanist of the First Rank " ) though this came without a salary . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Parkinson , John ( 1629 ) . Paradisi in Sole Paradisus Terrestris : Or A Garden of All Sorts of Pleasant Flowers which our English Ayre will <unk> to be <unk> Vp . With a Kitchen Garden of All Manner of Herbes , Rootes , & <unk> , for <unk> or <unk> <unk> with Vs , and an Orchard of All <unk> of <unk> Trees and <unk> Fit for Our Land . Together with the Right <unk> , Planting & Preserving of Them and Their Uses and Vertues Collected by Iohn Parkinson Apothecary of London . London : Printed by <unk> Lownes and Robert <unk> at the Signe of the <unk> on Bread @-@ Street <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 5962 / <unk> Retrieved 29 December 2014 . Folio . In some copies the title page is woodcut ; in others it is printed ( dated 1635 ) . Later editions and reprints : 
 Parkinson , John ( 1656 ) . Paradisi in Sole Paradisus Terrestris , or , A <unk> Garden of All Sorts of <unk> Flowers with their Nature , Place of Birth , Time of <unk> , Names , and Vertues to Each Plant , Useful in Physic or Admired for Beauty : To which is <unk> a Kitchin @-@ Garden Furnished with All Manner of Herbs , Roots , and Fruits , for Meat or Sauce Used with Us , with the Art of Planting an Orchard ... All <unk> in Former Herbals . London : Printed by R.N. and are to be sold by Richard Thrale at his shop at the signe of the Cross @-@ Keys at S. Pauls @-@ gate , going into Cheap @-@ side . Folio . 
 Parkinson , John ; Alfred H. Hyatt ( comp . ) ( 1904 ) . A Garden of Pleasant Flowers : Being a Description of the Most Familiar of Our English Garden Flowers from the Famous Collection of John Parkinson . London : T.N. Foulis . 
 Parkinson , John ( 1904 ) . Paradisi in Sole Paradisus Terrestris ... Faithfully Reprinted from the Edition of 1629 . London : Methuen & Co. doi : 10 @.@ 5962 / <unk> Retrieved 29 December 2014 . 
 Parkinson , John ( 1975 ) . Paradisi in Sole Paradisus Terrestris , etc . [ The English Experience ; no . 758 ] . Amsterdam ; Norwood , N.J. : Theatrum Orbis Terrarum ; Walter J. Johnson . Facsimile of the 1629 edition without the letterpress title page , made from copies in the Bodleian Library . 
 Parkinson , John ( 1976 ) . Paradisi in Sole , etc . New York , N.Y. : Dover Publications . ISBN 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . Facsimile of the 1629 edition . 
 Parkinson , John ( 1976 ) . A Garden of Pleasant Flowers . New York , N.Y. ; London : Dover Publications ; Constable . ISBN 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Parkinson , John ( 1640 ) . Theatrum Botanicum : The Theater of Plants . Or , An Herball of a Large Extent , Containing therein a More Ample and Exact History and Declaration of the Physicall Herbs and Plants that are in Other <unk> , <unk> by the <unk> of Many Hundreds of New , Rare , and Strange Plants from All the Parts of the World , with Sundry <unk> , and Other Physicall Materials , than hath beene hitherto Published by Any before ; and a Most Large Demonstration of their Natures and Vertues . <unk> <unk> the Many Errors , Differences , and <unk> of Sundry Authors that have Formerly Written of Them ; and a Certaine Confidence , or most Probable <unk> of the True and Genuine Herbes and Plants . Distributed into Sundry Classes or Tribes , for the More <unk> Knowledge of the Many Herbes of One Nature and Property , with the <unk> Notes of Dr. Lobel , Dr. Bonham , and Others Inserted therein . Collected by the Many Years <unk> , Industry , and Experience in this Subject , by Iohn Parkinson Apothecary of London , and the Kings <unk> . And Published by the Kings <unk> <unk> <unk> . London : Thomas Cotes . Folio . Reprints : 
 Parkinson , John ( 1967 ) . A Fragment from Theatrum Botanicum , " or An Herball of a Large Extent " . Falls Village , Conn . : Herb Grower Press . 
 Parkinson , John ( 1982 ) . Theatrum botanicum : Or an Herball of a Large <unk> . [ S.l. ] : <unk> . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = French ironclad Colbert = 
 The French ironclad Colbert was the lead ship of the Colbert @-@ class ironclads that were built for the French Navy in the 1870s . The ship was the flagship of the Mediterranean Squadron for most of her career . She took part in the French conquest of Tunisia , notably shelling and landing troops in Sfax on 15 – 16 July 1881 . Colbert was paid off in 1895 and condemned in 1900 . The ship was finally sold for scrap in 1909 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Colbert @-@ class ships were designed by Constructor Sabattier as improved versions of the ironclad Richelieu . As a central battery ironclad , Colbert had her armament concentrated amidships . Like most ironclads of her era she was equipped with a plough @-@ shaped ram . Her crew numbered 774 officers and men . The metacentric height of the ship was low , a little above 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) . 
 The ship measured 101 @.@ 1 meters ( 331 ft 8 in ) overall , with a beam of 17 @.@ 4 meters ( 57 ft 1 in ) . Colbert had a maximum draft of 8 @.@ 5 meters ( 27 ft 11 in ) and displaced 8 @,@ 617 metric tons ( 8 @,@ 481 long tons ) . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Colbert reverted to a single propeller shaft to improve her sailing qualities . She had one Wolf 3 @-@ cylinder horizontal return connecting rod compound steam engine . The engine was powered by eight oval boilers and was designed for a capacity of 4 @,@ 600 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 400 kW ) . On sea trials the engine produced 4 @,@ 652 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 469 kW ) and Colbert reached 14 @.@ 75 knots ( 27 @.@ 32 km / h ; 16 @.@ 97 mph ) . She carried a maximum of 620 metric tons ( 610 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for approximately 3 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 100 km ; 3 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Colbert was ship rigged with three masts and had a sail area around 2 @,@ 100 square meters ( 23 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Colbert had two 274 @-@ millimeter ( 10 @.@ 8 in ) guns mounted in barbettes on the upper deck , one gun at the forward corners of the battery , with six additional guns on the battery deck below the barbettes . The side of the upper deck were cut away to improve the ability of the barbette guns to bear fore and aft . One 240 @-@ millimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) was mounted in the forecastle as a chase gun . The ship 's secondary armament consisted of six 138 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) guns , four forward of the battery and two aft . These latter two guns were replaced in 1878 by another 240 @-@ millimeter gun as a stern chaser . The ship also mounted four above @-@ water 356 @-@ millimeter ( 14 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes . 
 All of the ship 's guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . The 274 @-@ millimeter Modèle 1870 gun was credited with the ability to penetrate a maximum of 14 @.@ 3 inches ( 360 mm ) of wrought iron armor while the 240 @-@ millmeter Modèle 1870 gun could penetrate 14 @.@ 4 inches ( 366 mm ) of armor . 
 At some point the ship received fourteen to eighteen 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss 5 @-@ barrel revolving guns . The gun had a range of about 3 @,@ 200 meters ( 3 @,@ 500 yd ) and a rate of fire of about 30 rounds per minute . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The Colbert @-@ class ships had a complete wrought iron waterline belt that was 220 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) thick amidships and tapered to 180 millimeters ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) at the stern . It was backed by 89 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) of wood . The sides of the battery itself were armored with 160 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) of wrought iron , backed by 62 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) of wood , and the ends of the battery were closed by transverse armored bulkheads 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick , backed by 480 millimeters ( 18 @.@ 9 in ) of wood . The barbettes were unarmored , but the deck was 15 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick . 
 = = Service = = 
 Colbert was named in honor of Jean @-@ Baptiste Colbert , Controller @-@ General of Finances from 1665 to 1683 under King Louis XIV . She was laid down at Brest on 4 July 1870 and launched on 16 September 1875 . While the exact reason for such prolonged construction time is not known , it is believed that reduction of the French Navy 's budget after the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 and out @-@ of @-@ date work practices in French dockyards were likely causes . The ship began her sea trials on 23 May 1877 , but became flagship of the Reserve Squadron on 31 August 1878 . On 1 October 1879 she became the flagship of the Mediterranean Squadron ; which post she would hold until 14 January 1890 when she was placed in reserve . Colbert bombarded the Tunisian port of Sfax on 15 – 16 July 1881 as the French occupied Tunisia . She became flagship of the Reserve Squadron again on 12 April 1892 until she was disarmed and paid off in 1895 . She was condemned on 11 August 1900 , before being sold for scrap in 1909 . 
 = Typhoon Wayne ( 1986 ) = 
 Typhoon Wayne , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Miding , is one of the longest @-@ lived tropical cyclones on record for the north @-@ western Pacific ocean . The system meandered for 22 days in August – September 1986 between the South China sea and far western tropical North Pacific ocean , staying within the monsoon trough and causing heavy rains across the Philippines , Taiwan , southeast China , Hainan Island , and Vietnam . Its maximum sustained winds peaked at category two strength on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . Various signals were raised for Hong Kong three times due to Wayne 's unusual track . A total of 490 perished and US $ 399 million ( 1986 dollars ) in damage was due to the typhoon . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 This system began its long life on August 16 in the South China Sea , having formed within the monsoon trough . It drifted to the southwest , then looped back to the northwest , becoming a tropical storm on August 18 . Wayne , which remained embedded in the monsoon trough throughout its lifetime , turned to the northeast in response to a relocation of the trough , and became a typhoon according to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) on August 19 , and on August 20 according to the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) . At 2 p.m. that day , the ship M. V. <unk> recorded 78 knots ( 144 km / h ) winds just west of its center . The typhoon came close but remained offshore of southeastern China , and after reaching maximum sustained winds of 75 knots ( 139 km / h ) it hit western Taiwan on August 22 . The building subtropical ridge forced Wayne west and southwestward through the Luzon Strait , where after weakening to a tropical storm it restrengthened briefly to a typhoon on August 24 , according to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . The JMA did not upgrade Wayne back to a typhoon during this segment of Wayne 's existence . 
 Vertical shear caused Wayne to weaken to a depression on August 25 according to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , and August 26 according to the JMA , as the cyclone began to rotate around the circulation of Vera to its north . Tropical Depression Wayne sped up to the northeast , but when Vera moved far enough away , Wayne drifted northeastward through the South China Sea , becoming a tropical storm again on August 27 . <unk> to its north forced Wayne southward , where it again became a typhoon on August 30 according to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , and August 31 according to the JMA . Wayne passed close to northern Luzon on September 2 as a 75 knots ( 139 km / h ) typhoon , but turned back to the west . The JMA lowered Wayne back to a tropical storm on September 3 before restrengthening the cyclone back into a typhoon by early September 4 . On September 4 while moving quickly westward through the South China Sea , Wayne reached a peak of 85 knots ( 157 km / h ) winds according to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , or 70 knots ( 130 km / h ) winds according to the JMA , before it weakened due to land interaction . It hit northern Hainan on September 5 as an 70 knots ( 130 km / h ) typhoon . Its center passed just north of Haikou , whose pressure fell to 970 @.@ 1 hectopascals ( 28 @.@ 65 inHg ) . Wayne then entered the Gulf of Tonkin , and made its final landfall on northern Vietnam later that day as a tropical storm . The next day , Wayne dissipated over Vietnam , after 85 JTWC advisories and being the longest lasting Western Pacific system in history . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In Hong Kong , the Stand By Signal 1 was hoisted at 11 : 30 a.m. on August 19 . As Wayne approached , the Strong Wind Signal 3 was raised at 11 : 00 a.m. on August 20 . During its first approach , the Northeast Gale / Storm Signal 8 was issued at 10 p.m. on August 20 . As winds relaxed , the Strong Wind Signal 3 replaced the Storm Signal 8 at 2 a.m. on August 21 , with all signals lowered by 5 a.m. on August 21 . During Wayne 's second approach , the Stand By Signal 1 was raised at 11 : 45 a.m. on August 25 . Signals were again lowered once Wayne moved farther away at 2 : 35 p.m. on August 26 . During Wayne 's third approach , the Stand By Signal 1 was hoisted at 1 : 30 a.m. on September 4 . As Wayne continued its approach , the Strong Wind Signal 3 was raised at 3 p.m. the same day . Once Wayne moved away to the west of the area , signals were lowered for their final time at 2 : 10 p.m. on September 5 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 During its passage of Taiwan , 63 died , 12 @,@ 000 houses collapsed , and a thousand fishing vessels were wrecked . Total damage to the island reached US $ 360 million ( 1986 dollars ) . As a result of its consistent variance in track and drifting track , Wayne brought torrential rains through its path to the Philippines , Taiwan , southeastern China , Hainan Island , and Vietnam . In Hong Kong , winds gusted to 78 knots ( 144 km / h ) at Tate 's Cairn . During its various passages of Hong Kong , a total of 295 millimetres ( 11 @.@ 6 in ) of rainfall accumulated at Sai Kung . A total of 523 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 20 @.@ 61 in ) of rainfall was recorded at Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines . Thirty @-@ six perished in the Philippines . A total of 490 fatalities ( with dozens of casualties in Vietnam ) , tens of thousands left homeless , and US $ 399 million ( 1986 dollars ) in damage can be attributed to Typhoon Wayne . Despite its impact on the region and longevity , the name Wayne was not retired from the western Pacific naming list , being used again in 1989 . At the same time , President Corazon Aquino declared a state of calamity over Northern Luzon . 
 = The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter = 
 The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter : A Treasury of Myths , Legends , and Fascinating Facts is a guide to the fictional Harry Potter universe , written by David Colbert . It explores the references to history , legends , and literature in J.K. Rowling 's Harry Potter novels . Colbert conceived the idea for The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter while quizzing his nephew and nieces about the mythological references in the novels . He later wrote the book while teaching a seminar on self @-@ publishing to graduate students at the University of North Carolina . The book was published in March 2001 , without approval from Rowling , and has since received positive reviews from critics . An updated version of The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter was published in 2004 by Berkley Books . 
 = = Content = = 
 The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter explores the references to history , legends , and literature in J.K. Rowling 's Harry Potter novels . David Colbert , the author of the book , told the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch that the Harry Potter novels " are [ ... ] literary treasure hunts for [ Rowling 's ] readers . What seem like funny @-@ sounding names and places and excursions into fantasy all have a basis in either history , myth or legend . " He added , however , that he thinks Rowling has been able to turn these elements into her own , and concluded : " A couple of times , every generation , some writer gets it exactly right and really makes it their own , and J.K. Rowling has done that . " 
 The 220 @-@ pages @-@ long book features 53 chapters . Colbert writes about the connections between Rowling 's novels and folklore , Greek mythology , and the cultures of Ancient Egypt , Ancient Rome , and the Aztec . For example , he explains that Rowling got the name for the character Draco Malfoy from the Latin word for dragon , <unk> . One of the connections to folklore that Colbert find the most fascinating is the name of the evil wizard family The Malfoys . They are named after the Latin word for " evil @-@ doer " , <unk> , which was used in medieval times to describe witches . In addition , there is a chapter in the book that explains the origins of the names of the spells featured in the Harry Potter series . <unk> , for example , is a spell that disarms the opponent ; it comes from the Latin words <unk> and arma , which mean " to drive out " and " weapon " . 
 Colbert explains in the introduction of the book that one of the reasons he enjoys reading Rowling is because of these references that she hides in the novels . He comments that he believes she may have inserted them into the books to encourage readers to learn more about mythology and folklore ; " As [ Rowling ] said when somebody asked her in a chat about the source of one of the unforgivable curses [ featured in the books ] , she said , ' Look it up , a little investigation is good for a person . ' " 
 = = Background = = 
 Colbert received the idea for The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter during the summer of 2000 , when his young nephew and nieces spent their vacation at his home in Wrightsville Beach , North Carolina . During the first half of the children 's vacation , Colbert noticed their excitement for the novel Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire , which was about to be released in bookstores . When his nephew and nieces received the book , they read it for the remainder of their vacation with him . 
 Colbert , a historian and former head writer on the television quiz show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? , became interested in the books and bought the first novel in the series , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , to see what the story was about . As he was reading , he began to notice mythological references in the book . He commented : " I almost laughed out loud when I came across the three @-@ headed dog [ Fluffy ] . I instantly knew it was a reference to Cerberus , the <unk> beast which Ancient Greeks believed guarded the gates to the Underworld . " Inspired by this , Colbert continued to search the book for more references and noticed that most characters ' names are based on their personality and every magic creature is a reference to mythology and folklore . 
 Excited about his discoveries , Colbert began quizzing his nephew and nieces about the references featured in the books . He started by asking them if they knew who Fluffy was based on , and when revealing that the answer was Cerberus , they " gave him a blank stare " . Soon , however , the children thought it was " cool that their hero , Harry , was encountering some of the creatures of mythology . " Colbert felt that knowing the origins of Rowling 's character and creatures increased " the books ' magic tenfold " and made the Harry Potter universe seem more lifelike . Feeling that he wanted to share this with others , Colbert spent a year researching the references in the novels and collected his discoveries for a guidebook to the magical world of Harry Potter . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 Colbert wrote The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter while teaching a seminar on self @-@ publishing to graduate students at the University of North Carolina . He had it self @-@ published in March 2001 and hired a company to take care of accounting , marketing , promotion , and selling . Colbert has never met Rowling and the book has not been approved by her or Warner Brothers ( the owner of the film rights to the Harry Potter novels ) . He was given permission to publish it as long as he noted on the cover that it had not been approved by Rowling . 
 The book has been met with positive reactions from critics . Margie Thomson of The New Zealand Herald commented that " it 's interesting , although light , and should keep smart @-@ alecky kids and the truly curious happy and occupied for some time . " The Sacramento Bee 's Judy Green was also positive , saying that it " comes across as smart fun just begging for a trivia game . It 's a great way to spend time with Harry while waiting for the next novel . " The Times ' Sarah Johnson said " this irresistibly <unk> book gently draws children into the joys of works of reference and is also a glorious tribute to Rowling 's work . " 
 Despite the book not having been approved by Rowling , Marti Davis of The Knoxville News @-@ Sentinel suspected that she " would definitely approve of the wonderfully researched book which traces many of the characters , creatures and terms used in Rowling 's book to classic literature and ancient history . " The Birmingham Post 's Jayne Howarth added that the book is " fun to dip in and out of while reading the Potter stories and it illustrates just how clever these pieces of literature are . " 
 The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter has been praised for teaching children about literature and history . Theresa Tighe of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch commented that " grown @-@ ups might like Colbert 's book , too , because it painlessly exposes youngsters to Shakespeare , Chaucer , Ovid , Flaubert and more . " In addition , Candice Nguyen of the The Oakland Tribune said " parents may actually appreciate this book more when they realize that their children are receiving subtle history lessons while they read Harry Potter books and actually enjoying it . " The Sunday Tasmanian noted that " understanding the derivatives of language , both made up and actual such as the French , can only enrich the vocabulary of children . " 
 Following the success of The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter , Colbert released the book The Magical Worlds of The Lord of the Rings : The Amazing Myths , Legends and Facts Behind the Masterpiece — a guide to J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings novels — in late 2002 . An updated version of The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter was published in 2004 by Berkley Books , just before the film Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was released . Colbert wrote and published The Magical Worlds of Narnia in 2005 , a guide to the fictional Narnia universe . 
 = The Silence ( song ) = 
 " The Silence " is a song by British singer Alexandra Burke from her debut studio album Overcome ( 2009 ) . The song was written by Bilal Hajji and Savan Kotecha , along with the song 's producer Nadir " RedOne " Khayat . The song was released as a promotional single in anticipation of the re @-@ release of Overcome ( 2010 ) . Burke stated that the song was written when her aunt told the singer about how she and her partner were experiencing troubles in their relationship , and that they were not telling each other how they felt . In response , Burke asked her aunt why he was letting the silence in their relationship do the talking instead of them discussing it . " The Silence " is an R & B and pop @-@ influenced power ballad and instrumentation consists of a piano , a guitar and drums . The lyrics of the song feature the protagonist asking why the other person in the relationship remains silent about their difficulties instead of talking about them . 
 The song garnered positive reviews from music critics , who praised Burke 's vocal performance . It also received comparisons to songs by Bonnie Tyler , Beyoncé Knowles and Leona Lewis . Upon the release of Overcome , the song debuted at number 95 on the UK Singles Chart on the strength of digital download sales . A year later when released as a promotional single , it peaked at number 16 on the chart . It peaked inside the top thirty on the singles charts in Hungary , Ireland and Scotland , and peaked at number 66 in Switzerland . An accompanying music video was directed by Nzingha Stewart and shot in black and white . It features Burke in a variety of different stylized sets in different outfits and dresses . The singer has performed the song on The Paul O 'Grady Show and The X Factor . It was included on the set list of her All Night Long Tour ( 2011 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 After the release and success of the lead single " Bad Boys " from her debut album Overcome in October 2009 , the singer released " Broken Heels " as the second single in January 2010 , with the intention of releasing " The Silence " as the album 's third single . However , a remix single version of " All Night Long " featuring Pitbull was released as the third single from the album instead in May 2010 . On 25 October 2010 , Burke announced via Twitter that " The Silence " would be the final song to be released from Overcome , writing " Some of you might be surprised at my choice of next single and some of you guys will hopefully be really happy . " The song was re @-@ recorded with a new vocal for inclusion on the re @-@ release of the album , entitled " The Silence ( New Single Mix ) " . In an interview with Eamonn Holmes for Sky News Sunrise in December 2010 , Burke stated that " The Silence " was released as a promotional single for the re @-@ release of Overcome and for Christmas . During an interview talking about the song for Virgin Media in December 2010 , Burke stated that " The Silence " is a " very special song " and that despite it being a " very emotional song to sing " , it is one of her most favourite songs on Overcome . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " The Silence " is a power ballad , which lasts for a duration of three minutes and 35 seconds . It draws influence from the music genre of R & B and pop , while instrumentation consists of a piano , a guitar and drums . The song is written in the key of A minor and is set in simple time with a metronome of 76 beats per minute . Burke 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of F3 to the high note of F5 . In an interview with Peter Andre on The Paul O 'Grady Show on 3 November 2009 , Burke explained the meaning of the songs lyrics , saying " I 'm sure everyone has been in that situation where you are in a relationship , it might not be going so well and you kinda want your other half to speak out and say what is on their mind , and I 've had relationships like that . " Burke continued to explain that when she was in the recording studio with RedOne , her Aunt was experiencing problems in her relationship which related to the lyrics in " The Silence , " and that she felt that her Aunt 's partner should not " let the silence do the talking ? Why doesn 't he let you know how he feels ? , " and that " The Silence " was written as a result . The songs begins with the lyrics " Oh , you lift me up . " 
 = = Response = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " The Silence " garnered positive reviews from music critics . Al Fox for BBC Music described the song as " a gargantuan power ballad " and that it displays Burke 's " rich and emotive vocals . " Fox also compared the song to the work of Bonnie Tyler and Beyoncé Knowles . Nick Levine for Digital Spy wrote that Overcome features ballads which are reminiscent to songs performed by previous X Factor winner Leona Lewis , with regard to " The Silence " and the title track " Overcome . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Upon the release of Overcome , " The Silence " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 95 in the chart issue dated 31 October 2009 . Upon its release as a promotional single in December 2010 , it re @-@ entered the singles chart at number 126 on 11 December 2010 , and leaped to its peak of number 16 the following week . In the chart issue dated 25 December 2010 , the song fell twenty positions to number 36 . " The Silence " leaped from number 125 to number 13 on the UK Digital Chart . The following week , it dropped to number 35 . In Scotland , the song peaked at number 16 on the Scottish Singles Chart on 18 December 2010 . The following week , it descended to number 37 . " The Silence " debuted and peaked at number 30 on the Irish Singles Chart on 9 December 2010 . The following week , it dropped to number 35 . The song debuted and peaked on the Swiss Singles Chart at number 66 on 12 December 2010 , and fell to number 69 the following week . A month later , the song re @-@ entered the chart at number 72 on 23 January 2011 for one week . In Hungary , the song peaked at number 26 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " The Silence " was directed by Nzingha Stewart before the video for " All Night Long " was shot . The video was shot in black and white , and features Burke in different outfits and dresses , as well as in a variety of sets with props . It begins with a couple of establishing shots of Burke of her posing with a balloon wearing and in another set where she is sitting on music speakers . Throughout the video , Burke is visibly in a studio with different backdrops , where she is preparing to be photographed . During the first verse , Burke is shown in the two sets while she sings the lyrics . Prior to the first chorus , a new set is introduced of Burke wearing a black dress which exposes all of her back while sitting on the floor next to a stereo . During the first verse , all three sets show Burke carrying out different tasks with he props , as well as a new set where she sits in front of a white backdrop in a plain white oversized shirt . As the second verse begins , the set of Burke sitting on the floor next to a stereo changes to that of her standing up in front of a microphone singing the lyrics , with the backdrop of a city skyline . During the second verse , another set is introduced of Burke posing against a stuffed animal . During the bridge , Burke sings the lyrics standing in front of the camera without any props surrounding her ; prior to sustaining a long note , Burke has her back to the camera and is nude from the waist up . During the final verse , Burke 's anger and desperation is shown to be heightened , as she sings to her herself in the mirror and places more emphasis on her movement . The video ends with the singer nude from the waist up and facing the camera , covering herself with her arms crossed over her chest . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Burke performed the song for the first time on MTV Push upon the release of Overcome . Burke then performed the song on 3 November 2009 on The Paul O 'Grady show , where she gave an interview about her experience on The X Factor and how the lyrics for " The Silence " were conceptualised . Upon the announcement that the song and music video were going to be released , Burke included the song on her set list of the Jingle Bell Ball concerts around the country , where other artists including Nicole Scherzinger , Olly Murs and The Wanted also performed . During the performance at The O2 Arena in London , Burke was moved to tears and apologised to the audience , saying " I 'm sorry for getting emotional , but that song means way too much to me . " Burke performed the song on the semi final of the seventh series of The X Factor on 5 December 2010 . At the end of the performance , Burke was lifted into the air on a harness . The song was also included on the set list of Burke 's All Night Long Tour ( 2011 ) . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 2009 standard edition 
 " The Silence " – 4 : 01 
 2010 deluxe edition 
 " The Silence " ( New Single Mix ) – 3 : 35 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 " The Silence " ( 2009 ) credits adapted from the liner notes of Overcome , and " The Silence " ( New Single Mix ) ( 2010 ) credits adapted from the deluxe edition of Overcome . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Mi Tierra = 
 Mi Tierra ( English : My Homeland ) is the third studio album by Cuban @-@ American recording artist Gloria Estefan , released on June 14 , 1993 by Epic Records . Produced by husband Emilio Estefan , it is her first Spanish @-@ language album and pays homage to her Cuban roots . The album features Cuban musical genres , including boleros , <unk> and son music . Recorded at Crescent Moon Studios in Miami , Florida , Mi Tierra features notable Latin musicians such as Arturo Sandoval , Cachao López , <unk> Correa and Paquito D 'Rivera . 
 The album was an international success , selling eight million copies worldwide as of 2006 . In the United States it was the first record to reach number one on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart , and peaked at number twenty @-@ seven on the Billboard 200 chart . Mi Tierra has sold over one million copies in the US and Spain . The album received favorable reviews from critics , who praised the album 's production , songs and Estefan 's vocals . Its success won the singer a Grammy Award for Best Tropical Latin Album . Mi Tierra spawned seven singles : " Mi Tierra " , " Con Los Años Que Me Quedan " , " Tradición " , " Montuno " , " ¡ Sí Señor ! ... " , " Mi Buen Amor " and " Ayer " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Gloria Estefan had wanted to record a Spanish @-@ language album reflecting her Cuban heritage since the beginning of her musical career . Before recording in English , Estefan and her band performed at Latino nightclubs ; she also remembered her grandmother teaching her old Cuban songs . Music had an important role in Estefan 's family ; her paternal grandmother was a poet , and an uncle played the flute in a salsa band . The singer 's desire to record an album in Spanish was also influenced by her son , <unk> ; she wanted him to recognize his Cuban heritage . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Mi Tierra was produced by Estefan 's husband , Emilio Estefan , and fellow Miami Sound Machine members Clay Ostwald and Jorge Casas . It features notable Latin musicians , including Nestor Torres , Cachao López , Paquito <unk> , <unk> Correa , Paquito D 'Rivera , Arturo Sandoval , Luis Enrique and Tito Puente . Additional performers include Sheila E. and the London Symphony Orchestra . The album was recorded at Crescent Moon Studios in Miami , Florida . Celia Cruz was invited to perform , but was unable to do so because of her touring schedule . The album 's cover features Estefan in a black @-@ and @-@ white photo at a Havana nightclub before the Cuban Revolution . 
 = = Musical style and songs = = 
 The opening track on the album , " Con los Años Que Me Quedan " ( " With the Years I Have Left " ) , is a Cuban bolero song . Three other bolero tracks on Mi Tierra are " Mi Buen Amor " ( " My True Love " ) , " Volverás " ( " You 'll Be Back " ) , and " <unk> de Mí " ( " You 're Talking About Me " ) . The title track details the passion of Estefan 's homeland in a salsa arrangement . In " Ayer " ( " Yesterday " ) the singer finds a flower given to her by a lover and yearns for him to return , since life is short . Its music combines bolero and son music . " No Hay Mal Que Por Bien No Bien " ( " Out of All Bad , Some Good Things Come " ) is a <unk> recalling a brief love affair . 
 " ¡ Sí Señor " ( " Yes Sir ! " ) is another son track featured on the album . The bolero " Volverás " was later covered by Mexican recording artist Alejandro Fernández on his album Me Estoy <unk> ( 1997 ) , also produced by Emilio Estefan . " Montuno " takes its name from the musical genre of the same name . " <unk> El Mismo <unk> " ( " Let 's Speak The Same Language " ) is an anthem , reaching out to other Latino groups , telling them that since they speak the same language they should leave their differences behind . The album closes with " Tradición " ( " Traditional " ) , which is performed as a <unk> . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 In the United States , Mi Tierra peaked at number twenty @-@ seven on the Billboard 200 chart . It was the first number @-@ one album on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart , established when it was released . The album spent a total of fifty @-@ eight weeks atop the chart , until it was displaced by Selena 's album Amor Prohibido the week of June 11 , 1994 . It was more successful on the Billboard Tropical Albums chart , where it spent ninety @-@ one weeks on top . Mi Tierra debuted at number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart the week of July 10 , 1993 , but it was removed from the chart following week since it did not meet its criteria . 
 Mi Tierra ended 1994 as the best @-@ selling Latin album of the year in the United States . The album was certified 16 × platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America by Latin standards , for shipments of 1 @.@ 6 million copies in the U.S. According to Nielsen SoundScan , it sold 1 @,@ 198 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. by 2007 ; according to Billboard , most purchasers did not speak Spanish . In Latin America , the album was certified double platinum in Argentina and triple platinum in Mexico . It sold over 30 @,@ 000 copies in Chile . 
 In Europe , Mi Tierra peaked at number fifty @-@ nine in Germany , number nine in the Netherlands , number one in Spain , number twenty @-@ five in Switzerland and number eleven in the United Kingdom . The album was certified 10 × platinum in Spain ( for shipping one million copies ) and certified gold in Switzerland . It also sold 200 @,@ 000 in England . Mi Tierra was the 60th @-@ best @-@ selling album of the 1990s , and sold over eight million copies worldwide by 2006 . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Mi Tierra " was the first single released from the album . In the United States , it reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart and number five on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . In Europe , the song peaked at number seventy @-@ seven on the Media Control charts in Germany , twenty @-@ seventh on the Mega Single Top 100 chart in Netherlands and thirty @-@ sixth on the UK Singles Chart . The second single , " Con Los Años Que Me Quedan " , also reached number one on the Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States . An English version , " If We Were Lovers " , was released as a single and peaked at number forty on the UK Singles Chart . The third single , " Tradición " , reached number one the Hot Dance Clubs chart in the United States . 
 " Montuno " was the fourth single released from the album , peaking at number fifty @-@ five on the UK Singles chart . The fifth single , " ¡ Sí Señor ! ... " peaked at number forty @-@ four on the Mega Single Top 100 chart in the Netherlands . The sixth , " Mi Buen Amor " , reached number one on the Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States . The last single released from the album was " Ayer " , which peaked at number five on the Hot Latin Songs chart . 
 = = Critical reception and accolades = = 
 Jose F. Promis of Allmusic awarded the album four stars out of five , calling it " one of [ Estefan 's ] most satisfying . " Mi Tierra was " a breezy , sunny album with moments of melancholy , " and " one of her most consistent albums to date . " Achy Obejas of the Chicago Tribune gave the album four out of four stars , praised it as " dispensing with the brash sound of more contemporary salsa " and lauded Emilio Estefan for the album 's production . Anne Hurley of Entertainment Weekly said that Mi Tierra " will whirl you through an intoxicating landscape of traditional Cuban rhythms and aromatic flavors , " and applauded the guest musicians on the album . 
 Parry Gettelman of the Orlando Sentinel gave Mi Tierra four out of five stars , commending the album as " uncompromising , offering up songs and arrangements firmly rooted in Cuban traditions . " He compared it to Estefan 's earlier recordings with the Miami Sound Machine , including her musical style and songwriting : " She ditches the synths and employs the London Symphony Orchestra 's strings to graceful effect ... abandoning melodrama for real color and emotional shading . " John Lannert described Mi Tierra for the Sun @-@ Sentinel as " <unk> Latin ' unplugged ' album " and her " most satisfying effort to date . " 
 At the 36th Grammy Awards , Mi Tierra was the Best Tropical Latin Album . At the 6th Lo Nuestro Awards Estefan received two awards in the tropical category , for Female Artist of the Year and Album of the Year . The singer was Female Artist of the Year at the first Billboard Latin Music Awards , and Mi Tierra was Album of the Year in the tropical @-@ salsa category . At the 1994 Spanish Ondas Awards , Mi Tierra was the Best International Album and Estefan the Best International Artist . It was recognized as the best @-@ selling Latin album of the year with a 1993 – 94 NARM Best Seller Award . In 2015 , Billboard listed Mi Tierra as one of the Essential Latin Albums of Past 50 Year stating that " Through son , she transports us to a magical place in the ‘ 50s where time stood still on her beloved island " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Official translations provided by Allmusic and by Gloria Estefan on the Mi Tierra liner notes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are from Allmusic and from the Mi Tierra liner notes : 
 = = = Performance credits = = = 
 = = = Technical credits = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = Hurricane Isaac ( 2006 ) = 
 Hurricane Isaac was the final tropical cyclone of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season . Isaac originated in a tropical wave that entered the Atlantic Ocean on September 18 . An associated area of disturbed weather eventually organized sufficiently to be declared a tropical depression on September 27 , while located 930 mi ( 1 @,@ 500 km ) southeast of Bermuda . The depression was upgraded to a tropical storm just 12 hours later , though unfavorable atmospheric conditions , including high wind shear and cool water temperatures , initially inhibited further intensification . Isaac ultimately peaked as a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , and brushed Newfoundland as a tropical storm . Effects from the storm were minimal and limited to gusty winds , rough surf , and sporadic rainfall . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged from the western coast of Africa and entered the Atlantic Ocean on September 18 , 2006 . On September 23 , an associated area of disturbed weather began to exhibit indications of organization ; in response , Dvorak classifications were initiated . Influenced by moderate to strong wind shear , the system moved west @-@ northwestward for several days . Once environmental conditions became more favorable for tropical cyclone development , the storm had sufficiently organized to be designated a tropical depression on September 27 . At this time , the depression was located about 930 mi ( 1 @,@ 500 km ) southeast of Bermuda . Despite being upgraded , deep convection had not wrapped around the entire center of circulation . Although the depression was approaching tropical storm status by later on September 27 , wind shear continued to affect the cyclone . On September 28 — about 12 hours after the storm 's formation — it became the tenth tropical storm of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season , and received the name Isaac . 
 Initially , the storm was tracking towards the northwest , between another low pressure system to its west and a low- to mid @-@ level ridge to its east . Throughout the day , thunderstorm activity remained unstable , possibly as a result of cooler waters churned up by previous storms . In addition , mid- to upper @-@ level dry air had become entrained into the circulation , and the storm contained some subtropical characteristics with a baroclinic @-@ type cloud pattern . By early September 29 , Isaac had slowed and turned towards the west . Convection began to intensify and consolidate later that day ; outflow had also improved , and became more symmetric in nature . Moving into warmer waters , Isaac continued to strengthen , and attained hurricane status on September 30 . However , this period of intensification was short @-@ lived , and the cyclone reached its peak intensity with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) at around 0000 UTC on October 1 . Around that time , a ragged eye feature appeared on satellite imagery . 
 " A fairly well @-@ defined hurricane " , Isaac began to recurve around the periphery of a subtropical ridge while accelerating in forward speed . While tracking towards the north @-@ northeast , the storm began to gradually weaken as a result of increasing southwesterly wind shear and colder sea surface temperatures . At about 1200 UTC on September 2 , Isaac was downgraded to a tropical storm . The storm passed about 40 mi ( 64 km ) to the southeast of the Avalon Peninsula on October 2 , spawning tropical storm @-@ force winds on land . After passing Newfoundland Isaac transitioned into an extratropical storm , and subsequently merged with a larger storm on October 3 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 A tropical storm watch was issued in response to Isaac on October 1 for the Avalon Peninsula . The watch was upgraded to a tropical storm warning the next day , while a separate watch was posted for the Burin and Bonavista peninsulas , though it was quickly discontinued . By 2100 UTC on October 2 , all tropical cyclone watches and warnings were lifted . Heavy rainfall and gusty winds were expected , prompting the issuance of rainfall warnings for parts of southeastern Newfoundland , while wind and gale advisories were declared offshore . 
 On October 2 , the Elektra ( call sign <unk> ) reported winds of 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) while located about 170 mi ( 270 km ) to the east of the storm 's center . Two other ships , several buoys , and several oil platforms also recorded tropical storm @-@ force winds . Waves offshore reached 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) in height . 
 Impacts on land were generally insignificant ; no damages or fatalities were reported . However , parts of the Avalon Peninsula experienced tropical storm conditions . At Cape Race , sustained winds peaked at 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) , with gusts of up to 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) . The most intense winds remained offshore . Due to the storm 's rapid passage , rainfall was primarily light and amounted to less than 1 in ( 25 mm ) . 
 = Military of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth = 
 The military of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth evolved from the merger of the armies of the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania following the 1569 Union of Lublin , which formed the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth . The army was commanded by the Hetmans of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth . The most unique formation of the army was the heavy cavalry in the form of the Polish winged hussars . The Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth Navy never played a major role in the military structure , and ceased to exist in the mid @-@ 17th century . 
 Commonwealth forces were engaged in numerous conflicts in the south ( against the Ottoman Empire ) , the east ( against the Tsardom of Muscovy and later , the Russian Empire ) and the north ( the Kingdom of Sweden ) ; as well as internal conflicts ( most notably , numerous Cossack uprisings ) . For the first century or so , the Commonwealth military was usually successful , but became less so from around the mid @-@ 17th century . Plagued by insufficient funds , it found itself increasingly hard @-@ pressed to defend the country , and inferior in numbers to the growing armies of the Commonwealth 's neighbors . 
 Following the end of the Commonwealth , the Polish military tradition would be continued by Napoleonic Polish Legions and the Army of the Duchy of Warsaw . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Commonwealth was formed at the Union of Lublin of 1569 from the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania . The armies of those states differed from the organization common in the west of Europe , as according to Bardach , the mercenary formations ( Polish : wojsko <unk> ) , common there , never gained popularity in Poland . Brzezinski , however , notes that foreign mercenaries did form a significant portion of the more elite infantry units , at least till the early 17th century . In the 15th century Poland , several other formations formed the core of the military . There was a small standing army , <unk> <unk> ( " continuous defense " ) about 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 strong , paid for by the king , and primarily stationed at the troubled south and eastern borders . It was supplemented by two formations mobilized in case of war : the pospolite ruszenie ( Polish levée en masse – feudal levy of mostly noble knights @-@ landholders ) , and the wojsko zaciężne , recruited by the Polish commanders for the conflict ( it differed from Western mercenary formations in that it was commanded by Polish officers , and dissolved after the conflict has ended ) . 
 Several years before the Union of Lublin , the Polish <unk> <unk> was reformed , as the Sejm ( national parliament of Poland ) legislated in 1562 – 1563 the creation of wojsko kwarciane ( named after <unk> , the type of tax levied on the royal lands for the purpose of maintaining this formation ) . This formation was also paid for by the king , and in the peace time , numbered about 3 @,@ 500 – 4 @,@ 000 men according to Bardach ; Brzezinski gives the range of 3 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 . It was composed mostly of the light cavalry units manned by nobility ( szlachta ) and commanded by hetmans . Often , in wartime , the Sejm would legislate a temporary increase in the size of the wojsko kwarciane . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 At its heyday , the Commonwealth comprised the territories of present @-@ day Poland , and large parts of Ukraine , Belarus , Lithuania , Latvia , Estonia , and Russia . It was engaged in the struggles along most of its borders , with only the Western border with the lands of the Holy Roman Empire being relatively peaceful . In its first decades , major conflicts included the Livonian campaign of Stephen Báthory , the interventions in Moldavia , the Danzig rebellion , and the War against Sigismund . Early 17th century saw a number of the Polish – Swedish wars , the Polish – Ottoman Wars , and the Polish – Russian Wars ( Dymitriads , the Smolensk War ) . The Commonwealth also suffered from a number of Cossacks uprisings , culminating in the devastating Chmielnicki Uprising of 1648 . That period also saw some of the Commonwealth 's most talented military commanders : Stanisław Żółkiewski ( 1547 @-@ 1620 ) , Jan Karol Chodkiewicz ( 1560 @-@ 1621 ) , Stanisław Koniecpolski ( 1593 @-@ 1646 ) and Stefan Czarniecki ( 1599 @-@ 1665 ) . The Commonwealth managed to hold its weight in most of those conflicts , and scored a number of major victories on all fronts , such as the battle of Kircholm , the battle of Klushino , and had briefly garrisoned Moscow . However , the Chmielnicki Uprising , together with the Russo @-@ Polish War and the Swedish Deluge , all taking place around the same period of the 1650s , proved devastating for the country , resulting in a loss of most of Ukraine to Russia in the Treaty of <unk> in 1667 . In 1683 the Commonwealth scored its last major victory that resounded on the European scene , the relief of Vienna by king Jan III Sobieski . During the 18th century , European powers ( most frequently consisting of Russia , Sweden , Prussia and Saxony ) fought several wars for the control of the territories of the former Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , particularly during the Great Northern War . By the end of the 18th century a series of internal conflicts and wars with foreign enemies ( the War of the Bar Confederation ) led to the dissolution of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth and the partitioning of most of its dependent territories among other European powers . The final attempts to preserve independence of the Commonwealth , including the political reforms of the Great Sejm , eventually failed on the military front , with the Commonwealth defeats in the Polish – Russian War of 1792 and the Kościuszko Uprising of 1794 , ultimately ending in Poland 's final partition and the final dissolution of the remains of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 By the time of the Commonwealth formation , there was little practical difference between the Polish and Lithuanian components ; the Lithuanian component formed about a fourth to a third of the Commonwealth army . The army of the Commonwealth was organized along several different models , with the primary division being that into two ' contingents ' or ' enlistments ' ( or in Polish : <unk> ) : national and foreign . The name applied to types of formation , regulations and the officer cadres ; the majority of regular recruits for both came from within the Commonwealth , particularly from the 1630s onward . National units included the towarzysz cavalry ( including the Polish hussars and lighter <unk> ( Polish ) and <unk> ( Lithuanian ) units ) and some light cavalry units , with infantry being the distant second in reputation ; whereas the foreign units were primarily centered around the infantry and artillery formations , with dragoons gaining prominence from the 1620s , and <unk> cavalry soon afterward . 
 The Polish – Lithuanian national contingent was organized in traditional formations dating back to the earlier medieval times , with chorągiew ( banner ) unit , commanded by a rotmistrz and composed of smaller <unk> ( lance ) retinues , each composed of one towarzysz and a varying number of aides . The size of a chorągiew could vary from as little as 60 to as many as 300 men . Two or more <unk> ( through rarely more than a dozen , and never more than about forty ) formed a regiment ( <unk> ) unit , a type of a unit similar to the medieval battle or modern division or corps . Its senior commander was known as pułkownik ( colonel ) . The foreign contingent was organized into regiments , often numbering around 500 @-@ 1 @,@ 000 , and divided into companies . King Jan III Sobieski made an attempt in the 1670s to replace the national @-@ foreign contingent divisions with a single structure , dividing units into infantry , cavalry and dragoons , but it would take many decades before those reforms bore fruit . 
 = = = Formations and their evolution = = = 
 After the creation of the Commonwealth , several new types of military units were introduced . First among these were the registered Cossacks , formed in 1578 . These were the troops made up of Cossacks , paid for their service and not subject to serfdom . Their numbers varied from about 500 to many times that number , with the Treaty of <unk> setting the record at 40 @,@ 477 . The Cossacks ' refusal to submit to serfdom , and the Commonwealth 's nobility attempts to force them into it led to much political wrangling with regard to the size of the Cossack register , and to numerous Cossack uprisings , particularly in the 17th century . These weakened the state , and eventually led to the Cossack subjugation and destruction by the Russian Empire . In addition to the Cossack formations , another group that provided notable service to the Polish state were the Tatars , some of whom resided in Lithuania , and were Commonwealth subjects . Known as Lipka Tatars , they provided some light and medium cavalry units for the Lithuanian army . 
 In the late 16th century , during the reign of Stefan Batory ( 1576 – 1586 ) , a peasant @-@ based levy formation , piechota <unk> ( lit. drafted or selected infantry , also known as piechota <unk> , lit. acreage infantry ) was formed . It was based on peasants from the royal estates only , who received a unit of land ( <unk> ) in exchange for their service . The formation numbered about 2 @,@ 300 and after early disappointments was never seen as of much military value . It supplemented the few small units of <unk> infantry , which saw service in Poland primarily around late 16th and 17th centuries . In 1655 a new infantry unit was created , the żołnierz <unk> ( or żołnierz <unk> – lit. chimney or <unk> soldier , named again after the type of tax applied ) . It required all lands , no matter whether owned by king , nobles or the Church , to provide peasant recruits , and applied a similar requirement to towns . 
 Starting in 1613 , the growing inefficiencies of the central government , as well as an increase in foreign threats , led to the creation of a local territorial defense force , known as żołnierz <unk> ( district 's soldiers raised by the powiat regions ) . The artillery formations , at first staffed by foreigners , were reformed in the 1630s , with a new tax levied to support them . This time also marked the introduction of the General of the Artillery post into the Commonwealth army . In the mid @-@ 17th century , the numbers of wojsko zaciężne and kwarciane proved to be insufficient , which led to the creation of wojsko <unk> ( named after <unk> , a document passed by the Sejm ) . <unk> <unk> numbered ( in 1649 ) 26 @,@ 000 . At the same time , wojsko kwarciane was disbanded , and <unk> directed towards the newly created artillery forces . Brzezinski notes that wojsko kwarciane was dissolved in the aftermath of its defeat at the battle of Batoh in 1652 . In 1659 , in aftermath of a series of wars , the reformed army numbered around 54 @,@ 000 @-@ 60 @,@ 000 ; it would decline from that point onward , as the country , impoverished from those wars , would not be able to support such a number again . 
 Another element of the Commonwealth army consisted of various private armies fielded by the most powerful magnates . In time of peace these consisted of usually small regiments of a few hundred men , but at their extreme they could number up to 10 @,@ 000 , including cavalry and artillery . In some instances the magnate contribution could surpass that of the main Commonwealth army on the frontlines , although often the magnates preferred to save their troops , as they were not compensated for the state for their contributions . The troops were paid for and equipped by the richest of the noble families , such as the Opaliński , Lubomirski , Potocki , Ossoliński , Zamoyski , Koniecpolski , <unk> , Żółkiewski , Sapieha , Chodkiewicz , Pac and Radziwiłł families . This was one of the reasons why the magnates played a major role in Polish politics , and on occasion , allowed them to engage in bloody civil wars ( such as the Lithuanian Civil War in 1700 ) amongst themselves . 
 Similarly , occasional forces of town guard and militia were fielded by some cities . The most impressive town guard and accompanying fortifications belonged to the port of Gdańsk ( Danzig ) , which in 1646 boasted 12 infantry companies of 6 @,@ 000 men total . There was also a small royal guard regiment , paid for directly by the king . In peace time , the royal guard numbered around 1 @,@ 200 , but would often be expanded during time of war . The royal force included a hussar banner , <unk> cavalry element , and an infantry unit , based upon the " foreign " model . Finally , there were also some irregular militia or mercenary troops which received no official pay but operated with the permission of the government and were allowed to retain their loot ; most notable of these were the Lisowczycy mercenary group which operated in the first half of the 17th century . 
 Both the state and the magnates supported the construction and renovations of several fortifications ( such as the Kamianets @-@ Podilskyi Castle ) . 
 = = = Command structure = = = 
 The army of the Commonwealth was commanded by king , under who served four hetmans : two Grand Hetmans ( the Grand Crown Hetman and Grand Lithuanian Hetman ) and two Field Hetmans ( the Field Crown Hetman and Field Lithuanian Hetman ) . The office of a hetman appeared in the late 15th century as a consequence of the introduction of the wojsko zaciężne , and a need for a more professional army commanders than the king could usually provide . By the 1530s the hetman system has evolved into that of regular offices that would exist both in Poland and Lithuania for the next three centuries . From 1581 it became officially a lifelong appointment . Hetmans had the right to carry out summary justice in the field . Grand Crown Hetman had the right to maintain his representatives in the Ottoman Empire , which allowed him to influence Poland – Ottoman relations and also laid groundwork for the first Polish intelligence services . Hetman deputy was known as regimentarz and could replace a hetman on a temporary basis . 
 = = Navy = = 
 The Commonwealth Navy was small and played a relatively minor role in the history of the Commonwealth . Despite having access to the Baltic Sea , neither Poland nor Lithuania had any significant navy throughout their histories . In the 16th century , as Poland and Lithuania became involved in conflicts in Livonia , Polish king Zygmunt August supported the operations of privateers , but that met with opposition of the Poland 's primary port , Gdańsk ( Danzig ) , which saw them as a threat to its trade operations . This led to the development of a privateer port in Puck . At the turn of the century , Poland became ruled by the House of Vasa , and was involved in a series of wars with Sweden ( see also dominium maris baltici ) . Vasa kings attempted to create a proper fleet , and Władysław IV Waza built a dedicated port for the royal navy ( Władysławowo ) , but their attempts met with repeated failures , due to lack of funds in the royal treasury ( seeing little need for the fleet , Polish nobility refused to raise taxes for its construction , and Gdańsk continued its opposition to the idea of a royal fleet ) . Although Władysław bought 12 ships , they were sold between 1641 and 1643 , marking the end of the Commonwealth Navy . 
 = = Logistics and tactics = = 
 Due to lack of centralized logistical system , the Polish armies were encumbered by large baggage trains . To some degree , this was turned into an advantage with the development of the tabor – military horse @-@ drawn wagons , usually carrying army supplies . The wagon use for defensive formations was perfected by the Cossacks , and to a smaller extent used by other Commonwealth units . The Commonwealth army relied on cavalry , which the nobility saw as a much more respectable type of a troop than the infantry . Despite the reforms of the 17th century , it lost much of its military significance in the 18th century ; the primary reason for this was a lack of sufficient funding . 
 = = Problems and reforms = = 
 With the growing influence of foreign powers in the Commonwealth , the Russian @-@ dominated Silent Sejm of 1717 declared that the size of the Commonwealth Army should be 24 @,@ 200 ( 18 @,@ 000 from Poland and 6 @,@ 200 for Lithuania ) . Due to insufficient taxation , the military was often not paid properly , which led to a relatively small army size ; in mid @-@ 18th century , the Commonwealth had funds to field an army of around 24 @,@ 000 , whereas the Commonwealth 's neighbors ' armies were often up to 12 times larger : the Imperial Russian Army numbered 300 @,@ 000 ; the Prussian Army and Imperial Austrian Army , 150 @,@ 000 , and a few decades later , the Commonwealth could field an army of about 16 @,@ 000 , with Prussian and Austrian armies rising to 200 @,@ 000 . The stated size of the Commonwealth army was further exaggerated , as some money was lost due to corruption . The first half of the 18th century , following the 1717 Sejm , marks the nadir of the Commonwealth army , as it lacked funds and training , and was primarily used for ceremonial purposes . The only constructive reform of that time was the introduction of a stable ( if grossly insufficient ) budget for the military . Furthermore , the unpaid units of the army were known for mutinying and forming confederations , occupying the Commonwealth 's own lands until such a time that they were paid properly or pillaged enough to satisfy themselves . 
 The trend reversed itself following the election of the last king of Poland , Stanisław August Poniatowski , in 1765 and the introduction of the new governing body , Permanent Council , in 1775 . Its Military Department attempted to modernize the army , and increase its size ( although even the target number of 30 @,@ 000 was never achieved ) . A major military reform came with the passing of the Constitution of May 3 , 1791 , which stated that the Army was to be built up to 100 @,@ 000 men . ( The exact number would be settled on only on 22 May 1792 , at 25 @,@ 654 cavalry and 72 @,@ 910 infantry ) . A new conscription law was introduced , affecting all lands ( royal , noble and Church @-@ owned ) . With the days of the Commonwealth numbered , the Constitution was never fully implemented in practice , although the new Military Commission saw the Army expanded to 65 @,@ 000 before the Polish defeat in the War in Defense of the Constitution . After the Commonwealth defeat in that war and the rescinding of the Constitution , the Army was reduced to about 36 @,@ 000 . In 1794 Russians demanded a further downsizing of the army to 15 @,@ 000 . This plan was one of the sparks that led to the Army 's ( and Commonwealth 's ) final conflict , the Kościuszko Uprising . 
 = Italian ironclad Formidabile = 
 Formidabile was the lead ship of the Formidabile @-@ class ironclad warships , the first ships of that type to be built for the newly formed Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . Formidabile and her sister , Terribile , were both built in France ; Formidabile was laid down in December 1860 , was launched in October 1861 , and was completed in May 1862 . She was a broadside ironclad , equipped with four 203 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) and sixteen 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns . 
 The ship took part in the operation off Lissa in 1866 during the Third Italian War of Independence . There , she silenced the Austrian coastal batteries protecting the main port , but she was too badly damaged to take part in the ensuing Battle of Lissa . The ship 's postwar career was limited due to a combination of drastically reduced naval budgets and the appearance of more modern ironclads . Formidabile was used as a training ship starting in 1887 ; she was discarded in 1903 and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Formidabile was 65 @.@ 8 meters ( 215 ft 11 in ) long overall ; she had a beam of 14 @.@ 44 m ( 47 ft 5 in ) and an average draft of 5 @.@ 45 m ( 17 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 682 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 640 long tons ; 2 @,@ 956 short tons ) normally and up to 2 @,@ 807 t ( 2 @,@ 763 long tons ; 3 @,@ 094 short tons ) at full load . She had a crew of 371 . Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by six coal @-@ fired , rectangular boilers . Her engine produced a top speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) from 1 @,@ 080 indicated horsepower ( 810 kW ) . She could steam for about 1 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ; 1 @,@ 500 mi ) at her top speed . To supplement her steam engine , the ship was schooner @-@ rigged . 
 Formidabile was a broadside ironclad , carrying all of her guns in the traditional broadside arrangement . She was armed with a main battery of four 203 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) guns and sixteen 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The ship 's wooden hull was sheathed with wrought iron belt armor that was 4 @.@ 3 in ( 109 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Formidabile was laid down at the Société Nouvelle des Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée shipyard in La Seyne , France in December 1860 , originally ordered by the Navy of the Kingdom of Sardinia . She was launched on 1 October 1861 and was completed in May 1862 ; by this time , the Sardinian fleet had been reformed as the Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) of the newly unified Kingdom of Italy . In June 1866 , Italy declared war on Austria , as part of the Third Italian War of Independence , which was fought concurrently with the Austro @-@ Prussian War . The Italian fleet commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , initially adopted a cautious course of action ; he was unwilling to risk battle with the Austrian Navy , despite the fact that the Austrian fleet was much weaker than his own . Persano claimed he was simply waiting on the ironclad ram Affondatore , en route from Britain , but his inaction weakened morale in the fleet , with many of his subordinates openly accusing him of cowardice . 
 Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on 27 June , in attempt to draw out the Italians . Persano held a council of war aboard the ironclad Principe di Carignano to determine whether he should sortie to engage Tegetthoff , but by that time , the Austrians had withdrawn , making the decision moot . The Minister of the Navy , Agostino Depretis , urged Persano to act and suggested he capture the island of Lissa , to restore Italian confidence after their defeat at the Battle of Custoza the previous month . On 7 July , Persano left Ancona and conducted a sweep into the Adriatic , but encountered no Austrian ships and returned on the 13th . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet out of Ancona , bound for Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers ; the Italian warships began bombarding the Austrian forts on the island , with the intention of landing the soldiers once the fortresses had been silenced . In response , the Austrian Navy sent the fleet under Tegetthoff to attack the Italian ships . Formidabile was at that time in the 3rd Division , along with her sister Terribile , the ironclads Re di Portogallo and Regina Maria Pia , and the coastal defense ship Varese . After spending the 18th unsuccessfully bombarding the Austrian fortresses , the Italians withdrew late in the day , preparing to launch another attack the following morning . Persano ordered Formidabile to enter the harbor at Vis and attack the Madonna battery , supported by the ironclads Castelfidardo , Ancona , and Principe di Carignano . 
 Upon entering the small harbor , the Italians found it impossible for the four ships to attack simultaneously , and so Formidabile was left to engage the Madonna battery alone . Following the conclusion of the bombardment , the ship 's captain , Simone Antonio Saint @-@ Bon , reported to Persano that his ship had suffered over 50 casualties , and it had been significantly damaged by Austrian fire , though its armor had not been penetrated . Saint @-@ Bon took his battered ship to the west , where he transferred his wounded to a hospital ship . The following day , while Formidabile was with the hospital ship , the Austrian fleet under Tegetthoff appeared . Persano had ordered Formidabile to return to the line , but Saint @-@ Bon informed Persano that his ship was unable to fight , and instead he withdrew to Ancona . The Italians were defeated in the ensuing battle , with the ironclads Re d 'Italia and Palestro sunk . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After the battle , Persano was replaced by Admiral Giovanni Vacca ; he was ordered to attack the main Austrian naval base at Pola , but the war ended before the operation could be carried out . After the end of the war , the government lost confidence in the fleet and drastically reduced the naval budget . The cuts were so severe that the fleet had great difficulty in mobilizing its ironclad squadron to attack the port of Civitavecchia in September 1870 , as part of the wars of Italian unification . Instead , the ships were laid up and the sailors conscripted to man them were sent home . In addition , Formidabile was rapidly surpassed , first by central battery and then turret ships , which made the first generation of ironclads like Formidabile and her sister obsolete . In 1872 – 73 , the ship received new boilers . Her armament was significantly reduced in 1878 to eight 8 @-@ inch guns . In 1887 , the ship was withdrawn from front @-@ line service and was thereafter employed as a gunnery training ship . At this time , her armament was reduced to six 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) guns . She served in this capacity until 1903 , when she was stricken from the naval register and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = Tropical Storm Linfa ( 2015 ) = 
 Severe Tropical Storm Linfa , known in the Philippines as Severe Tropical Storm Egay , was a tropical cyclone that affected the northern Philippines , Taiwan and southern China in early July 2015 . The tenth named storm of the annual typhoon season , Linfa developed on July 1 over in the Philippine Sea . It moved erratically westward toward the Philippines , eventually striking the island of Luzon on July 4 . Linfa weakened across the island , but reorganized over the South China Sea . It turned northward and strengthened to near typhoon intensity , or winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , but weakened as it curved to the northwest toward southern China . On July 9 , the storm made landfall along the Chinese province of Guangdong , dissipating the next day west of Hong Kong . 
 Interacting with the monsoon , Linfa brought heavy rainfall across much of the Philippines for several days , causing flooding and landslides that resulted in traffic accidents and power outages . Across Luzon , Linfa damaged 198 houses and destroyed another seven , causing ₱ 214 @.@ 6 million ( $ 4 @.@ 8 million USD ) in damage . The storm briefly threatened Taiwan , prompting warnings and restricted ferry travel . Over China , Linfa produced heavy rainfall and gusty winds that wrecked 288 homes . Damage in the country totaled ¥ 1 @.@ 7 billion ( $ 284 million USD ) , and there was one death . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Toward the end of June , a westerly wind burst moved across the western Pacific Ocean , spawning Typhoon Chan @-@ hom as well as the storm that would become Linfa . On July 1 , a large area of convection persisted east of the Philippines , with an associated circulation exposed due to moderate wind shear . At 06 : 00 UTC that day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) assessed a low probability of tropical cyclogenesis over the subsequent 24 hours . However , the system quickly organized , prompting the JTWC to issue a tropical cyclone formation alert later that day , indicating that a storm would likely form imminently . At 18 : 00 UTC on July 1 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) estimated that a tropical depression developed about 500 km ( 300 mi ) east @-@ northeast of the Philippine island of Samar . Early the next day , the JTWC classified the system as Tropical Depression 10W , based on the organization of the rainbands about the center . PAGASA – the Philippines ' weather agency – also began monitoring the system , giving it the local name Egay . 
 With the subtropical ridge to the northeast , the nascent system moved northwestward initially . Despite persistent shear dislocating the convection , the JMA upgraded the system to a tropical storm at 12 : 00 UTC on July 2 , naming it Linfa . The storm slowly intensified , amplified by good outflow to the south and the presence of warm water temperatures . On July 3 , Linfa 's track briefly shifted to the southwest , by which time the convective structure had evolved into a central dense overcast . There was uncertainty in the storm 's future as it approached the Philippines . This was due to potential interaction with Typhoon Chan @-@ hom to the northeast , and differences in storm models whether an approaching trough would turn Linfa to the east or the west . 
 After turning back to the northwest , the convection around Linfa became even more symmetrical , although the circulation became slightly elongated . At 06 : 00 UTC on July 4 , the storm reached a preliminary peak intensity , with 10 minute sustained winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) according to the JMA . As Linfa neared the northern Philippines , the bulk of the convection was shifted to the southern periphery , due to the continued wind shear . Late on July 4 , the center of Linfa made landfall over Palanan , Isabela , on the island of Luzon . Moving westward across the island , the circulation became disorganized as the core convection diminished . By late on July 5 , Linfa emerged into the South China Sea . Once over open waters , Linfa began moving to the north @-@ northwest , still moving around the subtropical ridge , and it was expected to move over Taiwan . The circulation remained well @-@ defined but exposed , with the deep convection displaced to the south . With the isolated thunderstorms and unfavorable wind shear , the JTWC noted the potential for the circulation to dissipate over open waters . By July 7 , easing wind shear allowed the convection to rebuild and for the structure to improve in organization . By that time , the future of the storm was still uncertain , although a turn to the northwest toward China was expected . Also on July 7 , PAGASA issued its final bulletin on the storm as Linfa exited their area of responsibility . 
 More favorable conditions allowed the storm to intensify more on July 8 . Around that time , the storm turned more to the northwest due to a ridge exiting China , bringing the storm southwest of western Taiwan . At 00 : 00 UTC on July 8 , the JMA estimated peak 10 minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) , making it a severe tropical storm . The JTWC assessed further strengthening , upgrading Linfa to typhoon status at 18 : 00 UTC that day based on a developing well @-@ defined eye . At that time , the agency estimated peak 1 minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Early on July 9 , the Hong Kong Observatory ( HKO ) sent a reconnaissance aircraft into the storm , which measured winds of near hurricane @-@ force , as well as gale force winds 100 km ( 60 mi ) from the center . As the storm approached the southern China coast , the eye expanded to a diameter of 37 km ( 23 mi ) , while the thunderstorms on the northern periphery diminished . Around 03 : 00 UTC on July 9 , Linfa made landfall east of Hong Kong near Lufeng , Guangdong , and it quickly weakened once over land . The storm turned westward , inland and parallel to the southern Chinese coastline . As the thunderstorms diminished , the surface sustained winds continued to drop . At 18 : 00 UTC on July 9 , the JTWC issued their final advisory for Linfa , and shortly after the JMA downgraded the storm to a tropical depression . The system turned to the southwest , dissipating over open waters on July 10 off the coast of Guangdong province . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 As Linfa ( locally known as Egay ) approached closer to the Philippine island of Luzon , PAGASA issued Public Storm Warning Signal ( PSWS ) # 2 , expecting gale force @-@ winds in Apayao , Aurora , Cagayan , northern Isabela , Kalinga , and Quirino , including the offshore Babuyan and Calayan islands . A lower PSWS was issued for other portions of Luzon . Ahead of the storm , 45 @,@ 336 people evacuated in the Philippines , utilizing 31 government shelters and assisted by police officers . Restricted travel by boat stranded 1 @,@ 147 people during the storm 's passage . Due to the enhancement of the southwest monsoon by the storm , all ships in the Port of Manila were ordered to remain in harbor , and 20 flights were cancelled in northern Luzon . La Union province declared a state of calamity on July 6 because of the storm . Road @-@ clearing teams were prepared ahead of the storm . 
 The threat of the storm prompted officials in Taiwan to issue sea warnings for the island 's southern coast , causing ferry service to two offshore islands to be canceled . A hot air balloon festival was canceled in Taitung City . On July 8 , the HKO issued a Standby Signal # 1 for Hong Kong due to the increased threat from Linfa . On the next day , the agency upgraded it to a Warning Signal # 8 , indicating that gale force winds were expected , although it was dropped in 5 @.@ 5 hours , becoming one of the shortest @-@ lasting such warning . The local government opened 22 shelters , housing 196 people during the storm . The storm caused the Hong Kong International Airport to close , causing 1 @,@ 020 flights to be canceled . The China Meteorological Administration also issued 14 warnings for the Chinese mainland , advising residents on the threat of the storm . Schools were closed in Guangdong due to the storm , while train service was canceled and 10 @,@ 400 boats returned to port . The Chinese government handled the preparations for Linfa at the same time Typhoon Chan @-@ hom was threatening the country 's east coast . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In its formative stages , Linfa brought light rainfall to Palau and Yap , causing minimal effects . The outskirts of the storm increased winds across eastern Malaysia , which knocked down trees and destroyed the roofs of eight school and several houses . In one of the damaged homes , an 18 @-@ month @-@ old baby inside was thrown into a nearby field and suffered injuries . 
 While moving through the Philippines , Linfa caused flooding and four separate landslides . The storm 's heavy rainfall caused water levels to rise in reservoirs , prompting officials to drain some excess waters from the Binga Dam in Benguet province . Schools were closed in Metro Manila for three days due to flooding and landslides . The storm damaged 18 sections of roads , as well as two bridges and an irrigation canal in San Gabriel , La Union . Slick roads and a fallen tree caused a bus accident in Quezon City , injuring ten people . Portions of Luzon lost power during the storm , including the entirety of La Union province , and <unk> briefly lost water access . In the Ilocos region , a Chinese fishing vessel docked at <unk> port ran aground after being battered by huge waves . Three days of high waves washed 30 tons of mussels ashore Valladolid , Negros Occidental , prompting officials to use trucks to bury the rotting shells to prevent the spread of disease . Rough waves also disrupted rescue efforts for an unrelated ferry disaster in the country that killed 54 . The storm interacted with the monsoon to spawn two tornadoes in Negros Occidental , as well as strong winds that knocked down trees and billboards . Across Luzon , Linfa damaged 198 houses and destroyed another seven . The storm damaged ₱ 34 million ( $ 71 @,@ 000 USD ) worth of crops , and total damage reached ₱ 214 @.@ 6 million ( $ 4 @.@ 8 million USD ) . Most of the power outages were repaired within a few days of Linfa 's passage . After the storm , officials distributed meals to affected residents . 
 Linfa was originally forecast to move northwards and make landfall in Taiwan . However , Linfa curved to the west and hit Southern China instead . Only heavy rains and gusty winds were felt in Southern and Central Taiwan . 
 Moving ashore southern China , Linfa produced wind gusts of 171 km / h ( 106 mph ) in <unk> County , while a station in Lufeng , Guangdong recorded sustained winds of 123 km / h ( 76 mph ) . The storm also dropped heavy rainfall in southern China , peaking at 269 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) in <unk> . About 370 @,@ 000 lost power in Shanwei and Shantou . Linfa caused 288 homes to collapse in the country , while 56 @,@ 000 people were displaced . One person was killed in the country . Damage totaled ¥ 1 @.@ 7 billion ( $ 284 million USD ) . Linfa passed about 50 km ( 30 mi ) north of Hong Kong as a weakening storm , producing gusts of around 47 km / h ( 29 mph ) . During its passage , the storm produced a storm surge of 0 @.@ 48 m ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) along Waglan Island . Rainfall reached around 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) in the territory . The winds remained fairly weak , knocking down a few trees , both in Hong Kong and nearby Macau . 
 = Puthiya Paravai = 
 Puthiya Paravai ( English : New Bird ) is a 1964 Indian Tamil @-@ language romantic thriller film directed by Dada Mirasi . The film features Sivaji Ganesan , B. Saroja Devi , M. R. Radha and Sowcar Janaki in the lead roles , with V. K. Ramasamy , Nagesh and Manorama playing supporting roles . The plot revolves around Gopal , a businessman who falls in love with a woman named Latha , but is haunted by the death of his wife Chitra . 
 Puthiya Paravai is the maiden Tamil production of Sivaji Films , later renamed Sivaji Productions , and the third overall production for Sivaji Films after the Hindi films Amar Deep ( 1958 ) and Rakhi ( 1962 ) . The film is a remake of the Bengali film Shesh Ankaa ( 1963 ) , which is itself inspired by the British film Chase a Crooked Shadow ( 1958 ) . The costumes featured in the film were tailored and brought from Singapore and England . The soundtrack album and background score were composed by M. S. Viswanathan and T. K. Ramamoorthy while the lyrics were written by Kannadasan . 
 Puthiya Paravai was released on 12 September 1964 to positive reviews from critics , with praise directed at the innovative filmmaking , the music and the performances from the lead actors . The film was also a commercial success , and had a theatrical run of 100 days . The film was later dubbed in Telugu as Singapore CID . The film was re @-@ released on 23 July 2010 at Ganesan 's family @-@ owned theatre Shanti , and was again met with positive response and commercial success . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Gopal ( Sivaji Ganesan ) is a rich businessman en route to India from Singapore on a cruise ship . He meets Latha ( Saroja Devi ) , another traveller who has been accompanied by her father Ramadurai ( V. K. Ramasamy ) . Gopal and Latha find that they like each other , so Gopal invites them to stay at his palatial mansion in Ooty , which they accept . One day , Latha discovers that Gopal gets agitated whenever he sees an onrushing train and demands the reason for it . Gopal explains that the reason behind this is his first wife . 
 In a flashback , after losing his mother , Gopal , in his sorrow had been wandering aimlessly at Singapore . In a nightclub , he meets a singer named Chitra ( Sowcar Janaki ) . He gets attracted to her and they decide to marry , in the presence of Chitra 's brother Raju ( S. V. Ramadoss ) . But he is disappointed — from the very first day of their marriage , she comes home inebriated , and despite his repeated requests , has little respect for tradition and family values . Eventually , Gopal 's father ( Dada Mirasi ) dies of a heart attack after seeing Chitra 's drunken behaviour on Gopal 's birthday . Gopal tries to control Chitra , but she is always irritated by his acts . At one point , she tries to leave him . Gopal begs her to change her decision , but Chitra still leaves . The next day , he hears that Chitra had died on a railway track , and this hurts him a lot . Latha sympathises with Gopal and accepts his love . 
 The engagement of Gopal and Latha is fixed and while the reception is being held , a young woman arrives , claiming to be Chitra , accompanied by her uncle Rangan ( M. R. Radha ) . Gopal says the woman is an impostor , but she and her uncle produce evidence which convinces even Gopal 's police officer friend Kumar ( O. A. K. Thevar ) . Gopal 's engagement with Latha is cancelled . Chitra and Rangan become disruptive and Gopal gets frustrated , fearing that Latha might leave him because his " wife " has turned up . Several days later , Gopal reveals the truth to everyone . In a flashback , when Chitra was ready to leave Gopal , he slapped her . Chitra , suffering from a heart condition , is unable to take the insult of his slap and dies from the shock . Gopal realises that he had inadvertently killed his wife . To avoid arrest , and safeguard the honour of his family , he manipulates the murder to appear like a suicide on a railway track and fabricates the necessary evidence to show that Chitra committed suicide . Thus , Gopal escapes from the charges of murder . Not wishing to continue living in Singapore , he leaves by a ship to India . 
 Upon hearing this , Latha and Ramadurai reveal themselves as police officers from Singapore investigating Chitra 's death based on the complaint filed by Raju . Rangan is the local investigating officer , while the woman impersonating Chitra is actually Rangan 's aide , Saroja . Together , they staged an entrapment to get the killer 's confession , because there was no other conclusive evidence . Latha confesses to a dejected Gopal that though she initially pretended to love him , his good nature impressed her and she truly loves him ; she promises that she will wait for him till he returns after completing his jail term . Gopal is relieved , but is still arrested and imprisoned . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sivaji Ganesan as Gopal , a businessman formerly from Singapore 
 B. Saroja Devi as Latha , Gopal 's love interest 
 M. R. Radha as Rangan , the local investigating officer who acts as Chitra 's uncle 
 Sowcar Janaki as Chitra , Gopal 's former wife / Saroja , Rangan 's aide 
 Nagesh as Sanjeev , Gopal 's servant 
 Manorama as Alli , Sanjeev 's wife 
 V. K. Ramasamy as Ramadurai , Latha 's father 
 O. A. K. Thevar as Kumar , a police inspector and a close friend of Gopal 
 S. V. Ramadoss as Raju , Chitra 's brother 
 Dada Mirasi as Gopal 's father 
 = = Production = = 
 The 1958 British thriller film Chase a Crooked Shadow , directed by Michael Anderson , was a global success , especially in India . It inspired the Bengali film Shesh Ankaa ( 1963 ) , which starred Uttam Kumar , Sharmila Tagore and <unk> Chowdhary . Shesh Ankaa 's screenplay by Rajkumar Mitra was acquired by Sivaji Films ( later renamed Sivaji Productions ) to be made in Tamil as its first " in @-@ house " production . The film was titled Puthiya Paravai , meaning " New Bird " , with Dada Mirasi as its director and screenwriter . Shanmugham , a relative of Sivaji Ganesan , also made inputs to the film 's screenplay . The film was the third production for Sivaji Films after the Hindi films Amar Deep ( 1958 ) and Rakhi ( 1962 ) . Arur Doss wrote the dialogues for the film . 
 Sivaji Ganesan was cast as the male lead . Both the female leads – B. Saroja Devi and Sowcar Janaki – were cast in roles different from what they were earlier proposed for . According to Ganesan 's eldest son Ramkumar , " Sivaji always thought of Sowcar Janaki as classy and sophisticated , " which was why he cast her as a " modern woman " in Puthiya Paravai . " Before that Sowcar had only acted in homely roles " . Mirasi , who made a cameo appearance as the hero 's father in the film , was initially not convinced about Janaki acting in the film . But after seeing her performance in the song " Paartha Gnaabagam Illaiyo " , Mirasi decided to include her for the rest of the film . Janaki added her own subtle distinctions and inputs to her role as portraying an out @-@ and @-@ out seductive vamp , according to her , would have felt deplorable . Nagesh , S. V. Ramadoss , V. K. Ramasamy , M. R. Radha , O. A. K. Thevar and Manorama were cast in supporting roles . 
 Puthiya Paravai was filmed in Eastman Color . The costumes were tailored and brought from Singapore and England . K. S. Prasad was the film 's cinematographer , and N. M. Shankar served as the editor , with Ganga as art director . The tuxedo worn by Ganesan in the film was ordered from London . For the filming of the song " Unnai Ondru Ketpen " , Ganesan smoked so as to set the mood for the song 's feel . For some scenes in the film , Saroja Devi was made to walk with mincing steps and flutter her eyelashes . The final length of the film was 4 @,@ 473 metres ( 14 @,@ 675 ft ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In her 2002 book Cinema of Interruptions : Action Genres in Contemporary Indian Cinema , Lalitha Gopalan noted that the male protagonists in Indian films use the piano to express their desire with no regard to the consequences and cited Sivaji Ganesan in Puthiya Paravai as an example for the same . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film 's soundtrack and score were composed by the duo Viswanathan – Ramamoorthy ( M. S. Viswanathan and T. K. Ramamoorthy ) while the lyrics were written by Kannadasan ; T. M. Soundararajan and P. Susheela are the only singers featured in the soundtrack . The soundtrack was released under the label of Saregama . The first song recorded was " Chittu Kuruvi " . " Paartha Gnaabagam Illaiyo " is inspired by Dean Martin 's version of " Sway " . Philips , an autodidact guitarist , played the guitar for " Aha Mella " . The interlude of " Unnai Ondru Ketpen " had saxophone music . 
 The heavily orchestrated " Engey Nimmadhi " number , at that time , had the highest number of instruments used for recording . Choir singers from the Purasawalkam and <unk> areas of Chennai were used in the song . According to film historian and actor Mohan V. Raman , " Kannadasan could not get the right words nor was there a tune ready and Sivaji came to the composing and did a pantomime of what he would like to do and thus was born the line and the song " . Cellist R. Selvaraj , whose father was a part of the orchestration for " Engey Nimmadhi " said 250 instrumentalists were used for playing different instruments in sync . Other sources state that Viswanathan used over 300 instruments for the song . The music directors tried over 100 different ways of composing the tune of " Engey Nimmadhi " before the song was recorded . It was based on the raga <unk> Todi . S. S. Vasan of The Hindu Tamil compared the sombre moments in " Engey Nimmadhi " to that of the song " <unk> Is Raat Ki <unk> Me " from Dil Bhi Tera Hum Bhi Tere ( 1960 ) . The song " Yae Dushyanta " , composed by Bharathwaj for Asal ( 2010 ) samples " Paartha Gnaabagam Illaiyo " . 
 The soundtrack received positive response from critics ; all the songs were successful , especially " Engey Nimmadhi " . Film historian Randor Guy stated , " The movie has excellent music ( Viswanathan @-@ Ramamurthy ; lyrics by Kannadasan ) and many songs became hits — Paartha <unk> <unk> ... ! , Unnai <unk> <unk> ( P. Sushila [ sic ] ) and Engey <unk> ( T. M. Soundararajan ) . " Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu said , " Who can forget the everlasting flavour of MSV ’ s expertise that emanated through each and every number , beginning with ‘ Unnai Ondru <unk> ’ ! " Film critic Baradwaj Rangan called it a " stylish musical bonanza " . According to singer Charulatha Mani , " Unnai Ondru Ketpen " was based on the <unk> raaga and further wrote , " In the phrase , ‘ Ennai Pada <unk> ’ , the notes <unk> , S S , N set the mood for the raga . " whilst also calling the song a " super @-@ hit piece " . Music director and singer Ramesh <unk> said " Engey Nimmadhi " was an example of " the unconscious yet natural and healthy fusion that was happening to cinema music at the hands of music directors . " The Hindu included " Engey Nimmadhi " in its list , " Immortal songs of TMS " . P. K. Ajith Kumar of The Hindu stated , " Just as [ Susheela ] does not need to know the language to sing a song perfectly , we need not know Tamil to enjoy her songs like ... <unk> ... ( Puthiya Paravai ) " . The Times of India noted , " Think any of Sivaji Ganesan 's songs and you 'll immediately think of the film . Be it the seductive club song Partha <unk> <unk> ( Pudhiya Paravai ) ... the songs in his films were perfectly in sync with the sequence . " 
 = = = Track list = = = 
 All lyrics written by Kannadasan . 
 = = Release = = 
 Puthiya Paravai was released on 12 September 1964 , and was slated to be released in the theatre Shanthi , which is Sivaji Ganesan 's family @-@ held theatre . However , Sangam was already running there successfully , so Ganesan instead released in the now non @-@ existent theatre Paragon at Wallajah Road , which had to be refurbished before the film 's screening . It was his fifth release of the year . The film was also dubbed in Telugu as Singapore CID . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Puthiya Paravai received positive reviews , with praise directed at the performances of the lead actors and its innovative filmmaking , which was considered to be of " international standard " . On 4 October 1964 , Ananda Vikatan said , " We can accept the film intellectually . However , it is tough to accept it in our heart due to the climax " . G. Dhananjayan , in his book The Best of Tamil Cinema : 1931 to 1976 , called it " An innovative landmark film with international standards of direction " . Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu said , " [ Puthiya ] Paravai is a thriller in the whodunit genre . Dada Mirasi ’ s astute adaptation saw to it that the suspense was maintained till the very end , and the denouement neatly tied up the strands of suspense . " The Times of India rated the film four out of five , praising the performances of Ganesan , Saroja Devi , Janaki and Radha , and stated , " Coupled with the stylish visuals of KV Prasad and a haunting score by the composer duo MS Viswanathan and TK Ramamurthy , the film proves to be an irresistible thriller . " The reviewer did , however , note that the first half of the film moved at a slow pace , but called the climax " riveting " . 
 Film historian Randor Guy stated , " Sivaji Ganesan as the hero forced into a corner is excellent . Saroja Devi exudes glamour , while Sowcar Janaki as the boozing wife acquits her role with considerable conviction " , concluding that the film would be " Remembered for the taut onscreen narration , the excellent performances by Sivaji Ganesan , Sowcar Janaki and M. R. Radha , and Saroja Devi ’ s glamour " . Film historian Film News Anandan praised it for being " the first film which had a classy , rich look right through . " T. Ramakrishnan of The Hindu called Saroja Devi 's character a " brilliant role " . Mohan V. Raman noted that Janaki was popular mainly for her " sentimental " roles , but described her " anti @-@ sentimental " role in Puthiya Paravai as one of her " exceptional performances " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film had a theatrical run of 100 days in theatres . In Chennai , it was showing for 132 days at Paragon , 76 days at the theatres Krishna and <unk> , and for eight weeks in all major centres . Due to the successful run of Puthiya Paravai at Paragon , the film <unk> <unk> ( 1964 ) , which was also running at the same theatre , was removed after completing 70 days . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Puthiya Paravai is frequently screened on Tamil television channels , most notably Jaya TV . The film portrayed a new investigating technique for the police , which met with a positive response . The songs were featured in a charity concert held by M. S. Viswanathan at the Kamaraj Arangam in Chennai on 14 July 2012 . In April 2006 , P. Susheela chose " Paartha Gnaabagam Illaiyo " and " Unnai Ondru Ketpen " along with " Paal Polave " from Uyarndha Manithan ( 1968 ) as her favourite songs that she had recorded . A song from <unk> ( 1990 ) also has the same title as the song from Puthiya Paravai — " Engey Nimmadhi " . In September 2014 , Vijay Sethupathi , in an interview with Sudhir Srinivasan of The Hindu , listed Puthiya Paravai among his favourite films alongside Ratha Kanneer ( 1954 ) , Thillana Mohanambal ( 1968 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 1973 ) . 
 Many scenes from the film , especially those involving Sivaji Ganesan and Saroja Devi were parodied many times . One notable parody is the comedy track from Guru En Aalu ( 2009 ) , which featured Vivek and M. S. Bhaskar , who imitate Saroja Devi and Sivaji Ganesan respectively . The parody became popular and was frequently screened on comedy channels like <unk> TV and <unk> . In Muthu ( 1995 ) , Padmini ( <unk> ) hums the song " Aha Mella " . In the film <unk> ( 2000 ) , Kailash ( Jayaram ) watches " Chittu Kuruvi " on television but changes the channel after imagining that Ganesan 's face morphs into <unk> ( Kamal Haasan ) . In the film Siruthai ( 2011 ) , <unk> Poochi ( N. Santhanam ) watches the film 's climax on television before stealing the television set . Scenes from Puthiya Paravai are featured in the film Burma ( 2014 ) . 
 In the third season of the television show Airtel Super Singer , the show 's host <unk> and singer Mano imitate Saroja Devi and Sivaji Ganesan 's mannerisms from the film . " Paartha Gnaabagam Illaiyo " inspired a television serial of the same name , which featured actress Kushboo . The serial aired on Kalaignar TV in March 2012 . 
 = = Re @-@ releases = = 
 Footage from Puthiya Paravai was screened at Ganesan 's 80th birthday celebrations held at Kalaignar Arangam , Chennai in 2008 . The film was re @-@ released on 23 July 2010 to commemorate the ninth anniversary of Sivaji Ganesan 's death . The negatives of the film were " cleaned up at a lab " prior to release , and the film was released at Shanthi theatre , where it could not originally be released in 1964 . Despite being a re @-@ release , the film earned public acclaim and took a good opening , running to one @-@ hundred percent theatre occupancy for three days , and became a commercial success . In 2013 , production house Sai Ganesh Films announced that the film 's digitally restored version would be released in 2014 , 50 years since the original release in 1964 , but this did not happen . The film was screened at the Russian Cultural Centre Auditorium in <unk> on 14 September 2014 . 
 = Mycena nargan = 
 Mycena nargan , commonly known as the Nargan 's bonnet , is a species of fungus in the Mycenaceae family , and the sole member of the section Nargan in the genus Mycena . Reported as a new species in 1995 , it is known predominantly from Southern Australia . The saprobic fungus produces mushrooms that grow on well @-@ decayed wood , often on the underside of wood lying in litter . The dark chestnut @-@ coloured caps are covered with white , easily removed scales , and reach diameters of up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide . The pale , slender stems are up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) long and have white scales at the base . On the underside of the cap , the cream @-@ coloured gills are widely spaced and bluntly attached to the stem . The edibility of the mushroom is unknown . 
 = = Taxonomy , naming , and classification = = 
 The species was first discovered in 1992 in <unk> Forest , South Australia , and reported as new to science in a 1995 Australian Systematic Botany publication . The species name refers to the nargan or <unk> , a mythical aboriginal being – originally the mycologists Tom May and Bruce Fuhrer had called it " nargan " , as its white speckles <unk> in the dark like the eyes of the nargan , and Cheryl Grgurinovic incorporated this into its specific epithet . It is commonly known as " Nargan 's bonnet " , but has also been referred to as the " spotted pixie cap " . 
 With respect to infrageneric classification ( i.e. , taxonomic ranking below the level of genus ) in Mycena , several characteristics suggest the mushroom fits best in Rudolph Arnold Maas Geesteranus ' section Fragilipedes : the ellipsoidal , amyloid spores ; dextrinoid spore @-@ bearing tissue ; smooth cheilocystidia ; gills with the edge the same colour as the face ; and the non @-@ slimy , distinctly coloured cap . According to the 1986 infrageneric classification proposed by Rolf Singer , the mushroom would be classified in subgenus Mycena , subsection <unk> , stirps <unk> ( roughly equivalent to section Fragilipedes of Maas Geesteranus ) because of the amyloid spores , smooth , elongated cheilocystidia , dull @-@ coloured pigment , and stem without either latex or a slimy sheath . Grgurinovic erected the new section Nargan to accommodate M. nargan , because its scales , lack of coarse fibrils at the base of the stem , and lack of pruinose coating meant it was not a good fit for section Fragilipedes . 
 = = Description = = 
 The caps of young mushrooms are initially egg @-@ shaped to conical , expanding to become bell @-@ shaped and up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter . Initially , the margin of the cap is rolled inwards ; it typically assumes a lighter colour than the centre of the cap surface . Dark brown in colour , the mushroom is distinguished by the presence of white speckles or scales on the cap and stem ; these scales may disappear when they become sloughed off or washed away by rain , which can make the species hard to recognise . The thick gills have an adnate attachment to the stem ( broadly attached to the stem slightly above the bottom of the gill , with most of the gill fused to the stem ) , and are white to light grey in colour , paler toward the edge . There are about 24 – 28 gills extending completely from the cap margin to the stem , and one or two tiers of lamellulae ( shorter gills does do not extend fully from the margin to the stem ) . The thin stem is up to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) high and 0 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 12 in ) wide , and does not have a ring . Young specimens will typically have whitish scales at the base ; later , these will slough off and a felt @-@ like whitish mycelium may be apparent . The mushroom have no distinctive odour . The spore print is white or cream . The edibility of the mushroom has not been reported . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores of M. nargan are roughly ellipsoid , smooth , hyaline , and measure 7 @.@ 4 – 10 @.@ 4 by 4 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 1 μm . They have a small , oblique apiculus , and lack oil droplets . In terms of staining reactions , they are acyanophilous ( not absorbing methyl blue dye ) , and amyloid ( turning blue @-@ black in Melzer 's reagent ) . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells in the hymenium ) are club @-@ shaped , have clamp connections at their bases , and measure 29 @.@ 6 – 36 @.@ 4 by 8 @.@ 2 – 10 @.@ 7 μm . They are four @-@ spored , and the spores are attached to the basidia by long slender sterigmata that are up to 7 @.@ 2 μm long . The gill edge is sterile ( without basidia ) , and has <unk> cystidia . These thin @-@ walled cheilocystidia range in shape from swollen in the middle with a beak @-@ like point , to spindle @-@ shaped ( fusiform ) to club @-@ shaped . They are smooth , hyaline , and inamyloid , with dimensions of 20 @.@ 8 – 38 @.@ 4 by 4 @.@ 8 – 10 @.@ 4 μm . They have a clamp connection at base . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are not present in this species . The gill tissue is made of smooth , thin @-@ walled cylindrical to egg @-@ shaped cells , up to 30 @.@ 4 μm in diameter . The cells are dextrinoid ( producing a black to blue @-@ black positive reaction with Melzer 's reagent ) , and reddish @-@ brown . The surface of the cap ( the pileipellis ) is made of a layer of bent @-@ over filamentous hyphae measuring 1 @.@ 8 – 4 @.@ 8 μm . These loosely arranged hyphae are slightly gelatinised , smooth , thin @-@ walled , hyaline , inamyloid , and have clamp connections . The tissue layer directly under the pileipellis ( the hypodermium ) has cells containing brown pigment . The cap tissue consists of smooth , thin @-@ walled , cylindrical to broadly cylindrical or ovoid cells , up to 37 @.@ 0 μm in diameter , with clamp connections . These cells are dextrinoid and reddish orange @-@ brown in colour . The surface of the stem is made of filamentous hyphae , 2 @.@ 2 – 4 @.@ 0 μm in diameter , either smooth or with sparse to moderately dense short , rod @-@ like to cylindrical projections . The cells are thin @-@ walled to very slightly thick @-@ walled , hyaline , inamyloid , and have clamp connections . Caulocystidia ( cystidia on the cap surface ) are not present . The stem tissue consists of short , cylindrical cells , up to 28 @.@ 0 μm in diameter that are smooth , thin @-@ walled , and with or without brown pigment in the cytoplasm . The cells contain clamp connections and are reddish orange @-@ brown . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Mycena nargan has a very distinct appearance , and is unlikely to be mistaken for other Mycenas . However , one noted unintentional misidentification occurred when the M. nargan on the cover photograph of Bruce A. Fuhrer 's 2005 book A Field Guide to Australian Fungi was labelled as Mycena nivalis , a species with a white cap . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 A common mushroom , Mycena nargan is found growing singly or in clusters on the underside of rotting wood in wet and shaded areas , and is especially partial to Eucalyptus and Pinus pinaster . Fruit bodies usually appear from April to June . The species has been recorded from Tasmania , Victoria and southeastern South Australia . The Australian <unk> initiative has reported isolated collections in Western Australia , South Australia , and New South Wales , although the majority of sightings have been in Tasmania and Victoria . The fungus is saprobic , meaning it derives nutrients from dead or dying organic matter . A field study conducted in Tasmania showed that it is much more likely to be found in mature eucalypt forest ( defined as having grown at least 70 years before the last wildfire ) than young , regenerating forest that had experienced clearfelling , burning , and sowing two to three years previously . 
 = James Ferguson ( Scottish politician ) = 
 James Ferguson FRSE ( 25 May 1735 – 6 September 1820 ) was a Scottish advocate and Tory politician and the third Laird of Pitfour , a large estate in the Buchan area of north east Scotland , which is known as the ' Blenheim of the North ' . 
 Ferguson studied law in Edinburgh , qualifying in 1757 to gain membership of the Faculty of Advocates . He then undertook a tour of Europe throughout 1758 before following in his father 's footsteps by joining the Scottish legal profession . Later in life his interests turned to politics and he became a Scottish Tory politician . 
 Among the extensive work carried out by Ferguson at Pitfour , he is also credited with beginning work on a canal between the Pitfour estate and the sea at Peterhead in order to transport agricultural produce . Despite planning objections from neighbours , work began in 1797 . He is also credited with establishing the planned village of Mintlaw in 1813 . 
 = = Ancestry and early life = = 
 James Ferguson was born at Pitfour on 25 May 1735 . He was the eldest son of James Ferguson ( 1700 – 1777 ) and Ann Murray ( 1708 – 1793 ) . His parents were married on 3 February 1733 , and he was born three years later . They had five other , younger children . 
 Before undertaking a grand tour of Europe during 1758 , Ferguson continued the family tradition of studying law in Edinburgh . After qualifying , he gained membership of the Faculty of Advocates and Society of Writers to the Signet in July 1757 . 
 Ferguson spent a great deal of time at Pitfour but also had an apartment in St James Place , Westminster , Middlesex . Ferguson became the third Laird of Pitfour on the death of his father , Lord Pitfour , in 1777 . 
 The Third Laird was a known associate of James Boswell and together with his brother Patrick , who was the designer of the Ferguson rifle , breakfasted with Boswell in November 1762 . Other close associates were William Pitt the Younger and Henry Dundas , 1st Viscount Melville . He was the Rector at Aberdeen University from 1794 @-@ 6 . 
 In a confidential report titled " View of the political state of Scotland " published in 1788 , Ferguson was described as " a man of real good sense , but indolent . " The document was published in 1887 but covered the personal circumstances of those involved in county elections in Scotland during the previous century . Ferguson was not a good @-@ looking man and appeared plain , small and stocky . His mother once wrote to him : 
 Never expose yourself , James , to the charge of rape , for your broad shoulders will cause the jury to think it probable that you made the attempt , and your face will make it manifest that it must have been against the will . 
 He remained a bachelor although there was speculation he yearned for Jane Gordon , Duchess of Gordon . She was born in Edinburgh in 1749 , and was a Scottish Tory political hostess who was shrewd , sharp @-@ witted and humorous but good @-@ natured . In a riddle written by the Duchess , the last two lines refer to Ferguson and confirm that he was not an attractive man . It reads : 
 Around 1813 , he established the planned village of Mintlaw , and he is also credited with expanding Longside in 1801 . 
 Prior to his death his Edinburgh address was 30 Heriot Row in the Second New Town . 
 He died without issue , and on his death in St James ' Place , London , in September 1820 , the estate passed to his younger brother , George Ferguson ( 1748 – 1820 ) , who was then 72 years old and in poor health . He was said to have died " without a struggle " of " apoplexy " . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Ferguson became a Scottish Tory politician . He sat in the House of Commons of Great Britain from 1788 to 1800 , and then in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom until his death in 1820 . 
 He unsuccessfully contested Aberdeenshire at a by @-@ election in 1786 with the support of the Duke of Gordon . George Skene — proposed by the Earl of Fife , who held tremendous sway in the political circles of that time — defeated him . The total electorate for Aberdeenshire was 190 , and Ferguson was defeated by ten votes . Ferguson was again nominated for Aberdeenshire in July 1790 and was appointed after Skene withdrew when his alcoholism began to blight his political career . 
 Ferguson was elected as the Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Banffshire at a by @-@ election in 1789 , holding that seat until 1790 . He was elected at the 1790 general election as MP for Aberdeenshire , and held that seat until his death 30 years later . 
 The Member became a close associate and political friend of the Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger . After Pitt 's death in 1806 , Ferguson did not so easily retain his seat in Parliament . In the elections of 1806 , he retained the seat by just two votes , and his opponent General Alexander Hay demanded he be investigated for bribery and corruption . Ferguson again beat Hay in the contest for the seat in June 1807 , but this time with a more convincing majority of 54 to 39 votes . Ferguson was unopposed in the next three elections . Some records indicate that Ferguson never spoke in the Commons except to complain about a broken window behind his seat causing a draught . He is actually recorded as speaking on at least five occasions over the years . 
 The diarist and fellow lawyer Henry Crabb Robinson gave an indication of Ferguson 's political party affiliation when he recorded in his diary of 1826 : 
 Late at the Athenaeum . Hudson Gurney was there . He related with great effect the experience of Ferguson of Pitfour , which he used to repeat when an old man , for the benefit of young Members : ' I was never absent from any division I could get at . I have heard many arguments which convinced my judgement , but never one that influenced my vote . I never voted but once according to my own opinion , and that was the worst vote I ever gave . I found that the only way to be quiet in Parliament was always to vote with the ministers , and never to take a place ' . 
 It was not until after 1832 and the introduction of the Scottish Reform Act 1832 that control of Scottish politics was taken from the hands of landowners and a small number of merchants . The Friends of the People Society in the 1790s was opposed by those landed gentry politicians . After the Act came into effect , the constituencies were changed , and this raised the electorate from under 5 @,@ 000 to 65 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Pitfour = = 
 The Pitfour Estate beside Mintlaw in the Buchan area of north @-@ east Scotland became one of the country 's most extensive and lavish estates during the 18th and 19th centuries . The Pitfour estate is shown on old maps as Petfouir or Petfour . The estate was purchased by Ferguson 's grandfather , the first Laird , in 1700 and was developed and extended by both the Sheriff and Lord Pitfour . Covering a large area of Buchan , the policies stretched to around 50 square miles and would be valued at £ 30m at its peak in the 18th century . The third Laird is attributed with much of the development work on the mansion house which was designed by architect John Smith in 1809 . In his architectural guide to Banff and Buchan , Charles McKean describes the estate as the " Blenheim of Buchan " and " the Blenheim of Northern Scotland " . 
 Pitfour 's canal and lake 
 Ferguson was Laird of Pitfour during the period known as the Industrial Revolution in Britain . He began work on a canal between Pitfour and Peterhead in 1797 despite major opposition from adjoining landowners . The canal was proposed to cover about ten miles following the course of the River Ugie . References also refer to Pitfour 's canal as the St Fergus and River Ugie Canal . A project Ferguson had considered since 1793 , it was never completed owing to " difficulties in effecting the necessary arrangements with neighbouring heritors . " The objections were particularly raised by the Merchant Maiden Hospital , which owned the land on the south side of the Ugie . Despite being advised to take out an interdict to prevent the work , in January 1797 the Hospital did not feel it had a strong enough case . However , four months later when two miles of the canal had been dug up to where the north and south Ugie joined , the Hospital did apply for an interdict , and this was granted in July 1797 . 
 A few years after starting work on the canal , the Member had an artificial lake built on a flat piece of land to the front of the mansion house . The landscape gardener William S Gilpin was carrying out work on the adjacent Strichen estate at about the same time , and it is assumed he gave help with the work at Pitfour . The lake extends to almost 50 acres and was based on the artificial lake at Windsor Great Park . 
 Later history of the estate 
 After the death of the Member intestate in 1820 , the estate was inherited by his younger brother George Ferguson ( 1748 – 1820 ) , who died shortly after inheriting the estate . He was succeeded by his illegitimate son George Ferguson who , despite incurring severe debts , continued to develop the estate by adding a stable block , race course , an observation tower and other follies . He had huge gambling debts , and although the estate had been valued at £ 300 @,@ 000 when he inherited it , he sold off many of the farms and other parts of the estate to raise funds . Despite these injections of funds , when he died the estate was mortgaged to the extent of £ 250 @,@ 000 . It was further decimated by his son , George Arthur Ferguson ( 1835 – 1924 ) . George Arthur was sequestrated , and what remained of the estate was marketed in 1909 . It was eventually sold in mid @-@ 1926 , and the mansion house was knocked down . 
 = Benjamin Britten = 
 Edward Benjamin Britten , Baron Britten , OM CH ( 22 November 1913 – 4 December 1976 ) was an English composer , conductor and pianist . He was a central figure of 20th @-@ century British classical music , with a range of works including opera , other vocal music , orchestral and chamber pieces . His best @-@ known works include the opera Peter Grimes ( 1945 ) , the War Requiem ( 1962 ) and the orchestral showpiece The Young Person 's Guide to the Orchestra ( 1945 ) . 
 Born in Suffolk , the son of a dentist , Britten showed talent from an early age . He studied at the Royal College of Music in London and privately with the composer Frank Bridge . Britten first came to public attention with the a cappella choral work A Boy was Born in 1934 . With the premiere of Peter Grimes in 1945 , he leapt to international fame . Over the next 28 years , he wrote 14 more operas , establishing himself as one of the leading 20th @-@ century composers in the genre . In addition to large @-@ scale operas for Sadler 's Wells and Covent Garden , he wrote " chamber operas " for small forces , suitable for performance in venues of modest size . Among the best known of these is The Turn of the Screw ( 1954 ) . Recurring themes in the operas are the struggle of an outsider against a hostile society , and the corruption of innocence . 
 Britten 's other works range from orchestral to choral , solo vocal , chamber and instrumental as well as film music . He took a great interest in writing music for children and amateur performers , including the opera Noye 's Fludde , a Missa Brevis , and the song collection Friday Afternoons . He often composed with particular performers in mind . His most frequent and important muse was his personal and professional partner , the tenor Peter Pears ; others included Kathleen Ferrier , Jennifer Vyvyan , Janet Baker , Dennis Brain , Julian Bream , Dietrich Fischer @-@ Dieskau and Mstislav Rostropovich . Britten was a celebrated pianist and conductor , performing many of his own works in concert and on record . He also performed and recorded works by others , such as Bach 's Brandenburg concertos , Mozart symphonies , and song cycles by Schubert and Schumann . 
 Together with Pears and the librettist and producer Eric Crozier , Britten founded the annual Aldeburgh Festival in 1948 , and he was responsible for the creation of Snape Maltings concert hall in 1967 . In his last year , he was the first composer to be given a life peerage . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Britten was born in the fishing port of Lowestoft in Suffolk , on the east coast of England on 22 November 1913 , the feast day of Saint Cecilia . He was the youngest of four children of Robert Victor Britten ( 1878 – 1934 ) and his wife Edith Rhoda , née Hockey ( 1874 – 1937 ) . Robert Britten 's youthful ambition to become a farmer had been thwarted by lack of capital , and he had instead trained as a dentist , a profession he practised successfully but without pleasure . While studying at Charing Cross Hospital in London he met Edith Hockey , the daughter of a junior Home Office official . They were married in September 1901 at St John 's , Smith Square , London . 
 The consensus among biographers of Britten is that his father was a loving but somewhat stern and remote parent . Britten , according to his sister Beth , " got on well with him and shared his wry sense of humour , dedication to work and capacity for taking pains " . Edith Britten was a talented amateur musician and secretary of the Lowestoft Musical Society . In the English provinces of the early 20th century , distinctions of social class were taken very seriously . Britten described his family as " very ordinary middle class " , but there were aspects of the Brittens that were not ordinary : Edith 's father was illegitimate , and her mother was an alcoholic ; Robert Britten was an agnostic and refused to attend church on Sundays . Music was the principal means by which Edith Britten strove to maintain the family 's social standing , inviting the pillars of the local community to musical soirées at the house . 
 When Britten was three months old he contracted pneumonia and nearly died . The illness left him with a damaged heart , and doctors warned his parents that he would probably never be able to lead a normal life . He recovered more fully than expected , and as a boy was a keen tennis player and cricketer . To his mother 's great delight he was an outstandingly musical child , unlike his sisters , who inherited their father 's indifference to music , while his brother , though musically talented , was interested only in ragtime . Edith gave the young Britten his first lessons in piano and notation . He made his first attempts at composition when he was five . He started piano lessons when he was seven years old , and three years later began to play the viola . He was one of the last composers brought up on exclusively live music : his father refused to have a gramophone or , later , a radio in the house . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 = = = = Lowestoft = = = = 
 When he was seven Britten was sent to a dame school , run by the Misses Astle . The younger sister , Ethel , gave him piano lessons ; in later life he said that he remained grateful for the excellence of her teaching . The following year he moved on to his prep school , South Lodge , Lowestoft , as a day boy . The headmaster , Thomas Sewell , was an old @-@ fashioned disciplinarian ; the young Britten was outraged at the severe corporal punishments frequently handed out , and later he said that his lifelong pacifism probably had its roots in his reaction to the regime at the school . He himself rarely fell foul of Sewell , a mathematician , in which subject Britten was a star pupil . The school had no musical tradition , and Britten continued to study the piano with Ethel Astle . From the age of ten he took viola lessons from a friend of his mother 's , Audrey Alston , who had been a professional player before her marriage . In his spare time he composed prolifically . When his Simple Symphony , based on these juvenilia , was recorded in 1956 , Britten wrote this pen @-@ portrait of his young self for the sleeve note : 
 Once upon a time there was a prep @-@ school boy . ... He was quite an ordinary little boy ... he loved cricket , only quite liked football ( although he kicked a pretty " corner " ) ; he adored mathematics , got on all right with history , was scared by Latin Unseen ; he behaved fairly well , only ragged the recognised amount , so that his contacts with the cane or the slipper were happily rare ( although one nocturnal expedition to stalk ghosts left its marks behind ) ; he worked his way up the school slowly and steadily , until at the age of thirteen he reached that pinnacle of importance and grandeur never to be quite equalled in later days : the head of the Sixth , head @-@ prefect , and Victor Ludorum . But – there was one curious thing about this boy : he wrote music . His friends bore with it , his enemies kicked a bit but not for long ( he was quite tough ) , the staff couldn 't object if his work and games didn 't suffer . He wrote lots of it , reams and reams of it . 
 Audrey Alston encouraged Britten to go to symphony concerts in Norwich . At one of these , during the triennial Norfolk and Norwich Festival in October 1924 , he heard Frank Bridge 's orchestral poem The Sea , conducted by the composer . It was the first substantial piece of modern music he had ever encountered , and he was , in his own phrase , " knocked sideways " by it . Audrey Alston was a friend of Bridge ; when he returned to Norwich for the next festival in 1927 she brought her not quite 14 @-@ year @-@ old pupil to meet him . Bridge was impressed with the boy , and after they had gone through some of Britten 's compositions together he invited him to come to London to take lessons from him . Robert Britten , supported by Thomas Sewell , doubted the wisdom of pursuing a composing career ; a compromise was agreed by which Britten would , as planned , go on to his public school the following year but would make regular day @-@ trips to London to study composition with Bridge and piano with his colleague Harold Samuel . 
 Bridge impressed on Britten the importance of scrupulous attention to the technical craft of composing and the maxim that " you should find yourself and be true to what you found . " The earliest substantial works Britten composed while studying with Bridge are the String Quartet in F , completed in April 1928 , and the Quatre Chansons Françaises , a song @-@ cycle for high voice and orchestra . Authorities differ on the extent of Bridge 's influence on his pupil 's technique . Humphrey Carpenter and Michael Oliver judge that Britten 's abilities as an orchestrator were essentially self @-@ taught ; Donald Mitchell considers that Bridge had an important influence on the cycle . 
 = = = = Public school and Royal College of Music = = = = 
 In September 1928 Britten went as a boarder to Gresham 's School , in Holt , Norfolk . At the time he felt unhappy there , even writing in his diary of contemplating suicide or running away : he hated being separated from his family , most particularly from his mother ; he despised the music master ; and he was shocked at the prevalence of bullying , though he was not the target of it . He remained there for two years and in 1930 , he won a composition scholarship at the Royal College of Music ( RCM ) in London ; his examiners were the composers John Ireland and Ralph Vaughan Williams and the college 's harmony and counterpoint teacher , S P Waddington . 
 Britten was at the RCM from 1930 to 1933 , studying composition with Ireland and piano with Arthur Benjamin . He won the Sullivan Prize for composition , the Cobbett Prize for chamber music , and was twice winner of the Ernest Farrar Prize for composition . These honours notwithstanding , he was not greatly impressed by the establishment : he found his fellow @-@ students " amateurish and folksy " and the staff " inclined to suspect technical brilliance of being superficial and insincere " . Another Ireland pupil , the composer Humphrey Searle , said that Ireland could be " an inspiring teacher to those on his own wavelength " ; Britten was not , and learned little from him . He continued to study privately with Bridge , although he later praised Ireland for " <unk> [ ing ] me very gently through a very , very difficult musical adolescence " . 
 Britten also used his time in London to attend concerts and become better acquainted with the music of Stravinsky , Shostakovich and , most particularly , Mahler . He intended postgraduate study in Vienna with Alban Berg , Arnold Schoenberg 's student , but was eventually dissuaded by his parents , on the advice of the RCM staff . 
 The first of Britten 's compositions to attract wide attention were composed while at the RCM : the Sinfonietta , Op. 1 ( 1932 ) , and a set of choral variations A Boy was Born , written in 1933 for the BBC Singers , who first performed it the following year . In this same period he wrote Friday Afternoons , a collection of 12 songs for the pupils of Clive House School , Prestatyn , where his brother was headmaster . 
 = = = Early professional life = = = 
 In February 1935 , at Bridge 's instigation , Britten was invited to a job interview by the BBC 's director of music Adrian Boult and his assistant Edward Clark . Britten was not enthusiastic about the prospect of working full @-@ time in the BBC music department and was relieved when what came out of the interview was an invitation to write the score for a documentary film , The King 's Stamp , directed by Alberto Cavalcanti for the GPO Film Unit . 
 Britten became a member of the film unit 's small group of regular contributors , another of whom was W H Auden . Together they worked on the documentary films Coal Face and Night Mail in 1935 . They also collaborated on the song cycle Our Hunting Fathers ( 1936 ) , radical both in politics and musical treatment , and subsequently other works including Cabaret Songs , On This Island , Paul Bunyan and Hymn to St. Cecilia . Auden was a considerable influence on Britten , encouraging him to widen his aesthetic , intellectual and political horizons , and also to come to terms with his homosexuality . Auden was , as David Matthews puts it , " cheerfully and <unk> promiscuous " ; Britten , puritanical and conventional by nature , was sexually repressed . 
 In the three years from 1935 to 1937 Britten wrote nearly 40 scores for the theatre , cinema and radio . Among the film music of the late 1930s Matthews singles out Night Mail and Love from a Stranger ( 1937 ) ; from the theatre music he selects for mention The Ascent of F6 ( 1936 ) , On the Frontier ( 1938 ) and Johnson Over Jordan ( 1939 ) ; and of the music for radio , King Arthur ( 1937 ) and The Sword in the Stone ( 1939 ) . 
 In 1937 there were two events of huge importance in Britten 's life : his mother died , and he met the tenor Peter Pears . Although Britten was extraordinarily devoted to his mother and was devastated at her death , it also seems to have been something of a liberation for him . Only after that did he begin to engage in emotional relationships with people his own age or younger . Later in the year he got to know Pears while they were both helping to clear out the country cottage of a mutual friend who had died in an air crash . Pears quickly became Britten 's musical inspiration and close ( though for the moment platonic ) friend . Britten 's first work for him was composed within weeks of their meeting , a setting of Emily Brontë 's poem , " A thousand gleaming fires " , for tenor and strings . 
 During 1937 Britten composed a Pacifist March to words by Ronald Duncan for the Peace Pledge Union , of which , as a pacifist , he had become an active member ; the work was not a success and was soon withdrawn . The best known of his compositions from this period is probably Variations on a Theme of Frank Bridge for string orchestra , described by Matthews as the first of Britten 's works to become a popular classic . It was a success in North America , with performances in Toronto , New York , Boston , Chicago and San Francisco , under conductors including John Barbirolli and Serge Koussevitzky . 
 = = = America 1939 – 42 = = = 
 In April 1939 Britten and Pears sailed to North America , going first to Canada and then to New York . They had several reasons for leaving England , including the difficult position of pacifists in an increasingly bellicose Europe ; the success that Frank Bridge had enjoyed in the US ; the departure of Auden and his friend Christopher Isherwood to the US from England three months previously ; hostile or belittling reviews of Britten 's music in the English press ; and under @-@ rehearsed and inadequate performances . Britten and Pears consummated their relationship and from then until Britten 's death they were partners in both their professional and personal lives . When the Second World War began , Britten and Pears turned for advice to the British embassy in Washington and were told that they should remain in the US as artistic ambassadors . Pears was inclined to disregard the advice and go back to England ; Britten also felt the urge to return , but accepted the embassy 's counsel and persuaded Pears to do the same . 
 Already a friend of the composer Aaron Copland , Britten encountered his latest works Billy the Kid and An Outdoor Overture , both of which influenced his own music . In 1940 Britten composed Seven Sonnets of Michelangelo , the first of many song cycles for Pears . Britten 's orchestral works from this period include the Violin Concerto and Sinfonia da Requiem . In 1941 Britten produced his first music drama , Paul Bunyan , an operetta , to a libretto by Auden . While in the US , Britten had his first encounter with Balinese gamelan music , through transcriptions for piano duo made by the Canadian composer Colin McPhee . The two met in the summer of 1939 and subsequently performed a number of McPhee 's transcriptions for a recording . This musical encounter bore fruit in several Balinese @-@ inspired works later in Britten 's career . 
 Moving to the US did not relieve Britten of the nuisance of hostile criticism : although Olin Downes , the doyen of New York music critics , and Irving Kolodin took to Britten 's music , Virgil Thomson was , as the music scholar Suzanne Robinson puts it , consistently " severe and spiteful " . Thomson described Les Illuminations ( 1940 ) as " little more than a series of <unk> and facile ' effects ' ... pretentious , banal and utterly disappointing " , and was equally unflattering about Pears 's voice . Robinson surmises that Thomson was motivated by " a mixture of spite , national pride , and professional jealousy " . Paul Bunyan met with wholesale critical disapproval , and the Sinfonia da Requiem ( already rejected by its Japanese sponsors because of its overtly Christian nature ) received a mixed reception when Barbirolli and the New York Philharmonic premiered it in March 1941 . The reputation of the work was much enhanced when Koussevitzky took it up shortly afterwards . 
 = = = Return to England = = = 
 In 1942 Britten read the work of the poet George Crabbe for the first time . The Borough , set on the Suffolk coast close to Britten 's homeland , awakened in him such longings for England that he knew he must return . He also knew that he must write an opera based on Crabbe 's poem about the fisherman Peter Grimes . Before Britten left the US , Koussevitzky , always generous in encouraging new talent , offered him a $ 1 @,@ 000 commission to write the opera . Britten and Pears returned to England in April 1942 . During the long transatlantic sea crossing Britten completed the choral works A Ceremony of Carols and Hymn to St Cecilia . The latter was his last large @-@ scale collaboration with Auden . Britten had grown away from him , and Auden became one of the composer 's so @-@ called " corpses " – former intimates from whom he completely cut off contact once they had outlived their usefulness to him or offended him in some way . 
 Having arrived in Britain , Britten and Pears applied for recognition as conscientious objectors ; Britten was initially allowed only non @-@ combatant service in the military , but on appeal he gained unconditional exemption . After the death of his mother in 1937 he had used money she bequeathed him to buy the Old Mill in Snape , Suffolk which became his country home . He spent much of his time there in 1944 working on the opera Peter Grimes . Pears joined Sadler 's Wells Opera Company , whose artistic director , the singer Joan Cross , announced her intention to re @-@ open the company 's home base in London with Britten 's opera , casting herself and Pears in the leading roles . There were complaints from company members about supposed favouritism and the " cacophony " of Britten 's score , as well as some ill @-@ suppressed homophobic remarks . Peter Grimes opened in June 1945 and was hailed by public and critics ; its box @-@ office takings matched or exceeded those for La bohème and Madame Butterfly , which were staged during the same season . The opera administrator Lord Harewood called it " the first genuinely successful British opera , Gilbert and Sullivan apart , since Purcell . " Dismayed by the in @-@ fighting among the company , Cross , Britten and Pears severed their ties with Sadler 's Wells in December 1945 , going on to found what was to become the English Opera Group . 
 A month after the opening of Peter Grimes , Britten and Yehudi Menuhin went to Germany to give recitals to concentration camp survivors . What they saw , at Belsen most of all , so shocked Britten that he refused to talk about it until towards the end of his life , when he told Pears that it had coloured everything he had written since . Colin Matthews comments that the next two works Britten composed after his return , the song @-@ cycle The Holy Sonnets of John Donne and the Second String Quartet , contrast strongly with earlier , lighter @-@ hearted works such as Les Illuminations . Britten recovered his joie de vivre for The Young Person 's Guide to the Orchestra ( 1945 ) , written for an educational film , Instruments of the Orchestra , directed by Muir Mathieson and featuring the London Symphony Orchestra conducted by Malcolm Sargent . It became , and remained , his most often played and popular work . 
 Britten 's next opera , The Rape of Lucretia , was presented at the first post @-@ war Glyndebourne Festival in 1946 . It was then taken on tour to provincial cities under the banner of the " Glyndebourne English Opera Company " , an uneasy alliance of Britten and his associates with John Christie , the autocratic proprietor of Glyndebourne . The tour lost money heavily , and Christie announced that he would underwrite no more tours . Britten and his associates set up the English Opera Group ; the librettist Eric Crozier and the designer John Piper joined Britten as artistic directors . The group 's express purpose was to produce and commission new English operas and other works , presenting them throughout the country . Britten wrote the comic opera Albert Herring for the group in 1947 ; while on tour in the new work Pears came up with the idea of mounting a festival in the small Suffolk seaside town of Aldeburgh , where Britten had moved from Snape earlier in the year , and which became his principal place of residence for the rest of his life . 
 = = = Aldeburgh ; the 1950s = = = 
 The Aldeburgh Festival was launched in June 1948 , with Britten , Pears and Crozier directing it . Albert Herring played at the Jubilee Hall , and Britten 's new cantata for tenor , chorus and orchestra , Saint Nicolas , was presented in the parish church . The festival was an immediate success and became an annual event that has continued into the 21st century . New works by Britten featured in almost every festival until his death in 1976 , including the premieres of his operas A Midsummer Night 's Dream at the Jubilee Hall in 1960 and Death in Venice at Snape Maltings Concert Hall in 1973 . 
 Unlike many leading English composers , Britten was not known as a teacher , but in 1949 he accepted his only private pupil , Arthur Oldham , who studied with him for three years . Oldham made himself useful , acting as musical assistant and arranging Variations on a Theme by Frank Bridge for full orchestra for the Frederick Ashton ballet Le Rêve de <unk> ( 1949 ) , but he later described the teacher – pupil relationship as " beneficial five per cent to [ Britten ] and ninety @-@ five per cent to me ! " 
 Throughout the 1950s Britten continued to write operas . Billy Budd ( 1951 ) was well received at its Covent Garden premiere and was regarded by reviewers as an advance on Peter Grimes . Gloriana ( 1953 ) , written to mark the coronation of Elizabeth II , had a cool reception at the gala premiere in the presence of the Queen and the British Establishment en masse . The downbeat story of Elizabeth I in her decline , and Britten 's score – reportedly thought by members of the premiere 's audience " too modern " for such a gala – did not overcome what Matthews calls the " ingrained philistinism " of the ruling classes . Although Gloriana did well at the box office , there were no further productions in Britain for another 13 years . It was later recognised as one of Britten 's finer operas . The Turn of the Screw the following year was an unqualified success ; together with Peter Grimes it became , and at 2013 remained , one of the two most frequently performed of Britten 's operas . 
 In the 1950s the " fervently anti @-@ homosexual " Home Secretary , David Maxwell Fyfe , urged the police to enforce the Victorian laws making homosexual acts illegal . Britten and Pears came under scrutiny ; Britten was visited by police officers in 1953 and was so perturbed that he discussed with his assistant Imogen Holst the possibility that Pears might have to enter a sham marriage ( with whom is unclear ) . In the end nothing was done . 
 An increasingly important influence on Britten was the music of the East , an interest that was fostered by a tour there with Pears in 1956 , when Britten once again encountered the music of the Balinese gamelan and saw for the first time Japanese Noh plays , which he called " some of the most wonderful drama I have ever seen . " These eastern influences were seen and heard in the ballet The Prince of the Pagodas ( 1957 ) and later in two of the three semi @-@ operatic " Parables for Church Performance " : Curlew River ( 1964 ) and The Prodigal Son ( 1968 ) . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 By the 1960s , the Aldeburgh Festival was outgrowing its customary venues , and plans to build a new concert hall in Aldeburgh were not progressing . When redundant Victorian maltings buildings in the village of Snape , six miles inland , became available for hire , Britten realised that the largest of them could be converted into a concert hall and opera house . The 830 @-@ seat Snape Maltings hall was opened by the Queen at the start of the twentieth Aldeburgh Festival on 2 June 1967 ; it was immediately hailed as one of the best concert halls in the country . The hall was destroyed by fire in 1969 , but Britten was determined that it would be rebuilt in time for the following year 's festival , which it was . The Queen again attended the opening performance in 1970 . 
 The Maltings gave the festival a venue that could comfortably house large orchestral works and operas . Britten conducted the first performance outside Russia of Shostakovich 's Fourteenth Symphony at Snape in 1970 . Shostakovich , a friend since 1960 , dedicated the symphony to Britten ; he was himself the dedicatee of The Prodigal Son . Two other Russian musicians who were close to Britten and regularly performed at the festival were the pianist Sviatoslav Richter and the cellist Mstislav Rostropovich . Britten composed his cello suites , Cello Symphony and Cello Sonata for Rostropovich , who premiered them at the Aldeburgh Festival . 
 One of the best known of Britten 's works , the War Requiem , was premiered in 1962 . He had been asked four years earlier to write a work for the consecration of the new Coventry Cathedral , a modernist building designed by Basil Spence . The old cathedral had been left in ruins by an air @-@ raid on the city in 1940 in which hundreds of people died . Britten decided that his work would commemorate the dead of both World Wars in a large @-@ scale score for soloists , chorus , chamber ensemble and orchestra . His text interspersed the traditional Requiem Mass with poems by Wilfred Owen . Matthews writes , " With the War Requiem Britten reached the apex of his reputation : it was almost universally hailed as a masterpiece . " Shostakovich told Rostropovich that he believed it to be " the greatest work of the twentieth century " . 
 In 1967 the BBC commissioned Britten to write an opera specially for television . Owen Wingrave was based , like The Turn of the Screw , on a ghost story by Henry James . By the 1960s Britten found composition much slower than in his prolific youth ; he told the 28 @-@ year @-@ old composer Nicholas Maw , " Get as much done now as you can , because it gets much , much more difficult as you grow older . " He did not complete the score of the new opera until August 1970 . Owen Wingrave was first broadcast in Britain in May 1971 , when it was also televised in Austria , Belgium , Denmark , France , Germany , Ireland , the Netherlands , Norway , Sweden , Switzerland , the USA and Yugoslavia . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 In September 1970 Britten asked Myfanwy Piper , who had adapted the two Henry James stories for him , to turn another prose story into a libretto . This was Thomas Mann 's novella Death in Venice , a subject he had been considering for some time . At an early stage in composition Britten was told by his doctors that a heart operation was essential if he was to live for more than two years . He was determined to finish the opera and worked urgently to complete it before going into hospital for surgery . His long @-@ term colleague Colin Graham wrote : 
 Perhaps of all his works , this one went deepest into Britten 's own soul : there are extraordinary cross @-@ currents of affinity between himself , his own state of health and mind , Thomas Mann , <unk> ( Mann 's dying protagonist ) , and Peter Pears , who must have had to tear himself in three in order to reconstitute himself as the principal character . 
 After the completion of the opera Britten went into the National Heart Hospital and was operated on in May 1973 to replace a failing heart valve . The replacement was successful , but he suffered a slight stroke , affecting his right hand . This brought his career as a performer to an end . While in hospital Britten became friendly with a senior nursing sister , Rita Thomson ; she moved to Aldeburgh in 1974 and looked after him until his death . 
 Britten 's last works include the Suite on English Folk Tunes " A Time There Was " ( 1974 ) ; the Third String Quartet ( 1975 ) , which drew on material from Death in Venice ; and the dramatic cantata Phaedra ( 1975 ) , written for Janet Baker . 
 In July 1976 , the last year of his life , Britten accepted a life peerage – the first composer so honoured – becoming Baron Britten of Aldeburgh in the County of Suffolk . After the 1976 Aldeburgh Festival , Britten and Pears travelled to Norway , where Britten began writing Praise We Great Men , for voices and orchestra based on a poem by Edith Sitwell . He returned to Aldeburgh in August , and wrote Welcome Ode for children 's choir and orchestra . In November , Britten realised that he could no longer compose . On his 63rd birthday , 22 November , at his request Rita Thomson organised a champagne party and invited his friends and his sisters Barbara and Beth , to say their goodbyes to the dying composer . When Rostropovich made his farewell visit a few days later , Britten gave him what he had written of Praise We Great Men . 
 Britten died of congestive heart failure on 4 December 1976 . His funeral service was held at Aldeburgh Parish Church three days later , and he was buried in its churchyard , with a gravestone carved by Reynolds Stone . The authorities at Westminster Abbey had offered burial there , but Britten had made it clear that he wished his grave to be side by side with that , in due course , of Pears . A memorial service was held at the Abbey on 10 March 1977 , at which the congregation was headed by Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother . 
 = = Personal life and character = = 
 Despite his large number of works on Christian themes , Britten has sometimes been thought of as agnostic . Pears said that when they met in 1937 he was not sure whether or not Britten would have described himself as a Christian . In the 1960s Britten called himself a dedicated Christian , though sympathetic to the radical views propounded by the Bishop of Woolwich in Honest to God . Politically , Britten was on the left . He told Pears that he always voted either Liberal or Labour and could not imagine ever voting Conservative , but he was never a member of any party , except the Peace Pledge Union . 
 Physically , Britten was never robust . He walked and swam regularly and kept himself as fit as he could , but Carpenter in his 1992 biography mentions 20 illnesses , a few of them minor but most fairly serious , suffered over the years by Britten before his final heart complaint developed . Emotionally , according to some commentators , Britten never completely grew up , retaining in his outlook something of a child 's view of the world . He was not always confident that he was the genius others declared him to be , and though he was hypercritical of his own works , he was acutely , even aggressively sensitive to criticism from anybody else . 
 Britten was , as he acknowledged , notorious for dumping friends and colleagues who either offended him or ceased to be of use – his " corpses " . The conductor Sir Charles Mackerras believed that the term was invented by Lord Harewood . Both Mackerras and Harewood joined the list of corpses , the former for joking that the number of boys in Noye 's Fludde must have been a delight to the composer , and the latter for an extramarital affair and subsequent divorce from Lady Harewood , which shocked the puritanical Britten . Among other corpses were his librettists Montagu Slater and Eric Crozier . The latter said in 1949 , " He has sometimes told me , jokingly , that one day I would join the ranks of his ' corpses ' and I have always recognized that any ordinary person must soon outlive his usefulness to such a great creative artist as Ben . " Dame Janet Baker said in 1981 , " I think he was quite entitled to take what he wanted from others ... He did not want to hurt anyone , but the task in hand was more important than anything or anybody . " Matthews feels that this aspect of Britten has been exaggerated , and he observes that the composer sustained many deep friendships to the end of his life . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 = = = = Boys = = = = 
 Throughout his adult life , Britten had a particular rapport with children and enjoyed close friendships with several boys , particularly those in their early teens . The first such friendship was with Piers <unk> , 13 years old in 1934 when Britten was aged 20 . Other boys Britten befriended were the young David Hemmings and Michael Crawford , both of whom sang treble roles in his works in the 1950s . Hemmings later said , " In all of the time that I spent with him he never abused that trust " , and Crawford wrote " I cannot say enough about the kindness of that great man ... he had a wonderful patience and affinity with young people . He loved music , and loved youngsters caring about music . " 
 It was long suspected by several of Britten 's close associates that there was something exceptional about his attraction to teenage boys : Auden referred to Britten 's " attraction to thin @-@ as @-@ a @-@ board juveniles ... to the sexless and innocent " , and Pears once wrote to Britten : " remember there are lovely things in the world still – children , boys , sunshine , the sea , Mozart , you and me " . In public , the matter was little discussed during Britten 's lifetime and much discussed after it . Carpenter 's 1992 biography closely examined the evidence , as do later studies of Britten , most particularly John Bridcut 's Britten 's Children ( 2006 ) , which concentrates on Britten ’ s friendships and relationships with various children and adolescents . Some commentators have continued to question Britten 's conduct , sometimes very sharply . Carpenter and Bridcut conclude that he held any sexual impulses under firm control and kept the relationships affectionate – including bed @-@ sharing , kissing and skinny dipping – but strictly platonic . 
 = = = = Cause of death = = = = 
 A more recent controversy was the statement in a 2013 biography of Britten by Paul Kildea that the composer 's heart failure was due to undetected syphilis , which Kildea speculates was a result of Pears 's promiscuity while the two were living in New York . In response , Britten 's consultant cardiologist said that , like all the hospital 's similar cases , Britten was routinely screened for syphilis before the operation , with negative results . He described as " complete rubbish " Kildea 's allegation that the surgeon who operated on Britten in 1973 would or even could have covered up a syphilitic condition . Kildea continued to maintain , " When all the composer 's symptoms are considered there can be only one cause " . In The Times , Richard Morrison praised the rest of Kildea 's book , and hoped that its reputation would not be " tarnished by one sensational speculation ... some second @-@ hand hearsay ... presenting unsubstantiated gossip as fact " . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Britten 's early musical life was dominated by the classical masters ; his mother 's ambition was for him to become the " Fourth B " – after Bach , Beethoven and Brahms . Britten was later to assert that his initial development as a composer was stifled by reverence for these masters : " Between the ages of thirteen and sixteen I knew every note of Beethoven and Brahms . I remember receiving the full score of Fidelio for my fourteenth birthday ... But I think in a sense I never forgave them for having led me astray in my own particular thinking and natural inclinations " . He developed a particular animosity towards Brahms , whose piano music he had once held in great esteem ; in 1952 he confided that he played through all Brahms 's music from time to time , " to see if I am right about him ; I usually find that I underestimated last time how bad it was ! " 
 Through his association with Frank Bridge , Britten 's musical horizons expanded . He discovered the music of Debussy and Ravel which , Matthews writes , " gave him a model for an orchestral sound " . Bridge also led Britten to the music of Schoenberg and Berg ; the latter 's death in 1935 affected Britten deeply . A letter at that time reveals his thoughts on the contemporary music scene : " The real musicians are so few & far between , aren 't they ? Apart from the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> & Bridges one is a bit stumped for names , isn 't one ? " – adding , as an afterthought : " <unk> – perhaps – possibly " . By this time Britten had developed a lasting hostility towards the English pastoral school represented by Vaughan Williams and Ireland , whose work he compared unfavourably with the " brilliant folk @-@ song arrangements of Percy Grainger " ; Grainger became the inspiration of many of Britten 's later folk arrangements . Britten was also impressed by Delius , and thought Brigg Fair " delicious " when he heard it in 1931 . Also in that year he heard Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring , which he found " bewildering and terrifying " , yet at the same time " incredibly marvellous and arresting " . The same composer 's Symphony of Psalms , and Petrushka were lauded in similar terms . However , he and Stravinsky later developed a mutual antipathy informed by jealousy and mistrust . 
 Besides his growing attachments to the works of 20th century masters , Britten – along with his contemporary Michael Tippett – was devoted to the English music of the late 17th and early 18th centuries , in particular the work of Purcell . In defining his mission as a composer of opera , Britten wrote : " One of my chief aims is to try to restore to the musical setting of the English Language a brilliance , freedom and vitality that have been curiously rare since the death of Purcell " . Among the closest of Britten 's kindred composer spirits – even more so than Purcell – was Mahler , whose Fourth Symphony Britten heard in September 1930 . At that time Mahler 's music was little regarded and rarely played in English concert halls . Britten later wrote of how the scoring of this work impressed him : " ... entirely clean and transparent ... the material was remarkable , and the melodic shapes highly original , with such rhythmic and harmonic tension from beginning to end " . He soon discovered other Mahler works , in particular Das Lied von der Erde ; he wrote to a friend about the concluding " Abschied " of Das Lied : " It is cruel , you know , that music should be so beautiful " . Apart from Mahler 's general influence on Britten 's compositional style , the incorporation by Britten of popular tunes ( as , for example , in Death in Venice ) is a direct inheritance from the older composer . 
 = = = Operas = = = 
 The Britten @-@ Pears Foundation considers the composer 's operas " perhaps the most substantial and important part of his compositional legacy . " Britten 's operas are firmly established in the international repertoire : according to Operabase , they are performed worldwide more than those of any other composer born in the 20th century , and only Puccini and Richard Strauss come ahead of him if the list is extended to all operas composed after 1900 . 
 The early operetta Paul Bunyan stands apart from Britten 's later operatic works . Philip Brett , in Grove 's article on Britten , calls it " a patronizing attempt by W H Auden to evoke the spirit of a nation not his own in which Britten was a somewhat dazzled accomplice " . The American public liked it , but the critics did not , and it fell into neglect until interest revived near the end of the composer 's life . 
 Britten 's subsequent operas range from large @-@ scale works written for full @-@ strength opera companies , to chamber operas for performance by small touring opera ensembles or in churches and schools . In the large @-@ scale category are Peter Grimes ( 1945 ) , Billy Budd ( 1951 ) , Gloriana ( 1953 ) , A Midsummer Night 's Dream ( 1960 ) and Death in Venice ( 1973 ) . Of the remaining operas , The Rape of Lucretia ( 1946 ) , Albert Herring ( 1947 ) , The Little Sweep ( 1949 ) and The Turn of the Screw ( 1954 ) were written for small opera companies . Noye 's Fludde ( 1958 ) , Curlew River ( 1964 ) , The Burning Fiery Furnace ( 1966 ) and The Prodigal Son ( 1968 ) were for church performance , and the secular The Golden Vanity was intended to be performed in schools . Owen Wingrave , written for television , was first presented live by the Royal Opera at Covent Garden in 1973 , two years after its broadcast premiere . 
 Music critics have frequently commented on the recurring theme in Britten 's operas from Peter Grimes onward of the isolated individual at odds with a hostile society . The extent to which this reflected Britten 's perception of himself , pacifist and homosexual , in the England of the 1930s , 40s and 50s is debated . Another recurrent theme is the corruption of innocence , most sharply seen in The Turn of the Screw . 
 Over the 28 years between Peter Grimes and Death in Venice Britten 's musical style changed , as he introduced elements of <unk> – though remaining essentially a tonal composer – and of eastern music , particularly gamelan sounds but also eastern harmonies . In A Midsummer Night 's Dream the orchestral scoring varies to fit the nature of each set of characters : " the bright , percussive sounds of harps , keyboards and percussion for the fairy world , warm strings and wind for the pairs of lovers , and lower woodwind and brass for the <unk> " . In Death in Venice Britten turns <unk> and his family into silent dancers , " accompanied by the colourful , glittering sounds of tuned percussion to emphasize their remoteness . " 
 As early as 1948 the music analyst Hans Keller , summarising Britten 's impact on 20th @-@ century opera to that date , compared his contribution to that of Mozart in the 18th century : " Mozart may in some respects be regarded as a founder ( a ' second founder ' ) of opera . The same can already be said today , as far as the modern British – perhaps not only British – field goes , of Britten " . In addition to his own original operas , Britten , together with Imogen Holst , extensively revised Purcell 's Dido and Aeneas ( 1951 ) and The Fairy @-@ Queen ( 1967 ) . These " realisations " brought Purcell , who was then neglected , to a wider public , but have themselves been neglected since the dominance of the trend to authentic performance practice . His 1948 revision of The Beggar 's Opera amounts to a wholesale recomposition , retaining the original melodies but giving them new , highly sophisticated orchestral accompaniments . 
 = = = Song cycles = = = 
 Throughout his career Britten was drawn to the song cycle form . In 1928 , when he was 14 , he composed an orchestral cycle , Quatre chansons <unk> , setting words by Victor Hugo and Paul Verlaine . Brett comments that though the work is much influenced by Wagner on the one hand and French mannerisms on the other , " the diatonic nursery @-@ like tune for the sad boy with the consumptive mother in ' L <unk> ' is entirely characteristic " . After he came under Auden 's influence Britten composed Our Hunting Fathers ( 1936 ) , ostensibly a protest against fox @-@ hunting but which also alludes allegorically to the contemporary political state of Europe . The work has never been popular ; in 1948 the critic Colin Mason lamented its neglect and called it one of Britten 's greatest works . In Mason 's view the cycle is " as exciting as Les Illuminations , and offers many interesting and enjoyable <unk> of the best moments of his later works . " 
 The first of Britten 's song cycles to gain widespread popularity was Les Illuminations ( 1940 ) , for high voice ( originally soprano , later more often sung by tenors ) with string orchestra accompaniment , setting words by Arthur Rimbaud . Britten 's music reflects the eroticism in Rimbaud 's poems ; Copland commented of the section " Antique " that he did not know how Britten dared to write the melody . Matthews judges the piece the crowning masterpiece of Britten 's early years . By the time of Britten 's next cycle , Seven Sonnets of Michelangelo ( 1942 ) for tenor and piano , Pears had become his partner and muse ; in Matthews 's phrase , Britten wrote the cycle as " his declaration of love for Peter " . It too finds the sensuality of the verses it sets , though in its structure it resembles a conventional 19th @-@ century song cycle . Mason draws a distinction between this and Britten 's earlier cycles , because here each song is self @-@ contained , and has no thematic connection with any of the others . 
 The Serenade for Tenor , Horn and Strings ( 1943 ) sets verses by a variety of poets , all on the theme of night @-@ time . Though Britten described the cycle as " not important stuff , but quite pleasant , I think " , it was immediately greeted as a masterpiece , and together with Peter Grimes it established him as one of the leading composers of his day . Mason calls it " a beautifully unified work on utterly dissimilar poems , held together by the most superficial but most effective , and therefore most suitable symphonic method . Some of the music is pure word @-@ painting , some of it mood @-@ painting , of the subtlest kind . " Two years later , after witnessing the horrors of Belsen , Britten composed The Holy Sonnets of John Donne , a work whose bleakness was not matched until his final tenor and piano cycle a quarter of a century later . Britten 's technique in this cycle ranges from atonality in the first song to firm tonality later , with a resolute B major chord at the climax of " Death , be not proud " . 
 Nocturne ( 1958 ) is the last of the orchestral cycles . As in the Serenade , Britten set words by a range of poets , who here include Shakespeare , Coleridge , Keats , Shelley , Tennyson and Wilfred Owen . The whole cycle is darker in tone than the Serenade , with pre @-@ echoes of the War Requiem . All the songs have subtly different orchestrations , with a prominent obbligato part for a different instrument in each . Among Britten 's later song cycles with piano accompaniment is the Songs and Proverbs of William Blake , composed for the baritone Dietrich Fischer @-@ Dieskau . This presents all its poems in a continuous stream of music ; Brett writes that it " <unk> a ritornello @-@ like setting of the seven proverbs with seven songs that paint an increasingly sombre picture of human existence . " A Pushkin cycle , The Poet 's Echo ( 1965 ) , was written for Galina Vishnevskaya , and shows a more robust and extrovert side of the composer . Though written ostensibly in the tradition of European song cycles , it draws atmospherically on the polyphony of south @-@ east Asian music . Who Are These Children ? ( 1969 ) , setting 12 verses by William Soutar , is among the grimmest of Britten 's cycles . After he could no longer play the piano , Britten composed a cycle of Robert Burns settings , A Birthday Hansel ( 1976 ) , for voice and harp . 
 = = = Other vocal works = = = 
 Nicholas Maw said of Britten 's vocal music : " His feeling for poetry ( not only English ) and the <unk> of language make him , I think , the greatest musical <unk> of English " . One of the best @-@ known works in which Britten set poetry was the War Requiem ( 1962 ) . It intersperses the Latin requiem mass , sung by soprano and chorus , with settings of works by the First World War poet Wilfred Owen , sung by tenor and baritone . At the end the two elements are combined , as the last line of Owen 's " Strange meeting " mingles with the In <unk> of the mass . Matthews describes the conclusion of the work as " a great wave of benediction [ which ] recalls the end of the Sinfonia da Requiem , and its similar ebbing away into the sea that symbolises both reconciliation and death . " Other works for voices and orchestra include the Missa Brevis and the Cantata <unk> ( both 1959 ) on religious themes , and the late cantata Phaedra ( 1975 ) , a story of fated love and death modelled on Handel 's Italian cantatas . 
 Smaller @-@ scale works for accompanied voice include the five Canticles , composed between 1947 and 1974 . They are written for a variety of voices ( tenor in all five ; counter @-@ tenor or alto in II and IV and baritone in IV ) and accompaniments ( piano in I to IV , horn in III and harp in V ) . The first is a setting of Francis Quarles 's 17th century poem " A Divine Rapture " , and according to Britten was modelled on Purcell 's Divine Hymns . Matthews describes it as one of the composer 's most serene works , which " ends in a mood of untroubled happiness that would soon become rare in Britten 's music " . The second Canticle was written in 1952 , between Billy Budd and Gloriana , on the theme of Abraham 's obedience to Divine Authority in the proffered sacrifice of his son Isaac . " Canticle III " from 1954 is a setting of Edith Sitwell 's wartime poem " Still Falls the Rain " , composed just after The Turn of the Screw with which it is structurally and stylistically associated . The twelve @-@ note cycle in the first five bars of the piano part of the Canticle introduced a feature that became thereafter a regular part of Britten 's compositional technique . The fourth Canticle , premiered in 1971 is based on T. S. Eliot 's poem " Journey of the Magi " . It is musically close to The Burning Fiery Furnace of 1966 ; Matthews refers to it as a " companion piece " to the earlier work . The final Canticle was another Eliot setting , his juvenile poem " Death of Saint Narcissus " . Although Britten had little idea of what the poem was about , the musicologist Arnold Whittall finds the text " almost frighteningly apt ... for a composer conscious of his own sickness " . Matthews sees Narcissus as " another figure from [ Britten 's ] magic world of dreams and ideal beauty " . 
 = = = Orchestral works = = = 
 The Britten scholar Donald Mitchell has written , " It is easy , because of the scope , stature , and sheer volume of the operas , and the wealth of vocal music of all kinds , to pay insufficient attention to the many works Britten wrote in other , specifically non @-@ vocal genres . " Maw said of Britten , " He is one of the 20th century 's great orchestral composers ... His orchestration has an individuality , incisiveness and integration with the musical material only achieved by the greatest composers . " Among Britten 's best @-@ known orchestral works are the Variations on a Theme of Frank Bridge ( 1937 ) , the Sinfonia da Requiem ( 1940 ) , the Four Sea Interludes ( 1945 ) and The Young Person 's Guide to the Orchestra ( 1945 ) . The Variations , an affectionate tribute to Britten 's teacher , range from comic parodies of Italian operatic clichés and Viennese waltzes to a strutting march , reflecting the rise of militarism in Europe , and a <unk> funeral march ; the piece ends with an exuberant fugal finale . The Sinfonia moves from an opening Lacrymosa filled with fear and lamentation to a fierce Dies Irae and then to a final Requiem aeternam , described by the critic Herbert Glass as " the most uneasy ' eternal rest ' possible " . Mason considers the Sinfonia a failure : " less entertaining than usual , because its object is not principally to entertain but to express symphonically . It fails because it is neither picturesquely nor formally symphonic " . The Sea Interludes , adapted by Britten from the full score of Peter Grimes , make a concert suite depicting the sea and the Borough in which the opera is set ; the character of the music is strongly contrasted between " Dawn " , " Sunday Morning " , " Moonlight " and " Storm " . The commentator Howard Posner observes that there is not a bar in the interludes , no matter how beautiful , that is free of foreboding . The Young Person 's Guide , based on a theme by Purcell , showcases the orchestra 's individual sections and groups , and gained widespread popularity from the outset . Christopher Headington calls the work " exuberant and uncomplicated music , scored with clarity and vigour [ that ] fits well into Britten 's oeuvre . " David Matthews calls it " a brilliant educational exercise . " 
 Unlike his English predecessors such as Elgar and Vaughan Williams , and composers from mainland Europe whom he admired , including Mahler and Shostakovich , Britten was not a classical symphonist . His youthful <unk> d 'esprit the Simple Symphony ( 1934 ) is in conventional symphonic structure , observing sonata form and the traditional four @-@ movement pattern , but of his mature works his Spring Symphony ( 1949 ) is more a song cycle than a true symphony , and the concertante Cello Symphony ( 1963 ) is an attempt to balance the traditional concerto and symphony . During its four movements the Cello Symphony moves from a deeply pessimistic opening to a finale of radiant happiness rare for Britten by this point . The composer considered it " the finest thing I 've written " . 
 The Piano Concerto ( 1938 ) was at first criticised for being too light @-@ hearted and virtuoso . In 1945 Britten revised it , replacing a skittish third movement with a more sombre passacaglia that , in Matthews 's view , gives the work more depth , and makes the apparent triumph of the finale more ambivalent . The Violin Concerto ( 1940 ) has virtuoso elements , but they are balanced by lyrical and elegiac passages , " undoubtedly reflecting Britten 's growing concern with the escalation of world hostilities . " Neither concerto is among Britten 's most popular works , but in the 21st century the Violin Concerto has been performed more frequently than before , both in the concert hall and on record . 
 Britten 's incidental music for theatre , film and radio , much of it unpublished , was the subject of an essay by William Mann , published in 1952 in the first detailed critical assessment of Britten 's music to that date . Of these pieces the music for a radio play , The Rescue , by Edward Sackville @-@ West , is praised by the musicologist Lewis Foreman as " of such stature and individual character as to be worth a regular place alongside [ Britten 's ] other dramatic scores . " Mann finds in this score pre @-@ echoes of the second act of Billy Budd , while Foreman observes that Britten " appears to have made passing allusions to The Rescue in his final opera , Death in Venice . 
 = = = Chamber and instrumental works = = = 
 Britten 's close friendship with Rostropovich inspired the Cello Sonata ( 1961 ) and three suites for solo cello ( 1964 – 71 ) . String quartets featured throughout Britten 's composing career , from a student work in 1928 to his Third String Quartet ( 1975 ) . The second Quartet , from 1945 , was written in homage to Purcell ; Mason considered it Britten 's most important instrumental work to that date . Referring to this work , Keller writes of the ease with which Britten , relatively early in his compositional career , solves " the modern sonata problem – the achievement of symmetry and unity within an extended ternary circle based on more than one subject " . Keller likens the innovatory skill of the Quartet to that of Walton 's Viola Concerto . The third Quartet was Britten 's last major work ; the critic Colin Anderson said of it in 2007 , " one of Britten 's greatest achievements , one with interesting allusions to Bartók and Shostakovich , and written with an economy that opens out a depth of emotion that can be quite chilling . " The Gemini Variations ( 1965 ) , for flute , violin and piano duet , were based on a theme of Zoltán Kodály and written as a virtuoso piece for the 13 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> twins , musical prodigies whom Britten had met in Budapest in the previous year . For Osian Ellis , Britten wrote the Suite for Harp ( 1969 ) , which Joan <unk> in The Times described as " a little masterpiece of concentrated fancy " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Britten 's fellow @-@ composers had divided views about him . To Tippett he was " simply the most musical person I have ever met " , with an " incredible " technical mastery ; some contemporaries , however , were less effusive . In Tippett 's view Walton and others were convinced that Britten and Pears were leaders of a homosexual conspiracy in music , a belief Tippett dismisses as ridiculous , inspired by jealousy at Britten 's postwar successes . Leonard Bernstein considered Britten " a man at odds with the world " , and said of his music : " [ I ] f you hear it , not just listen to it superficially , you become aware of something very dark " . The tenor Robert Tear , who was closely associated with Britten in the latter part of the composer 's career , made a similar point : " There was a great , huge abyss in his soul ... He got into the valley of the shadow of death and couldn 't get out " . 
 In the decade after Britten 's death , his standing as a composer in Britain was to some extent overshadowed by that of the still @-@ living Tippett . The film @-@ maker Tony Palmer thought that Tippett 's temporary ascendancy might have been a question of the two composers ' contrasting personalities : Tippett had more warmth and had made fewer enemies . In any event this was a short @-@ lived phenomenon ; Tippett adherents such as the composer Robert Saxton soon rediscovered their enthusiasm for Britten , whose audience steadily increased during the final years of the 20th century . Britten has had few imitators ; Brett describes him as " inimitable , possessed of ... a voice and sound too dangerous to imitate " . Nevertheless , after his death Britten was lauded by the younger generation of English composers to whom , in the words of Oliver Knussen , he became " a phenomenal father @-@ figure " . Brett believes that he affected every subsequent British composer to some extent : " He is a key figure in the growth of British musical culture in the second half of the 20th century , and his effect on everything from opera to the revitalization of music education is hard to overestimate . " 
 Whittall believes that one reason for Britten 's enduring popularity is the " progressive conservatism " of his music . He generally avoided the avant garde , and did not challenge the conventions in the way that contemporaries such as Tippett did . Perhaps , says Brett , " the tide that swept away serialism , atonality and most forms of musical modernism and brought in neo @-@ Romanticism , minimalism and other modes of expression involved with tonality carried with it renewed interest in composers who had been out of step with the times " . Britten defined his mission as a composer in very simple terms : composers should aim at " pleasing people today as seriously as we can " . 
 = = Pianist and conductor = = 
 Britten , though a reluctant conductor and a nervous pianist , was greatly sought after in both capacities . The piano accompanist Gerald Moore wrote in his memoirs about playing at all the main music festivals except for Aldeburgh , because " as the presiding genius there is the greatest accompanist in the world , my services are not needed " . Britten 's recital partnership with Pears was his best @-@ known collaboration , but he also accompanied Kathleen Ferrier , Rostropovich , Dietrich Fischer @-@ Dieskau , James Bowman and John Shirley @-@ Quirk , among others . Though usually too nervous to play piano solos , Britten often performed piano duets with Clifford Curzon or Richter , and chamber music with the Amadeus Quartet . The composers whose works , other than his own , he most often played were Mozart and Schubert ; the latter , in Murray Perahia 's view , was Britten 's greatest idol . As a boy and young man , Britten had intensely admired Brahms , but his admiration waned to nothing , and Brahms seldom featured in his repertory . 
 Singers and players admired Britten 's conducting , and David Webster rated it highly enough to offer him the musical directorship of the Covent Garden Opera in 1952 . Britten declined ; he was not confident of his ability as a conductor and was reluctant to spend too much time performing rather than composing . As a conductor , Britten 's repertory included Purcell , Bach , Haydn , Mozart and Schubert , and occasional less characteristic choices including Schumann 's Scenes from Goethe 's Faust ; Elgar 's The Dream of Gerontius and Introduction and Allegro ; Holst 's Egdon Heath and short pieces by Percy Grainger . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Britten , like Elgar and Walton before him , was signed up by a major British recording company , and performed a considerable proportion of his output on disc . For the Decca Record Company he made some monaural records in the 1940s and 1950s , followed , with the enthusiastic support of the Decca producer John Culshaw , by numerous stereophonic versions of his works . Culshaw wrote , " The happiest hours I have spent in any studio were with Ben , for the basic reason that it did not seem that we were trying to make records or video tapes ; we were just trying to make music . " 
 In May 1943 Britten made his debut in the Decca studios , accompanying Sophie Wyss in five of his arrangements of French folk songs . The following January he and Pears recorded together , in Britten 's arrangements of British folk songs , and the following day , in duet with Curzon he recorded his Introduction and Rondo alla <unk> and Mazurka <unk> . In May 1944 he conducted the Boyd Neel string orchestra , Dennis Brain and Pears in the first recording of the Serenade for Tenor , Horn and Strings , which has frequently been reissued , most recently on CD . 
 Britten 's first operatic recording was The Turn of the Screw , made in January 1955 with the original English Opera Group forces . In 1957 he conducted The Prince of the Pagodas in an early stereo recording , supervised by Culshaw . Decca 's first major commercial success with Britten came the following year , with Peter Grimes , which has , at 2013 , never been out of the catalogues since its first release . From 1958 Britten conducted Decca recordings of many of his operas and vocal and orchestral works , including the Nocturne ( 1959 ) , the Spring Symphony ( 1960 ) and the War Requiem ( 1963 ) . The last sold in unexpectedly large numbers for a classical set , and thereafter Decca <unk> made resources available to Culshaw and his successors for Britten recordings . Sets followed of Albert Herring ( 1964 ) , the Sinfonia da Requiem ( 1964 ) Curlew River ( 1965 ) , A Midsummer Night 's Dream ( 1966 ) , The Burning Fiery Furnace ( 1967 ) , Billy Budd ( 1967 ) and many of the other major works . In 2013 , to mark the anniversary of Britten 's birth , Decca released a set of 65 CDs and one DVD , " Benjamin Britten – Complete Works " . Most of the recordings were from Decca 's back catalogue , but in the interests of comprehensiveness a substantial number of tracks were licensed from 20 other companies including EMI , Virgin Classics , Naxos , Warner and NMC . 
 As a pianist and conductor in other composers ' music , Britten made many recordings for Decca . Among his studio collaborations with Pears are sets of Schubert 's Winterreise and Die schöne <unk> , Schumann 's <unk> , and songs by Haydn , Mozart , Bridge , Ireland , Holst , Tippett and Richard Rodney Bennett . Other soloists whom Britten accompanied on record were Ferrier , Rostropovich and Vishnevskaya . As a conductor he recorded a wide range of composers , from Purcell to Grainger . Among his best @-@ known Decca recordings are Purcell 's The Fairy @-@ Queen , Bach 's Brandenburg concertos , Cantata 151 , Cantata 102 and St John Passion , Elgar 's The Dream of Gerontius and Mozart 's last two symphonies . 
 = = Honours , awards and commemorations = = 
 State honours awarded to Britten included Companion of Honour ( Britain ) in 1953 ; Commander of the Royal Order of the Polar Star ( Sweden ) in 1962 ; the Order of Merit ( Britain ) in 1965 ; and a life peerage ( Britain ) in July 1976 . He received honorary degrees and fellowships from 19 conservatories and universities in Europe and America . His awards included the Hanseatic Goethe Prize ( 1961 ) ; the Aspen Award , Colorado ( 1964 ) ; the Royal Philharmonic Society 's Gold Medal ( 1964 ) ; the Sibelius Prize ( 1965 ) ; the Mahler Medal ( Bruckner and Mahler Society of America , 1967 ) ; the <unk> Sonning Music Prize ( Denmark , 1968 ) ; the Ernst von Siemens Prize ( 1974 ) ; and the Ravel Prize ( 1974 ) . 
 Prizes for individual works included UNESCO 's International Rostrum of Composers 1961 ( for A Midsummer Night 's Dream ) ; and for the War Requiem Grammy Awards 1963 – Classical Album of the Year , Best Classical Composition by a Contemporary Composer and Best Classical Performance – Choral ( Other than Opera ) ; the BRIT Awards 1977 – Best Orchestral Album of the past 25 years ; and the Grammy Hall of Fame Award 1998 . 
 The Red House in Aldeburgh , where Britten and Pears lived and worked together from 1957 until Britten 's death in 1976 , is now the home of the Britten @-@ Pears Foundation , established to promote their musical legacy . In Britten 's centenary year his studio at the Red House was restored to the way it was in the 1950s and opened to the public . The converted hayloft was designed and built by H T Cadbury Brown in 1958 and was described by Britten as a " magnificent work " . In June 2013 Dame Janet Baker officially opened the Britten @-@ Pears archive in a new building in the grounds of the Red House . 
 A memorial stone to Britten was unveiled in the north choir aisle of Westminster Abbey in 1978 . There are memorial plaques to him at three of his London homes : 173 Cromwell Road , 45a St John 's Wood High Street , and 8 <unk> Street in Islington . In April 2013 Britten was honoured by the Royal Mail in the UK , as one of ten people selected as subjects for the " Great Britons " commemorative postage stamp issue . 
 Other creative artists have celebrated Britten . In 1970 Walton composed Improvisations on an Impromptu of Benjamin Britten , based on a theme from Britten 's Piano Concerto . Works commemorating Britten include Cantus in Memoriam Benjamin Britten an orchestral piece written in 1977 by Arvo Pärt , and Sally Beamish 's Variations on a Theme of Benjamin Britten , based on the second Sea Interlude from Peter Grimes ; she composed the work to mark Britten 's centenary . Alan Bennett depicts Britten in a 2009 play The Habit of Art , set while Britten is composing Death in Venice and centred on a fictional meeting between Britten and Auden . Britten was played in the premiere production by Alex Jennings . 
 Tony Palmer made three documentary films about Britten : Benjamin Britten & his Festival ( 1967 ) ; A Time There Was ( 1979 ) ; and Nocturne ( 2013 ) . 
 = = = Centenary = = = 
 In September 2012 , to mark the composer 's forthcoming centenary , the Britten @-@ Pears Foundation launched " Britten 100 " , a collaboration of leading organisations in the performing arts , publishing , broadcasting , film , academia and heritage . Among the events were the release of a feature film Benjamin Britten – Peace and Conflict , and a centenary exhibition at the British Library . The Royal Mint issued a 50 @-@ pence piece , to mark the centenary – the first time a composer has featured on a British coin . 
 Centenary performances of the War Requiem were given at eighteen locations in Britain . Opera productions included Owen Wingrave at Aldeburgh , Billy Budd at Glyndebourne , Death in Venice by English National Opera , Gloriana by The Royal Opera , and Peter Grimes , Death in Venice and A Midsummer Night 's Dream by Opera North . Peter Grimes was performed on the beach at Aldeburgh , opening the 2013 Aldeburgh Festival in June 2013 , with Steuart Bedford conducting and singers from the Chorus of Opera North and the Chorus of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama , described by The Guardian as " a remarkable , and surely <unk> achievement . " 
 Internationally , the anniversary was marked by performances of the War Requiem , Peter Grimes and other works in four continents . In the US the centennial events were described as " coast to coast , " with a Britten festival at Carnegie Hall , and performances at the New York Philharmonic , the Metropolitan Opera and Los Angeles Opera . 
 = Dawson Creek Rage = 
 The Dawson Creek Rage ( aka DC Rage ) were a Tier II Junior A ice hockey team , based out of Dawson Creek , British Columbia . Formed in 2010 , they played in the North American Hockey League 's West Division for two seasons . Their 2010 – 11 season included a six @-@ game win streak , though they ended the season fifth in a six team division with 24 wins in 58 games . The 2011 – 12 season included an 11 @-@ game homestand in which they only won 2 games , and a last place finish ( in their division ) with only 12 wins overall . With losing records in both seasons , the team did not make the playoffs in either season . Despite attracting better than average attendance for a NAHL team , high travelling and operating costs resulted in the team ceasing operations in April 2012 . 
 The Rage played in the 4 @,@ 500 seat EnCana Events Centre where their first win came on September 24 , 2010 , against the Alaska Avalanche . Their final home game was a loss to the Wenatchee Wild in March 2012 . The team 's name and symbol was intended to represent an outward expression of passion and internal desire to dominate other teams . The Rage players , all aged between 15 and 20 years old in accordance with league rules , were active with charities and within the community . Prior to the team 's formation , the ownership group attempted to establish the team in the British Columbia Hockey League but were refused with the league citing the lack of a competitive base for a northern division . The group also attempted to establish the team in the Alberta Junior Hockey League but that league was not interested in expanding or re @-@ locating teams at that time . Another unsuccessful attempt at moving the team to either of those league was made before their dissolution . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Dawson Creek was last home to a Junior A hockey team in the 1980s when the Dawson Creek Kodiaks of the Peace @-@ Cariboo Junior Hockey League spent time at the equivalent level . While the Kodiaks ended operations in 1990 , a new Junior A team was proposed in 2006 by Global Spectrum , the contracted management company responsible for operating the city 's new South Peace Community Multiplex which included the EnCana Events Centre , capable of hosting ice hockey events with a seating capacity of 4 @,@ 500 people . The objective was to create an anchor tenant which could help fill the Multiplex 's schedule with several dozen home games per year . The company recruited several Dawson Creek @-@ based businessmen to form a non @-@ profit society ( eventually named the DC Rage Society ) that would fund the start @-@ up of the team . To add credibility to their application , Dawson Creek resident Rob Bremner , who was the head coach of the Junior A @-@ level Vernon Vipers when they won the 1996 Royal Bank Cup , was appointed the General Manager of the team and tasked with recruiting potential players . 
 The group first approached the British Columbia Hockey League with the intention of creating a new franchise for the 2007 – 08 season , which came with a $ 400 @,@ 000 expansion franchise fee . While the Multiplex arena was well over the BCHL 's minimum requirement of a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ seat arena , the Society estimated the franchise would need an average attendance of 1 @,@ 200 @-@ 1 @,@ 500 tickets sold to cover operational costs . At the same time , the group pursued entry into the Alberta Junior Hockey League , which had a $ 250 @,@ 000 franchise fee , even though AJHL communicated they had no intention of expanding until at least 2011 . As the BCHL also communicated they were not interested in expansion at that time , the group additionally pursued relocation of an existing team to Dawson Creek . However , at a late @-@ 2006 meeting , the BCHL board of governors voted to not accept the Dawson Creek application as a potential site for a team , citing delays with the construction of the Multiplex arena and a question over compensation for the expenses of visiting teams . On appeal , the BCHL reversed this decision two months later and actively considered both Dawson Creek and Wenatchee , Washington , as possible sites for a requested relocation of the Williams Lake TimberWolves . The BCHL noted two concerns with a Dawson Creek team : the cost and time of travel required ( at the time the league 's most northerly team was the Prince George Spruce Kings ) to reach the city and the lack of a rival team . To address these concerns , the Society attempted to initiate a Fort St. John team , as well , who would be a rival to Dawson Creek and enable a northern division within the BCHL . 
 At their 2007 meeting , the BCHL board of governors rejected moving the Williams Lake TimberWolves to Dawson Creek , but then voted to allow the move if the Burnaby Express ( who was also seeking relocation ) moved to Fort St. John . However , the Society was not able to recruit sufficient support in Fort St. John to form an ownership group and the Burnaby Express re @-@ arranged its management and ownership so that it could stay in Burnaby . The Williams Lake TimberWolves , after one year of dormancy , relocated to Wenatchee , Washington . Efforts at relocating an Alberta Junior Hockey League team were also unsuccessful as no team expressed interest in moving at that time . 
 Over the next year , still seeking a league , the US @-@ based North American Hockey League , which was looking to expand , was approached as a possibility . In an April 2009 announcement , they accepted the Dawson Creek franchise , which would be the only Canadian team in the league and the first since the Fernie <unk> left the league in 2004 to become a Junior B team . The ownership group agreed to pay the $ 400 @,@ 000 franchise fee with the team entering the league for the 2010 – 11 season with 31 home games to be played in the Multiplex each season . The local government , the City of Dawson Creek , agreed to contribute $ 675 @,@ 000 over 3 years to help establish the team as a reliable tenant for the Multiplex which was operating at a loss due to the lack of events . The team , now known as the Dawson Creek Rage , selected Scott Robinson , a former BCHL coach of the year , to lead the new team as its general manager and head coach . To recruit and evaluate potential players ( aged 15 – 20 ) , they held Spring 2010 try @-@ out camps in Princeton , Abbotsford and Dawson Creek which attracted about 200 players . 
 = = Team history = = 
 = = = 2010 – 11 season = = = 
 With the roster filled , the team debuted at a late @-@ August 2010 exhibition tournament , Face Off Fever 2 , where Dawson Creek hosted the Prince George Spruce Kings and Quesnel Millionaires of the BCHL and the Grande Prairie Storm of the AJHL . The NAHL 2010 – 11 season began at the Showcase Tournament , held Minneapolis in mid @-@ September . The Rage lost their first game 3 – 0 to the St. Louis Bandits on September 15 , but the next day won their second game , in an overtime shoot @-@ out , 2 – 1 against the Alexandria Blizzard . The team emerged from the tournament with a 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 record . Returning to Dawson Creek , the Rage held their home @-@ opener in a three @-@ game series against the Alaska Avalanche , losing the first and third games but winning their September 24 game . The Rage also lost two of three games the next weekend against the Kenai River Brown Bears . On their Alaska road trip , they lost three straight to the Avalanche and won three straight against the Brown Bears . In California , the Rage lost both games in a two @-@ game series against the Fresno Monsters and in Washington the Rage lost two of three against the Wenatchee Wild . 
 Back in Dawson Creek in November , the Rage split a three @-@ game series against the Monsters , 1 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 , and won both games against the Chicago Hitmen . Following another 6 @-@ game road trip to Alaska , the Rage continued into December winning approximately one @-@ in @-@ three games , with an 11 @-@ 22 @-@ 2 record near the mid @-@ season break , when they traded their 20 @-@ year @-@ old captain , Blaine <unk> , to the Merritt Centennials in exchange for future considerations . Scott Fellnermayr became the new captain of the Rage , and would remain the captain for the remainder of the season and the next . In January , the Rage split two @-@ game series against the Wild and split another in Chicago . The team put together a six @-@ game winning streak in January – February , winning games against the Brown Bears and the Avalanche before splitting a two @-@ game series with the Monsters . On their next road trip , they lost their two games against the Wild and won the next three against the Monsters . The season ended in early March with Rage in fifth place with a 24 @-@ 31 @-@ 3 record , in the six @-@ team West division . 
 Despite the losing record , attendance at the home games averaged over 1 @,@ 000 people , the tenth highest attendance in the 26 @-@ team league . They sent two players to the league 's Top Prospects Tournament : goalie Andrew Walsh and the team 's top scorer Dakota Mason . The team gave Scott Fellnermayr their most valuable player award and named goalie Edward Dyson their rookie of the year . 
 In the off @-@ season , with numerous players reaching the league 's age limit , the team held open camps in Kelowna and Dawson Creek in April – May 2011 which attracted about 150 potential players . Dakota Mason requested a trade and was sent to the Brooks Bandits for Mitch <unk> . In pre @-@ season play , the Rage played the Grande Prairie Storm in Peace River , Alberta , in an exhibition fundraiser game called the <unk> Cup Challenge , with proceeds going towards the North Peace Navigators Junior " B " hockey team . In early September , they split a two @-@ game exhibition series with the Prince George Spruce Kings . In finalizing the roster , the team kept rookie Luke Ripley and veteran Rage defenseman Evan Ripley , allowing the brothers to play on the same team . 
 = = = 2011 – 12 season = = = 
 The Rage began the 2011 – 12 season with the NAHL 's Showcase Tournament in Michigan where they lost to the Corpus Christi Ice Rays and the Kalamazoo Jr . K @-@ Wings but beat the Michigan Warriors , before ending with a loss to the Coulee Region Chill . They started with a 3 – 7 record , winning two out of three games against the Minot <unk> but then losing two games against the Monsters in Fresno and two games against the Bismarck Bobcats in Dawson Creek . Trying to add scoring , they acquired Shawn Mueller from the Chilliwack Chiefs . They fell to 5 @-@ 13 @-@ 1 after splitting a series in Minot , losing in Bismarck , and splitting a series against the Alaska Avalanche back in Dawson Creek . Between mid @-@ November and the mid @-@ season break the team played a 12 @-@ game road trip , spending the first two weekends in Alaska and the next two in Wenatchee and Fresno , and entered the break last in their division with a 7 @-@ 24 @-@ 2 overall record . They acquired defenceman Zach <unk> from the Nanaimo Clippers and goalie Paul <unk> from the Kenai River Brown Bears . In a January – February 11 game homestand , the Rage only won 2 games , falling to 9 @-@ 32 @-@ 3 , as they lost three to the Wild ( all shut outs ) , two each to the Monsters and the Ice Dogs , and split their series against the Avalanche and Brown Bears . The team 's struggles continued , losing two games each to the Monsters and the Ice Dogs . Against the Wild , they lost all three games in their homestand which ended with brawl . They ended the season going 1 – 2 in both Kenai River and Wenatchee and splitting the series against the Alaska Avalanche , 1 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 . They played their last home game in mid @-@ March losing to the Wenatchee Wild and ending the game with brawl . The Rage ended their season with a road trip , losing both three @-@ game series 2 – 1 in Kenai River and then Wenatchee . Three players were sent to the NAHL 's Top Prospects Showcase : Scott Fellnermayr , Luke Ripley and Josh Hartley . 
 = = Dissolution = = 
 In early 2011 , the Rage along with the Fresno Monsters , Wenatchee Wild , and Alaska Avalanche , all declared dormancy for various reasons , not committing to playing the next season ; the Rage were pursuing entry into the AJHL . As the season was ending , the other teams in the division came out of dormancy ; the Wenatchee team had their BCHL move denied and the Fresno Monsters were able to secure a lease agreement for their arena . The bid by the DC Rage Society to move the team into the AJHL , by purchasing the rights to the St. Albert Steel , failed as the Steel were moved to <unk> . While the team was achieving the expected levels of corporate sponsorship and had an average attendance of 1 @,@ 010 people ( 13th best in the league of 28 teams ) , the Rage 's costs ( especially the travel costs ) were higher than expected . In the first week of April 2012 , a final appeal by the DC Rage Society to the City of Dawson Creek to cover certain fees was denied and the society announced the team was ending operations . 
 = = Community = = 
 The Rage were operated by a Dawson Creek @-@ based non @-@ profit group , the DC Rage Society . They obtained over $ 200 @,@ 000 each year in financial support from the City of Dawson Creek who wanted the team to help fill the schedule of their new 6 @,@ 500 @-@ seat arena . Compared to other NAHL teams , the Rage received above average fan support with over 1 @,@ 000 people attending each game . With few of the players were native to the Peace Region , billet families housed team players while they were in town . The team participated in visits to local elementary schools , hosted meet @-@ and @-@ greets with community members , and fund @-@ raised for the local branch of the Canadian Cancer Society and other charities . Likewise , the community supported the team by fund @-@ raising for pay for general team activities and for a scholarship fund for players going onto university . In August 2011 , the team took over hosting duties ( from the city 's minor hockey association ) of Dawson Creek 's annual week @-@ long hockey camp in which 95 players attended , as well , in the same month , they hosted an open house for Dawson Creek community members meet the team . 
 = = Uniform = = 
 In May 2010 , the team unveiled their logo and uniform . Designed by a Dawson Creek resident , it featured predominately orange , black , and silver colours stylized as a warrior helmet . The logo was meant to illustrate the team 's dominance with the burning eyes representing the rage within . Between seasons , they altered the logo by adding the words " Dawson Creek " and " Rage " with the Canadian maple leaf symbol , replacing the longhorn symbol with a plume on the helmet , eliminating the red colouring , and removing the flames . 
 = = Season Records = = 
 = Casino Royale ( 1967 film ) = 
 Casino Royale is a 1967 spy comedy film originally produced by Columbia Pictures starring an ensemble cast of directors and actors . It is loosely based on Ian Fleming 's first James Bond novel . The film stars David Niven as the " original " Bond , Sir James Bond 007 . Forced out of retirement to investigate the deaths and disappearances of international spies , he soon battles the mysterious Dr. Noah and SMERSH . The film 's slogan : " Casino Royale is too much ... for one James Bond ! " refers to Bond 's ruse to mislead SMERSH in which six other agents are pretending to be " James Bond " , namely , baccarat master Evelyn Tremble ( Peter Sellers ) ; millionaire spy Vesper Lynd ( Ursula Andress ) ; Bond 's secretary Miss Moneypenny ( Barbara Bouchet ) ; Mata Bond ( Joanna Pettet ) , Bond 's daughter with Mata Hari ; and British agents " Coop " ( Terence Cooper ) and " The Detainer " ( <unk> Lavi ) . 
 Charles K. Feldman , the producer , had acquired the film rights in 1960 and had attempted to get Casino Royale made as an Eon Productions Bond film ; however , Feldman and the producers of the Eon series , Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman , failed to come to terms . Believing that he could not compete with the Eon series , Feldman resolved to produce the film as a satire . The budget escalated as various directors and writers got involved in the production , and actors expressed dissatisfaction with the project . 
 Casino Royale was released on 13 April 1967 , two months prior to Eon 's fifth Bond movie , You Only Live Twice . The film was a financial success , grossing over $ 41 @.@ 7 million worldwide , and Burt Bacharach 's musical score was praised , earning him an Academy Award nomination for the song " The Look of Love " . Critical reception to Casino Royale , however , was generally negative ; some critics regarded it as a baffling , disorganised affair . Since 1999 , the film 's rights have been held by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer , distributors of the official Bond movies by Eon Productions . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The story of Casino Royale is told in an episodic format . Val Guest oversaw the assembly of the sections , although he turned down the credit of " co @-@ ordinating director " . 
 = = = Opening sequence = = = 
 Evelyn Tremble / James Bond 007 ( Peter Sellers ) and Inspector Mathis meet in a <unk> , where Mathis presents his credentials — in a shot suggesting a display of Mathis ' genitals , and setting the tone of the film by satirising the dramatic opening sequences in the Eon Bond films . 
