 = = = Plot summary = = = 
 Sir James Bond 007 , a legendary British spy who retired from the secret service 20 years previously , is visited by the head of British MI6 , M , CIA representative Ransome , KGB representative <unk> , and Deuxième Bureau representative Le Grand . All implore Bond to come out of retirement to deal with SMERSH who have been eliminating agents : Bond spurns all their pleas . When Bond continues to stand firm , his mansion is destroyed by a mortar attack at the orders of M , who is , however , killed in the explosion . 
 Bond travels to Scotland to return M 's remains to the grieving widow , Lady Fiona McTarry . However , the real Lady Fiona has been replaced by SMERSH 's Agent Mimi . The rest of the household have been likewise replaced , with SMERSH ’ s aim to discredit Bond by destroying his " celibate image " . Attempts by a bevy of beauties to seduce Bond fail , but Mimi / Lady Fiona becomes so impressed with Bond that she changes loyalties and helps Bond to foil the plot against him . On his way back to London , Bond survives another attempt on his life . 
 Bond is promoted to the head of MI6 . He learns that many British agents around the world have been eliminated by enemy spies because of their inability to resist sex . Bond is also told that the " sex maniac " who was given the name of " James Bond " when the original Bond retired has gone to work in television . He then orders that all remaining MI6 agents will be named " James Bond 007 " , to confuse SMERSH . He also creates a rigorous programme to train male agents to ignore the charms of women . Moneypenny recruits " Coop " , a karate expert who begins training to resist seductive women : he also meets an exotic agent known as the Detainer . 
 Bond then hires Vesper Lynd , a retired agent turned millionaire , to recruit baccarat expert Evelyn Tremble , whom he intends to use to beat SMERSH agent Le Chiffre . Having embezzled SMERSH 's money , Le Chiffre is desperate for money to cover up his theft before he is executed . 
 Following up a clue from agent Mimi , Bond persuades his estranged daughter Mata Bond to travel to East Berlin to infiltrate International Mothers ' Help , an au pair service that is a cover for a SMERSH training center . Mata uncovers a plan to sell compromising photographs of military leaders from the US , USSR , China and Great Britain at an " art auction " , another scheme Le Chiffre hopes to use to raise money : Mata destroys the photos . Le Chiffre 's only remaining option is to raise the money by playing baccarat . 
 Tremble arrives at the Casino Royale accompanied by Lynd , who foils an attempt to disable him by seductive SMERSH agent Miss Goodthighs . Later that night , Tremble observes Le Chiffre playing at the casino and realises that he is using infrared sunglasses to cheat . Lynd steals the sunglasses , allowing Evelyn to eventually beat Le Chiffre in a game of baccarat . Lynd is apparently abducted outside the casino , and Tremble is also kidnapped while pursuing her . Le Chiffre , desperate for the winning cheque , <unk> tortures Tremble . Lynd rescues Tremble , only to subsequently kill him . Meanwhile , SMERSH agents raid Le Chiffre 's base and kill him . 
 In London , Mata Bond is kidnapped by SMERSH in a giant flying saucer , and Sir James and Moneypenny travel to Casino Royale to rescue her . They discover that the casino is located atop a giant underground headquarters run by the evil Dr. Noah , secretly Sir James ' nephew Jimmy Bond , a former MI6 agent who defected to SMERSH to spite his famous uncle . Jimmy reveals that he plans to use biological warfare to make all women beautiful and kill all men over 4 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 37 m ) tall , leaving him as the " big man " who gets all the girls . Jimmy has already captured The Detainer , and he tries to convince her to be his partner ; she agrees , but only to dupe him into swallowing one of his " atomic time pills " , turning him into a " walking atomic bomb " . 
 Sir James , Moneypenny , Mata and Coop manage to escape from their cell and fight their way back to the Casino Director 's office where Sir James establishes Lynd is a double agent . The casino is then overrun by secret agents and a battle ensues . American and French support arrive , but just add to the chaos . Eventually , Jimmy 's atomic pill explodes , destroying Casino Royale with everyone inside . Sir James and all of his agents then appear in heaven , and Jimmy Bond is shown descending to hell . 
 = = Cast = = 
 David Niven as Sir James Bond – A legendary British secret agent forced out of retirement to fight SMERSH . 
 Peter Sellers as Evelyn Tremble / James Bond 007 – A baccarat master recruited by Vesper Lynd to challenge Le Chiffre at Casino Royale . 
 Ursula Andress as Vesper Lynd / 007 – A retired British secret agent forced back into service in exchange for writing off her tax arrears . 
 Orson Welles as Le Chiffre – SMERSH 's financial agent , desperate to win at baccarat to repay the money he has embezzled from the organisation . 
 Woody Allen as Dr. Noah / Jimmy Bond – Bond 's nephew and head of SMERSH . 
 Barbara Bouchet as Miss Moneypenny – The beautiful daughter of Bond 's original Miss Moneypenny . She works for the service in the same position her mother had years before . 
 Deborah Kerr as Agent Mimi / Lady Fiona McTarry – A SMERSH agent who masquerades as the widow of M but cannot help falling in love with Bond . 
 Jacqueline Bisset ( credited as Jacky Bisset ) as Giovanna Goodthighs – A SMERSH agent who attempts to kill Evelyn Tremble at Casino Royale . 
 Also , as an extra who stands behind Le Chiffre at the casino . 
 Joanna Pettet as Mata Bond – Bond 's daughter , born of his love affair with Mata Hari . 
 <unk> Lavi as The Detainer – A British secret agent who successfully poisons Dr. Noah with his own atomic pill . 
 Terence Cooper as Coop – A British secret agent specifically chosen , and trained for this mission to resist the charms of women . 
 Bernard Cribbins as Carlton Towers – A British Foreign Office official who drives Mata Bond all the way from London to Berlin in his taxi . 
 Ronnie Corbett as Polo – A SMERSH agent at the International Mothers ' Help who was in love with Mata Hari and expresses the same feelings for Mata Bond . 
 Anna Quayle as Frau <unk> – Frau <unk> is Mata Hari 's teacher , portrayed as a parody of Cesare in the German Expressionist film The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari ( her school is modelled on the film 's expressionist decor ) . 
 John Huston as M / McTarry – Head of MI6 who dies from an explosion caused by his own bombardment of Bond 's estate . 
 William Holden as Ransome – A CIA agent who accompanies M to persuade Bond out of retirement , then reappears in the final climactic fight scene . 
 Charles Boyer as LeGrand – A Deuxième Bureau agent who accompanies M and Ransom to see Bond . 
 Geoffrey <unk> as Q. 
 Casino Royale also takes credit for the greatest number of actors in a Bond film either to have appeared or to go on to appear in the rest of the Eon series – besides Ursula Andress in Dr. No , Vladek Sheybal appeared as Kronsteen in From Russia with Love , Burt Kwouk featured as Mr. Ling in Goldfinger and an unnamed SPECTRE operative in You Only Live Twice , Jeanne Roland plays a masseuse in You Only Live Twice , and Angela Scoular appeared as Ruby Bartlett in On Her Majesty 's Secret Service . Jack Gwillim , who had a tiny role as a British army officer , played a Royal Navy officer in Thunderball . Caroline Munro , who can be seen very briefly as one of Dr Noah 's gun @-@ toting guards , received the role of Naomi in The Spy Who Loved Me . Milton Reid , who appears in a bit part as the temple guard , opening the door to Mata Bond 's hall , played one of Dr. No 's guards and Stromberg 's underling , Sandor , in The Spy Who Loved Me . John Hollis , who plays the temple priest in Mata Bond 's hall , went on to play the unnamed figure clearly intended to be Blofeld in the pre @-@ credits sequence of For Your Eyes Only . John Wells , Q 's assistant , appeared in For Your Eyes Only as Denis Thatcher . Hal <unk> , who appears briefly as a US army officer at the auction , had earlier played gangster Jack Strap in Goldfinger . 
 Major stars like George Raft and Jean @-@ Paul Belmondo were given top billing in the film 's promotion and screen trailers despite the fact that they only appeared for a few minutes in the final scene . 
 = = = Uncredited cast = = = 
 Well established stars like Peter O 'Toole and sporting legends like Stirling Moss were prepared to take uncredited parts in the film just to be able to work with the other members of the cast . Stunt director Richard Talmadge employed Geraldine Chaplin to appear in a brief Keystone Cops insert . The film also proved to be young Anjelica Huston 's first experience in the film industry as she was called upon by her father , John Huston , to cover the screen shots of Deborah Kerr 's hands . The film also marks the debut of Dave Prowse , later the physical form of Darth Vader in the Star Wars series , as Frankenstein 's monster , a role he would later play again in the Hammer films The Horror of Frankenstein and Frankenstein and the Monster from Hell . John Le Mesurier also features in the early scenes of the film as M 's driver . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In March 1955 Ian Fleming sold the film rights of his novel Casino Royale , the first book featuring the character of James Bond , to the producer Gregory Ratoff for $ 6 @,@ 000 ( $ 53 @,@ 001 in 2016 dollars ) . In 1956 Ratoff set up a production company with Michael Garrison to produce a film adaptation , but wound up not finding financial backers before his death in December 1960 . After Ratoff 's death , the producer Charles K. Feldman represented Ratoff 's widow and obtained the Casino Royale rights . Albert R. Broccoli , who had a long time interest in adapting James Bond , offered to purchase the Casino Royale rights from Feldman , but he declined . Feldman and his friend , the director Howard Hawks , had an interest in adapting Casino Royale , considering Leigh Brackett as a writer and Cary Grant as James Bond . They eventually gave up once they saw the 1962 film Dr. No , the first Bond adaptation made by Broccoli and his partner Harry Saltzman through their company Eon Productions . 
 By 1964 , with Feldman having invested nearly $ 550 @,@ 000 of his own money into pre @-@ production of Casino Royale , he decided to try a deal with Eon Productions and its distributor United Artists . The attempt at a co @-@ production eventually fell through as Feldman frequently argued with Broccoli and Saltzman , specially regarding the profit divisions and when the Casino Royale adaptation would start production . Feldman approached Sean Connery to play Bond , with Connery 's offering to do the film for one million dollars being rejected . Feldman eventually decided to offer his project to Columbia Pictures through a script written by Ben Hecht , and the studio accepted . Given Eon 's series led to a spy film craze at the time , Feldman opted to make his film a spoof of the Bond series instead of a straightforward adaptation . 
 = = = Screenplay development = = = 
 Ben Hecht 's contribution to the project , if not the final result , was in fact substantial . The Oscar @-@ winning writer was recruited by Feldman to produce a screenplay for the film and wrote several drafts , with various evolutions of the story incorporating different scenes and characters . All of his treatments were " straight " adaptations , far closer to the original source novel than the spoof which the final production became . A draft from 1957 discovered in Hecht 's papers – but which does not identify the screenwriter – is a direct adaptation of the novel , albeit with the Bond character absent , instead being replaced by a poker @-@ playing American gangster . 
 Later drafts see vice made central to the plot , with the Le Chiffre character becoming head of a network of brothels ( as he is in the novel ) whose patrons are then blackmailed by Le Chiffre to fund Spectre ( an invention of the screenwriter ) . The racy plot elements opened up by this change of background include a chase scene through Hamburg 's red light district that results in Bond escaping whilst disguised as a female mud wrestler . New characters appear such as Lili Wing , a brothel madam and former lover of Bond whose ultimate fate is to be crushed in the back of a garbage truck , and Gita , wife of Le Chiffre . The beautiful Gita , whose face and throat are hideously disfigured as a result of Bond using her as a shield during a gunfight in the same sequence which sees Wing meet her fate , goes on to become the prime protagonist in the torture scene that features in the book , a role originally Le Chiffre 's . 
 Virtually nothing from Hecht 's scripts were ever filmed . He died from a heart attack in April 1964 , two days before he was due to present it to Feldman . Time reported in 1966 that the script had been completely re @-@ written by Billy Wilder , and by the time the film reached production only the idea that the name James Bond should be given to a number of other agents remained . This key plot device in the finished film , in the case of Hecht 's version , occurs after the demise of the original James Bond ( an event which happened prior to the beginning of his story ) which , as Hecht 's M puts it " not only perpetuates his memory , but confuses the opposition . " 
 Peter Sellers hired Terry Southern to write his dialogue ( and not the rest of the script ) to " outshine " Orson Welles and Woody Allen . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The principal filming was carried out at Pinewood Studios , Shepperton Studios and Twickenham Studios in London . Extensive sequences also featured London , notably Trafalgar Square and the exterior of 10 Downing Street . Mereworth Castle in Kent was used as the home of Sir James Bond , which is blown up at the start of the film . Much of the filming for M 's Scottish castle was actually done on location in County Meath , Ireland , with Killeen Castle , Dunsany , as the focus . However , the car chase sequences where Bond leaves the castle were shot in the Perthshire village of Killin with further sequences in Berkshire ( specifically Old Windsor and Bracknell ) . 
 The production proved to be rather troubled , with five different directors helming different segments of the film and with stunt co @-@ ordinator Richard Talmadge co @-@ directing the final sequence . In addition to the credited writers , Woody Allen , Peter Sellers , Val Guest , Ben Hecht , Joseph Heller , Terry Southern , and Billy Wilder are all believed to have contributed to the screenplay to varying degrees . Val Guest was given the responsibility of splicing the various " chapters " together , and was offered the unique title of " Co @-@ ordinating Director " but declined , claiming the chaotic plot would not reflect well on him if he were so credited . His extra credit was labelled " Additional Sequences " instead . 
 Part of the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes drama of this film 's production concerned the filming of the segments involving Peter Sellers . Screenwriter Wolf Mankowitz declared that Sellers felt intimidated by Orson Welles to the extent that , except for a couple of shots , neither was in the studio simultaneously . Other versions of the legend depict the drama stemming from Sellers being slighted , in favour of Welles , by Princess Margaret ( whom Sellers knew ) during her visit to the set . Welles also insisted on performing magic tricks as Le Chiffre , and the director obliged . Director Val Guest wrote that Welles did not think much of Sellers , and had refused to work with " that amateur " . Director Joseph McGrath , a personal friend of Sellers , was punched by the actor when he complained about Sellers ' behavior on the set . 
 Some biographies of Sellers suggest that he took the role of Bond to heart , and was annoyed at the decision to make Casino Royale a comedy , as he wanted to play Bond straight . This is illustrated in somewhat fictionalised form in the film The Life and Death of Peter Sellers , based on the biography by Roger Lewis , who has claimed that Sellers kept re @-@ writing and improvising scenes to make them play seriously . This story is in agreement with the observation that the only parts of the film close to the book are the ones featuring Sellers and Welles . In the end , Sellers ' involvement with the film was cut abruptly short . 
 Jean @-@ Paul Belmondo and George Raft received major billing , even though both actors appear only briefly . Both appear during the climactic brawl at the end , Raft flipping his trademark coin and promptly shooting himself dead with a backwards @-@ firing pistol , while Belmondo appears wearing a fake moustache as the French Foreign Legion officer who requires an English phrase book to translate " merde ! " into " <unk> ! " during his fistfight . Raft 's coin flip , which originally appeared in Scarface ( 1932 ) , had been spoofed a few years earlier in Some Like It Hot ( 1959 ) . 
 At the <unk> science fiction convention held in Slough in 1978 , David Prowse commented on his part in this film , apparently his big @-@ screen debut . He claimed that he was originally asked to play " Super Pooh " , a giant Winnie @-@ the @-@ Pooh in a superhero costume who attacks Tremble during the Torture of The Mind sequence . This idea , as with many others in the film 's script , was rapidly dropped , and Prowse was re @-@ cast as a Frankenstein @-@ type Monster for the closing scenes . The final sequence was principally directed by former actor and stuntman Richard Talmadge . 
 Director credits : 
 = = = Unfinished scenes = = = 
 Sellers left the production before all his scenes were shot , which is why his character , Tremble , is so abruptly captured in the film . Whether Sellers was fired or simply walked off is unclear . Given that he often went absent for days at a time and was involved in conflicts with Welles , either explanation is plausible . Regardless , Sellers was unavailable for the filming of an ending and of linking footage to explain the details , leaving the filmmakers to devise a way to make the existing footage work without him . The framing device of a beginning and ending with David Niven was invented to salvage the footage . Val Guest said that he was given the task of creating a narrative thread which would link all segments of the film . He chose to use the original Bond and Vesper as linking characters to tie the story together . In the originally released versions of the film , a cardboard cutout of Sellers in the background was used for the final scenes . In later versions , this cardboard cutout was replaced by footage of Sellers in highland dress , inserted by " trick photography " . 
 Signs of missing footage from the Sellers segments are evident at various points . Evelyn Tremble is not captured on camera ; an outtake of Sellers entering a racing car was substituted . In this outtake , he calls for the car , à la Pink Panther , to chase down Vesper and her kidnappers ; the next thing that is shown is Tremble being tortured . Out @-@ takes of Sellers were also used for Tremble 's dream sequence ( pretending to play the piano on Ursula Andress ' torso ) , in the finale - blowing out the candles whilst in highland dress - and at the end of the film when all the various " James Bond doubles " are together . In the kidnap sequence , Tremble 's death is also very abruptly inserted ; it consists of pre @-@ existing footage of Tremble being rescued by Vesper , followed by a later @-@ filmed shot of her abruptly deciding to shoot him , followed by a freeze @-@ frame over some of the previous footage of her surrounded by bodies ( noticeably a zoom @-@ in on the previous shot ) . 
 As well as this , an entire sequence involving Tremble going to the front for the underground James Bond training school ( which turns out to be under Harrods , of which the training area was the lowest level ) was never shot , thus creating an abrupt cut from Vesper announcing that Tremble will be James Bond to Tremble exiting the lift into the training school . 
 So many sequences from the film were removed , that several well @-@ known actors never appeared in the final cut , including Ian Hendry ( as 006 , the agent whose body is briefly seen being disposed of by Vesper ) , Mona <unk> and Arthur Mullard . 
 = = Music = = 
 For the music , Feldman decided to bring Burt Bacharach , who had done the score for his previous production What 's New Pussycat ? . Bacharach worked over two years writing for Casino Royale , in the meantime composing the After the Fox score and being forced to decline participation in Luv . Lyricist Hal David contributed with various songs , many of which appeared in just instrumental versions . Herb Alpert & the Tijuana Brass performed some of the songs with Mike Redway singing the lyrics to the title song as the end credits rolled ( a version of the song was also sung by Peter Sellers ) . The title theme was Alpert 's second number one on the Easy Listening chart where it spent two weeks at the top in June 1967 and peaked at number 27 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 The fourth chapter of the film features the song " The Look of Love " performed by Dusty Springfield . It is played in the scene of Vesper Lynd recruiting Evelyn Tremble , seen through a man @-@ size aquarium in a seductive walk . " The Look of Love " was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Song . The song was a Top 10 radio hit at the KGB and KHJ radio stations . It was heard again in the first Austin Powers film , which was to a degree inspired by Casino Royale . For the European release , Mireille Mathieu sang versions of " The Look of Love " in both French ( " Les <unk> D 'Amour " ) , and German ( " Ein Blick von Dir " ) . 
 Bacharach would later rework two tracks of the score into songs : " Home James , Don 't Spare the Horses " was re @-@ arranged as " Bond Street " , appearing on Bacharach 's album Reach Out ( 1967 ) , and " Flying Saucer – First Stop Berlin " , was reworked with vocals as " Let the Love Come Through " by orchestra leader and arranger Roland Shaw . A clarinet melody would later be featured in a Cracker Jack commercial . As an in @-@ joke , a brief snippet of John Barry 's song " Born Free " is used in the film . At the time , Barry was the main composer for the Eon Bond series , and said song won an Academy Award over Bacharach 's own " Alfie " . 
 The original album cover art was done by Robert McGinnis , based on the film poster and the original stereo vinyl release of the soundtrack ( <unk> # <unk> @-@ 5005 ) is still highly sought after by audiophiles . It has been regarded by some music critics as the finest @-@ sounding LP of all time . The original LP was later issued by Varèse Sarabande in the same track order as shown below : 
 Soundtrack listing 
 " Casino Royale Theme " – Herb Alpert & the Tijuana Brass 
 " The Look of Love " – Dusty Springfield 
 " Money Penny Goes for Broke " 
 " Le Chiffre 's Torture of the Mind " 
 " Home James , Don 't Spare the Horses " 
 " Sir James ' Trip to Find Mata " 
 " The Look of Love " ( Instrumental ) 
 " Hi There Miss Goodthighs " 
 " Little French Boy " 
 " Flying Saucer – First Stop Berlin " 
 " The Venerable Sir James Bond " 
 " Dream on James , You 're Winning " 
 " The Big Cowboys and Indians Fight at Casino Royale " / " Casino Royale Theme " ( reprise ) 
 The soundtrack album became famous among audio purists for the excellence of its recording . It then became a standard " audiophile test " record for decades to come , especially the vocal performance by Dusty Springfield on " The Look of Love . " 
 The film soundtrack has since been released by other companies in different configurations ( including complete score releases ) . 
 = = Budget = = 
 The studio approved the film 's production budget of $ 6 million , already quite large in 1966 . However , during filming the project ran into several problems and the shoot ran months over schedule , with the costs also running well over . When the film was finally completed it had doubled its original budget . The final production budget of $ 12 million made it one of the most expensive films that had been made to that point . The previous Eon Bond film , Thunderball ( 1965 ) , had a budget of $ 11 million while the nearly contemporary You Only Live Twice ( 1967 ) , had a budget of $ 9 @.@ 5 million . The extremely high budget of Casino Royale led to comparisons with a troubled production from 1963 , and it was referred to as " a runaway mini @-@ Cleopatra " . Columbia at first announced the film was due to be released in time for Christmas 1966 . The problems postponed the launch until April 1967 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Casino Royale had its world premiere in London 's Odeon Leicester Square on 13 April 1967 , breaking many opening records in the theatre 's history . Its American premiere was held in New York on 28 April , at the Capitol and Cinema I theatres . It opened two months prior to the fifth Bond film by Eon Productions , You Only Live Twice . 
 = = = Box office and marketing = = = 
 Despite the lukewarm nature of the contemporary reviews , the pull of the James Bond name was sufficient to make it the 13th highest grossing film in North America in 1967 with a gross of $ 22 @.@ 7 million and a worldwide total of $ 41 @.@ 7 million ( $ 296 million in 2016 dollars ) . Orson Welles attributed the success of the film to a marketing strategy that featured a naked tattooed woman on the film 's posters and print ads as well as a billboard in New York 's Times Square . The campaign also included a series of commercials featuring British model Twiggy . As late as 2011 , the film was still making money for the estate of Peter Sellers , who negotiated an extraordinary 3 % of the gross profits ( an estimated £ 120 million ) , with the proceeds currently going to Cassie Unger , the daughter and sole heir of Sellers ' beneficiary , fourth wife Lynne Frederick . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 No advance press screenings of Casino Royale were held , leading reviews to only appear after the premiere . The chaotic nature of the production was featured heavily in contemporary reviews , while later reviewers have sometimes been kinder towards this . Roger Ebert said " This is possibly the most indulgent film ever made " , Time described Casino Royale as " an incoherent and vulgar vaudeville " , and Variety declared the film to be " a conglomeration of frenzied situations , ‘ in ’ gags and special effects , lacking discipline and cohesion . " Bosley Crowther of The New York Times had some positive statements about the film , considering Casino Royale had " more of the talent agent than the secret agent " and praising the " fast start " and the scenes up to the baccarat game between Bond and Le Chiffre . Afterwards , Crowther felt , the script became tiresome , repetitive and filled with clichés due to " wild and haphazard injections of ' in ' jokes and outlandish gags " , leading to an excessive length that made the film a " reckless , disconnected nonsense that could be telescoped or stopped at any point " . 
 Since its release the film has been widely criticised by a number of people . The film currently holds a 29 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 34 reviews with the consensus stating : " A goofy , dated parody of spy movie cliches , Casino Royale squanders its all @-@ star cast on a meandering , mostly laugh @-@ free script . " For instance , Simon Winder called Casino Royale " a pitiful spoof " , while Robert Druce described it as " an abstraction of real life " . In his review of the film , Leonard Maltin remarked , " Money , money everywhere , but [ the ] film is terribly uneven – sometimes funny , often not . " 
 Some later reviewers have been more impressed by the film . Andrea LeVasseur , in the AllMovie review , called it " the original ultimate spy spoof " , and opined that the " nearly impossible to follow " plot made it " a satire to the highest degree " . Further describing it as a " hideous , zany disaster " LeVasseur concluded that it was " a psychedelic , absurd masterpiece " . Cinema historian Robert von <unk> has written about the artistic merits of the film and says " like Casablanca , Casino Royale is a film of momentary vision , collaboration , adaption , pastiche , and accident . It is the anti @-@ auteur work of all time , a film shaped by the very zeitgeist it took on . " Romano Tozzi complimented the acting and humour , although he also mentioned that the film has several dull stretches . 
 Writing in 1986 , Danny Peary noted , " It 's hard to believe that in 1967 we actually waited in anticipation for this so @-@ called James Bond spoof . It was a disappointment then ; it 's a curio today , but just as hard to get through . " Peary described the film as being " disjointed and stylistically erratic " and " a testament to wastefulness in the bigger @-@ is @-@ better cinema , " before adding , " It would have been a good idea to cut the picture drastically , perhaps down to the scenes featuring Peter Sellers and Woody Allen . In fact , I recommend you see it on television when it 's in a two @-@ hour ( including commercials ) slot . Then you won 't expect it to make any sense . " 
 = = = Home video and film rights = = = 
 Columbia Pictures released Casino Royale on VHS in 1989 , and on Laserdisc in 1994 . In 1997 , following the Columbia / MGM / Kevin McClory lawsuit on ownership of the Bond film series , the rights to the film reverted to Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( whose sister company United Artists co @-@ owns the Bond film franchise ) as a condition of the settlement . MGM then issued the first DVD release of Casino Royale in 2002 , followed by a 40th anniversary special edition in 2007 . 
 Years later , as a result of the Sony / Comcast acquisition of MGM , Columbia would once again become responsible for the co @-@ distribution of this film as well as the entire Eon Bond series , including the 2006 adaptation of Casino Royale . However , MGM Home Entertainment changed its distributor to 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment in May 2006 . Fox has since been responsible for the debut of the 1967 Casino Royale on Blu @-@ ray disc in 2011 . Danjaq LLC , Eon 's holding company , is shown as one of its present copyright owners . 
 Alongside six other MGM @-@ owned films , the studio posted Casino Royale on YouTube . 
 = Characters of Final Fantasy XII = 
 Final Fantasy XII , a role @-@ playing video game released by Square Enix in 2006 , revolves around the attempt to liberate the kingdom of Dalmasca from the Archadian Empire . The story is told through the eyes of Vaan , an orphan who wishes to be a sky pirate , and the cadre of other characters he encounters throughout the adventure . The visuals of the characters were designed by Akihiko Yoshida , while their stories were created by Yasumi Matsuno . The characters were designed to look and behave unlike any that had existed in the Final Fantasy series . Their stories were written to create a script where neither side was truly right or wrong , but instead just had different opinions and interpretations of the events occurring in the game . 
 There are a total of six main playable characters in Final Fantasy XII ; Vaan , an energetic orphan of Rabanastre who dreams of becoming a sky pirate ; Ashe , a determined princess of Dalmasca who lost her husband in the Archadian invasion ; Basch , a disgraced knight of Dalmasca charged with treason for slaying the king ; Balthier , a gentlemanly sky pirate who pilots his airship , the Strahl ; Fran , Balthier 's partner and a viera exile whose knowledge extends to legends and myths ; and Penelo , Vaan 's childhood friend who accompanies him in journeys to keep an eye over him . There is also a number of " Guest " characters , who temporarily join the main party at various points in the plotline , such as Larsa , the young prince of Archadia , Vossler , a member of the resistance against the Archadian Empire , and Reddas , a disillusioned former Magistrate of Archadia . Other major characters who influence the plot of the game but are not playable characters include Vayne , the eldest prince of Archadia and main antagonist of the story , Gabranth , the twin brother of Basch , and Cid , a brilliant scientist and father to Balthier . 
 The characters in the game have been the basis of several pieces of merchandise produced by Square Enix , such as statues , action figures , and jewelry . They have been subject to mixed reviews ; some reviews have applauded the characters ' dialogue and relationships to each other , while others dismissed the story and characters as uninteresting . Critiques of the voice acting for the characters has also been mixed , with different reviews either praising or criticizing both the acting and the technical quality of the recordings . 
 = = Cast creation and influences = = 
 Final Fantasy XII 's characters were designed by Akihiko Yoshida . It was his first involvement in a main @-@ series Final Fantasy game , though he worked as the character designer for Final Fantasy Tactics and Vagrant Story , both of which were set in the same game world as XII , Ivalice . Comments have been made about the similarity between Yoshida 's creations and those of Tetsuya Nomura , the character designer for Final Fantasy VII , VIII , X , and XIII . Yoshida feels this connection is sparked by the style of color used by both artists , which involves a color consistency between the characters and the environments . In an interview included in a bonus disc of the collector 's edition of the game , he states that he created the design of the characters after reading all of the design documents on their history and beliefs . He tried to create designs and clothing that did not exist anywhere in real life and had never been seen before , designing for example the armor for the Judges on a combination of historical armor , mountain bike gear , and futuristic ideas . 
 The story of the characters was created by scenario writer Daisuke Watanabe . In the bonus disc interview , he states that he endeavored to create characters that were neither fully good nor evil , adding flaws such as selfishness to the heroes and virtues such as kindness to the villains , in an attempt to make them more realistic . He also said he tried to create a scenario in which neither side was truly right or wrong , but instead just had different interpretations of the events in the game . He tried to convey the emotions of the characters through their lines , the acting of the voice actors , and in the facial expressions of the in @-@ game models . Alexander O. Smith , the English translator for the game , included accents to the characters for the English version of the game to add a layer of depth to the game by having characters from different areas of Ivalice sound different . He based these accents off the extensive notes made by game designer Yasumi Matsuno on the backgrounds of the characters . Smith chose voice actors for the project who had stage and film acting experience , in an attempt to avoid the common problem of " flat " reading he felt was prevalent in video game voice acting . 
 The designers have stated that non @-@ human characters and races feature a prominent role in the game , which was influenced by an interest in history among the developers . Comparing the non @-@ human races in Final Fantasy IX with those of XII , the developers have stated that the former were modeled after humans , while the latter were fundamentally different in terms of biological characteristics . These non @-@ human races include Bangaa , Viera , Seeq , and Moogles . In the game humans are referred to as Humes . Some of the races in the game that first appeared in Final Fantasy Tactics Advance , such as Bangaa , were originally designed for Final Fantasy XII . 
 Basch was initially meant to be the main character of the story , but the focus was eventually shifted to Vaan and Penelo when the two characters were created later in development . The development team explained that their previous game , Vagrant Story , which featured a " strong man in his prime " as the protagonist had been unsuccessful and unpopular ; the change regarding Final Fantasy XII from a " big and tough " protagonist to a more effeminate one was thus decided after targeting demographics were considered . The game 's art director Hideo Minaba has said that Vaan is not comparable to any previous protagonist of the series , which he explained as partially a result of the game using a different character designer than previous ones . The geography of Ivalice , particularly Dalmasca , had an influence in the character 's initial designs . When asked about the characters ' revealing clothing , Yoshida commented that " Dalmasca is supposed to have a hot climate " , and that the idea of the characters revealing skin was his . 
 = = Playable characters = = 
 = = = Vaan = = = 
 Vaan ( ヴァン , Van ) is the main protagonist in Final Fantasy XII . He is a 17 @-@ year @-@ old orphaned Hume street urchin who lost his parents in a plague when he was 12 years old . His only brother , Reks , died two years before the start of the game , during the Archadian invasion of Dalmasca . He makes a living as Migelo 's assistant , running various errands for him , while at the same time pickpocketing from Archadian soldiers while claiming to take back what is Dalmasca 's . He is a cheerful and energetic boy . Vaan dreams of someday becoming a sky pirate in command of his own airship . He trains to meet this goal by killing large dire rats in the sewers of Rabanastre on a daily basis , for which Dalan gave him the nickname " Vaan <unk> . " Despite nominally being the main protagonist ( as the player starts the game controlling him ) , the majority of the game focuses on the events and conflicts of the world as a whole and of Ashe , rather than Vaan 's individual problems , with his character instead used as a narrative device to allow the player to follow the events as an outside observer . During the course of the game , Vaan comes to understand he has spent his time running from his problems and blaming the Archadian empire for them , rather than moving on with his life after his brother and parents ' deaths . Vaan ends the game as a sky pirate , traveling the world along with Penelo . 
 During the events of Revenant Wings , Vaan becomes captain of the Airship Galbana and uses it to travel to Lemures , meeting old friends while making new ones . He is given the title of the " leading man " formerly held by Balthier , and other characters suggest a teacher / student relationship between them , though Balthier denies this . In the aftermath , Vaan and Penelo , now a couple , take their leave from Rabanastre to have their own adventure , sporting a shirt over his outfit by the time of Final Fantasy Tactics A2 . 
 Although Basch was originally intended to be the rugged main character , Vaan was added at the last minute during development of the game to have a more effeminate leading role after " taking into consideration the target demographic " . With the casting of Kouhei Takeda for the voice acting and motion capture , however , Vaan became a little less feminine and more " active , upbeat , bright and positive " than planned . He was designed by character designer Akihiko Yoshida to look Asian . Vaan was voiced in Final Fantasy XII by Bobby Edner in English and by Kouhei Takeda in Japanese . Vaan also made appearances in other video games ; despite having been created for Final Fantasy XII , Vaan was first introduced in the 2004 crossover board game Itadaki Street Special for the PlayStation 2 . He also appears in Itadaki Street Portable for the PlayStation Portable . He also appears in the PSP game Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy , where , as in Final Fantasy XII he is voiced by Bobby Edner in the English version ; however , Takeda was unable to reprise his role as Vaan and he was replaced by <unk> Ono in the Japanese version . 
 = = = Ashe = = = 
 <unk> B <unk> Dalmasca ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) or Ashe , is a 19 @-@ year @-@ old Hume princess and a main character of Final Fantasy XII , fighting to liberate her kingdom , Dalmasca , from the Archadian Empire . The only living child of King Raminas and the sole heir to the throne , she married Rasler <unk> Nabradia shortly before Archadia 's invasion of Dalmasca . Her husband died in the battle to protect Nalbina Fortress directly following their marriage , ( on the border of fellow Nabradia , Rasler 's home state ) , making Ashe a young widow . While many believed their marriage was driven by politics , she spent the two years following his death in mourning and continued to wear her wedding ring . 
 She was thought to have committed suicide , but took on the alias , Amalia ( <unk> , <unk> ) , to serve as the leader of the Resistance before joining the group . Her desire for revenge against Archadia , for the horrors its army committed on her people , was manipulated by the Occuria to reinforce their rule over Ivalice . Along the course of the story , the Occuria created an image of the late Rasler to lead Ashe wherever they needed her to go . In their encounter , the Occuria offered her nethicite to rule as another Dynast @-@ King , and conquer Ivalice in their stead . At the final moment , however , Ashe rejected Occuria 's offer to use the nethicite . Ashe acknowledges Larsa 's intention to stop the war and finally makes her way to Vayne in the Sky Fortress Bahamut to end it . A year after the Bahamut 's crash , Ashe is crowned Queen of Dalmasca and eventually rejoins her friends in protecting the peace from the mysterious Judge of Wings in Revenant Wings . She is also featured in the rhythm game Theatrhythm Final Fantasy as a subcharacter representing Final Fantasy XII . 
 Akihiko Yoshida has stated that Ashe 's physical features were designed with the intent of making her look vaguely French , stating that " the base of her bone structure is a French person 's . We were given orders from the start to not make her look like an Asian . But we modified her a bit to look more like a Japanese for the sake of the Japanese audience , and also since a character that looks completely French makes some of the CG expressions difficult . " Ashe was voiced by Kari Wahlgren in English and by Mie Sonozaki in Japanese . Despite having been created for Final Fantasy XII , she was first introduced in the 2004 crossover board game Itadaki Street Special . She also appears in Itadaki Street Portable , and was set to appear in Fortress , as revealed in concept art for the game . 
 = = = Basch fon Ronsenburg = = = 
 Basch fon Ronsenburg ( <unk> ・ フォン ・ <unk> , <unk> fon <unk> ) is a 36 @-@ year @-@ old Captain in the Order of Knights of Dalmasca . He and his twin brother Noah are natives of the Republic of Landis , which was conquered by the Archadians long before the events of the game . When Landis was overthrown , Basch fled to Dalmasca and Noah to Archadia , and the brothers lost contact . Basch joined the Dalmascan army , eventually rising to become one of its most respected officers . When Archadia attacked Nalbina Fortress , Basch and Ashe 's husband , Lord Rasler <unk> , led the defense . However , the Archadian forces overwhelmed their troops and Lord Rasler was mortally wounded by an archer . Basch carried Rasler 's body from the battlefield and went into hiding with the surviving commanders of the Dalmascan military . Shortly after the Archadians moved in to occupy Rabanastre , he and Captain Azelas led an assault on Nalbina Fortress in an attempt to save the king , only to be captured by Imperial forces . His brother Noah , now called Gabranth and in the employ of Archadia , posed as Basch and slew the Dalmascan king and Vaan 's older brother , Reks , who witnessed the crime . Basch was denounced by the <unk> as a traitor and reportedly executed by Marquis Ondore . In reality , he was imprisoned in the Nalbina Dungeons by Vayne to ensuring Ondore 's loyalty to the Empire — if Ondore betrayed the Archadians , Vayne could destroy his credibility by revealing that Basch was still alive . 
 During their attempt to escape Nalbina Dungeon , Vaan , Balthier , and Fran discovered Basch chained in a cage suspended from the ceiling . Though all three were initially suspicious of him ( especially Vaan , who blamed him for Reks 's death ) , Basch protested his innocence and told them about his twin . The party decided his story was plausible and released him . After being freed , he made it his mission to protect Ashe and support the resistance . When he and his brother were reunited , Gabranth was deeply puzzled by Basch 's continued ability to hold his head high in spite of his past failures . Basch explained that his vow to defend Ashe had given him purpose and a renewed sense of honor . After the final battle against Vayne , as Noah was dying , he asked Basch to take his place as Larsa 's protector . Because it was still widely believed that Basch was dead , he adopted his brother 's name and title when he entered Larsa 's service . In Revenant Wings , Basch is sent by Larsa to be the Empire 's representative in dealing with the Judge of Wings . Basch was voiced by Keith Ferguson in English and by Rikiya Koyama in Japanese . He also appears in Itadaki Street Portable . 
 = = = Penelo = = = 
 Penelo ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a 17 @-@ year @-@ old ( 16 @-@ year @-@ old in the Japanese version ) Hume orphan and Vaan 's childhood friend , being the voice of reason to keep him out of trouble . She dreams of being a dancer , and learned martial arts from her older brothers . Five years before the Archadian invasion , a plague struck Rabanastre , killing Vaan 's parents , and as a result Vaan and Reks were adopted into Penelo 's household . The Archadian invasion claimed the lives of Penelo 's family members as well as Reks , leaving her and Vaan as orphans . Migelo , a friend to Penelo 's parents , took them under his care and gave them work at his sundry shop . 
 Penelo is usually trying to keep Vaan out of trouble , but she could not stop Vaan from intruding into the palace grounds . She encountered Vaan , who was arrested along with Balthier and Fran . This encounter forced her into a series of events , when she was kidnapped by Bangaa headhunter Ba <unk> and held as hostage in exchange for Balthier . When she managed to escape , she met with Larsa Solidor , one of the sons of Archadian Emperor Gramis , who took care of her and convinced her he wished to make peace with Dalmasca . When she is finally reunited with Vaan , she made him promise not to leave her side , and ever since traveled with Vaan , furthering their relationship as sky pirate and partner . 
 A year after the Bahamut , during the game epilogue , Penelo serves as Vaan 's navigator from their adventure in Revenant Wings . In the backstory of Final Fantasy XII , she has terrible cooking skills , despite being the motherly figure to the other orphans , and in the sequel , she is trying her best to improve her skills by running a diner on the Galbana . Her relationship with Vaan was also explored , and there had been a conflict when Penelo cared deeply for a Dalmascan knight who appeared in Lemures , much to Vaan 's chagrin . By the events of Final Fantasy Tactics A2 , Penelo gains much reputation as a Sky Pirate . She was voiced by Catherine Taber in English and by Yuna <unk> in Japanese . Penelo also appears in Itadaki Street Portable . 
 = = = Balthier = = = 
 Balthier , known as <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) in the original Japanese language version , is a 22 @-@ year @-@ old Hume sky pirate and owner of the airship Strahl ( German for " streak " or " beam " [ of light ] ) . He and his Viera companion , Fran , prefer to remain outside politics , making their living off of whomever has the most for the taking . They are inadvertently drawn into the war , however , when they attempt to steal the Goddess 's Magicite — later revealed to be the Dusk Shard — from the Dalmascan Royal Palace . Vaan gets to the magicite first , and when Balthier and Fran confront him , the three of them are caught up in the chaos of a rebel assault on the palace . 
 Balthier is Archadian by birth ( as evidenced by his English accent , which is used by Archadian characters in the game ) , and eventually reveals he is Ffamran mied Bunansa ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ ブナンザ , <unk> Mido Bunanza ) , the son of Imperial magicite researcher Dr. Cid ( Cidolfus Demen Bunansa ) . Balthier received many privileges as Cid 's son , including being made an Imperial Judge , but eventually cut ties with his father when Cid became consumed by his experimentation with nethicite . He left the service of the empire , stole an Archadian airship , and took a new name . Balthier is now a renowned career criminal with a sizable bounty on his head , and must be careful to avoid the attention of both the law and the bounty hunters seeking the reward for his capture . He originally joins the resistance in the hope of reacquiring the Dusk Shard , but when he learns it is actually a piece of nethicite , he sees too much of his father 's obsession in his own quest and decides to abandon the search . After the party defeats Dr. Cid at the Pharos , Balthier makes peace with his father and helps the group to destroy the Sky Fortress Bahamut as penance for Cid 's deeds . 
 Balthier says that he is be the " leading man " of the story many times throughout the game , and insists that this makes him invincible , since the hero always emerges in one piece . He and Fran are feared dead after they go down with the Sky Fortress Bahamut , but later reappear to retrieve the Strahl from Vaan and Penelo and leave a note for Ashe . 
 Both he and Fran intend on finding the Cache of Glabados , which is resolved in Revenant Wings when it turned out to be tied to Eternal . Balthier was at first intent to take Lemures ' treasure , the Auracite , but knew the truth behind it and attempted to destroy the Auralith , eventually rejoining Vaan 's group to fight the Judge of Wings , letting Vaan be the " leading man " while he himself leaves the limelight . Balthier was voiced by Gideon Emery in English and by Hiroaki Hirata in Japanese . He made a crossover appearance in Final Fantasy Tactics : The War of the Lions . He also appears in Itadaki Street Portable . 
 = = = Fran = = = 
 Fran ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a Viera warrior , mechanic to the Strahl , and Balthier 's copilot . Like all Viera , she is exceptionally sensitive to the magical Mist that permeates Ivalice , and is affected by it on three separate occasions : in the Tomb of Raithwall , when Judge Ghis heats the Dawn Shard in his airship 's engine , and when she is in the presence of the Sun @-@ Cryst . When the party reaches Giruvegan , she can detect the Mist nearby has cooled and is less intense . She is the oldest of all the characters , Viera being very long @-@ lived , but still appears youthful . 
 Fran once lived with her sisters Jote and Mjrn in <unk> Village , the secluded Viera settlement in Golmore Jungle , but became restless and desired to see the outside world . This was a major source of conflict between her and the other viera , especially her elder sister Jote , who served as the village matriarch . Fran argued that although all Viera begin their lives in the forest , they are not necessarily bound to remain there to the end . When the party encounters an impassable Viera barrier on the path through Golmore , Fran is forced to return to the village and ask for help . She learns from Jote that their youngest sister Mjrn has run off to the nearby magicite mines . When Fran finds her and brings her back , Mjrn reveals she wishes to leave Golmore , but Fran advises her against doing so , relating how her own independence has cost her her family and the ability to commune with the Wood . Fran accepts that she is now part of the Hume world , and asks for a confirmation from Jote that the Wood accepts her before she leaves . In Revenant Wings , Balthier and Fran are searching for the Cache of Glabados . Fran was voiced by Nicole <unk> in English and by Rika Fukami in Japanese . She also appears in Itadaki Street Portable . 
 = = = Larsa Solidor = = = 
 Larsa <unk> Solidor ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is a 12 @-@ year @-@ old Hume , the fourth and youngest son of Emperor Gramis of Archadia , and brother of Vayne . He is by far and quite obviously the Emperor 's favorite , and Gramis works tirelessly to ensure that Larsa remains pure and free from the stain of politics and war . Though only twelve years old , Larsa is idealistic and believes that the strife within Ivalice can be quelled without war . Larsa possesses a great deal of respect for House Solidor and the men of his family , especially his older brother . The Senate , however , fears Vayne 's growing power and the perceived threat to their own , and thus plot from the beginning of the game to place Larsa on the throne with the hopes of easily manipulating him from behind the scenes . 
 During the course of the game , however , Larsa proves himself to be more capable than the Senate believes . He travels with Vaan and company under the alias " Lamont " during their trip to the <unk> Mines to rescue Penelo . However , his knowledge of nethicite exposes him . Larsa helps Vaan and company escape from the Leviathan and later joins the party again at <unk> , urging Ashe to use her influence on the Resistance to prevent an aggravation between the warring countries . He leaves the party at Mt . Bur @-@ Omisace , after learning from Al @-@ Cid Margrace that his father had been murdered , attempting to reason with Vayne . However , seeing Vayne wouldn 't listen to reason , Larsa aided Vaan and company in battling Vayne . After his brother is defeated , Larsa takes his place in the Archadian throne and settles into peace agreements with Basch as his protector . In Revenant Wings , Larsa journeys to the Dalmascan <unk> with Basch , joining the Galbana 's crew with intent to stop the Judge of Wings who is creating Anti @-@ Archadian propaganda with her actions . Larsa was voiced by Johnny McKeown in English and by Yuka Imai in Japanese . 
 = = = Vossler Azelas = = = 
 Vossler York Azelas ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , a 38 @-@ year @-@ old Hume , is a former Dalmascan Knight and a close colleague of Basch . Vossler fought alongside Basch , during the counter @-@ attack at Nalbina Fortress . Like Reks , he too was tricked into thinking Basch was responsible for killing King Raminas . After the battle , he fled underground , and joined the Resistance , alongside Princess Ashe . For the next two years , he protected the Princess , as well as trying to restore their lost Kingdom . During the events of Final Fantasy XII , he reunites with Basch , after the captain escaped Nalbina Dungeon with Vaan . Skeptical of the traitor , Vossler eventually learns to trust his friend once again . They meet up on the Leviathan , when they are on their way to rescue Ashe . Vossler dons an Archadian judge armor to fool the guards and enable them to rescue the Princess , and escape to Bhujerba where they plan to keep the Princess safe . 
 However , the Princess decides to take matters in her own hands and travel to the Tomb of Raithwall to obtain the treasure of the Dynast @-@ King . Vossler catches up , after being left behind , at the <unk> @-@ Yensa <unk> , while on their way to the Tomb . He offers to protect Princess Ashe once again , despite objecting to Balthier and Fran 's invading the royal tomb . However , once the party gets the treasure , the Dawn Shard , from the tomb , they are taken aboard the Leviathan once again . Here , Vossler reveals that he , embittered by their " profitless battle " , has made a deal with the Archadian Empire so that Dalmasca 's sovereignty could be restored . After he was defeated he tells Basch that it 's up to him to protect the Princess now . As Ashe and the others escape in an airship , the nethicite explosion from the Leviathan annihilates the fleet , Vossler is presumably alive because the Shiva was seen able to escape the explosion , albeit badly damaged . Vossler was voiced by Nolan North in English and by Masaki <unk> in Japanese . 
 = = = Reddas = = = 
 Reddas ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a 33 @-@ year @-@ old Hume sky pirate from Balfonheim . In truth , he was originally the missing Judge Magister Foris <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) of Archadia . In the war with Nabradia , he was responsible for the <unk> Shard destroying the kingdom under orders from Cid without being told what the effect would be . Filled with guilt , he abandoned his post and took on the name " Reddas " , arriving in Balfonheim where he cleaned up the town and became a patron to pirates . He was eventually approached by Ondore who asked that he retrieve deifacted nethicite , the shards of the Sun @-@ Cryst , from Doctor Cid . Later , he accompanied Ashe to the Pharos at <unk> to find the Sun @-@ Cryst . When Cid activated the Sun @-@ Cryst , Reddas sacrificed himself by using the Sword of Kings to destroy the crystal , unleashing an explosion which vaporized him and most of the upper Pharos . Reddas was voiced by Phil LaMarr in English and by Takayuki <unk> in Japanese . 
 = = Major characters = = 
 = = = Vayne Solidor = = = 
 Vayne <unk> Solidor ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> , Vein <unk> <unk> ) is the third son of Emperor Gramis and Larsa 's older brother , as well as the main antagonist of Final Fantasy XII . He is the 27 @-@ year @-@ old Hume Consul of the Archadian @-@ occupied Dalmasca , Commandant of the Archadian Empire 's Western Armada and a member of House Solidor , whose members had led the Empire for four generations . This in effect makes him a " Prince " , though as he claims the democratic nature of the Empire makes him no more eligible for the throne than anyone . 
 However , while he cares for the welfare of the people and of his family , Vayne is willing to use any means necessary to maintain order and retain power . He ensures the complete subjugation of Nabradia and Dalmasca and <unk> their royal families in order to acquire their deifacted nethicite . He confronts Dalmasca 's resistance movement with absolute ruthlessness , accepting no surrender . He even goes so far as to murder his own ailing father and frame the Imperial senators , to put an end to their scheming against himself and Larsa , and to level cities in <unk> testing experiments . Vayne 's ultimate goal is to free humanity from the control of the Occurians , a race of god @-@ like beings that have for centuries secretly meddled with the course of human history . 
 During the battle over Rabanastre at the end of the game , Vayne commands the Sky Fortress Bahamut , and when confronted by the team , uses the nethicite to become " Vayne Novus " before being mortally wounded by Vaan . Venat , however , awards Vayne for helping it by giving him the power of an Occurian , causing Vayne to become the monstrous " Undying " and grafting pieces of the Bahamut 's superstructure onto his body . In the ensuing battle , Vayne is finally killed by Vaan . Vayne is voiced in English by Elijah Alexander and by Nobuo <unk> in Japanese . 
 = = = Gabranth = = = 
 Gabranth ( <unk> , <unk> ) , also known as Noah fon Ronsenburg ( <unk> ・ フォン ・ <unk> , Noa fon <unk> ) , is a 36 @-@ year @-@ old Hume Judge Magister of Archadia , as well as the secondary antagonist of Final Fantasy XII . He is Basch 's twin brother , and in the introduction to the game is responsible for the deaths of Reks and King Raminas , which are blamed on Basch . After the fall of Landis years prior to the start of the game , Basch left for Dalmasca , leaving behind Noah and their mother , who was suffering from an illness at the time . Noah , however , remained with their mother and moved with her to her home country of Archadia , where he took on his mother 's surname of Gabranth . After his mother died of her illness , Gabranth began to hate Basch for abandoning his homeland and family . <unk> by Emperor Gramis , Gabranth joined the Archadian Judges with the Emperor 's backing and rose to become a Judge Magister , the position that he holds at the beginning of the game . 
 During the game , at the Emperor 's behest , he acts as an informant on Vayne and is selected as Larsa 's protector . Gabranth loathes himself for the framing of his brother and the horrible tasks Vayne and the Empire have commanded him to do , such as killing <unk> to prove his loyalty to Vayne after his rise to power . He accompanies Bergan and <unk> to Mt . Bur @-@ Omisace where Larsa agrees to return with him , to avoid any trouble . Gabranth later was sent to Pharos to " test " Ashe if she would take revenge , attacking the group in rage when they refused to exact vengeance for the wrongs against them as he had ; he leaves after his defeat and the arrival of Cid . At the end of the game , after a discussion and fight with Basch , Gabranth decides to make up for his wrongs by protecting Larsa and helping the Resistance kill Vayne . He is fatally injured by Vayne in the process . He dies after the battle , requesting that Basch replace him as the protector of the new Emperor Larsa . Basch agrees , and is later shown serving as " Gabranth " and Larsa 's protector . Gabranth is one of the villains and the sole character representing Final Fantasy XII in Dissidia : Final Fantasy , where , as in Final Fantasy XII , he is voiced by Akio Ōtsuka in the Japanese version ; in the English version of XII he was voiced by Michael E. Rodgers , but in Dissidia he is instead voiced by Keith Ferguson , the voice for his twin brother Basch in XII . 
 = = = Cid Bunansa = = = 
 Cidolfus Demen Bunansa ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ ブナンザ , <unk> <unk> Bunanza ) , also referred to as Doctor Cid , is a fifty @-@ eight @-@ year @-@ old Archadian Hume scientist who is the head of the <unk> Laboratory in <unk> . He is one of the main antagonists of Final Fantasy XII . He is the man responsible for discovering the technology behind airships , as well as for the creation of manufacted , or artificial , nethicite . Cid is revealed during the game to be Balthier 's father , whose ambitions drove Balthier away ; this incident was the result of Cid going to Giruvegan to study more of the nethicite , only to return as a maniacal shell of his former self . During the game , Cid seems to talk to himself multiple times , but it is revealed that he is instead talking to Venat , a renegade Occurian ; Occurians have the ability to make themselves seen and heard only by whom they wish . Under Venat 's guidance , Cid helped Vayne encourage the war to gain shards of the Sun @-@ Cryst in order to help him create manufacted nethicite . 
 Cid is confronted by Vaan , Balthier and company at the <unk> Laboratory , which results in a fight that Cid loses . Cid survives the encounter and flees . Cid goes to the Pharos lighthouse to invoke the Sun @-@ Cryst 's full power , revealing himself to the main characters there once Gabranth is defeated . Enraged , Gabranth tries to attack Cid , who teleports out of the way as Venat throws the judge against a wall . Cid fights Vaan , Balthier and the rest of the party once again , and again loses . Cid dies after the battle , dissolving into energy absorbed by the Sun @-@ Cryst before it is destroyed and fully activates his final airship , the Bahamut . A character named Cid appears or is mentioned in every main Final Fantasy . He made his debut appearance in Final Fantasy II , though this appearance is the first Final Fantasy game to feature a Cid character as a villain . Cid was voiced by John Rafter Lee in English and by Chikao Ōtsuka in Japanese . 
 = = = Halim Ondore IV = = = 
 Halim Ondore IV ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is the Hume Marquis of the Skycity of Bhujerba , the most recent in a line of nobles that ruled Bhujerba for generations . Ondore is also Ashe 's uncle , serving as the preacher to her wedding and Rasler 's funeral soon after . At the opening of the game , Ondore appears to have yielded to Archadian rule , though he secretly supports the resistance movement . He is being blackmailed by Vayne who forced him to announce the execution of Basch and the death of Ashe in an attempt to keep the resistance from trusting him or accepting his support . During the game , once the Archadian 8th Fleet was destroyed , Ondore openly announces his support of the rebel forces and enlists Rozarria 's aid for a large assault against the Archadian Empire . Ondore is the narrator character in the story , as his memoirs are read during certain points of the game . He is voiced by Tom Kane in English and by Akio Nojima in Japanese . 
 = = = Al @-@ Cid Margrace = = = 
 Al @-@ Cid Margrace ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a member of the Rozarrian ruling family , the House of Margrace . Al @-@ Cid is seen during the game attempting to keep Rozarria and Archadia from fighting a costly war , as well as informing the main characters of political developments in Archadia . Although he succeeds in keeping the two countries from fighting for most of the game , Rozarria does join the resistance in a strike against Vayne at the end of the game . Al @-@ Cid made an appearance in Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift when Vaan requests his aid . After Vaan and Penelo join Luso 's party , Al @-@ Cid requests membership as well to lie low from his duties as royalty . Al @-@ Cid was initially given only a small role in the original storyline , but Norio Wakamoto , his Japanese voice actor , had " voiced Al @-@ Cid in such an interesting way " that the developers decided to expand on Al @-@ Cid 's role . He was voiced in English by David Rasner . 
 = = = Occuria = = = 
 The Occuria ( <unk> , <unk> ) are a small group of immortal beings , often called ( by both themselves and others ) the Undying ( <unk> , <unk> Kami ) . Referred to as gods by some , but unknown to the major religions in Ivalice , the Occuria race played a vital role in the history of Ivalice such as the creation of the Espers and granting power to King Raithwall to conquer the countries of Ivalice with the Dawn , Dusk , and <unk> shards of nethicite . The Occuria were first designed to be a race of <unk> , a type of enemy monster in the game . Earlier concept artwork portrayed these " <unk> " as wearing luxurious robes and turbans and lounging in a bar and smoking pipes . The design was changed during development and the <unk> was placed as a special monster , retaining the initial design ; the Occuria were then given a different design of glowing eyes in a mist @-@ like form . 
 The Occurian with the greatest influence on the story is Venat ( <unk> , <unk> ) , one of the primary antagonists of Final Fantasy XII , who rebels against the other Occuria and tries to give the people of Ivalice the power to not be manipulated by the Occuria ; for its defiance it is labeled a heretic . Venat taught Doctor Cid the secrets of nethicite , allowing them to manufacture it themselves ; it also convinced Cid and Vayne to seek out the nethicite shards originally cut from the Sun @-@ Cryst by Raithwall . In the game , Venat is seen talking to Cid both while visible and not . Venat 's ambitions were ultimately fulfilled when Ashe resisted the Occurians ' plans and Reddas destroyed the Sun @-@ Cryst , later sacrificing itself to give Vayne his power while proclaiming they will die together , as it has accomplished everything it set out to do . It was voiced by Anita Carey and Narumi <unk> for the English and Japanese versions of the game . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 In conjunction with the game 's release , Square Enix has produced a lineup of merchandise including jewelry , action figures and other goods related to the characters . Most of the merchandise are released in Japan . The items produced include Vaan 's necklace , Ashe 's wedding ring , a Judge Magister @-@ themed lighter and a Magister @-@ themed card case . A plush doll of Nono and four full @-@ colored action figures of Ashe , Balthier , Vaan , and Judge Gabranth have also been displayed in the Square Enix Japan merchandise page , along with a full @-@ sized replica of Judge Gabranth 's helmet from the game , a statue of Gabranth , and a statue of Balthier and Fran riding a flying machine through a collapsing building . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The characters in Final Fantasy XII have received mixed opinions from reviewers . Praises were given by Calvin Smith of PSX Extreme , who stated that the characters are " classy and well thought out , an ensemble cast whose players rarely descend into needless melodrama or writhing angst " . He also said that the supposed main character 's role was changed to become an observer , " a different outlook than in the previous installments " . 1UP.com 's Andrew Pfister applauded the character dialogues as being " intelligent , subtle and sharp " ; the relationships between characters were lauded as well . Balthier and Fran 's relationship was compared to Han Solo and Chewbacca of Star Wars , being " far more interesting than anything Square 's put out in the modern FF era " . IGN editor Jeremy Dunham praised the game and its writers for " evolving the personalities , histories , and motives of characters you already thought you knew , but didn 't " and for " <unk> [ ing ] on the opportunity to tell you about them " . He also noted the visual and auditory detail of the characters , saying that " each and every model , down to the most obscure NPC , has an immense level of attention paid to them -- from their clothes and facial expressions , to their walking and idle animations " and that the voice acting was " top @-@ notch " . GameSpy 's Justin Speer also praised the characters , saying that it was hard to " resist being charmed by a few of the characters " and that they " interact with each other in dramatic and interesting ways " . The voice acting was praised by Keith Schleicher of Gaming Trend , who said that the characters voices all matched their appearances well . 
 Other reviewers have criticized the character development . Shane Bettenhausen of Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine found the game 's cast " a tad mundane " compared to characters from previous installments . Moreover , they found both Vaan and Ashe uninteresting , making the story lack " the emotional punch " . They also criticized the voice acting as uneven and rife with mispronunciations . GameTrailers also criticized the characters , saying that many of the game 's " other characters " are " more interesting than the ones you ’ ll actually control " , and that the " characters ’ motivations are thin to non @-@ existent " . RPGFan editor Stephen Harris , while praising the quality of most of the voice acting and especially Balthier 's , criticized Fran 's as " monotone and subdued " with an " indecipherable accent " . Cortney Stone of RPGamer found fault with the voice acting recording , describing it as " substandard " and said that " it sounds as though a few of the actors were too close to the microphones or the equipment was faulty " , though she called " the voice acting itself quite good , with characters of different nations having distinctive accents . " 
 = Do You ... ( Miguel song ) = 
 " Do You ... " is a song by American R & B recording artist Miguel . It was released on September 18 , 2012 , as the second single from his 2012 album Kaleidoscope Dream . It was written by producer Jerry Duplessis , co @-@ producer Arden Altino , guitarist Paul Pesco , and Miguel , who recorded the song at Platinum Sound Recording Studios in New York City . " Do You ... " is a love song built around gentle guitar strumming and a playful rhythm section . Its lyrics pose flirtatious , rhetorical questions and feature both metaphorical and literal references to narcotics . 
 As a single , " Do You ... " charted for eight weeks on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , peaking at number 32 . It was well received by music critics , who praised Miguel 's playful delivery and cited it as a highlight on Kaleidoscope Dream . A music video for the song was filmed in Las Vegas and showed Miguel and his girlfriend <unk> Mandi on an intimate date . He performed " Do You ... " on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon and incorporated elements of Bob Marley 's " Stir It Up " into the song in his other concert performances . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Do You ... " was written by Miguel , producer Jerry Duplessis , co @-@ producer Arden Altino , and guitarist Paul Pesco . It was recorded at Platinum Sound Recording Studios in New York City and mixed by engineer Manny Marroquin at Larrabee Studios in North Hollywood . The song features slap bass by Duplessis . 
 " Do You ... " is built around gentle guitar strumming and a playful rhythm section , featuring a walking bassline and double @-@ time drums . Chris Kelly of Fact categorizes it as an atmospheric pop rock song , while Mesfin Fekadu of the Associated Press calls it " a mellow R & B outtake " . The song begins with an echoed haze and acoustic guitar , with Miguel asking , " Have you ever felt alone ? " It is then followed by a euphoric vocal reverb that leads to blasting drums , and Miguel asks " Do you like drugs " over a smooth guitar riff . 
 A wooing love song , " Do You ... " poses flirtatious , rhetorical questions such as " Do you like hugs ? " and " Do you like love ? " . Miguel <unk> with three syllables at the end of each question , before he replies with " Well , me too . " He evokes a romantic relationship with simple , imagistic lyrics : " What about matinee movies , pointless secrets / Midnight summer swims , private beaches / Rock , paper , scissors . Wait ! Best out of three . " 
 The song references drugs both metaphorically and literally , and innocently delivers a transgressive message through the use of simile : " I 'm going to do you like drugs tonight " . Miguel said of the song 's lyrics , " I have this propensity to just come out and say things . That 's how I am in real life . If I wanna know something I just ask . Like , ' Hey , do you like drugs ? ' Because I do ! Sometimes ! ... MDMA … on occasion . " Alex Macpherson of The Guardian observes " faded psychedelia " and " promises of narcotic trysts " in the song 's lyrics . Pitchfork Media 's Carrie Battan said that " Do You ... " is " not so much about being in love as about a shared love of vices . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Do You ... " was originally featured on Kaleidoscope Dream : The Air Preview , which was released on September 11 , 2012 , as the second in a three @-@ part series of EPs released by Miguel to preview Kaleidoscope Dream . It was released as a digital single on September 18 by ByStorm Entertainment and RCA Records . In the week of November 3 , it debuted at number 49 on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . It spent eight weeks on the chart , peaking at number 32 in the week of January 26 , 2013 . It also charted for 19 weeks and reached number 24 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Airplay . On the R & B Songs chart , " Do You ... " spent 24 weeks and peaked at number 10 . 
 " Do You ... " was well received by critics . Evan Rytlewski from The A.V. Club said the song " spins the ostensibly sleazy pickup line ' Do you like drugs ? ' into an irresistibly sweet proposal , imagining lovely , perfectly wasted afternoons spent in a content daze . " Erin Thompson of Seattle Weekly called it a " fabulous song " and felt that " Miguel 's smooth , subtle swagger is so appealing that a line like ' I wanna do you like drugs tonight ' comes off as audacious instead of offensive . " Rob Tannenbaum of Rolling Stone quipped , " Just when you thought there were no new ways to say ' I love you ' " . 
 In MSN Music , Robert Christgau found the lyric " Do you like drugs ? " to be one of " the two most memorable lines " on Kaleidoscope Dream , while Kevin Ritchie of Now cited " Do You ... " as the album 's best song . Andrew Ryce from Pitchfork Media cited it as a " standout " on the album and commented that it " unfolds in an ethereal cloud of synth , voices streaming like angelic choirs before stumbling into a verse buoyed by its own euphoria . " The website 's Carrie Battan called " Do You ... " " one of Miguel 's best songs [ and ] also his <unk> " . However , Ken Capobianco of The Boston Globe felt that its " good hook ... gets washed away by effects " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 A music video for the song was released on October 3 , 2012 . It juxtaposes tableaus of the Great Basin Desert in Nevada with black @-@ and @-@ white shots of Miguel and his real @-@ life girlfriend , actress and model <unk> Mandi . Set in Las Vegas , the video shows them on a date , driving a 1967 Pontiac GTO convertible through the desert , " making out on a pool table , and taking a helicopter trip " . Miguel and Mandi become increasingly intimate as the night progresses in the video , which is " intercut with a sequence of Miguel performing on stage in a packed nightclub " . 
 On November 16 , Miguel performed the song as a musical guest on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon . He incorporated elements of Bob Marley 's 1973 reggae song " Stir It Up " into " Do You ... " when performing the song live at Oracle Arena in Oakland on November 23 , at Madison Square Garden in New York City on December 5 , and at Shepherds Bush Empire in London on January 14 , 2013 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from liner notes for Kaleidoscope Dream . 
 Arden " <unk> " Altino – co @-@ producer 
 Delbert Bowers – mixing assistant 
 Tyler Bunting – assistant engineer 
 Jerry " Wonda " Duplessis – producer 
 Chris Galland – mixing assistant 
 <unk> Hass – assistant engineer 
 Manny Marroquin – mixing 
 Miguel – co @-@ producer 
 Michel <unk> – additional drum programming 
 Paul Pesco – guitar 
 Lance Powell – assistant engineer 
 Serge " <unk> " Tsai – engineer 
 Kevin ' Kev @-@ O ' Wilson – assistant engineer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Mississippi Highway 473 = 
 Mississippi Highway 473 ( MS 473 ) is a short highway in central Mississippi . Its southern terminus is at the Hinds – Copiah county line . The route travels north to Terry , and turns west . MS 473 enters Terry , and ends at Interstate 55 ( I @-@ 55 ) and U.S. Route 51 ( US 51 ) . The route was designated in 1957 , from MS 27 to US 51 . MS 473 was removed from the state highway system in 1967 . It was restored into the system in 1995 , from the county line to I @-@ 55 / US 51 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 All of the route is a paved road , located inside Hinds County . MS 473 is not included as a part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of highways identified as being most important for the economy , mobility and defense of the nation . MS 473 is legally defined in Mississippi Code § 65 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 . In 2012 , Mississippi Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) calculated as many as 5 @,@ 300 vehicles traveling east of I @-@ 55 / US 51 , and as few as 1 @,@ 300 vehicles traveling north of the Hinds – Copiah county line . MS 473 is maintained by Mississippi Department of Transportation for four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , and Terry for 0 @.@ 95 miles ( 1 @.@ 53 km ) . 
 MS 473 starts at the Hinds – Copiah county and travels north . It passes nearby ponds and intersects various dirt roads . About one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) later , MS 473 intersects Moncure Road and continues north . At Bozeman Road , the route turns northeast , passing through a small forest . The road then turns north and passes over Vaughn Creek . MS 473 intersects Rosemary Road as it turned northwest , and soon travels west near Gaines Drive and Shady Oaks Road . The route enters Terry and crossed over a railroad , owned by Canadian National and Illinois Central . The route turns northwest , and enters downtown Terry . MS 473 leaves downtown Terry , and intersects a frontage road of I @-@ 55 . The route ends at I @-@ 55 at a diamond interchange , and the road continues west as Green Gable Road . 
 = = History = = 
 MS 473 was designated in 1957 , as a gravel road connecting from MS 27 to US 51 . The next year , the section in Hinds County was paved . By 1960 , MS 473 in Copiah County was transferred to local maintenance . Two years later , US 51 was realigned to I @-@ 55 , and MS 473 's northern terminus remained on old US 51 's alignment . MS 473 was temporarily removed from the state highway system in 1967 , and an interchange with I @-@ 55 / US 51 was built near Terry in the same year . In 1974 , the route 's old alignment in Copiah County became paved . By 1995 , MS 473 in Hinds County was restored in the state highway system , and was also extended to I @-@ 55 / US 51 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Church of St. Polyeuctus = 
 The Church of St. Polyeuctus ( Greek : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) was an ancient Byzantine church in Constantinople ( now Istanbul , Turkey ) built by the noblewoman Anicia Juliana and dedicated to Saint Polyeuctus . Intended as an assertion of Juliana 's own imperial lineage , it was a lavishly decorated building , and the largest church of the city before the construction of the Hagia Sophia . It introduced the large @-@ scale use of Sassanid Persian decorative elements , and may have inaugurated the new architectural type of domed basilica , perfected in the later Hagia Sophia . 
 Little is known of the church 's history after its construction . The building survived until the 11th century , after which it fell into decay , while several architectural elements were removed and reused in Constantinople and other cities . After being built over in the Ottoman period , the site of the church was rediscovered during excavations in the 1960s . The area , directly opposite the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality City Hall , is now a preserved archaeological site open to visitors , although the sculptures have been removed to the Istanbul Archaeological Museum . 
 = = History = = 
 The church was commissioned by the noblewoman Anicia Juliana , descendant of several Western emperors , and was constructed between 524 and 527 , during the reign of Justin I ( r . 518 – 527 ) . It was meant to replace an earlier church , built by Eudocia , wife of Theodosius II and Juliana 's great @-@ grandmother , to enshrine the relic skull of Saint Polyeuctus . The new church was thought to have been the largest in Constantinople before the building of the Hagia Sophia by Justin 's nephew and heir , Justinian I ( r . 527 – 565 ) . 
 In a laudatory 76 @-@ line epigram inscribed on the walls of the church and preserved in its entirety ( <unk> Graeca , <unk> ) , Juliana compares herself to past emperors Constantine I and Theodosius II as a monumental builder , and claims to have surpassed Solomon 's Temple , on whose proportions the new church was allegedly based . The building constituted thereby a direct challenge to the prestige and authority of the low @-@ born reigning dynasty , and it may have been one of the reasons for the massive scale of Justinian 's reconstruction of the Hagia Sophia a few years later . In light of this rivalry , it is perhaps no coincidence that Justinian too , when he beheld the completed Hagia Sophia , is said to have cried out : " Solomon , I have surpassed thee . " The importance of the Solomonic allusions is however questioned by some scholars , who see the church more as a statement of the imperial prestige of the Old Roman aristocracy , from which Juliana descended , and of Chalcedonian orthodoxy , which she had championed during the reign of the Monophysite emperor Anastasius I ( r . 491 – 518 ) . A further aspect of the antagonism with Justinian however is evidenced by a tale recorded by Gregory of Tours : shortly after his accession , Justinian called upon the aged Juliana to contribute a part of her large fortune to the state treasury . After stalling for time , she had her gold melted down and fashioned into plates , with which she adorned the interior of the roof of the newly built church of St. Polyeuctus , thus preserving it from the emperor 's avarice . 
 The church survived until the 11th century , when it was abandoned . Thereafter it was liberally plundered for sculptures and other architectural elements ( spolia ) by both the Byzantines and , after the sack of the city in 1204 , by the Crusaders . Several pieces from St. Polyeuctus were reused in the Monastery of Christ Pantokrator ( the modern <unk> Mosque ) , and various pieces such as capitals were spread to places as far as Venice , Barcelona and Vienna , including the so @-@ called <unk> <unk> ( " Pillars of Acre " ) in St Mark 's Basilica , Venice . 
 The site of the church , in the <unk> quarter ( the ancient <unk> ) , was gradually occupied by houses and a mosque in the Ottoman period . In 1940 , the area was leveled , and in 1960 , during construction of the intersection of the <unk> Caddesi and Atatürk <unk> roads , excavations began . Brick vaults and pieces of <unk> marble sculpture were discovered , among them fragments of the monumental epigram adorning the church . These fragments , in conjunction with references to the approximate location of church in Byzantine texts concerning the imperial processions on the Mese avenue , allowed a secure identification . The site was extensively excavated between 1964 and 1969 by archaeologists under the direction of Dr. <unk> <unk> from the Istanbul Archaeological Museum and Roy Michael Harrison of the Dumbarton Oaks Institute . The area , directly opposite the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality City Hall , is now a preserved archaeological site open to visitors , although the sculptures have been removed to the Istanbul Archaeological Museum . 
 = = Description = = 
 Despite its architectural prominence , very little is known of the church 's history and its precise architecture . Most of the information on the church 's original appearance is derived from the epigram in honour of Juliana and her family , which was inscribed in pieces in various parts of the church . The epigram claims that the church was laid out as a replica of the ancient Jewish Temple with the precise proportions given in the Bible for the Temple of Solomon , and using the royal cubit as a unit of measure , as in its model . Richard Martin Harrison , the site 's chief excavator , has reconstructed the church as a roughly square basilica , ca . 52 m long on the sides , with a central nave and two side aisles , fronted by a narthex and preceded by a large atrium of 26 m length . To the north of the atrium , remains of another building have been identified as either the church 's baptistery or Juliana 's palace . An oval substructure in the building 's center indicates the position of the ambon , while strong foundations throughout the building indicate , according to Harrison , the presence of a dome , bringing the estimated height of the building to over 30 m . The area of the altar was not sufficiently excavated , and its shape remains unknown . The possible presence of a dome , although not universally accepted , is of major importance , since it would mean that it was St. Polyeuctus , and not Justinian 's churches ( Saints Sergius and Bacchus and the Hagia Sophia ) , which first combined the traditional basilica with a dome . From the epigram , we know that the interior featured two storeys with colonnades and galleries . Based on the epigram and the substructures , Harrison also posited the existence of a pair of two @-@ storey <unk> , composed of three niches with a pier in between , on the northern and southern sides of the <unk> . The spaces around the domed western bay would have been covered with barrel or cross @-@ vaults . 
 The interior decoration was extraordinarily rich . The walls were decorated with marble , the roof was gilded , while the narthex featured a depiction of the baptism of Constantine the Great . Fragments of ivory , amethyst , gold and colored glass , originally inlaid in the marble sculptures , have also been found at the site , as well as fragments of mosaics . The deliberate evocation of the Solomonic Temple was further reinforced by the preponderance of motifs such as palm trees , pomegranates and lilies in the church 's decoration . A notable characteristic , which has not been attested before in Constantinopolitan art and architecture , is the extensive use of Sassanid Persian decorative motifs such as friezes of running palmette and pomegranate leaves or symmetric geometric and vegetal patterns . Persian motifs became increasingly popular in the 6th century , and were also used in the decoration of the Hagia Sophia . Another exceptional find are ten relief plaques bearing the images of Christ , the Virgin Mary and the Apostles ; such images are very rare due to the destruction of human representations in the Iconoclasm of the 8th and 9th centuries . 
 One of the largest decorative marble remains of the site is the niche @-@ head pieces . These massive pieces of marble consist of a concave segment with a large frontal peacock carved in the center , tail fanned out proud . The epigram runs along the semicircle of the carving . Surrounding the peacocks are the spandrels filled with grape vines and leaves . The inscription 's letters are raised 11 cm high , and surrounded by realistic grape vines . The detail involved in every individual leaf is remarkable . Each leaf has visible veins , some edges of the leaves are frayed and torn , and the artist even took the time to layer the design , pulling some leaves forward , and carving others in the background , giving the sense of depth . Martin Harrison notes that this workmanship is all done by the artist ’ s eye , and with no use of a constant measure , as indicated by the marks made by the chisel , minute irregularities , and slight bends in the lattice work . This area was originally painted in vibrant colors . The primary colors used were blues , greens , and some purples . These colors are difficult to find or make and show Anicia Juliana ’ s power in the decorative aspect of the structure . The background to vines and letters was a bright blue . The peacocks — associated with the goddess Hera and royalty in Antiquity and symbolizing renewal and rebirth for Christians — adorned with carved necklaces , were painted in blues , greens and gold . Due to the empty cavities in the eyes of the remaining bird head pieces , green glass was used for the pupils . They also held chains to suspend something . Connor suggests due to their location , a lamp is a believable use for the chains in their beaks . 
 = Rip Van Winkle ( 1910 film ) = 
 Rip Van Winkle is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film is an adaptation of Washington Irving 's story of Rip Van Winkle with some differences in the plot . The film focuses on the title character whose idle life is made difficult by his cantankerous wife . Winkle heads into the mountains and encounters spirits of Henry Hudson 's men . Upon partaking of their alcohol , Winkle falls into a slumber for twenty years . He returns home and has difficulty proving his identity and must save his property from an unlawful accusation by his rival . After he proves his identity , he is reunited with his family . The title character was played by Frank H. Crane , but the production credits are largely unknown . The film was released on December 6 , 1910 , and met with positive reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from December 10 , 1910 . It states : " Rip Van Winkle , although a loving father to his little girl <unk> and a hail @-@ fellow @-@ well @-@ met with all of his fellow townsmen , is being constantly scolded by his wife for leading an idle and profitless existence . Rip is also fond of the bottle and spends a greater part of his time and money at the village tavern . Catching him entering the house late one night after a day 's carousing , his wife Gretchen becomes thoroughly angry with him and drives him from the house . In the face of a terrible storm with only his dog Schneider and his faithful rifle to protect him , Rip wanders toward the mountains . Here he comes across a band of gnomes who are supposed to be the spirits of Heinrich Hudson [ sic ] and his merry men who disappeared near the Catskill Mountains hundreds of years before , and had never been heard of since . The gnomes give Rip some magic schnapps to drink , and under its influence he goes to sleep for 20 years . When he awakes , he is an old man and in ragged clothes . His dog is dead , and his rifle has rusted away . He makes his way as best he can back to the village , and his own home . But there no one knows him . He finds his wife married to another man , his daughter grown to womanhood , and most of his old friends dead and gone . Rip , however , finally manages to prove his identity , and also to lay claim to his property , which has greatly increased in value during his sleep , in which he is just in time to save from being unlawfully confiscated by his old @-@ time enemy . Happily reunited to his family , Rip looks forward to his declining years with a spirit born of peace and solace . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Frank H. Crane as Rip Van Winkle 
 Marie Eline 
 = = Production = = 
 The production and an adaptation of Washington Irving 's story of Rip Van Winkle . The stage adaptation was well @-@ known and the adaptation would be compared to Joseph Jefferson 's portrayal on the stage . The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The adaptation differs from the original in some ways , including that Winkle 's cantankerous wife has remarried instead of died . 
 The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Sometimes the directional credit is given to Theodore Marston . The apparent origin of this error is from the American Film @-@ Index 1908 – 1915 . Film historian Q. David Bowers consulted one of the co @-@ authors of the book , Gunnar Lundquist , and confirmed that the credit of Marston was in error . Theodore Marston worked with Pathé , Kinemacolor , Vitagraph and other companies , but there is no record of Marston working with Thanhouser . This error has persisted in several works including The Complete Index to Literary Sources in Film . The same work also credits Alphonse Ethier with a role , but this is not cited by Bowers . 
 The only known cast credits are for Frank H. Crane and Marie Eline . The other cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list included G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on December 6 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release , advertising theaters for the Thanhouser film include those in Pennsylvania , South Dakota , Kansas , and Indiana . 
 The film received positive reviews in trade publications . The Moving Picture World review said . " Probably the story of Rip Van Winkle as told by Washington Irving will always be a delight . Surely the Rip Van Winkle , as depicted by the late Joseph Jefferson , will linger long in the memory of those fortunate enough to have seen it . Unquestionably , however , the third in the list of delights is this film from Thanhouser which tells the story over again in much the same way that Jefferson told it . The Rip of Jefferson and the Rip of Irving are two different versions , though both do substantially the same things . ... It is a good piece of work from every standpoint . The actors have entered into the spirit of the story and have depicted it with close adherence to the facts as they are related in the original . The stage manager understood what was required to make the background appear natural , while the photographer handled the camera with full knowledge of the requirements . " The New York Dramatic Mirror reviewer also agreed and commended the film by stating , " The Thanhouser Company has done very well with this old legend , paying particular attention to details . ... The acting is exceptionally good for a story representing that era of time , and the adaption is very clear to the spectator . " 
 = Willy Loman = 
 William " Willy " Loman is a fictional character and the protagonist of Arthur Miller 's Death of a Salesman , which debuted on Broadway with Lee J. Cobb playing Loman at the <unk> Theatre on February 10 , 1949 . Loman is a 63 @-@ year @-@ old travelling salesman from Brooklyn with 34 years of experience with the same company who endures a pay cut and a firing during the play . He has difficulty dealing with his current state and has created a fantasy world to cope with his situation . This does not keep him from multiple suicide attempts . 
 = = Description = = 
 Willy Loman is an aging suburban Brooklyn , New York salesman whose less than spectacular career is on the decline . He has lost the youthful verve of his past and his camaraderie has faded away . His business knowledge is still at its peak , but without his youth and heartiness , he is no longer able to leverage his personality to get by . Time has caught up with him . The play presents Loman 's struggle " to maintain a foothold in the upward @-@ striving American middle class " while combating his own self @-@ doubt that plagues him in reminders from the past that his life rests on <unk> ground . According to Charles Isherwood , Loman is the play 's dominant character because " It is his losing battle against spiritual and economic defeat that provides the narrative spine of the play . " Loman is a symbolic representation of millions of white collar employees who outlived their corporate usefulness . He lives in a world with delusions about how popular , famous , influential and successful he is and about the prospects for the success of his sons . His wife not only allows these delusions , but also she buys into them , somewhat . His misplaced values of importance and popularity were shaken to the core by his declining ability to leverage those self @-@ perceived traits successfully as he grew older . 
 Loman 's world crumbles around him during the play . According to Associated Press correspondent Cynthia Lowry 's review of the drama , " we watched an aging , defeated traveling salesman move inexorably toward self @-@ destruction , clinging desperately to fantasies " . The play begins with the 63 @-@ year @-@ old Loman dealing with a recent paycut after 34 years on the job at a time when he is having difficulty meeting his financial responsibilities . In the second act , he deals with being fired . The firing was at the hands of the son of the person who had hired him 36 years prior . In the play , Loman reveals his past in scenes from his memory that the audience is challenged to judge for accuracy . Loman had succeeded in large part due to popularity , which is a value he attempted to instill in his sons . 
 Although the play was performed earlier in Philadelphia , the February 10 , 1949 Broadway opening is considered the debut and on February 11 , Brooks Atkinson of The New York Times said the following : " Mr. Cobb 's tragic portrait of the defeated salesman is acting of the first rank . Although it is familiar and folksy in the details , it has something of the grand manner in the big size and the deep tone . " While reviewing a touring production of Death of a Salesman , Los Angeles Times critic Laurie Winer described Loman as " ... the saddest , self @-@ <unk> soul in American drama , a character who will continue to haunt the landscape as long as there are fathers and sons . " United Press International critic Rick Du Brow described Loman as " ... the aging failure of a salesman who has wasted his life by living in a world of delusions and shallow values ... " Willie is described as a " suffering . . <unk> @-@ aged man at the end of his emotional rope " . Lowry described the production as depicting " the end of a man when his dream world is shattered " . 
 Creator Arthur Miller described the role as one for a large character in a small physical body and noted he had difficulty finding the right actor at first . Loman 's Brooklyn accent is part of the challenge of the role . In 1950 , Miller described Loman as a man who upon hearing society 's " thundering command to succeed " found himself staring at a failure in the mirror . The Amazon.com editorial review by Ali Davis states that " Willy Loman is a salesman desperately hustling for a living even as he slides into old age . " <unk> Corporation 's Matthew Tobey describes him as an everyman who has to cope with the sudden realization that he is over the hill and does so with a fantasy world in which he remains important . The Huffington Post 's theater critic , Wilborn Hampton , describes the role as " one of the most complicated characters in dramatic literature " , making it a draw for the great actors . 
 The play is a statement on the idea that a man is valued by his position in life . Loman never matures enough to realize that being popular without any substance or skill is meaningless in the end and Miller uses Loman to make his point against the anti @-@ <unk> . In the end , Loman gives way to the belief that his inability to be a successful man and father is condemning . 
 = = Family = = 
 The marriage is described as " symbolic " . Linda is a devoted wife who understands that he has issues . Linda has emotional scenes as she attempts to manage Willy 's emotional collapse and deals with her two adult sons whose lives have been wasted following the easy road of pursuing popularity as guided by their father . She breaks down as she confides in her sons about Willy 's disintegration and reveals his attempts at suicide . 
 Willy has always made the point to his sons that being popular and having contacts is the key to success . His older son , Biff , causes " old hopes and boiling resentments " to return by visiting home . Willy is loved by Biff , who nonetheless does not get along with him . Their relationship is the emotional lynchpin of the production . “ In fact , Willy 's logical mind becomes blind … ” Biff attempts to help his father see what has become of him . In the end , Biff decides that he must force his father to see the truth rather than his fanciful images , for his own good , regardless of its toll on his father . This is the emotional climax of the show as he bares his soul saying " Pop , I 'm nothing ! I 'm nothing , Pop ! Can 't you understand that ? There 's no spite in it any more . I 'm just what I am , that 's all . " At Willy 's funeral , Biff states that " He had the wrong dreams ... He never knew who he was . " . 
 Although his younger son , Happy , is self @-@ absorbed , he attempts to humor Willy . He views his Uncle Ben ( his father 's brother ) as his role model rather than his father because Ben went out to the world as a teenager and was rich by the age of 21 . He repeatedly reminds Willy of this . In the end , he is determined to not only adopt his father 's dream ( even when it killed him ) , but to surpass him as he states " It 's the only dream you can have -- to come out No. 1 man . " 
 = = Critical history = = 
 Loman is the central role of the only play that has won a Tony Award for Best Broadway Production four times ( Best Play , Best Revival and twice Best Revival of a Play ) . 
 Each of the four Broadway revivals has brought critical acclaim to the role . In addition , the role has been reprised in film with six English @-@ language film portrayals of this character , at least four of which received critical acclaim . Three actors have won Golden Globe Awards playing the role , two have won Drama Desk Awards playing the role and actors playing the role have also won a Primetime Emmy Award , a Screen Actors Guild Award and a Tony Award . The role has been nominated for an Oscar Award , a BAFTA Award , a Grammy Award , three Tony Awards and three Primetime Emmy Awards . At least two West End productions have earned Olivier Awards for this role . 
 Although Cobb did not earn critical acclaim when he originated the role , he did when he reprised it for television . Other actors who have played the role on Broadway or in English @-@ language cinema have almost all received critical acclaim . On Broadway , the role was reprised by George C. Scott ( 1975 , Tony nomination ) , Dustin Hoffman ( 1984 , Drama Desk award ) , Brian Dennehy ( 1999 , Tony and Drama Desk awards ) , and Philip Seymour Hoffman ( 2012 , Tony nomination ) . In cinema , the role has also been highly acclaimed : Fredric March ( 1951 , Golden Globe award and both Oscar and BAFTA nominations ) , Cobb ( 1966 , Emmy and Grammy nominations ) , Rod Steiger ( 1966 ) , D. Hoffman ( 1985 , Golden Globe and Emmy awards ) , Warren Mitchell ( 1996 ) and Dennehy ( 2000 , Golden Globe and SAG awards and Emmy nomination ) . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Fredric March won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama at the 9th Golden Globe Awards and was nominated for Academy Award for Best Actor at the 24th Academy Awards and BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role ( Foreign ) at the 6th British Academy Film Awards . 
 Brian Dennehy won Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play at the 53rd Tony Awards in 1999 , while Philip Seymour Hoffman was nominated for the same award at the 66th Tony Awards in 2012 and George C. Scott was nominated for the award at the 30th Tony Awards in 1976 . 
 Dennehy also won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Miniseries or Television Film at the 58th Golden Globe Awards in 2001 and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie at the 7th Screen Actors Guild Awards in 2001 and was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie at the 52nd Primetime Emmy Awards in 2000 . 
 Dustin Hoffman and Brian Dennehy won Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Actor in a Play at the 1984 and 1999 Drama Desk Awards . 
 Hoffman also won both the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Miniseries or Television Film at the 43rd Golden Globe Awards in 1986 and Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie at the 38th Primetime Emmy Awards in 1986 . 
 Lee J. Cobb was nominated for an Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Single Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Drama at the 19th Primetime Emmy Awards as well as a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word , Documentary or Drama Recording at the 9th Grammy Awards in 1967 . 
 Warren Mitchell earned the Laurence Olivier Award for Actor of the Year in a Revival in 1979 for his West End theatre performance of the role . Dennehy earned a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor in 2006 for his reprisal of the role in the West End . 
 = = = Commentary = = = 
 Time described Scott 's performance as " ... a performance of staggering impact .... When his head is bowed , it is not in resignation but rather like that of a bull bloodied by the <unk> yet ready to charge again . " Philip Seymour Hoffman 's performance came at a time when the Occupy Wall Street <unk> echoed the play while its actors could not afford the $ 120 ticket price . The March version of Loman presented him as a bit more of a lunatic than other versions . 
 = = Influences = = 
 Miller noted that although he wrote the play in 1947 and 1948 , the play grew out of his life experiences , that included his father losing everything in the 1929 stock market crash . Miller claims that the role was actually modeled on one of his uncles . 
 Dustin Hoffman says that the play was the first one he ever read and predated his interest in becoming an actor . He noted that the play resonated with him because his father was a travelling salesman and he had an older brother . Hoffman eventually played the role in a high @-@ school production . In 1965 , Hoffman served as the assistant director in an off @-@ Broadway revival of A View from the Bridge at the Sheridan Square Playhouse with a cast that included Robert Duvall and Jon Voight . The show 's director Ulu <unk> suggested to Miller that Hoffman had the potential to make a great Willy Loman . Miller was unimpressed and later wrote that " My estimate of <unk> all but collapsed as , observing Dustin Hoffman 's awkwardness and his big nose that never seemed to get <unk> , I wondered how the poor fellow imagined himself a candidate for any kind of acting career . " 
 = 1979 FA Charity Shield = 
 The 1979 FA Charity Shield was the 57th Charity Shield , an annual English football match played between the winners of the previous season 's Football League and FA Cup . It was held at Wembley Stadium on 11 August 1979 . The match was contested by Liverpool , champions of the 1978 – 79 Football League and Arsenal , who beat Manchester United in the final of the 1978 – 79 FA Cup . Watched by a crowd of 92 @,@ 800 , Liverpool won the match 3 – 1 . 
 This was Arsenal 's tenth Charity Shield appearance and Liverpool 's ninth . Arsenal made no changes to the first team which played in the FA Cup Final the previous season , whereas for Liverpool new signing Avi Cohen started on the bench . In the match Liverpool took the lead in the 38th minute when Terry McDermott scored past goalkeeper Pat Jennings . They extended their lead through Kenny Dalglish in the 63rd minute before McDermott added his second two minutes later . Alan Sunderland scored a consolation for Arsenal late on . 
 = = Background and pre @-@ match = = 
 The FA Charity Shield was founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield . It was a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , and then by 1913 teams of amateur and professional players . In 1921 , it was played by the Football League champions and FA Cup winners for the first time . This was the fifth year that Wembley Stadium played host to the Shield . 
 Liverpool qualified for the 1979 FA Charity Shield as winners of the previous season 's First Division . Under manager Bob Paisley , the team amassed a then @-@ record points total of 68 and conceded the fewest goals in a 42 @-@ game Football League season with 16 . The other Charity Shield place went to Arsenal who beat Manchester United to win the final of the 1978 – 79 FA Cup . Arsenal led the game 2 – 0 , but conceded twice late into the match before retaking the lead in the 89th minute ; the final score was 3 – 2 . The game is referred to as the " Five @-@ minute final " as three goals were scored in that time frame . 
 Liverpool had won three previous Shields outright ( 1966 , 1974 , 1976 ) , shared two with Manchester United ( 1965 and 1977 ) and one apiece with Everton ( 1986 ) and West Ham United ( 1964 ) . The club lost one Shield contest – against Leicester City in 1971 . This was Arsenal 's first appearance in the Charity Shield in 10 years ; prior to the game they had won seven Shields ( 1930 , 1931 , 1933 , 1934 , 1938 , 1948 and 1953 ) , and lost two ( 1935 , 1936 ) . Before the match Paisley told reporters , " Basically it is a conditioning game , part of the process of getting the players fit " . 
 = = Match = = 
 Liverpool employed a traditional 4 – 4 – 2 formation , with David Johnson playing alongside Kenny Dalglish up front . Defender Avi Cohen was named on the substitutes ' bench , whereas Frank McGarvey – signed from St Mirren in the close season – was omitted from the matchday squad . Arsenal organised themselves similarly to their opponents and named an unchanged team from the one which won the FA Cup . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Liverpool dominated the opening exchanges , but struggled to create clear @-@ cut chances . They almost went a goal behind when Frank Stapleton 's header forced goalkeeper Ray Clemence into action . Seven minutes before the interval , Terry McDermott scored for Liverpool . The midfielder collected a pass from Ray Kennedy who surged through the centre , turned left and from outside the penalty area struck the ball low into the bottom left @-@ hand corner . Arsenal began the second half with more vigour , but struggled to suppress Liverpool 's attacks . Alan Kennedy found space to shoot after a one @-@ two with Ray , but his effort went over the post . Arsenal were forced to make a substitution around the hour mark after Sammy Nelson collided with McDermott and was concussed ; Willie Young replaced him . Liverpool extended their lead minutes later . Alan Hansen intercepted an Arsenal attack , strode forward and passed the ball to Dalglish . The striker approached the penalty area , cut inside Steve Walford and curled the ball into the right @-@ hand corner . John Hollins came on for David Price , at which point Liverpool scored their third . Dalglish dispossessed Liam Brady , but tripped himself in the process . Johnson collected the ball and played it back to Dalglish , who charged forward and sprayed a pass towards McDermott , the furthest forward player on the right . The midfielder 's shot went under the legs of Pat Jennings and into the goal . Alan Sunderland scored a late goal for Arsenal having combined well with Stapleton . This did not dampen the spirits of the Liverpool spectators , who chanted , " What 's it like to be outclassed ? " and , " Why are we so great ? " during the course of the 90 minutes . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Liverpool 's performance was greeted with applause from both sets of supporters as Phil Thompson led his team up to the Royal Box to receive the Charity Shield . Paisley was delighted with the manner of his team 's win and quipped , " I am just sorry we didn 't get two points for it ! " He praised the Wembley surface and said of McDermott 's first goal " [ It ] captured what we are looking for – the run , the control and the finish were perfect . " Arsenal manager Terry Neill described the match as a " great advertisement for football " and felt his side contributed greatly in periods . Of his opponents , he said : " Liverpool are a smashing side and I don 't expect to meet anyone better this season . " Indeed , Liverpool went on to retain the First Division title , withstanding pressure from Manchester United and ending their league campaign on 60 points . Arsenal finished three places behind in fourth , and reached the finals of the FA Cup and UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup , only to end the season empty @-@ handed . 
 = Crystal Palace F.C. = 
 Crystal Palace Football Club is an English professional football club based in South Norwood , London , that plays in the Premier League , the highest tier in English football . 
 The club was founded in 1905 at the famous Crystal Palace Exhibition building by the owners of the FA Cup Final stadium , who wanted their own team to play at the historic venue . Palace played their home games at the Cup Final venue until 1915 , but then the First World War forced them to move out and play at Herne Hill Velodrome and the Nest . In 1924 , they moved to their current home at Selhurst Park . 
 The club spent their early years playing in the Southern League , before joining the Football League in 1920 , and they became inaugural champions of the newly formed Third Division in 1920 @-@ 21 . Since 1964 , Palace have mostly played in the top two leagues of English football . Their best ever top flight season came in 1990 – 91 , when the club challenged for the league title , eventually finishing in third place in the top division , their highest league position to date . The club were denied a place in Europe at the end of that season due to the partial UEFA ban on English clubs caused by the Heysel Stadium disaster . Palace became founder members of the Premier League in 1992 . The club have been second tier champions twice and hold the record for the most play @-@ off wins for promotion to the top flight , winning the final four times . Palace have been FA Cup finalists twice in 1990 and 2016 , finishing as runners @-@ up to Manchester United on both occasions . 
 In 1973 , the club changed its original nickname from the Glaziers to the Eagles and introduced the red @-@ and @-@ blue vertical stripes now associated with the club . The club had previously played in claret and blue colours . Palace have rivalries with Brighton & Hove Albion , with whom they contest the M23 derby , and fellow South London club Millwall . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1895 , the Football Association had found a new permanent home for the FA Cup Final at the site of the famous Crystal Palace Exhibition building . Some years later the owners of the attraction , who were reliant on tourist activity for their income , sought fresh attractions for the venue , and decided to form their own football team to play at the Palace stadium . There had been an amateur Crystal Palace team as far back as 1861 , which was formed by workers from the exhibition building , but they had disappeared from historical records around 1876 . The owners of the venue wanted a professional club to play there and tap into the vast crowd potential of the area . 
 Crystal Palace Football Club , originally nicknamed " the Glaziers " , was formed on 10 September 1905 under the guidance of Aston Villa assistant secretary Edmund Goodman . The club applied to enter the Football League alongside Chelsea and Southampton , but was the only unsuccessful team of the three . The club instead found itself in the Southern League Second Division for the 1905 – 06 season . The club was successful in its inaugural season and was promoted to the First Division , crowned as champions . In their first season Crystal Palace also played in the mid @-@ week United Counties League , finishing runner @-@ up to Watford , and it was in this competition that the club played their first match , winning 3 – 0 away to New Brompton . 
 Palace remained in the Southern League up until 1914 , their one highlight the 1907 shock First Round victory over Newcastle United in the FA Cup . The outbreak of the First World War led to the Admiralty requisitioning the Crystal Palace and the club was forced to move to the home of West Norwood F.C. at Herne Hill Velodrome . Three years later the club moved again to the Nest due to the folding of Croydon Common F.C. The club joined the Football League Third Division in the 1920 – 21 season , finishing as champions and gaining promotion to the Second Division . During this period , Palace also won the London Challenge Cup three times in 1913 , 1914 , and 1921 . Palace moved to the purpose @-@ built stadium Selhurst Park in 1924 , the ground the club plays at today . 
 The opening fixture at Selhurst Park was against Sheffield Wednesday , Palace losing 0 – 1 in front of a crowd of 25 @,@ 000 . Finishing in twenty @-@ first position , the club was relegated to the Third Division South . Before the Second World War Palace made good efforts at promotion , never finishing outside the top half of the table and finishing second on three occasions . During the war years , the Football League was suspended , and the club won two Wartime Leagues , the South Regional League and the South ' D ' League . After the war , the club were less successful in the league , their highest position being seventh , and conversely on three occasions the club had to apply for re @-@ election . The club remained in Division Three South until 1957 – 58 . A league reorganisation would see clubs in the bottom half of the table merge with those in the bottom half of Division Three North to form a new Fourth Division . Palace finished fourteenth – just below the cut – and found itself in the basement of English football . Their stay proved brief . With Arthur Rowe appointed manager , the 1960 – 61 season saw Palace gain promotion . Palace also achieved distinction in 1962 when they played the great Real Madrid team of that era in a friendly match . This was the first time that the Spanish giants had played a match in London . Although Rowe then stepped down for health reasons towards the end of 1962 , the promotion proved a turning point in the club 's history . Dick Graham and then Bert Head guided the club to successive promotions in 1963 – 64 and 1968 – 69 , taking the club through the Second Division and into the heights of the First Division . 
 Palace stayed in the top flight from 1969 until 1973 , but then experienced great disappointment . Under the management of Malcolm Allison the club was relegated in consecutive seasons , finding itself back in Division Three for the 1974 – 75 season . It was under Allison that the club became nicknamed " the Eagles " and they enjoyed a run to the semi @-@ final of the 1975 @-@ 76 FA Cup , beating Leeds and Chelsea along the way . Allison was sacked at the end of the 1975 – 76 campaign , and it was under Terry Venables ' management that Palace were promoted in 1976 – 77 and again in 1978 – 79 , the latter saw the club crowned as Division Two champions . That team from 1979 was dubbed " The team of the Eighties " and were briefly top of the whole Football League in the early part of the 1979 – 1980 season , before financial difficulties suffered by the club caused the break up of that talented side , and this ultimately led to the club being unable to maintain their position in the top tier . They were relegated from the First Division in 1980 – 81 , coinciding with Ron Noades takeover of the club . Steve Coppell arrived as manager on 4 June 1984 , and under his stewardship and rebuilding the club achieved promotion via the play @-@ offs back to the First Division in 1988 – 89 . The club followed this up by reaching the 1990 FA Cup Final , drawing 3 – 3 with Manchester United in the first match but losing the replay 1 – 0 . The club built on the success of the previous season in 1990 – 91 by achieving its highest league finish of third place in the top division . Palace were denied a European place at the end of that season due to the partial UEFA ban on English clubs caused by the Heysel Stadium disaster . The club had also returned to Wembley to win the Full Members Cup . The club beat Everton 4 – 1 ( after extra time ) in the final . The following season saw star striker Ian Wright leave the club for Arsenal . Palace finished tenth , allowing the club to become a founder member of the FA Premier League in 1992 – 93 . 
 The club sold Mark Bright to Sheffield Wednesday the following season , but failed to rebuild the squad adequately , and Palace struggled to score throughout the season . The club found itself relegated with a total of 49 points , which is still a Premier League record for a relegated club . Steve Coppell resigned and Alan Smith , his assistant at the club , took over . His first season saw the club win the First Division title and gain promotion to the Premier League . Their stay on this occasion proved eventful . On 25 January 1995 , Palace played Manchester United at Selhurst Park in which Eric Cantona was sent off . He was taunted by Palace fan Matthew Simmons , and retaliated with a flying kick . Cantona was sentenced to two weeks in jail , reduced to 120 hours community service on appeal . Simmons was immediately banned from Selhurst Park , and found guilty on two charges of threatening Cantona . More was to follow in March , when Chris Armstrong was suspended by the FA for failing a drugs test . On the field , Alan Smith guided the club to the semi finals of both the FA Cup and the League Cup , but League form was a concern and Palace once again found itself relegated , finishing fourth from bottom as the Premier League reduced from 22 to 20 clubs . 
 Smith left the club and Steve Coppell returned as technical director in the summer of 1995 , and through a combination of the first @-@ team coaching of Ray Lewington and latterly Dave Bassett 's managership Palace reached the play @-@ offs . Palace lost the 1996 play off final in dramatic fashion , Steve Claridge scoring a last minute goal for Leicester City to win the tie 2 – 1 . The following season saw Coppell take charge as first @-@ team manager when Dave Bassett departed for Nottingham Forest in early 1997 The club was successful in the play @-@ offs at the second time of asking when the club defeated Sheffield United in the final at Wembley . 
 This stay in the Premier League was no more successful than the previous two , and in true yo @-@ yo club fashion the club was relegated back to the First Division for the 1998 – 99 season . The club competed in European competition during the summer when they played in the UEFA Intertoto Cup . Palace then went into administration in 1999 , when owner Mark Goldberg was unable to sustain his financial backing of the club . The club emerged from administration under the ownership of Simon Jordan , and Steve Coppell left the club , replaced by Alan Smith for a second time . The club were almost relegated in Jordan 's first season , in 2000 – 01 . Smith was sacked in April and Steve Kember managed to win the two remaining fixtures that would guarantee survival , Dougie Freedman scoring the winner in a 1 – 0 victory over Stockport County in the 87th minute on the final day of the season . Steve Bruce was appointed manager for the 2001 – 02 season . A good start to the season gave Palace hope for a promotion challenge , but Bruce attempted to walk out on the club after just four months at the helm to take charge of Birmingham City . After a short spell on ' gardening leave ' , Bruce was eventually allowed to join Birmingham , succeeded by Trevor Francis , who had ironically been his predecessor at the Midlands club . 
 Under Francis , Palace finished mid @-@ table for two successive seasons , and Francis left to be replaced by long @-@ serving coach Steve Kember . Kember guided Palace to victories in their opening three games of the 2003 – 04 First Division campaign , which put Palace at the top of the table , but he was sacked in November after a terrible loss of form saw the team slip towards the relegation zone . Iain Dowie was appointed manager and guided the club to the play @-@ offs , securing promotion with a 1 – 0 victory over West Ham . Again Palace could not maintain their footing in the top tier and were relegated on the last day of the season after drawing at local rivals Charlton Athletic . 
 Jordan was unable to put the club on a sound financial footing after 2008 , and in January 2010 the club was once again placed in administration , this time by a creditor . The Football League 's regulations saw the Eagles deducted ten points , and the administrators was forced to sell key players including Victor Moses and José Fonte . Neil Warnock had also departed as manager in the early part of 2010 . He had taken over as manager in 2007 , replacing Peter Taylor who had a brief spell as manager . Paul Hart took over as caretaker manager for the final weeks of the season . Survival in the Championship was only secured on the final day of the season after a memorable 2 – 2 draw at Sheffield Wednesday , which was itself relegated as a result . 
 During the close season CPFC 2010 , a consortium consisting of several wealthy fans successfully negotiated the purchase of the club . Led by Steve Parish , the vocal representative for a consortium of four that also included Stephen Browett , Jeremy Hosking and Martin Long . Crucially , CPFC 2010 also secured the freehold of the ground , the consortium paying tribute to a fans ' campaign which helped pressure Lloyds Bank into selling the ground back to the club . The consortium swiftly installed George Burley as the Eagles ' new manager . However a poor start to the season saw the club hovering around the bottom of the table by December . On 1 January 2011 , after a 3 – 0 defeat to Millwall , Burley was sacked and his assistant Dougie Freedman named caretaker manager . Freedman was appointed manager on a full @-@ time basis on 11 January 2011 . Palace moved up the table and by securing a 1 – 1 draw at Hull City on 30 April , the club was safe from relegation with one game of the season left . After another year and a half as manager , Freedman departed to manage Bolton Wanderers on 23 October 2012 . 
 In November 2012 , Ian Holloway became the club 's manager . He guided Palace to the Premier League after an 8 @-@ year absence by defeating Watford 1 – 0 in the Championship Play @-@ Off Final at the new Wembley . On 23 October 2013 , Holloway left his post as manager on mutual consent terms . This came after only managing one win in the first nine games of the 2013 – 14 season . Assistant manager Keith Millen was named caretaker manager while Palace searched for a new manager . On 23 November 2013 , former Stoke City boss Tony Pulis was confirmed as the new manager of Crystal Palace . On 19 April 2014 , Crystal Palace ensured they were mathematically safe from relegation from the Premier League for the first time in five attempts . Pulis resigned on 14 August 2014 , just two days before the start of the 2014 – 2015 season and was replaced by Neil Warnock who returned to the club for a second spell as manager . However , Warnock was sacked by the club at Christmas after a poor run of results . On 2 January 2015 , former Palace player Alan Pardew was confirmed as the new manager , signing a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract with the club after a compensation package of £ 3 @.@ 5 million was agreed with Newcastle United . Two days later , in his first match in charge , Palace won 4 – 0 away to Conference club Dover Athletic in the third round of the FA Cup . Pardew then guided the club to comfortable mid @-@ table safety and a third consecutive season in the Premier League . During the following season , Pardew led Palace to their first FA Cup Final for twenty @-@ six years . Their opponents would be Manchester United again , who they lost to back in the 1990 final . But Palace would suffer disappointment again when they lost 2 @-@ 1 after extra time . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 When Crystal Palace were founded in 1905 , they turned to one of the biggest clubs in the country at the time , Aston Villa , to seek advice . Villa helped the club in a number of ways , not least by donating their kit . As a result , Palace 's colours were originally claret and blue shirts paired with white shorts , socks tending to be claret . They kept to this formula fairly consistently until 1938 . The 1937 – 38 strip saw them try vertical stripes of claret and blue on the jersey rather than the claret body and blue sleeves , but then in 1938 they abandoned the claret and blue and adopted white shirts and black shorts with matching socks . Although they returned to claret and blue from 1949 – 54 , the 1955 season saw them return to white and black , now using claret and blue as trim . 
 Variations on this theme lasted until 1963 when the club adopted the away strip of yellow jersey as the home colours . 1964 saw them adopt an all @-@ white strip modelled on Real Madrid whom the club had played recently in a friendly , before they returned to claret and blue jerseys with white shorts in 1966 . The club employed variations upon this theme up until Malcolm Allison 's arrival as manager in 1973 . Allison overhauled the club 's image , adopting red and blue vertical stripes for colours and kit , inspired by Barcelona and Levante . The club have played in variations of red and blue ever since , bar the centenary season of 2005 which saw them deploy a version of their 1971 – 72 claret , blue and white kit . 
 The club were relatively late in establishing a crest . Although the initials were embroidered onto the shirt from the 1935 – 36 season , a crest featuring the façade of the Crystal Palace did not appear until 1955 . This crest disappeared from the shirt in 1964 , and the team 's name appeared embroidered on shirts in 1967 – 72 . 1972 saw a round badge adopted with the club 's initials and nickname " the Glaziers " before Allison changed this too . The nickname became " the Eagles " , inspired by Portuguese club Benfica , and the badge adopted an eagle holding a ball . This emblem remained until 1987 when the club married the eagle with the Crystal Palace façade , and although updated in 1996 and again in 2013 the crest retains these features . Since mid @-@ 2010 , the club has made use of an American bald eagle , called Kayla , as the club mascot , with the bird flying from one end of the stadium to the other at every home game . 
 = = = Kit manufacturers and sponsors = = = 
 Since 2014 Crystal Palace 's kit has been manufactured by Macron . Previous manufacturers include Umbro ( 1975 – 77 ) , Admiral ( 1977 – 80 , 1987 – 88 , 2003 – 04 ) , Adidas ( 1980 – 83 , 1996 – 99 ) , Hummel ( 1984 – 87 ) , Bukta ( 1988 – 92 ) , <unk> ( 1992 – 94 ) Nutmeg ( 1994 – 96 ) , TFG Sports ( 1999 – 2001 ) Le Coq Sportif ( 2001 – 03 ) , Diadora ( 2004 – 07 ) , <unk> ( 2007 – 09 ) , Nike ( 2009 – 12 ) , and Avec ( 2012 – 14 ) . The club 's shirts are currently sponsored by <unk> , and have previously been sponsored by Red Rose ( 1983 – 84 ) , Top Score ( 1985 – 86 ) , AVR ( 1986 – 87 ) , Andrew Copeland ( 1987 – 88 ) , Fly Virgin ( 1988 – 91 ) , Tulip Computers ( 1991 – 93 ) , TDK ( 1993 – 99 ) , Churchill Insurance ( 2000 – 06 ) , GAC Logistics ( 2006 – 14 ) , and <unk> ( 2014 – 15 ) . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 In 1905 , the owners of the FA Cup Final venue , the Crystal Palace Company wanted a professional club to play there and tap into the crowd potential of the area . A new club , Crystal Palace F.C. , was formed to use the stadium . When the First World War broke out the Palace and grounds were seized by the armed forces , and in 1915 the club were forced to move by the Admiralty . They found a temporary base at the Herne Hill Velodrome . Although other clubs had offered the use of their ground to Palace , the club felt it best to remain as close to their natural catchment area as possible . When Croydon Common F.C. were wound up in 1917 , the club took over their old stadium at the Nest , but in 1919 they began the purchase of the land on which they would build Selhurst Park , their current home . 
 Archibald Leitch , the renowned stadium architect , was employed to draw up plans , and the club constructed and completed the ground in time for the 1924 – 25 season . It remained relatively unchanged , with only the introduction of floodlights and maintenance and updating until 1969 when the Arthur Wait stand was constructed . The Main Stand became all @-@ seater in 1979 and more work followed in the 1980s when the Whitehorse Lane End was redeveloped to allow for a Sainsbury 's supermarket , club offices and a club shop . The Arthur Wait stand became all seater in 1990 , and in 1994 the Holmesdale Terrace was redeveloped , replaced with a two tier Stand . Selhurst 's attendance record was set in 1979 , with an official total of 51 @,@ 482 . After all the redevelopments to the ground and safety requirements due to the Taylor Report , the ground 's current capacity is 26 @,@ 309 . Proposals were put forward to move the club back to the Crystal Palace National Stadium in 2010 , but after the club gained promotion to the Premier League in 2013 there has been a renewed focus on redeveloping their current home into a 40 @,@ 000 seater stadium . 
 = = Support base = = 
 Crystal Palace have a fan base drawn predominantly from the local area which draws on South London , Kent and Surrey . The club 's original home , at the Crystal Palace , was on the boundary with Kent , while Selhurst Park was within Surrey 's borders until the London Government Act 1963 saw Greater London encompass Croydon . The club 's passionate support at home games emanates from the Holmesdale Road Stand , in which the ultras group the Holmesdale Fanatics have been based since 2005 . The fans have established at least two other supporters groups . The Palace Independent Supporters ' Association was set up to raise supporter concerns with the club , while the Crystal Palace Supporters ' Trust was originally established to enable fans to purchase the club during the administration of 2000 . The Trust remained in existence , and now lists one of its aims as building " a new state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art training ground to lease to the Club " . 
 A number of fanzines have been produced by the fans over the years . Eagle Eye launched in 1987 and ran until 1994 , with a number of contributors launching the replacement Palace Echo in 1995 , running until 2007 . The Eastern Eagles , So Glad You 're Mine and One More Point were also published by fans in the 1990s . When One More Point ceased publication , Five Year Plan launched in its place , and maintains an online presence . Supporters also congregate on two internet forums , The BBS and <unk> which the club use as channels to communicate with fans . 
 Being a London club means they compete against a number of other local clubs for the attention of supporters but the club does have a recognisably large catchment area of 900 @,@ 000 . When the new owners took control of the club in 2010 , they sought the fans ' input into future decisions . They consulted on a new badge design , and when their chosen designs were rejected the club instead opted for a design based on a fans ' idea from an internet forum . The club are also strengthening their ties with the local community , and through the Crystal Palace F.C. Foundation they work with local London boroughs of Croydon , Bromley and Sutton to provide sports and educational programmes . Through this work the club hope to develop their supporter base and geographical base . The Foundation 's work was recognised by the Football League in August 2009 with their Silver Standard Community Scheme Award . 
 The club also maintains a healthy celebrity support . Kevin Day and Jo Brand host an annual comedy night for Comic Relief and the Palace Academy , and the club also count fellow comedians Eddie Izzard , Harry Enfield , Sean Hughes , Mark Steel , Jim Piddock and Roy Hudd amongst their fans . The late Ronnie Corbett had also been a lifelong supporter of the club . The actor Neil Morrissey developed Palace Ale , a beer on sale in the ground , while actor Bill Nighy is patron of the <unk> , a Crystal Palace @-@ based charity . Two of the stars of The Inbetweeners , James Buckley and Simon Bird are also Palace fans . Smooth Radio DJ David Kid Jensen is chairman of the Crystal Palace Vice Presidents Club and acted as spokesman for the CPFC 2010 consortium during their takeover bid for the club . Also , the heavy metal journalist Dave Ling is a passionate follower . Actor , writer and producer John Salthouse was on the books of Crystal Palace from 1968 to 1970 , and was also a mascot for the club as a child . He incorporated the club into his role as Tony in Abigail 's Party he was under the name of John Lewis at Palace . Susanna Reid revealed her love of Palace while taking part in Strictly Come Dancing , visiting Selhurst Park for inspiration . Rebecca Lowe , currently the host of Premier League coverage for NBC Sports , is also a supporter . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 Because of their location in the capital , Crystal Palace are involved in a number of local derbies , mostly across South London . Their strongest rivalry in London is with Millwall . They also enjoy a smaller rivalry with former tenants Charlton Athletic . They have a fierce rivalry with Brighton & Hove Albion which did not develop until Palace 's relegation to the Third Division in 1974 , reaching its height when the two teams were drawn together in the first round of the 1976 – 77 FA Cup . The game went to two replays , but the controversy was based on referee Ron Challis ordering a successful Brighton penalty be retaken because of Palace player encroachment . The retake was saved , Palace won the game 1 – 0 and a fierce rivalry was born . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 Due to the Football League not wishing the owners of the FA Cup Final to also own a team , a separate company was established to found and own the team . The first chairman , Sydney Bourne , was found by club secretary Edmund Goodman after he had examined records of FA Cup Final ticket purchasers . Goodman noted his name as one that had bought a number of tickets every year , and so he met with Bourne and found him very agreeable to the idea of the new club . Bourne was invited onto the board of directors and elected chairman at the club 's first ever meeting . Bourne remained chairman until his death in 1930 . 
 Arthur Wait established a consortium of seven businessmen to purchase the club in 1949 , and initially they rotated the chairmanship . In 1958 Wait became the Chairman , before being replaced by Raymond Bloye in 1972 . Bloye 's ownership lasted until 26 January 1981 , when property developer Ron Noades and his small consortium took control of the club . Noades eventually sold the club to Mark Goldberg on 5 June 1998 , becoming the second longest serving chairman behind Sydney Bourne . Goldberg 's tenure of the club was not a success and the club entered administration in March 1999 . Although the fans established a group , the Crystal Palace Supporters ' Trust in a bid to gain control of the club , millionaire Simon Jordan negotiated a deal with creditors and the administrator , and a new company , CPFC 2000 took control . This company entered administration in January 2010 , leaving administration in June of that year after a takeover by a consortium of four wealthy fans , CPFC 2010 . 
 Crystal Palace F.C. is currently owned by CPFC 2010 Limited , a Private Limited Company registered at Company House . CPFC 2010 was established by a consortium of four businessmen , Steve Parish , Martin Long , Stephen Browett and Jeremy Hosking in 2010 , each owning a 25 % share of the company . The four successfully negotiated a take @-@ over with the administrator Brendan Guilfoyle and a company voluntary arrangement was formally accepted by company creditors on 20 August 2010 . CPFC 2010 also purchased the ground from Lloyds Bank after a demonstration by fans put pressure on the bank to agree terms . 
 On 18 December 2015 , it was announced that a new deal had been signed with American investors Josh Harris and David Blitzer . The club stated that Steve Parish would continue as chairman alongside Harris and Blitzer and that Browett , Long and Hosking would also retain a substantial investment . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 Jim Cannon holds the record for Crystal Palace appearances , having played 660 first @-@ team matches between 1973 and 1988 . He also holds the record for most League appearances , making 571 . Cannon joined the club as a trainee , and of his appearances only four of them were made as a substitute . His first appearance was made aged 19 , scoring in a home win against Chelsea on 31 March 1973 . Cannon 's last game was on 7 May 1988 , a home win against Manchester City . Peter Simpson holds the record for the most goals scored in a season , 54 in the 1930 – 31 season in Division Three ( South ) . Simpson , who signed for the club from Kettering Town , is also the top scorer over a career – 165 between 1929 and 1935 . He died in 1974 . Mile <unk> holds the club record for most international caps , with 37 appearances for Australia while at Palace . 
 Crystal Palace hold a number of records and achievements . They are one of only a small group of clubs to have been inaugural champions of a Football League Division , winning the newly formed Third Division in 1920 – 21 . Their average league attendance of 19 @,@ 092 achieved in the 1960 – 61 season and the attendance of 37 @,@ 774 for the Good Friday game at Selhurst Park between Palace and Millwall the same season are Fourth Division attendance records . The club 's widest victory margin in the league was their 9 – 0 win against Barrow in the Fourth Division in 1959 , while their heaviest defeat in the league was by the same scoreline , 9 – 0 , against Liverpool in 1989 in Division One . 
 Palace 's record home attendance is 51 @,@ 482 for a Division Two match against Burnley , achieved on 11 May 1979 . With the introduction of regulations enforcing all @-@ seater stadiums , it is unlikely that this record will be beaten in the foreseeable future . The highest transfer fee received for a Palace player is £ 15 million , from Manchester United for Wilfried Zaha in January 2013 , while the highest transfer fee paid by the club to date was for Yohan Cabaye from Paris Saint @-@ Germain in July 2015 , thought to be around £ 13 million . The club 's highest ever league finish so far is third place in the Football League First Division which is now called the Premier League achieved in 1990 – 91 , under the management of Steve Coppell . The club have been FA Cup finalists twice in 1990 and 2016 , finishing runners @-@ up on both occasions and have also reached the semi @-@ final on two other occasions . Palace have reached the semi @-@ finals of the League Cup four times , most recently in 2012 . The club were winners of the Full Members Cup in 1990 – 91 . 
 Palace remain the only team ever to be relegated from the Premier League even though they finished 4th from bottom in the 1994 / 1995 season . This was because it had been decided that the following season would see the Premier League reduced from 22 teams down to the current standard of 20 . Palace also hold the record for relegations from the Premier League with a total of 4 , ( 1992 / 93 , 1994 / 95 , 1997 / 98 , 2004 / 05 ) , but conversely they also hold the record for most Play Off wins resulting in promotion to the Premier League amassing 4 Play Off victories , they also hold the record ( in any division ) for winning promotion at 4 different locations , ( Selhurst Park 1989 , Old Wembley 1997 , Millennium Stadium 2004 and New Wembley 2013 ) . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = First @-@ team squad = = = 
 As of 1 July 2016 . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Out on loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Development squad = = = 
 As of 3 June 2016 . 
 Crystal Palace Reserves joined the London League in the year 1906 – 07 . Crystal Palace has gained a reputation for their academy which produced players such as Wilfried Zaha , Nathaniel Clyne , Victor Moses , Wayne Routledge , Ben Watson , Clinton Morrison , Gareth Southgate etc . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = Notable former players = = 
 Players with over 100 appearances for Crystal Palace can be found here 
 All past ( and present ) players who are the subjects of Wikipedia articles can be found here 
 = = = Crystal Palace " Centenary XI " = = = 
 To celebrate Crystal Palace 's centenary in 2005 , the club asked Palace fans to vote for a " Centenary XI " from a shortlist of ten players per position , provided by the club . 
 Nigel Martyn ( 1989 – 96 ) 
 Paul <unk> ( 1974 – 83 ) 
 Chris Coleman ( 1991 – 95 ) 
 Jim Cannon ( 1972 – 88 ) 
 Kenny Sansom ( 1975 – 80 ) 
 John Salako ( 1986 – 95 ) 
 Geoff Thomas ( 1987 – 93 ) 
 Andy Gray ( 1984 – 87 @,@ 1989 – 92 ) 
 Attilio Lombardo ( 1997 – 99 ) 
 Andrew Johnson ( 2002 – 06 , 2014 ) 
 Ian Wright ( 1985 – 91 ) 
 = = = Player of the Year = = = 
 = = Club staff = = 
 = = Managers = = 
 As of matches played 22 May 2016 . Not including caretaker managers . All competitive matches are counted . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Crystal Palace 's honours and achievements include the following ; 
 = = = League = = = 
 English top tier ( currently the Premier League ) 
 Highest position : 3rd place 1990 – 91 
 English second tier ( currently the Football League Championship ) 
 Champions ( 2 ) : 1978 – 79 , 1993 – 94 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 1968 – 69 
 Play @-@ off winners ( 4 ) : 1988 – 89 , 1996 – 97 , 2003 – 04 , 2012 – 13 
 Play @-@ off runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 1995 – 96 
 English third tier ( currently Football League One ) 
 Champions ( 1 ) : 1920 – 21 
 Runners @-@ up ( 4 ) : 1928 – 29 , 1930 – 31 ( Third Division South ) , 1938 – 39 ( Third Division South ) , 1963 – 64 
 English fourth tier ( currently Football League Two ) 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 1960 – 61 
 = = = Cup = = = 
 FA Cup 
 Runners @-@ up ( 2 ) : 1990 , 2016 
 Full Members CupWinners ( 1 ) : 1990 – 91 
 = = = Wartime = = = 
 South Regional League 
 Champions ( 1 ) : 1940 – 41 
 South ' D ' Wartime League 
 Champions ( 1 ) : 1939 – 40 
 = = = Regional = = = 
 Southern Football League Division One 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 1913 – 14 
 Southern Football League Division Two 
 Champions ( 1 ) : 1905 – 06 
 United <unk> ( 1 ) : 1906 – 07 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 1905 – 06 
 London Challenge CupWinners ( 3 ) : 1912 – 13 , 1913 – 14 , 1920 – 21 
 Surrey Senior CupWinners ( 3 ) : 1996 – 97 , 2000 – 01 , 2001 – 02 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In the 1999 Michael Winterbottom film Wonderland the scenes of the character Dan and his son at a football match were filmed at Selhurst Park , the ground of Crystal Palace in a 1 – 1 draw against Birmingham City on 6 February 1999 . In the Mike Leigh play Abigail 's Party , the character Tony mentions that he used to play professionally for Crystal Palace but it " didn 't work out " , something actor John Salthouse brought to the character in rehearsals based on his own life . Salthouse also incorporated the club into the children 's television series he wrote , Hero to Zero , in which the father of the main character once played for Palace reserves . In the first series of Only Fools and Horses a Crystal Palace scarf could be seen on the coat rack , placed there by producer Ray Butt . Headmaster Keith Blackwell , who played Crystal Palace mascot " Pete the Eagle " in the late nineties fronted a series of Coca @-@ Cola advertisements in 1996 . Blackwell spoke about his role and the embarrassment it brought to his family , and clips of him in costume were used in the campaign . 
 = = Crystal Palace Ladies = = 
 Crystal Palace Ladies is the women 's football club affiliated to Crystal Palace , founded in 1992 . They are managed by Ian Jackson . Crystal Palace LFC compete in the Women 's South East Combination League , in the third tier of English women 's football . They play their home games at the Hayes Lane , Bromley , London . 
 Their kits are sponsored by the insurance broker Lark ( Group ) Limited . 
 = Tintin in Tibet = 
 Tintin in Tibet ( French : Tintin au Tibet ) is the twentieth volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . It was serialised weekly from September 1958 to November 1959 in Tintin magazine and published as a book in 1960 . Hergé considered it his favourite Tintin adventure and an emotional effort , as he created it while suffering from traumatic nightmares and a personal conflict while deciding to leave his wife of three decades for a younger woman . The story tells of the young reporter Tintin in search of his friend Chang Chong @-@ Chen , who the authorities claim has died in a plane crash in the Himalayas . Convinced that Chang has survived , Tintin leads his companions across the Himalayas to the plateau of Tibet , along the way encountering the mysterious Yeti . 
 Following The Red Sea Sharks ( 1958 ) and its large number of characters , Tintin in Tibet differs from other stories in the series in that it features only a few familiar characters and is also Hergé 's only adventure not to pit Tintin against an antagonist . Themes in Hergé 's story include extrasensory perception , the mysticism of Tibetan Buddhism , and friendship . Tintin in Tibet has been translated into 32 languages , is highly regarded by critics , and has been praised by the Dalai Lama , who awarded it the Light of Truth Award . The story was a commercial success and was published in book form by Casterman shortly after its conclusion ; the series itself became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . Tintin in Tibet was adapted for television , radio , documentary , theatre , and a video game , and has been the subject of a museum exhibition . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 While on holiday at a resort in the French Alps with Snowy , Captain Haddock , and Professor Calculus , Tintin reads about a plane crash in the Gosain Than Massif in the Himalayas of Tibet . He then has a vision of his friend Chang Chong @-@ Chen , badly injured and calling for help from the wreckage of the crashed plane . Tintin confirms that Chang was aboard the plane and , convinced of his survival , flies to Kathmandu with Snowy and a sceptical Captain Haddock . They hire a Sherpa named Tharkey and , accompanied by porters , travel overland from Nepal towards the crash site . 
 The porters abandon the group in fear when mysterious tracks are found , while Tintin , Haddock and Tharkey go on and eventually reach the crash site . Tintin sets off with Snowy to trace Chang 's steps , and finds a cave where Chang has carved his name on a rock . On leaving the cave , he encounters a snowstorm and glimpses what seems to be a human silhouette . Tharkey believes that Tintin saw the Yeti and convinces him to abandon his friend and return with him to Nepal , since the area is too large to search . Tintin spots a scarf on a cliff face , concludes Chang is nearby , and continues with only the Captain . While attempting to scale a cliff face , Haddock slips and hangs out of reach , imperilling Tintin , who is tied to him . He tells Tintin to cut the rope to save himself , but Tintin refuses . Haddock tries to cut it himself , but drops his knife , alerting Tharkey , who has returned in time to rescue them . They try to camp for the night but lose their tent and must trek onwards , unable to sleep lest they freeze , arriving within sight of the Buddhist monastery of Khor @-@ <unk> before being caught in an avalanche . 
 Blessed Lightning , a monk at the monastery , has a vision of Tintin , Snowy , Haddock , and Tharkey in danger . Tintin regains consciousness and , too weak to walk , gives Snowy a note to deliver . Snowy runs to the monastery , loses the message , but is recognised as the dog from Blessed Lightning 's vision . Tintin , Haddock and Tharkey regain consciousness in the monastery and are brought before the Grand Abbot . The Abbot tells Tintin to abandon his quest , but Blessed Lightning has another vision , through which Tintin learns that Chang is still alive inside a mountain cave at the Horn of the Yak — and that the Yeti is also there . Tintin and Haddock travel on to the Horn of the Yak . 
 They arrive at a cave . Tintin ventures inside and finds Chang , who is feverish and shaking . The Yeti suddenly appears , revealed as a large anthropoid , reacting with anger at Tintin 's attempt to take Chang . As it lunges at Tintin , the flash bulb of Tintin 's camera accidentally goes off , and scares the Yeti away . Chang tells Tintin that the Yeti saved his life after the crash . Upon returning to inhabited lands , the friends are surprised to be met by the Grand Abbot , who presents Tintin with a silk scarf in honour of the bravery he has shown for his friend Chang . As the party travels home , Chang muses that the Yeti is not a wild animal , but has a human soul . The Yeti sadly watches their departure from a distance . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background and early ideas = = = 
 In October 1957 , Hergé sent his publisher , Casterman , the cover of his completed nineteenth Tintin adventure , The Red Sea Sharks , and for several weeks considered plot ideas for his next story . Fondly recalling the Scouting days of his youth , his first idea was to send Tintin back to the United States , as in the third adventure , Tintin in America , to help a group of Native Americans defend their land from a large corporation that wished to drill for oil ; on reflection , Hergé came to believe that retracing old ground would be a step backwards . Another idea had Tintin striving to prove that Haddock 's butler Nestor was framed for a crime committed by his old employers , the Bird brothers . He dismissed this as well , but kept the idea of an adventure with no guns or violence . This was to become the only Tintin story without an antagonist . A third idea sent Tintin and Professor Calculus to a snow @-@ covered polar region , where a stranded group of explorers need Calculus to save them from food poisoning . He abandoned this plot as well , but kept the setting in a snowy environment and decided to focus , not on Calculus , but on his main character Tintin . 
 A collaborator of Hergé 's , Jacques Van Melkebeke , had suggested in 1954 having a story set in Tibet , likely influenced by the play he adapted for Hergé in the 1940s , M. Boullock a <unk> ( Mr. Boullock 's Disappearance ) . Bernard Heuvelmans , a cryptozoologist who had helped Hergé envision lunar exploration for the two @-@ part Destination Moon and Explorers on the Moon , had given him a copy of his book Sur la piste des bêtes <unk> ( On the Trail of Unknown Animals ) in 1955 , inscribing on the inside the suggestion that one day Tintin should meet the Yeti . By 1958 , Hergé decided that Tibet would be the setting of Tintin 's next Adventure . Initial ideas for the title were Le museau de la <unk> ( The Cow 's Snout ) , Le museau de l <unk> ( The Bear 's Snout ) , and Le museau du yak ( The Yak 's Snout ) , all of which refer to the mountain in the latter part of the story . Although it was initially claimed that " market research " chose the title Tintin in Tibet suggesting sales would be better if the book used Tintin 's name in the title , entertainment producer and author Harry Thompson suggested " the title reflected the solo nature of [ Tintin 's ] undertaking . " 
 = = = Hergé 's psychological issues = = = 
 Hergé reached a particularly traumatic period in his life and suffered a mental breakdown . In 1956 , he realised that he had fallen out of love with his wife Germaine , whom he had married in 1932 , and by 1958 , he and Fanny Vlaminck , a colourist at Studios Hergé twenty @-@ eight years his junior , had developed a deep mutual attraction . They began courting ; Hergé 's new companion lifted his morale and shared many of his interests . Germaine soon began interfering with the courtship , causing Hergé to admit his desire had been to maintain a relationship with both women . When he failed to please either , he began to contemplate divorcing Germaine to marry Fanny . His Catholic upbringing and Boy Scout ethic caused him to feel tremendous guilt . As he later related to interviewer Numa Sadoul : 
 " It meant turning upside down all my values — what a shock ! This was a serious moral crisis : I was married , and I loved someone else ; life seemed impossible with my wife , but on the other hand I had this scout @-@ like idea of giving my word for ever . It was a real catastrophe . I was completely torn up . " 
 During this period , Hergé had recurrent nightmares where he faced images of what he described as " the beauty and cruelty of white " — visions of white and snow that he could not explain . As he later told Sadoul : 
 " At the time , I was going through a time of real crisis and my dreams were nearly always white dreams . And they were extremely distressing . I took note of them and remember one where I was in a kind of tower made up of a series of ramps . Dead leaves were falling and covering everything . At a particular moment , in an immaculately white alcove , a white skeleton appeared that tried to catch me . And then instantly everything around me became white . " 
 At the advice of his former editor Raymond de Becker , Hergé travelled to Zürich to consult the Swiss psychoanalyst Franz Riklin , a student of Carl Jung , to decipher his disturbing dreams . Riklin latched on to the " quest for purity " that featured so prominently in Hergé 's dreams , and ultimately in Tintin in Tibet . He told the author that he must destroy " the demon of purity " in his mind as soon as possible : " I do not want to discourage you , but you will never reach the goal of your work . It comes to one or the other : you must overcome your crisis , or continue your work . But , in your place , I would stop immediately ! " 
 Although Hergé was tempted to abandon Tintin at Riklin 's suggestion , devoting himself instead to his hobby of abstract art , he felt that doing so would be an acceptance of failure . In the end , he left his wife so that he could marry Fanny Vlaminck , and continued work on Tintin in Tibet , trusting that completing the book would exorcise the demons he felt possessed him . " It was a brave decision , and a good one " , said reporter and British Tintin expert Michael Farr . " Few problems , psychological included , are solved by abandoning them . " Thompson noted , " It was ironic , but not perhaps unpredictable , that faced with the moral dilemma posed by Riklin , Hergé chose to keep his Scout 's word of honour to Tintin , but not to Germaine . " Belgian Tintin expert Philippe Goddin summarised : " [ Hergé ] sought to regain a lost equilibrium , that he imposes on his hero a desire to seek purity ... considering it necessary for Tintin to go through the intimate experience of distress and loneliness ... and discover himself . " 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 In creating Tintin in Tibet , Hergé drew upon a range of influences . Setting it in the Himalayas , a snow @-@ covered environment , followed his recurring dreams of whiteness and his need to create an adventure that " must be a solo voyage of redemption " from the " whiteness of guilt " . The idea of a solo voyage led to Tintin being accompanied only by Snowy , their guide , and a reluctant Haddock — who supplies the needed counterpoint and humour . 
 While considering the character of Chang , absent since The Blue Lotus , Hergé thought of his artistic Chinese friend Zhang Chongren , whom he had not seen since the days of their friendship over twenty years earlier . Hergé and Zhang used to spend every Sunday together , during which Hergé learned much about Chinese culture for his work on The Blue Lotus . Later , Zhang moved back to his homeland and Hergé lost contact with his friend after the Japanese invasion of China in 1937 . Hergé felt Chang and Tintin must be reunited , just as he hoped to see his friend again some day . 
 Hergé read a variety of books about Tibet for this project : <unk> <unk> 's Secret Tibet , Heinrich <unk> 's Seven Years in Tibet , <unk> Pemba 's Tibet my Homeland , Maurice Herzog 's Annapurna , discredited author Lobsang <unk> 's The Third Eye , and the books of Belgian explorer and spiritualist Alexandra David @-@ Néel . Hergé visited the Belgian Alpine Society to examine their photographic collection of the Himalayas , and they sent him photographer Richard Lannoy 's work on India . Models for drawings such as of monks with musical instruments , Sherpas with backpacks , and the aircraft wreckage came from clippings Hergé had collected from sources such as National Geographic . Members of the Studios helped him gather other source material ; for instance , collaborator Jacques Martin researched and drew the story 's costumes . 
 To learn about the Yeti , which he depicted as a benevolent creature , Hergé contacted his friend Bernard Heuvelmans , the author of On the Trail of Unknown Animals . After re @-@ reading Heuvelmans ' description of the Yeti , Hergé went on to research the cryptid species as much as possible . Hergé interviewed mountaineers , including Herzog , who had spotted the tracks of what he believed was an enormous biped that stopped at the foot of a rock face on Annapurna . The creature 's care for the starving Chang derives from a Sherpa account of a Yeti that rescued a little girl in similar circumstances . Another influence came from Fanny Vlaminck , who was interested in extrasensory perception and the mysticism of Tibetan Buddhism , prominent themes in the story that also fascinated Hergé . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Studios Hergé serialised Tintin in Tibet weekly from September 1958 to November 1959 , two pages per week , in Tintin magazine . Because of his desire for accuracy , Hergé added the logo of Air India to the airliner crash debris . A representative of Air India complained to Hergé about the adverse publicity the airline might suffer , arguing , " It 's scandalous , none of our aircraft has ever crashed ; you have done us a considerable wrong . " Air India had cooperated with Hergé , aiding his research by providing him reading material , contemporary photographs , and film footage of India and Nepal , particularly Delhi and Kathmandu . While the crashed aircraft 's tail number remained " VT " , the country code for Indian aircraft , Hergé agreed to change the airline logo in the published edition to the fictional Sari @-@ Airways , dryly noting that there were so many Indian airlines it was possible that there really was a Sari @-@ Airways . 
 While developing the story , members of the Studios confronted Hergé with concerns about elements of Tintin in Tibet . Bob de Moor feared the scene in which Haddock crashes into a stupa was disrespectful to Buddhists . Jacques van Melkebeke suggested that the Yeti not be depicted to create a sense of enigma ; Hergé disagreed , believing that it would disappoint his child readers . 
 After the serial concluded , Hergé worked with his publisher , Casterman , to produce the work in book form . Hergé 's original design for the front cover featured Tintin and his expedition standing on a backdrop of pure white . Casterman deemed it too abstract , so Hergé added a mountain range at the top ; biographer Benoît Peeters expressed that in doing so , the image was deprived of some of its " strength and originality " . 
 During production , Hergé kept abreast of the turbulent political developments in Tibet . In March 1959 , Tibet 's foremost political and spiritual leader , the Dalai Lama , fled the region into self @-@ imposed exile in India following disagreements with China 's governing Communist Party . In May 2001 , when Tintin in Tibet was published in the People 's Republic of China , state authorities renamed it Tintin in Chinese Tibet . When Casterman and the Hergé Foundation protested , the authorities restored the book 's original title . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Hergé came to see Tintin in Tibet as his favourite volume in The Adventures of Tintin . He thought it an ode to friendship , composed " under the double sign of tenacity and friendship " . " It 's a story of friendship " , Hergé said about his book years later , " the way people say , ' It 's a love story . ' " 
 = = = Critical analysis = = = 
 Tintin in Tibet is well received by critics from the comics and literary fields . Farr calls it " exceptional in many respects , standing out among the twenty @-@ three completed Tintin adventures ... an assertion of the incorruptible value of bonds of friendship . " Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier laud it as " the ultimate Tintin book " , reaching " a degree of perfection , both in its story and in its stunning art , that has rarely been equaled , before or since " and " arguably the best book in the series " . They detail the story 's many emotional moments : Haddock 's willingness to sacrifice his life for Tintin 's , Tharkey 's return , the tearful reunion of Tintin and his starving friend Chang , the reverence paid to Tintin by the Grand Abbot and the monks , and the Yeti 's sadness while watching the departure of his only friend . " For a comic book to handle such powerful emotions , convey them to the readers , and make them feel what the characters are feeling is a rare and precious achievement . " Thompson calls it " a book of overwhelming whiteness and purity " , saying that the " intensely personal nature of the story made this Hergé 's favourite Tintin adventure " , adding that if readers wonder whether " the enormous weight [ was ] lifted from Hergé 's shoulders , [ this ] can be seen in his next book , The Castafiore Emerald , a masterpiece of relaxation . " As Tintin in Tibet was translated into 32 languages , Donald Lopez , professor of Buddhist and Tibetan studies , calls it the " largest selling book about Tibet . " 
 Literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès , in a psychoanalytical analysis of Tintin in Tibet , observes that Tintin is more firmly in control of the plot than he was in earlier adventures . Apostolidès notes that the character displays worry and emotion not present previously , something he suggested showed Tintin sorting out the problems that he faced in life . In his analysis , he calls Tintin a " foundling " and his friend Chang " the lost child " and " Tintin 's twin ... the heroes have to struggle to great heights to escape the temporality and pervasive values of [ the ] universe . " He saw the Yeti , who " <unk> certain human characteristics " , as more complex than Hergé 's previous bestial character , Ranko in The Black Island : " The monster loves Chang with a love as unconditional as Tintin 's love for his friend . " 
 The literary analysis of Tom McCarthy compares Tintin 's quest to Hergé 's conquest of his own fear and guilt , writing , " this is the <unk> of Hergé 's own white mythology , his anaemic destiny : to become Sarrasine to Tintin 's la <unk> . " McCarthy suggested the " icy , white expanses of Hergé 's nightmares [ may ] really have their analogue in his own hero " , especially as " Tintin represents an unattainable goal of goodness , cleanness , authenticity . " 
 Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline opines that the work is " a portrait of the artist at a turning point " in his life . He believes that it " stands alone " in The Adventures of Tintin due to its lack of antagonist and few characters , describing it as " a spiritual quest " where the " only conflict is between man and nature ... [ Hergé ] put the best of himself into Tintin in Tibet . " Referring to its " stripped @-@ bare story and archetypal clarity " , Benoît Peeters believes Tintin in Tibet to be one of the two " pivotal " books in the series , alongside The Blue Lotus , and deems it poignant that Chang features in both . He also suggests that Hergé included the benevolent Yeti to " make up for the interminable massacre " of animals in the second Tintin adventure , Tintin in the Congo , and that the sadness the Yeti experienced at the story 's end reflected Hergé 's feelings about his separation from Germaine . Peeters concluded , " Even more than Art Spiegelman 's Maus , Tintin in Tibet is perhaps the most moving book in the history of the comic strip . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 At a ceremony in Brussels on 1 June 2006 , the Dalai Lama bestowed the International Campaign for Tibet ( ICT ) ' s Light of Truth Award upon the Hergé Foundation in recognition of Tintin in Tibet , which introduced the region to audiences across the globe . ICT executive director Tsering Jampa said , " For many , Hergé 's depiction of Tibet was their introduction to the awe @-@ inspiring landscape and culture of Tibet . " During the ceremony , copies of Tintin in Tibet in the Esperanto language ( <unk> en Tibeto ) were distributed . Accepting the award for the foundation , Hergé 's widow Fanny Rodwell said , " We never thought that this story of friendship would have a resonance more than 40 years later " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Eight years after Hergé 's death , Tintin in Tibet was adapted into an episode of The Adventures of Tintin ( 1991 – 92 ) , a television series by French studio Ellipse and Canadian animation company Nelvana . The episode was directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , with Thierry Wermuth voicing Tintin . Tintin in Tibet was also a 1992 episode of the BBC Radio 4 series The Adventures of Tintin , in which Richard Pearce voiced Tintin . The book became a video game for the PC and Game Boy in 1995 . 
 Tintin and I ( 2003 ) , a documentary by Danish director Anders <unk> Østergaard based on Numa Sadoul 's 1971 interview with Hergé , includes restored portions of the interview that Hergé had heavily edited and rewritten in Sadoul 's book . With full access to the audio recordings , the filmmaker explored the personal issues that the author had while he was creating Tintin in Tibet and how they drove him to create what is now regarded as his most personal adventure . 
 As the centenary of Hergé 's birth approached in 2007 , Tintin remained popular . Tintin in Tibet was adapted into a theatrical musical , Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin , which ran from late 2005 to early 2006 at the Barbican Arts Centre in London . The production , directed by Rufus Norris and adapted by Norris and David Greig , featured Russell Tovey as Tintin . The musical was revived at the Playhouse Theatre in London 's West End before touring in 2007 . In 2010 , the television channel Arte filmed an episode of its documentary series Sur les traces de Tintin ( On the Trail of Tintin ) in the Nepalese Himalayas , exploring the inspiration and setting of Tintin in Tibet . From May to September 2012 , the Musée Hergé in Louvain @-@ la @-@ Neuve hosted an exhibition about the book , entitled Into Tibet with Tintin . 
 = Klondike Gold Rush = 
 The Klondike Gold Rush was a migration by an estimated 100 @,@ 000 prospectors to the Klondike region of the Yukon in north @-@ western Canada between 1896 and 1899 . Gold was discovered there by local miners on August 16 , 1896 and , when news reached Seattle and San Francisco the following year , it triggered a stampede of would @-@ be prospectors . Some became wealthy , but the majority went in vain . The Klondike Gold Rush ended in 1899 after gold was discovered in Nome , Alaska prompting an exodus from the Klondike . It has been immortalized by photographs , books , films , and artifacts . 
 To reach the gold fields most took the route through the ports of Dyea and Skagway in Southeast Alaska . Here , the <unk> could follow either the Chilkoot or the White Pass trails to the Yukon River and sail down to the Klondike . Each of them was required to bring a year 's supply of food by the Canadian authorities in order to prevent starvation . In all , their equipment weighed close to a ton , which for most had to be carried in stages by themselves . Together with mountainous terrain and cold climate this meant that those who persisted did not arrive until summer 1898 . Once there , they found few opportunities and many left disappointed . 
 Mining was challenging as the ore was distributed in an uneven manner and digging was made slow by permafrost . As a result , some miners chose to buy and sell claims , building up huge investments and letting others do the work . To accommodate the prospectors , boom towns sprang up along the routes and at their end Dawson City was founded at the confluence of the Klondike and the Yukon River . From a population of 500 in 1896 , the hastily constructed town came to house around 30 @,@ 000 people by summer 1898 . Built of wood , isolated and unsanitary , Dawson suffered from fires , high prices and epidemics . Despite this , the wealthiest prospectors spent extravagantly gambling and drinking in the saloons . The Native Hän people , on the other hand , suffered from the rush . Many of them died after being moved into a reserve to make way for the stampeders . 
 From 1898 , the newspapers that had encouraged so many to travel to the Klondike lost interest in it . When news arrived in the summer of 1899 that gold had been discovered in Nome in west Alaska , many prospectors left the Klondike for the new goldfields , marking the end of the rush . The boom towns declined and the population of Dawson City fell away . Mining activity of the gold rush lasted until 1903 when production peaked after heavier equipment was brought in . Since then the Klondike has been mined on and off , and today the legacy draws tourists to the region and contributes to its prosperity . 
 = = Background = = 
 The indigenous peoples in north @-@ west America had traded in copper nuggets prior to European expansion . Most of the tribes were aware that gold existed in region but the metal was not valued by them . The Russians and the Hudson 's Bay Company had both explored the Yukon in the first half of the 19th century , but ignored the rumours of gold in favour of fur trading , which offered more immediate profits . 
 In the second half of the 19th century , American prospectors began to spread into the peninsula . Making deals with the Native Tlingit and Tagish tribes , the early prospectors succeeded in opening up the important routes of Chilkoot and White Pass to reach the Yukon valley between 1870 and 1890 . Here , they encountered the Hän people , semi @-@ nomadic hunters and fishermen who lived along the Yukon and Klondike Rivers . The Hän did not appear to know about the extent of the gold deposits in the region . 
 In 1883 , Ed <unk> identified gold deposits along the Yukon River , and an expedition up the Fortymile River in 1886 returned having discovered considerable amounts of it and founded Fortymile City . The same year gold had been found on the banks of Klondike River , but in small amounts and no claims were made . By the late 1880s , several hundred miners were working their way along the Yukon valley , living in small mining camps and trading with the Hän . On the Alaskan side of the border Circle City , a log town , was established 1893 at Yukon River . In three years it grew to become " the Paris of Alaska " with 1200 inhabitants , saloons , opera houses , schools , and libraries . In 1896 it was so well known that a foreign correspondent from The Chicago Daily Record came to visit . At the end of the year it was to become a ghost town when news had arrived about rich amounts of gold found upstream at Klondike . 
 = = Discovery ( 1896 ) = = 
 On August 16 , 1896 , an American prospector named George Carmack , his Tagish wife Kate Carmack ( <unk> <unk> ) , her brother Skookum Jim ( <unk> ) and their nephew Dawson Charlie ( K ̲ <unk> <unk> ̱ ) were travelling south of the Klondike River . Following a suggestion from Robert Henderson , another prospector , they began looking for gold on Bonanza Creek , then called Rabbit Creek , one of the Klondike 's tributaries . It is not clear who discovered the gold : George Carmack or Skookum Jim , but the group agreed to let George Carmack appear as the official discoverer because they feared that mining authorities would be reluctant to recognize a claim made by an Indian . 
 In any event , gold was present along the river in huge quantities . Carmack measured out four claims , strips of ground that could later be legally mined by the owner , along the river ; these including two for himself — one as his normal claim , the second as a reward for having discovered the gold — and one each for Jim and Charlie . The claims were registered next day at the police post at the mouth of the Forty mile River and news spread rapidly from there to other mining camps in the Yukon River valley . 
 By the end of August , all of Bonanza Creek had been claimed by miners . A prospector then advanced up into one of the creeks feeding into Bonanza , later to be named Eldorado Creek . He discovered new sources of gold there , which would prove to be even richer than those on Bonanza . Claims began to be sold between miners and speculators for considerable sums . Just before Christmas , word of the gold reached Circle City . Despite the winter , many prospectors immediately left for the Yukon by dog @-@ sled , eager to reach the region before the best claims were taken . The outside world was still largely unaware of the news and although Canadian officials had managed to send a message to their superiors in Ottawa about the finds and influx of prospectors , the government did not give it much attention . The winter prevented river traffic , and it was not until June 1897 that the first boats left the area , carrying the freshly mined gold and the full story of the discoveries . 
 = = Beginning of the stampede ( July , 1897 ) = = 
 The Klondike stampede was an attempt by an estimated 100 @,@ 000 people to reach the Klondike goldfields , of whom only around 30 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 eventually did . It formed the height of the Klondike gold rush from the summer of 1897 until the summer of 1898 . It began on July 15 , 1897 in San Francisco and was spurred further two days later in Seattle , when the first of the early prospectors returned from the Klondike , bringing with them large amounts of gold on the ships Excelsior and Portland . The press reported that a total of $ 1 @,@ 139 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 000 million at 2010 prices ) had been brought in by these ships , although this proved to be an underestimate . The migration of prospectors caught so much attention that it was joined by outfitters , writers and photographers . 
 Various factors lay behind this sudden mass response . Economically , the news had reached the US at the height of a series of financial recessions and bank failures in the 1890s . The gold standard of the time tied paper money to the production of gold and shortages towards the end of the 19th century meant that gold dollars were rapidly increasing in value ahead of paper currencies and being hoarded . This had contributed to the financial panics of 1893 and 1896 , which caused unemployment and financial uncertainty . There was a huge , unresolved demand for gold across the developed world that the Klondike offered to fulfil and , for individuals , the region promised higher wages or financial security . 
 Psychologically , the Klondike , as historian Pierre Berton describes , was " just far enough away to be romantic and just close enough to be accessible " . Furthermore , the Pacific ports closest to the gold strikes were desperate to encourage trade and travel to the region . The mass journalism of the period promoted the event and the human interest stories that lay behind it . A worldwide publicity campaign engineered largely by Erastus Brainerd , a Seattle newspaper man , helped establish the city as the premier supply centre and the departure point for the gold fields . 
 The prospectors came from many nations , although an estimated majority of 60 to 80 percent were Americans or recent immigrants to America . Most had no experience in the mining industry , being clerks or salesmen . Mass resignations of staff to join the gold rush became notorious . In Seattle , this included the mayor , twelve policemen and a significant percentage of the city 's streetcar drivers . 
 Some stampeders were famous : John McGraw , the former governor of Washington joined together with the prominent lawyer and sportsman A. <unk> . Frederick Burnham , a well @-@ known American scout and explorer arrived from Africa , only to be called back to take part in the Second Boer War . Among those who documented the rush were the Swedish @-@ born photographer Eric Hegg , who took some of the iconic pictures of Chilkoot Pass , and reporter Tappan <unk> , who would afterwards write a first @-@ hand history of the stampede . Jack London , later a famous American writer , left to seek for gold but made his money during the rush mostly by working for prospectors . 
 Seattle and San Francisco competed fiercely for business during the rush , with Seattle winning the larger share of trade . Indeed , one of the first to join the gold rush was William D. Wood , the mayor of Seattle , who resigned and formed a company to transport prospectors to the Klondike . The publicity around the gold rush led to a flurry of branded goods being put onto the market . Clothing , equipment , food and medicines were all sold as " Klondike " goods , allegedly designed for the north @-@ west . Guidebooks were published , giving advice about routes , equipment , mining and capital necessary for the enterprise . The newspapers of the time termed this phenomenon " <unk> " . 
 = = Routes to the Klondike = = 
 Klondike could only be reached by the Yukon River either upstream from its delta , downstream from its head or from somewhere in the middle through its tributaries . River boats could navigate the Yukon in the summer from the delta until a point called Whitehorse above Klondike . Travel in general was made difficult by both the geography and climate . The region was mountainous , the rivers winding and sometimes impassable ; the short summers could be hot , while from October to June , during the long winters , temperatures could drop below − 50 ° C ( − 58 ° F ) . 
 Aids for the travellers to carry their supplies varied ; some had brought dogs , horses , mules or oxen , whereas others had to rely on carrying their equipment on their backs or on sleds pulled by hand . Shortly after the stampede began in 1897 , the Canadian authorities had introduced rules requiring anyone entering Yukon Territory to bring with them a year 's supply of food ; typically this weighed around 1 @,@ 150 pounds ( 520 kg ) . By the time camping equipment , tools and other essentials were included , a typical traveller was transporting as much as a ton in weight . Unsurprisingly , the price of draft animals spiralled ; at Dyea , even poor quality horses could sell for as much as $ 700 ( $ 19 @,@ 000 ) , or be rented out for $ 40 ( $ 1 @,@ 100 ) a day . 
 From Seattle or San Francisco , prospectors could travel by sea up the coast to the ports of Alaska . The route following the coast is now referred to as the Inside Passage . It led to the ports of Dyea and Skagway plus ports of nearby trails . The sudden increase in demand encouraged a range of vessels to be pressed into service including old paddle wheelers , fishing boats , barges and coal ships still full of coal dust — all were overloaded and many sank . 
 = = = All water route = = = 
 It was possible to sail all the way to the Klondike , first from Seattle across the northern Pacific to the Alaskan coast . From St. Michael , at the Yukon River delta , a river boat could then take the prospectors the rest of the way up the river to Dawson , often guided by one of the Native <unk> people who lived near St. Michael . Although this all @-@ water route , also called " the rich man 's route " , was expensive and long , 4 @,@ 700 miles ( 7 @,@ 600 km ) in total , it had the attraction of speed and avoiding overland travel . At the beginning of the stampede a ticket could be bought for $ 150 ( $ 4 @,@ 050 ) while during the winter 1897 – 98 the fare settled at $ 1 @,@ 000 ( $ 27 @,@ 000 ) . 
 In 1897 , 1 @,@ 800 travellers attempted this route but the vast majority were caught along the river when the region iced over in October . Only 43 successfully reached the Klondike before winter and of those 35 had to return , having thrown away their equipment en route to reach their destination in time . The remainder mostly found themselves stranded in isolated camps and settlements along the ice @-@ covered river often in desperate circumstances . 
 = = = Dyea / Skagway routes = = = 
 Most of the prospectors landed at the South @-@ east Alaskan towns of Dyea and Skagway , both located at the head of the natural Lynn Canal at the end of the Inside Passage . From there , they would need to travel 30 miles ( 48 km ) over the mountain ranges into Canada 's Yukon Territory , and then down the river network to the Klondike . Along the trails , tent camps sprung up at places where prospectors had to stop to eat or sleep or at obstacles such as the icy lakes at the head of the Yukon . At the start of the rush , a ticket from Seattle to the port of Dyea cost $ 40 ( $ 1 @,@ 100 ) for a cabin . Premiums of $ 100 ( $ 2 @,@ 700 ) , however , were soon paid and the steamship companies hesitated to post their rates in advance since they could increase on a daily basis . 
 = = = = White Pass trail = = = = 
 Those who landed at Skagway would make their way over the White Pass before cutting across to Bennett Lake . Although the trail began gently , it progressed over several mountains with paths as narrow as 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) and in wider parts covered with boulders and sharp rocks . Under these conditions horses died in huge numbers , giving the route the informal name of Dead Horse Trail . The volumes of travellers and the wet weather made the trail impassable and , by late 1897 , it was closed until further notice , leaving around 5 @,@ 000 stranded in Skagway . 
 An alternative toll road suitable for wagons was eventually constructed and this , combined with colder weather that froze the muddy ground , allowed the White Pass to reopen , and prospectors began to make their way into Canada . Moving supplies and equipment over the pass had to be done in stages . Most divided their belongings into 65 pounds ( 29 kg ) packages that could be carried on a man 's back , or heavier loads that could be pulled by hand on a sled . Ferrying packages forwards and walking back for more , a prospector would need about thirty round trips , a distance of at least 2 @,@ 500 miles ( 4 @,@ 000 km ) , before they had moved all of their supplies to the end of the trail . Even using a heavy sled , a strong man would be covering 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) and need around 90 days to reach Lake Bennett . 
 = = = = Chilkoot trail = = = = 
 Those who landed at Dyea , Skagway 's neighbour town , travelled the Chilkoot Trail and crossed its Pass to reach Lake Lindeman , which fed into Lake Bennett at the head of the Yukon River . The Chilkoot Pass was higher than the White Pass , but more used it : around 22 @,@ 000 during the gold rush . The trail passed up through camps until it reached a flat ledge , just before the main ascent , which was too steep for animals . This location was known as the Scales , and was where goods were weighed before travellers officially entered Canada . The cold , the steepness and the weight of equipment made the climb extremely arduous and it could take a day to get to the top of the 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) high slope . 
 As on the White Pass trail , supplies needed to be broken down into smaller packages and carried in relay . Packers , prepared to carry supplies for cash , were available along the route but would charge up to $ 1 ( $ 27 ) per lb ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) on the later stages ; many of these packers were Natives , members of the Tlingit people or , less commonly , the Tagish . Avalanches were common in the mountains and , on April 3 , 1898 , one claimed the lives of more than 60 people travelling over Chilkoot Pass . 
 Entrepreneurs began to provide solutions as the winter progressed . Steps were cut into the ice at the Chilkoot Pass which could be used for a daily fee , this 1 @,@ 500 step staircase becoming known as the " Golden Steps " . By December 1897 , a tramway powered by a horse at the bottom , which walked in a circle pulling a wheel @-@ mounted rope , had been built by Archie Burns to ferry packages up the final parts of the Chilkoot Pass . Five more tramways soon followed , one powered by a steam engine , charging between 8 and 30 cents ( $ 2 and $ 8 ) per 1 pound ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) . An aerial tramway was built in the spring of 1898 , able to move 9 tonnes of goods an hour up to the summit . 
 = = = = Head of Yukon River = = = = 
 At Lakes Bennett and Lindeman , the prospectors camped to build rafts or boats that would take them the final 500 miles ( 800 km ) down the Yukon to Dawson City in the spring . 7 @,@ 124 boats of varying size and quality left in May 1898 ; by that time , the forests around the lakes had been largely cut down for timber . The river posed a new problem . Until Whitehorse , it was dangerous , with several rapids along the Miles Canyon through to the White Horse Rapids . 
 After many boats were wrecked and several hundred people died , the North @-@ West Mounted Police ( NWMP ) introduced safety rules , vetting the boats carefully and forbidding women and children to travel through the rapids . Additional rules stated that any boat carrying passengers required a licensed pilot , typically costing $ 25 ( $ 680 ) , although some prospectors simply unpacked their boats , let them drift unmanned through the rapids with the intent of walking down to collect them on the other side . During the summer , a horse @-@ powered rail @-@ tramway was built by Norman Macaulay , capable of carrying boats and equipment through the canyon at $ 25 ( $ 680 ) a time , removing the need for prospectors to navigate the rapids . 
 = = = = Parallel trails = = = = 
 There were a few more trails established during 1898 from South @-@ east Alaska to the Yukon River . One was the Dalton trail : starting from Pyramid Harbour , close to Dyea , it went across the <unk> Pass some miles west of Chilkoot and turned north to the Yukon River , a distance of about 350 miles ( 560 km ) . This was created by Jack Dalton as a summer route , intended for cattle and horses , and Dalton charged a toll of $ 250 ( $ 6 @,@ 800 ) for its use . 
 The <unk> route started from Juneau and went north @-@ east to <unk> Lake . From here , it followed a river to the Yukon , where it met the Dyea and Skagway route at a point halfway to the Klondike . It meant dragging and poling canoes up @-@ river and through mud together with crossing a 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) mountain along a narrow trail . Finally , there was the Stikine route starting from the port of Wrangell further south @-@ east of Skagway . This route went up the uneasy Stikine River to Glenora , the head of navigation . From Glenora , prospectors would have to carry their supplies 150 miles ( 240 km ) to <unk> Lake where it , like the <unk> route , met the Yukon River system . 
 = = = All @-@ Canadian routes = = = 
 An alternative to the South @-@ east Alaskan ports were the All @-@ Canadian routes , so @-@ called because they mostly stayed on Canadian soil throughout their journey . These were popular with British and Canadians for patriotic reasons and because they avoided American customs . The first of these , around 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) in length , started from Ashcroft in British Columbia and crossed swamps , river gorges , and mountains until it met with the Stikine River route at Glenora . From Glenora , prospectors would face the same difficulties as those who came from Wrangell . At least 1 @,@ 500 men attempted to travel along the Ashcroft route and 5 @,@ 000 along the Stikine . The mud and the slushy ice of the two routes proved exhausting , killing or incapacitating the pack animals and creating chaos amongst the travellers . 
 Three more routes started from Edmonton , Alberta ; these were not much better - barely trails at all - despite being advertised as " the inside track " and the " back door to the Klondike " . One , the " overland route " , headed north @-@ west from Edmonton , ultimately meeting the Peace River and then continuing on overland to the Klondike , crossing the <unk> River en route . To encourage travel via Edmonton , the government hired T.W. Chalmers to build a trail , which became known as the Klondike Trail or Chalmers Trail . The other two trails , known as the " water routes " , involved more river travel . One went by boat along rivers and overland to the Yukon River system at Pelly River and from there to Dawson . Another went north of Dawson by the Mackenzie River to Fort McPherson , before entering Alaska and meeting the Yukon River at Fort Yukon , downstream to the Klondike . From here , the boat and equipment had to be pulled up the Yukon about 400 miles ( 640 km ) . An estimated 1 @,@ 660 travellers took these three routes , of whom only 685 arrived , some taking up to 18 months to make the journey . 
 = = = = " All @-@ American " route = = = = 
 An equivalent to the All @-@ Canadian routes was the " All @-@ American route " , which aimed to reach the Yukon from the port of Valdez , which lay further along the Alaskan coast from Skagway . This , it was hoped , would evade the Canadian customs posts and provide an American @-@ controlled route into the interior . 3 @,@ 500 men and women attempted it from late 1897 onwards ; delayed by the winter snows , fresh efforts were made in the spring . 
 In practice , the huge Valdez glacier that stood between the port and the Alaskan interior proved almost insurmountable and only 200 managed to climb it ; by 1899 , the cold and scurvy was causing many deaths amongst the rest . Other prospectors attempted an alternative route across the <unk> Glacier just to the east , suffering even greater hardships . Those who did manage to cross it found themselves having to negotiate miles of wilderness before they could reach Dawson . Their expedition was forced to turn back the same way they had come with only four men surviving . 
 = = = Border control = = = 
 The borders in South @-@ east Alaska were disputed between the US , Canada and Britain since the American purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867 . The US and Canada both claimed the ports of Dyea and Skagway . This , combined with the numbers of American prospectors , the quantities of gold being mined and the difficulties in exercising government authority in such a remote area , made the control of the borders a sensitive issue . 
 Early on in the gold rush , the US Army sent a small detachment to Circle City , in case intervention was required in the Klondike , while the Canadian government considered excluding all American prospectors from the Yukon Territory . Neither eventuality took place and instead the US agreed to make Dyea a sub @-@ port of entry for Canadians , allowing British ships to land Canadian passengers and goods freely there , while Canada agreed to permit American miners to operate in the Klondike . Both decisions were unpopular among their domestic publics : American businessmen complained that their right to a monopoly on regional trade was being undermined , while the Canadian public demanded action against the American miners . 
 The North @-@ West Mounted Police set up control posts at the borders of the Yukon Territory or , where that was disputed , at easily controlled points such as the Chilkoot and White Passes . These units were armed with Maxim guns . Their tasks included enforcing the rules requiring that travellers bring a year 's supply of food with them to be allowed into the Yukon Territory , checking for illegal weapons , preventing the entry of criminals and enforcing customs duties . 
 This last task was particularly unpopular with American prospectors , who faced paying an average of 25 percent of the value of their goods and supplies . The Mounties had a reputation for running these posts honestly , although accusations were made that they took bribes . Prospectors , on the other hand , tried to smuggle prize items like silk and whiskey across the pass in tins and bales of hay : the former item for the ladies , the latter for the saloons . 
 = = Mining = = 
 Of the estimated 30 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 people who reached Dawson City during the gold rush , only around 15 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 finally became prospectors . Of these , no more than 4 @,@ 000 struck gold and only a few hundred became rich . By the time most of the stampeders arrived in 1898 , the best creeks had all been claimed , either by the long @-@ term miners in the region , or by the first arrivals of the year before . The Bonanza , Eldorado , <unk> and Dominion Creeks were all taken , with almost 10 @,@ 000 claims recorded by the authorities by July 1898 ; a new prospector would have to look further afield to find a claim of his own . 
 Geologically , the region was permeated with veins of gold , forced to the surface by volcanic action and then worn away by the action of rivers and streams , leaving nuggets and gold dust in deposits known as placer gold . Some ores lay along the creek beds in lines of soil , typically 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) to 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) beneath the surface . Others , formed by even older streams , lay along the hilltops ; these deposits were called " bench gold " . Finding the gold was challenging . Initially , miners had assumed that all the gold would be along the existing creeks , and it was not until late in 1897 that the hilltops began to be mined . Gold was also unevenly distributed in the areas where it was found , which made prediction of good mining sites even more uncertain . The only way to be certain that gold was present was to conduct exploratory digging . 
 = = = Methods = = = 
 Mining began with clearing the ground of vegetation and debris . Prospect holes were then dug in an attempt to find the ore or " pay streak " . If these holes looked productive , proper digging could commence , aiming down to the bedrock , where the majority of the gold was found . The digging would be carefully monitored in case the operation needed to be shifted to allow for changes in the flow . 
 In the sub @-@ Arctic climate of the Klondike , a layer of hard permafrost lay only 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) below the surface . Traditionally , this had meant that mining in the region only occurred during the summer months , but the pressure of the gold rush made such a delay unacceptable . Late 19th century technology existed for dealing with this problem , including hydraulic mining and stripping , and dredging , but the heavy equipment required for this could not be brought into the Klondike during the gold rush . 
 Instead , the miners relied on wood fires to soften the ground to a depth of about 14 inches ( 360 mm ) and then removing the resulting gravel . The process was repeated until the gold was reached . In theory , no support of the shaft was necessary because of the permafrost although in practice sometimes the fire melted the permafrost and caused collapses . Fires could also produce noxious gases , which had to be removed by bellows or other tools . The resulting " dirt " brought out of the mines froze quickly in winter and could only be processed during the warmer summer months . An alternative , more efficient , approach called steam thawing was devised between 1897 and 1898 ; this used a furnace to pump steam directly into the ground , but since it required additional equipment it was not a widespread technique during the years of the rush . 
 In the summer , water would be used to sluice and pan the dirt , separating out the heavier gold from gravel . This required miners to construct sluices , which were sequences of wooden boxes 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) long , through which the dirt would be washed ; up to 20 of these might be needed for each mining operation . The sluices in turn required lots of water , usually produced by creating a dam and ditches or crude pipes . " Bench gold " mining on the hill sides could not use sluice lines because water could not be pumped that high up . Instead , these mines used rockers , boxes that moved back and forth like a cradle , to create the motion needed for separation . Finally , the resulting gold dust could be exported out of the Klondike ; exchanged for paper money at the rate of $ 16 ( $ 430 ) per troy ounce ( ozt ) through one of the major banks that opened in Dawson City , or simply used as money when dealing with local traders . 
 = = = Business = = = 
 Successful mining took time and capital , particularly once most of the timber around the Klondike had been cut down . A realistic mining operation required $ 1 @,@ 500 ( $ 1 @.@ 2 million ) for wood to be burned to melt the ground , along with around $ 1 @,@ 000 ( $ 800 @,@ 000 ) to construct a dam , $ 1 @,@ 500 ( $ 1 @.@ 2 million ) for ditches and up to $ 600 ( $ 480 @,@ 000 ) for sluice boxes , a total of $ 4 @,@ 600 . The attraction of the Klondike to a prospector , however , was that when gold was found , it was often highly concentrated . Some of the creeks in the Klondike were fifteen times richer in gold than those in California , and richer still than those in South Africa . In just two years , for example , $ 230 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 840 million ) worth of gold was brought up from claim 29 on the Eldorado Creek . 
 Under Canadian law , miners first had to get a license , either when they arrived at Dawson or en route from Victoria in Canada . They could then prospect for gold and , when they had found a suitable location , lay claim to mining rights over it . To stake a claim , a prospector would drive stakes into the ground a measured distance apart and then return to Dawson to register the claim for $ 15 ( $ 410 ) . This normally had to be done within three days , and by 1897 only one claim per person at a time was allowed in a district , although married couples could exploit a loophole that allowed the wife to register a claim in her own name , doubling their amount of land . 
 The claim could be mined freely for a year , after which a $ 100 ( $ 2 @,@ 800 ) fee had to be paid annually . Should the prospector leave the claim for more than three days without good reason , another miner could make a claim on the land . The Canadian government also charged a royalty of between 10 and 20 percent on the value of gold taken from a claim . 
 The proper size of a claim was a matter of dispute . Traditionally , a mining claim had been granted over a 500 @-@ foot ( 150 m ) long stretch of a creek , including the land from one side of the valley to another ; the Canadian authorities had tried to reduce this length to 150 feet ( 46 m ) , but under pressure from miners had been forced to agree to 250 @-@ foot ( 76 m ) . The only exception to this was a " Discovery " claim , the first to be made on a creek , which could be 500 feet ( 150 m ) long . The exact lengths of claims were often challenged and when the government surveyor William Ogilvie conducted surveys to settle disputes , he found some claims exceeded the official limit . The excess fractions of land then became available as claims and were sometimes quite valuable . 
 Claims could be bought , however , their price depended on whether they had been yet proved to contain gold . A prospector with capital might consider taking a risk on an " unproved " claim on one of the better creeks for $ 5 @,@ 000 ( $ 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) ; a wealthier miner could buy a " proved " mine for $ 50 @,@ 000 ( $ 40 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) . The well known claim eight on Eldorado Creek was sold for as much as $ 350 @,@ 000 ( $ 280 million ) . Prospectors were also allowed to hire others to work for them , either on their first claim or on later purchases . Enterprising miners such as Alex McDonald set about amassing mines and employees . Leveraging his acquisitions with short term loans , by the autumn of 1897 McDonald had purchased 28 claims , estimated to be worth millions . Swiftwater Bill Gates famously borrowed heavily against his claim on the Eldorado creek , relying on hired hands to mine the gold to keep up his interest payments . 
 The less fortunate or less well funded prospectors rapidly found themselves destitute . Some chose to sell their equipment and return south . Others took jobs as manual workers , either in mines or in Dawson ; the typical daily pay of $ 15 ( $ 410 ) was high by external standards , but low compared to the cost of living in the Klondike . The possibility that a new creek might suddenly produce gold , however , continued to tempt poorer prospectors . Smaller stampedes around the Klondike continued throughout the gold rush , when rumours of new strikes would cause a small mob to descend on fresh sites , hoping to be able to stake out a high value claim . 
 = = Life in the Klondike = = 
 The massive influx of prospectors drove the formation of boom towns along the routes of the stampede , with Dawson City in the Klondike the largest . The new towns were crowded , often chaotic and many disappeared just as soon as they came . Most stampeders were men but women also travelled to the region , typically as the wife of a prospector . Some women entertained in gambling and dance halls built by business men and women who were encouraged by the lavish spending of successful miners . 
 Dawson remained relatively lawful , protected by the Canadian NWMP , which meant that gambling and prostitution were accepted while robbery and murder were kept low . By contrast , especially the port of Skagway under US jurisdiction in Southeast Alaska became infamous for its criminal underworld . The extreme climate and remoteness of the region in general meant that supplies and communication with the outside world including news and mail were scarce . 
 = = = Boom towns = = = 
 The ports of Dyea and Skagway , through which most of the prospectors entered , were tiny settlements before the gold rush , each consisting of only one log cabin . Because there were no docking facilities , ships had to unload their cargo directly onto the beach , where people tried to move their goods before high tide . Inevitably cargos were smashed , stolen or lost in the process . Some travellers had arrived intending to supply goods and services to the would @-@ be miners ; some of these in turn , realizing how difficult it would be to reach Dawson , chose to do the same . Within weeks , storehouses , saloons , and offices lined the muddy streets of Dyea and Skagway , surrounded by tents and hovels . 
 Skagway became famous in international media ; the author John Muir described the town as " a nest of ants taken into a strange country and stirred up by a stick " . While Dyea remained a transit point throughout the winter , Skagway began to take on a more permanent character . Skagway also built wharves out into the bay in order to attract a greater share of the prospectors . The town was effectively lawless , dominated by drinking , gunfire and prostitution . The visiting NWMP Superintendent Sam Steele noted that it was " little better than a hell on earth ... about the roughest place in the world " . Nonetheless , by the summer of 1898 , with a population — including migrants — of between 15 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 , Skagway was the largest city in Alaska . 
 In late summer 1897 Skagway and Dyea fell under the control of Jefferson Randolph " Soapy " Smith and his men , who arrived from Seattle shortly after Skagway began to expand . He was an American confidence man whose gang , 200 to 300 strong , cheated and stole from the prospectors travelling through the region . He maintained the illusion of being an upstanding member of the community , opening three saloons as well as creating fake businesses to assist in his operations . One of his scams was a fake telegraph office charging to send messages all over the US and Canada , often pretending to receive a reply . Opposition to Smith steadily grew and , after weeks of vigilante activity , he was killed in Skagway during the shootout on Juneau Wharf on July 8 , 1898 . 
 Other towns also boomed . Wrangell , port of the Stikine route and boom town from earlier gold rushes , increased in size again , with robberies , gambling and nude female dancing commonplace . Valdez , formed on the Gulf of Alaska during the attempt to create the " All @-@ American " route to the Klondike during the winter of 1897 – 1898 , became a tent city of people who stayed behind to supply the ill @-@ fated attempts to reach the interior . Edmonton in Canada increased from a population of 1 @,@ 200 before the gold rush to 4 @,@ 000 during 1898 . Beyond the immediate region , cities such as San Francisco , Seattle , Tacoma , Portland , Vancouver and Victoria all saw their populations soar as a result of the stampede and the trade it brought along . 
 = = = Dawson City = = = 
 Dawson City was created in the early days of the Klondike gold rush , when prospector Joe Ladue and shopkeeper Arthur Harper decided to make a profit from the influx to the Klondike . The two men bought 178 acres ( 72 ha ) of the mudflats at the junction of the Klondike and Yukon rivers from the government and laid out the street plan for a new town , bringing in timber and other supplies to sell to the migrants . The Hän village of Tr <unk> along Deer Creek was considered to be too close to the new town , and the NWMP Superintendent Charles Constantine moved its inhabitants 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) down @-@ river to a small reserve . The town , in the beginning simply known as " Harper and Ladue town site " , was named Dawson City after the director of Canada 's Geographical Survey . It grew rapidly to hold 500 people by the winter of 1896 , with plots of land selling for $ 500 ( $ 400 @,@ 000 ) each . 
 In the spring of 1898 , Dawson 's population rose further to 30 @,@ 000 as stampeders arrived over the passes . The centre of the town , Front Street , was lined with hastily built buildings and warehouses , together with log cabins and tents spreading out across the rest of the settlement . There was no running water or sewerage , and only two springs for drinking water to supplement the increasingly polluted river . In spring , the unpaved streets were churned into thick mud and in summer the settlement reeked of human effluent and was plagued by flies and mosquitoes . Land in Dawson was now scarce , and plots sold for up to $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 8 million ) each ; prime locations on Front Street could reach $ 20 @,@ 000 ( $ 16 million ) while a small log cabin might rent for $ 100 ( $ 2 @,@ 700 ) a month . As a result , Dawson 's population spread south into the empty Hän village , renaming it Klondike City . Other communities emerged closer to the mines , such as Granville on Dominion Creek and Grand Forks on Bonanza Creek . 
 The newly built town proved highly vulnerable to fire . Houses were made of wood , heated with stoves and lit by candles and oil lamps ; water for emergencies was wanting , especially in the frozen winters . The first major fire occurred on November 25 , 1897 , started accidentally by dance @-@ hall girl Belle Mitchell . She also accidentally started a second major fire on October 14 , 1898 which , in the absence of a fire brigade in Dawson , destroyed two major saloons , the post @-@ office building and the Bank of British North America at a cost of $ 500 @,@ 000 ( $ 400 million ) . The worst fire occurred on April 26 , 1899 when a saloon caught fire in the middle of a strike by the newly established fire brigade . Most of the major landmarks in the town were burned to the ground : 117 buildings were destroyed , with the damage estimated at over $ 1 million ( $ 810 million ) . 
 = = = = Logistics = = = = 
 The remoteness of Dawson proved an ongoing problem for the supply of food and as the population grew to 5 @,@ 000 in 1897 this became critical . When the rivers iced over , it became clear that there would not be enough food for that winter . The NWMP evacuated some prospectors without supplies to Fort Yukon in Alaska from September 30 onwards , while others made their way out of the Klondike in search of food and shelter for the winter . 
 Prices remained high in Dawson and supply fluctuated according to the season . During the winter of 1897 salt became worth its weight in gold , while nails , vital for construction work , rose in price to $ 28 ( $ 760 ) per lb ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) . Cans of butter sold for $ 5 ( $ 140 ) each . The only eight horses in Dawson were slaughtered for dog food as they could not be kept alive over the winter . The first fresh goods arriving in the spring of 1898 sold for record prices , eggs reaching $ 3 ( $ 81 ) each and apples $ 1 ( $ 27 ) . 
 Under these conditions scurvy , a potentially fatal illness caused by the lack of vitamin C , proved a major problem in Dawson City , particularly during the winter where supply of fresh food was not available . English prospectors gave it the local name of " Canadian black leg " , on account of the unpleasant effects of the condition . It struck , among others , writer Jack London and , although not fatal in his case , brought an end to his mining career . Dysentery and malaria were also common in Dawson , and an epidemic of typhoid broke out in July and ran rampant throughout the summer . Up to 140 patients were taken into the newly constructed St Mary 's Hospital and thousands were affected . Measures were taken by the following year to prevent further outbreaks , including the introduction of better sewage management and the piping in of water from further upstream . These gave improvements in 1899 , although typhoid remained a problem . The new Hän reserve , however , lay downstream from Dawson City , and here the badly contaminated river continued to contribute to epidemics of typhoid and diphtheria throughout the gold rush . 
 = = = = Conspicuous consumption = = = = 
 Despite these challenges , the huge quantities of gold coming through Dawson City encouraged a lavish lifestyle amongst the richer prospectors . Saloons were typically open 24 hours a day , with whiskey the standard drink . Gambling was popular , with the major saloons each running their own rooms ; a culture of high stakes evolved , with rich prospectors routinely betting $ 1 @,@ 000 ( $ 27 @,@ 000 ) at dice or playing for a $ 5 @,@ 000 ( $ 140 @,@ 000 ) poker pot . The establishments around Front Street had grand facades in a Parisian style , mirrors and plate @-@ glass windows and , from late 1898 , were lit by electric light . The dance halls in Dawson were particularly prestigious and major status symbols , both for customers and their owners . Wealthy prospectors were expected to drink champagne at $ 60 ( $ 1 @,@ 600 ) a bottle , and the Pavilion dancehall cost its owner , Charlie Kimball , as much as $ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 80 million ) to construct and decorate . Elaborate opera houses were built , bringing singers and specialty acts to Dawson . 
 Tales abounded of prospectors spending huge sums on entertainment — Jimmy McMahon once spent $ 28 @,@ 000 ( $ 760 @,@ 000 ) in a single evening , for example . Most payments were made in gold dust and in places like saloons , there was so much spilled gold that a profit could be made just by sweeping the floor . Some of the richest prospectors lived flamboyantly in Dawson . Swiftwater Bill Gates , a gambler and ladies man who rarely went anywhere without wearing silk and diamonds , was one of them . To impress a woman who liked eggs — then an expensive luxury — he was alleged to have bought all the eggs in Dawson , had them boiled and fed them to dogs . Another miner , Frank Conrad , threw a sequence of gold objects onto the ship when his favourite singer left Dawson City as tokens of his esteem . The wealthiest dance @-@ hall girls followed suit : Daisy D <unk> had a belt made for herself from $ 340 ( $ 9 @,@ 200 ) in gold dollar coins ; another , Gertie Lovejoy , had a diamond inserted between her two front teeth . The miner and businessman Alex McDonald , despite being styled the " King of the Klondike " , was unusual amongst his peers for his lack of grandiose spending . 
 = = = = Law and order = = = = 
 Unlike its American equivalents , Dawson City was a law @-@ abiding town . By 1897 , 96 members of the NWMP had been sent to the district and by 1898 this had increased to 288 , an expensive commitment by the Canadian government . By June 1898 the force was headed by Colonel Sam Steele , an officer with a reputation for firm discipline . In 1898 , there were no murders and only a few major thefts ; in all , only about 150 arrests were made in the Yukon for serious offenses that year . Of these arrests , over half were for prostitution and resulted from an attempt by the NWMP to regulate the sex industry in Dawson : regular monthly arrests , $ 50 ( $ 1 @,@ 400 ) fines and medical inspections were imposed , with the proceeds being used to fund the local hospitals . The so @-@ called blue laws were strictly enforced . Saloons and other establishments closed promptly at midnight on Saturday , and anyone caught working on Sunday was liable to be fined or set to chopping firewood for the NWMP . The NWMP are generally regarded by historians to have been an efficient and honest force during the period , although their task was helped by the geography of the Klondike which made it relatively easy to bar entry to undesirables or prevent suspects from leaving the region . 
 In contrast to the NWMP , the early civil authorities were criticized by the prospectors for being inept and potentially corrupt . Thomas Fawcett was the gold commissioner and temporary head of the Klondike administration at the start of the gold rush ; he was accused of keeping the details of new claims secret and allowing what historian Kathryn Winslow termed " carelessness , ignorance and partiality " to reign in the mine recorder 's office . Following campaigns against him by prospectors , who were backed by the local press , Fawcett was relieved by the Canadian government . His successor , Major James Walsh , was considered a stronger character and arrived in May 1898 but fell ill and returned east in July . It was left to his replacement , William Ogilvie , supported by a Royal Commission , to conduct reforms . The Commission , in lack of evidence , cleared Fawcett of all charges , which meant that he was not punished further than being relieved . Ogilvie proved a much stronger administrator and subsequently revisited many of the mining surveys of his predecessors . 
 = = = News and mail = = = 
 In the remote Klondike , there was a great demand for news and contact with the world outside . During the first months of the stampede in 1897 , it was said that no news was too old to be read . In the lack of newspapers , some prospectors would read can labels until they knew them by heart . The following year , two teams fought their way over the passes to reach Dawson City first , complete with printing @-@ presses , with the aim of gaining control of the newspaper market . Gene Kelly , the editor of the Klondike Nugget arrived first , but without his equipment , and it was the team behind the Midnight Sun who produced the first daily newspaper in Dawson . The Dawson Miner followed shortly after , bringing the number of daily newspapers in the town during the gold rush up to three . The Nugget sold for $ 24 ( $ 680 ) as an annual subscription , and became well known for championing popular causes associated with miners and for its lucid coverage of scandals . Paper was often hard to find and during the winter of 1898 – 99 , the Nugget had to be printed on butcher 's wrapping paper . In the lack of paper , news could be told . In June , 1898 , a prospector bought an edition of the Seattle Post @-@ <unk> at an auction and charged spectators a dollar each to have it read aloud in one of Dawson 's halls . 
 The mail service was chaotic and ill @-@ organised , not at least because government had not anticipated the stampede of prospectors from the United States to the region . Two major problems stood in the way of an effective system . To begin with , any mail from America to Dawson City was sent to Juneau in South @-@ east Alaska before being sent through Dawson and then down the Yukon to Circle City . From here it was then distributed by the US Post Office back up to Dawson . The huge distances involved resulted in delays of several months and frequently the loss of protective envelopes and their addresses . The second problem was in Dawson itself , which initially lacked a post office and therefore relied on two stores and a saloon to act as informal delivery points . The NWMP were tasked to run the mail system by October 1897 , but they were ill @-@ trained to do so . Up to 5 @,@ 700 letters might arrive in a single shipment , all of which had to be collected in person from the post office . This resulted in huge queues , with claimants lining up outside the office for up to three days . Those who had no time and could afford it would pay others to stand in line for them , preferably a woman since they were allowed to get ahead in line out of politeness . Postage stamps , like paper in general , were scarce and rationed to two per customer . By 1899 , trained postal staff took over mail delivery and relieved the NWMP of this task . 
 = = = Role of women = = = 
 In 1898 eight percent of those living in the Klondike territory were women , and in towns like Dawson this rose to 12 percent . Many women arrived with their husbands or families , but others travelled alone . Most came to the Klondike for similar economic and social reasons as male prospectors , but they attracted particular media interest . The gender imbalance in the Klondike encouraged business proposals to ship young , single women into the region to marry newly wealthy miners ; few , if any , of these marriages ever took place , but some single women appear to have travelled on their own in the hope of finding prosperous husbands . Guidebooks gave recommendations for what practical clothes women should take to the Klondike : the female dress code of the time was formal , emphasising long skirts and corsets , but most women adapted this for the conditions of the trails . Regardless of experience , women in a party were typically expected to cook for the group . Few mothers brought their children with them to the Klondike , due to the risks of the travel and the remote location . 
 Once in the Klondike , very few women — less than one percent — actually worked as miners . Many were married to miners ; however , their lives as partners on the gold fields were still hard and often lonely . They had extensive domestic duties , including thawing ice and snow for water , breaking up frozen food , chopping wood and collecting wild foods . In Dawson and other towns , some women took in laundry to make money . This was a physically demanding job , but could be relatively easily combined with child care duties . Others took jobs in the service industry , for example as waitresses or seamstresses , which could pay well , but were often punctuated by periods of unemployment . Both men and women opened roadhouses , but women were considered to be better at running them . A few women worked in the packing trade , carrying goods on their backs , or became domestic servants . 
 Wealthier women with capital might invest in mines and other businesses . One of the most prominent businesswomen in the Klondike , was Belinda <unk> . She brought a consignment of cloth and hot water bottles with her when she arrived in the Klondike in early 1897 and with the proceeds of those sales she first built a roadhouse at Grand Forks and later a grand hotel in Dawson . She invested widely , including acquiring her own mining company , and was reputed to be the richest woman of the Klondike . The wealthy Martha Black was abandoned by her husband early in the journey to the Klondike , but continued on without him , reaching Dawson City where she became a prominent citizen , investing in various mining and business ventures with her brother . 
 A relatively small number of women worked in the entertainment and sex industries . The elite of these women were the highly paid actresses and courtesans of Dawson ; beneath them were chorus line dancers , who usually doubled as hostesses , and other dance hall workers . While still better paid than white @-@ collar male workers , these women worked very long hours and had significant expenses . The entertainment industry merged into the sex industry , where women made a living as prostitutes . The sex industry in the Klondike was concentrated on Klondike City and in a <unk> area of Dawson . A hierarchy of sexual employment existed , with brothels and parlour houses at the top , small independent " cigar shops " in the middle , and , at the bottom , the prostitutes who worked out of small huts called " <unk> " . Life for these workers was a continual struggle and the suicide rate was high . 
 The degree of involvement between Native women and the stampeders varied . Many Tlingit women worked as packers for the prospectors , for example , carrying supplies and equipment , sometimes also transporting their babies as well . Hän women had relatively little contact with the white immigrants , however , and there was a significant social divide between local Hän women and white women . Although before 1897 there had been a number of Native women who married western men , including Kate Carmack , the Tagish wife of one of the discoverers , this practice did not survive into the stampede . Very few stampeders married Hän women , and very few Hän women worked as prostitutes . " Respectable " white women would avoid associating with Native women or prostitutes : those that did could cause scandal . 
 = = End of the gold rush = = 
 By 1899 telegraphy stretched from Skagway , Alaska to Dawson City , Yukon , allowing instant international contact . In 1898 , the White Pass and Yukon Route railway began to be built between Skagway and the head of navigation on the Yukon . When it was completed in 1900 , the Chilkoot trail and its tramways were obsolete . Despite these improvements in communication and transport , the rush faltered from 1898 on . It began in summer 1898 when many of the prospectors arriving in Dawson City found themselves unable to make a living and left for home . For those who stayed , the wages of casual work , depressed by the number of men , fell to $ 100 ( $ 2 @,@ 700 ) a month by 1899 . The world 's newspapers began to turn against the Klondike gold rush as well . In the spring of 1898 the Spanish – American War removed Klondike from the headlines . " Ah , go to the Klondike ! " became a popular phrase to express disgust with an idea . Unsold , Klondike @-@ branded goods had to be disposed of at special rates in Seattle . 
 Another factor in the decline was the change in Dawson City , which had developed throughout 1898 , metamorphosing from a ramshackle , if wealthy , boom town into a more sedate , conservative municipality . Modern luxuries were introduced , including the " zinc bath tubs and pianos , billiard tables , Brussels carpets in the hotel dining rooms , menus printed in French and invitational balls " noted by historian Kathryn Winslow . The visiting Senator Jerry Lynch likened the newly paved streets with their smartly dressed inhabitants to the Strand in London . It was no longer as attractive a location for many prospectors , used to a wilder way of living . Even the formerly lawless town of Skagway had become a stable and respectable community by 1899 . 
 The final trigger , however , was the discovery of gold elsewhere in Canada and Alaska , prompting a new stampede , this time away from the Klondike . In August 1898 , gold had been found at <unk> Lake at the head of the Yukon River , generating a flurry of interest , but during the winter of 1898 – 99 much larger quantities were found at Nome at the mouth of the Yukon . In 1899 , a flood of prospectors from across the region left for Nome , 8 @,@ 000 from Dawson alone during a single week in August . The Klondike gold rush was over . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = People = = = 
 Only a handful of the 100 @,@ 000 people who left for the Klondike during the gold rush became rich . They typically spent $ 1 @,@ 000 ( $ 27 @,@ 000 ) each reaching the region , which when combined exceeded what was produced from the gold fields between 1897 and 1901 . At the same time , most of those who did find gold lost their fortunes in the subsequent years . They often died penniless , attempting to reproduce their earlier good fortune in fresh mining opportunities . Businessman and miner Alex McDonald , for example , continued to accumulate land after the boom until his money ran out ; he died in poverty , still prospecting . Antoine <unk> , who discovered gold on Eldorado Creek , abused alcohol , dissipated his fortune and ended working in a ship 's kitchen to pay his way . The three discoverers had mixed fates . George Carmack left his wife Kate — who had found it difficult to adapt to their new lifestyle — remarried and lived in relative prosperity ; Skookum Jim had a huge income from his mining royalties but refused to settle and continued to prospect until his death in 1916 ; Dawson Charlie spent lavishly and died in an alcohol @-@ related accident . 
 The richest of the Klondike saloon owners , businessmen and gamblers also typically lost their fortunes and died in poverty . Gene Allen , for example , the editor of the Klondike Nugget , became bankrupt and spent the rest of his career in smaller newspapers ; the prominent gambler and saloon owner Sam Bonnifield suffered a nervous breakdown and died in extreme poverty . Nonetheless , some of those who joined the gold rush prospered . Kate Rockwell , " Klondike Kate " , for example , became a famous dancer in Dawson and remained popular in America until her death . Dawson City was also where Alexander Pantages , her business partner and lover , started his career , going on to become one of America 's greatest theatre and movie tycoons . The businesswoman Martha Black remarried and ultimately became the second female member of the Canadian parliament . 
 The impact of the gold rush on the Native peoples of the region was considerable . The Tlingit and the <unk> peoples prospered in the short term from their work as guides , packers and from selling food and supplies to the prospectors . In the longer term , however , especially the Hän people living in the Klondike region suffered from the environmental damage of the gold mining on the rivers and forests . Their population had already begun to decline after the discovery of gold along Fortymile River in the 1880s but dropped catastrophically after their move to the reserve , a result of the contaminated water supply and smallpox . The Hän found only few ways to benefit economically from the gold rush and their fishing and hunting grounds were largely destroyed ; by 1904 they needed aid from the NWMP to prevent famine . 
 = = = Places = = = 
 Dawson City declined after the gold rush . Transport improvements meant that heavier mining equipment could be brought in and larger , more modern mines established in the Klondike , revolutionising the gold industry . Gold production increased until 1903 as a result of the dredging and hydraulic mining but then declined ; by 2005 , approximately 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 pounds ( 570 @,@ 000 kg ) had been recovered from the Klondike area . When the journalist Laura Berton ( future mother of Pierre Berton ) moved to Dawson in 1907 it was still thriving , but away from Front Street , the town had become increasingly deserted , jammed , as she put it , " with the refuse of the gold rush : stoves , furniture , gold @-@ pans , sets of dishes , double @-@ <unk> seltzer bottles ... piles of rusting mining machinery — boilers , winches , wheelbarrows and pumps " . By 1912 , only around 2 @,@ 000 inhabitants remained compared to the 30 @,@ 000 of the boom years and the site was becoming a ghost town . By 1972 , 500 people were living in Dawson whereas the nearby settlements created during the gold rush had been entirely abandoned . In the 21st century Dawson City still has a small gold mining industry , which together with tourism , drawing on the legacy of the gold rush , plays a role in the local economy . Many buildings in the center of the town reflect the style of the era . The population has grown since the 1970s , with 1 @,@ 300 recorded in 2006 . Klondike River valley is affected by the gold rush by the heavy dredging that occurred after it . 
 The port of Skagway also shrank after the rush , but remains a well @-@ preserved period town , centered on the tourist industry and sight @-@ seeing trips from visiting cruise ships . Restoration work by the National Park Service began in 2010 on Jeff Smith 's Parlor , from which the famous con man " Soapy " Smith once operated . Skagway also has one of the two visitor centres forming the Klondike Gold Rush National Historical Park ; the other is located in Seattle , and both focus on the human interest stories behind the gold rush . By contrast , Dyea , Skagway 's neighbour and former rival , was abandoned after the gold rush and is now a ghost town . The railway built for prospectors through White Pass in the last year of the rush reopened in 1988 and is today only used by tourists , closely linked to the Chilkoot trail which is a popular hiking route . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 The events of the Klondike gold rush rapidly became embedded in North American culture , being captured in poems , stories , photographs and promotional campaigns long after the end of the stampede . In the Yukon , Discovery Day is celebrated on the third Monday in August as a holiday , and the events of the gold rush are promoted by the regional tourist industries . The events of the gold rush were frequently exaggerated at the time and modern works on the subject similarly often focus on the most dramatic and exciting events of the stampede , not always accurately . Historian Ken Coates describes the gold rush as " a resilient , pliable myth " , which continues to fascinate and appeal . 
 Several novels , books and poems were generated as a consequence of the Klondike gold rush . The writer Jack London incorporated scenes from the gold rush into his novels set in the Klondike , including The Call of the Wild , a novel about a sledge dog . His colleague , poet Robert W. Service , did not join the rush himself , although he made his home in Dawson City in 1908 . Service created well @-@ known poems about the gold rush , among them Songs of a Sourdough , one of the bestselling books of poetry in the first decade of the 20th century , along with his novel , The Trail of ' 98 , which was written by hand on wallpaper in one of Dawson 's log cabins . The Canadian historian Pierre Berton grew up in Dawson where his father had been a prospector , and wrote several historical books about the gold rush , such as The Last Great Gold Rush . The experiences of the Irish <unk> Mac <unk> resulted the posthumous work Rotha Mór an <unk> ( translated into English as The Hard Road to Klondike in 1962 ) , a vivid description of the period . 
 Some terminology from the stampede made its way into North American English like " <unk> " , referring to newly arrived miners , and " <unk> " , experienced miners . The photographs taken during the Klondike gold rush heavily influenced later cultural approaches to the stampede . The gold rush was vividly recorded by several early photographers , for instance Eric Hegg ; these stark , black @-@ and @-@ white photographs showing the ascent of the Chilkoot pass rapidly became iconic images and were widely distributed . These pictures in turn inspired Charlie Chaplin to make the The Gold Rush , a silent movie , which uses the background of the Klondike to combine physical comedy with its character 's desperate battle for survival in the harsh conditions of the stampede . The photographs reappear in the documentary City of Gold from 1957 which , narrated by Pierre Berton , won prizes for pioneering the incorporation of still images into documentary film @-@ making . The Klondike gold rush , however , has not been widely covered in later fictional films ; even The Far Country , a Western from 1955 set in the Klondike , largely ignores the unique features of the gold rush in favour of a traditional Western plot . Indeed , much of the popular literature on the gold rush approaches the stampede simply as a final phase of the expansion of the American West , a perception critiqued by modern historians such as Charlene <unk> . 
 = = Appendix = = 
 = = = Archives = = = 
 Library and Archives Canada , images 
 University of Washington Library , Digital Collections ; Alaska and Western Canada Collection 
 University of Washington Library , Eric A. Hegg Gold Rush Photography Collection 
 University of Washington Library , Frank La Roche Photography ; including images of the Klondike Gold Rush 
 University of Washington Library , William E. <unk> Photography 
 University of Washington Library . Henry M. <unk> Photography - Documents his adventures in the Klondike Gold Rush from August 1897 to November 1901 
 Alaska Digital Archives 
 = = = Private collections = = = 
 Photo of Klondike River valley from 1983 showing traces of dredging 
 = Tropical Depression One ( 1992 ) = 
 Tropical Depression One in June 1992 produced 100 @-@ year floods in portions of southwestern Florida . The first tropical depression and second tropical cyclone of the 1992 Atlantic hurricane season , the depression developed on June 25 from a tropical wave . Located in an environment of strong wind shear , much of the convection in the system was located well to the southeast of the poorly defined center of circulation . The depression moved northeastward and made landfall near Tampa , Florida on June 26 shortly before dissipating over land . 
 The depression , in combination with an upper @-@ level trough to its west , produced heavy rainfall to the east of its path , peaking at 33 @.@ 43 inches ( 849 mm ) in Cuba and 25 inches ( 635 mm ) in Florida . In Cuba , the rainfall destroyed hundreds of homes and caused two fatalities . In Florida , particularly in Sarasota and Manatee counties , the rainfall caused severe flooding . 4 @,@ 000 houses were affected , forcing thousands to evacuate . The flooding killed two in the state and was indirectly responsible for a traffic causality . Damage in Florida totaled over $ 2 @.@ 6 million ( 1992 USD , $ 4 million 2009 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A weak tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on June 12 . It tracked westward across the tropical Atlantic Ocean with minimal convection , and subsequent to moving through the southern Windward Islands it crossed northern Central America . Convection increased on June 20 as the wave entered the southwestern Caribbean . Under the influence of southeasterly flow from developing Hurricane Celia in the eastern Pacific Ocean and the south @-@ southwesterly flow from a mid- to upper @-@ level trough over the Gulf of Mexico , the area of disturbed weather tracked generally north @-@ northwestward through the Caribbean Sea while spreading across Cuba and southern Florida . On June 24 , a mid @-@ level circulation developed near the Yucatán Channel , and shortly thereafter satellite image loops indicated deep convection with some cyclonic rotation near the western tip of Cuba . A reconnaissance aircraft flight was dispatched late on June 24 into the system to determine if it developed into a tropical cyclone , though the flight did not observe evidence of a closed low @-@ level circulation . Subsequent to the flight , satellite imagery indicated a low @-@ level circulation was forming , and on June 25 ship and buoy data confirmed the system developed into Tropical Depression One while located about 235 miles ( 375 km ) west @-@ southwest of Key West , Florida . Operationally , the National Hurricane Center incorrectly classified the system as Tropical Depression Two due to an earlier subtropical storm . 
 Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression was poorly organized , with much of the convection located well to the southeast of the broad center due to strong upper @-@ level wind shear . The shearing environment was caused by a trough in the Gulf of Mexico and from the outflow from Pacific Hurricane Celia . This was reflected in forecasts , with the National Hurricane Center predicting no significant change in intensity or structure . The depression moved northward before turning to the northeast , and on June 26 the poorly organized system made landfall just north of Tampa , Florida . The low @-@ level circulation dissipated while crossing the Florida peninsula , with the remnants continuing northeastward before being absorbed by a large extratropical cyclone over the western Atlantic . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The tropical depression , in combination with the upper @-@ level trough to its west , produced moderate precipitation across Cuba , peaking at 33 @.@ 43 inches ( 849 mm ) . This is the fifth highest known rainfall total from a tropical cyclone in the country . The rainfall primarily affected the provinces of Pinar del Río , Matanzas , and Havana . Two Cuban citizens were killed by the rainfall , with an Arab student reported missing and presumed drowned . The deluge damaged or destroyed hundreds of houses in Pinar del Río and Havana provinces . 
 In Florida , the depression produced moderate winds near the coast , peaking at 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) in Naples . As in Cuba , the system dropped torrential rainfall , peaking at 25 inches ( 635 mm ) at Arcadia Tower . Large portions of the state reported totals in excess of 10 inches ( 255 mm ) from the depression , with much of Sarasota County receiving over 20 inches ( 510 mm ) of rain . The rainfall was classified as a 100 @-@ year flood in Sarasota and Manatee counties , where flooding reached 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) deep in some locations . Officials in Manatee County declared a state of emergency in response to the flooding . There , about 3 @,@ 000 people were forced to evacuate their homes due to the flooding , some of whom left by boat . The flooding damaged about 50 houses in and around <unk> . Due to the evacuations , no injuries were reported . The reservoir in Manatee County rose to over 39 feet ( 11 @.@ 9 m ) , 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal , which resulted in officials opening floodgates to prevent flooding . 
 In Sarasota County , the flooding closed several roads and led to many overflown creeks and rivers , including the Horse Creek which crested at 5 @.@ 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) above flood level . Damage to roads and bridges totaled about $ 1 million . Due to the flat landscape of the region , the flooding persisted for several days . The depression spawned a tornado in a mobile home park in Nokomis , destroying the roofs of five homes and causing leaks in twelve others . Throughout the area , the passage of the depression left about 45 @,@ 000 customers without power , primarily due to gusty winds . The outages were fairly short @-@ lived due to power companies calling in extra workers to restore the power . Moderate winds toppled a construction crane at the northern end of the Sunshine Skyway Bridge , closing the bridge for 35 minutes before the crane was removed . In Pinellas County , a man hydroplaned while driving along a flooded roadway ; he crashed into a concrete pole and was killed . Severe crop damage to orange trees was reported in association with the flooding . Damage from the depression totaled over $ 2 @.@ 6 million ( 1992 USD , $ 4 million 2008 USD ) , with about 4 @,@ 000 houses affected by the flooding and an additional 70 destroyed . Two people were killed in Florida . 
 On August 14 , about six weeks after the flooding , President George H. W. Bush declared a major disaster area for Charlotte , DeSoto , Manatee , and Sarasota counties . The declaration allowed for the use of federal funding to assist in the aftermath of the system . 
 = Newt Gingrich = 
 Newton Leroy " Newt " Gingrich ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born Newton Leroy McPherson ; June 17 , 1943 ) is an American political consultant , former politician , and historian . He represented Georgia 's 6th congressional district as a Republican from 1979 until his resignation in 1999 , and served as the 50th Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives from 1995 to 1999 . In 2012 , Gingrich was a candidate for the Republican Party presidential nomination . 
 In the 1970s , Gingrich taught history and geography at the University of West Georgia . During this period he ran twice ( 1974 and 1976 ) for the United States House of Representatives before winning in November 1978 . He served as House Minority Whip from 1989 to 1995 . 
 A co @-@ author and architect of the " Contract with America " , Gingrich was a major leader in the Republican victory in the 1994 congressional election . In 1995 , Time named him " Man of the Year " for " his role in ending the four @-@ decades @-@ long Democratic majority in the House " . While he was House Speaker , the House enacted welfare reform , passed a capital gains tax cut in 1997 , and in 1998 passed the first balanced budget since 1969 . The poor showing by Republicans in the 1998 Congressional elections , a reprimand from the House for Gingrich 's ethics violation , and pressure from Republican colleagues caused Gingrich 's resignation from the speakership on November 6 , 1998 , followed by his outright resignation from the House on January 3 , 1999 . 
 Since leaving the House , Gingrich has remained active in public policy debates and worked as a political consultant . He founded and chaired several policy think tanks , including American Solutions for Winning the Future and the Center for Health Transformation . He has written or co @-@ authored 27 books . In May 2011 , he announced his unsuccessful campaign for the Republican presidential nomination . On May 2 , 2012 , Gingrich ended his presidential campaign and endorsed then @-@ front @-@ runner Mitt Romney , who went on to win the nomination . 
 After being raised Lutheran and spending most of his adult life as a Southern Baptist , Gingrich converted to Roman Catholicism in 2009 . He has been married three times , with the first two marriages ending in affairs and divorce . He has two children from his first marriage and has been married to Callista Gingrich ( née Bisek ) since 2000 . 
 Currently , Gingrich serves as an advisor to the Canadian mining company Barrick Gold . 
 On July 12 , 2016 , it was announced that Gingrich was on Donald Trump 's three @-@ person shortlist to be the presumptive Republican nominee 's running mate in the 2016 presidential election , along with New Jersey Governor Chris Christie and Indiana Governor Mike Pence . However , on July 15 , 2016 , Trump officially announced that Pence will be Trump 's running mate . 
 = = Early life , family , and education = = 
 Newton Leroy McPherson was born at the Harrisburg Hospital in Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , on June 17 , 1943 . His mother , Kathleen " Kit " ( née Daugherty ; 1925 – 2003 ) , and father , Newton Searles McPherson ( 1923 – 1970 ) , married in September 1942 , when she was 16 and McPherson was 19 . The marriage fell apart within days . He is of German , Scottish , and Irish descent . 
 In 1946 , his mother married Army officer Robert Gingrich ( 1925 – 1996 ) , who adopted Newt . His father , a career officer , served tours in Korea and Vietnam . In 1956 the family moved to Europe living for a period in Orleans , France and Stuttgart , Germany . 
 Gingrich has three younger half @-@ sisters , Candace Gingrich , Susan Gingrich , and Roberta Brown . Gingrich was raised in Hummelstown ( near Harrisburg ) and on military bases where Robert Gingrich was stationed . The family 's religion was Lutheran . He also has a half @-@ sister and half @-@ brother , Randy McPherson , from his father 's side . In 1960 the family moved to Georgia at Fort Benning during his junior year in high school . 
 In 1961 , Gingrich graduated from Baker High School in Columbus , Georgia . He had been interested in politics since his teen years while living in Orléans , France . He visited the site of the Battle of Verdun and learned about the sacrifices made there and the importance of political leadership . 
 Gingrich avoided the draft , receiving deferments for being a student and being a father , and he did not serve in the military . He expressed some regret about that decision in 1985 , saying , " Given everything I believe in , a large part of me thinks I should have gone over . " 
 Gingrich received a B.A. degree in history from Emory University in Atlanta in 1965 . He then proceeded to earn an M.A. ( 1968 ) and a Ph.D. in European history ( 1971 ) , both from Tulane University in New Orleans . He spent six months in Brussels in 1969 – 70 working on his dissertation , " Belgian Education Policy in the Congo 1945 – 1960 " . In 1970 , Gingrich joined the history department at West Georgia College as an assistant professor . In 1974 he moved to the geography department and was instrumental in establishing an interdisciplinary environmental studies program . Denied tenure , he left the college in 1978 as he was elected to Congress . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Gingrich was the southern regional director for Nelson Rockefeller in 1968 . 
 = = = Congressional campaigns = = = 
 In 1974 , Gingrich made his first bid for political office as the Republican candidate in Georgia 's 6th congressional district , which stretched from the southern Atlanta suburbs to the Alabama state line . He lost to 20 @-@ year incumbent Democrat Jack Flynt by 2 @,@ 770 votes . Gingrich ran up huge margins in the more suburban areas of the district , but was unable to overcome Flynt 's lead in the more rural areas . Gingrich 's relative success came as a considerable shock on two fronts . Flynt had never faced a serious challenger — indeed , Gingrich was only the second Republican to even run against him . Additionally , 1974 was a disastrous year for Republicans nationally due to fallout from the Watergate scandal . 
 Gingrich sought a rematch in 1976 . While the Republicans did slightly better in the 1976 House elections than in 1974 nationally , the Democratic candidate in the 1976 presidential election was former Governor of Georgia , Jimmy Carter . Carter won over two @-@ thirds of the vote in his native Georgia . As a possible result of Carter 's coattails , Gingrich lost by 5 @,@ 100 votes . 
 With Gingrich priming for another run in the 1978 elections , Flynt decided not to run for re @-@ election and retired . Gingrich defeated Democratic State Senator Virginia <unk> by 7 @,@ 500 votes . Gingrich was re @-@ elected six times from this district , only facing a close general election race once — in the House elections of 1990 — when he won by 978 votes in a race against Democrat David Worley . Although the district was trending Republican at the national level , conservative Democrats continued to hold most local offices , as well as most of the area 's seats in the General Assembly , well into the 1980s . 
 = = In Congress = = 
 In 1981 , Gingrich co @-@ founded the Military Reform Caucus ( MRC ) and the Congressional Aviation and Space Caucus . During the 1983 congressional page sex scandal , Gingrich was among those calling for the expulsion of representatives Dan Crane and Gerry <unk> . Gingrich supported a proposal to ban loans from the International Monetary Fund to Communist countries and he endorsed a bill to make Martin Luther King , Jr . ' s birthday a national holiday . 
 In 1983 , he founded the Conservative Opportunity Society ( COS ) , a group that included young conservative House Republicans . Early COS members included Robert Smith Walker , Judd Gregg , Dan Coats and Connie Mack III . The group expanded over time to comprise several dozen representatives who met each week to exchange and develop ideas . 
 Gingrich 's analysis of polls and public opinion identified the group 's initial focus . Ronald Reagan adopted the " opportunity society " ideas for his 1984 re @-@ election campaign , supporting the group 's conservative goals on economic growth , education , crime , and social issues , which he had not emphasized during his first term . Reagan also referenced an " opportunity " society in the first State of the Union address of his second term . 
 In May 1988 , Gingrich ( along with 77 other House members and Common Cause ) brought ethics charges against Democratic Speaker Jim Wright , who was alleged to have used a book deal to circumvent campaign @-@ finance laws and House ethics rules . During the investigation , it was noted Gingrich had his own unusual book deal , for Window of Opportunity , in which publicity expenses were covered by a limited partnership , which raised $ 105 @,@ 000 from Republican political supporters to promote sales of Gingrich 's book . Gingrich 's success in forcing Wright 's resignation was in part responsible for his rising influence in the Republican caucus . 
 In March 1989 , Gingrich became House Minority Whip in a close election against Edward Rell Madigan . This was Gingrich 's first formal position of power within the Republican party He stated his intention to " build a much more aggressive , activist party " . Early in his role as Whip , in May 1989 , Gingrich was involved in talks about the appointment of a Panamanian administrator of the Panama Canal , which was scheduled to occur in 1989 subject to U.S. government approval . Gingrich was outspoken in his opposition to giving control over the canal to an administrator appointed by the dictatorship in Panama . 
 Gingrich and others in the House , including the newly minted Gang of Seven , railed against what they saw as ethical lapses under Democratic control for almost 40 years . The House banking scandal and Congressional Post Office scandal were emblems of the exposed corruption . Gingrich himself was among members of the House who had engaged in check kiting ; he had overdrafts on twenty @-@ two checks , including a $ 9 @,@ 463 check to the Internal Revenue Service in 1990 . 
 In 1990 , after consulting focus groups with the help of pollster Frank Luntz , <unk> distributed a memo with a cover letter signed by Gingrich titled " Language , a Key Mechanism of Control " , that encouraged Republicans to " speak like Newt " and contained lists of " contrasting words " — words with negative connotations such as " radical " , " sick , " and " traitors " — and " optimistic positive governing words " such as " opportunity " , " courage " , and " principled " , that Gingrich recommended for use in describing Democrats and Republicans , respectively . 
 As a result of the 1990 United States Census , Georgia picked up an additional seat for the 1992 U.S. House elections . However , the Democratic @-@ controlled Georgia General Assembly under the leadership of fiercely partisan Speaker of the House Tom Murphy specifically targeted Gingrich , eliminating the district that Gingrich represented . <unk> split Gingrich 's territory among three neighboring districts . Much of the southern portion of Gingrich 's district , including his home in Carrollton , was drawn into the Columbus @-@ based 3rd District , represented by five @-@ term Democrat Richard Ray . Gingrich remarked that " The Speaker , by raising money and gerrymandering , has sincerely dedicated a part of his career to wiping me out . " At the same time , the Assembly created a new , heavily Republican 6th District in Fulton and Cobb counties in the wealthy northern suburbs of Atlanta — -an area that Gingrich had never represented . However , Gingrich sold his home in Carrollton and moved to Marietta in the new 6th . His primary opponent , State Representative Herman Clark , made an issue out of Gingrich 's 22 <unk> checks in the House Bank Scandal , and also criticized Gingrich for moving into the district . After a recount Gingrich prevailed by 980 votes , or a 51 % to 49 % result — all but assuring him of election in November . He was re @-@ elected three times from this district against only nominal Democratic opposition . 
 = = = " Republican Revolution " of 1994 = = = 
 In the 1994 campaign season , in an effort to offer an alternative to Democratic policies and to unite distant wings of the Republican Party , Gingrich and several other Republicans came up with a Contract with America , which laid out ten policies that Republicans promised to bring to a vote on the House floor during the first hundred days of the new Congress , if they won the election . The contract was signed by Gingrich and other Republican candidates for the House of Representatives . The contract ranged from issues such as welfare reform , term limits , tougher crime laws , and a balanced budget law , to more specialized legislation such as restrictions on American military participation in United Nations missions . 
 In the November 1994 elections , Republicans gained 54 seats and took control of the House for the first time since 1954 . Long @-@ time House Minority Leader Bob Michel of Illinois had not run for re @-@ election , giving Gingrich , the highest @-@ ranking Republican returning to Congress , the inside track at becoming Speaker . The midterm election that turned congressional power over to Republicans " changed the center of gravity " in the nation 's capital . Time magazine named Gingrich its 1995 " Man of the Year " for his role in the election . 
 = = Speaker of the House = = 
 The House fulfilled Gingrich 's promise to bring all ten of the Contract 's issues to a vote within the first 100 days of the session , even though most of the legislation was initially held up in the Senate by the objection of liberal / progressive interest groups and President Clinton , who called it the " Contract on America " . 
 Legislation proposed by the 104th United States Congress included term limits for Congressional Representatives , tax cuts , welfare reform , and a balanced budget amendment , as well as independent auditing of the finances of the House of Representatives and elimination of non @-@ essential services such as the House barbershop and shoe @-@ shine concessions . Following Gingrich 's first two years as House Speaker , the Republican majority was re @-@ elected in the 1996 election , the first time Republicans had done so in 68 years , and the first time simultaneously with a Democratic president winning re @-@ election . 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 = = = = Welfare reform = = = = 
 A central pledge of President Bill Clinton 's campaign was to reform the welfare system , adding changes such as work requirements for recipients . However , by 1994 , the Clinton Administration appeared to be more concerned with pursuing a universal health care program . Gingrich accused Clinton of stalling on welfare , and proclaimed that Congress could pass a welfare reform bill in as little as 90 days . He insisted that the Republican Party would continue to apply political pressure to the President to approve their welfare legislation . 
 In 1996 , after constructing two welfare reform bills that Clinton vetoed , Gingrich and his supporters pushed for passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act , which was intended to reconstruct the welfare system . The act gave state governments more autonomy over welfare delivery , while also reducing the federal government 's responsibilities . It instituted the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program , which placed time limits on welfare assistance and replaced the longstanding Aid to Families with Dependent Children program . Other changes to the welfare system included stricter conditions for food stamp eligibility , reductions in immigrant welfare assistance , and work requirements for recipients . The bill was signed into law on August 22 , 1996 . 
 In his 1998 book Lessons Learned the Hard Way , Gingrich encouraged volunteerism and spiritual renewal , placing more importance on families , creating tax incentives and reducing regulations for businesses in poor neighborhoods , and increasing property ownership by low @-@ income families . He also praised Habitat for Humanity for sparking the movement to improve people 's lives by helping them build their own homes . 
 = = = = Balancing the federal budget = = = = 
 Although congressional Republicans had opposed Clinton 's Deficit Reduction Act of 1993 , a key aspect of the 1994 Contract with America was the promise of a balanced federal budget . After the end of the government shutdown , Gingrich and other Republican leaders acknowledged that Congress would not be able to draft a balanced budget in 1996 . Instead , they opted to approve some small reductions that were already approved by the White House and to wait until the next election season . 
 By May 1997 , Republican congressional leaders reached a compromise with Democrats and President Clinton on the federal budget . The agreement called for a federal spending plan designed to reduce the federal deficit and achieve a balanced budget by 2002 . The plan included a total of $ 152 billion in bipartisan tax cuts over five years . Other major parts of the spending plan called for $ 115 billion to be saved through a restructuring of Medicare , $ 24 billion set aside to extend health insurance to children of the working poor , tax credits for college tuition , and a $ 2 billion welfare @-@ to @-@ work jobs initiative . 
 President Clinton signed the budget legislation in August 1997 . At the signing , Gingrich gave credit to ordinary Americans stating , " It was their political will that brought the two parties together . " 
 In early 1998 , with the economy performing better than expected , increased tax revenues helped reduce the federal budget deficit to below $ 25 billion . Clinton submitted a balanced budget for 1999 , three years ahead of schedule originally proposed , making it the first time the federal budget had been balanced since 1969 . 
 = = = = Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 = = = = 
 In 1997 President Clinton signed into effect the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 , which included the largest capital gains tax cut in U.S. history . Under the act , the profits on the sale of a personal residence ( $ 500 @,@ 000 for married couples , $ 250 @,@ 000 for singles ) were exempted if lived in for at least 2 years over the last 5 . ( This had previously been limited to a $ 125 @,@ 000 once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ lifetime exemption for those over the age of 55 . ) There were also reductions in a number of other taxes on investment gains . 
 Additionally , the act raised the value of inherited estates and gifts that could be sheltered from taxation . Gingrich has been credited with creating the agenda for the reduction in capital gains tax , especially in the " Contract with America " , which set out to balance the budget and implement decreases in estate and capital gains tax . Some Republicans felt that the compromise reached with Clinton on the budget and tax act was inadequate , however Gingrich has stated that the tax cuts were a significant accomplishment for the Republican Congress in the face of opposition from the Clinton administration . Gingrich along with Bob Dole had earlier set @-@ up the Kemp Commission , headed by former US Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Jack Kemp , a tax reform commission that made several recommendations including that dividends , interest , and capital gains should be untaxed . 
 = = = = Other legislation = = = = 
 Among the first pieces of legislation passed by the new Congress under Gingrich was the Congressional Accountability Act of 1995 , which subjected members of Congress to the same laws that apply to businesses and their employees , including the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 . As a provision of the Contract with America , the law was symbolic of the new Republican majority 's goal to remove some of the entitlements enjoyed by Congress . The bill received near universal acceptance from the House and Senate and was signed into law on January 23 , 1995 . 
 Gingrich shut down the highly regarded Office of Technology Assessment , and relied instead on what the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists called " self @-@ interested lobbyists and think tanks " . 
 = = = Government shutdown = = = 
 Gingrich and the incoming Republican majority 's promise to slow the rate of government spending conflicted with the president 's agenda for Medicare , education , the environment and public health , leading to two temporary shutdowns of the federal government totaling 28 days . 
 Clinton said Republican amendments would strip the U.S. Treasury of its ability to dip into federal trust funds to avoid a borrowing crisis . Republican amendments would have limited appeals by death @-@ row inmates , made it harder to issue health , safety and environmental regulations , and would have committed the president to a seven @-@ year balanced budget . Clinton vetoed a second bill allowing the government to keep operating beyond the time when most spending authority expires . 
 A GOP amendment opposed by Clinton would have not only have increased Medicare Part B premiums , but it would also cancel a scheduled reduction . The Republicans held out for an increase in Medicare part B premiums in January 1996 to $ 53 @.@ 50 a month . Clinton favored the then current law , which was to let the premium that seniors pay drop to $ 42 @.@ 50 . 
 The government closed most non @-@ essential offices during the shutdown , which was the longest in U.S. history . The shutdown ended when Clinton agreed to submit a CBO @-@ approved balanced budget plan . 
 During the crisis , Gingrich 's public image suffered from the perception that the Republicans ' hardline budget stance was owed partly to an alleged snub of Gingrich by Clinton during a flight on Air Force One to and from Yitzhak Rabin 's funeral in Israel . That perception developed after the trip when Gingrich , while being questioned by Lars @-@ Erik Nelson at a Christian Science Monitor breakfast , said that he was dissatisfied that Clinton had not invited him to discuss the budget during the flight . He complained that he and Dole were instructed to use the plane 's rear exit to <unk> , saying the snub was " part of why you ended up with us sending down a tougher continuing resolution " . In response to Gingrich 's complaint that they were " forced to use the rear door , " NBC news released their videotape footage showing both Gingrich and Dole disembarking at Tel Aviv just behind Clinton via the front stairway . 
 Gingrich was widely lampooned for implying that the government shutdown was a result of his personal grievances , including a widely shared editorial cartoon depicting him as a baby throwing a tantrum . Democratic leaders , including Chuck Schumer , took the opportunity to attack Gingrich 's motives for the budget standoff . In 1998 , Gingrich said that these comments were his " single most avoidable mistake " as Speaker . 
 Discussing the impact of the government shutdown on the Republican Party , Gingrich later commented that , " Everybody in Washington thinks that was a big mistake . They 're exactly wrong . There had been no reelected Republican majority since 1928 . Part of the reason we got reelected ... is our base thought we were serious . And they thought we were serious because when it came to a show @-@ down , we didn 't flinch . " In a 2011 op @-@ ed in The Washington Post , Gingrich said that the government shutdown led to the balanced @-@ budget deal in 1997 and the first four consecutive balanced budgets since the 1920s , as well as the first re @-@ election of a Republican majority since 1928 . 
 = = = Ethics charges and reprimand = = = 
 Eighty @-@ four ethics charges were filed by Democrats against Gingrich during his term as Speaker . All were eventually dropped except for one : claiming tax @-@ exempt status for a college course run for political purposes . The House officially reprimanded Gingrich ( in a vote of 395 in favor , 28 opposed ) and " ordered [ him ] to reimburse the House for some of the costs of the investigation in the amount of $ 300 @,@ 000 " . It was the first time a Speaker was disciplined for an ethics violation . 
 Additionally , the House Ethics Committee concluded that inaccurate information supplied to investigators represented " intentional or ... reckless " disregard of House rules . The Ethics Committee 's Special Counsel James M. Cole concluded that Gingrich had violated federal tax law and had lied to the ethics panel in an effort to force the committee to dismiss the complaint against him . The full committee panel did not agree whether tax law had been violated and left that issue up to the IRS . In 1999 , the IRS cleared the organizations connected with the " Renewing American Civilization " courses under investigation for possible tax violations . 
 Regarding the situation , Gingrich said in January 1997 , " I did not manage the effort intensely enough to thoroughly direct or review information being submitted to the committee on my behalf . In my name and over my signature , inaccurate , incomplete and unreliable statements were given to the committee , but I did not intend to mislead the committee ... I brought down on the people 's house a controversy which could weaken the faith people have in their government . " 
 = = = Leadership challenge = = = 
 In the summer of 1997 several House Republicans attempted to replace him as Speaker , claiming Gingrich 's public image was a liability . The attempted " coup " began July 9 with a meeting of Republican conference chairman John Boehner of Ohio and Republican leadership chairman Bill Paxon of New York . According to their plan , House Majority Leader Dick Armey , House Majority Whip Tom DeLay , Boehner and Paxon were to present Gingrich with an ultimatum : resign , or be voted out . However , Armey balked at the proposal to make Paxon the new Speaker , and told his chief of staff to warn Gingrich . On July 11 , Gingrich met with senior Republican leadership to assess the situation . He explained that under no circumstance would he step down . If he was voted out , there would be a new election for Speaker . This would allow for the possibility that Democrats , along with dissenting Republicans , would vote in Democrat Dick Gephardt as Speaker . On July 16 , Paxon offered to resign his post , feeling that he had not handled the situation correctly , as the only member of the leadership who had been appointed to his position — by Gingrich — instead of elected . 
 = = = Resignation = = = 
 In 1998 , Republicans lost five seats in the House — the worst midterm performance in 64 years by a party not holding the presidency . Gingrich , who won his reelection , was held largely responsible for Republican losses in the House . His private polls had given his fellow Republican Congressmen a false impression that pushing the Lewinsky scandal would damage Clinton 's popularity and result in the party winning a net total of six to thirty seats in the US House of Representatives in this election . The day after the election , a Republican caucus ready to rebel against him prompted his resignation of the speakership . He also announced his intended and eventual full departure from the House in January 1999 . When relinquishing the speakership , Gingrich said he was " not willing to preside over people who are cannibals , " and claimed that leaving the House would keep him from overshadowing his successor . 
 = = Post @-@ speakership = = 
 Gingrich has since remained involved in national politics and public policy debate , especially on issues regarding healthcare , national security , and the role of religion in American public life . 
 = = = Policy = = = 
 In 2003 he founded the Center for Health Transformation to develop a 21st @-@ century healthcare system that is centered on the individual , prevention focused , knowledge intense , and innovation rich . Gingrich supported the Medicare Prescription Drug , Improvement , and Modernization Act of 2003 , creating the Medicare Part D federal prescription drugs benefit program . Some conservatives have criticized him for favoring the plan , due to its cost . However , Gingrich has remained a supporter , stating in a 2011 interview that it was a necessary modernization of Medicare , which was created before pharmaceutical drugs became standard in medical care . He has said that the increase in cost from medication must be seen as preventive , leading to reduced need for medical procedures . In a May 15 , 2011 , interview on Meet the Press , Gingrich repeated his long @-@ held belief that " all of us have a responsibility to pay — help pay for health care " , and suggested this could be implemented by either a mandate to obtain health insurance or a requirement to post a bond ensuring coverage . In the same interview Gingrich said " I don 't think right wing social engineering is any more desirable than left wing social engineering . I don 't think imposing radical change from the right or the left is a very good way for a free society to operate . " This comment caused back @-@ lash within the Republican Party . Gingrich has also been an advocate for health information technology . 
 In 2005 , with Hillary Rodham Clinton , Gingrich announced the proposed 21st Century Health Information Act , a bill which aimed to replace paperwork with confidential , electronic health information networks . Gingrich also co @-@ chaired an independent congressional study group made up of health policy experts formed in 2007 to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of action taken within the U.S. to fight Alzheimer 's disease . 
 Gingrich has served on several commissions , including the Hart @-@ Rudman Commission , formally known as the U.S. Commission on National Security / 21st century , which examined issues affecting the armed forces , law enforcement and intelligence agencies with regards to national security . In 2005 he became the co @-@ chair of a task force for UN reform , which aimed to produce a plan for the U.S. to help strengthen the UN . For over two decades , Gingrich has taught at the United States Air Force 's Air University , where he is the longest @-@ serving teacher of the Joint Flag Officer Warfighting Course . In addition , he is an honorary Distinguished Visiting Scholar and Professor at the National Defense University and teaches officers from all of the defense services . Gingrich informally advised Defense secretary Donald Rumsfeld on strategic issues , on issues including the Israeli – Palestinian conflict and encouraging the Pentagon to not " yield " foreign policy influence to the State Department and National Security Council . Gingrich is also a guiding coalition member of the Project on National Security Reform . 
 In September 2007 , Gingrich founded the 527 group American Solutions for Winning the Future . The stated mission of the group is to become the " leading grassroots movement to recruit , educate , and empower citizen activists and elected officials to develop solutions to transform all levels of government " . Gingrich spoke of the group and its objectives at the CPAC conference of 2008 and currently serves as its General Chairman . Other organizations and companies founded or chaired by Gingrich include the creative production company Gingrich Productions , and religious educational organization Renewing American Leadership . 
 Gingrich is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations . He is also a fellow at conservative think tanks the American Enterprise Institute and Hoover Institution , focusing on U.S. politics , world history , national security policy , and environmental policy issues . He sometimes serves as a commentator , guest or panel member on cable news shows , such as the Fox News Channel . He is listed as a contributor by Fox News Channel , and frequently appears as a guest on various segments ; he has also hosted occasional specials for the Fox News Channel . Gingrich is a proponent of the Lean Six Sigma management techniques for waste reduction , and has signed the " Strong America Now " pledge committing to promoting the methods to reduce government spending . 
 = = = Businesses = = = 
 After leaving Congress in 1999 , Gingrich started a number of for @-@ profit companies : Between 2001 and 2010 , the companies he and his wife owned in full or part had revenues of almost $ 100 million . 
 According to financial disclosure forms released in July 2011 , Gingrich and his wife had a net worth of at least $ 6 @.@ 7 million in 2010 , compared to a maximum net worth of $ 2 @.@ 4 million in 2006 . Most of the increase in his net worth was because of payments to him from his for @-@ profit companies . 
 = = = = Gingrich Group and the Center for Health Transformation = = = = 
 The Gingrich Group was organized in 1999 as a consulting company . Over time , its non @-@ health clients were dropped , and it was renamed the Center for Health Transformation . The two companies had revenues of $ 55 million between 2001 and 2010 . The revenues came from more than 300 health @-@ insurance companies and other clients , with membership costing as much as $ 200 @,@ 000 per year in exchange for access to Gingrich and other perks . In 2011 , when Gingrich became a presidential candidate , he sold his interest in the business and said he would release the full list of his clients and the amounts he was paid , " to the extent we can " . In April 2012 , the Center for Health Transformation filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy , planning to liquidate its assets to meet debts of $ 1 – $ 10 million . 
 Between 2001 and 2010 , Gingrich consulted for Freddie Mac , a government @-@ sponsored secondary home mortgage company , which was concerned about new regulations under consideration by Congress . Regarding payments of $ 1 @.@ 6 million for the consulting , Gingrich said that " Freddie Mac paid Gingrich Group , which has a number of employees and a number of offices , a consulting fee , just like you would pay any other consulting firm . " In January 2012 , he said that he could not make public his contract with Freddie Mac , even though the company gave permission , until his business partners in the Center for Health Transformation also agreed to that . 
 = = = = Gingrich Productions = = = = 
 Gingrich Productions , which is headed by Gingrich 's wife Callista Gingrich , was created in 2007 . According to the company 's website , in May 2011 , it is " a performance and production company featuring the work of Newt and Callista Gingrich . Newt and Callista host and produce historical and public policy documentaries , write books , record audio books and voiceovers , produce photographic essays , and make television and radio appearances . " 
 Between 2008 and 2011 , the company produced three films on religion , one on energy , one on Ronald Reagan , and one on the threat of radical Islam . All were joint projects with the conservative group Citizens United . In 2011 , Newt and Callista appeared in A City Upon a Hill , on the subject of American exceptionalism . 
 As of May 2011 , the company had about five employees . In 2010 , it paid Gingrich more than $ 2 @.@ 4 million . 
 = = = = Gingrich Communications = = = = 
 Gingrich Communications promoted Gingrich 's public appearances , including his Fox News contract and his website , <unk> Gingrich received as much as $ 60 @,@ 000 for a speech , and did as many as 80 in a year . One of Gingrich 's nonprofit groups , Renewing American Leadership , which was founded in March 2009 , paid Gingrich Communications $ 220 @,@ 000 over two years ; the charity shared the names of its donors with Gingrich , who could use them for his for @-@ profit companies . Gingrich Communications , which employed 15 people at its largest , closed in 2011 when Gingrich began his presidential campaign . 
 = = = = Other = = = = 
 Celebrity Leaders is a booking agency that handled Gingrich 's speaking engagements , as well as those other clients such as former Republican National Committee chair Michael Steele and former Pennsylvania Senator Rick Santorum . Kathy Lubbers , the President and CEO of the agency , who is Gingrich 's daughter , owns the agency . Gingrich has shares in the agency , and was paid more than $ 70 @,@ 000 by it in 2010 . 
 <unk> Publications handles the production of and royalties from fiction books co @-@ authored by Gingrich . 
 = = = Political activity = = = 
 Between 2005 and 2007 , Gingrich expressed interest in running for the 2008 Republican presidential nomination . On October 13 , 2005 , Gingrich suggested he was considering a run for president , saying , " There are circumstances where I will run " , elaborating that those circumstances would be if no other candidate champions some of the platform ideas he advocates . On September 28 , 2007 , Gingrich announced that if his supporters pledged $ 30 million to his campaign by October 21 , he would seek the nomination . 
 However , insisting that he had " pretty strongly " considered running , on September 29 spokesman Rick Tyler said that Gingrich would not seek the presidency in 2008 because he could not continue to serve as chairman of American Solutions if he did so . Citing campaign finance law restrictions ( the McCain @-@ Feingold campaign law would have forced him to leave his American Solutions political organization if he declared his candidacy ) , Gingrich said , " I wasn 't prepared to abandon American Solutions , even to explore whether a campaign was realistic . " 
 During the 2009 special election in New York 's 23rd congressional district , Gingrich endorsed moderate Republican candidate Dede <unk> , rather than Conservative Party candidate Doug Hoffman , who had been endorsed by several nationally prominent Republicans . He was heavily criticized for this endorsement , with conservatives questioning his candidacy for President in 2012 and even comparing him to Benedict Arnold . Gingrich has since regretted his decision . 
 = = = 2012 presidential campaign = = = 
 In late 2008 several political commentators , including Marc Ambinder in The Atlantic and Robert Novak in The Washington Post , identified Gingrich as a top presidential contender in the 2012 election , with Ambinder reporting that Gingrich was " already planting some seeds in Iowa , New Hampshire " . A July 2010 poll conducted by Public Policy Polling indicated that Gingrich was the leading GOP contender for the Republican nomination with 23 % of likely Republican voters saying they would vote for him . 
 Describing his views as a possible candidate during an appearance on On the Record with Greta Van Susteren in March 2009 , Gingrich said , " I am very sad that a number of Republicans do not understand that this country is sick of earmarks . [ Americans ] are sick of politicians taking care of themselves . They are sick of their money being spent in a way that is absolutely indefensible ... I think you 're going to see a steady increase in the number of incumbents who have opponents because the American taxpayers are increasingly fed up . " 
 On March 3 , 2011 , Gingrich officially announced a website entitled " Newt Exploratory 2012 " in lieu of a formal exploratory committee for exploration of a potential presidential run . On May 11 , 2011 , Gingrich officially announced his intention to seek the GOP nomination in 2012 . 
 On June 9 , 2011 , a group of Gingrich 's senior campaign aides left the campaign en masse , leading to doubts about the viability of his presidential run . On June 21 , 2011 , two more senior aides left . 
 In response , Gingrich stated that he had not quit the race for the Republican nomination , and pointed to his experience running for 5 years to win his seat in Congress , spending 16 years helping to build a Republican majority in the house and working for decades to build a Republican majority in Georgia . Some commentators noted Gingrich 's resilience throughout his career , in particular with regards to his presidential campaign . 
 After then @-@ front @-@ runner Herman Cain was damaged by allegations of past sexual harassment , Gingrich gained support , and quickly became a contender in the race , especially after Cain suspended his campaign . By December 4 , 2011 , Gingrich was leading in the national polls . However , after an abundance of negative ads run by his opponents throughout December , Gingrich 's national polling lead had fallen to a tie with Mitt Romney . 
 On January 3 , 2012 , Gingrich finished in fourth place in the Iowa Republican caucuses , far behind Rick Santorum , Romney , and Ron Paul . On January 10 , Gingrich finished in fifth place in the New Hampshire Republican primary , far behind Romney , Santorum , Jon Huntsman , and Paul . 
