 After the field narrowed with the withdrawal from the race of Huntsman and Rick Perry , Gingrich won the South Carolina Republican primary on January 21 , obtaining about 40 % of the vote , considerably ahead of Romney , Santorum and Paul . This surprise victory allowed Gingrich to reemerge as the frontrunner once again heading into Florida . 
 On January 31 , 2012 , Gingrich placed second in the Republican Florida primary , losing by a fifteen percentage point margin , 47 % to 32 % . Some factors that contributed to this outcome include two strong debate performances by Romney ( which were typically Gingrich 's strong suit ) , the wide margin by which the Gingrich campaign was outspent in television ads , and a widely criticized proposal by Gingrich to have a permanent colony on the moon by 2020 to reinvigorate the American Space Program . It was later revealed that Mitt Romney had hired a debate coach to help him perform better in the Florida debates . Gingrich did , however , significantly outvote Santorum and Paul . On February 4 , 2012 , Gingrich placed a distant second in the Nevada Republican caucuses with 21 % , losing to Romney who received over 50 % of the total votes cast . 
 On February 7 , 2012 , Gingrich came in last place in the Minnesota Republican caucuses with about 10 @.@ 7 % of the vote . Santorum won the caucus , followed by Paul and Romney . 
 On Super Tuesday Gingrich won his home state , Georgia , which has the most delegates , in " an otherwise dismal night for him " . Santorum took Tennessee and Oklahoma , where Gingrich had previously performed well in the polls , though Gingrich managed a statistical second place showing in Oklahoma . 
 On April 4 , the Rick Santorum campaign shifted its position and urged Gingrich to drop out of the race and support Santorum . 
 On April 10 , Santorum announced the suspension of his campaign . Following this announcement , The Newt 2012 campaign used a new slogan referring to Gingrich as " the last conservative standing " . Despite this , on April 19 , Gingrich told Republicans in New York that he would work to help Romney win the general election if Romney secured the nomination . 
 After a disappointing second place showing in the Delaware primary on April 24 , and with a campaign debt in excess of $ 4 million , Gingrich suspended his campaign and endorsed front @-@ runner Mitt Romney on May 2 , 2012 , on whose behalf he subsequently campaigned ( i.e. stump speeches and television appearances ) . 
 Gingrich later hosted a number of policy workshops at the GOP Convention in Tampa presented by the National Republican Committee called " Newt University " . He and his wife Calista addressed the convention on its final day with a Ronald Reagan @-@ themed introduction . 
 = = = 2016 Donald Trump presidential campaign = = = 
 After having consulted Donald Trump 's 2016 campaign , Gingrich encouraged his fellow Republicans to unify behind Trump who was by then the presumptive Republican presidential nominee . Gingrich was speculated to be a possible nominee for Vice President , and is still a candidate for Chief of Staff , or simply a senior political adviser to a Trump presidential ticket , and a July 12 , 2016 NBC News report stated that Gingrich was among Trump 's final three choices to be his running mate . Had Gingrich been the vice presidential nominee and Trump been successful in his bid for the presidency , Gingrich would have become ( on January 20 , 2017 ) the oldest Vice President in American political history since Alben Barkley . 
 = = Political positions = = 
 Gingrich is most widely identified with the 1994 Contract with America . He is a founder of American Solutions for Winning the Future . More recently , Gingrich has advocated replacing the Environmental Protection Agency with a proposed " Environmental Solutions Agency " . 
 He favors a strong immigration border policy and a guest worker program and a flex @-@ fuel mandate for cars sold in the U.S. 
 Gingrich has taken a diminutive view of internationalism and the United Nations , saying in 2015 , " after several years of looking at the UN , I can report to you that it is sufficiently corrupt and sufficiently inefficient . That no reasonable person would put faith in it . " 
 In 2007 , Gingrich authored a book , Rediscovering God in America , arguing that the Founding Fathers actively intended the new republic to not only allow , but encourage , religious expression in the public square . Following publication of the book , he was invited by Jerry Falwell to be the speaker for the second time at Liberty University 's graduation , on May 19 , 2007 , due to Gingrich having , " dedicated much of his time to calling [ the United States of ] America back to our Christian heritage " . 
 Gingrich 's later books take a large @-@ scale policy focus , including Winning the Future , and the most recent , To Save America . Gingrich has identified education as " the number one factor in our future prosperity " , and has partnered with Al Sharpton and Education Secretary Arne Duncan on education issues . Although he previously opposed gay marriage , in December 2012 Gingrich suggested that Republicans should reconsider their opposition to it . 
 On July 14 , 2016 , Gingrich stated that he believes that Americans of Muslim backgrounds who believe in Sharia law should be deported , and that visiting websites that promote the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant or Al @-@ Qaeda should be a felony . Some observers have questioned whether these views violate the free speech and free exercise of religion clauses of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution . 
 On July 21 , 2016 , Gingrich argued that members of NATO " ought to worry " about a U.S. commitment to their defense . He expanded , saying , " They ought to worry about commitment under any circumstances . Every president has been saying that the NATO countries do not pay their fair share " . He also stated that , in the context of whether the United States would provide aid to Estonia ( a NATO member ) in the event of a Russian invasion , he " would think about it a great deal " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Marriages and children = = = 
 Gingrich has married three times . In 1962 , he married Jacqueline May " Jackie " Battley ( February 21 , 1936 – August 7 , 2013 ) , his former high school geometry teacher , when he was 19 years old and she was 26 . They have two daughters from their marriage : Kathy Gingrich Lubbers , married to Paul Lubbers , is president of Gingrich Communications , and Jackie Gingrich Cushman , the wife of Jimmy Cushman , Jr . , is an author , conservative columnist , and political commentator , whose books include 5 Principles for a Successful Life , co @-@ authored with Newt Gingrich . 
 In the spring of 1980 , Gingrich left his wife after beginning an affair with Marianne Ginther . In 1984 , Jackie Battley Gingrich told The Washington Post that the divorce was a " complete surprise " to her . According to Jackie , in September 1980 , Gingrich and their children visited her while she was in the hospital , recovering from surgery for cancer , and Gingrich wanted to discuss the terms of their divorce . Gingrich has disputed that account . In 2011 , their daughter , Jackie Gingrich Cushman , remembers that it was her mother who requested the divorce , that it happened prior to the hospital stay , and that Gingrich 's visit was for the purpose of bringing the couple 's children to see their mother , not to discuss the divorce . Although Gingrich 's presidential campaign staff continued to insist in 2011 that his wife requested the divorce , court documents obtained by CNN from Carroll County , Georgia , indicated that Jackie had asked a judge to block the process stating that although " she has adequate and ample grounds for divorce ... she does not desire one at this time [ and ] does not admit that this marriage is irretrievably broken . " The daughter of the former Linda May Clay and Wilbur Allen Battley , Jackie Gingrich was a native of Columbus , Georgia . She was a deacon and active volunteer in the First Baptist Church of Carrollton , Georgia . She died in Atlanta at the age of 77 . 
 According to L. H. Carter , Gingrich 's campaign treasurer , Gingrich said of his first wife : " She 's not young enough or pretty enough to be the wife of the President . And besides , she has cancer . " Gingrich has denied saying it . His supporters dismiss Carter as a disgruntled former aide who was miffed at not being asked to accompany Gingrich to Washington . 
 In 1981 , six months after his divorce from his first wife was final , Gingrich wed Marianne Ginther . Marianne helped control their finances to get them out of debt . She was also coauthor of his 1984 book Window of Opportunity : A Blueprint for the Future . She did not , however , want to have the public life of a politician 's wife . Gingrich 's daughter Kathy Lubbers described the marriage as " difficult " . 
 In 1993 , while still married to Marianne , Gingrich began an affair with House of Representatives staffer Callista Bisek , who is 23 years his junior . Gingrich and his second wife were divorced in 2000 . The marriage produced no children . On January 19 , 2012 , Marianne Ginther Gingrich alleged in an interview on ABC 's Nightline that she had declined to accept Gingrich 's suggestion of an open marriage . Asked about the allegations at the beginning of the televised South Carolina primary debate , Gingrich said the story was false and told the co @-@ ordinator that making an ex @-@ wife a significant question in a presidential campaign was " close to despicable " . 
 In August 2000 , Gingrich married Callista Bisek four months after his divorce from Marianne was finalized . He and Callista live in McLean , Virginia . In a 2011 interview with David Brody of the Christian Broadcasting Network , Gingrich addressed his past infidelities by saying , " There 's no question at times in my life , partially driven by how passionately I felt about this country , that I worked too hard and things happened in my life that were not appropriate . " In December 2011 , after the group Iowans for Christian Leaders in Government requested that he sign their so @-@ called " Marriage Vow " , Gingrich sent a lengthy written response . It included his pledge to " uphold personal fidelity to my spouse " . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Gingrich was raised a Lutheran . In graduate school , he was a Southern Baptist . He converted to Catholicism , Bisek 's faith , on March 29 , 2009 . He said " over the course of several years , I gradually became Catholic and then decided one day to accept the faith I had already come to embrace . " The moment when he decided to officially become a Catholic was when he saw Pope Benedict XVI , on his visit to the United States in 2008 : " Catching a glimpse of Pope Benedict that day , I was struck by the happiness and peacefulness he exuded . The joyful and radiating presence of the Holy Father was a moment of confirmation about the many things I had been thinking and experiencing for several years . " Gingrich has stated that he has developed a greater appreciation for the role of faith in public life following his conversion , and believes that the United States has become too secular . 
 At a 2011 appearance in Columbus , Ohio , he said , " In America , religious belief is being challenged by a cultural elite trying to create a secularized America , in which God is driven out of public life . " 
 Gingrich is allowed to receive holy communion , despite being divorced , because his two earlier marriages were annulled by the Catholic church . 
 = = = Other interests = = = 
 Gingrich has written about his interest in animals . Gingrich 's first engagement in civic affairs was speaking to the city council in Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , about why the city should establish its own zoo . He wrote the introduction to America 's Best Zoos . He is also a dinosaur enthusiast . The New Yorker said of his 1995 book To Renew America : " <unk> , he has retained his enthusiasm for the extinct giants into middle age . In addition to including breakthroughs in dinosaur research on his list of futuristic wonders , he specified ' people interested in dinosaurs ' as a prime example of who might benefit from his education proposals . " 
 Space exploration has been an interest since his fascination with the United States / Soviet Union Space Race during his teenage years . Gingrich wants the U.S. to pursue new achievements in space , such as sustaining civilizations beyond Earth , but advocates relying more on the private sector and less on the publicly funded NASA to drive progress . As of 2010 and to the present , Gingrich serves on the National Space Society Board of Governors . 
 During the 2012 election campaign , <unk> noted that Gingrich has expressed appreciation for the work of two American painters . He has described James H. Cromartie 's painting of the U.S. Capitol as " an exceptional and truly beautiful work of art " ; in Norman Rockwell 's work , he saw the embodiment of an America circa 1965 , at odds with the prevailing sentiment of the modern day " cultural elites " . 
 CNN announced on June 26 , 2013 , that Gingrich would join a new version of Crossfire re @-@ launching in fall 2013 , with panelists S.E. Cupp , Stephanie Cutter , and Van Jones . Gingrich represented the right on the revamped debate program . The show is now off the air . 
 = = Books and film = = 
 = = = Nonfiction = = = 
 Gingrich has authored or co @-@ authored 18 non @-@ fiction books since 1982 . 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 Gingrich co @-@ wrote the following alternate history novels and series of novels with William R. Forstchen . 
 1945 Baen Books , August 1995 ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Civil War series 
 Gettysburg : A Novel of the Civil War Thomas Dunne Books , June 2003 ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Grant Comes East Thomas Dunne Books , June 2004 ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Never Call Retreat : Lee and Grant : The Final Victory Thomas Dunne Books , June 2005 ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 The Battle of the Crater : A Novel Thomas Dunne Books , November 2011 ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Pacific War series 
 Pearl Harbor : A Novel of December 8 Thomas Dunne Books , May 2007 ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Days of Infamy Thomas Dunne Books , April 2008 ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Revolutionary War series 
 To Try Men 's Souls : A Novel of George Washington and the Fight for American Freedom , October 2009 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Valley Forge : George Washington and the Crucible of Victory , November 2010 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 Victory at Yorktown , November 2012 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Miscellaneous Fiction 
 <unk> : A Novel Center Street Press , October 13 , 2015 , co @-@ author Pete Earley , ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Nine Days that Changed the World , Gingrich Productions , April 2010 
 = Kid Icarus : Uprising = 
 Kid Icarus : Uprising , known in Japan as New Light Mythology : Palutena 's Mirror ( Japanese : 新 ・ <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Shin Hikari Shinwa : <unk> no Kagami ) is a third @-@ person shooter developed by Project Sora and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo 3DS handheld video game console . Released worldwide in March 2012 , it is the third installment in the Kid Icarus franchise and the first to be released since Kid Icarus : Of Myths and Monsters in 1991 . 
 Kid Icarus : Uprising takes place in a setting based loosely around Greek mythology . The main protagonist is the angel Pit , servant of the Goddess of Light Palutena . When the Goddess of Darkness Medusa returns to destroy humanity , Pit goes on missions first against her , then against the forces of Hades , Lord of the Underworld and the source behind Medusa 's return . During gameplay , players control Pit during airborne rail shooter segments and ground @-@ based third @-@ person shooter segments . In addition to the single @-@ player campaign , multiple multiplayer modes are available , with competitive modes available for up to six players . 
 Uprising was created by Masahiro Sakurai after receiving a request from Satoru Iwata to create a launch title for then @-@ in development 3DS . Development began in 2009 , but was faced with multiple difficulties : these included lack of access to the hardware during early stages , balancing between its many elements , and issues with the controls . Sakurai was responsible for creating the story , which retained the light @-@ hearted tone of the first Kid Icarus . The music was created by a team of composers that included Motoi Sakuraba and Yasunori Mitsuda . Since release , Uprising has sold over a million copies worldwide , and met with mainly positive reviews : while giving praise to the story , graphics , music and gameplay , the control scheme was frequently faulted . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Kid Icarus : Uprising is a third @-@ person shooter where players take control of the angel Pit during his missions for the Goddess of Light Palutena . Gameplay is divided into two different styles : aerial @-@ based rail shooter segments , and ground @-@ based segments that feature both linear paths and free @-@ roaming areas . The game 's difficulty , or Intensity , is determined by betting hearts in the Fiend 's Cauldron before beginning each mission . The difficulty ranges from the very @-@ easy " 0 @.@ 0 " to the highly difficult " 9 @.@ 0 " . Pit 's combat abilities are divided between long @-@ range attacks using gun @-@ like weapons , and close @-@ quarters melee attacks . During missions , defeating enemies grants the player hearts , the game 's currency . Hearts are used to increase the game 's difficulty by laying bets against the player 's own performance . As the game progresses , Pit gains access to weapons separated into nine types : bows , bracer @-@ like claws , blades ( a combination of a sword and a gun ) , clubs , <unk> ( twin orbs hovering near pit ) , staffs , arms ( a weapon that fits around Pit 's wrist ) , palms ( magical tattoos covering Pit 's arm ) , and cannons . Each weapon has different advantages and disadvantages . Once equipped , weapons can be tried out in the game 's Practice Range . Using the 3DS ' StreetPass network , players can share weapons with other players in the form of Weapon Gems . Other players can pay hearts to convert the gem into a weapon . Hearts can be spent upgrading weapons or fusing Weapon Gems , along with being gained by dismantling unwanted weapons or converting Weapon Gems . 
 Each chapter begins with an aerial battle , consisting of a five @-@ minute on rails shooter segment , with Pit being guided along a pre @-@ determined path . During these stages , the player moves Pit with the Circle Pad , aims with either the 3DS stylus or face buttons , and fires with the L Button . Not firing for a time allows the player to fire a powerful Charge Shot , which kills several enemies at once . Once on the ground , players have more control over Pit as he traverses through the level : Pit can either shoot enemies from a distance or attack them up close with melee attacks , while also performing various moves to dodge enemy attacks . These areas also featured more open spaces , and hidden areas unlocked when playing on certain difficulties . The main controls are carried over from aerial segments , but their assigned actions alter slightly . When an enemy strikes Pit , his health bar is depleted . This can be replenished with items scattered throughout levels . If sufficiently damaged , the health bar vanishes and Crisis Mode is activated : this will either end naturally or can be ended by fully replenishing health with a " Drink of the Gods " item . If Pit is defeated , the player is given the option of continuing , but an amount of Hearts are lost from the Fiend 's Cauldron and the difficulty is lowered . Completing a level without dying grants additional rewards . In ground @-@ based levels , Pit can also take control of various vehicles for short stretches , gaining special attacks unique to each vehicle type . Each stage ends in a ground @-@ based boss battle . Pit has the ability to sprint during ground @-@ based gameplay , but sprinting for too long uses up his stamina and leaves him vulnerable to attack . 
 Uprising supports both local and online multiplayer . Along with the game 's single @-@ player story mode , the game also features multiplayer for up to six players locally or via Wi @-@ Fi . Players can compete in team @-@ based cooperative matches or free @-@ for @-@ all melees using standard fighter characters . In the team @-@ based mode , named Light vs Dark , each team has a health meter that depletes when a player is defeated . The value of the player 's weapon determines how far the meter depletes after death , and the player whose death depletes the meter completely will become their team 's angel , a more powerful character who represents the team . The match ends when the other team 's angel is defeated . In addition to normal ways of playing , Uprising comes bundled with a 3DS stand for the platform for ease of play . Augmented reality ( AR ) Cards , collected by players , can be used as part of a card contest . Using the 3DS ' outer camera , the AR Cards produce " Idols " ( representations of characters from Uprising ) : by lining up the back edges of two AR Cards and selecting the " Fight " option , Idols appear from the cards and battle each other : which one wins depends on the card 's statistics . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Kid Icarus : Uprising takes place in a world loosely based on Greek mythology , and is set 25 years after the events of the first game . Pit , an angel serving the Goddess of Light Palutena , is sent on missions against the Goddess of Darkness Medusa , who threatens to destroy humanity . During his missions , Pit fights Medusa 's servant <unk> , defeats her commander Dark Lord Gaol with the help of a human mercenary named Magnus , then confronts the Goddess of Calamity Pandora so as to destroy the Mirror of Truth . In the process , the Mirror spawns a doppelgänger called Dark Pit , who absorbs the defeated Pandora 's powers and departs . With help from the God of the Sea Poseidon , Pit defeats <unk> 's final commander , Thanatos . He then retrieves the Three Sacred Treasures , powerful artifacts that originally debuted in the first game , in order to use them against Medusa . When defeated , it is revealed that Medusa was merely resurrected to act as a puppet ruler in order to hide the true antagonist : Hades , Lord of the Underworld . Hades , by spreading a rumor about a " wish seed " guarded by the Phoenix , provokes war among humanity so as to claim their souls . This war prompts the Goddess of Nature Viridi to attack them and Hades ' army . Pit and Palutena work against both Viridi and Hades , during the course of which a military base called the Lunar Sanctum is destroyed , releasing an unknown creature from its depths . 
 The deities ' ongoing battles prompt an alien race called the Aurum to invade Earth for its resources . In response , the warring deities strike a brief ceasefire and unite alongside the self @-@ proclaimed Sun God Pyrrhon in order to fight the Aurum . However , Pyrrhon betrays the deities due to wanting to claim the Aurum 's power and prove himself as the strongest god in existence , which leads to him being mentally controlled by the Aurum Brain . After Pit defeats the fusion of Pyrrhon and the Aurum Brain , Pyrrhon briefly comes to his senses and sacrifices himself to banish the Aurum to the far side of the galaxy . Three years after the Aurum invasion , Pit is revealed to be trapped inside a ring with no clear memory of what lead to his predicament . Using hosts to make his way to a ruined city , he meets up with Magnus , who reveals that Palutena 's army has turned against humanity and that Pit 's body is attacking humans . Using Magnus ' body , Pit defeats his body and repossesses it . Viridi then flies him to Palutena 's capital of <unk> , which has been reduced to ruins : Viridi reveals that the Lunar Sanctum was a prison holding the Chaos Kin , a soul @-@ devouring creature that escaped when Pit destroyed the base . The Chaos Kin has possessed Palutena and caused her to become deranged . After obtaining the Lightning Chariot , Pit breaks through the defensive barrier around <unk> 's capital and defeats Palutena . The Chaos Kin then steals her soul , leading to both Pit and Dark Pit pursuing the Chaos Kin into its dimension , the Chaos Vortex , to retrieve Palutena 's soul . To save Dark Pit from a final attack from the defeated Chaos Kin , Pit overuses his Power of Flight , burning his wings and nearly dying in the process . 
 Feeling a sense of debt to Pit , Dark Pit takes him to the Rewind Spring so time can be reversed for Pit 's body . On his journey there , he , Palutena , and Viridi learn that Hades has been profiting off the wars against the Underworld Army , Forces of Nature , Aurum , and Chaos Kin by using the souls of slaughtered humans to add numbers to his forces . Upon arrival at the Rewind Spring , Pandora is revived due to the Spring 's effects on her stolen powers within Dark Pit . Pandora then uses the Spring to restore her health and ultimately her physical body , but is still defeated by Dark Pit . Pit is restored by the Spring , while the loss of Pandora 's powers leaves Dark Pit unable to fly on his own . Now restored , Pit attempts to destroy Hades with the Three Sacred Treasures , but Hades easily destroys them and attempts to eat Pit . After escaping from Hades ' insides with assistance from Dark Pit , Pit is guided by Palutena to the home of the God of the Forge <unk> , who crafts the Great Sacred Treasure after Pit proves himself in multiple trials . Launching a fresh assault , Pit succeeds in injuring Hades , but the Great Sacred Treasure is badly damaged during the battle , leaving only its cannon intact . Hades attempts to launch a massive attack , but a revived Medusa injures him further , giving Palutena the chance to charge the Great Sacred Treasure 's cannon with her power . Pit then uses the cannon to obliterate Hades ' body , saving the world . In a post @-@ credits scene , Hades speaks to the player , saying he will return in 25 years . 
 = = Development = = 
 After completing work on Super Smash Bros. Brawl for the Wii , Masahiro Sakurai was taken out for a meal by Nintendo 's then @-@ CEO Satoru Iwata in July 2008 . During their meal , Iwata asked Sakurai to develop a launch title for the Nintendo 3DS . The platform was still in early development at the time , with Sakurai being the first external staff member to learn of its existence . On his way home , Sakurai was faced with both ideas and problems : Sora Ltd . , which had developed Super Smash Bros. Brawl , had been drastically reduced in size as most of the game 's staff had been either from other Nintendo teams or outsourced . While he had the option to creating an easy @-@ to @-@ develop port for the system , Sakurai decided to create a game around the third @-@ person shooter genre , which was unpopular in Japan yet seemed suited to the planned 3D effects of the 3DS . At this point , the project was still an original game . In later conversations with Iwata , Sakurai decided to use an existing Nintendo IP as the game 's basis . This was inspired by feedback received from players of Super Smash Bros. Brawl that many members of its character roster had not been in an original game for some time . After a positive response from Iwata at the suggestion , Sakurai ran through the possible franchises and decided to use Kid Icarus due to its long absence from the gaming market and continued popularity in the West . He also decided upon him due to his involvement with the character through Super Smash Bros. Brawl . Once he had chosen a possible series , he conceived the basic sequence of five @-@ minute aerial segments , ground @-@ based combat and bosses at the end of chapters . After submitting his plan , Sakurai was given the go @-@ ahead to develop the game . One of the other franchises under consideration by Sakurai for use in the game was Star Fox , but he felt that there were some restrictions in implementing the planned gameplay features within the Star Fox setting . Uprising was the first Kid Icarus game to be developed since the Western @-@ exclusive 1991 Game Boy title Kid Icarus : Of Myths and Monsters , and the first to be planned for Japan since the original Kid Icarus in 1986 . 
 The game 's story and script were written by Sakurai . With video game stories , Sakurai believes that developers lack an ability to balance story @-@ based gameplay hindrances with the prerequisite of victory over enemies . To this end , he was obsessed with striking that balance with Uprising , and so wrote the entire story script himself . He did this so he could write a story that " <unk> " with the flow and style of gameplay . The characters ' roles and personalities were shaped by their roles in the game and the game structure itself . He also wanted the dialogue to mesh perfect with the story and music : by writing the script himself , Sakurai was able to sidestep the necessity of explaining to another writer all the time . This also made fine tuning much easier for him . While retaining the first game 's Greek mythic influences , the mythology itself had no direct influence on the story of Uprising . Sakurai also wanted to make sure that the game 's Greek influence did not stray in the same direction as the God of War series . For the main story , Sakurai avoided portraying a simple good versus evil situation ; instead , he had the various factions coming into conflict due to clashing views rather than openly malicious intentions , with their overlapping conflicts creating escalating levels of chaos for players to experience . Rather than relying on stand @-@ alone cutscenes , the majority of story dialogue was incorporated into gameplay . What cutscenes there were made as short as possible . Events after Chapter 6 were deliberately kept secret during the run @-@ up to release so players would be taken by surprise by what they experienced . The character of Palutena , a damsel in distress in the original game , was reworked as Pit 's partner and support . The original idea was for Pit to have a mascot character as his support , but it was abandoned in favor of Palutena . Pit and Palutena 's dialogue was influenced by the traditions of Japanese double acts . Dark Pit was written as a mirror image of Pit rather than an evil twin . A key element was retaining the humorous elements from the first game , such as anachronistic elements and silly enemy designs . This attitude , as observed by Sakurai , contrasted sharply with the weighty or grim character stories present in the greater majority of video games . The story was originally three chapters longer than the final version , but these additional parts needed to be cut during early development . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 In November 2008 , after Sakurai was given the go @-@ ahead to develop Uprising , he rented out an office in <unk> , a district of Tokyo . At this stage , due to the game 's platform still being in early development , there were no development tools available for Sakurai to use . Between November and March 2009 , Sakurai finalized his vision for the game . During this period , to help design the game 's settings and characters , Sakurai hired several outside illustrators to work on concept art : these artists were Toshio Noguchi , Akifumi Yamamoto and Masaki <unk> . The art style was inspired by manga . In January 2009 , development studio Project Sora was established for Uprising 's development . At its inception , it had a staff of 30 . With the start of active recruitment in March 2009 , the game officially entered development : at the time , it was the very first game to be in development for the new platform . During this early stage , due to the lack of platform specific development tools , the team were developing the game on Wii hardware and personal computers . The changing specifications of the developing hardware resulted in multiple features undergoing major revisions . This hardware instability led to a protracted development cycle : in the event , the team managed to fully utilize the platform 's capabilities , doing detailed work on how many enemies they could show on the screen at any one time . <unk> also took a long time due to the size and variability of gameplay built into Uprising . 
 From the start , Uprising was meant to be distinct from the original Kid Icarus : while Kid Icarus was a platformer featuring horizontal and vertical movement from a side @-@ scrolling perspective , Uprising shifted to being a fully 3D third @-@ person shooter broken between airborne and ground @-@ based segments in each chapter . Much of the game 's depth and scale came from Sakurai 's own game design philosophy , along with the inclusion of various weapon types that opened up different strategic options . The number of weapons available in @-@ game was decided from an early stage , as Sakurai wanted solid goals for the development team so development would go smoothly . The original Kid Icarus was notorious for its high difficulty , but this was an aspect Sakurai wanted to tone down so that casual gamers could enjoy Uprising . For this reason , the Fiend 's Cauldron was created as a user @-@ controlled means of both setting difficulty and allowing players to challenge themselves by placing bets against their performances . The Fiend 's Cauldron tied into the game 's overall theme of " challenge " . The game 's difficulty was one of the three key elements decided upon by Sakurai , alongside the music and light @-@ hearted storyline . The addition of the AR Card game was based on Sakurai 's wish to fully utilize the 3DS ' planned features , and was inspired by the trophy viewing option from Super Smash Bros. Brawl . Due to the volume of cards produced , the team needed to create a special system based on a <unk> , an ID recognition code along the bottom edge of a card . After consideration , it was decided to have the " Idol " displays able to fight each other , with battles revolving around a stat @-@ based rock @-@ paper @-@ scissors mechanic . It also provided a means for players to measure the strength of characters without directly connecting their consoles . 
 While the game had fast @-@ paced action and a high difficulty , its control scheme was designed to be relatively simple . This was because Sakurai had observed equivalent console games using all the buttons on a console 's controller , creating a barrier for first @-@ time players . To open up the game for newcomers while keeping gameplay depth , the team took the three basic controls and combined them with the game 's structure . In later interviews , Sakurai said that the team had great difficulty properly incorporating the control scheme into the game . Their initial goal was to fully utilize the 3DS ' processing power , which left little room for incorporation of elements such as the Circle Pad Pro , which was created fairly late in the game 's own development cycle . Due to the lack of space , providing independent analogue controls for left @-@ handed players was impossible . The inclusion of a stand for the system to help players properly experience Uprising as part of the game 's package was requested by the team from an early stage . A major element of the 3DS ' design that influenced development was the touch screen , used for aiming Pit 's weapons . While similar touch @-@ based aiming had been used for first @-@ person shooters on the Nintendo DS , Sakurai was dissatisfied with the resulting experience , phrasing it as " like trying to steer with oars " . With the 3DS touch screen , the team was able to create a more responsive experience similar to a computer mouse , creating the system of flicking the 3DS stylus to change camera and character direction . The team also attempted to tackle the ingrained problem of trying to move the character and camera while 3D graphics were activated . The multiplayer functionality was decided upon from an early stage , with the main focus being on balancing it with the single @-@ playing campaign . The design for weapon usage was inspired by fighter choices in Super Smash Bros. Brawl , contrasting with weapon systems from other equivalent Western shooters . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music was composed by a large team , many of them from outside Nintendo . They were Motoi Sakuraba , Yuzo Koshiro , Masafumi Takada , Noriyuki Iwadare , in @-@ house composer Takahiro Nishi , and Yasunori Mitsuda . Nishi acted as the music director . Orchestration was handled by Mitsuda and Natsumi Kameoka . Sakurai and Nishi were in early discussions about what the style of Uprising 's music would be , and which composers to hire for it . The composers were those who had contributed most prominently to Super Smash Bros. Brawl . The music involved both live orchestral music , synthesized tracks , and tracks that combined both musical styles . The air battle themes were created to match the dialogue and action on @-@ screen , which was stated early on to be an important goal . Another aspect of the music , as noted by Koshiro , was that it should stand out while not interfering with dialogue . Sakuraba and Koshiro were brought in fairly early , and thus encountered difficulties with creating their music . Sakuraba recalled that he needed to rewrite the opening theme multiple times after his first demo clashed with the footage he saw due to his not knowing much about the game 's world . Takada came on board when there was an ample amount of footage , but was shocked when he saw gameplay from the game 's fifth chapter and tried to create suitable music within Sakurai 's guidelines . 
 Iwadare was asked to create memorable melodies , but found creating suitable tracks difficult as many of his initial pieces were thrown out . For Kameoka , recording the live orchestral segments proved a time @-@ consuming and difficult business : each element of a track was recorded separately , then mixed into a single track , then each orchestral element needed to be adjusted for speed and tone so they lined up correctly . According to Mitsuda , the live recording of music spanned seven full sessions , estimated by him as being the largest @-@ scale musical production for a video game to that date . He was entirely dedicated to orchestration and recording for four months . Mitsuda was tasked with creating the music for the game 's 2010 reveal trailer , which he knew was a very important task as it would have an international audience . He estimated that around 150 people worked on the score throughout its creation . 
 In separate commentary on selected tunes , Sakurai drew to particular tracks . Sakuraba 's main theme was made notably different from earlier themes incorporated into the soundtrack , because he wanted Uprising to have an original theme to distinguish it from its predecessors : as it played in the main menu between missions , the team treated it as Palutena 's theme tune . Koshiro composed " Magnus ' Theme " : the theme had two distinct versions based around the same motif , alongside incorporating one of Hirokazu Tanaka 's original tracks for Kid Icarus . The theme for Dark Pit was composed by Western gun duels in mind , making heavy use of the acoustic guitar to give it a " Spanish flavor " : multiple arrangements were created , including a version for use in multiplayer . Mitsuda was responsible for the " Boss Theme " , and worked to make the music positive and encouraging as opposed to the more common " oppressive " boss tunes heard in games . Iwadare 's " Space Pirate Theme " , written for a faction of the Underworld Army , combined musical elements associated with both seafaring pirates and outer space . Iwadare also composed " Hades ' Infernal Theme " , which mixed choral , circus and " violent " elements to both symbolize Hades ' contrasting attributes and distinguish him from Medusa . 
 Koshiro 's song , " Wrath of the Reset Bomb " , used the motif associated with Viridi , which would be reused in multiple tracks . According to Sakurai , it was only intended to be used in one level , but he liked it so much that he made it the theme for Viridi 's Forces of Nature . A track that went through multiple redrafts was " Aurum Island " , the theme associated with the titular alien invaders : while every attempt made to create a theme ended up as a " techno @-@ pop song " , the tune underwent multiple adjustments so it would not clash with the rest of the soundtrack while retaining its form . " Lightning Chariot Base " , due to the size of the level , was designed so players would notice its presence without growing tired of it . " Practice Arena " , the tune for the pre @-@ multiplayer training area , was designed by Takada to have a light , analogue feel ; it was originally composed for a different unspecified area , but it was decided that it fitted well with the build @-@ up to a multiplayer match . 
 Selected music from the game was originally released in a promotional single CD by Club Nintendo . A limited 3 @-@ CD official soundtrack album , New Light Mythology : Palutena 's Mirror Original Soundtrack , was released through Sleigh Bells and Procyon Studio on August 21 , 2012 under the catalog number <unk> @-@ 0016 ~ 8 . Upon release , music critics were very positive : Video Game Music Online writer Julius Acero gave the game a perfect 5 @-@ star rating , calling it " the best modern Nintendo soundtrack , beating out the likes of The Legend of Zelda : Skyward Sword and even Super Smash Bros. Brawl " . It also won the site 's " Best Score award in the Eastern category " . Patrick Gann , writing for Original Sound Version , called it an " epic musical score " , praising the developers for bringing together the composers to create the score . He did not review the album in detail due to its sheer size . 
 = = Release = = 
 In 2009 , Sakurai confirmed that he was working on a new game through Project Sora . Uprising was officially announced at the 2010 Electronic Entertainment Expo alongside the announcement of the 3DS . In an interview closer to release , Sakurai said that he had misgivings about Uprising being shown off at gaming expos since 2010 while it was still in an unfinished state . As announced in 2011 , the game suffered a delay that pushed its release into 2012 . In January 2012 , Sakurai announced via his Twitter feed that the game had gone gold . The game released on Japan on 22 March 2012 ; in Europe and North America on 23 March ; and in Australia on 29 March . The game 's box art was almost identical between its Japanese and English releases . 
 The English localization of Uprising was handled by Nintendo of America 's Nintendo Treehouse localization department . Sakurai gave the localization team " a lot of leeway " for this part of development . Much of the original script 's humor stemmed from the usage of Japanese conversational nuances , which would not have translated properly into English . Because of this , adjustments needed to be made so that it was enjoyable for English speakers . The video game references were taken almost directly from the Japanese script , with some adjustments so they resonated with the Western market . As with other localizations , the team avoided topical references so the scripts would take on a timeless feel . The casting and recording director was Ginny McSwain . Two prominent English cast members were Antony Del Rio , who voices Pit and Dark Pit , and Ali Hillis , who voices Palutena . The majority of the voice recording was done separately , but half the dialogue between Pit and Palutena was recorded by the two actors together before scheduling conflicts forced them to record their lines separately , responding to either voice clips of the other actors or the director reading lines . The European version only included the English dub , as there was no room on the 3DS cartridge to include multiple voice tracks . 
 To promote the game , Nintendo collaborated with multiple Japanese animation studios to create animated shorts based on the world and characters of Uprising . There were five shorts produced : the single @-@ episode Medusa 's Revenge by Studio 4 ° C , the two part Palutena 's Revolting Dinner by Shaft , and the three @-@ part Thanatos Rising by Production I.G. Sakurai supervised work on the anime shorts , but otherwise let the animators " do their own thing " . The anime shorts were streamed in Japan , Europe and North America through the 3DS ' Nintendo Video service in the week prior to the game 's release in each region . Limited packs of AR Cards were also produced by Nintendo in two series , including special packs featuring rare cards . Six random cards also came packaged with the game itself . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Uprising has garnered a positive reception since release . On aggregate site Metacritic , the game scored 83 / 100 based on 75 critic reviews . Famitsu gave the game a perfect score of 40 points . In its review , the magazine praised the attention to detail , flexibility , and general gameplay balance . It also positively noted the game 's dialogue . Marty Silva , writing for 1UP.com , said that there was " a never @-@ ending litany of things to love " about Uprising . IGN 's Richard George called Uprising " a fantastic game " despite its flaws . Simon Parkin of Eurogamer said that " Kid Icarus : Uprising is a strong , pretty game turned into an essential one by way of its surrounding infrastructure " . GameSpot 's Ashton Raze said that Uprising was a fun game when it hit its stride , calling it " a deep and satisfying shooter " despite its issues with control and character movement . Neal Ronaghan of Nintendo World Report , while commenting on control issues , called Uprising an " amazing game " packed with content . 
 Nintendo Power was positive overall , saying that it " was well worth the wait . " Jeff Cork of Game Informer was more critical than other reviewers , saying that most other aspects of the game were let down badly by the control scheme . Edge Magazine was positive overall , saying that fans of the original Kid Icarus would enjoy the game , praising the way it effectively combined elements from multiple genres . Steve Hogarty of Official Nintendo Magazine recommended Uprising for hardcore rather than casual gamers , saying it felt deeper than equivalent home console games . Opinions were generally positive on the light @-@ hearted story , in @-@ game dialogue , graphics , several aspects of gameplay , and its multiplayer options . However , a unanimous criticism was the control scheme , which was variously described as difficult or potentially damaging to players ' hands , while also creating issues with moving Pit . There were also negative comments about the game 's linear structure . 
 During its first week on sale in Japan , Uprising reached the top of gaming charts with sales of 132 @,@ 526 units . It also boosted sales of the 3DS to just over 67 @,@ 000 from just under 26 @,@ 000 the previous week . By April , the game remained in the top five best @-@ selling games with over 205 @,@ 000 units sold . Going into May , it was cited by Nintendo as a reason for increased profits , alongside other titles such as Fire Emblem Awakening . As of December 2012 , Uprising had sold just over 316 @,@ 000 copies in Japan , becoming the 28th best @-@ selling game of the year . In North America , the game sold over 135 @,@ 000 units , becoming one of the better @-@ selling Nintendo products of the month . In the UK , the game came in seventh place in the all @-@ format gaming charts . As of April 2013 , the game has sold 1 @.@ 18 million units , being the 10th best @-@ selling title for the system at that time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite speculation about a sequel being developed to Uprising , Sakurai confirmed that there was no sequel planned for the game . Uprising was the only game Project Sora ever produced : just four months after the game 's release , it was announced that the studio had closed down , while Sakurai and Sora Ltd. were working on the next entry in the Smash Bros series . No explanation was given for the closure . Pit returned from Super Smash Bros. Brawl as a playable character in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , while fellow Kid Icarus characters Dark Pit and Palutena were also introduced as newcomers . The games ' Classic Mode also incorporate a difficulty slider similar to the Fiend 's Cauldron in Uprising . 
 = Star Wars : Episode II – Attack of the Clones = 
 Star Wars : Episode II – Attack of the Clones is a 2002 American epic space opera film directed by George Lucas and written by Lucas and Jonathan Hales . It is the second installment of the Star Wars prequel trilogy , and stars Ewan McGregor , Natalie Portman , Hayden Christensen , Ian McDiarmid , Samuel L. Jackson , Christopher Lee , Temuera Morrison , Anthony Daniels , Kenny Baker , and Frank Oz . 
 The film is set ten years after the events in Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace . The galaxy is on the brink of civil war . Led by a former Jedi named Count Dooku , thousands of planetary systems threaten to secede from the Galactic Republic . After Senator Padmé Amidala evades assassination , Jedi apprentice Anakin Skywalker becomes her protector , while his mentor Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi investigates the attempt on Padmé 's life . Soon Anakin , Padmé , and Obi @-@ Wan witness the onset of a new threat to the galaxy , the Clone Wars . 
 Development of Attack of the Clones began in March 2000 , after the release of The Phantom Menace . By June 2000 , Lucas and Hales completed a draft of the script and principal photography took place from June to September 2000 . The film crew primarily shot at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney , Australia , with additional footage filmed in Tunisia , Spain and Italy . It was one of the first motion pictures shot completely on a high definition digital 24 @-@ frame system . 
 The film premiered on May 16 , 2002 . Critics praised the visual effects , costume design , musical score , and Ewan McGregor ’ s performance as Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi . Despite this , critics lambasted the romance of Anakin and Padmé , the dialogue , most of the acting , and the film 's long runtime . Nevertheless , the film was a financial success ; however , it also became the first Star Wars film to be out @-@ grossed in its year of release , placing only third domestically and fourth internationally . The film came out on DVD and VHS on November 12 , 2002 and was later released on Blu @-@ ray on September 16 , 2011 . Following Attack of the Clones , the third and final film of the prequel trilogy , Star Wars : Episode III – Revenge of the Sith , premiered in 2005 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ten years after the Trade Federation 's invasion of Naboo , the Galactic Republic is threatened by a Separatist movement organized by former Jedi Master Count Dooku . Senator Padmé Amidala comes to Coruscant to vote on a motion to create an army to assist the Jedi against this threat . Narrowly avoiding an assassination attempt upon arrival , she is placed under the protection of Jedi Knight Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi and his apprentice , Anakin Skywalker . The two Jedi thwart a second attempt on her life and subdue the assassin , Zam Wesell , a shape @-@ shifter who is soon killed by her bounty hunter client before she can reveal his identity . The Jedi Council assigns Obi @-@ Wan to identify and capture the bounty hunter , while Anakin is assigned to escort Padmé back to Naboo , where the two fall in love . 
 Obi @-@ Wan 's investigation leads him to the remote ocean planet Kamino , where he discovers an army of clones is being produced for the Republic , with bounty hunter Jango Fett serving as their genetic template . Obi @-@ Wan deduces Jango to be the bounty hunter he is seeking , and follows him and his clone son , Boba , to the desert planet Geonosis via a homing beacon placed on their ship , the Slave I. Meanwhile , Anakin becomes troubled by premonitions of his mother , Shmi , in pain , and travels to Tatooine with Padmé to save her . They meet Owen Lars , Anakin 's stepbrother and the son of Shmi 's new husband , Cliegg Lars . Cliegg tells Anakin that Shmi was abducted by <unk> Raiders weeks earlier and is likely dead . Determined to find her , Anakin ventures out and , finding the <unk> campsite , locates Shmi , dying from torture at the hands of the <unk> . She dies in Anakin 's arms . Anakin , enraged , massacres the <unk> and returns to the Lars homestead with Shmi 's body . After revealing his deed to Padmé , Anakin says that he wants to prevent death . 
 On Geonosis , Obi @-@ Wan discovers a Separatist gathering led by Count Dooku , who Obi @-@ Wan learns had authorized Padmé 's assassination and is developing a battle droid army with Trade Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray . Obi @-@ Wan transmits his findings to Anakin to relay to the Jedi Council , but is captured mid @-@ transmission . With knowledge of the droid army , Supreme Chancellor Palpatine is voted emergency powers to send the clones into battle . Anakin and Padmé journey to Geonosis to rescue Obi @-@ Wan , but are also captured . The three are sentenced to death , but are eventually saved by a battalion of Jedi and clone troopers led by Mace Windu and Yoda ; Jango Fett is killed by Mace during the rescue . As the clone and droid armies battle , Obi @-@ Wan and Anakin intercept Dooku , and the three engage in a lightsaber battle . Dooku overpowers Obi @-@ Wan and Anakin , but then Yoda arrives and engages the Count in a duel . Finding he is unable to defeat Yoda , Dooku flees . Arriving at Coruscant , he delivers blueprints for a superweapon to his Sith master , Darth Sidious , who confirms that everything is going as planned . As the Jedi gravely acknowledge the beginning of the Clone Wars , Anakin is fitted with a robotic arm and secretly marries Padmé on Naboo , with C @-@ 3PO and R2 @-@ D2 as their witnesses . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ewan McGregor as Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi : A Jedi Master and mentor of Anakin Skywalker . 
 Natalie Portman as Padmé Amidala : The former Queen of Naboo , who has recently been elected the planet 's senator . 
 Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker : Obi @-@ Wan 's Padawan apprentice , who has grown into a powerful but arrogant Jedi . 
 Ian McDiarmid as Chancellor Palpatine / Darth Sidious : A former senator of Naboo who has recently been elected Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic . 
 Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu : A Jedi Master sitting on the Jedi Council who warily watches the Galactic Senate 's politics . 
 Christopher Lee as Count Dooku / Darth <unk> : A former Jedi Master who now leads a Separatist movement and is Darth Sidious ' new Sith apprentice . 
 Anthony Daniels as C @-@ 3PO : A humanoid protocol droid built by Anakin for his mother . 
 Kenny Baker as R2 @-@ D2 : An astromech droid often seen on missions with Anakin and Obi @-@ Wan . 
 Frank Oz voices Yoda : The centuries @-@ old Jedi Grand Master of an unknown species who , in addition to sitting on the Jedi Council , is the instructor for young Jedi . 
 Ahmed Best , Pernilla August , Oliver Ford Davies , Andy Secombe , and Silas Carson reprise their roles as Jar Jar Binks , Shmi Skywalker , Sio Bibble , Watto , and Nute Gunray , respectively from The Phantom Menace , with Carson also portraying Ki @-@ Adi @-@ Mundi , a member of the Jedi Council . Alethea McGrath portrays Jocasta Nu , the chief librarian of the Jedi Archives . Temuera Morrison portrays Jango Fett , a Mandalorian bounty hunter who provides his DNA to use for cloning purposes in the creation of the clone army . Jimmy Smits portrays Bail Organa , a senator of the Republic , and Jay Laga <unk> portrays Captain <unk> , the head of security for Padmé Amidala . Daniel Logan portrays a young Boba Fett , Jango 's son , who is created from his " father " ' s DNA . <unk> <unk> portrays Zam Wesell , a shape @-@ shifting <unk> bounty hunter and partner of Jango 's , who is given the task of assassinating Padmé . Jack Thompson portrays Cliegg Lars , a moisture farmer who freed and married Shmi , thus becoming the stepfather of Anakin Skywalker . Joel Edgerton and Bonnie Piesse appear as Owen Lars , the son of Cliegg Lars and stepbrother of Anakin Skywalker , and Beru <unk> , Owen 's girlfriend . Ayesha Dharker appears as <unk> , the Queen of Naboo , and Rose Byrne and Verónica Segura appear as <unk> and <unk> , Padmé 's handmaidens and the latter who serves as a decoy to the senator and is killed during an assassination attempt . 
 A large search for the new Anakin Skywalker was performed across the United States . Lucas auditioned various actors , mostly unknown , before casting Christensen . Among the many established actors who auditioned were Jonathan <unk> , Ryan Phillippe , Colin Hanks , and Paul Walker . Leonardo DiCaprio also met with Lucas for the role , but was " definitely unavailable " according to DiCaprio publicist Ken Sunshine . Co @-@ star Natalie Portman later told Time magazine that Christensen " gave a great reading . He could simultaneously be scary and really young . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 After the mixed critical response to The Phantom Menace , Lucas was hesitant to return to the writing desk . In March 2000 , just three months before the start of principal photography , Lucas finally completed his rough draft for Episode II . Lucas continued to iterate on his rough draft , producing a proper first and second draft . For help with the third draft , which would later become the shooting script , Lucas brought on Jonathan Hales , who had written several episodes of The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles for him , but had limited experience writing theatrical films . The final script was completed just one week before the start of principal photography . 
 As an in @-@ joke , the film 's working title was Jar Jar 's Big Adventure , a sarcastic reference to the negative fan response to the Episode I character . 
 In writing The Empire Strikes Back , Lucas initially decided that Lando Calrissian was a clone and came from a planet of clones which caused the " Clone Wars " mentioned by Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi in A New Hope ; he later came up with an alternate concept of an army of clone <unk> from a remote planet which were used by the Republic as an army in the war that followed . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography occurred between June 26 , 2000 and September 20 , 2000 at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney . Location shooting took place in the Tunisian desert , at the Plaza de España in Seville , London , China , Vancouver , San Diego , and Italy ( Villa del <unk> on Lake Como , and in the former royal Palace of Caserta ) . At his own personal request , Samuel L. Jackson 's character Mace Windu received a lightsaber that emitted an amethyst glow , as opposed to traditional blue and green for " good guys " and red for " bad guys " . Reshoots were performed in March 2001 . During this time , a new action sequence was developed featuring the droid factory after Lucas had decided that the film lacked a quick enough pace in the corresponding time @-@ frame . The sequence 's previsualization was rushed , and the live @-@ action footage was shot within four and a half hours . Because of Lucas ' method of creating shots through various departments and sources that are sometimes miles and years apart from each other , Attack of the Clones became the first film ever to be produced through what Rick McCallum called " virtual filmmaking " . 
 Like The Phantom Menace , Attack of the Clones furthered technological development , effectively moving Hollywood into the " digital age " with the use of the HDW @-@ F900 , developed by Sony and Panavision , a digital camera using an HD digital 24 @-@ frame system . This spawned controversy over the benefits and disadvantages of digital cinematography that continues as more filmmakers " convert " to digital filmmaking while many filmmakers oppose it . In contrast to previous installments , for which scenes were shot in the Tunisian desert in temperatures up to 125 ° F ( 51 ° C ) , the camera would still run without complications . Lucas had stated that he wished to film The Phantom Menace on this format but Sony was unable to build the cameras quickly enough . In 2002 , Attack of the Clones became the third film to be released that was shot entirely on a 24p digital camera ( preceded by 2001 's Jackpot and Vidocq ) . The cameras record in the 16 : 9 HDCAM format ( 1080p ) , although the image was cropped to a 2 @.@ 40 : 1 widescreen ratio . The area above and below the 2 @.@ 40 extraction area was available for Lucas to reframe the picture as necessary in post @-@ production . Despite Lucas ' efforts to persuade movie theaters to switch to digital projectors for viewing of Episode II , few theaters did . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 The film relied almost solely on digital animatics as opposed to storyboards in order to previsualize sequences for editing early on in the film 's production . While Lucas had used other ways of producing motion @-@ based storyboards in the past , after The Phantom Menace the decision was made to take advantage of the growing digital technology . The process began with Ben Burtt 's creation of what the department dubbed as " videomatics " , so called because they were shot on a household <unk> . In these videomatics , production assistants and relatives of the department workers acted out scenes in front of greenscreen . Using computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) , the previsualization department later filled in the green screen with rough background footage . Burtt then cut together this footage and sent it off to Lucas for changes and approval . The result was a rough example of what the final product was intended to be . The previsualization department then created a finer version of the <unk> by creating an animatic , in which the <unk> actors , props , and sets were replaced by digital counterparts to give a more precise , but still rough , look at what would eventually be seen . The animatic was later brought on set and shown to the actors so that they could understand the concept of the scene they were filming in the midst of large amount of bluescreen used . Unlike most of the action sequences , the Battle of Geonosis was not storyboarded or created through videomatics but was sent straight to animatics after the department received a small vague page on the sequence . The intent was to create a number of small events that would be edited together for pacing inside the finished film . The animatics department was given a free hand regarding events to be created within the animatic ; Lucas only asked for good action shots that he could choose from and approve later . 
 In addition to introducing the digital camera , Attack of the Clones emphasized " digital doubles " as computer @-@ generated models that doubled for actors , in the same way that traditional stunt doubles did . It also furthered the authenticity of computer @-@ generated characters by introducing a new , completely CGI @-@ created version of the character Yoda . Rob Coleman and John Knoll prepared two tests featuring a CGI @-@ animated Yoda using audio from The Empire Strikes Back . Yoda 's appearance in Episode V also served as the reference point for the creation of the CGI Yoda ; Lucas repeatedly stated to the animation department that " the trick " to the animation of the CGI Yoda was to make him like the puppet from which he was based , in order to maintain a flow of continuity . Frank Oz ( voice and puppeteer for Yoda in the original trilogy and The Phantom Menace ) was consulted ; his main piece of advice was that Yoda should look extremely old , sore , and frigid . Coleman later explained the process of making the digital Yoda like the puppet version , by saying , " When Frank [ Oz ] would move the head , the ears would jiggle . If we hadn 't put that in , it wouldn 't look like Yoda . " Because of the acrobatics of the lightsaber fight between Count Dooku and Yoda , the then 78 @-@ year @-@ old Christopher Lee relied on a stunt double to perform the most demanding scenes instead . Lee 's face was superimposed onto the double 's body in all shots other than close @-@ ups , which he performed himself . Lucas often called the duel crucial to the animation department , as it had such potential to be humorous rather than dramatic . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack to the film was released on April 23 , 2002 by Sony Classical Records . The music was composed and conducted by John Williams , and performed by the London Voices and London Symphony Orchestra . The soundtrack recreates " The Imperial March " from the film The Empire Strikes Back for its first chronological appearance in Attack of the Clones , even though a hint of it appeared in the previous movie in one of the final scenes . A music video for the main theme " Across the Stars " was produced specifically for the DVD . 
 On March 15 , 2016 , a limited edition vinyl version of the soundtrack was released . Only 1 @,@ 000 copies were pressed initially . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Lucas has noted that Palpatine 's rise to power is very similar to that of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany ; as Chancellor of Germany , the latter was granted " emergency powers " , as is Palpatine . Comparisons have been made to Octavian – who became Augustus , the first emperor of Rome – and to Napoleon Bonaparte , who rose to power in France from 1796 to 1799 . Octavian was responsible for the deaths of hundreds of political opponents well before he was granted tribunician powers ; Bonaparte was appointed First Consul for life ( and later Emperor ) by the French Consulate after a failed attempt on his life and the subsequent coup of 18 Brumaire in 1799 . References to the American Civil War can also be discerned . 
 English scholar Anne Lancashire describes Attack of the Clones as " thoroughly political in its narrative " , to the point that interpersonal relations are made subordinate to the political drama that unfolds , and " a critique of the increasing role played by economic and political appetite in contemporary First World international politics in general " . In this political drama , the Trade Federation , the former idealist Dooku and Palpatine " [ represent ] the economic and political greed and ambition ( ... ) of the political and business classes " , while the Jedi have become a force of aggression , and the cityscape of Coruscant has devolved into a dystopian environment that references 1982 's Blade Runner . 
 War journalism , combat films , and footage of World War II combat influenced the documentary @-@ style camera work of the Battle of Geonosis , even to the point that hand @-@ held shakes were digitally added to computer @-@ generated sequences . 
 The prequel trilogy films often refer to the original trilogy in order to help connect the films together . Lucas has often referred to the films as a long poem that rhymes . Such examples include the line " I have a bad feeling about this " , a phrase used in each film , and lightsaber duels which almost always occur over a pit . As with Attack of the Clones , The Empire Strikes Back was the middle film in a trilogy , and of the original trilogy films , The Empire Strikes Back is the object of the most references in Attack of the Clones . In both films , an asteroid field is the backdrop of a major star battle in the middle of the film . Obi @-@ Wan escapes Jango Fett by attaching his spacecraft to an asteroid in order to disappear from the enemy sensors ; Han Solo uses a similar tactic by attaching the Millennium Falcon to a Star Destroyer in The Empire Strikes Back . As a retcon , John Knoll confirms on the film 's DVD commentary that Boba Fett , who would later catch Solo in the act in The Empire Strikes Back , " learned his lesson " from the events of Attack of the Clones . In another scene , Obi @-@ Wan asks Anakin , " Why do I get the feeling you 're going to be the death of me ? " This is an allusion to A New Hope where Anakin , as Darth Vader , kills Obi @-@ Wan aboard the Death Star . Also , Count Dooku cuts off Anakin 's arm , similar to when Darth Vader cut off Luke Skywalker 's hand in The Empire Strikes Back . 
 = = Release = = 
 After a teaser trailer premiered with the film Monsters , Inc . , a new trailer for the film aired on the Fox Network on March 10 , 2002 between Malcolm in the Middle and The X @-@ Files , and was made available on the official Star Wars web site the same day . The <unk> firm Challenger , Gray & Christmas from Chicago predicted before the film 's release that U.S. companies could lose more than $ 319 million in productivity due to employees calling in sick and then heading to theaters to see the film . 
 The film premiered as part of the inaugural Tribeca Film Festival at the BMCC Performing Arts Center , 199 Chambers St. in New York City at a Sunday , May 12 set of screenings benefitting the Children 's Aid Society , a charity supported by George Lucas . Attack of the Clones was then screened out of competition at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival , before getting a worldwide theatrical release on May 16 , 2002 . The film was also later released in IMAX theaters ; the film had not been filmed for IMAX but was " up converted " with the digital remastering process . Because of the technical limitations of the IMAX projector , an edited , 120 @-@ minute version of the film was presented . 
 Before the film 's release , there was a string of controversies regarding piracy . In 2000 , an underground organization calling itself the Atlas Group , based in Perth , Western Australia offered a copy of the screenplay , with an asking price of US $ 100 @,@ 000 , to various fan sites and media organizations , including <unk> The scheme was subsequently reported to Lucasfilm Ltd. by the fan site . 
 A pirate copy was allegedly made at a private showing , using a digital recorder that was pointed at the screen . This copy spread over the internet , and analysts predicted up to a million fans would have seen the film before the day of its release . In addition , authorities seized thousands of bootlegs throughout Kuala Lumpur before the film opened . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Star Wars Episode II : Attack of the Clones was released on DVD and VHS on November 12 , 2002 . The DVD features an audio commentary from director George Lucas , producer Rick McCallum , editor and sound designer Ben Burtt , ILM animation director Rob Coleman , and ILM visual effects supervisors Pablo Helman , John Knoll , and Ben Snow . Eight deleted scenes are included along with multiple documentaries , which include a full @-@ length documentary about the creation of digital characters and two others that focus on sound design and the animatics team . Three featurettes examine the storyline , action scenes , and love story , and a set of 12 short web documentaries cover the overall production of the film . 
 The Attack of the Clones DVD also features a trailer for a mockumentary @-@ style short film known as R2 @-@ D2 : Beneath the Dome . Some stores offered the full mockumentary as an exclusive bonus disc for a small extra charge . The film gives an alternate look at the " life " of the droid R2 @-@ D2 . The story , which Lucas approved , was meant to be humorous . 
 The DVD was re @-@ released in a prequel trilogy box set on November 4 , 2008 . 
 The Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu @-@ ray Disc on September 16 , 2011 in three different editions . 
 On April 7 , 2015 , Walt Disney Studios , 20th Century Fox , and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films . Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Attack of the Clones through the iTunes Store , Amazon Video , Vudu , Google Play , and Disney Movies Anywhere on April 10 , 2015 . 
 = = = 3D re @-@ release = = = 
 On September 28 , 2010 ( 2010 @-@ 09 @-@ 28 ) , it was announced that all six films in the series were to be stereo @-@ converted to 3D , and re @-@ released in chronological order beginning with The Phantom Menace which was released on February 10 , 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 02 @-@ 10 ) . Attack of the Clones was originally scheduled to be re @-@ released in 3D on September 20 , 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 09 @-@ 20 ) , but was postponed due to Lucasfilm 's desire to focus on Star Wars : The Force Awakens . However , the 3D presentation of the film was shown at Celebration Europe II in July 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 66 % approval rating and overall rating of 6 @.@ 7 / 10 for the film based on 242 reviews , with the general consensus being " Star Wars Episode II : Attack of the Clones benefits from an increased emphasis on thrilling action , although they 're once again undercut by ponderous plot points and underdeveloped characters . " On Metacritic , the film holds a score of 54 out of 100 based on 39 reviews , which indicates " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Numerous critics characterized the dialogue " stiff " and " flat " . The acting ( particularly by Christensen and Portman ) was also disparaged by some critics . Conversely , other critics felt fans would be pleased to see that Jar Jar Binks has only a minor role . Additionally , Jar Jar 's attempts at comic relief seen in The Phantom Menace were toned down ; instead , C @-@ 3PO reprised some of his bumbling traditions in that role . McGregor referred to the swordplay in the film as " unsatisfactory " when comparing it to the climactic duel in Revenge of the Sith as it neared release . <unk> 's James Berardinelli gave a positive review , saying , " in a time when , more often than not , sequels disappoint , it 's refreshing to uncover something this high @-@ profile that fulfills the promise of its name and adds another title to a storied legacy . " 
 Roger Ebert , who had praised all of the previous Star Wars films , gave Episode II only two out of four stars , noting , " [ As ] someone who admired the freshness and energy of the earlier films , I was amazed , at the end of Episode II , to realize that I had not heard one line of quotable , memorable dialogue . " About Anakin and Padme 's relationship , Ebert stated , " There is not a romantic word they exchange that has not long since been reduced to cliché . " Leonard Maltin , who also liked all of the previous installments , only awarded two stars out of four to this endeavor as well , as seen in his Movie and Video Guide from the 2002 edition onward . Maltin cited an " overlong story " as reason for his dissatisfaction and added , " Wooden characterizations and dialogue don 't help . " 
 Following suit with the series ' previous installments , the Academy Awards nominated Attack of the Clones ' Rob Coleman , Pablo Helman , John Knoll , and Ben Snow for Best Visual Effects at the 2003 Academy Awards , but the award ultimately went to The Lord of the Rings : The Two Towers . Natalie Portman was also honored at the Teen Choice Awards , and the film received an award for Best Fight at the MTV Movie Awards . In contrast , the film also received seven nominations from the Golden Raspberry Awards for Worst Picture , Worst Director ( George Lucas ) , Worst Screenplay ( George Lucas ) , Worst Supporting Actor ( Hayden Christensen ) , Worst Supporting Actress ( Natalie Portman ) , Worst Screen Couple ( Hayden Christensen and Natalie Portman ) and Worst Remake or Sequel . It took home two awards for Worst Screenplay ( George Lucas ) and Worst Supporting Actor ( Hayden Christensen ) . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film grossed $ 310 @,@ 676 @,@ 740 in North America and $ 338 @,@ 721 @,@ 588 overseas for a worldwide total of $ 649 @,@ 398 @,@ 328 . Though a huge financial success , it was nevertheless overshadowed by the even greater box @-@ office success of The Phantom Menace three years earlier . It was not the top grossing film of the year , either in North America ( where it finished in third place ) or worldwide ( where it was fourth ) , the first time that a Star Wars film did not have this distinction . In North America it was outgrossed by Spider @-@ Man and The Lord of the Rings : The Two Towers , both of which received a less favorable critical reception as well . Worldwide , it was also outgrossed by Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , though Attack of the Clones performed better than The Chamber of Secrets in North America . Adjusted for inflation , Attack of the Clones is the lowest @-@ performing live @-@ action Star Wars film at the North American box office , though is still among the 100 highest @-@ grossing films of all time when adjusted for inflation . It sold an estimated 52 @,@ 012 @,@ 300 tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run . 
 = = Novelizations = = 
 Two novels based on the movie were published , a tie @-@ in junior novel by Scholastic , and a novelization written by R. A. Salvatore , which includes some unique scenes . A four @-@ issue comic book adaptation was written by Henry Gilroy and published by Dark Horse Comics . 
 = Typhoon Zeb = 
 Typhoon Zeb , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Iliang , was a powerful typhoon that struck the island of Luzon in October 1998 . The tenth tropical storm of the season , Zeb formed on October 10 from the monsoon trough near the Caroline Islands . It moved westward initially and quickly intensified . Zeb 's inflow briefly spawned another tropical storm , which it ultimately absorbed . Developing an eye , Zeb rapidly intensified into a super typhoon , officially reaching maximum sustained winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) ; one warning agency estimated winds as high as 285 km / h ( 180 mph ) . After reaching peak intensity , the typhoon struck northern Luzon and quickly weakened over land . Turning to the north , Zeb brushed the east coast of Taiwan at a reduced intensity , and after accelerating to the northeast it moved through Japan . It became extratropical on October 18 and moved eastward over open waters . 
 First affecting the Philippines , Zeb dropped torrential rainfall in Luzon , reaching 1 @,@ 116 mm ( 43 @.@ 9 in ) in one day in La Trinidad , estimated as a 1 in 1147 year event . The rains caused floods and landslides , which compounded with high winds to leave heavy crop damage . Zeb destroyed or damaged 85 @,@ 844 houses in the Philippines , and damage in the country was estimated at ₱ 5 @.@ 375 billion ( 1998 Philippine pesos , $ 126 million United States dollars ) , the fifth costliest at the time . There were also 83 deaths in the country , a number compounded upon when Typhoon Babs struck the same region a week later . High winds and rainfall from Zeb later affected Taiwan , causing NT $ 4 @.@ 15 billion ( New Taiwan dollar , $ 125 million USD ) in damage as well as 31 deaths . Gusty winds affected much of Japan , while heavy rainfall peaked at 586 mm ( 23 @.@ 1 in ) on Mount Ontake . The storm killed 14 people in the country , several related to landslides . Zeb destroyed 770 homes and flooded another 12 @,@ 548 in Japan . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The monsoon trough spawned a tropical disturbance over the western Pacific Ocean to the east of Guam around October 7 . The system moved steadily westward , organizing enough for the American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) to issue a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert early on October 9 . After the disturbance passed south of Guam , the JTWC began issuing advisories on Tropical Depression 18W late on October 9 , and the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) followed suit the next day . While passing north of Yap in the Caroline Islands , the depression intensified into a tropical storm according to the JTWC , which gave it the name Zeb . The JMA again was delayed in upgrading by a day . 
 After becoming a tropical storm , Zeb proceeded to steadily intensify . Its large inflow spawned a circulation well to the east @-@ northeast , which organized into a separate tropical storm – Alex . Early on October 11 , the storm entered the area of responsibility of PAGASA – the Philippine @-@ based weather agency – which gave it the local name Iliang . Late on October 11 , the JTWC upgraded Zeb to typhoon status , or 1 minute winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . This was based on the appearance of a banding @-@ type eye on satellite imagery . On October 12 , the storm rapidly intensified as it turned more to the west @-@ northwest toward the Philippines . During this time , it caused increased wind shear over the smaller Tropical Storm Alex to the east @-@ northeast , ultimately absorbing it . At 00 : 00 UTC on October 13 , the JTWC upgraded Zeb to super typhoon status , estimating winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) . Twelve hours later , the agency estimated that the typhoon strengthened further to a peak of 285 km / h ( 180 mph ) , making it the strongest storm of the season . At the same time , PAGASA also estimated peak 10 minute winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) , also designating Zeb as a super typhoon . Late on October 13 , the JMA estimated peak 10 minute winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) just east of the island of Luzon . While near peak intensity , the JTWC estimated that winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) extended 95 km ( 60 mi ) , and gales extended 465 km ( 290 mi ) from the center . 
 Zeb 's eyewall continued to contract up until it moved ashore . Early on October 14 , Zeb made landfall on eastern Luzon just south of Palanan Bay , or east of <unk> , near peak intensity . The typhoon weakened rapidly over land , while its track shifted more to the north around a ridge to the east . It emerged into the Luzon Strait between the eponymous island and Taiwan with a much larger eyewall , and failed to re @-@ intensify over open waters . Late on October 15 , Zeb passed within 19 km ( 11 mi ) of Taiwan 's east coast before accelerating to the northeast due to a passing trough . The JMA downgraded the typhoon to tropical storm status on October 16 , although the JTWC retained Zeb at typhoon status . Favorable upper @-@ level conditions allowed the storm to briefly re @-@ intensify after passing Taiwan , although this was short @-@ lived , and it weakened while accelerating toward Japan . At 07 : 00 UTC on October 17 , Zeb struck southern Kyushu in Kagoshima Prefecture . It continued northeastward through the country , striking Kōchi Prefecture on Shikoku and later crossing central Honshu as a tropical storm . During this time , the storm was losing tropical characteristics as it swiftly entered the Sea of Japan . At 00 : 00 UTC on September 18 , the JMA declared Zeb extratropical , and shortly after the storm moved over northern Hokkaido and into the Sea of Okhotsk . The remnants moved across the southern Kamchatka Peninsula and continued eastward through the open north Pacific . It was last noted by the JMA early on October 20 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Ahead of the storm , PAGASA issued Public Storm Warning Signal # 4 , in which winds of over 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) were expected within 12 hours . The warning covered Batanes , Cagayan , Isabela , Quirino , and northern Aurora . Lesser warnings were issued as far south as the Visayas , and extended into the Metro Manila area . After two damaging storms in September , the government began making widespread preparations on October 13 , organizing efforts through its National Disaster Coordinating Council . Ports were closed and flights were canceled due to the storm . Before the worst of the storm struck , power companies shut off electricity to prevent accidents . About 103 @,@ 000 people evacuated their homes , including over 6 @,@ 325 staying in 114 government shelters . Evacuations extended as far south as Camarines Sur . 
 The Hong Kong Observatory issued a stand @-@ by warning signal # 1 due to the storm 's proximity to the South China Sea . 
 Before Zeb brushed the east coast of Taiwan , a typhoon warning was issued , causing schools , government buildings , and financial markets to close . Airports and ferry travel were also disrupted . 183 residents evacuated to storm shelters , including 50 from a nursing home . Hundreds of Chinese fishing boats rode out the storm in Taiwan harbors . Similarly to Taiwan , Zeb delayed ferry service in Japan , and caused 271 domestic flights to be canceled . Train service was canceled on Kyushu during the storm . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 Striking the Philippines at peak intensity , Zeb largely affected the island of Luzon , including the regions of Ilocos , Cagayan Valley , and Central Luzon . Wind gusts were estimated as high as 296 km / h ( 184 mph ) in the country . The storm also dropped torrential rainfall , particularly in mountainous regions . In the municipality of Bakun , the 1 @,@ 000 mm ( 39 in ) rain gauge overflowed , and in nearby La Trinidad , the rainfall was 1 @,@ 116 mm ( 43 @.@ 9 in ) on October 14 alone . The latter total was estimated as a 1 in 1147 year event , based on the history of local rainfall totals . In the city of Baguio , the precipitation reached 994 @.@ 6 mm ( 39 @.@ 16 in ) , enough to flood the town 9 m ( 30 ft ) deep . The Binga and <unk> dams in Benguet were unable to support the rains from the storm , forcing them to be opened and flood three towns in neighboring Pangasinan . Minor street flooding occurred along the west coast near Manila . 
 Across Luzon , the high rains caused flooding , landslides , and halted construction of a dam in Bakun . Considered one of the strongest typhoons to hit the area in decades , Zeb knocked down tress and power lines , which covered roads and left areas isolated . The winds were strong enough to blow over a jeepney . Along its path , the storm destroyed 26 @,@ 305 houses and damaged another 59 @,@ 539 , mostly affecting those of weaker building materials . River flooding caused heavy damage to crops , estimated at ₱ 1 @.@ 76 billion ( 1998 Philippine pesos , $ 41 @.@ 3 million United States dollars ) ; the storm destroyed 181 @,@ 630 t ( 400 @,@ 430 @,@ 000 lb ) of rice in Ilocos Region and Cagayan Valley . Most of the damage occurred in Luzon , with little impact elsewhere . The storm also marred the local infrastructure ; areas in northeastern Luzon were isolated when landslides blocked a highway , and several other roads and bridges were impassible . Overall , Zeb killed 83 people in the country , while injuring another 63 ; most of the deaths were related to the landslides , and 33 of the deaths were in Cordillera Administrative Region . Overall damage was estimated at ₱ 5 @.@ 375 billion ( PHP , $ 126 million USD ) , which as of 2011 was the 13th costliest typhoon in the Philippines and the 5th costliest at the time . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 The interaction between Zeb and the monsoon brought gusty winds to Hong Kong , reaching 88 km / h ( 55 mph ) on Cheung Chau . High tides were also recorded , although there was no reported damage in the territory . 
 Later , Zeb produced sustained winds of 155 km / h ( 96 mph ) in Taiwan , although gusts topped at 191 km / h ( 119 mph ) . The typhoon dropped torrential rainfall in the northern and eastern portions of the island , with peak hourly rates of 42 @.@ 1 mm ( 1 @.@ 66 in ) . Several regions of Taiwan received over 400 mm ( 16 in ) of rainfall . The rains caused severe flooding along rivers , with a peak discharge of <unk> m ³ / s ( 131 @,@ 193 ft ³ / s ) . The high rainfall forced workers at the Fei @-@ <unk> Dam to release water , after water levels rose by 300 mm ( 12 in ) . Landslides near Taipei wrecked homes , trapping at least two people . Landslides also covered several highways while floods washed away bridges , cutting off traffic . Flooding occurred in the suburbs of Taipei , and the winds were strong enough to cause skyscrapers to sway in the city . Zeb 's winds knocked over trees , billboards , and power lines , leaving 1 @.@ 15 million without electricity . Two @-@ story high waves killed a fisherman in Taitung City , washed a freighter ashore in Taichung , and capsized a boat in Tamsui District , killing one sailor ; five of the others on board swam two hours to reach shore . The storm left $ 57 @.@ 6 million ( USD ) in crop damage , after hundreds of acres of fields were damaged in the southern and central Taiwan . Overall damage was estimated at NT $ 4 @.@ 15 billion ( New Taiwan dollar , $ 125 million USD ) , and there were 31 confirmed deaths in Taiwan , with 19 people injured . 
 While moving through Japan , Zeb produced peak sustained winds of 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) in Kōchi Prefecture within Shikoku . The highest rainfall was 586 mm ( 23 @.@ 1 in ) on Mount Ontake on Honshu . The widespread rainfall caused 332 landslides and washed away seven bridges . Within Japan , Zeb first affected Miyako @-@ jima while passing about 180 km ( 110 mi ) to the northwest . High winds left 2 @,@ 600 houses without power and caused damage to public buildings . It later passed about 230 km ( 145 mi ) to the northwest of Okinawa . Along the island , wind gusts reached 134 km / h ( 83 mph ) , and wave heights peaked at 13 @.@ 7 m ( 45 ft ) . The waves swept away two people over a sea wall , killing them both . High waves also damaged a port at Kadena Air Base as well as several houses near the coast . The storm also passed near the Yaeyama Islands with strong winds . Salt spray coated trees and ruined them , and there was scattered public building damage . 
 On Kyushu , Zeb damaged houses , marred crops , and flooded rivers . The storm spawned a tornado in Miyazaki Prefecture that damaged two roofs and a vehicle . In <unk> , a motorist died after a roadway collapse landed his vehicle in a nearby river . On Shikoku , Zeb destroyed roads and farmlands and eroded lands along waterways . Three people died due to a landslide in Matsuyama . In Okayama Prefecture along Honshu , Zeb left six people missing or killed and was the costliest typhoon since Typhoon Fran in 1976 . Landslides killed three people in Hiroshima Prefecture . Power outages and landslides affected much of Honshu , while strong winds damaged many fields . A cargo freighter washed aground amid high waves in Shizuoka Prefecture , causing oil to leak and requiring assistance from the Coast Guard ; oil recovery equipment was sent to the area to clean the spill . Lastly , Zeb affected the northern island of Hokkaido , causing one landslide , damaging 152 buildings , and knocking 152 @,@ 000 apples to the ground . Nationwide , Zeb destroyed 770 homes and flooded another 12 @,@ 548 , with thousands forced to evacuate their homes due to flooding . Overall , there were 14 deaths and 67 injuries , with damage estimated at $ 335 @.@ 5 million ( 1998 USD ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the storm , then @-@ Philippine president Joseph Estrada declared six provinces as a state of calamity , which allocated ₱ 1 million in emergency funds for each province . The president was unable to return home from a trip to Singapore due to the storm . The military was activated to help organize relief efforts , using rubber boats and trucks to reach the hardest hit areas as floodwaters decreased . They were aided by the Philippine Red Cross and other government agencies . Most evacuees returned home after the storm passed , excluding those whose houses sustained damage . Volunteers , the military , and public workers helped clean up from the damage . Just seven days after Zeb 's damaging Philippine landfall , another typhoon – Babs – struck the same general region with a similar , but lesser intensity . After both storms , the Philippine National Electrification Administration provided ₱ 1 @.@ 78 million to the Batanes Electric Cooperative to restore damaged power lines . Power was gradually restored in northeastern Luzon , allowing communication of the damage extent . The nation 's Department of Health distributed ₱ 547 @,@ 469 worth of medicine to four provinces . The government airlifted about 3 @,@ 000 bags of supplies to Cagayan that included rice and canned goods . The back to back storm impacts caused an estimated 30 % drop in coconut exports . Food prices rose dramatically , in some instances up to 400 % , after both storms damaged crops . The storms also delayed shipments of sugar from neighboring countries , although prices were expected to fall once they arrived . By December 1998 , consumer prices had risen by 11 @.@ 2 % over the previous year due to the typhoons ' damage . 
 Workers in Taiwan began a search and rescue mission for missing victims once the typhoon warning was lifted . Workers immediately began repairing road damage in Japan once the storm passed . 
 = Weather Machine = 
 Weather Machine is a <unk> @-@ kinetic bronze sculpture and columnar machine that serves as a weather beacon , displaying a weather prediction each day at noon . Designed and constructed by Omen Design Group Inc . , the approximately 30 @-@ foot ( 9 m ) tall sculpture was installed in 1988 in the northwest corner of Pioneer Courthouse Square in Portland , Oregon , in the United States . Two thousand people attended its dedication , which was broadcast live nationally from the square by Today weatherman Willard Scott . The machine cost $ 60 @,@ 000 . 
 During its daily two @-@ minute sequence , which includes a trumpet fanfare , mist , and flashing lights , the machine displays one of three metal symbols as a prediction of the weather for the following 24 @-@ hour period : a sun for clear and sunny weather , a blue heron for drizzle and transitional weather , or a dragon and mist for rainy or stormy weather . The sculpture includes two bronze wind scoops and displays the temperature via vertical colored lights along its stem . The air quality index is also displayed by a light system below the stainless steel globe . Weather predictions are made based on information obtained by employees of Pioneer Courthouse Square from the National Weather Service and the Department of Environmental Quality . Considered a tourist attraction , Weather Machine has been called " bizarre " , " playful " , " unique " , and " wacky " , and has been compared to a giant scepter . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 Weather Machine is a <unk> @-@ kinetic bronze sculpture that serves as a weather beacon , designed and constructed by Omen Design Group Inc . Contributors included Jere and Ray Grimm , Dick Ponzi , who won a 40 @-@ entry international competition to design the machine for Pioneer Courthouse Square ( 1984 ) , and Roger Patrick Sheppard . The group described their efforts as " collaborative " , but Sheppard considered Ponzi the " maestro " of the project . Ponzi did the engineering and hydraulics , and the machine was assembled at his vineyard near Beaverton . The sculpture was inspired by Portland @-@ born @-@ and @-@ based writer Terence O 'Donnell , who suffered from osteomyelitis during his childhood , and his " funny Irish jig " . Weather Machine , which took five years to plan and build and cost $ 60 @,@ 000 , was installed in the square in August 1988 . Today weatherman Willard Scott broadcast live from the square to dedicate the sculpture on its August 24 opening . Two thousand people were present as early as 4 a.m. for the dedication . Financial contributors included Pete and Mary Mark , the AT & T Foundation , Alyce R. Cheatham , Alexandra MacColl , E. Kimbark MacColl , Meier & Frank , the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality , David Pugh and Standard Insurance Company . Information about the donors was included on a plaque added to the sculpture 's stem in the weeks following the dedication . 
 Each day at noon , the columnar machine performs a two @-@ minute sequence that begins with a trumpet fanfare of the opening bars of Aaron Copland 's Fanfare for the Common Man , and produces mist and flashing lights . It eventually reveals one of three metal symbols : a stylized golden sun ( " <unk> " ) for clear and sunny weather , a blue heron ( Portland 's official bird ) for drizzle and transitional weather , or mist and a " fierce , open @-@ mouthed " dragon for heavy rain or stormy weather . The fanciful symbols change at the same time every day , representing weather predictions for the following 24 @-@ hour period . " Helia " , described as " gleaming " , was designed by Jere Grimm ; her design would later be applied to one of her husband 's pots , exhibited in 1989 . The trumpets are allowed to play at noon due to a waiver of Portland 's noise ordinance for that time period . Ray Grimm constructed the blue heron symbol , and the group collaborated on the dragon symbol based on his drawings . In order for the machine to display an accurate weather prediction , as reported by The Oregonian in 1988 , employees of Pioneer Courthouse Square contacted the National Weather Service each morning at 10 : 30 a.m. for the forecast , and then entered information into the machine 's computer , located behind a nearby door . 
 The machine , whose height is reported to be between 25 and 33 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 and 10 @.@ 1 m ) , includes two bronze wind scoops that turn in opposite directions . It also indicates the temperature ( when 20 ° F or above ) via vertical colored lights along the sculpture 's stem . Measured by an internal gauge , the machine displays blue lights for below freezing , white lights for above freezing and red lights to mark every ten degrees ( ° F ) . Referring to an additional light system ( below the stainless steel globe ) that indicates air quality , The Oregonian reported in 1988 that a green light indicates good air quality , amber reflects " <unk> " air and a red light indicates poor air quality . However , in 1998 one writer for The Oregonian warned : " you don 't want to breathe so much when the white light is on " . Pioneer Courthouse Square employees enter air quality information into the machine 's computer following routine checks with the Department of Environmental Quality . 
 In addition to its pre @-@ dawn dedication on national television , Weather Machine had a public dedication at noon on August 24 , attended by Mayor Bud Clark and other city officials . On that day , the machine displayed the sun symbol and a green light for good air quality , and indicated a temperature of 82 ° F ( 28 ° C ) . Following the fanfare , known officially as " Fanfare for Weather Machine with Four Trumpets " , jazz singer Shirley Nanette led the crowd in a rendition of " You Are My Sunshine " . Portland had good weather in the days following its dedication , preventing visitors from seeing all three symbols for an extended length of time ( though all three symbols are displayed briefly during the daily two @-@ minute sequence ) . This prompted the executive director of Pioneer Courthouse Square to consider altering the machine 's schedule so that the public would have a chance to see all three symbols . The sculpture maintained good health until winter 1995 , when its mechanical performance temporarily began deviating from noon and the temperature gauge had difficulties working properly . In 2012 , the machine malfunctioned and stopped operating for about a week . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the weeks following Weather Machine 's dedication , an estimated 300 to 400 people gathered at the square daily to witness the noon sequence . Following the dedication , The Oregonian published : " It takes nothing from its fascination to know that a human on the staff of the square will be making the daily phone calls to the Weather Service and the Department of Environmental Quality , and pushing the necessary buttons to cue the pillar 's performance ... They have given Portland an attraction no other city has . We 're going to like it . " 
 Ponzi described the machine as " light @-@ hearted . . . active , distinctive — and fun " . O 'Donnell , who inspired the sculpture , called it a " gentle spectacle " and described the work as " a cartoon contraption , an odd little <unk> . It has bells and whistles and other mechanized wonders that confirm rain sometime after the downpour and proudly announce sunshine in the bright light of day . " In 1994 , The Oregonian reported that O 'Donnell regarded Weather Machine with a " mixture of wonder and embarrassment " and stated that he " [ didn 't ] think it 's all that attractive " . The publication 's Vivian <unk> said of O 'Donnell and the machine : " Practical people may wonder why the square needs such a silly weather machine when a glance out the window works as well . . . And these practical people may be the very ones who make the world go ' round . But it is the less practical people , the dreamers like O 'Donnell , who make it worth going ' round . " 
 In 1995 , The Oregonian 's Jonathan Nicholas wrote , " To this day , nobody is exactly sure what happens when the thing sounds off each day at noon . It 's like having a governor in blue jeans . We can 't really explain it : It just happens . " Grant Butler of The Oregonian gave the machine 's trumpet fanfare as one of three examples of ways in which people could be certain it was noon in Portland . 
 The machine is considered a tourist attraction , recommended in visitor guides for Portland and included in walking tours . One travel contributor recommended a visit to the sculpture for people with children seeking a " perfect family day " . Weather Machine has been compared to a giant scepter and has been called " bizarre " , " eccentric " , " playful " , " unique " , " wacky " , " whimsical " , " zany " , and a " piece of wizardry " . 
 = Java Man = 
 Java Man ( Homo erectus erectus ) is the popular name given to early human fossils discovered on the island of Java ( Indonesia ) in 1891 and 1892 . Led by Eugène Dubois , the excavation team uncovered a tooth , a skullcap , and a thighbone at Trinil on the banks of the Solo River in East Java . Arguing that the fossils represented the " missing link " between apes and humans , Dubois gave the species the scientific name Anthropopithecus erectus , then later renamed it Pithecanthropus erectus . 
 The fossil aroused much controversy . Less than ten years after 1891 , almost eighty books or articles had been published on Dubois 's finds . Despite Dubois ' argument , few accepted that Java Man was a transitional form between apes and humans . Some dismissed the fossils as apes and others as modern humans , whereas many scientists considered Java Man as a primitive side branch of evolution not related to modern humans at all . In the 1930s Dubois made the claim that Pithecanthropus was built like a " giant gibbon " , a much misinterpreted attempt by Dubois to prove that it was the " missing link " . 
 Eventually , similarities between Pithecanthropus erectus ( Java Man ) and Sinanthropus pekinensis ( Peking Man ) led Ernst Mayr to rename both Homo erectus in 1950 , placing them directly in the human evolutionary tree . To distinguish Java Man from other Homo erectus populations , some scientists began to regard it as a subspecies , Homo erectus erectus , in the 1970s . Other fossils found in the first half of the twentieth century in Java at Sangiran and Mojokerto , all older than those found by Dubois , are also considered part of the species Homo erectus . Estimated to be between 700 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 years old , at the time of their discovery the fossils of Java Man were the oldest hominin fossils ever found . The fossils of Java Man have been housed at the Naturalis in the Netherlands since 1900 . 
 = = History of discoveries = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Charles Darwin had argued that humanity evolved in Africa , because this is where great apes like gorillas and chimpanzees lived . Though Darwin 's claims have since been vindicated by the fossil record , they were proposed without any fossil evidence . Other scientific authorities disagreed with him , like Charles Lyell , a geologist , and Alfred Russel Wallace , who had thought of the theory of evolution around the same time as Darwin . Because both Lyell and Wallace believed that humans were more closely related to gibbons and orangutans , they identified Southeast Asia as the cradle of humanity because this is where these great apes lived . Dutch anatomist Eugène Dubois favored the latter theory , and sought to confirm it . 
 = = = Trinil fossils = = = 
 In October 1887 , Dubois abandoned his academic career and left for the Dutch East Indies ( present @-@ day Indonesia ) to look for the fossilized ancestor of modern man . Having received no funding from the Dutch government for his eccentric endeavor – since no one at the time had ever found an early human fossil while looking for it – he joined the Dutch East Indies Army as a military surgeon . Because of his work duties , it was only in July 1888 did he begin to excavate caves in Sumatra . Having quickly found abundant fossils of large mammals , Dubois was relieved of his military duties ( March 1889 ) , and the colonial government assigned two engineers and fifty convicts to help him with his excavations . After he failed to find the fossils he was looking for on Sumatra he moved on to Java in 1890 . 
 Again assisted by convict laborers and two army sergeants , Dubois began searching along the Solo River near Trinil in August 1891 . His team soon excavated a molar ( Trinil 1 ) and a skullcap ( Trinil 2 ) . Its characteristics were a long cranium with a sagittal keel and heavy <unk> . Dubois first gave them the name Anthropopithecus , or " man @-@ ape " , as the chimpanzee was known at the time . He chose this name because a similar tooth found in the Siwalik Hills in India in 1878 had been named Anthropopithecus , and because Dubois first assessed the cranium to have been about 700 cubic centimetres ( 43 cu in ) , closer to apes than to humans . 
 In August 1892 , Dubois 's team found a long femur ( thighbone ) shaped like a human one , suggesting that its owner had stood upright . Believing that the three fossils belonged to a single individual , " probably a very aged female " , Dubois renamed the specimen Anthropopithecus erectus . Only in late 1892 , when he determined that the cranium measured about 900 cubic centimetres ( 55 cu in ) , did Dubois consider that his specimen was a transitional form between apes and humans . In 1894 , he thus renamed it Pithecanthropus erectus ( " upright ape @-@ man " ) , borrowing the genus name Pithecanthropus from Ernst Haeckel , who had coined it a few years earlier to refer to a supposed " missing link " between apes and humans . This specimen has also been known as Pithecanthropus 1 . 
 = = = Comparisons with Peking Man = = = 
 In 1927 , Canadian Davidson Black identified two fossilized teeth he had found in Zhoukoudian near Beijing as belonging to an ancient human , and named his specimen Sinanthropus pekinensis , now better known as Peking Man . In December 1929 , the first of several skullcaps was found on the same site , and it appeared similar but slightly larger than Java Man . Franz Weidenreich , who replaced Black in China after the latter 's death in 1933 , argued that Sinanthropus was also a transitional fossil between apes and humans , and was in fact so similar to Java 's Pithecanthropus that they should both belong to the family Hominidae . Eugène Dubois categorically refused to entertain this possibility , dismissing Peking Man as a kind of Neanderthal , closer to humans than the Pithecanthropus , and insisting that Pithecanthropus belonged to its own family , the <unk> . 
 = = = Other discoveries on Java = = = 
 After the discovery of Java Man , Berlin @-@ born paleontologist G. H. R. von Koenigswald recovered several other early human fossils in Java . Between 1931 and 1933 von Koenigswald discovered fossils of Solo Man from sites along the Bengawan Solo River on Java , including several skullcaps and cranial fragments . In 1936 , von Koenigswald discovered a juvenile skullcap known as the Mojokerto child in East Java . Considering the Mojokerto child skull cap to be a closely related to humans , von Koenigswald wanted to name it Pithecanthropus <unk> ( after Dubois 's specimen ) , but Dubois protested that Pithecanthropus was not a human but an " ape @-@ man " . 
 Von Koenigswald also made several discoveries in Sangiran , Central Java , where more fossils of early humans were discovered between 1936 and 1941 . Among the discoveries was a skullcap of similar size to that found by Dubois at the Trinil 2 site . Von Koenigswald 's discovers in Sangiran convinced him that all these skulls belonged to early humans . Dubois again refused to acknowledge the similarity . Ralph von Koenigswald and Franz Weidenreich compared the fossils from Java and Zhoukoudian and concluded that Java Man and Peking Man were closely related . Dubois died in 1940 , still refusing to recognize their conclusion , and official reports remain critical of the Sangiran site 's poor presentation and interpretation . 
 = = Early interpretations = = 
 More than 50 years after Dubois 's find , Ralph von Koenigswald recollected that , " No other paleontological discovery has created such a sensation and led to such a variety of conflicting scientific opinions . " The Pithecanthropus fossils were so immediately controversial that by the end of the 1890s , almost 80 publications had already discussed them . 
 Until the Taung child – the 2 @.@ 8 million @-@ year @-@ old remains of an Australopithecus africanus – were discovered in South Africa in 1924 , Dubois 's and Koenigswald 's discoveries were the oldest hominid remains ever found . Some scientists of the day suggested that Dubois 's Java Man was a potential intermediate form between modern humans and the common ancestor we share with the other great apes . This supposition has been confirmed , but the current consensus of anthropologists is that the direct ancestors of modern humans were African populations of Homo erectus ( possibly Homo <unk> ) , rather than the Asian populations of the same species exemplified by Java Man and Peking Man . 
 = = = Missing link theory = = = 
 Dubois first published his find in 1894 . Dubois 's central claim was that Pithecanthropus was a transitional form between apes and humans , a so @-@ called " missing link " . Many disagreed . Some critics claimed that the bones were those of an upright walking ape , or that they belonged to a primitive human . This judgment made sense at a time when an evolutionary view of humanity had not yet been widely accepted , and scientists tended to view hominid fossils as racial variants of modern humans rather than as ancestral forms . After Dubois let a number of scientists examine the fossils in a series of conferences held in Europe in the 1890s , they started to agree that Java Man may be a transitional form after all , but most of them thought of it as " an extinct side branch " of the human tree that had indeed descended from apes , but not evolved into humans . This interpretation eventually imposed itself and remained dominant until the 1940s . 
 Dubois was bitter about this and locked the fossil up in a trunk until 1923 when he showed it to Ales <unk> from the Smithsonian Institution . In response to critics who refused to accept that Java Man was a " missing link " , in 1932 Dubois published a paper arguing that the Trinil bones looked like those of a " giant gibbon " . Dubois ' use of the phrase has been widely misinterpreted as a retraction , but it was intended an argument to support his claim that Pithecanthropus was a transitional form . According to Dubois , evolution occurred by leaps , and the ancestors of humanity had doubled their brain @-@ to @-@ body ratio on each leap . To prove that Java Man was the " missing link " between apes and humans , he therefore had to show that its brain @-@ to @-@ body ratio was double that of apes and half that of humans . The problem was that Java Man 's cranial capacity was 900 cubic centimeters , about two thirds of modern humans ' . 
 Like many scientists who believed that modern humans evolved " Out of Asia " , Dubois thought that gibbons were closest to humans among the great apes . To preserve the proportions predicted by his theory of brain evolution , Dubois argued that Java Man was shaped more like a gibbon than a human . Imagined " with longer arms and a greatly expanded chest and upper body " , the Trinil creature became a gigantic ape of about 100 kilograms ( 220 lb ) , but " double <unk> of the anthropoid apes in general and half that of man " . It was therefore halfway on the path to becoming a modern human . As Dubois concluded his 1932 paper : " I still believe , now more firmly than ever , that the Pithecanthropus of Trinil is the real ' missing link . ' " 
 = = = <unk> as Homo erectus = = = 
 Based on Weidenreich 's work and on his suggestion that Pithecanthropus erectus and Sinanthropus pekinensis were connected through a series of interbreeding populations , German biologist Ernst Mayr reclassified them both as being part of the same species : Homo erectus . Mayr presented his conclusion at the Cold Spring Harbor Symposium in 1950 , and this resulted in Dubois 's erectus species being reclassified under the genus Homo . As part of the reclassification , Mayr included not only Sinanthropus and Pithecanthropus , but also <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and several other genera as synonyms , arguing that all human ancestors were part of a single genus ( Homo ) , and that " never one more than one species of man existed on the earth at any one time " . A " revolution in taxonomy " , Mayr 's single @-@ species approach to human evolution was quickly accepted . It shaped paleoanthropology in the 1950s and lasted into the 1970s , when the African genus Australopithecus was accepted into the human evolutionary tree . 
 In the 1970s a tendency developed to regard the Javanese variety of H. erectus as a subspecies , Homo erectus erectus , with the Chinese variety being referred to as Homo erectus pekinensis . 
 = = Post @-@ discovery analysis = = 
 = = = Date of the fossils = = = 
 Dubois ' complete collection of fossils were transferred between 1895 and 1900 to what is now known as the Naturalis , in Leiden in the Netherlands . The main fossil of Java Man , the skullcap cataloged as " Trinil 2 " , has been dated <unk> , that is , by correlating it with a group of fossilized animals ( a " faunal assemblage " ) found nearby on the same geological horizon , which is itself compared with assemblages from other layers and classified chronologically . Ralph von Koenigswald first assigned Java Man to the Trinil Fauna , a faunal assemblage that he composed from several Javanese sites . He concluded that the skullcap was about 700 @,@ 000 years old , thus dating from the beginning of the Middle Pleistocene . 
 Though this view is still widely accepted , in the 1980s a group of Dutch paleontologists used Dubois 's collection of more than 20 @,@ 000 animal fossils to reassess the date of the layer in which Java Man was found . Using only fossils from Trinil , they called that new faunal assemblage the Trinil H. K. Fauna , in which H. K. stands for Haupt <unk> , or " main fossil @-@ bearing layer " . This assessment dates the fossils of Java Man to between 900 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 years old . ( Work published in 2014 gives a " maximum age of 0 @.@ 54 ± 0 @.@ 10 million years and a minimum age of 0 @.@ 43 ± 0 @.@ 05 million years " for Ar @-@ Ar and luminescence dating of sediment in human @-@ predated shell material from Trinil . " Homo erectus at Trinil on Java used shells for tool production and engraving " <unk> et al . , 2014 , Nature online publishing ; work continues on assessing the dating of this complex site . ) . Other fossils attest to the even earlier presence of H. erectus in Java . Sangiran 2 ( named after its discovery site ) may be as old as 1 @.@ 66 Ma ( million years ) . The controversial Mojokerto child , which Carl C. Swisher and <unk> Curtis once dated to 1 @.@ 81 ± 0 @.@ 04 Ma , has now been convincingly re @-@ dated to a maximum age of 1 @.@ 49 ± 0 @.@ 13 Ma , that is , 1 @.@ 49 million years with a margin of error of plus or minus 130 @,@ 000 years . 
 = = = Type Specimen = = = 
 The fossils found in Java are considered the type specimen for H. erectus . Because the fossils of Java Man were found " scattered in an alluvial deposit " – they had been laid there by the flow of a river – detractors doubted that they belonged to the same species , let alone the same individual . German pathologist Rudolf Virchow , for instance , argued in 1895 that the femur was that of a gibbon . Dubois had difficulty convincing his critics , because he had not attended the excavation , and could not explain specifically enough the exact location of the bones . Because the Trinil thighbone looks very much like that of a modern human , it might have been a " reworked fossil " , that is , a relatively young fossil that was deposited into an older layer after its own layer had been eroded . For this reason , there is still dissent about whether all the Trinil fossils represent the same species . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Java Man was about 5 feet 8 inches ( 170 cm ) tall and his thighbones show that he walked erect like modern humans . The femur is thicker than that of a modern human . The skull was characterized by thick bones and a retreating forehead and no chin , as well as protruding <unk> and a massive jaw . With 900 <unk> , his cranial capacity was smaller than that of later H. erectus specimens . He had human teeth with large canines . Judging from anatomical and archeological aspects as well as Java Man 's ecological role , meat from vertebrates was likely an important part of their diet . Java Man , like other Homo erectus , was probably a rare species . There is evidence that Java Man used shell tools to cut meat . 
 = = Material culture = = 
 H. erectus arrived in Eurasia approximately 1 @.@ 8 million years ago , in an event considered to be the first African exodus . There is evidence that the Java population of H. erectus lived in an ever @-@ wet forest habitat . More specifically the environment resembled a savannah , but was likely regularly inundated ( " <unk> savanna " ) . The plants found at the Trinil excavation site included grass ( <unk> ) , ferns , ficus , and <unk> , which are typical of lowland rainforest . 
 = = = Control of fire = = = 
 The control of fire by Homo erectus is generally accepted by archaeologists to have begun some 400 @,@ 000 years ago , with claims regarding earlier evidence finding increasing scientific support . Burned wood has been found in layers that carried the Java Man fossils in Trinil , dating to around from 500 @,@ 000 to 830 @,@ 000 BP . However , because Central Java is a volcanic region , the charring may have resulted from natural fires , and there is no conclusive proof that Homo erectus in Java controlled fire . It has been proposed that Java Man was aware of the use of fire , and that the frequent presence of natural fires may have allowed Java Man " opportunistic use [ ... that ] did not create an archeologically visible pattern " . 
 = Jedd Gyorko = 
 Jedd Lindon Gyorko ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ koh ; born September 23 , 1988 ) is an American professional baseball second baseman for the St. Louis Cardinals of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He previously played in MLB for the San Diego Padres . 
 Gyorko attended University High School in Morgantown , West Virginia . Playing for the school 's baseball team as a shortstop , he was named one of the best baseball players in the state . He then enrolled at West Virginia University , and set numerous school records for the West Virginia Mountaineers baseball program . Gyorko won the 2010 Brooks Wallace Award as the best shortstop in the National Collegiate Athletic Association 's Division I. 
 The Padres selected Gyorko in the second round of the 2010 MLB Draft . Playing in minor league baseball , Gyorko shifted to third base , and developed into one of the best prospects in baseball . He made the Padres ' Opening Day roster as their starting second baseman , and had a strong rookie season . The Padres signed Gyorko to a contract extension worth $ 35 million early in the 2014 season , but traded him to St. Louis after the 2015 season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gyorko was born on September 23 , 1988 , in Morgantown , West Virginia , to Randall and Penny Gyorko . His family also had a home on Cheat Lake , where he stayed often in his youth . He was a fan of the Pittsburgh Pirates of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . 
 When he was five years old , his father , Randall , and Jerry Mahoney , a former college baseball player at West Virginia University ( WVU ) and WVU employee , began to train Gyorko to become a baseball player through various instructional drills . They trained at WVU 's Shell Building , which Mahoney had access to , when the weather was too cold to train outdoors . In youth baseball , Gyorko played as a second baseman . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Gyorko attended University High School in Morgantown . He played for the school 's baseball , American football , and basketball teams . He was an infielder for the baseball team , but primarily played shortstop . In baseball , Gyorko was named to the All @-@ Conference team all four years of his high school career . He was also named to the All @-@ State team three times . Gyorko also played American Legion baseball for four years . He led his American Legion teams to state championships in 2004 and 2007 . 
 Gyorko played quarterback and wide receiver for the football team , and shooting guard and point guard for the basketball team . In basketball , Gyorko was named All @-@ Conference as a sophomore . University won the conference championship in Gyorko 's junior year , as he averaged 17 @.@ 4 points per game ( PPG ) , second best in the conference . He was named his conference 's Player of the Year and to the All @-@ State second team . In his senior year , he averaged 18 @.@ 2 PPG and was named to the All @-@ State first team . 
 After weighing scholarship offers to play college baseball from WVU , St. John 's University and Clemson University , Gyorko chose to remain near home , enrolling at WVU in order to play college baseball for the West Virginia Mountaineers baseball team , which competed in the Big East Conference of the National Collegiate Athletic Association 's ( NCAA ) Division I. Gyorko shifted to second base for his freshman year to accommodate senior Tyler Kuhn , who played shortstop . He had a 21 @-@ game hitting streak to start his tenure with the Mountaineers , registering a .500 batting average during the streak . As a freshman , Gyorko finished the season with a .409 batting average with eight home runs and 63 runs batted in ( RBIs ) , winning the Big East Rookie of the Year Award . He was also named to the All @-@ Big East 's second team , and the Freshman All @-@ America teams of Louisville Slugger and the National Collegiate Baseball Writers Association . He agreed to play collegiate summer baseball for the Brewster Whitecaps of the Cape Cod Baseball League ( CCBL ) after the college season , but he required shoulder surgery and was unable to play . 
 Following Kuhn 's graduation , Gyorko returned to shortstop for the Mountaineers . In his sophomore season , Gyorko batted .421 with eight home runs and 58 RBIs . He set a Mountaineers single @-@ season record with 28 doubles . He was named First Team All @-@ Big East and Second Team All @-@ American by Louisville Slugger . After the season , he joined the United States national collegiate baseball team , but did not make the final roster . He joined Brewster for the CCBL season , playing second base . He was named to the CCBL All @-@ Star Team , and he competed in the home run derby , held at Fenway Park . 
 Prior to Gyorko 's junior season , in 2010 , he was named the preseason Big East Player of the Year and a Third Team All @-@ American by Baseball America . Continuing to play as a shortstop , Gyorko batted .381 with 19 home runs and 57 RBIs in his junior year . He won the 2010 Brooks Wallace Award as the best shortstop in NCAA Division I. By the end of his junior season , Gyorko established himself as the Mountaineers career leader in batting average ( <unk> ) , doubles ( 73 ) , extra @-@ base hits ( 113 ) and the single @-@ season leader in walks ( 43 ) , doubles ( 28 ) , extra @-@ base hits ( 48 ) , and total bases ( 192 ) . He also tied the WVU records for career home runs ( 35 ) and single @-@ season home runs ( 19 ) . Gyorko was considered a potential first or second round pick in the MLB Draft following his junior year , Though he had one more year of eligibility remaining at West Virginia , Gyorko said " it has always been my dream to play professionally " and that he would " go and play for a living " after his junior year . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = San Diego Padres = = = 
 = = = = Minor leagues = = = = 
 Professional teams coveted Gyorko for his hitting ability , though they did not expect him to play shortstop at the professional level . Though his throwing arm was viewed as strong enough to allow him to play at any position in the infield , analysts believed that Gyorko would not have sufficient range or speed to play shortstop professionally , and Gyorko understood he would likely change positions . Regarding his defense , Gyorko said " where I play [ on defense ] isn 't a big concern for me . I 'm just ready for this chance to live a dream and it will all work out . " 
 The San Diego Padres drafted Gyorko in the second round , with the 59th overall selection , of the 2010 MLB draft . They selected Gyorko as a third baseman . Gyorko signed with the Padres quickly , receiving a $ 614 @,@ 700 signing bonus , while other draft selections held out for higher signing bonuses . After signing with the Padres , Gyorko was assigned to the Eugene Emeralds of the Class A @-@ Short Season Northwest League , where he hit .330 with five home runs , 18 RBIs , and 35 hits in 26 games . He was then promoted to the Fort Wayne TinCaps of the Class A Midwest League . He hit a home run in his first at @-@ bat with the TinCaps . Gyorko batted .284 with 46 hits in 42 games . 
 Gyorko began the 2011 season with the Lake Elsinore Storm of the Class A @-@ Advanced California League . He split time between third base and designated hitter , as fellow third base prospect Edinson Rincon was also a member of the Storm . Gyorko appeared in the California / Carolina League All @-@ Star Game , and was named the Top Star as he batted 2 @-@ for @-@ 4 with a run scored and an RBI . Gyorko batted .365 with 18 home runs and 74 RBIs for Lake Elsinore before he was promoted to the San Antonio Missions of the Class AA Texas League , following the promotion of Missions third baseman James Darnell . In 576 at @-@ bats for Lake Elsinore and San Antonio , Gyorko had 192 hits , 25 home runs , 114 RBIs , a batting average of .333 and a .400 on @-@ base percentage ( OBP ) . Following the season , he competed in the Arizona Fall League . He was named the 10th best prospect in the AFL that year , after he led the league with a .437 batting average . 
 Gyorko began the 2012 season with San Antonio , where he batted .262 with six home runs and 17 RBIs in 34 games . He was promoted to the Tucson Padres of the Class AAA Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) in mid @-@ May , as the Padres promoted <unk> Cabrera and Alexi <unk> from Tucson , released Orlando Hudson , and placed Jason Bartlett on the disabled list . He continued to split his time between second base and third base at each level after playing third in his previous minor league seasons . Baseball America ranked Gyorko as the 50th best prospect in their midseason ranking of prospects , after ranking him 98th coming into the 2012 season . With Tucson , Gyorko hit .328 with 24 home runs and 83 RBIs . He finished the season with a combined .311 batting average , .373 OBP , and <unk> slugging percentage ( SLG ) , with 30 home runs . In 410 plate appearances , he struck out only 68 times . Baseball America named Gyorko the best third baseman in Class AAA . 
 = = = = 2013 season = = = = 
 The Padres invited to spring training in 2013 , giving him a chance to win a job as the starting second baseman for the 2013 Padres . Gyorko impressed Padres ' manager Bud Black with his hitting ability and defense at second base . With injuries to infielders Chase Headley and Logan Forsythe , Gyorko made the Padres ' Opening Day roster , with the opportunity to alternate between second and third base . In his MLB debut , on April 1 , 2013 , Gyorko started at second base , but later shifted to third base . He also recorded his first MLB hit , a double off of Jonathan Niese . He hit his first major league home run off of Scott Feldman of the Chicago Cubs on May 1 , 2013 . His six home runs in May tied Evan Gattis for the most among MLB rookies . Gyorko had a .280 batting average through June 10 , and missed the next 30 games due to a groin injury . 
 Gyorko batted .100 in July , but he improved his on @-@ base percentage and on @-@ base plus slugging in August , and passed Gattis with 16 home runs . He continued to swing at pitches outside of the strike zone and not draw enough walks . Gyorko finished the season as the team leader in both home runs ( 23 ) and RBIs ( 63 ) . He led all MLB rookies that season in OBP ( .301 ) , SLG ( .444 ) , and home runs , and his home run total was the third @-@ most ever by an MLB rookie second baseman . He broke the Padres ' record for home runs by a second baseman , passing Bret Boone 's 19 in 2000 . Gyorko was also the first MLB rookie second baseman to lead his team in RBIs . Additionally , he became just the second rookie to lead the Padres in either category since Nate Colbert in San Diego 's inaugural season in 1969 . He was named to Baseball America 's All @-@ Rookie Team , and finished sixth in NL Rookie of the Year balloting . 
 = = = = 2014 season = = = = 
 Going into spring training in 2014 , Gyorko began focusing on improving his plate discipline , while maintaining his aggressiveness in swinging at <unk> pitches . He also lost weight in an effort to improve his flexibility . Gyorko agreed to a $ 510 @,@ 900 salary for the 2014 season . On April 14 , Gyorko signed a five @-@ year extension with the Padres worth $ 35 million , which was the third largest for a player with only one year of service in the majors . After committing four errors in his first 25 games , Gyorko increased his infield practice with Glenn Hoffman , the Padres ' third base and infield coach . 
 After struggling to start the season , with a .162 batting average , the Padres placed Gyorko on the 15 @-@ day disabled list on June 6 due to plantar fasciitis in his left foot . After missing 44 games , Gyorko was activated off the disabled list on July 28 . With his 31st career home run on August 16 , Gyorko succeeded Mark Loretta for most home runs as a Padres ' second baseman . He batted .260 in his final 222 plate appearances of the year , but ended the season with disappointing numbers : a .210 batting average , .280 OBP , .333 SLG , and ten home runs . 
 = = = = 2015 season = = = = 
 During the 2014 – 15 offseason , Gyorko worked to regain the muscle he lost during the previous offseason . With Matt Kemp and Justin Upton added to the Padres ' lineup , Black hoped to reduce the pressure on Gyorko to perform . By late April , with Gyorko off to a 7 @-@ for @-@ 47 ( <unk> ) start to the season , he began to lose playing time to Yangervis Solarte , and to Cory Spangenberg in May and June as he continued to struggle . 
 On June 10 , after hitting .210 with two home runs in 46 games , the Padres demoted Gyorko to the El Paso Chihuahuas of the PCL . Gyorko hit .279 with four home runs in 16 games , before the Padres recalled him on June 30 . Gyorko made his first appearance at shortstop as a professional on August 17 , and continued to play shortstop throughout the remainder of the season . Gyorko finished the season with a .247 batting average and 16 home runs in 128 games . 
 = = = St. Louis Cardinals = = = 
 On December 8 , 2015 , the Padres traded Gyorko to the St. Louis Cardinals in exchange for Jon Jay , while also agreeing to pay $ 7 @.@ 5 million towards the remaining $ 33 million guaranteed by Gyorko 's contract . The Cardinals intend to use Gyorko as a backup for second baseman <unk> Wong , third baseman Matt Carpenter , and shortstop Jhonny Peralta . He opened the season as the Cardinals ' starting shortstop due to an injury to Peralta . While playing the Pittsburgh Pirates on April 5 , he hit his first home run for the Cardinals . Due to the emergence of <unk> Díaz at shortstop and Wong 's struggles , Gyorko opened the season receiving most of his playing time at second base . 
 In his first five games against the Padres , Gyorko homered in each game , totaling six , and also had 13 hits in 21 at bats with 10 RBI . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gyorko is the youngest of three sons . His older brother , Scott , attended WVU and played college football for the West Virginia Mountaineers football team as a linebacker . Jedd attends all Mountaineers football games . Gyorko used the money he received in his signing bonus to build a house in Morgantown near his parents ' house . Gyorko intends on finishing his bachelor 's degree in business . 
 Gyorko married his wife Karley in 2011 . The couple live within walking distance of Petco Park , the home stadium of the Padres , during the season , and return to Morgantown during the offseason . Karley gave birth to twin sons on April 28 , 2014 . They were born premature , and one remained in the hospital for a few extra days for observation . 
 = Ernie Banks = 
 Ernest " Ernie " Banks ( January 31 , 1931 – January 23 , 2015 ) , nicknamed " Mr. Cub " and " Mr. Sunshine " , was an American professional baseball player who played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) as a shortstop and first baseman for the Chicago Cubs between 1953 and 1971 . He was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1977 , and was named to the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team in 1999 . 
 Banks is regarded by some as one of the greatest players of all time . He began playing professional baseball in 1950 with the Kansas City Monarchs in the Negro leagues . He served in the U.S. military for two years , played for the Monarchs again , and began his major league career in September 1953 . The following year , Banks was the National League Rookie of the Year runner @-@ up . Beginning in 1955 , Banks was a National League ( NL ) All @-@ Star for 11 seasons , playing in 13 of the 15 All @-@ Star Games held during those seasons . Banks was the Cubs ' main attraction in the late 1950s , the National League Most Valuable Player in 1958 and 1959 , and the Cubs ' first Gold Glove winner in 1960 . 
 In 1962 , Banks became a regular first baseman for the Cubs . In the mid @-@ 1960s , Cubs manager Leo Durocher became frustrated with Banks , saying the slugger 's performance was faltering . Durocher said he was unable to remove Banks from the lineup due to the star 's popularity among Cubs fans . Between 1967 and 1971 , he was a player @-@ coach . In 1969 , through a Chicago Sun @-@ Times fan poll , Cubs fans voted him the greatest Cub ever . In 1970 , Banks hit his 500th career home run at Wrigley Field . He retired from playing in 1971 , was a coach for the Cubs in 1972 , and in 1982 was the team 's first player to have his uniform number retired . 
 Banks was active in the Chicago community during and after his tenure with the Cubs . He founded a charitable organization , became the first black Ford Motor Company dealer in the United States , and made an unsuccessful bid for a local political office . In 2013 , Banks was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom for his contribution to sports . Banks lived in the Los Angeles and Chicago areas . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Banks was born in Dallas , Texas , to Eddie and Essie Banks on January 31 , 1931 ; he was the second of twelve children . His father , who had worked in construction and was a warehouse loader for a grocery chain , played baseball for black , semi @-@ professional teams in Texas . As a child , Banks was not very interested in baseball , preferring swimming , basketball and football . His father bought Ernest a baseball glove for less than three dollars at a five and dime store and motivated Banks with nickels and dimes to play catch . Banks 's mother encouraged him to follow one of his grandfathers into a career as a minister . 
 Banks graduated from Booker T. Washington High School in 1950 . He lettered in basketball , football and track . Banks ' school did not have a baseball team ; he played fastpitch softball for a church team during the summer . He was also a member of the Amarillo Colts , a semi @-@ professional baseball team . History professor Timothy Gilfoyle wrote that Banks ' talent for baseball was discovered by Bill Blair , a family friend who scouted for the Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro American League . Other sources say Banks was noticed by Cool Papa Bell of the Monarchs . 
 In 1951 , Banks was drafted into the U.S. Army and served in Germany during the Korean War . He served as a flag bearer in the 45th Anti @-@ Aircraft Artillery Battalion at Fort Bliss , where he played with the Harlem Globetrotters on a part @-@ time basis . In 1953 , he was discharged from the army and joined the Monarchs for the remainder of that season , achieving a .347 batting average . Banks later said , " Playing for the Kansas City Monarchs was like my school , my learning , my world . It was my whole life . " 
 = = MLB career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Banks signed with the Chicago Cubs in late 1953 , making his major league debut on September 17 at age 22 and playing in 10 games at Wrigley Field . He was the Cubs ' first black player ; he became one of several former Negro league players who joined MLB teams without playing in the minor leagues . Larry <unk> and Jonathan Kronstadt wrote that he " just was not the crusading type . He was so grateful to be playing baseball for a living , he did not have time to change the world , and if that meant some people called him an Uncle Tom , well , so be it . " 
 During his first game for the Cubs , Banks received a visit from Jackie Robinson that influenced his quiet presence in baseball . Robinson told Banks , " Ernie , I 'm glad to see you 're up here so now just listen and learn ... For years , I didn 't talk and learned a lot about people " . Later , when Banks felt like becoming more vocal , he discussed the issue with teammate Billy Williams , who advised him to remain quiet . Williams drew the analogy of fish that are caught once they open their mouths . Banks said , " I kept my mouth shut but tried to make a difference . My whole life , I 've just wanted to make people better " . 
 In 1954 , Banks ' double play partner during his official rookie season was Gene Baker , the Cubs ' second black player . Banks and Baker roomed together on road trips and became the first all @-@ black double @-@ play combination in major league history . When Steve Bilko played first base , Cubs announcer Bert Wilson referred to the Banks @-@ Baker @-@ Bilko double play combination as " Bingo to Bango to Bilko " . Banks hit 19 home runs and finished second to Wally Moon in Rookie of the Year voting . Banks participated in a trend toward lighter baseball bats after he accidentally picked up a teammate 's bat and liked that it was easy to generate bat speed . 
 In 1955 , Banks hit 44 home runs , had 117 RBI and batted .295 . He played and was the starting NL shortstop in his first of 13 All @-@ Star Games that season . His home run total was a single @-@ season record among shortstops . He also set a thirty @-@ year record of five single @-@ season grand slam home runs . Banks finished third in 1955 in the league 's Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) voting , behind Roy Campanella and Duke Snider . The Cubs finished with a 72 – 81 win @-@ loss record , winning 29 of 77 road games . In 1956 , Banks missed 18 games due to a hand infection , breaking his run of 424 consecutive games played . He finished the season with 28 home runs , 85 RBIs , and a .297 batting average . He made the All @-@ Star selection as a reserve player but did not play in the game . In 1957 , Banks finished the season with 43 home runs , 102 RBI , and a .285 batting average . 
 In 1958 and 1959 , Banks became the first NL player to be awarded back @-@ to @-@ back NL MVP Awards . He hit .313 and led the major league and NL with 47 HR in 1958 . The following year , he hit .304 with 45 HR , and was the NL RBI leader with 129 and 143 RBI in both of those seasons . In 1959 , the Cubs came the closest to a winning season since Banks ' arrival , finishing with a 74 – 80 record . 
 In 1960 , Banks hit a major league and NL @-@ leading 41 HR , had 117 RBI , and led the NL in games played for the sixth time in seven years . He was also the first Cubs player to receive an annual NL Gold Glove award ( for shortstop ) . On the eve of the 1960 World Series , Joe <unk> , a writer for the Associated Press , reported that the Milwaukee Braves were prepared to pay cash and trade pitchers Joey Jay , Carlton Willey and Don <unk> , outfielder Billy Bruton , shortstop Johnny Logan and first baseman Frank Torre in exchange for Banks from the Cubs . 
 = = = Move to first base = = = 
 In 1961 , Banks experienced problems with a knee injury he had acquired while in the army . After 717 consecutive games , he removed himself from the Cubs lineup for at least four games , ending his pursuit of the record for playing in the most consecutive NL games of 895 games set by Stan Musial . In May , the Cubs announced that Jerry <unk> would replace Banks at shortstop and that Banks would move to left field . Banks later said , " Only a duck out of water could have shared my loneliness in left field " . Banks credited center fielder Richie Ashburn with helping him learn to play left field ; in 23 games Banks committed only one error . In June , he was moved to first base , learning that position from former first baseman and Cubs coach Charlie Grimm . He was not selected to be an All @-@ Star for the first of two All @-@ Star games that season since 1959 , when MLB started having two All @-@ Star Games per season through 1962 , but was selected as a reserve player . Banks was a pinch hitter in the second All @-@ Star game . 
 The Cubs began playing under the College of Coaches in 1961 , a system in which decisions were made by a group of 12 coaches rather than by one manager . By the 1962 season , Banks hoped to return to shortstop but the College of Coaches had determined that he would remain at first base indefinitely . In May 1962 , Banks was hit in the head by a fastball from former Cubs pitcher Moe <unk> and was taken off the field unconscious . He sustained a concussion , spent two nights in a hospital , sat out a Monday game , and hit three home runs and a double on Tuesday . 
 In May 1963 , Banks set a single @-@ game record of 22 putouts by a first baseman . However , he caught mumps that year and finished the season with 18 home runs , 64 RBI , and a .227 batting average . Despite Banks ' struggles that season , the Cubs had their first winning record since the 1940s . Banks , following his doctor 's orders , avoided his usual off @-@ season participation in handball and basketball , and began the 1964 season weighing seven pounds ( 3 @.@ 2 kg ) more than the previous year . In February , Cubs second baseman Ken Hubbs was killed in an airplane crash . Banks finished the season with 23 home runs , 95 RBI , and a .264 batting average . The Cubs finished in eighth place in 1964 , losing over $ 315 @,@ 000 . In 1965 , Banks hit 28 home runs , had 107 RBI , a .265 batting average , and played and started at first base in the All @-@ Star Game . On September 2 , he hit his 400th home run . The Cubs finished the season with a baseball operations deficit of $ 1 @.@ 2 million , though this was largely offset by television and radio revenue , and the rental of Wrigley Field to the Chicago Bears football team . 
 The Cubs hired Leo Durocher as manager in 1966 , hoping he could inspire renewed interest in the team 's fan base . Banks hit only 15 home runs ; Cubs finished the 1966 season in last place with a 59 – 103 win @-@ loss record , the worst season of Durocher 's career . From the time Durocher arrived in Chicago , he was frustrated at his inability to trade or bench the aging Banks . In Durocher 's autobiography , he says : 
 ... [ Banks ] was a great player in his time . Unfortunately , his time wasn 't my time . Even more unfortunately , there was not a thing I could do about it . He couldn 't run , he couldn 't field ; toward the end , he couldn 't even hit . There are some players who instinctively do the right thing on the base paths . Ernie had an unfailing instinct for doing the wrong thing . But I had to play him . Had to play the man or there would have been a revolution in the street . " 
 Banks said of Durocher , " I wish there had been someone around like him early in my career ... He 's made me go for that little extra needed to win " . Durocher served as Cubs manager until mid @-@ 1972 , the season after Banks retired . In his memoir Mr. Cub , published around the time that Banks retired , Banks said too much had been made of the racial implications in his relationship with Durocher ; ; he said : 
 My philosophy about race relations is that I 'm the man and I 'll set my own patterns in life . I don 't rely on anyone else 's opinions . I look at a man as a human being ; I don 't care about his color . Some people feel that because you are black you will never be treated fairly , and that you should voice your opinions , be militant about them . I don 't feel this way . You can 't convince a fool against his will ... If a man doesn 't like me because I 'm black , that 's fine . I 'll just go elsewhere , but I 'm not going to let him change my life . 
 The Cubs appointed Banks a player @-@ coach for the 1967 season . Banks competed with John <unk> for a starting position at first base . Shortly after , Durocher named Banks the outright starter at first base . Banks hit 23 home runs and drove in 95 runs , and went to the All @-@ Star Game that year . After the 1967 season , an article in Ebony said Banks was not thought to have made more than $ 65 @,@ 000 ( equal to $ 461 @,@ 292 today ) in any season . He had received a pay increase from $ 33 @,@ 000 to $ 50 @,@ 000 between his MVP seasons in 1958 and 1959 , but Ebony said several MLB players were making $ 100 @,@ 000 at the time . 
 = = = Final seasons = = = 
 Banks won the Lou Gehrig Memorial Award in 1968 , an honor recognizing playing ability and personal character . The 37 @-@ year @-@ old Banks hit 32 home runs , had 83 RBI , and finished that season with a .246 batting average . In 1969 , he came the closest to helping the Cubs win the National League pennant ; the Cubs fell from first place after holding an 8 1 ⁄ 2 game lead in August . Banks made his 11th and final All @-@ Star season appearance as a pinch hitter ; it was his 14th All @-@ Star Game appearance that season . Banks hit his 500th home run on May 12 , 1970 , at Chicago 's Wrigley Field . On December 1 , 1971 , Banks retired as a player but continued to coach for the Cubs until 1973 . He was an instructor in the minor leagues for the next three seasons and also worked in the Cubs ' front office . 
 Banks finished his career with 512 home runs ; his 277 home runs as a shortstop were a career record at the time of his retirement . ( Cal Ripken , Jr now holds the record for most home runs as a shortstop with 345 . ) Banks holds Cubs records for games played ( 2 @,@ 528 ) , at @-@ bats ( 9 @,@ 421 ) , extra @-@ base hits ( 1 @,@ 009 ) and total bases ( 4 @,@ 706 ) . Banks also excelled as an infielder ; he won a National League Gold Glove Award for shortstop in 1960 . He led the NL in putouts five times and was the NL leader in fielding percentage as shortstop three times , and once as first baseman . 
 Banks holds the major league record for most games played without a postseason appearance ( 2 @,@ 528 ) . In his memoir , citing his fondness for the Cubs and owner Philip K. Wrigley , Banks said he did not regret signing with the Cubs rather than one of the more successful baseball franchises . Banks ' popularity and positive attitude led to the nicknames " Mr. Cub " and " Mr. Sunshine " . Banks was known for his catchphrase , " It 's a beautiful day for a ballgame ... Let 's play two ! " , expressing his wish to play a doubleheader every day out of his love of baseball . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1953 , after returning from military service in Germany , Banks married his first wife <unk> Ector . He proposed to her in a letter from Germany . Although he filed for divorce two years later , the couple briefly reconciled in early 1959 . By that summer , they agreed on a divorce settlement that would pay $ 65 @,@ 000 to Ector in lieu of alimony . Shortly thereafter , Banks eloped with <unk> Johnson . The couple had twin sons within a year and a daughter four years after that . Ector filed suit against Banks in 1963 for failure to make payments on a life insurance policy agreed upon in their divorce settlement . 
 Banks was a lifelong Republican – and he also once stated that " I 'm not goin ' anywhere I 'm not wanted " – prompting critics to claim that he was " soft " on Jim Crow ; he ran for alderman in Chicago in 1963 . He lost the election and later said , " People knew me only as a baseball player . They didn 't think I qualified as a government official and no matter what I did I couldn 't change my image ... What I learned , was that it was going to be hard for me to disengage myself from my baseball life and I would have to compensate for it after my playing days were over . " 
 In 1966 , Banks worked for Seaway National Bank in the off @-@ season and enrolled in a banking correspondence course . He bought into several business ventures , including a gas station , during his playing career . Though he had been paid modestly in comparison to other baseball stars , Banks had taken the advice of Wrigley and invested much of his earnings . He later spent time working for an insurance company and for New World Van Lines . Banks began building assets that would be worth an estimated $ 4 million by the time he was 55 years old . 
 Banks and Bob Nelson became the first black owners of a U.S. Ford Motor Company dealership in 1967 . Nelson had been the first non @-@ white commissioned officer in the United States Army Air Forces during World War II ; he operated an import car dealership before the venture with Banks . Banks was appointed to the board of directors of the Chicago Transit Authority in 1969 . On a trip to Europe , Banks visited the Pope , who presented him with a medal that became a proud possession . 
 Banks was divorced from <unk> in 1981 . She received several valuable items from his playing career as part of their divorce settlement , including his 500th home run ball . She sold the items not long after the divorce . He remarried in 1984 . In 1993 , his third wife Marjorie was part of a group that met with MLB executives to discuss race relations in baseball after allegations of racial slurs surfaced against Cincinnati Reds owner Marge Schott . Banks married Liz Ellzey in 1997 and Hank Aaron served as his best man . In late 2008 , Banks and Ellzey adopted an infant daughter . 
 Banks 's nephew , Bob Johnson , was a major league catcher and first baseman for the Texas Rangers between 1981 and 1983 . His great nephew , Acie Law , is a professional basketball player who attended Texas A & M University before playing in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Banks was voted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1977 , his first year of eligibility . He received votes on 321 of the 383 ballots . Though several players were selected through the Veterans Committee and the Special Committee on the Negro Leagues that year , Banks was the only player elected by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America . He was inducted on August 8 of that year . During his induction speech , Banks said , " We 've got the setting – sunshine , fresh air , the team behind us . So let 's play two ! " 
 The Cubs retired Banks ' uniform number 14 in 1982 . He was the first player to have his number retired by the team . At the time of the ceremony , Banks was employed as the Cubs ' corporate sales representative . The team did not retire any more numbers for another five years , when Billy Williams received the honor . Through the 2014 season , only six former Cubs , along with Brooklyn Dodger Jackie Robinson , have had their numbers retired by the organization . 
 Banks served as a team ambassador after his retirement , though author Phil Rogers says the team had never placed Banks in a position of authority or significant influence . In 1983 , shortly after Wrigley sold the team to the Tribune Company , Banks and the Cubs briefly severed ties . Rogers wrote that after the sale , Banks was viewed as " something of a crazy uncle who hung around the house for no apparent reason " , and that team officials anonymously told the press that Banks had been fired because he was unreliable . Soon Banks and the Cubs reconciled and he resumed making appearances on behalf of the team . 
 In 1984 , when the Cubs won the NL East division , the club named Banks an honorary team member . At the 1990 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game , the first one held at Wrigley Field since Banks ' playing days , he threw out the ceremonial first pitch to starting catcher Mike Scioscia . Banks was named to the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team in 1999 . In the same year , the Society for American Baseball Research listed him 27th on a list of the 100 greatest baseball players . 
 In June 2006 , Crain 's Chicago Business said Banks was part of a group looking into buying the Chicago Cubs in case the Tribune Company decided to sell the club . Banks established a charity , the Live Above & Beyond Foundation , which assists youth and the elderly with issues including self @-@ esteem and healthcare . In 2008 , Banks released a charity wine called Ernie Banks 512 Chardonnay , the proceeds of which were donated to his foundation . 
 Banks was an ordained minister ; he presided at the wedding of MLB pitcher Sean Marshall . On March 31 , 2008 , a statue of Banks ( " Mr. Cub " ) was unveiled in front of Wrigley Field . That year , Eddie Vedder released a song called " All The Way " , which Banks had asked Vedder to write about the Cubs as a birthday gift . 
 In 2009 , Banks was named a Library of Congress Living Legend , a designation that recognizes those " who have made significant contributions to America 's diverse cultural , scientific and social heritage " . In 2013 , he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom with 15 other people , including Bill Clinton and Oprah Winfrey . During the ceremony , he presented President Obama with a bat that had belonged to Jackie Robinson . Banks remained close to the Cubs team and made frequent appearances at their spring training grounds , <unk> Stadium in Arizona . Author Harry Strong wrote in 2013 that " the Chicago Cubs do not have a mascot , but they hardly need one when the face of the franchise is still so visible " . 
 Ernie Banks was inducted as a Laureate of The Lincoln Academy of Illinois and awarded the Order of Lincoln ( the State 's highest honor ) by the Governor of Illinois in 1970 in the area of Sports . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Banks died of a heart attack at a Chicago hospital on January 23 , 2015 , eight days before his 84th birthday . Following a public visitation , a memorial service was held at the Fourth Presbyterian Church . Several well @-@ known people spoke at the service , including Chicago mayor Rahm Emanuel and baseball personalities Joe Torre and Billy Williams . After the service , a procession moved from Downtown Chicago toward Wrigley Field . 
 In the weeks after his death , a legal battle arose over Banks ' estate and the disposition of his body . His estranged widow Elizabeth said that he had amended his will in October without her knowledge . The new will left all of Banks ' assets to his longtime caregiver , Regina Rice . Banks had been diagnosed with dementia shortly before the change in his will . A Chicago funeral home sent Elizabeth a bill for $ 35 @,@ 000 in funeral costs , but the bill went unpaid as Elizabeth challenged the legality of Banks ' new will . In March 2015 , the Chicago Cubs announced that they would pay the funeral home costs . 
 = Japanese cruiser Yakumo = 
 Yakumo ( <unk> , sometimes transliterated as <unk> ) was an armored cruiser built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the late 1890s . As Japan lacked the industrial capacity to build such warships herself , the ship was built in Germany . She participated in most of the naval battles of the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 , and was lightly damaged during the Battle of the Yellow Sea and the Battle of Tsushima . Yakumo saw no combat during World War I and began the first of many training cruises in 1917 , although she was not officially reclassified as a training ship until 1931 . Her last training cruise was in 1939 , but the ship continued to conduct training in home waters throughout the Pacific War . Yakumo became a repatriation transport after the war and was broken up in 1946 – 47 . 
 = = Background and design = = 
 The 1896 Naval Expansion Plan was made after the First Sino @-@ Japanese War , and included four armored cruisers in addition to four more battleships , all of which had to be ordered from overseas shipyards as Japan lacked the capability to build them itself . Further consideration of the Russian building program caused the IJN to believe that the battleships ordered under the original plan would not be sufficient to counter the Imperial Russian Navy . Budgetary limitations prevented ordering more battleships , and the IJN decided to expand the number of more affordable armored cruisers to be ordered from four to six ships , believing that the recent introduction of tougher Krupp cemented armor would allow them to stand in the line of battle . The revised plan is commonly known as the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " . The first four ships were built by Armstrong Whitworth in the United Kingdom , but the last two ships were built in Germany and France . To ensure ammunition compatibility , the IJN required their builders to use the same British guns as the other four ships . In general , the IJN provided only a sketch design and specifications that each builder had to comply with ; otherwise each builder was free to build the ships as they saw fit . Unlike most of their contemporaries which were designed for commerce raiding or to defend colonies and trade routes , Yakumo and her half @-@ sisters were intended as fleet scouts and to be employed in the battleline . 
 = = Description = = 
 The ship was 132 @.@ 3 meters ( 434 ft 1 in ) long overall and 124 @.@ 64 meters ( 408 ft 11 in ) between perpendiculars . She had a beam of 19 @.@ 57 meters ( 64 ft 2 in ) and had an average draft of 7 @.@ 21 meters ( 23 ft 8 in ) . Yakumo displaced 9 @,@ 646 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 494 long tons ) at normal load and 10 @,@ 288 metric tons ( 10 @,@ 126 long tons ) at deep load . The ship had a metacentric height of 0 @.@ 95 meters ( 3 ft 1 in ) . She had a double bottom and her hull was subdivided into 247 watertight compartments . Her crew consisted of 670 officers and enlisted men . 
 Yakumo had two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was provided by 24 Belleville boilers and the engines were rated at a total of 15 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 600 kW ) . The ship had a designed speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) and reached 21 @.@ 005 knots ( 38 @.@ 901 km / h ; 24 @.@ 172 mph ) during her sea trials from 16 @,@ 960 ihp ( 12 @,@ 650 kW ) . She carried up to 1 @,@ 300 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 300 long tons ; 1 @,@ 400 short tons ) of coal and could steam for 7 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 000 km ; 8 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament for all of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " armored cruisers was four Armstrong Whitworth @-@ built 45 @-@ caliber eight @-@ inch guns in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The electrically operated turrets were capable of 130 ° rotation left and right , and the guns could be elevated to + 30 ° and depressed to − 5 ° . The turret accommodated 65 shells , but could only be reloaded through doors in the turret floor and the ship 's deck that allowed the electric winch in the turret to hoist shells up from the shell room deep in the hull . The ship carried a total of 320 eight @-@ inch shells . The guns were manually loaded and had a rate of fire about 1 @.@ 2 rounds per minute . The 203 @-@ millimeter gun fired 113 @.@ 5 @-@ kilogram ( 250 lb ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 760 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ) to a range of 18 @,@ 000 meters ( 20 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 The secondary armament consisted of a dozen Elswick Ordnance Company " Pattern Z " quick @-@ firing ( QF ) , 40 @-@ caliber , 6 @-@ inch guns . Only four of these guns were not mounted in armored casemates on the main and upper decks , and their mounts on the upper deck were protected by gun shields . Their 45 @.@ 4 kilograms ( 100 lb ) AP shells were fired at a muzzle velocity of 700 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ) . The guns were provided with 150 rounds each . Yakumo was also equipped with a dozen 40 @-@ caliber QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 @-@ cwt guns and eight QF 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Yamauchi guns as close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats . The former gun fired 76 @-@ millimeter ( 3 in ) , 5 @.@ 7 @-@ kilogram ( 12 @.@ 5 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 719 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 359 ft / s ) . 
 Yakumo was equipped with five 457 mm ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes , one above water in the bow and four submerged tubes , two on each broadside . The Type 30 torpedo had a 100 @-@ kilogram ( 220 lb ) warhead and three range / speed settings : 800 meters ( 870 yd ) at 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) , 1 @,@ 000 meters ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) at 23 @.@ 6 knots ( 43 @.@ 7 km / h ; 27 @.@ 2 mph ) or 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 3 @,@ 300 yd ) at 14 @.@ 2 knots ( 26 @.@ 3 km / h ; 16 @.@ 3 mph ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 All of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " armored cruisers used the same armor scheme with some minor differences , one of which was that the four later ships all used Krupp cemented armor . The waterline belt ran the full length of the ship and its thickness varied from 178 millimeters ( 7 @.@ 0 in ) amidships to 89 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) at the bow and stern . It had a height of 2 @.@ 13 meters ( 7 ft 0 in ) , of which 1 @.@ 49 meters ( 4 ft 11 in ) was normally underwater . The upper strake of belt armor was 127 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) thick and extended from the upper edge of the waterline belt to the main deck . It extended 61 @.@ 49 meters ( 201 ft 9 in ) from the forward to the rear barbette . Yakumo had only a single transverse 127 mm armored bulkhead that closed off the forward end of the central armored citadel . 
 The barbettes , gun turrets and the front of the casemates were all 152 millimeters thick while the sides and rear of the casemates were protected by 51 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of armor . The deck was 63 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) thick and the armor protecting the conning tower was 356 millimeters ( 14 @.@ 0 in ) in thickness . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Yakumo , named from a stanza of the waka poem by Susanoo in the Japanese mythology , was ordered on 1 September 1897 and laid down a year later by AG Vulcan Stettin in Stettin , Germany . The ship was launched on 8 July 1899 and completed on 20 June 1900 . She departed Stettin two days later and arrived in Yokosuka , Japan , on 30 August . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 At the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War , Yakumo was assigned to the 2nd Division of the 2nd Fleet . She participated in the Battle of Port Arthur on 9 February 1904 , when Vice Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō led the Combined Fleet in an attack on the Russian ships of the Pacific Squadron anchored just outside Port Arthur . Tōgō had expected the surprise night attack by his destroyers to be much more successful than it was , anticipating that the Russians would be badly disorganized and weakened , but they had recovered from their surprise and were ready for his attack . The Japanese ships were spotted by the protected cruiser Boyarin , which was patrolling offshore and alerted the Russians . Tōgō chose to attack the Russian coastal defenses with his main armament and engage the ships with his secondary guns . Splitting his fire proved to be a poor decision as the Japanese eight- and six @-@ inch guns inflicted little damage on the Russian ships , which concentrated all their fire on the Japanese ships with some effect . Although many ships on both sides were hit , Russian casualties numbered some 150 , while the Japanese suffered roughly 90 killed and wounded before Tōgō disengaged . Yakumo was not hit during the engagement , although she did hit the protected cruiser Novik one time with an eight @-@ inch shell . 
 In early March , Vice Admiral Kamimura Hikonojō was tasked to take the reinforced 2nd Division north and make a diversion off Vladivostok . While scouting for Russian ships in the area , the Japanese cruisers bombarded the harbor and defenses of Vladivostok on 6 March to little effect . Upon their return to Japan a few days later , the 2nd Division was ordered to escort the transports ferrying the Imperial Guards Division to Korea and then to join the ships blockading Port Arthur . Yakumo was then transferred to Rear Admiral Dewa Shigetō 's 3rd Division . On 23 June , the ship was Dewa 's flagship when the Pacific Squadron sortied in an abortive attempt to reach Vladivostok , but the new squadron commander , Rear Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft , ordered the squadron to return to Port Arthur when it encountered the Japanese battleline shortly before sunset , as he did not wish to engage his numerically superior opponents in a night battle . 
 = = = = Battle of the Yellow Sea = = = = 
 On the morning of 10 August 1904 , Dewa 's cruisers were over 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) south of Tōgō 's 1st Division when the Russians sortied from Port Arthur in another attempt to reach Vladivostok . In the early stages of the battle , Dewa attempted to engage the Russian cruisers trailing the battleships in accordance with Tōgō 's standing orders , but was rebuffed by fire from the battleships . As Dewa closed with the Russians later in the afternoon in another attempt to attack the Russian cruisers , a 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) shell struck Yakumo amidships at 15 : 40 , killing 12 and wounding 11 . The range at this time exceeded 8 nautical miles ( 15 km ; 9 @.@ 2 mi ) , beyond the range of any gun in his squadron , so Dewa ordered his ships to disengage . By 17 : 45 , Yakumo had maneuvered to about 8 @,@ 000 or 9 @,@ 000 meters ( 8 @,@ 700 or 9 @,@ 800 yd ) from the damaged Russian battleship Poltava and opened fire . Yakumo continued to close until the Russian squadron was thrown into confusion by the death of Vitgeft around 18 : 40 . 
 The 3rd Division then followed Tōgō 's ships as they circled the Russian ships while they sorted themselves out , now firing at the Russian cruisers with little effect , until Tōgō ordered Dewa to attack the Russian destroyers at about 19 : 44 . Dewa cancelled that last order and turned south around 20 : 00 in pursuit of several Russian cruisers that were fleeing to the south , in an attempt to intercept them before they reached the isolated flotillas of destroyers and torpedo boats . The Russian ships were engaged by other Japanese cruisers before they could reach the small ships , and Dewa broke off the pursuit around 20 : 25 as light was fading . He continued south @-@ eastwards overnight and spotted one cruiser and two destroyers , but was unable to catch any of them . On 14 August , Yakumo and the 3rd Division was ordered to Tsingtao to confirm that the Germans had indeed interned the battleship Tsesarevich and three destroyers that had taken shelter there after the battle . After their return , they were reassigned to the blockade of Port Arthur . 
 In mid @-@ September , Yakumo was transferred back to Kamimura 's 2nd Division , which was defending the Strait of Tsushima , although she began a refit at the end of the month . The ship returned to Dewa on 15 November and he transferred his flag back to her . On 13 December , the ship attempted to rescue survivors of the Takasago after she had struck a mine , but found no one still living . Yakumo was sent to Sasebo Naval Arsenal for another refit five days later . On 1 February 1905 , the ship was ordered to join Rear Admiral Shimamura Hayao 's 2nd Division blockading Vladivostok , although this only lasted for a few weeks as she was ordered to Kure Naval Arsenal for a final refit in mid @-@ February before the anticipated battle with the Russian ships sent from the Baltic Fleet . 
 = = = = Battle of Tsushima = = = = 
 As the Russian 2nd and 3rd Pacific Squadrons approached Japan on 27 May , having sailed from the Baltic Sea , Yakumo was assigned to Kamimura 's 2nd Division of the 2nd Fleet . The Russians were spotted by patrolling Japanese ships early that morning , but visibility was limited and radio reception poor . The preliminary reports were enough to cause Tōgō to order his ships to put to sea and the 2nd Division spotted the Russian ships under the command of Vice Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky at around 11 : 30 . Kamimura closed to about a range of 8000 meters before sheering off under fire to join Tōgō 's battleships . Yakumo was fourth of six when Tōgō opened fire on the 2nd Pacific Squadron at 14 : 10 and , like most of the ships in the division , engaged the battleship Oslyabya which was forced to fall out of formation at 14 : 50 and sank 20 minutes later . By this time the Russian formation was in disorder and the battleship Knyaz Suvorov suddenly appeared out of the mist at 15 : 35 at a range of about 2 @,@ 000 meters ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) . All of Kamimura 's ships engaged her for five minutes or so , with Yakumo and the armored cruiser Azuma also firing torpedoes at the Russian ship without effect . 
 After 17 : 30 Kamimura led his division in a fruitless pursuit of some of the Russian cruisers , leaving Tōgō 's battleships to their own devices . He abandoned his chase around 18 : 03 and turned northwards to rejoin Tōgō . His ships spotted the rear of the Russian battleline around 18 : 30 and opened fire when the range closed to 8000 – 9000 meters . Nothing is known of any effect on the Russians , and they ceased fire by 19 : 30 and rejoined Tōgō at 20 : 08 as night was falling . The surviving Russian ships were spotted the next morning and the Japanese ships opened fire around 10 : 30 , staying beyond the range at which the Russian ships could effectively reply . Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov therefore decided to surrender his ships , as he could neither return fire nor close the range . 
 In the meantime , the coast defense ship Admiral Ushakov had fallen well behind Nebogatov 's ships and was spotted by the protected cruiser Chiyoda early in the morning , but the Japanese were more intent on locating the main body of the Russian fleet than attacking a single isolated ship . Admiral Ushakov was then spotted at 14 : 10 , well after Nebogatov 's surrender , by Shimamura who received permission to pursue her with his flagship , the armored cruiser Iwate , and Yakumo . They caught up with the Russian ship at 17 : 00 and demanded her surrender . Admiral Ushakov attempted to close the range to bring the Japanese cruisers within range of her guns , but they were fast enough to keep the range open and the Russian ship never hit either one . After about half an hour , Admiral Ushakov was listing heavily enough that her guns could not elevate enough to bear , and her commander ordered his crew to abandon ship and the scuttling charges detonated . The ship sank in three minutes and 12 officers and 327 crewmen were rescued by the Japanese . Between them , Yakumo and Iwate fired 89 eight- and 278 six @-@ inch shells during the engagement . Over the course of the entire battle , Yakumo was struck by a single twelve @-@ inch shell and six others , of which three or four were six inches in size . They inflicted only minor damage . 
 On 14 June , Yakumo was assigned as the flagship of Vice Admiral <unk> <unk> , commander of the 3rd Fleet , as part of the operation to capture the island of Sakhalin in July . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 In November 1914 , Yakumo was deployed to Singapore preparatory to searching for the German commerce raider Emden , but the ship was sunk before the mission began . Yakumo served as the flagship of Destroyer Squadron ( Suiraisentai ) 2 from 13 December 1915 to 1 December 1916 and then of Suiraisentai 1 from 1 to 12 December . In February 1917 , the ship began patrolling the South Pacific and Indian Oceans , searching for German commerce raiders . She began the first of her many training cruises on 5 April when she departed for North America and Hawaii , before arriving back in Japan on 17 August . In October 1918 , Kichisaburō Nomura was appointed captain of Yakumo for two months , only one of which he spent on board the vessel , as a political appointment to qualify Nomura for flag rank . 
 = = = Interwar years = = = 
 On 1 September 1921 , Yakumo was re @-@ designated as a 1st class coast @-@ defense ship and used primarily for training duties in long @-@ distance oceanic navigation and officer training for cadets in the Imperial Japanese Navy Academy . In this capacity , she participated in 13 more voyages in the 1920s and 1930s to Europe , North and South America , and the South Pacific , including a circumnavigation of the globe from August 1921 to April 1922 , in company with the armored cruiser Izumo . Two of the naval cadets that participated in this cruise were Princes Kuni <unk> and Kachō Hirotada . 
 In 1924 , four of Yakumo 's 12 @-@ pounder guns were removed , as were all of her QF 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder guns , and a single 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type anti @-@ aircraft gun was added . In addition three of her torpedo tubes were removed . Three years later , her boilers were replaced by six Yarrow boilers , formerly from the battleship Haruna , which reduced her power to 7 @,@ 000 ihp ( 5 @,@ 200 kW ) and maximum speed to 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . These boilers used a mix of coal and fuel oil , and the ship now carried a total of 1 @,@ 210 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 190 long tons ) of coal and 306 metric tons ( 301 long tons ) of oil . 
 During a visit to Tsingtao in 1930 , Yakumo and Izumo had to land marines on 13 January to quell a riot by Japanese residents there . The following year , the ship was reclassified as a training ship . On 6 November 1936 , between the islands of Saipan and Truk , an accidental explosion in her front magazine killed four crewmen and flooded her front food locker . Repairs were made underway and Yakumo arrived home two weeks later . A month after her return , in December 1936 , Captain Matome Ugaki assumed command of Yakumo until he took command of the battleship Hyūga the next year . Her last training cruise ended on 20 November 1939 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 After the start of the Pacific War , Yakumo was reclassified as a 1st class cruiser on 1 July 1942 , and her eight @-@ inch guns were replaced by four 12 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) Type 89 dual @-@ purpose guns in two twin mounts . In addition her light anti @-@ aircraft armament was augmented . However , Yakumo remained within the confines of the Seto Inland Sea throughout the war as she was assigned to training duties , and was not used in any combat operations . She was stricken from the navy list on 1 October 1945 . Yakumo began service as a repatriation transport on 7 December . Her mission was to return troops and civilians to the home islands from Japan 's former overseas possessions , primarily from Taiwan and mainland China . She completed her last voyage in June 1946 , repatriating a total of 9 @,@ 010 people . Yakumo arrived at the Maizuru shipyard of Hitachi Shipbuilding & Engineering on 20 July 1946 to begin demolition that lasted until 1 April 1947 . 
 = U.S. Route 16 in Michigan = 
 US Highway 16 ( US 16 ) , also called Grand River Avenue for much of its length in the state , was one of the principal pre @-@ Interstate roads in the state of Michigan . Before the creation of the United States Numbered Highway System in 1926 , the highway had been designated M @-@ 16 . The modern route of Grand River Avenue cuts across the Lower Peninsula in a northwest – southeast fashion from near Grand Rapids to Detroit . Before the late 1950s and early 1960s , US 16 followed other roads between Muskegon and Grand Rapids , and then Grand River Avenue through Lansing to Detroit . In the years immediately preceding the creation of the Interstate Highway System , US 16 was shifted from older roads to newer freeways . Later , it was co @-@ designated as an Interstate . When the gap in the freeway was filled in around Lansing , the US 16 designation was decommissioned in the state . The freeway was then solely designated Interstate 96 ( I @-@ 96 ) east of Grand Rapids and I @-@ 196 west of that city . 
 The original pathway along the Grand River Avenue corridor was an Indian trail , a footpath used by the native population . This trail was later used by the first European settlers to the area now known as Michigan . In Detroit , Grand River is one of five major avenues ( along with Woodward , Michigan , Gratiot , and Jefferson ) planned by Judge Augustus Woodward in 1805 that extended from Downtown Detroit in differing directions ; Grand River Avenue extends northwesterly from the city 's downtown . In the middle of the 19th century , the trail was expanded into a plank road that formed the basis for one of the first state trunkline highways as M @-@ 16 in the early 20th century . Later , the highway was rerouted to replace M @-@ 126 and create M @-@ 104 . Current segments of the roadway are still part of the state highway system as sections of M @-@ 5 , M @-@ 11 , M @-@ 43 or business loops off I @-@ 96 . The portion of Grand River Avenue in Detroit between I @-@ 96 and the intersection with Cass Avenue and Middle Street in Downtown Detroit is an unsigned state trunkline , sometimes referred to as Old Business Spur I @-@ 96 ( Old BS I @-@ 96 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 At the time of its decommissioning , US 16 started its run through Michigan at the Grand Trunk Western Railroad docks in Muskegon . The SS Milwaukee Clipper operated as a car ferry across Lake Michigan , connecting Muskegon to Milwaukee , Wisconsin , where US 16 continued to the west . From the docks , US 16 and M @-@ 46 traveled concurrently south and then east through downtown Muskegon . At Peck Street , US 16 turned south along Business US 31 ( Bus . US 31 ) . These two highways ran concurrently out of town to the south through Muskegon Heights to Norton Shores . There , the business loop ended at US 31 , and US 16 joined the I @-@ 196 freeway headed east . ( Later , the I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 196 designations west of Grand Rapids would be flipped , but at the time leading up to US 16 's decommissioning in the state of Michigan , this had not yet been approved . ) The I @-@ 196 / US 16 freeway traveled southeast of Norton Shores through woodlands in rural Muskegon County parallel to the former US 16 routing through Fruitport to Nunica in Ottawa County . The freeway turned more directly east in Nunica past the eastern terminus of M @-@ 104 , and continued through more mixed forest and grassland terrain to serve the communities of Coopersville and Marne . 
 As the freeway approached Kent County , it met the western terminus of M @-@ 11 which was the former routing of US 16 through the Grand Rapids metropolitan area . I @-@ 196 / US 16 continued eastward around the north side of the metropolitan area through the suburbs of Walker and Comstock Park . The freeway intersected the contemporaneous routing of US 131 along the East Beltline and curved south through the eastern edge of Grand Rapids to meet the end of I @-@ 96 east of downtown . There I @-@ 196 ended and US 16 was transferred to the I @-@ 96 freeway . I @-@ 96 / US 16 continued southward intersecting Cascade Road , which was previously US 16 . Cascade Road east of this interchange meets the westernmost part of Grand River Avenue , which carried US 16 east continuously to Downtown Detroit . 
 M @-@ 50 also joined the freeway at Cascade Road headed east , and together I @-@ 96 / US 16 / M @-@ 50 continued through eastern Kent County . M @-@ 50 departed to the south near Lowell , and the freeway crossed into southern Ionia County . Passing south of Portland , the freeway crossed east into Clinton County . North of Grand Ledge , I @-@ 96 ended and US 16 followed Wright Road off the freeway to Grand River Avenue . From there east , US 16 resumed its historic routing into the city of Lansing . Grand River Avenue carried the highway past the Capital City Airport and east to Larch Street , where US 16 turned south along US 27 north of downtown Lansing . At Saginaw Street , eastbound US 16 turned east on the one @-@ way street , while westbound traffic ran a block north on Grand River Avenue . The two directions of travel merge at the east end of Saginaw Street in East Lansing . Grand River Avenue through East Lansing follows a tree @-@ lined boulevard that forms the division between the campus of Michigan State University to the south and the rest of the city to the north . US 16 continued east in Ingham County through Okemos and rural parts of the county through Williamston and Webberville . 
 Grand River Avenue crosses to the east into Livingston County through Fowlerville to Howell . In Howell , Grand River Avenue meets Hartland Road which carries M @-@ 59 ; the highway also met M @-@ 155 in downtown , which at the time provided access to the Howell State Hospital . In the approach to Brighton , Grand River Avenue passes through rural southeast Michigan lake country . In Brighton , Grand River Avenue crossed the western end of the I @-@ 96 freeway . US 16 merged onto the freeway , and I @-@ 96 / US 16 met the northern end of the US 23 freeway . I @-@ 96 / US 16 continued east into Oakland County through Wixom and Novi . 
 Near Farmington , I @-@ 96 / US 16 continued to the southeast of the present @-@ day I @-@ 96 / I @-@ 275 / I @-@ 696 / M @-@ 5 interchange along the current M @-@ 5 freeway . Grand River Avenue through there was Business Loop I @-@ 96 ( BL I @-@ 96 ) . The freeway ends at a junction with Grand River Avenue that also marked the end of the business loop and the eastern end of I @-@ 96 at the time . From there , US 16 continued along Grand River Avenue the rest of way into Downtown Detroit . Along that routing , it intersected US 24 at Telegraph Road and M @-@ 39 at Southfield Road . US 12 joined US 16 along Grand River Avenue at Plymouth Road . The two ran the rest of the way concurrently to Cadillac Square . There they terminated at a common point with US 10 ( Woodward Avenue ) and US 112 ( Michigan Avenue ) . US 25 ran through the square on Fort Street and Gratiot Avenue . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of Grand River Avenue , and US 16 in Michigan , dates back to before the earliest settlement of Michigan by Europeans . The route has been the basis for an Indian trail , a pathway for European settlers , a state highway , a part of the US Highway System , and a section of the Interstate Highway System . 
 = = = Indian trail to state highway = = = 
 The chief transportation routes in 1701 were the Indian footpaths that crossed the future state of Michigan ; the Grand River Trail was one of these thirteen trails at the time . In 1805 , Detroit created 120 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) rights @-@ of @-@ way for the principal streets of the city , Grand River Avenue included . This street plan was devised by Augustus Woodward and others following a devastating fire in Detroit . A ten @-@ year project to construct a plank road between Detroit and Howell was authorized in 1820 along the Grand River Trail . Grand River Avenue was included as one of Five Great Military Roads by Governor Lewis Cass in 1825 , along with the River Road , Michigan Avenue , Woodward Avenue and Gratiot Avenue . The Grand River Road , precursor to the modern Grand River Avenue was named by Benjamin Williams , cofounder of Owosso . The original Native American name for the river was Wash @-@ ten @-@ <unk> sibi meaning " the river that extends far off " , or " far into the interior " , which was translated as La Grande Riviere , the French name for the river ; this name was then applied to the name of the trail that paralleled at least half of the river 's length . 
 The opening of the Erie Canal in New York in 1826 brought new settlers to the Great Lakes region , and to the future state of Michigan . Many of these settlers began their inland journeys in Detroit . At first the Grand River Road was a " deep rutted , ditch bordered road " . The road branched into two at Rouge ( now Redford ) ; the southern branch roughly followed the modern route of Grand River Avenue and the northern route ran by way of Pontiac along Woodward Avenue and the modern M @-@ 21 to the north of the Lansing area . From Bancroft , several trails branched off , including the northern branch of the Grand River Road and the Saginaw Trail . The two branches merged back together near Dewitt and continued west toward Ionia and on to Grand Rapids and Newton ( now Grand Haven ) . The early travelers plied the road in wagons pulled by oxen or horses , and drivers charged between four and seven cents a mile ( equivalent to $ 0 @.@ 84 – 1 @.@ 46 / mi in 2015 ) . The horses were exchanged every 12 – 15 miles ( 19 – 24 km ) with the speed averaging around 8 – 10 miles per hour ( 13 – 16 km / h ) with few obstacles . 
 Congress further aided the road in 1835 with an appropriation of $ 25 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 15 @.@ 5 million in 2015 ) for a 20 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 6 m ) road on 100 feet ( 30 m ) of right @-@ of @-@ way . These improvements included removing brush and debris and the construction of bridges across the Rouge , Shiawassee , Red Cedar and Grand rivers . The Grand River Road was a major route for settlers headed inland to Grand Rapids in 1836 , as the shortest route for travelers coming from Detroit . An economic panic in 1837 drove settlers from New York to Michigan ; these were the travelers who followed the Grand River Road . New settlements were created along the route , every six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) or so , that distance being a good day 's travel by horse . Approximately 120 wagons left Detroit each day between August and November 1843 . 
 After statehood in 1837 , Michigan assumed the costs for construction work to the Grand River Trail . At that time , about 60 miles ( 97 km ) had been surveyed from Detroit westward . The new state lacked the money to continue improvements to the road , and Michigan petitioned Congress for the better part of the next decade for money to complete the work . When the state capital was moved to Lansing in 1847 , an improved road was needed to the capital city . The first segments of roadway were privatized starting in 1844 . In 1850 , the Michigan State Legislature established the Lansing and Howell Plank Road Company , which set about converting various Indian trails into the Lansing – Howell Plank Road , a task the company completed by 1853 . At Howell the road connected with the Detroit – Howell Plank Road , establishing the first improved connection direct from the state capital to Michigan 's largest metropolis . The Lansing – Detroit Plank Road was a toll road until the 1880s , and it eventually evolved into the eastern part of the modern Grand River Avenue . 
 By 1900 , only a short stretch of the Detroit – Howell Plank Road was still made of planks ; most of the other plank roads had been converted to gravel by this time . On May 13 , 1913 , the Michigan Legislature passed the State Reward Trunk Line Highway Act ( Public Act 334 of 1913 ) that created the original state highway system . In that act , Grand River Avenue between Detroit and Grand Rapids was included as Division 9 of the system . The state highways were signposted starting in 1919 , and on the first maps published on July 1 of that year , the Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) had applied the M @-@ 16 number to Grand River Avenue across the state between Grand Haven and Detroit . M @-@ 16 was rerouted in the Lansing area in 1925 , running along Grand River Avenue from Grand Ledge to East Lansing . The former routing through Downtown Lansing on Michigan Avenue became part of M @-@ 39 and the section north of Grand Ledge was eventually redesignated M @-@ 100 . A second realignment moved M @-@ 16 to follow Grand River Avenue from Ionia through Ada . The former alignment became a part of M @-@ 21 . On August 7 , 1926 , the state completed paving on M @-@ 16 , opening it to traffic as " the first paved highway across the state " . 
 The M @-@ 16 designation lasted for seven years . As the states were meeting with the American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO , now AASHTO ) to plan the United States Numbered Highway System , the route of M @-@ 16 was originally planned for inclusion in US 18 . When the system was created on November 11 , 1926 , Grand River Avenue and M @-@ 16 became part of US 16 . 
 = = = US Highway to Interstate = = = 
 In 1929 , Allan Williams placed a picnic table on the side of the road along US 16 south of Saranac . Williams was the Ionia County engineer in charge of the various roads in the county , and that location is " what many consider to be the nation 's first roadside table " . The first change to the US 16 routing was made in 1933 when the highway was moved to bypass Farmington , with the old routing retained as a state highway . The next year , in 1934 , M @-@ 126 was created between Nunica and Muskegon . In 1940 , US 16 was rerouted to replace M @-@ 126 , and the former route of US 16 between Nunica and Grand Haven was redesignated M @-@ 104 . Two further changes during 1941 – 42 rerouted the western end in Muskegon to end at the car ferry docks . Previously , motorists had to navigate from the western end along other roads to the ferry connection to the rest of US 16 in Wisconsin . The second change routed Bypass US 16 ( Byp . US 16 ) along 28th Street and Wilson ( previously the South Beltline and West Beltline sections of M @-@ 114 ) in the Grand Rapids area . The US 16 designation was moved in 1953 to replace Byp . US 16 while the former routing through downtown Grand Rapids was redesignated Business US 16 ( Bus . US 16 ) . 
 MSHD had plans to upgrade the US 16 corridor to freeway standards in the middle of the 20th century . The first planning map in 1947 for what later became the Interstate Highway System showed a highway in the corridor . The General Location of National System of Interstate Highways Including All Additional Routes at Urban Areas Designated in September 1955 , showed generalized plans for the locations of Interstate Highways as designated in 1955 . This also included a highway in the US 16 corridor . The 1957 approval for the Interstate Highway System replaced the Grand Rapids – Detroit section of US 16 with a portion of Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) , with the remainder to be I @-@ 94N . MSHD submitted a recommended numbering plan for the Interstates in 1958 that showed I @-@ 96 following the US 16 corridor . When initially approved , the Muskegon – Grand Rapids segment of US 16 was to be numbered as I @-@ 196 while the remainder was part of I @-@ 96 . 
 Segments of the road were upgraded in 1956 between Coopersville and Marne , Portland and Eagle , and Brighton and Farmington . By 1962 , freeway construction allowed motorists to travel between Muskegon and the Lansing area on a freeway , bypassing the old Grand River Avenue route . The final connection between Lansing and Brighton was completed in late 1962 . At that time , the US 16 designation , which had been applied alongside the I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 196 designations , was decommissioned . Segments of the old highway were retained in the state highway system under different numbers . Sections through Portland , Lansing , Howell , Farmington and Detroit were given Business Loop ( BL ) or Business Spur ( BS ) I @-@ 96 designations . The section between Lansing and Webberville became part of an extended M @-@ 43 . Other sections in the Detroit area became parts of M @-@ 102 , M @-@ 5 , or unsigned state highway . 
 = = = Post @-@ Interstate era = = = 
 After US 16 was transferred to the new freeway , Grand River Avenue lost its state highway status along most of its length . Today the roadway remains the " Main Street " of over a dozen Michigan cities and a scenic route through one of the state 's most populated corridors . In 1995 , major reconstruction work along Grand River Avenue in East Lansing uncovered rotting logs , buried about 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) below the present grade , that had been used as <unk> for the plank road surface in a low , swampy area . The logs had been in place for nearly 150 years . In 2004 , the state transferred several blocks at the eastern end of Grand River Avenue to the City of Detroit . State trunkline control now ends at the corner of Grand River Avenue , Middle Street , and Cass Avenue . 
 Community leaders in Lansing have proposed renaming a section of Grand River Avenue in Old Town Lansing for César Chávez , the Mexican @-@ American civil rights activist . The group " Lansing for Cesar E. Chavez " was raising funds to rename the section between Oakland and Pine streets in Old Town . Previously , a section of Grand Avenue was renamed for Chávez in 1994 , but the voters overturned the decision . The renaming proposal was even mentioned as a way to untangle a maze of different branches of Grand River Avenue running through Old Town . Currently , East Grand River Avenue and North Grand River Avenue bridge between sections of Grand River Avenue , in addition to Grand Avenue which runs along the Grand River near downtown . While Lansing 's Latino community supported the proposal , the business community opposed it . One shop owner said she would have $ 10 @,@ 000 in costs associated with a name change , adding , " I think there 's many beautiful ways to honor such an incredible man . Changing five blocks of a street doesn 't seem to do justice . " Another business owner cited the work the Old Town Commercial Association has done to market the area using the Grand River Avenue name , marketing that would be useless after a name change . The compromise solution reached in August 2010 was to rename lot 56 , where Old Town holds festivals , to Cesar Chavez Plaza . Street signs would be installed marking parts of Grand River Avenue as Cesar E. Chavez Avenue , but only in a memorial capacity ; the street would still be officially named Grand River Avenue . 
 = = Memorial highway designations = = 
 Born in Grand Rapids in 1884 , Arthur H. Vandenberg was appointed to the United States Senate upon the death in office of Woodbridge N. Ferris in 1928 . Vandenberg , a Republican , served as a member of the " isolationist bloc " , and was an active opponent of the New Deal policies of Franklin D. Roosevelt . The senator declined a nomination for Vice President in 1936 . In the aftermath of World War II , Vandenberg 's world view changed significantly . He helped to draft the United Nations Charter and worked to secure is unanimous ratification in the Senate . He also worked to secure passage of the Marshall Plan and helped to establish the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . After his death in 1951 , Michigan residents wanted to memorialize Vandenberg . The following year , the Michigan Legislature dedicated the length of US 16 from Muskegon to Detroit as the Arthur Vandenberg Memorial Highway by enacting Public Act 70 of 1952 . 
 Vandenberg was not the only national figure honored with a memorial designation along the route of US 16 in Michigan . For a period from the 1930s through the 1950s , the highway used a few blocks of Washington Boulevard to connect between Grand River and Michigan avenues on its route through Detroit to its terminus at Cadillac Square . This street was named in honor of George Washington for his service as the " father of his country " . The street was named by Judge Woodward as a part of his general street plan for the city of Detroit in 1807 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Related trunklines = = 
 = = = Grand Rapids bypass = = = 
 Bypass US Highway 16 ( Byp . US 16 ) was a bypass route of US 16 in the Grand Rapids area . The highway became a part of the state highway system c . 1930 as a part of M @-@ 114 , which was a beltline around the Grand Rapids area . By 1942 , the trunkline was completed and reassigned a Byp . US 16 designation along the southern and western legs . The designation connected to US 16 in Walker Township ( now the city of Walker ) and ran south along what is now Wilson Avenue over the Grand River into Grandville . From there it turned easterly along what is now 28th Street through Wyoming and Paris townships ( now the cities of Wyoming and Kentwood ) before terminating at US 16 in Cascade Township . The designation was used until the mainline US 16 was rerouted over the bypass in 1953 . 
 = = = Grand Rapids business loop = = = 
 Business US Highway 16 ( Bus . US 16 ) was a business route in the Grand Rapids area in the 1950s and 1960s . When US 16 was rerouted to replace Byp . US 16 around the southern and western sides of the city in 1953 , the former route of the mainline through downtown was redesignated as the business loop . That loop followed Remembrance Avenue southeasterly to Leonard Avenue in Walker Township . From there , the loop turned easterly on Leonard over the Grand River to Monroe Avenue before turning south parallel to the river along Monroe into downtown . In downtown Grand Rapids , Bus . US 16 turned eastward on Fulton Avenue into East Grand Rapids . There the loop followed Cascade Road into Cascade Township where it reconnected to US 16 at the intersection with 28th Street . Bus . US 16 lasted until 1962 when US 16 was decommissioned in Michigan . 
 = = = Farmington alternate route = = = 
 US Highway 16A ( US 16A ) was an alternate route for US 16 that bypassed Farmington . It was designated in 1933 for a new highway that bypassed downtown along what is now Freedom Road . In 1956 , the designation was decommissioned when mainline US 16 was rerouted out of downtown Farmington , replacing US 16A . At the same time , the former route of the mainline through downtown was redesignated Bus . US 16 . 
 = = = Farmington business loop = = = 
 Business US Highway 16 ( Bus . US 16 ) was a business loop through downtown Farmington along Grand River Avenue . Its western terminus was at the junction of US 16 and Grand River Avenue west of the city , and the eastern terminus was at the intersection between US 16 and Grand River Avenue southeast of Farmington . This highway was the original route of US 16 though downtown Farmington . In 1933 , US 16 was routed onto a bypass route which had been constructed south of the city ( the present @-@ day Freedom Road ) and the route through Farmington was retained as state trunkline . In 1956 , a new bypass freeway was built just to the south of the old bypass as part of the " Brighton – Farmington Expressway " and the route through downtown was designated Bus . US 16 . The original plans for I @-@ 96 called for it to replace US 16 and to run parallel to Grand River Avenue all the way from Farmington into downtown Detroit . In 1959 , the Farmington bypass freeway was given the I @-@ 96 designation in addition to the US 16 moniker , and the business route was redesignated as Business Loop I @-@ 96 two years later . 
 = 2008 Sichuan earthquake = 
 The 2008 Sichuan earthquake or the Great Sichuan earthquake , measured at 8 @.@ 0 Ms and 7 @.@ 9 Mw , and occurred at 02 : 28 : 01 PM China Standard Time at epicenter ( 06 : 28 : 01 UTC ) on May 12 in Sichuan province , killed 69 @,@ 197 people and left 18 @,@ 222 missing . 
 It is also known as the Wenchuan earthquake ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> dà <unk> ; literally : " Great Wenchuan earthquake " ) , after the location of the earthquake 's epicenter , Wenchuan County , Sichuan . The epicenter was 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) west @-@ northwest of Chengdu , the provincial capital , with a focal depth of 19 km ( 12 mi ) . The earthquake was also felt in nearby countries and as far away as both Beijing and Shanghai — 1 @,@ 500 km ( 930 mi ) and 1 @,@ 700 km ( 1 @,@ 060 mi ) away — where office buildings swayed with the tremor . Strong aftershocks , some exceeding magnitude 6 , continued to hit the area even months after the main quake , causing new casualties and damage . 
 Official figures ( as of July 21 , 2008 12 : 00 CST ) stated that 69 @,@ 197 were confirmed dead , including 68 @,@ 636 in Sichuan province , and 374 @,@ 176 injured , with 18 @,@ 222 listed as missing . The earthquake left about 4 @.@ 8 million people homeless , though the number could be as high as 11 million . Approximately 15 million people lived in the affected area . It was the deadliest earthquake to hit China since the 1976 Tangshan earthquake , which killed at least 240 @,@ 000 people , and the strongest in the country since the 1950 <unk> earthquake , which registered at 8 @.@ 5 on the Richter magnitude scale . It is the 21st deadliest earthquake of all time . On November 6 , 2008 , the central government announced that it would spend 1 trillion RMB ( about US $ 146 @.@ 5 billion ) over the next three years to rebuild areas ravaged by the earthquake , as part of the Chinese economic stimulus program . 
 = = Effects of the earthquake = = 
 The earthquake had a magnitude of 8 @.@ 0 Ms and 7 @.@ 9 Mw . The epicenter was in Wenchuan County , <unk> Tibetan and Qiang Autonomous Prefecture , 80 km west / northwest of the provincial capital of Chengdu , with its main tremor occurring at 14 : 28 : 01 @.@ 42 China Standard Time ( 06 : 28 : 01 @.@ 42 UTC ) , on May 12 , 2008 lasting for around 2 minutes ; in the quake almost 80 % of buildings were destroyed . 
 According to a study by the China Earthquake Administration ( CEA ) , the earthquake occurred along the Longmenshan fault , a thrust structure along the border of the Indo @-@ Australian Plate and Eurasian Plate . Seismic activities concentrated on its mid @-@ fracture ( known as Yingxiu @-@ Beichuan fracture ) . The rupture lasted close to 120 sec , with the majority of energy released in the first 80 sec . Starting from Wenchuan , the rupture propagated at an average speed of 3 @.@ 1 kilometers per second 49 ° toward north east , rupturing a total of about 300 km . Maximum displacement amounted to 9 meters . The focus was deeper than 10 km . 
 In a United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) study , preliminary rupture models of the earthquake indicated displacement of up to 9 meters along a fault approximately 240 km long by 20 km deep . The earthquake generated deformations of the surface greater than 3 meters and increased the stress ( and probability of occurrence of future events ) at the northeastern and southwestern ends of the fault . On May 20 , USGS seismologist Tom Parsons warned that there is " high risk " of a major M > 7 aftershock over the next weeks or months . 
 Japanese seismologist Yuji Yagi at the University of Tsukuba said that the earthquake occurred in two stages : " The 155 @-@ mile Longmenshan Fault tore in two sections , the first one ripping about seven yards , followed by a second one that sheared four yards . " His data also showed that the earthquake lasted about two minutes and released 30 times the energy of the Great Hanshin earthquake of 1995 in Japan , which killed over 6 @,@ 000 people . He pointed out that the shallowness of the epicenter and the density of population greatly increased the severity of the earthquake . Teruyuki Kato , a seismologist at the University of Tokyo , said that the seismic waves of the quake traveled a long distance without losing their power because of the firmness of the terrain in central China . According to reports from Chengdu , the capital of Sichuan province , the earthquake tremors lasted for " about two or three minutes " . 
 = = = Extent of the tremors = = = 
 Places ordered by distance from epicenter ( or time of propagation ) : 
 China ( Mainland ) : All provincial @-@ level divisions except Xinjiang , Jilin and Heilongjiang were physically affected by the quake . 
 Hong Kong : Tremors were felt approximately three minutes after the quake , continuing for about half a minute . This was also the most distant earthquake known ever to be felt in Hong Kong . The intensity reached MM III in Hong Kong . 
 Macau : Tremors were felt approximately three minutes after the quake . 
 Vietnam : Tremors were felt approximately five minutes after the earthquake in northern parts of Vietnam . The intensity was MM III in Hanoi . 
 Thailand : In parts of Thailand tremors were felt six minutes after the quake . Office buildings in Bangkok swayed for the next several minutes . 
 Taiwan : It took about eight minutes for the quake to reach Taiwan , where the tremors continued for one to two minutes ; no damage or injuries were reported . The intensity was MM III in Taipei . 
 Mongolia : Tremors were felt approximately eight minutes after the earthquake in parts of Mongolia . 
 Bangladesh : Tremors were felt eight and a half minutes after the quake in all parts of Bangladesh . 
 Nepal : Tremors were felt approximately eight and a half minutes after the quake . 
 India : Tremors were felt approximately nine minutes after the earthquake in parts of India . 
 Pakistan : In parts of Northern Pakistan tremors were felt ten minutes after the quake . 
 Russia : Tremors were felt in Tuva , no casualties reported . 
 = = = Aftershocks = = = 
 Between 64 and 104 major aftershocks , ranging in magnitude from 4 @.@ 0 to 6 @.@ 1 , were recorded within 72 hours of the main quake . According to Chinese official counts , " by 12 : 00 CST , November 6 , 2008 there had been 42 @,@ 719 total aftershocks , of which 246 ranged from 4 @.@ 0 MS to 4 @.@ 9 MS , 34 from 5 @.@ 0 MS to 5 @.@ 9 MS , and 8 from 6 @.@ 0 Ms to 6 @.@ 4 MS ; the strongest aftershock measured 6 @.@ 4 MS. " The latest aftershock exceeding M6 occurred on August 5 , 2008 . 
 ( The Ms 6 @.@ 1 earthquake on August 30 , 2008 in southern Sichuan was not part of this series because it was caused by a different fault . See 2008 <unk> earthquake for details . ) 
 = = = <unk> and damage area = = = 
 The map of earthquake intensity published by CEA after surveying 500 @,@ 000 km2 of the affected area shows a maximum liedu of XI on the China Seismic Intensity Scale ( CSIS ) , described as " very destructive " on the European <unk> Scale ( EMS ) from which CSIS drew reference . ( USGS , using the Modified Mercalli intensity scale ( CC ) , also placed maximum intensity at XI , " very disastrous " . ) Two south @-@ west @-@ north @-@ east stripes of liedu XI are centered around Yingxiu , Wenchuan ( the town closest to the epicenter of the main quake ) and Beichuan ( the town repeatedly struck by strong aftershocks including one registering MS 6 @.@ 1 on Aug 1 , 2008 ) , both in Sichuan Province , occupying a total of 2 @,@ 419 km2 . The Yingxiu liedu @-@ XI zone is about 66 km long and 20 km wide along Wenchuan – Dujiangyan – <unk> ; the Beichuan liedu @-@ XI zone is about 82 km long and 15 km wide along An County – Beichuan – Pingwu . The area with liedu X ( comparable to X on EMS , " destructive " and X on MM , " disastrous " ) spans 3 @,@ 144 km2 . The area affected by earthquakes exceeding liedu VI totals 440 @,@ 442 km2 , occupying an oval 936 km long and 596 km wide , spanning three provinces and one autonomous region . 
 = = = Tectonics = = = 
 The extent of the earthquake and after shock @-@ affected areas lies north @-@ east , along the Longmen Shan fault . 
 The Longmen Shan Fault System is situated in the eastern border of the Tibetan Plateau and contains several faults . This earthquake ruptured at least two imbricate structures in Longmen Shan Fault System , i.e. the Beichuan Fault and the <unk> – <unk> Fault . In the epicentral area , the average slip in Beichuan Fault was about 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) vertical , 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) horizontal @-@ parallel to the fault , and 4 @.@ 8 metres ( 16 ft ) horizontal @-@ perpendicular to the fault . In the area about 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) northeast of the epicenter , the surface slip on Beichuan Fault was almost purely dextral strike @-@ slip up to about 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) , while the average slip in <unk> – <unk> Fault was about 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) vertical and 2 @.@ 3 metres ( 7 ft 7 in ) horizontal . 
 According to CEA : 
 " The energy source of the Wenchuan earthquake and Longmenshan 's southeast push came from the strike of the Indian Plate onto the Eurasian Plate and its northward push . The inter @-@ plate relative motion caused large scale structural deformation inside the Asian continent , resulting in a thinning crust of the Qinghai @-@ Tibet Plateau , the uplift of its landscape and an eastward extrude . Near the Sichuan Basin , Qinghai @-@ Tibet Plateau 's east @-@ northward movement meets with strong resistance from the South China Block , causing a high degree of stress accumulation in the Longmenshan thrust formation . This finally caused a sudden dislocation in the Yingxiu @-@ Beichuan fracture , leading to the violent earthquake of Ms 8 @.@ 0 . " 
 According to the United States Geological Survey : 
 The earthquake occurred as the result of motion on a northeast striking reverse fault or thrust fault on the northwestern margin of the Sichuan Basin . The earthquake ’ s epicenter and focal @-@ mechanism are consistent with it having occurred as the result of movement on the Longmenshan fault or a tectonically related fault . The earthquake reflects tectonic stresses resulting from the convergence of crustal material slowly moving from the high Tibetan Plateau , to the west , against strong crust underlying the Sichuan Basin and southeastern China . 
 On a continental scale , the seismicity of central and eastern Asia is a result of northward convergence of the Indian Plate against the Eurasian Plate with a velocity of about 50 mm / y . The convergence of the two plates is broadly accommodated by the uplift of the Asian highlands and by the motion of crustal material to the east away from the uplifted Tibetan Plateau . The northwestern margin of the Sichuan Basin has previously experienced destructive earthquakes . The magnitude 7 @.@ 5 earthquake of August 25 , 1933 killed more than 9 @,@ 300 people . 
 According to the British Geological Survey : 
 The earthquake occurred 92 km northwest of the city of Chengdu in eastern Sichuan province and over 1500 km from Beijing , where it was also strongly felt . Earthquakes of this size have the potential to cause extensive damage and loss of life . 
 The epicenter was in the mountains of the Eastern Margin of Qing @-@ Tibet Plateau at the northwest margin of the Sichuan Basin . The earthquake occurred as a result of motion on a northeast striking thrust fault that runs along the margin of the basin . 
 The seismicity of central and eastern Asia is caused by the northward movement of the India plate at a rate of 5 cm / year and its collision with Eurasia , resulting in the uplift of the Himalaya and Tibetan plateaux and associated earthquake activity . This deformation also results in the extrusion of crustal material from the high Tibetan Plateaux in the west towards the Sichuan Basin and southeastern China . China frequently suffers large and deadly earthquakes . In August 1933 , the magnitude 7 @.@ 5 <unk> earthquake , about 90 km northeast of today 's earthquake , destroyed the town of <unk> and surrounding villages , and caused many landslides , some of which dammed the rivers . 
 = = Immediate aftermath = = 
 Office buildings in Shanghai 's financial district , including the Jin Mao Tower and the Hong Kong New World Tower , were evacuated . A receptionist at the Tibet Hotel in Chengdu said things were " calm " after the hotel evacuated its guests . Meanwhile , workers at a Ford plant in Sichuan were evacuated for about 10 minutes . Chengdu Shuangliu International Airport was shut down , and the control tower and regional radar control evacuated . One <unk> flight was diverted and landed in Kunming as a result . Cathay Pacific delayed both legs of its quadruple daily Hong Kong to London route due to this disruption in air traffic services . Chengdu Shuangliu Airport reopened later on the evening of May 12 , offering limited service as the airport began to be used as a staging area for relief operations . 
 Reporters in Chengdu said they saw cracks on walls of some residential buildings in the downtown areas , but no buildings collapsed . Many Beijing office towers were evacuated , including the building housing the media offices for the organizers of the 2008 Summer Olympics . None of the Olympic venues were damaged . Meanwhile , a cargo train carrying 13 petrol tanks derailed in Hui County , Gansu , and caught on fire after the rail was distorted . 
 All of the highways into Wenchuan , and others throughout the province , were damaged , resulting in delayed arrival of the rescue troops . In Beichuan County , 80 % of the buildings collapsed according to Xinhua News . In the city of Shifang , the collapse of two chemical plants led to leakage of some 80 tons of liquid ammonia , with hundreds of people reported buried . In the city of Dujiangyan , south @-@ east of the epicenter , a whole school collapsed with 900 students buried and fewer than 60 survived . The <unk> Middle School , where many teenagers were buried , was excavated by civilians and cranes . Dujiangyan is home of the Dujiangyan Irrigation System , an ancient water diversion project which is still in use and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site . The project 's famous Fish Mouth was cracked but not severely damaged otherwise . 
 Both the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange suspended trading of companies based in southwestern China . Copper rose over speculations that production in southwestern China may be affected , and oil prices dropped over speculations that demand from China would fall . 
 Immediately after the earthquake event , mobile and terrestrial telecommunications were cut to the affected and surrounding area , with all internet capabilities cut to the Sichuan area too . Elements of telecommunications were restored by the government piece by piece over the next number of months as the situation in the Sichuan province gradually improved . Eventually , a handful of major news and media websites were made accessible online in the region , albeit with dramatically pared back webpages . 
 China Mobile had more than 2 @,@ 300 base stations suspended due to power disruption or severe telecommunication traffic congestion . Half of the wireless communications were lost in the Sichuan province . China Unicom 's service in Wenchuan and four nearby counties was cut off , with more than 700 towers suspended . 
 Initially , officials were unable to contact the Wolong National Nature Reserve , home to around 280 giant pandas . However , the Foreign Ministry later said that a group of 31 British tourists visiting the Wolong Panda Reserve in the quake @-@ hit area returned safe and uninjured to Chengdu . Nonetheless , the well @-@ being of an even greater number of pandas in the neighbouring panda reserves remained unknown . Five security guards at the reserve were killed by the earthquake . Six pandas escaped after their enclosures were damaged . By May 20 , two pandas at the reserve were found to be injured , while the search continued for another two adult pandas that went missing after the quake . By May 28 , 2008 , one panda was still missing . The missing panda was later found dead under the rubble of an enclosure . Nine @-@ year @-@ old Mao Mao , a mother of five at the breeding center , was discovered on Monday , her body crushed by a wall in her enclosure . Panda keepers and other workers placed her remains in a small wooden crate and buried her outside the breeding centre . 
 The Zipingpu Hydropower Plant ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ) located 20 km east of the epicenter was damaged . A recent inspection indicated that the damage was less severe than initially feared , and it remains structurally stable and safe . The <unk> reservoir upstream is in danger of collapse . About 2 @,@ 000 troops have been allocated to Zipingpu , trying to release the pressure through spillway . In total , 391 dams , most of them small , were reported damaged by the quake . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 According to Chinese state officials , the quake caused 69 @,@ 180 known deaths including 68 @,@ 636 in Sichuan province ; 18 @,@ 498 people are listed as missing , and 374 @,@ 176 injured , but these figures may further increase as more reports come in . This estimate includes 158 earthquake relief workers who were killed in landslides as they tried to repair roads . 
 One rescue team reported only 2 @,@ 300 survivors from the town of Yingxiu in Wenchuan County , out of a total population of about 9 @,@ 000 . 3 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 people were killed in Beichuan County , Sichuan alone ; in the same location , 10 @,@ 000 people were injured and 80 % of the buildings were destroyed . The old county seat of Beichuan was abandoned and preserved as part of the Beichuan Earthquake Museum . Eight schools were toppled in Dujiangyan . A 56 @-@ year @-@ old was killed in Dujiangyan during a rescue attempt on the <unk> <unk> , where due to the earthquake 11 tourists from Taiwan had been trapped inside cable cars since May 13 . A 4 @-@ year @-@ old boy named Zhu <unk> ( traditional Chinese : <unk> ; simplified Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Zhū <unk> ) was also killed in <unk> City when a house collapsed on him and another was reported missing . 
 Experts point out that the earthquake hit an area that has been largely neglected and untouched by China 's economic rise . Health care is poor in inland areas such as Sichuan , highlighting the widening gap between prosperous urban dwellers and struggling rural people . Vice Minister of Health Gao Qiang told reporters in Beijing that the " public health care system in China is insufficient . " The Vice Minister of Health also suggested that the government would pick up the costs of care to earthquake victims , many of whom have little or no insurance : " The government should be responsible for providing medical treatment to them , " he said . 
 In terms of school casualties , thousands of school children died due to shoddy construction . In <unk> City , seven schools collapsed , burying at least 1 @,@ 700 people . At least 7 @,@ 000 school buildings throughout the province collapsed . Another 700 students were buried in a school in <unk> . At least 600 students and staff died at <unk> Elementary School . Up to 1 @,@ 300 children and teachers died at Beichuan Middle School . According to Tan Zuoren , 5 @,@ 600 pupils were dead or missing from the 64 schools Tan investigated in the quake zone . Tan was detained after he published such a casualties number . 
 Details of school casualties had been under non @-@ governmental investigation since December 2008 by volunteers including artist and architect Ai Weiwei , who had been constantly posting updates on his blog since March 2009 . The official tally of students killed in the earthquake was not released until May 7 , 2009 , almost a year after the earthquake . According to the state @-@ run Xinhua news agency , the earthquake killed 5 @,@ 335 students and left another 546 children disabled . Some parents believe the real figure is twice that officially cited . The executive vice governor of Sichuan Wei Hong said the student death toll is 19 @,@ 065 . Mr. Wei noted the toll was incomplete as the officials were still tallying the final number . In the aftermath of the earthquake , the Chinese government declared that parents who had lost their only children would get free treatment from fertility clinics to reverse vasectomies and tubal <unk> conducted by family planning authorities . 
 = = = Property damage = = = 
 The earthquake left at least 5 million people without housing , although the number could be as high as 11 million . Millions of livestock and a significant amount of agriculture were also destroyed , including 12 @.@ 5 million animals , mainly birds . In the Sichuan province a million pigs died out of 60 million total . Catastrophe modeling firm AIR Worldwide reported official estimates of insurers ' losses at US $ 1 billion from the earthquake ; estimated total damages exceed US $ 20 billion . It values Chengdu , at the time having an urban population of 4 @.@ 5 million people , at around US $ 115 billion , with only a small portion covered by insurance . 
 Reginald <unk> , a professor of civil and environmental engineering at Georgia Tech , pointed out that the massive damage of properties and houses in the earthquake area was because China did not create an adequate seismic design code until after the devastating 1976 Tangshan earthquake . <unk> said : " If the buildings were older and built prior to that 1976 earthquake , chances are they weren 't built for adequate earthquake forces . " 
 In the days following the disaster , an international reconnaissance team of engineers was dispatched to the region to make a detailed preliminary survey of damaged buildings . Their findings show a variety of reasons why many constructions failed to withstand the earthquake . 
 News reports indicate that the poorer , rural villages were hardest hit . Swaminathan Krishnan , assistant professor of civil engineering and geophysics at the California Institute of Technology said : " the earthquake occurred in the rural part of China . Presumably , many of the buildings were just built ; they were not designed , so to speak . " Swaminathan Krishnan further added : " There are very strong building codes in China , which take care of earthquake issues and seismic design issues . But many of these buildings presumably were quite old and probably were not built with any regulations overseeing them . " 
 Even with the five largest cities in Sichuan suffering only minor damage from the quake , some estimates of the economic loss run higher than US $ 75 billion , making the earthquake one of the costliest natural disasters in Chinese history . 
 = = = Later casualties = = = 
 Strong aftershocks continued to strike even months after the main quake . On May 25 , an aftershock of 6 @.@ 0 Mw ( 6 @.@ 4 Ms according to CEA ) hit northeast of the original earthquake 's epicenter , in Qingchuan County , Sichuan , causing eight deaths , 1 @,@ 000 injuries , and destroying thousands of buildings . On May 27 , two aftershocks , one 5 @.@ 2 Mw in Qingchuan County and one 5 @.@ 7 Mw in <unk> County , Shaanxi , led to the collapse of more than 420 @,@ 000 homes and injured 63 people . The same area suffered two more aftershocks of 5 @.@ 6 and 6 @.@ 0 Ms ( 5 @.@ 8 and 5 @.@ 5 Mw , respectively , according to USGS ) on July 23 , resulting in 1 death , 6 serious injuries , the collapse of hundreds of homes and damaging kilometers of highways . Pingwu County and Beichuan County , Sichuan , also northeast of Wenchuan and close to the epicenter of a 7 @.@ 2 Ms earthquake in 1976 , suffered a 6 @.@ 1 Ms aftershock ( 5 @.@ 7 Mw according to USGS ) on August 1 ; it caused 2 deaths , 345 injuries , the collapse of 707 homes , damage to over 1 @,@ 000 homes , and blocked 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) of country roads . As late as August 5 , yet another aftershock of 6 @.@ 1 Ms ( 6 @.@ 2 Mw according to USGS ) hit Qingchuan , Sichuan , causing 1 death , 32 injuries , telecommunication interruptions , and widespread hill slides blocking roads in the area including a national highway . 
 = = = = Government data = = = = 
 Executive vice governor Wei Hong confirmed on November 21 , 2008 that more than 90 @,@ 000 people in total were dead or missing in the earthquake . He stated that 200 @,@ 000 homes had been rebuilt , and 685 @,@ 000 were under reconstruction , but 1 @.@ 94 million households were still without permanent shelter . 1 @,@ 300 schools had been reconstructed , with initial relocation of 25 townships , including Beichuan and Wenchuan , two of the most devastated areas . The government spent $ 441 billion on relief and reconstruction efforts . 
 = = Rescue efforts = = 
 General Secretary and President Hu Jintao announced that the disaster response would be rapid . Just 90 minutes after the earthquake , Premier Wen Jiabao , who has an academic background in <unk> , flew to the earthquake area to oversee the rescue work . Soon afterward , the Ministry of Health said that it had sent ten emergency medical teams to Wenchuan County . On the same day , the Chengdu Military Region Command dispatched 50 @,@ 000 troops and armed police to help with disaster relief work in Wenchuan County . However , due to the rough terrain and close proximity of the quake 's epicenter , the soldiers found it very difficult to get help to the rural regions of the province . <unk> Wen ordered PLA to get in epicenter and actually started to rescue people by saying “ It is the people who have raised you . It ’ s up to you to see what to do ! Even with two legs , you must walk in there " " ( <unk> , <unk> ! <unk> , <unk> ) . " But PLA commander only listened Jiang <unk> 's order , neither Wen <unk> 's or Hu Jintao 's . The first 72 critical rescue hours were wasted . 
 The National Disaster Relief Commission initiated a " Level II emergency contingency plan " , which covers the most serious class of natural disasters . The plan rose to Level I at 22 : 15 CST , May 12 . 
 An earthquake emergency relief team of 184 people ( consisting of 12 people from the State Seismological Bureau , 150 from the Beijing Military Area Command , and 22 from the Armed Police General Hospital ) left Beijing from <unk> Airport late May 12 in two military transport planes to travel to Wenchuan County . 
 Many rescue teams , including that of the Taipei Fire Department from Taiwan , were reported ready to join the rescue effort in Sichuan as early as Wednesday . However , the Red Cross Society of China said that ( on May 13 ) " it was inconvenient currently due to the traffic problem to the hardest hit areas closest to the epicenter . " The Red Cross Society of China also stated that the disaster areas need tents , medical supplies , drinking water and food ; however it recommended donating cash instead of other items , as it had not been possible to reach roads that were completely damaged or places that were blocked off by landslides . Landslides continuously threatened the progress of a search and rescue group of 80 men , each carrying about 40 kg of relief supplies , from a motorized infantry brigade under commander Yang <unk> , as they tried to reach the ethnically Tibetan village of <unk> at a height of 4000 m above sea level in Pingwu county . The extreme terrain conditions precluded the use of helicopter evacuation , and over 300 of the Tibetan villagers were stranded in their demolished village for five days without food and water before the rescue group finally arrived to help the injured and stranded villagers down the mountain . 
 Persistent heavy rain and landslides in Wenchuan County and the nearby area badly affected rescue efforts . At the start of rescue operations on May 12 , 20 helicopters were deployed for the delivery of food , water , and emergency aid , and also the evacuation of the injured and reconnaissance of quake @-@ stricken areas . By 17 : 37 CST on May 13 , a total of over 15 @,@ 600 troops and militia reservists from the Chengdu Military Region had joined the rescue force in the heavily affected areas . A commander reported from Yingxiu Town , Wenchuan , that around 3 @,@ 000 survivors were found , while the status of the other inhabitants ( around 9 @,@ 000 ) remained unclear . The 1 @,@ 300 rescuers reached the epicenter , and 300 pioneer troops reached the seat of Wenchuan at about 23 : 30 CST . By 12 : 17 CST , May 14 , 2008 , communication in the seat of Wenchuan was partly revived . On the afternoon of May 14 , 15 Special Operations Troops , along with relief supplies and communications gear , parachuted into inaccessible Mao County , northeast of Wenchuan . 
 By May 15 , Premier Wen Jiabao ordered the deployment of an additional 90 helicopters , of which 60 were to be provided by the PLAAF , and 30 were to be provided by the civil aviation industry , bringing the total of number of aircraft deployed in relief operations by the air force , army , and civil aviation to over 150 , resulting in the largest non @-@ combat airlifting operation in People 's Liberation Army history . 
 Beijing accepted the aid of the Tzu Chi Foundation from Taiwan late on May 13 . Tzu Chi was the first force from outside the People 's Republic of China to join the rescue effort . China stated it would gratefully accept international help to cope with the quake . 
 A direct chartered cargo flight was made by China Airlines from Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport to Chengdu Shuangliu International Airport sending some 100 tons of relief supplies donated by the Tzu Chi Foundation and the Red Cross Society of Taiwan to the affected areas . Approval from mainland Chinese authorities was sought , and the chartered flight departed Taipei at 17 : 00 CST , May 15 and arrived in Chengdu by 20 : 30 CST . A rescue team from the Red Cross in Taiwan was also scheduled to depart Taipei on a Mandarin Airlines direct chartered flight to Chengdu at 15 : 00 CST on May 16 . 
 Francis Marcus of the International Federation of the Red Cross praised the Chinese rescue effort as " swift and very efficient " in Beijing on Tuesday . But he added the scale of the disaster was such that " we can 't expect that the government can do everything and handle every aspect of the needs " . The Economist noted that China reacted to the disaster " rapidly and with uncharacteristic openness " , contrasting it with Burma 's secretive response to Cyclone Nargis , which devastated that country 10 days before the earthquake . 
 On May 16 , rescue groups from South Korea , Japan , Singapore , Russia and Taiwan arrived to join the rescue effort . The United States shared some of its satellite images of the quake @-@ stricken areas with Chinese authorities . During the weekend , the US sent into China two U.S. Air Force C @-@ 17 's carrying supplies , which included tents and generators . Xinhua reported 135 @,@ 000 Chinese troops and medics were involved in the rescue effort across 58 counties and cities . 
 The Internet was extensively used for passing information to aid rescue and recovery efforts . For example , the official news agency Xinhua set up an online rescue request center in order to find the blind spots of disaster recovery . After knowing that rescue helicopters had trouble landing into the epicenter area in Wenchuan , a student proposed a landing spot online and it was chosen as the first touchdown place for the helicopters . Volunteers also set up several websites to help store contact information for victims and evacuees . On May 31 , a rescue helicopter carrying earthquake survivors and crew members crashed in fog and turbulence in Wenchuan county . No @-@ one survived . 
 Rescue efforts performed by the Chinese government were praised by western media , especially in comparison with Myanmar 's blockage of foreign aid during Cyclone Nargis , as well as China 's previous performance during the 1976 Tangshan earthquake . China 's openness during the media coverage of the Sichuan earthquake led a professor at the Peking University to say , “ This is the first time [ that ] the Chinese media has lived up to international standards ” . Los Angeles Times praised China 's media coverage of the quake of being " democratic " . 
 Rescue efforts also came from Jet Li 's One Foundation which saw the martial arts actor Wu Jing assisting in the efforts . 
 = = = The " quake lakes " = = = 
 As a result of the magnitude 7 @.@ 9 earthquake and the many strong aftershocks , many rivers became blocked by large landslides , which resulted in the formation of " quake lakes " behind the blockages ; these massive amounts of water were pooling up at a very high rate behind the natural landslide dams and it was feared that the blockages would eventually crumble under the weight of the ever @-@ increasing water mass , potentially endangering the lives of millions of people living downstream . As of May 27 , 2008 , 34 lakes had formed due to earthquake debris blocking and damming rivers , and it was estimated that 28 of them were still of potential danger to the local people . Entire villages had to be evacuated because of the resultant flooding . 
 The most precarious of these quake @-@ lakes was the one located in the extremely difficult terrain at Mount <unk> in Beichuan County , Sichuan , accessible only by foot or air ; an Mi @-@ <unk> heavy lift helicopter belonging to the China Flying Dragon Special Aviation Company was used to bring heavy <unk> tractors to the affected location . This operation was coupled with the work done by PLAAF Mi @-@ 17 helicopters bringing in PLA engineering corps , explosive specialists and other personnel to join 1 @,@ 200 soldiers who arrived on site by foot . Five tons of fuel to operate the machinery was airlifted to the site , where a sluice was constructed to allow the safe discharge of the bottlenecked water . Downstream , more than 200 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from <unk> by June 1 in anticipation of the dam bursting . 
 = = Domestic reactions = = 
 The State Council declared a three @-@ day period of national mourning for the quake victims starting from May 19 , 2008 ; the PRC 's National Flag and Regional Flags of Hong Kong and Macau Special Administrative Regions flown at half mast . It was the first time that a national mourning period had been declared for something other than the death of a state leader , and many have called it the biggest display of mourning since the death of Mao Zedong . At 14 : 28 CST on May 19 , 2008 , a week after the earthquake , the Chinese public held a moment of silence . People stood silent for three minutes while air defense , police and fire sirens , and the horns of vehicles , vessels and trains sounded . Cars and trucks on Beijing 's roads also came to a halt . People spontaneously burst into cheering " Zhongguo <unk> ! " ( Let 's go , China ! ) and " Sichuan <unk> " ( Let 's go , Sichuan ! ) afterwards . 
 The Ningbo Organizing Committee of the Beijing Olympic torch relay announced that the relay , scheduled to take place in Ningbo during national morning , would be suspended for the duration of the mourning period . The route of the torch through the country was scaled down , and there was a minute of silence when the next leg started in city of Ruijin , Jiangxi on the Wednesday after the quake . 
 Many websites converted their home page to black and white ; Sina.com and <unk> , major internet portals , limited their homepages to news items and removed all advertisements . Chinese video sharing websites Youku and <unk> displayed a black background and placed multiple videos showing earthquake footage and news reports . The Chinese version of MSN , <unk> , also displayed banner ads about the earthquake and the relief efforts . Other entertainment websites , including various gaming sites , such as the Chinese servers for World of Warcraft , had shut down altogether , or had corresponding links to earthquake donations . After the moments of silence , in Tiananmen Square , crowds spontaneously burst out cheering various slogans , including " Long Live China " . Casinos in Macau closed down . 
 All Mainland Chinese television stations ( along with some stations in Hong Kong and expatriate communities ) cancelled all regularly @-@ scheduled programming , displayed their logo in grayscale , and replaced their cancelled programmes with live earthquake footage from CCTV @-@ 1 for multiple days after the quake . Even pay television channels ( such as Channel V ) had their programmes suspended . 
 On the evening of May 18 , CCTV @-@ 1 hosted a special four @-@ hour program called The Giving of Love ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ) , hosted by regulars from the CCTV New Year 's Gala and round @-@ the @-@ clock coverage anchor Bai <unk> . It was attended by a wide range of entertainment , literary , business and political figures from mainland China , Hong Kong , Singapore and Taiwan . Donations of the evening totalled 1 @.@ 5 billion Chinese Yuan ( ~ US $ 208 million ) . Of the donations , CCTV gave the biggest corporate contribution at ¥ 50 million . Almost at the same time in Taiwan , a similarly themed programme was on air hosted by the sitting president Ma Ying @-@ jeou . In June , Hong Kong actor Jackie Chan , who donated $ 1 @.@ 57 million to the victims , made a music video alongside other artists entitled " Promise " ; the song was composed by Andy Lau . The Artistes 512 Fund Raising Campaign , an 8 @-@ hour fundraising marathon , was held on June 1 in Hong Kong ; it was attended by some 200 Sinosphere musicians and celebrities . In Singapore , MediaCorp Channel 8 hosted a ' live ' programme <unk> to raise funds for the victims . 
 = = Collapse of schoolhouses = = 
 Although the Chinese government was initially praised for its response to the quake ( especially in comparison to Myanmar 's ruling military junta 's blockade of aid during Cyclone Nargis ) , it then saw an erosion in confidence over the school construction scandal . 
 The central government estimates that over 7 @,@ 000 inadequately engineered schoolrooms collapsed in the earthquake . Chinese citizens have since invented a catch phrase : " tofu @-@ dregs schoolhouses " ( Chinese : <unk> ) , to mock both the quality and the quantity of these inferior constructions that killed so many school children . Due to the one @-@ child policy , many families lost their only child when schools in the region collapsed during the earthquake . Consequently , Sichuan provincial and local officials have lifted the restriction for families whose only child was either killed or severely injured in the disaster . So @-@ called " illegal children " under 18 years of age may be registered as legal replacements for their dead siblings ; if the dead child was illegal , no further outstanding fines would apply . Reimbursement would not , however , be offered for fines that were already levied . 
 On May 29 , 2008 , government officials began inspecting the ruins of thousands of schools that collapsed , searching for clues about why they crumbled . Thousands of parents around the province have accused local officials and builders of cutting corners in school construction , citing that after the quake other nearby buildings were little damaged . In the aftermath of the quake , many local governments promised to formally investigate the school collapses , but as of July 17 , 2008 across Sichuan , parents of children lost in collapsed schools complained they had yet to receive any reports . Local officials urged them not to protest but the parents demonstrated and demanded an investigation . Furthermore , censors discouraged stories of poorly built schools from being published in the media and there was an incident where police drove the protestors away . 
 In the China Digital Times an article reports a close analysis by an alleged Chinese construction engineer known online as “ Book Blade ” ( <unk> ) , who stated : 
 " ... because of our nation ’ s particular brand of education , our children are fed 20 years of Marxist philosophy with Chinese characteristics — a philosophy that has nothing to say about saving lives ... School construction is the worst . First , there ’ s not enough capital . Schools in poor areas have small budgets and , unlike schools in the cities , they can ’ t collect huge fees , so they ’ re pressed for money . With construction , add in exploitation by government officials , education officials , school managers , etc. and you can imagine what ’ s left over for the actual building of schools . When earthquake prevention standards are raised , government departments , major businesses , etc. will all appraise and reinforce their buildings . But these schools with their 70s @-@ era buildings , no @-@ one pays attention to them . Because of this , the older school buildings suffer from inadequate protection while the new buildings have been shoddily constructed . " 
 On Children 's Day , June 1 , 2008 , many parents went to the rubble of schools to mourn for their children . The surviving children , who were mostly living in relief centres , performed ceremonies marking the special day , but also acknowledging the earthquake . 
 Ye Zhiping , the principal of <unk> Middle School in <unk> , one of the largest in An County , has been credited with proactive action that spared the lives of all 2 @,@ 323 pupils in attendance when the earthquake happened . During a three @-@ year period that ended in 2007 , he oversaw a major overhaul of his school . During that time he obtained more than 400 @,@ 000 yuan ( US $ 60 @,@ 000 ) from the county education department , money used to widen and strengthen concrete pillars and the balcony railing of all four storeys of his school , as well as secure its concrete floors . 
 The AP reported that " The state @-@ controlled media has largely ignored the issue , apparently under the propaganda bureau 's instructions . Parents and volunteers who have questioned authorities have been detained and threatened . " 
 However , Reuters reported in June that , to date , Chinese prosecutors have joined an official inquiry into ten collapsed schools during May 's devastating earthquake to gain first @-@ hand material of construction quality at the collapsed schools , launch preliminary inquiries and prepare for possible investigations into professional crime . It was also reported that safety checks were to be carried out at schools across China after last month 's earthquake . 
 The New York Times reported that " government officials in Beijing and Sichuan have said they are investigating the collapses . In an acknowledgment of the weakness of building codes in the countryside , the National Development and Reform Commission said on May 27 that it had drafted an amendment to improve construction standards for primary and middle schools in rural areas . Experts are reviewing the draft , the commission said . " To limit protests , officials pushed parents to sign a document , which forbade them from holding protests , in exchange of money , but some who refused to sign were threatened . The payment amounts varied from school to school but were approximately the same . In <unk> , parents were offered a package valued at 8 @,@ 800 USD in cash and a per @-@ parent pension of nearly 5 @,@ 600 USD . Furthermore , officials used other methods of silencing : riot police officers broke up protests by parents ; the authorities set up cordons around the schools ; and officials ordered the Chinese news media to stop reporting on school collapses . 
 Besides parents , Liu <unk> ( <unk> ) , a Sichuan school teacher , was detained on June 25 , 2008 for " disseminating rumors and destroying social order " about the Sichuan earthquake . Liu ’ s family was later told that he was being investigated on suspicion of the crime of inciting subversion . Liu had travelled to the Shifang , taken photos of collapsed school buildings , and put them online . He had also expressed his anger at “ the shoddy tofu @-@ dregs buildings ” ( <unk> ) in a media interview . He was ordered to serve one year of re @-@ education through labor ( RTL ) . According to the organization Human Rights in China , Liu has been released to serve his RTL sentence outside of the labor camp . 
 On May 15 , 2008 <unk> York of the <unk> reported that the shoddily constructed buildings are commonly called " tofu buildings " because builders cut corners by replacing steel rods with thin iron wires for concrete re @-@ <unk> ; using inferior grade cement , if any at all ; and using fewer bricks than they should . One local was quoted in the article as saying that " the supervising agencies did not check to see if it met the national standards . " 
 In January 2010 , Hong Kong @-@ based English newspaper The Standard reported that writer Tan Zuoren attempted to document shoddy construction that may have led to massive casualties in schools , was sentenced to in prison ostensibly for his writing an article in 2007 in support of the pro @-@ democracy movement in 1989 . 
 = = Foreign and domestic aid = = 
 Because of the magnitude of the quake , and the media attention on China , foreign nations and organizations immediately responded to the disaster by offering condolences and assistance . On May 14 , UNICEF reported that China formally requested the support of the international community to respond to the needs of affected families . 
 = = = Mainland China = = = 
 By May 14 , the Ministry of Civil Affairs stated that 10 @.@ 7 billion yuan ( approximately US $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ) had been donated by the Chinese public . Houston Rockets center Yao Ming , one of the country 's most popular sports icons , gave $ 214 @,@ 000 and $ 71 @,@ 000 to the Red Cross Society of China . The association has also collected a total of $ 26 million in donations so far . Other multinational firms located in China have also announced large amounts of donations . 
 The Red Cross Society of China flew 557 tents and 2 @,@ 500 quilts valued at 788 @,@ 000 yuan ( US $ 113 @,@ 000 ) to Wenchuan County . The Amity Foundation already began relief work in the region and has earmarked US $ 143 @,@ 000 for disaster relief . The Sichuan Ministry of Civil Affairs said that they have provided 30 @,@ 000 tents for those left homeless . 
 Central State @-@ owned enterprises have <unk> donated more than $ 48 @.@ 6 million . China National Petroleum Corp and Sinopec donated 10 million yuan each to the disaster area . 
 Following the earthquake , donations were made by people from all over mainland China , with booths set up in schools , at banks , and around gas stations . People also donated blood , resulting in according to Xinhua long line @-@ ups in most major Chinese cities . Many donated through text messaging on mobile phones to accounts set up by China Unicom and China Mobile By May 16 , the Chinese government had allocated a total of $ 772 million for earthquake relief so far , up sharply from $ 159 million from May 14 . 
 On May 16 China stated it had also received $ 457 million in donated money and goods for rescue efforts so far , including $ 83 million from 19 countries and four international organizations . Saudi Arabia was the largest aid donor to China , providing close to € 40 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in financial assistance , and an additional € 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 worth of relief materials . 
 = = First anniversary = = 
 On May 12 , 2009 , China marked the first anniversary of the quake with a moment of silence as people across the nation remembered the dead . The government also opened access to the sealed ruins of the Beichuan county seat for three days , after which it will be frozen in time as a state earthquake relic museum , to remind people of the terrible disaster . There were also several concerts across the country to raise money for the survivors of the quake . 
 However questions still remain , as some of the corrupt government officials have still not been brought to justice , while the many families who lost their only child , are still seeking compensation and justice to what had happened . According to the Times , many parents were warned by the government not to stage a protest under the threat of arrest . 
 = = Completion of works = = 
 In 2008 , State Council established a counterpart support plan ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . The plan is to arrange 19 eastern and central provinces and municipalities to help 18 counties , on " one province to one affected county " basis . The plan spanned 3 years , and cost no less than one percent of the province or municipality 's budget . 
 In 2012 , vice governor Wei Hong announced that the restoration and reconstruction are completed : 
 Wei said that 99 @.@ 5 percent of the budget , or 865 @.@ 8 billion yuan ( 137 @.@ 5 billion U.S. dollars ) , has been invested in post @-@ quake reconstruction efforts , and 99 percent of 29 @,@ 692 related projects have been completed . . . . Local governments have successfully helped more than 12 million people in rural and urban areas repair their houses , and have relocated 200 @,@ 000 farmers who lost their farmlands , the vice governor added . 
 = = Precursors and <unk> = = 
 The earthquake was the worst to strike the Sichuan area in over 30 years . Following the quake , experts and the general public sought information on whether or not the earthquake could have been predicted in advance , and whether or not studying statistics related to the quake could result in better prediction of earthquakes in the future . Earthquake prediction is not yet established science ; there was no consensus within the scientific community that earthquake " prediction " is possible . 
 In 2002 , Chinese geologist Chen <unk> published a Seismic Risk Analysis study in which he came to the conclusion that beginning with 2003 , attention should be paid to the possibility of an earthquake with a magnitude of over 7 @.@ 0 occurring in Sichuan region . He based his study on statistical correlation . That Sichuan is a seismically active area has been discussed for years prior to the quake , though few studies point to a specific date and time . 
 In a press conference held by the State Council Information Office the day after the earthquake , geologist Zhang <unk> , deputy director of CEA 's Seismic Monitoring Network Center , restated that earthquake prediction was a global issue , in the sense that no proven methods exist , and that no prediction notification was received before the earthquake . Seismologist Gary Gibson of Monash University in Australia told Deutsche Presse @-@ Agentur that he also did not see anything that could be regarded as having ' predicted ' the earthquake 's occurrence . 
 The earthquake also provided opportunities for researchers to retrofit data in order to model future earthquake predictions . Using data from the <unk> Lanzhou geomagnetic observatory , geologists Lazo <unk> from the Ss . Cyril and Methodius University of Skopje in Macedonia and <unk> <unk> from the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences attempted to establish a " time prediction method " through collecting statistics on geomagnetism with tidal gravitational potential . Using this method , they were said to have predicted the time of the 2008 Sichuan earthquake with an accuracy of ± 1 day . The same study , however , acknowledges the limitation of earthquake prediction models , and does not mention that the location of the quake could be accurately predicted . 
 An article in Science suggested that the construction and filling of the Zipingpu Dam may have triggered the earthquake . The chief engineer of the Sichuan Geology and Mineral Bureau said that the sudden shift of a huge quantity of water into the region could have relaxed the tension between the two sides of the fault , allowing them to move apart , and could have increased the direct pressure on it , causing a violent rupture . The effect was " 25 times more " than a year 's worth of natural stress from tectonic movement . The government had disregarded warnings about so many large @-@ scale dam projects in a seismically active area . Researchers have been denied access to seismological and geological data to examine the cause of the quake further . 
 Malaysia @-@ based <unk> <unk> conducted an interview with former researcher at the China Seismological Bureau Geng <unk> ( <unk> ) , in which Geng claimed that a confidential written report was sent to the State Seismological Bureau on April 30 , 2008 , warning about the possible occurrence of a significant earthquake in <unk> Prefecture region of Sichuan around May 8 , with a range of 10 days before or after the quake . Geng , while acknowledging that earthquake prediction was broadly considered problematic by the scientific community , believed that " the bigger the earthquake , the easier it is to predict . " Geng had long attempted to establish a correlation between the occurrence of droughts and earthquakes ; Premier Zhou Enlai reportedly took an interest in Geng 's work . Geng 's drought @-@ earthquake correlation theory was first released in 1972 , and said to have successfully predicted the 1975 <unk> and 1976 Tangshan earthquakes . The same <unk> <unk> article pointed out the inherent difficulties associated with predicting earthquakes . In response , an official with the Seismological Bureau stated that " earthquake prediction is widely acknowledged around the world to be difficult from a scientific standpoint . " The official also denied that the Seismological Bureau had received reports predicting the earthquake . 
 = Moondram Pirai = 
 Moondram Pirai ( English : The crescent seen on the third day following new moon day ) is a 1982 Indian Tamil @-@ language romantic drama film written , directed and filmed by Balu Mahendra . The film features Kamal Haasan and Sridevi in the lead roles , while Silk Smitha , Poornam Vishwanathan and Y. G. Mahendra play supporting roles . The music for the film was composed by Ilaiyaraaja , with lyrics written by Kannadasan , Vairamuthu and Gangai Amaran . It also featured the last song written by Kannadasan to be recorded before his death in 1981 . 
 Moondram Pirai is about a school teacher , R. Srinivas , who rescues a woman , Bhagyalakshmi , who is suffering from retrograde amnesia , from a brothel , and protects her in his house located in Ketti . The rest of the film shows how Bhagyalakshmi recovers her memory with Srinivas ' help . Moondram Pirai is based on Balu Mahendra 's brief relationship with actress Shoba , who died in 1980 , shortly after their marriage . It was shot in Ketti , a small town situated close to Ooty , with further shooting also taking place in Bangalore . A total of 30 days was taken to complete the filming , using 36 @,@ 000 feet of film negative . 
 Moondram Pirai was released on 19 February 1982 to positive critical reception . It was a box office success and had a theatrical run of 379 days at the Sathyam Theatre , and 200 days in other multiplexes . The film won two National Film Awards : Best Actor for Haasan , and Best Cinematography for Mahendra . It also won the Best Director Award for Mahendra at the Filmfare Awards , and five Tamil Nadu State Film Awards , including Best Film ( third prize ) , Best Actor ( Haasan ) and Best Actress ( Sridevi ) . The film was dubbed in Telugu under the title Vasantha Kokila and was released on the same day as the original version . Mahendra remade the film in Hindi as Sadma , with Haasan , Sridevi and Smita reprising their roles from the original version . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bhagyalakshmi , a young woman , has a car accident while returning from a party and is hospitalised with severe head injuries . When she recovers , she is diagnosed with retrograde amnesia and she fails to recognise her own parents . She mentally regresses to the state of a child . While she is undergoing treatment , she is kidnapped and sold to the madam of a brothel . Srinivas , also known as Cheenu , comes to Chennai to meet his old friend . Together , they visit the brothel to relax . The madam sends Bhagyalakshmi , renamed Vijaya , to his room . Cheenu realises that she is mentally still a child and pities her . He learns that she is from a cultured family , and that she was kidnapped and forced into prostitution . 
 Cheenu returns the next day and , after paying a huge sum to the madam , takes Vijaya out , supposedly on a pleasure trip . He takes her away to Ketti , where he is working as a school teacher . He takes her to his residence , where he protects her and also <unk> her like a child . Viji , as she is called by Cheenu , has completely forgotten her past and becomes very close to him . When Viji accidentally spills ink over Cheenu 's documents , angering him , their relationship is threatened , but they reconcile . Later , a local woodcutter named Nataraj lusts for Viji and nearly assaults her , but she manages to save herself . When she tells Cheenu about it , he becomes livid with rage and almost kills Nataraj , but is stopped by his neighbours who were informed of the incident by Viji . Meanwhile , the wife of Cheenu 's headmaster is attracted to Cheenu , though he does not reciprocate her feelings . 
 Viji 's father Vedachalam , who was searching her through the police , releases a newspaper advertisement about his lost daughter . A co @-@ passenger who had travelled with Cheenu and Viji from Chennai to Ooty by train gives them a lead . Cheenu takes Viji to an Ayurvedic medical practitioner and leaves her there for treatment for a day . In his absence , the police come to his house searching for Viji . Finally , the police learn that Viji is getting treated at the doctor 's place and reach there . Cheenu is unable to come as he is afraid of police action . The treatment goes through successfully . Viji regains her memory and completely forgets about the period between her accident and recovery . Vedachalam and his wife are happy and decide to leave . From the doctor , Vedachalam learns that the person who had brought her there had been taking good care of their daughter ; he withdraws his police complaint and they begin their journey to Chennai with Viji . 
 After the police leave , Cheenu comes running after the car in which Viji is travelling . He follows them to the railway station and tries to gain the attention of Viji , but she is unable to recognise him . Cheenu acts like a dancing monkey that Viji developed a liking for , but Viji , unable to comprehend , thinks that he is insane and begging for food . Cheenu continues his futile attempts to gain her attention , and the train eventually leaves with Viji not recognising him . Cheenu , who was hurt while chasing her car and trying to get her attention , is left alone , heartbroken . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Kamal Haasan as R. Srinivas " Cheenu " 
 Sridevi as <unk> / Vijaya " Viji " 
 Y. G. Mahendra as Srinivas 's friend 
 Silk Smitha as the school headmaster 's wife 
 Ganthimathi as the brothel owner 
 Poornam Vishwanathan as the school headmaster 
 S. R. <unk> as Vedachalam 
 <unk> as the Ayurveda practitioner 
 Nataraj as the woodcutter 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Moondram Pirai was produced by G. Thyagarajan and G. Saravanan under their production banner , Sathya Jyothi Films . A. Ramaswamy and D. Vasu were in charge of art direction and editing respectively . In an interview with Anu Hasan on the talk show <unk> with Anu , Balu Mahendra stated that Moondram Pirai was inspired by the suicide of his wife , actress Shoba ; she was 17 years old at the time of her death in 1980 . According to S. Shiva Kumar of The Hindu , the climax of the film was a clear allusion to how Shoba left Mahendra without warning . A Kannada film , <unk> <unk> , with a similar theme was also made by director Puttanna Kanagal the same year . In C. B. Rao 's review of the film 's Hindi version , Sadma ( 1983 ) , the English translation of the film 's title , Moondram Pirai is given as " The Third Generation . " The title Moondram Pirai literally means " the crescent seen on the third day following new moon day . " 
 According to Kamal Haasan , when Mahendra narrated the story of Moondram Pirai to him , Haasan listened to Mahendra for about twenty minutes before accepting the role of Cheenu . The role of Bhagyalakshmi was initially offered to Sripriya , who could not accept the role due to her prior commitments , before Sridevi was chosen for it . Poornam Vishwanathan was cast as the school headmaster , while Silk Smitha , who had done around 20 films by then and was considered only for performing item numbers , was cast as the sexually excited wife of Viswanathan 's character . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Moondram Pirai was shot in Ketti , a small town situated close to Ooty . Shooting also took place in Bangalore . A total of 30 days was taken to complete the filming on 36 @,@ 000 feet of film negative . Mahendra did not find hiring a train expensive at that time ; as a result , he hired a train for the film 's scene where Haasan and Sridevi depart for Ketti , and another train for the film 's climax which was shot at the Ketti railway station . Although it was raining on the day the climax was shot , Mahendra decided to continue shooting the climax even though the rain was not part of the film 's script . In the post @-@ production phase , Smitha 's voice was dubbed by Anuradha . Mahendra supervised Anuradha 's dubbing session and taught her the methods to emote the dialogues for Smitha in the film . 
 While the film was under production the team was scoffed at for making a film about a youth falling in love with an amnesiac , and that the film would not be a box office success . The film uses intense violin music in both its opening and closing credits . In April 2006 , Mahendra said that the inclusion of the song " <unk> <unk> " in the film was " absolutely unnecessary " , stating that the sole reason for its inclusion was the presence of Smitha in the song to help promote the film . The final length of the film was 3 @,@ 918 metres ( 12 @,@ 854 ft ) . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 Moondram Pirai depicts a young woman whose mental state regresses to that of a child following an accident . Sexuality and the repression of desire are dominant motifs , similar to Balu Mahendra 's previous film Moodu Pani ( 1980 ) . The film also explores the possibility of unresolved sexual tension between the protagonists . Critic K. Jeshi compares Moondram Pirai to other films based on physical and mental disabilities like Sethu ... ( 1999 ) , Pithamagan ( 2003 ) , <unk> ( 2004 ) , Chandramukhi ( 2005 ) , Anniyan ( 2005 ) and Ghajini ( 2005 ) . When asked about the reason amnesia was chosen for a disability , Mahendra said the disorder is used as a camouflage and as an excuse to portray relationships in the film . 
 Film critic Baradwaj Rangan finds the sequence where Haasan 's character , Cheenu , narrates the story of The Blue Jackal to Sridevi 's character , Bhagyalakshmi , to be a distant echo of the arc negotiated by Cheenu : " He is , after all , a nobody ( like the [ jackal ] ) who , through a salubrious twist of fate , becomes the ruler of a woman 's life , until he is restored , at the end , to the nobody he was , a fraudulent claimant to her emotions . " In his book Dispatches from the wall corner : A journey through Indian cinema , Rangan says that although Haasan is inspired by Marlon Brando , the scene where Haasan burns himself while cooking and vents his anger on Sridevi , is reminiscent of the acting style of Marcel Marceau . In another book of Rangan , Conversations with Mani Ratnam , he states that in the scene where Cheenu enters Bhagyalakshmi 's room in the brothel , there was fumbling and embarrassment , whereas in another Haasan film Nayakan ( 1987 ) , Haasan 's character , Velu Nayakar , behaves as if he has visited a brothel before . Nayakan 's director Mani Ratnam replied by saying that the two scenes are very different from one another and that it " can 't be played the same way " . 
 Hari Narayan of The Hindu compared Moondram Pirai to another Haasan film , Guna ( 1991 ) . In both narratives , the protagonist ’ s image of an ideal <unk> animate his antics . Cheenu , according to Narayan , " looks like a melange of [ John ] Keats ’ tragedy and [ Sigmund ] Freud ’ s psychoanalysis . " Narayan explains the idea of Cheenu keeping <unk> with him not only as an act of sympathy and love , but also with the intention to preserve her like a portrait . Narayan also states that the character , Robert <unk> 's ( Antonio Banderas ) attraction to Vera Cruz ( Elena Anaya ) in Pedro Almodóvar 's Spanish film The Skin I Live In ( 2011 ) , is similar to Cheenu 's attraction to Bhagyalakshmi . When Bhagyalakshmi recovers her memory and forgets him , Cheenu is hesitant to come back to his quiet existence , realising that in reality , dreams feel like its antithesis . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music of the film was composed by Ilaiyaraaja . The soundtrack was released through the record label Agi Music . The number " <unk> Kalaimane " , which is based on the <unk> raga , was written by Kannadasan in " about two minutes " time , after listening to the film 's story and the situation for the song . Kannadasan was present at the recording session of the song , which took place in September 1981 . It was the last recorded song which Kannadasan wrote before his death in October 1981 . " <unk> " was based on the Sindhu Bhairavi raga . 
 The soundtrack received positive critical reception . " <unk> <unk> " that was picturised on Haasan and Smitha developed cult status . G. Dhananjayan , in his book The Best of Tamil Cinema called the music " outstanding " , further saying that the songs contributed significantly to the success of the film . Hari Narayan of The Hindu said , " The lullaby " Kanne Kalaimane " sees the tranquillity reach a crescendo . " Another critic from The Hindu , Shankar , called " <unk> <unk> " a " dream song " . On the song , " Kanne Kalaimane " , Balu Mahendra said that it " stirs you to this day " . Lyricist Na . Muthukumar labelled " <unk> Kalaimane " as his favourite song . 
 = = Release = = 
 Moondram Pirai was given an " A " ( adults only ) certificate by the Central Board of Film Certification . According to Anand Mathew of The Quint , this was done so because of Smitha who " saunters into the film now and then striking Khajuraho inspired poses with Kamal . " The film was released on 19 February 1982 . The film was a box office success and had a theatrical run of 379 days at Sathyam Theatre , and 200 days in other multiplexes . According to its production company , Sathya Jyothi Films , Moondram Pirai received its highest distributor share in Chennai and Coimbatore . The film was also screened at <unk> , a Film Festival held at Thiruvananthapuram in September 2014 . Moondram Pirai was dubbed into Telugu under the title Vasantha Kokila and was released on the same day as the original version . The Hindi remake Sadma was released in 1983 , with Mahendra again directing while Haasan , Sridevi and Smitha reprised their roles . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Moondram Pirai received mostly positive reviews , with praise directed at the performances of the lead pair . Ananda Vikatan , in its original review of the film , dated 7 March 1982 , said , " The film gives an impression of reading a full novel in one go ... The lead actors Kamal and Sridevi have lived their roles and brought in the effect desired by the director and they are the best couple in Tamil Cinema ... Ilaiyaraaja 's background score and songs and Balu Mahendra 's photography have to be applauded " and gave the film 53 marks out of 100 . 
 Writing for The Hindu , Baradwaj Rangan called Moondram Pirai " The apotheosis of [ Balu Mahendra 's ] art " , while also opining that the film was " a superb example of how the presence of a commercially viable plot and the participation of commercially viable actors and technicians can result in art . " Another critic from The Hindu , Hari Narayan , wrote , " Throughout the narrative , a sense of uncertainty lurks in the viewer ’ s mind , the exact kind of uncertainty we get while dreaming . The knowledge that the spell would break any time . That Cheenu would be thrown back into his solitude . And that the fall from this ethereal tranquillity would be brutal , maybe even fatal . " Malathi Rangarajan described Haasan 's performance in the climax scene at the railway station as " sterling " . 
 Rediff considered the film to be a " beautiful and tragic love story " . In February 2013 , <unk> Prashanth , writing for the magazine Galatta Cinema said , " <unk> ’ s Moondram Pirai is a tragedy nevertheless , and that too one that had most of us bawling our eyes out . " He further stated that the scenes featuring the lead pair were " beautifully presented " , and concluded that " Sridevi and Kamal just outdid themselves in this one . " 
 In contrast , the magazine Aside called the film " a neon moon " and said , " There was at one time a brooding , premonitory quality about Balu Mahendra 's movies ... but ( he ) has now gone into the trade of picture postcards and pani puri . " And after a brief word of praise for Haasan 's performance in the climax ( " darkly luminescent , like a rain drenched monsoon night " ) added , " Kamal makes a very amusing monkey , but should he not rather be playing a human character ? " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Moondram Pirai attained cult status in Tamil cinema and was praised for bringing out human emotions , unconditional love and sacrifice . The film had a significant impact among the audience for its style of filmmaking , performances of the lead cast and for Ilaiyaraaja 's music . The climax scene where Haasan 's character , Cheenu , runs after Sridevi 's character , Bhagyalakshmi , who has recovered her memory but forgets the incidents that occur between her accident and recovery completely , and Cheenu trying desperately to make Bhagyalakshmi remember the time he spend with him , to no effect , became popular and was parodied many times . A. P. <unk> , in his obituary of Balu Mahendra , called him " The Moondram Pirai of Indian cinema " . Moondram Pirai is also the name of a drama written by Tamil poet <unk> . When S. Shiva Kumar of The Hindu suggested to Balu Mahendra that the film 's ending lacked logic , Mahendra said , " Believe me there ’ s no logic in life . " 
 In March 2005 , Sneha , in an interview with Rediff , listed Moondram Pirai among her favourite films . In July 2007 , S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu asked eight Tamil film directors to list their all @-@ time favourite Tamil films ; two of them – Mani Ratnam and Ameer – named Moondram Pirai . In September 2009 , singer Harini , in an interview with The Hindu , said that her favourite song is " Kanne Kalaimane " . In February 2010 , director R. Balki , in an interview with Forbes India , called Moondram Pirai as his favourite film . In October 2010 , actor Vijay said he prefers to watch films like Moondram Pirai and Mahanadi ( 1994 ) . In February 2015 , Moondram Pirai topped <unk> Sukanya of The New Indian Express ' list of " Top 5 Tamil Romances " . 
 In July 2011 , Janani Iyer said she considered a role like Sridevi 's character , Bhagyalakshmi , as " really challenging . " In March 2013 , S. Shiva Kumar of The Hindu compared the climax of Sethu ... ( 1999 ) to the climax in Moondram Pirai . In November 2013 , S. Saraswathi of Rediff included Moondram Pirai in her list of the " 10 best Films of Kamal Haasan " . In February 2014 , Arundhati said she " would love to play a role like Sridevi ’ s in Moondram Pirai " . Sridevi 's performance in the film was included in The Times of India 's 2015 list , " Sridevi : 5 times the actress bowled us with her performance " . Although no print of Moondram Pirai has survived , the film is still available on home video . Balki mentioned in an April 2016 interview with Indo @-@ Asian News Service , that Moondram Pirai " tremendously influenced " him as a filmmaker . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Balu Mahendra 's Telugu film <unk> ( 1982 ) was dubbed and released in Tamil as Kanne Kalaimane . In <unk> <unk> ( 1997 ) , Vadivelu and Senthil see Kovai Sarala , who suffers from retrograde amnesia , aboard a bus bound for another town . They try to make her remember the time they spent with her , but to no avail as she no longer remembers them . This leaves the two of them heartbroken and they sing the song " Aval <unk> <unk> " from Paar <unk> Paar ( 1963 ) to express their sadness . 
 In <unk> <unk> ( 2001 ) , <unk> ( Vivek ) pretends to have lost both his hands . His lover then promises to take care of him . The song " Kanne Kalaimane " is heard as the background music for the scene . In a comedy scene from Run ( 2002 ) , Mohan ( Vivek ) imitates Haasan 's mannerisms from the climax scene in Moondram Pirai to make his friend Shiva ( R. Madhavan ) recognise him but fails . 
 Malathi Rangarajan , in her review of Deiva Thirumagal ( 2011 ) said , " Probably because the scene of action is Ooty , the main character is mentally challenged , and the story @-@ telling sequence with Vikram and the kid is familiar , at times [ Deiva Thirumagal ] reminds you of Balu Mahendra 's inimitable <unk> Pirai . " Baradwaj Rangan compares a scene in Barfi ! ( 2012 ) , where Barfi ( Ranbir Kapoor ) goes after Shruti ( Ileana D 'Cruz ) and stumbles , to that of Moondram Pirai 's climax scene . Balu Mahendra 's defunct blog is also titled Moondram Pirai ... , named after the film . 
 = Stowaway ( Fringe ) = 
 " Stowaway " is the 17th episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 60th episode overall . It followed the Fringe team 's investigation into a woman , Dana Gray ( Paula Malcomson ) , who repeatedly but unsuccessfully tries to commit suicide . Meanwhile , Olivia continues to serve as the host for William Bell , to the dismay of most of her other team members . 
 The episode 's story was written by Akiva Goldsman , Jeff Pinkner , and J. H. Wyman , while Danielle Dispaltro contributed its teleplay . Charles Beeson served as the director . Along with Malcomson , " Stowaway " featured a guest appearance by previous Fringe actor Seth Gabel . Though Leonard Nimoy had recently retired , the writers still had storylines involving his character , leading to their decision to have Bell possess Olivia 's body . 
 " Stowaway " first aired in the United States on March 18 , 2011 to an estimated 3 @.@ 8 million viewers and a 1 @.@ 3 ratings share for adults aged between 18 and 49 . This was the series ' lowest ratings share for adults up to that point . Reviews of the episode were generally positive , as multiple critics praised Anna Torv 's Nimoy impression as well as Joshua Jackson 's reaction to it . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following from " Os " , Olivia 's ( Anna Torv ) body has been possessed by William Bell . Though he promises that no harm will come to Olivia while he seeks a suitable host for his mind , Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) demands that Bell leave Olivia in 48 hours . Bell begins searching local hospitals for a host . 
 They are alerted to eyewitness accounts of a woman who , after jumping with another man from a high roof and crashing onto a taxi parked below , simply walked away . As the Fringe team investigates , they are approached by another FBI agent , Lincoln Lee ( Seth Gabel ) , who identifies the woman as Dana Gray ( Paula Malcomson ) . Dana , who had been struck by lightning twice , was killed eighteen months earlier along with her family during a robbery of their home , but she apparently was able to walk away from the morgue . Since then , she has appeared to commit suicide with several others , but always managing to walk away . Walter ( John Noble ) and Bell , in studying Dana 's blood samples , find that her body may have been altered by several past lightning strikes , making her incapable of dying . 
 Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) and Lincoln find that Dana worked as a suicide hotline operator , and in investigating her belongings , find that she appears to have a strong desire to take her soul to heaven or hell . Lincoln comes to believe that Dana may be looking for way to have her soul " stow away " with that of another to join her family in the afterlife , and used the suicide hotline position to find those who are close to committing suicide . 
 Another man is found dead by a self @-@ inflicted bullet wound , though Dana was seen leaving his apartment . Evidence in his apartment points to the construction of a bomb , and the Fringe team suspects that Dana knows its location and may be hoping to exploit an event which will kill several people simultaneously in order to increase her own chances of death . Peter calls her , using caller ID spoofing to disguise his number as that of her late husband , and the signal allows authorities to pinpoint her location to a commuter train . The train is stopped and searched , while Dana leaves on her own with the bomb , moving it far enough away from the train . The bomb soon explodes , and when Peter and Lincoln search , they find Dana 's body nearby , finally dead , and the only fatality from the explosion . 
 Peter returns home where Walter has invited Bell to stay the evening . Bell explains that he believes that Dana was finally able to die after serving a purpose — saving the lives of the people on the train . When church bells go off nearby , Olivia 's personality slips through momentarily . Bell regains control , but expresses new @-@ found fear that his possession of Olivia 's body has become more complicated than he thought . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's teleplay was written by Danielle Dispaltro , while the story was contributed by consulting producer Akiva Goldsman and co @-@ showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman . Supernatural veteran Charles Beeson directed . The episode was shot in early February 2011 . 
 Despite previous guest actor Leonard Nimoy 's recent retirement , the writers still had plot lines concerning his character William Bell . Some months prior to the airing of " Stowaway " , Nimoy and others had noted that Bell 's character would return to Fringe . Anna Torv , who portrays Olivia , was not aware that her character would be channeling Bell until just prior to filming of the episode , and stated of the role , " This is not one I had been asking for ! " To prepare , Torv sought advice from her fellow star John Noble , as both as a friend and because Noble 's character , Walter , had spent the most time with Bell . She took further advice from the show 's dialect coach and reviewed footage of Nimoy 's previous work , though eventually she decided to jump right into the role . Noble later commented " I think the solutions she came up with – taking the essence of the man , playing with the eyebrows , simulating the voice — were really smart . We had a lot of fun doing it . " 
 Executive producers J.H. Wyman and Jeff <unk> were both impressed with Torv 's take on the role , with Wyman stating that it " just transcended all our expectations " , while Pinkner noted that Nimoy himself was " the most proud and most impressed " with the outcome . Actor Joshua Jackson found her performance " so creepy " . He explained , " In the episodes , you see I can barely look at her . I think it ended up being a good way to play Peter ’ s reaction to Olivia , but it was born out of the fact that when that voice came out of her , I was like : ‘ Oh , that ’ s just wrong ! ' " Pinkner confirmed in an interview with TVline that Bell 's appearance would last for " a couple " episodes , and also warned that " cohabitation is not as benign as William assumes it is " , a reference to problems Bell would soon have in Olivia 's body . The possessed state of Olivia has led viewers to refer to her as " Bellivia " . 
 " Stowaway " featured a guest appearance by actress Paula Malcomson , her first and only time on the show to date . Guest actor Seth Gabel had previously played just one version of character Lincoln Lee , who existed as the head of Fringe division in the parallel universe . " Stowaway " marked the first appearance of the character from the prime universe . Gabel described his prime universe character as someone who works for the FBI , " but has no idea about Fringe Division . He 's more of a desk jockey [ who ] eventually comes to believe there is much more than reality suggests " . Executive producer Jeff Pinkner described Lincoln 's introduction as " insanely fun -- the characterization Seth has created just makes you smile " . Gabel also indicated the new character would likely return for more episodes . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " Stowaway " , with the intention of having " students learn about magnetism and how magnets can be created and <unk> . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Stowaway " was watched by an estimated 3 @.@ 8 million viewers with a 1 @.@ 3 ratings share among those 18 @-@ 49 on its first broadcast . It fell 13 percent in this ratings share from the previous week 's episode . This was the lowest viewership for the show in the 18 – 49 adult demographic , though this has been partially attributed to the onset of daylight saving time and the NCAA Tournament . For that night , Fringe helped the Fox network finish in first place among the adult demographic , but it placed in third among total viewers . Time shifted viewing increased the episode 's ratings among adults by 57 percent to a 2 @.@ 2 ratings share . This was the largest increase in time shifting viewing for the week among network shows . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Television critics scribed mostly positive reviews for " Stowaway " . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Ken Tucker thought Anna Torv 's Nimoy impression was " aces , very wry and amusing , " and also praised Joshua Jackson 's acting in response to it . Like Tucker , Noel Murray from The A.V. Club also praised Torv and Jackson 's performances , and graded the episode with a B + , explaining it " was an effective episode despite all its metaphysical mumbo @-@ jumbo [ because ] Dana 's predicament was a legitimately tense one ... As she stepped on the train , I didn 't know if she was planning to save the passengers or send their souls a @-@ scattering ... the suspense itself was palpable " . Murray however admitted that " if the " villain " weren 't so sympathetic , or if the action weren 't so breathless , or if I didn 't find the Bellivia material so funny , I 'd probably be annoyed by the wacky way the Fringe writers have found to bring William Bell back . " Andrew Hanson of the Los Angeles Times noted of Torv that her " cadence of her words was dead on , and his / her interactions with everyone else in Fringe Division were pitch perfect . " He praised other facets of the episode , including how " the weekly mysteries unfold like origami " , and that introducing the prime 's version of the Lincoln character allowed the audience " to see all the weirdness of Fringe through fresh eyes " . 
 SFScope columnist Sarah Stegall also lauded Torv 's performance , noting that the actress " captures Nimoy 's staccato delivery , her growling voice , even his trick eyebrow . Not since Zachary Quinto played a young Spock in Star Trek a couple of years ago have I seen anyone so perfectly sound and move like Nimoy . " Stegall did express a wish that the characters not try to explain every case ( such as the one in the episode ) out of a belief that their explanations were often absurd ; this observation led Stegall to praise the new character of Lincoln however , as she believed , like Hanson , that the series has " been needing an Everyman in this mix for awhile , someone for whom immortality is not a commonplace . " Charlie Jane Anders of io9 was critical of the episode , remarking that " the whole ' soul magnets ' thing , which had seemed to be a throwaway comment a few episodes ago , is turning out to be sort of a weak plot device . And the whole bodily @-@ possession storyline is just perhaps one level of wackiness too far for me . I also had the feeling that this might finally be the acting challenge that was beyond Anna Torv 's considerable abilities , as her Leonard Nimoy impression quickly started to grate on my nerves . " 
 = Typhoon Kirogi ( 2000 ) = 
 Typhoon Kirogi , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Ditang , was a large typhoon that caused severe damage in Japan during early July 2000 . Forming out of an area of disturbed weather on June 30 , Kirogi initially tracked slowly towards the north . On July 3 , the storm underwent rapid intensification and attained Category 4 status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale the next day , according to the JTWC . On July 5 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) assessed the storm to have reached its peak intensity with winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) and a barometric pressure of 940 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 76 inHg ) . Over the following several days , the storm tracked towards the northeast and accelerated towards Japan . Early on July 8 , Kirogi brushed eastern Japan before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone . 
 Initial news reports stated that Kirogi produced deadly flooding in the Philippines ; however , the storm was too far from the country to have any impacts . In Japan , Kirogi produced torrential rainfall and high winds , killing five people and leaving 15 billion ( 2001 JPY , $ 140 million USD ) in damages . Flooding inundated nearly 1 @,@ 300 homes around Tokyo and high winds cut power to roughly 20 @,@ 000 residences . Three homes were destroyed in a landslide on <unk> . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Kirogi originated out of a disorganized area of showers and thunderstorms on June 30 , 2000 , associated with a weak area of low pressure , situated roughly 650 km ( 405 mi ) east of the Philippine island of Mindanao . The system remained nearly stationary for two days as it became increasingly organized . On July 1 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert as they anticipated the low to develop into a significant tropical cyclone within 24 hours . Around 0600 UTC the following day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) began monitoring the system as a tropical depression . At the same time , the JTWC also classified the system as Tropical Depression 05W and six hours later , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) began issuing advisories on the same system , classifying it as Tropical Depression Ditang . 
 Throughout the day on July 2 , the depression began to take a slow northward track in response to a mid @-@ level subtropical ridge to the east and later that day , the JTWC upgraded it to a tropical storm . Early the next day , the JMA also upgraded the system to a tropical storm , at which time it received the name Kirogi . Although a broad cyclone , convection was gradually wrapping around the southern periphery of the circulation . Several hours after being named , the JMA upgraded Kirogi to a severe tropical storm and later a typhoon . At the same time , the JTWC classified the storm as a typhoon . Upon being upgraded the typhoon featured a well @-@ developed outflow and prominent banding features consolidating around the system . 
 Not long after attaining typhoon intensity , Kirogi began to undergo rapid intensification . Roughly 18 hours later , the JTWC reported that the storm had attained its peak intensity with winds of 215 km / h ( 135 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) , equivalent to a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . By this time , the typhoon was situated roughly 870 km ( 540 mi ) southeast of Okinawa . The storm featured a 59 km ( 37 mi ) wide symmetrical eye . Early on July 5 , the JMA reported that Kirogi attained its peak intensity with winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) and a barometric pressure of 940 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 76 inHg ) . The storm was a relatively large typhoon , with a gale diameter of 520 km ( 325 mi ) . 
 Several hours after attaining peak intensity on July 5 , a mid @-@ level trough caused convection around the center of Kirogi to weaken and the eye became cloud @-@ filled . Later in the day , most of the convective bands were confined to the eastern periphery of the system . Around this time , the storm took a northeasterly track , which it maintained for several days . Increasing in forward motion , the storm began to weaken ; however , it also grew in size . By July 6 , the storm had a gale @-@ diameter of 925 km ( 575 mi ) . Gradual weakening took place as Kirogi tracked towards Japan , with both the JTWC and JMA reporting sustained winds at 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) by July 7 . Early on July 8 , the storm brushed the eastern coast of Japan near Chōshi , Chiba with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) . Several hours later , the typhoon weakened to a severe tropical storm before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone near the southeast coast of Hokkaido . By this time , the storm took a sharp eastward turn and briefly slowed before re @-@ accelerating . The remnants of the storm persisted until July 10 , at which time it dissipated to the southwest of the Aleutian Islands . 
 To measure wind speeds at the storm 's center , the Japan Meteorological Agency and Joint Typhoon Warning Center use 10 @-@ minute sustained winds and one @-@ minute sustained winds respectively . The conversion factor between 10 @-@ minute and one @-@ minute winds is <unk> The JMA 's peak intensity for Kirogi was 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained , or 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) one @-@ minute sustained . The JTWC 's peak intensity for Kirogi was 215 km / h ( 135 mph ) one @-@ minute sustained , or 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 In the typhoon 's early stages , news reports stated that the outer bands of the storm produced heavy rainfall in the Philippines , resulting in 16 fatalities . However , a meteorological analysis of the storm showed that Kirogi was not responsible for the rain ; instead , a monsoon depression that later became Typhoon Kai @-@ tak caused the flooding rains . Typhoon Kirogi was never closer than 835 km ( 520 mi ) from the Philippines . However , large swells produced by the storm caused moderate damage along coastal areas of the Philippines , forcing workers in Manila to clear debris left by the damaging waves . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 In Japan , Kirogi became the first typhoon to threaten the city of Tokyo since a storm in the 1989 Pacific typhoon season , prompting hundreds of residents to evacuate . A total of 120 flights were canceled ahead of the storm and 30 ferry services were halted due to rough seas up to 9 m ( 30 ft ) . On <unk> , 788 residents were evacuated as heavy rain from the typhoon produced landslides . Forecasters warned that upwards of 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) of rain could fall in the Tokyo region . In the city of Tokyo , Japanese officials ordered 800 residents to evacuate to shelters due to the threat of Typhoon Kirogi . 
 Since the storm weakened considerably from its peak intensity , damage was much less than initially anticipated . In all , damages from the storm amounted to 15 billion ( 2001 JPY , $ 140 million USD ) . Three people were killed by the storm , all of whom were found in irrigation ditches . The first fatality was an 81 @-@ year @-@ old man , the second was a 30 @-@ year @-@ old man who lost control of his car and crashed into a ditch , and the last fatality was a 3 @-@ year @-@ old boy who fell in a ditch near his home . Two 11 @-@ year @-@ old boys , initially reported as missing , were later found in a ditch after being swept away by flood waters . 
 About 1 @,@ 300 homes were inundated by flood waters around Tokyo and three were destroyed on <unk> by a landslide . Widespread power outages took place , leaving an estimated 20 @,@ 000 people without power in Kanagawa and Shizuoka prefectures as winds up to 177 km / h ( 110 mph ) knocked down trees and power lines . Rainfall from the storm fell at rates of 55 mm / h ( 2 @.@ 2 in / h ) . Total amounts reached 416 mm ( 16 @.@ 4 in ) in Tokyo , 400 mm ( 16 in ) on Izu Ōshima and 357 mm ( 14 @.@ 1 in ) in <unk> , Miyagi Prefecture . These rains were more than double the monthly average for July in eastern Japan . 
 Rainfall up to 182 mm ( 7 @.@ 2 in ) caused flooding throughout eastern Hokkaidō , resulting in widespread agricultural losses . Throughout Aomori Prefecture , large stretches of roads were washed out by flood waters and several thousand homes were inundated . Damage from the storm in Aomori was estimated at 600 million ( 2001 JPY , $ 6 @.@ 6 million USD ) . In Obihiro , Hokkaidō , a total of 2 @,@ 957 ha ( 7 @,@ 310 acres ) of agricultural land was inundated by flood waters . The fishing industry in Urakawa District , Hokkaidō sustained severe losses , amounting to 889 million ( 2001 JPY , $ 10 million USD ) . High winds in the district resulted in moderate roof damage to several homes , some of which lost their roofs . 
 = Berlevåg Airport = 
 Berlevåg Airport ( IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) ( Norwegian : Berlevåg lufthavn ) is a regional airport serving Berlevåg Municipality in Finnmark county , Norway . The airport is situated 2 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) northwest of the village of Berlevåg and is owned and operated by Avinor . The airport has a 880 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 890 ft ) runway aligned 06 / 24 . Services are provided by Widerøe using Dash 8 @-@ 100 aircraft to other communities in Finnmark . The airport served 6 @,@ 060 passengers in 2014 and received the most subsidies per passenger of any Avinor airport . 
 Construction of the airport started in 1943 by the Luftwaffe who stationed a detachment of Jagdgeschwader 5 ( <unk> ) there . Civilian operations started 1970 and were first provided by Norving . The airport was upgraded as part of a national program to establish regional airports and from 1974 services were taken over by Widerøe using de Havilland Canada Twin Otter aircraft . The current terminal building dates from 1988 ; Dash 8 aircraft were introduced in 1994 . There have been local proposals to expand the airport , but Avinor does not wish to pursue these . 
 = = History = = 
 During the German occupation of Norway during World War II , the German Wehrmacht was dependent on supplies to the town of Kirkenes which had to be shipped past Varanger Peninsula . The convoys were the target of bombardments from the Soviet Air Force , stationed close by on the Kola Peninsula . Originally the convoys were protected by the German Jagdgeschwader 5 based at Alta Airport . With an increasing number of raids , the Luftwaffe decided to build two airfields on <unk> , Berlevåg and Vardø Airport , <unk> 
 The Wehrmacht had become aware of the favorable location when two aircraft had performed an emergency landing at <unk> in 1941 . Construction at Berlevåg started in August 1943 and the airport received a 950 @-@ meter ( 3 @,@ 120 ft ) mixed concrete and wooden runway . The airfield received a detachment of fighter aircraft from <unk> , including the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 . A radar was installed on a hilltop close to the airport in 1944 . The airport was demolished with the German retreat from Finnmark in 1944 . The wooden runway was subsequently pillaged by locals to accumulate building materials for reconstruction . 
 Use of the airport area as a civilian airport was launched by Varangfly director Odd <unk> in 1964 . After visiting Iceland he proposed a series of short and simple airports in Finnmark which could serve the airline 's air ambulance service . A different proposal was launched in 1966 by several of the larger airlines , including Scandinavian Airlines System , Braathens SAFE and Widerøe , to establish a network of short take @-@ off and landing airports in rural areas ; Berlevåg was one of six original proposals for Finnmark . A county committee was established in 1966 to look into building small airfields in Finnmark , including Berlevåg . In the following years the municipality made investments to allow the airfield to be used for air ambulance services . Part of the motivation was Berlevåg 's poor port conditions , which often forced seaplanes to land at Kongsfjord . 
 Norving ( previously Varangfly ) started offering flights to the closed @-@ down military airport in 1970 using their newly delivered Britten @-@ Norman Islander . The background was a landing at the airfield to transport a baby to Kirkenes Hospital . The Civil Aviation Administration stated that they were not opposed to building smaller ambulance airports , but that the state 's priority was constructing a network of regional airports . The service started off with a daily round trip ordered by the district physician ; patients had priority , but the airline would transport other passengers as well . After a month a second daily round trip was introduced . 
 State funding was allocated , allowing the airport to be upgraded . The regional airport opened on 1 August 1974 , the same day as four other airports in Finnmark . Both Widerøe and Norving applied to operate the subsidized regional routes in Finnmark , which included the route to Berlevåg . Widerøe was awarded the contract in 1973 . Because of the steadily more regular flights to Berlevåg , Norving applied to the government for permission to operate these as taxi routes . While the airline had been forced to operate its taxi service on the time specifications of the customer , taxi routes would allow the airline to operate feeder services with timetables . No such permission was granted . Widerøe took over operations from 1 August 1974 using the de Havilland Canada Twin Otter . On 14 November 1980 the garage and workshop burned down ; a new building was built and opened in 1982 . The passenger terminal was expanded in 1988 with a new arrivals and departure hall . Widerøe introduced the Dash 8 in 1994 . The state and the Civil Aviation Administration took over ownership and operations of the airport from 1 January 1997 , in exchange for 2 @.@ 2 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) being paid to Berlevåg Municipality . Airport security was introduced on 1 January 2005 . 
 In the mid 2000s , Berlevåg Mayor Erik <unk> launched plans for an expansion of the airport , including both an expansion of the runway to at least 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) and the establishment of a helicopter base . The former was aimed at fish export to Asia while the latter was aimed at shuttle traffic to future oil fields in the Barents Sea . Avinor stated in 2012 that they saw no reason to look further into these plans . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The terminal building is 360 square meters ( 3 @,@ 900 sq ft ) , of which 110 square meters ( 1 @,@ 200 sq ft ) is for the public , and has a capacity for 70 passengers per hour . The control tower is integrated into the terminal building . In addition there is a separate technical building with a garage . The airport lot covers an area of 44 hectares ( 110 acres ) . 
 Berlevåg Airport is located 2 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from the village center , which is connected via County Road 271 . There is parking for ten cars at the airport . Taxis are available at the airport , but there is no bus service . 
 The runway has an asphalted area of 880 by 30 meters ( 2 @,@ 887 by 98 ft ) aligned 06 – 24 . The tarmac has parking to two Dash 8 @-@ sized aircraft . SCAT @-@ I , a Global Positioning System @-@ based landing system is under deployment . 
 Berlevåg Airport is located in an open flat area and therefore is among the most well @-@ suited sites for construction of a new primary airport in Finnmark . However , an expansion to 2 @,@ 000 meters ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) or longer will result in an all @-@ new runway having to be built . The air distance to Båtsfjord Airport is only 39 km , so some suggested a combined airport , but the road distance is 91 km , needing 1 ½ hour , and road is prone to snow storms in winter . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 Berlevåg Airport is served by Widerøe with Dash 8 @-@ 100 aircraft connecting the community with Tromsø , Kirkenes and other airports in Finnmark . The routes are operated on public service obligation with the Ministry of Transport and Communications . In 2014 the airport had 6 @,@ 060 passengers , 1 @,@ 804 aircraft movements and handled 3 tonnes of cargo , making it the second @-@ least Avinor @-@ operated airport . In 2007 there were 1 @,@ 878 aircraft movements , consisting of 1 @,@ 725 scheduled flights , 106 ambulance flights and 47 other flights . Of Avinor 's 45 airports , Berlevåg has the largest per @-@ passenger deficit , of NOK 3 @,@ 216 . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 11 March 1982 Widerøe Flight 933 crashed into the Barents Sea between Berlevåg and Mehamn Airport , after having made two intermediate stops since leaving Kirkenes Airport , Høybuktmoen . All fifteen people on board the Twin Otter were killed . The accident was caused by structural failure in the rudder and vertical stabilizer following severe clear @-@ air turbulence . A conspiracy theory arose concerning a collision with a British Harrier fighter , which resulted in four investigations — none which found any evidence of a collision . 
 = Aurelio López = 
 Aurelio Alejandro López Rios ( September 21 , 1948 – September 22 , 1992 ) was a Mexican professional baseball player . After pitching for several years in the Mexican League , he spent eleven seasons ( 1974 , 1978 – 87 ) with four teams in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He acquired the nickname " Señor Smoke " in Detroit , while he was known as " El Buitre de Tecamachalco " ( The Vulture of Tecamachalco ) in Mexico . López was discovered in his hometown by Mexican League scouts and converted from a starting pitcher to a relief pitcher . 
 López led the Mexico City Reds to the 1974 Mexican League World Series , then made a brief MLB debut with the Kansas City Royals before returning to the Mexican League . López was named the 1977 Mexican League Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) . He returned to the major leagues with the St. Louis Cardinals in 1978 and pitched for the Detroit Tigers between 1979 and 1985 . López finished seventh in the Cy Young Award voting in 1979 . He earned a 10 – 1 record and 14 saves for Detroit 's 1984 World Series championship team . 
 López returned to the postseason with Houston in 1986 , but he was the losing pitcher in Game Five of that year 's National League Championship Series . By the end of his MLB career , López earned a 62 – 36 win – loss record , 93 saves and a 3 @.@ 56 earned run average ( ERA ) . After his retirement from baseball , López served as municipal president of his hometown of Tecamachalco , Puebla , Mexico from 1989 until his death . He was killed in an automobile accident in 1992 . López was inducted into the Mexican Professional Baseball Hall of Fame the following year . 
 = = Early life = = 
 López was born on September 21 , 1948 in Tecamachalco , Puebla , Mexico , to Aurelio López Hernández of Veracruz and Félix Rios Torres of Tecamachalco . He grew up with five siblings . In his youth , López enjoyed both soccer and baseball but chose to pursue the latter , which was in its peak in Mexico ; he found it more difficult to locate practice facilities for soccer . He studied public administration at the Autonomous University of Puebla . 
 López caught the attention of scout Ramon " La Chita " García of the Mexico City Reds in the Mexican League . He debuted with the team 's minor @-@ league affiliate in Las <unk> in 1967 . He was promoted to the parent club the next season at the age of 19 . After starting the 1969 season with Mexico City , López joined the Minatitlán Red Devils . In 1970 , López rejoined Mexico City . During his time in the Mexican League , he was converted from starter to reliever by coach Wilfredo <unk> . 
 The Kansas City Royals purchased López 's contract in August 1974 , shortly after he led the Mexico City Reds to the Mexican League World Series title in four straight games . The Royals also purchased the contracts of Mexican League players Orlando Cepeda and 16 @-@ year @-@ old Germán Barranca in the same month . The Royals planned to use López in the September pennant race and throughout the next season . Lopez pitched in eight games in 1974 , and he was bought back by the Mexico City Reds in early 1975 . 
 During the 1977 Mexican League season , López earned a 19 – 3 win @-@ loss record , a 2 @.@ 01 ERA and 165 strikeouts over 157 innings in 73 games . Despite being a closer , he was fifth in the league in wins , and he set a new single @-@ season save record ( 30 ) . He was named the league 's MVP . For several years in the mid- to late @-@ 1970s , López pitched winter baseball in the Mexican Pacific League . He broke league records by leading the league in games pitched three times , by earning eight consecutive relief wins in 1977 – 78 , and by leading the league in relief appearances in four consecutive seasons . Among Mexican baseball fans , López became known as " El Buitre de Tecamachalco " ( The Vulture of Tecamachalco ) . 
 = = MLB career = = 
 López 's contract was purchased by the St. Louis Cardinals from Mexico City on October 26 , 1977 . He joined the Springfield Redbirds of the Class AAA American Association for 1978 , but returned to the major leagues during the 1978 season , earning a 4 – 2 record with the St. Louis Cardinals . After one season in St. Louis , López was traded to the Detroit Tigers with Jerry Morales for Jack Murphy and Bob Sykes . López posted some of his best individual statistics in the 1979 season , when he had a 10 – 5 win – loss record , 106 strikeouts , and a 2 @.@ 41 ERA ( an Adjusted ERA + of 181 ) . He was third in the AL in saves ( 21 ) and seventh in the Cy Young Award voting . López earned another 21 saves in 1980 . In the 1981 season , he shared closer responsibilities and collected only three saves before the 1981 Major League Baseball strike ended the season . 
 López suffered from shoulder problems during spring training in 1982 , and he was demoted to Detroit 's Class AAA minor @-@ league affiliate in Evansville by July . He was called back up to Detroit on September 1 , but later that month he shocked his teammates by announcing that he was giving up his MLB career and returning to Mexico . López said that his reasons were personal , and he cited his family , the education of his children and the Mexican economy as motivating factors for the decision . He came out of retirement and returned to Detroit in time for the 1983 season . In February 1983 , López became the first player in MLB history to receive a pay cut through salary arbitration . López had earned $ 285 @,@ 000 in 1982 , asked for $ 315 @,@ 000 for 1983 and was awarded $ 250 @,@ 000 . He finished 1983 with a 9 – 8 record , 2 @.@ 81 ERA and 18 saves . 
 López is perhaps best known for his role as the setup reliever for the Tigers during their 1984 championship season , when he finished with a 10 – 1 record , 14 saves , and a 2 @.@ 94 ERA . López had a 1 – 0 record in both the 1984 American League Championship Series ( ALCS ) and 1984 World Series , and he did not give up an earned run in over six innings pitched that postseason . He faced seven batters in Game Five of the 1984 World Series , retiring them all . After the pitcher got out of two extra @-@ inning jams to earn a 1984 ALCS win , Detroit manager Sparky Anderson said , " Nothing surprises me about Lopez . I 've had him for five years and believe me , there 's nothing like him . He 's got heart and there is none better . He 's one of the all @-@ time hearts . " While in Detroit , López had earned the nickname " Señor Smoke " , as he hailed from Mexico and threw a powerful fastball . 
 By early 1985 , López stated his intentions to enter free agency after the season . He placed his Detroit home up for sale , but appeared to soften when Detroit opened to the possibility of new contract negotiations . He said that he wanted to pitch another year or two and then enter the fast food business in Detroit . In late May , the Associated Press reported that López and Detroit reached a " gentleman 's agreement " which would allow the pitcher to finish his career in Detroit , though no contract was signed . López finished the 1985 season with a 3 – 7 record and five saves . The Tigers made López a free agent in November of that year . He temporarily retired again in early 1986 before signing with the Houston Astros . 
 López reached the postseason again that year with Houston . In the 1986 National League Championship Series , he pitched 1 1 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings in Game Two , but he was the losing pitcher in Game Six when the New York Mets won the series . López pitched the fourteenth through sixteenth innings and surrendered the lead twice . During spring training before the 1987 season , López was arrested in Florida on charges of driving while intoxicated and driving with a suspended license . He earned his final major league save on May 12 , 1987 . He finished his MLB career with a 62 – 36 win @-@ loss record , 93 saves and a 3 @.@ 56 earned run average . López 's career save total was the highest among Mexican pitchers in MLB until Joakim Soria surpassed the mark in 2010 . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After retiring from baseball , López moved back to Tecamachalco . He was elected municipal president of the city in 1990 , a position that he held until his death . The post is equivalent to that of mayor . Early in his political service , he oversaw the installation of new water and drainage systems . Facing great opposition from the previous ruling family and even enduring shots fired at his home , he described his post as " like coming into a game with the bases loaded . " As late as 1991 , López mentioned the possibility of returning to baseball in a coaching role . 
 López was killed in an auto accident a day after his 44th birthday in <unk> , San Luis Potosí . He was driving a car that overturned , and he was thrown from the vehicle . His wife Celia and another passenger were injured in the crash . López was buried in Tecamachalco Cemetery . He , Aurelio Rodríguez and Aurelio Monteagudo are the only three players in MLB history named Aurelio , and all three were killed in car accidents between the ages of 44 and 53 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 López was inducted into the Mexican Professional Baseball Hall of Fame in 1993 . He has been described as the pitcher with the highest velocity in Mexican baseball history . López had a reputation as a friendly player who got along well with other members of the team . Former Astros teammate Terry Puhl described López as " always upbeat , " while fellow Astro Craig Reynolds noted that López was " everybody 's friend . " 
 Detroit rock band Electric Six named their album Señor Smoke ( 2005 ) in López 's honor . In September 2012 , a youth sports complex in Tecamachalco was named in honor of López . 
 = Adrian Boult = 
 Sir Adrian Cedric Boult , CH ( / <unk> / ; 8 April 1889 – 22 February 1983 ) was an English conductor . Brought up in a prosperous mercantile family , he followed musical studies in England and at Leipzig , Germany , with early conducting work in London for the Royal Opera House and Sergei Diaghilev 's ballet company . His first prominent post was conductor of the City of Birmingham Orchestra in 1924 . When the British Broadcasting Corporation appointed him director of music in 1930 , he established the BBC Symphony Orchestra and became its chief conductor . The orchestra set standards of excellence that were rivalled in Britain only by the London Philharmonic Orchestra ( LPO ) , founded two years later . 
 Forced to leave the BBC in 1950 on reaching retirement age , Boult took on the chief conductorship of the LPO . The orchestra had declined from its peak of the 1930s , but under his guidance its fortunes were revived . He retired as its chief conductor in 1957 , and later accepted the post of president . Although in the latter part of his career he worked with other orchestras , including the London Symphony Orchestra , the Philharmonia Orchestra , the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra , and his former orchestra , the BBC Symphony , it was the LPO with which he was primarily associated , conducting it in concerts and recordings until 1978 , in what was widely called his " Indian Summer " . 
 Boult was known for his championing of British music . He gave the first performance of his friend Gustav Holst 's The Planets , and introduced new works by , among others , Bliss , Britten , Delius , Tippett , Vaughan Williams and Walton . In his BBC years he introduced works by foreign composers , including Bartók , Berg , Stravinsky , Schoenberg and Webern . A modest man who disliked the limelight , Boult felt as comfortable in the recording studio as on the concert platform , making recordings throughout his career . From the mid @-@ 1960s until his retirement after his last sessions in 1978 he recorded extensively for EMI . As well as a series of recordings that have remained in the catalogue for three or four decades , Boult 's legacy includes his influence on prominent conductors of later generations , including Colin Davis and Vernon Handley . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Boult was born in Chester , Cheshire , in North West England , the second child and only son of Cedric Randal Boult ( 1853 – 1950 ) , and his wife Katharine Florence née Barman ( d . 1927 ) . Cedric Boult was a Justice of the Peace and a successful businessman connected with Liverpool shipping and the oil trade ; Cedric and his family had " a Liberal Unitarian outlook on public affairs " with a history of philanthropy . When Boult was two years old the family moved to <unk> , where he was given a musical upbringing . From an early age he attended concerts in Liverpool , conducted mostly by Hans Richter . He was educated at Westminster School in London , where in his free time he attended concerts conducted by , among others , Sir Henry Wood , Claude Debussy , Arthur Nikisch , Fritz Steinbach , and Richard Strauss . His biographer , Michael Kennedy , writes , " Few schoolboys can have attended as many performances by great artists as Boult heard between 1901 and October 1908 , when he went up to Christ Church , Oxford . " While still a schoolboy , Boult met the composer Edward Elgar through Frank Schuster , a family friend . 
 At Christ Church college at Oxford , where he was an undergraduate from 1908 to 1912 , Boult studied history but later switched to music , in which his mentor was the musical academic and conductor Hugh Allen . Among the musical friends he made at Oxford was Ralph Vaughan Williams , who became a lifelong friend . In 1909 Boult presented a paper to an Oxford musical group , the Oriana Society , entitled Some Notes on Performance , in which he laid down three precepts for an ideal performance : observance of the composer 's wishes , clarity through emphasis on balance and structure , and the effect of music made without apparent effort . These guiding principles lasted throughout his career . He was president of the University Musical Club for the year 1910 , but his interests were not wholly confined to music : he was a keen rower , stroking his college boat at Henley , and all his life he remained a member of the Leander Club . 
 Boult graduated in 1912 , with a basic " pass " degree . He continued his musical education at the Leipzig Conservatory in 1912 – 13 . The musician Hans Sitt was in charge of the conducting class , but Boult 's main influence was Nikisch . He later recalled , " I went to all his [ Nikisch 's ] rehearsals and concerts in the Gewandhaus . ... He had an astonishing baton technique and great command of the orchestra : everything was indicated with absolute precision . But there were others who were greater interpreters . " Boult admired Nikisch " not so much for his musicianship but his amazing power of saying what he wanted with a bit of wood . He spoke very little " . This style was in accord with Boult 's opinion that " all conductors should be clad in an invisible <unk> which makes it possible to enjoy the music without seeing any of the antics that go on " . He sang in choral festivals and at the Leeds Festival of 1913 , where he watched Nikisch conduct . There he made the acquaintance of George Butterworth , and other British composers . Later that year Boult joined the musical staff of the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden , where his most important work was to assist the first British production of Wagner 's Parsifal , and do " odd jobs with lighting cues " while Nikisch conducted the Ring cycle . 
 = = = First conducting work = = = 
 Boult made his début as a professional conductor on 27 February 1914 at West Kirby Public Hall , with members of the Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra . His programme comprised orchestral works by Bach , Butterworth , Mozart , Schumann , Wagner and Hugo Wolf , interspersed with arias by Mozart and Verdi sung by Agnes Nicholls . Boult was declared medically unfit for active service during the First World War , and until 1916 he served as an orderly officer in a reserve unit . He was recruited by the War Office as a translator ( he spoke good French , German and Italian ) . In his spare time he organised and conducted concerts , some of which were subsidised by his father , with the aims of giving work to orchestral players and bringing music to a wider audience . 
 In 1918 Boult conducted the London Symphony Orchestra in a series of concerts that included important recent British works . Among them was the première of a revised version of Vaughan Williams 's A London Symphony , a performance which was " rather spoilt by a Zeppelin raid " . His best @-@ known première of this period was Holst 's The Planets . Boult conducted the first performance on 29 September 1918 to an invited audience of about 250 . Holst later wrote on his copy of the score , " This copy is the property of Adrian Boult who first caused The Planets to shine in public and thereby earned the gratitude of Gustav Holst . " 
 Elgar was another composer who had cause to be grateful to Boult . His Second Symphony had , since its premiere nine years earlier , received few performances . When Boult conducted it at the Queen 's Hall in March 1920 to " great applause " and " frantic enthusiasm " , the composer wrote to him : " With the sounds ringing in my ears I send a word of thanks for your splendid conducting of the <unk> . ... I feel that my reputation in the future is safe in your hands . " Elgar 's friend and biographer , the violinist W. H. Reed , wrote that Boult 's performance of Elgar 's neglected work brought " the grandeur and nobility of the work " to wider public attention . 
 Boult took a wide variety of conducting jobs in the years following the war . In 1919 he succeeded Ernest Ansermet as musical director of Sergei Diaghilev 's ballet company . Although Ansermet gave Boult all the help he could in his preparations , there were fourteen ballets in the company 's repertory – none of which Boult knew . In only a short period , Boult was required to master such scores as Petrushka , The Firebird , Scheherazade , La Boutique <unk> and The Good @-@ <unk> Ladies . In June 1921 , Boult conducted for Theodore Komisarjevsky and Vladimir Rosing 's experimental Opera <unk> week at London 's Aeolian Hall . He also took on an academic post . When Hugh Allen succeeded Sir Hubert Parry as principal of the Royal College of Music , he invited Boult to start a conducting class along the lines of Leipzig – the first such class in England . Boult ran the classes from 1919 to 1930 . In 1921 he received a Doctorate of Music . 
 = = = Birmingham = = = 
 In 1923 Boult conducted the first season of the Robert Mayer concerts for children , but his participation in the following season was prevented by his appointment in 1924 as conductor of the Birmingham Festival Choral Society . This led to his becoming musical director of the City of Birmingham Orchestra , where he remained in charge for six years , attracting widespread attention with his adventurous programmes . 
 The advantage of the Birmingham post was that for the first time in his life Boult had his own orchestra , and sole control of programming ; the only time in his life , he later said , when that was so . The disadvantages were that the orchestra was inadequately funded , the available venues ( including the Town Hall ) were unsatisfactory , the Birmingham Post 's music critic , A. J. Symons , was a constant thorn in Boult 's side , and the local concert @-@ going public had conservative tastes . Despite this conservatism , Boult programmed as much innovative music as was practical , including works by Mahler , Stravinsky and Bruckner . Such departures from the repertoire expected by the regular concert @-@ goers depressed the box @-@ office takings , requiring subsidies from private benefactors , including Boult 's family . 
