 While at Birmingham Boult had the opportunity to conduct a number of operas , chiefly with the British National Opera Company , for which he conducted Die Walküre and Otello . He also conducted a diverse range of operas from such composers as Purcell , Mozart and Vaughan Williams . In 1928 he succeeded Vaughan Williams as conductor of the Bach Choir in London , a position he held until 1931 . 
 = = = BBC Symphony Orchestra = = = 
 Visits to London by the Hallé Orchestra and particularly the Berlin Philharmonic under Wilhelm Furtwängler in 1929 , had highlighted the relatively poor standards of London orchestras . Sir Thomas Beecham and the director general of the BBC Sir John Reith were keen to establish a first @-@ class symphony orchestra , and they agreed in principle to do so jointly . Only a small number of core players were recruited before negotiations foundered . Beecham withdrew , and with Malcolm Sargent soon established the rival London Philharmonic Orchestra . 
 In 1930 Boult returned to London to succeed Percy Pitt as director of music at the BBC . On taking up the post , Boult and his department recruited enough musicians to bring the complement of the new BBC Symphony Orchestra to 114 . A substantial number of these players performed at the 1930 Promenade Concerts under Sir Henry Wood , and the full BBC Symphony Orchestra gave its first concert on 22 October 1930 , conducted by Boult at the Queen 's Hall . The programme consisted of music by Wagner , Brahms , Saint @-@ Saëns and Ravel . Of the 21 programmes in the orchestra 's first season , Boult conducted nine and Wood five . 
 The reviews of the new orchestra were enthusiastic . The Times wrote of its " virtuosity " and of Boult 's " superb " conducting . The Musical Times commented , " The boast of the B.B.C. that it intended to get together a first @-@ class orchestra was not an idle one " and spoke of " exhilaration " at the playing . The Observer called the playing " altogether magnificent " and said that Boult " deserves an instrument of this fine calibre to work on , and the orchestra deserves a conductor of his efficiency and insight . " After the initial concerts Reith was told by his advisers that the orchestra had played better for Boult than anyone else . Reith asked him if he wished to take on the chief conductorship , and if so whether he would resign as director of music or occupy both posts simultaneously . Boult opted for the latter . He later said that this was a rash decision , and that he could not have sustained the two roles at once without the efforts of his staff in the music department , which included Edward Clark , Julian Herbage and Kenneth Wright . 
 During the 1930s , the BBC Symphony Orchestra became renowned for its high standard of playing and for Boult 's capable performances of new and unfamiliar music . Like Henry Wood before him , Boult regarded it as his duty to give the best possible performances of a wide range of composers , including those whose works were not personally congenial to him . His biographer , Michael Kennedy , writes that there was a very short list of composers whose works Boult refused to conduct , " but it would be difficult to deduce who they were . " Boult 's pioneering work with the BBC included an early performance of Schoenberg 's Variations , Op. 31 , British premières , including Alban Berg 's opera Wozzeck and Three Movements from the Lyric Suite , and world premières , including Vaughan Williams 's Symphony No. 4 in F minor and Bartók 's Concerto for Two Pianos and Orchestra . He introduced Mahler 's Ninth Symphony to London in 1934 , and Bartók 's Concerto for Orchestra in 1946 . Boult invited Anton Webern to conduct eight BBC concerts between 1931 and 1936 . 
 The excellence of Boult 's orchestra attracted leading international conductors . In its second season guest conductors included Richard Strauss , Felix Weingartner and Bruno Walter , followed , in later seasons , by Serge Koussevitzky , Beecham and Willem Mengelberg . Arturo Toscanini , widely regarded at the time as the world 's leading conductor , conducted the BBC orchestra in 1935 and said that it was the finest he had ever directed . He returned to conduct the orchestra in 1937 , 1938 and 1939 . 
 During this period , Boult accepted some international guest conductorships , appearing with the Vienna Philharmonic , Boston Symphony , and New York Philharmonic orchestras . In 1936 and 1937 he headed European tours with the BBC Symphony Orchestra , giving concerts in Brussels , Paris , Zurich , Budapest and Vienna , where they were especially well received . During his BBC years , Boult did not entirely lose contact with the world of opera and his performances of Die Walküre at Covent Garden in 1931 and Fidelio at Sadler 's Wells Theatre in 1930 were considered outstanding . 
 For many years , Boult had been a close friend of the tenor Steuart Wilson and his wife Ann , née Bowles . When , in the late 1920s , Wilson began to mistreat his wife , Boult took her side . She divorced Wilson in 1931 . In 1933 , Boult astonished those who knew his notorious shyness with women by marrying her and becoming a much @-@ loved stepfather to her four children ; the marriage lasted for the rest of his life . The enmity it provoked in Wilson had repercussions in Boult 's later career . The stigma attached to divorce in Britain in the 1930s affected Wilson 's career but not Boult 's : Wilson was barred from performing in English cathedrals at the Three Choirs Festival but Boult was invited to conduct the orchestra at Westminster Abbey for the coronation of George VI in 1937 . 
 During the Second World War the BBC Symphony Orchestra was evacuated first to Bristol , where it suffered from bombing , and later to Bedford . Boult strove to maintain standards and morale as he lost key players . Between 1939 and the end of the war , forty players left for active service or other activities . In 1942 Boult resigned as the BBC 's director of music , while remaining chief conductor of the BBC Symphony Orchestra . This move , made as a favour to the composer Arthur Bliss to provide a suitable war @-@ time job for him , later came to be Boult 's undoing at the BBC . Meanwhile , he made recordings of Elgar 's Second Symphony , Holst 's The Planets and Vaughan Williams 's Job , A Masque for Dancing . At the end of the war Boult " found a changed attitude to the orchestra in the upper echelons of the BBC " . Reith was no longer director general , and without his backing Boult had to fight hard to restore the orchestra to its pre @-@ war glory . 
 On 29 September 1946 , Boult conducted Britten 's new Festival Overture , to inaugurate the BBC Third Programme . For this innovative cultural channel , Boult was concerned in pioneering ventures including the British premiere of Mahler 's Third Symphony . The Times later said of this period , " The Third Programme could not possibly have had the scope which made it world @-@ famous musically without Boult . " Nevertheless , Boult 's BBC days were numbered . When he was appointed in 1930 , Reith had informally promised him that would be exempt from the BBC 's rule that staff must retire at age 60 . However , Reith had left the BBC in 1938 and his promise carried no weight with his successors . In 1948 Steuart Wilson was appointed head of music at the BBC , the post previously occupied by Boult and Bliss . He made it clear from the start of his appointment that he intended that Boult should be replaced as chief conductor , and he used his authority to insist on Boult 's enforced retirement . The director general of the BBC at the time , Sir William Haley , was unaware of Wilson 's animus against Boult and later acknowledged , in a broadcast tribute to Boult , that he " had listened to ill @-@ judged advice in retiring him . " By the time of his retirement in 1950 , Boult had made 1 @,@ 536 broadcasts . 
 = = = London Philharmonic = = = 
 After it became clear that Boult would have to leave the BBC , Thomas Russell , the managing director of the London Philharmonic Orchestra ( LPO ) , offered him the post of principal conductor of the LPO in succession to Eduard van Beinum . In the 1930s the LPO had flourished , but since Beecham 's departure in 1940 , it had struggled to survive . Boult was well known to the orchestra , having been among the musicians who came to its aid in 1940 . He took over as chief conductor of the LPO in June 1950 , immediately after leaving the BBC , and threw himself into the task of rebuilding it . In the early years of his conductorship , the finances of the LPO were perilous , and Boult subsidised the orchestra from his own funds for some time . The need to earn money obliged the orchestra to play many more concerts than its rivals . In the 1949 – 50 season , the LPO gave 248 concerts , compared with 55 by the BBC Symphony Orchestra , 103 by the London Symphony Orchestra , and 32 apiece by the Philharmonia and Royal Philharmonic orchestras . 
 Although he had worked extensively in the studio for the BBC , Boult had , up to this point , recorded only a part of his large repertoire for the gramophone . With the LPO he began a series of commercial recordings that continued at a varying rate for the rest of his working life . Their first recordings together were Elgar 's Falstaff , Mahler 's Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen with the mezzo Blanche <unk> , and Beethoven 's First Symphony . The work of the new team was greeted with approval by the reviewers . Of the Elgar , The Gramophone wrote , " I have heard no other conductor approach [ Boult 's ] performance . ... His newly adopted orchestra responds admirably " . In The Manchester Guardian , Neville Cardus wrote , " Nobody is better able than Sir Adrian Boult to expound the subtly mingled contents of this master work . " 
 In January 1951 Boult and the LPO made a tour of Germany , described by Kennedy as " gruelling " , with 12 concerts on 12 successive days . The symphonies they played were Beethoven 's Seventh , Haydn 's London , No 104 , Brahms 's First , Schumann 's Fourth and Schubert 's Great C major . The other works were Elgar 's Introduction and Allegro , Holst 's The Perfect Fool ballet music , Richard Strauss 's Don Juan , and Stravinsky 's Firebird . 
 In 1952 , the LPO negotiated a five @-@ year contract with Decca Records , which was unusually rewarding for the orchestra , giving it a 10 per cent commission on most sales . On top of this , Boult always contributed his share of the recording fees to the orchestra 's funds . In the same year , the LPO survived a crisis when Russell was dismissed as its managing director . He was an avowed member of the Communist party ; when the cold war began some influential members of the LPO felt that Russell 's private political affiliations compromised the orchestra , and pressed for his dismissal . Boult , as the orchestra 's chief conductor , stood up for Russell , but when matters came to a head Boult ceased to protect him . Deprived of that crucial support , Russell was forced out . Kennedy speculates that Boult 's change of mind was due to a growing conviction that the orchestra would be " seriously jeopardized financially " if Russell remained in post . A later writer , Richard Witts , suggests that Boult sacrificed Russell because he believed doing so would enhance the LPO 's chance of being appointed resident orchestra at the Royal Festival Hall . 
 In 1953 Boult once again took charge of the orchestral music at a coronation , conducting an ensemble drawn from UK orchestras at the coronation of Elizabeth II . During the proceedings , he conducted the first performances of Bliss 's Processional and Walton 's march Orb and Sceptre . In the same year he returned to the Proms after a three @-@ year absence , conducting the LPO . The notices were mixed : The Times found a Brahms symphony " rather colourless , imprecise and uninspiring " , but praised Boult and the orchestra 's performance of The Planets . In the same year the orchestra celebrated its 21st birthday , giving a series of concerts at the Festival Hall and the Royal Albert Hall in which Boult was joined by guest conductors including Paul Kletzki , Jean <unk> , Hans Schmidt @-@ <unk> , Georg Solti , Walter Susskind and Vaughan Williams . 
 In 1956 Boult and the LPO visited Russia . Boult had not wished to go on the tour because flying hurt his ears , and long land journeys hurt his back . The Soviet authorities threatened to cancel the tour if he did not lead it , and he felt obliged to go . The LPO gave nine concerts in Moscow and four in Leningrad . Boult 's assistant conductors were Anatole <unk> and George Hurst . Boult 's four Moscow programmes included Vaughan Williams 's Fourth and Fifth Symphonies , Holst 's The Planets , Walton 's Violin Concerto ( with Alfredo Campoli as soloist ) , and Schubert 's Great C major Symphony . While in Moscow , Boult and his wife visited the Bolshoi Opera and were guests at the composer Dmitri Shostakovich 's 50th birthday party . 
 After the Russian tour , Boult told the LPO that he wished to step down from the principal conductorship . He continued to be the orchestra 's main conductor until his successor William Steinberg took up the post in 1959 . After the sudden resignation of Andrzej Panufnik from the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra ( CBSO ) , Boult returned as principal conductor of the CBSO for the 1959 – 60 season . That was his last chief conductorship , though he remained closely associated with the LPO as its president and a guest conductor until his retirement . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 After stepping down from the chief conductorship of the LPO , Boult was , for a few years , less in demand in the recording studio and the concert hall . Nevertheless , he was invited to conduct in Vienna , Amsterdam and Boston . In 1964 he made no recordings , but in 1965 he began an association with Lyrita records , an independent label specialising in British music . In the same year he resumed recording for EMI after a six @-@ year break . Celebrations for his eightieth birthday in 1969 also raised his profile in the musical world . After the death of his colleague Sir John Barbirolli in 1970 , Boult was seen as " the sole survivor of a great generation " and a living link with Elgar , Vaughan Williams and Holst . In the words of The Guardian , " it was when he reached his late seventies that the final and most glorious period of his career developed . " He ceased to accept overseas invitations , but conducted in the major British cities , as well as at the Festival and Albert Halls and began what is frequently called his " Indian Summer " in the concert hall and recording studio . He was featured in a 1971 film The Point of the Stick , in which he illustrated his conducting technique with musical examples . 
 At a spare recording session in August 1970 Boult recorded the Third Symphony of Brahms . This was well received and led to a series of recordings of Brahms , Wagner , Schubert , Mozart and Beethoven . His repertoire in general was much wider than his discography might suggest . It was a disappointment to him that he was rarely invited to conduct in the opera house , and he relished the opportunity to record extensive excerpts from the Wagner operas in the 1970s . Having conducted several ballets at Covent Garden during the 1970s , Boult gave his last public performance conducting Elgar 's ballet The Sanguine Fan for the London Festival Ballet at the London Coliseum on 24 June 1978 . His final record , completed in December 1978 , was of music by Hubert Parry . Boult formally retired from conducting in 1981 and died in London in 1983 , aged 93 . 
 = = Musicianship = = 
 A review in The Observer of Boult 's second London concert , in 1918 , said , " Having , apparently , a thorough knowledge of the work , he was content to let it speak for itself without having recourse to those aids to success which are a constant temptation to conductors . " Sixty @-@ five years later , in an obituary tribute , Peter Heyworth wrote in the same newspaper : " From Nikisch he had early acquired an immaculate stick technique and was quietly scathing about conductors who used their anatomy to indicate their artistic requirements . ... In an occupation ridden with inflated egos and circus tricksters Boult brought a rare probity to everything he undertook . " 
 Boult 's biographer , Kennedy , gave this summary : " In the music he admired most , Boult was often a great conductor ; in the rest , an extremely conscientious one . ... If from behind he seemed unexciting and unemotional , the players could see the animation in his face – and he was capable of frightening outbursts of temper at rehearsals . Tall and erect , with something of the military in his appearance ... he seemed the personification of the English gentleman . But recipients of his cutting wit and occasional sarcasm knew that this was not the whole picture . " Grove 's Dictionary similarly said of him : 
 Of the leading British conductors of his time , Boult was the least sensational but not the least remarkable . He made no attempt to cultivate a public image . He was neither oracle , orator nor professional wit , but he expressed himself with <unk> , and his gentlemanly self @-@ control was occasionally ruffled by storms of anger . ... [ T ] here were nights when the physical impact of his conducting was low , and there was little beyond faithfulness to the notes . There were others when precise , sensitive stick technique , loyalty to the composer , selflessness and ability to see the music as a whole , produced results equally satisfying in the classics and the British music he understood so well . 
 Boult , unlike many of his contemporaries , preferred the traditional orchestral layout , with first violins on the conductor 's left and the seconds on the right . Of the practice of grouping all the violins together on the left , he wrote , " The new seating is , I admit , easier for the conductor and the second violins , but I firmly maintain that the second violins themselves sound far better on the right . ... When the new fashion reached us from America somewhere about 1908 it was adopted by some conductors , but Richter , Weingartner , Walter , Toscanini and many others kept what I feel is the right balance . " 
 This care for balance was an important feature of Boult 's music @-@ making . Orchestral players across decades commented on his insistence that every important part should be heard without difficulty . His BBC principal violist wrote in 1938 , " If a woodwind player has to complain that he has already been blowing ' fit to burst ' there is trouble for somebody . " The trombonist Ray <unk> wrote forty years later , " One of the old school , like Boult , is so refreshing because he will reduce the dynamic level – ' No , no , pianissimo , strings , let the soloist through , less from everyone else . ' That is the old idea of balance . " 
 As an educator , Boult influenced several generations of musicians , beginning with his conducting class at the Royal College of Music , London , which he ran from 1919 to 1930 . As no such classes had been held before in Britain , Boult " created its curriculum from out of his own experience . ... From that first small class has come all the later formal training for conductors throughout Britain . " In the 1930s Boult ran a series of " conferences for conductors " at his country house near Guildford , sometimes helped by Vaughan Williams who lived a few miles away . From 1962 to 1966 he again taught at the Royal College of Music . In later life , he made time for young conductors who sought his counsel . Among those who studied with or were influenced by Boult were Colin Davis , James Loughran , Richard Hickox and Vernon Handley . The last was not only a pupil of Boult , but acted as his musical assistant on many occasions . 
 = = Honours and memorials = = 
 Boult was knighted in 1937 and was created Companion of Honour ( CH ) in 1969 . He received the gold medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society in 1944 and the Harvard Glee Club medal ( jointly with Vaughan Williams ) in 1956 . He received honorary degrees and fellowships from 13 universities and conservatoires . In 1951 he was invited to be the first president of the Elgar Society . In 1959 he was made president of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music . 
 Boult 's old school , Westminster , has a music centre named in his honour , and the Birmingham Conservatoire , a department of the Birmingham City University includes in its home building the Adrian Boult Hall . The hall is used for classical concerts , other musical performances , and conferences . 
 In the June 2013 issue of Gramophone Boult was added to the magazine 's Hall of Fame which recognises musicians who have made a lasting impact on the world of recorded classical music . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Boult was a prolific recording artist . Unlike many musicians , he felt at home in the recording studio and was happy working without an audience . His recording career stretched from the days of acoustic recording until the beginning of the digital era . His last recording of The Planets made in May 1978 was taped in experimental digital sound , although technical problems led EMI to release an analogue version . 
 Boult 's recordings fall into three main periods . In the first , from 1920 to the end of the 1940s , he recorded almost exclusively for HMV . In the 1950s and early 1960s , he was less in demand by the major labels , and although he made a substantial number of discs for Decca , he recorded mostly for smaller labels , chiefly Pye <unk> . His last period , from the mid @-@ 1960s , sometimes referred to as his Indian Summer , was once again with HMV . With his regular collaborators the producer Christopher Bishop and the engineer Christopher Parker he made more than sixty recordings , re @-@ recording much of his key repertoire in stereo . He also added many works to his discography that he had not recorded before . 
 Of the British composers , Boult extensively recorded and sometimes re @-@ recorded major works by Elgar and Vaughan Williams . He recorded all eight then @-@ existing symphonies by Vaughan Williams for Decca in the 1950s with the LPO , in the presence of the composer . The recording producer , John Culshaw , wrote that the composer " said very little during the sessions because he was totally in favour of Sir Adrian 's approach to his music . " Vaughan Williams was to have been present for the first recording of his Ninth symphony , for Everest Records in 1958 , but he died the night before the session took place ; Boult recorded a short introduction as a memorial tribute . All these recordings have been reissued on CD . In the 1960s Boult re @-@ recorded the nine symphonies for EMI . 
 Other British composers who feature significantly in Boult 's discography include Holst , Ireland , Parry , and Walton . Despite his reputation as a pioneer in Britain of the works of the Second Viennese School and other avant @-@ garde composers , the record companies , unlike the BBC , remained cautious about recording him in this repertory , and only a single recording of a Berg piece represents this side of Boult 's work . In the core continental orchestral repertoire , Boult 's recordings of the four symphonies of Brahms , and the Great C major Symphony of Schubert were celebrated in his lifetime and have remained in the catalogues during the three decades after his death . Late in his recording career he recorded four discs of excerpts from Wagner 's operas , which received great critical praise . The exceptional breadth of Boult 's repertoire has left some well @-@ regarded recordings of works not immediately associated with him , among which are versions of Franck 's Symphony ( recorded in 1959 ) , Dvořák 's Cello Concerto with Mstislav Rostropovich ( 1958 ) , and a pioneering recording of Mahler 's Third Symphony taped live in 1947 . 
 = Miranda Otto = 
 Miranda Otto ( born 16 December 1967 ) is an Australian actress . The daughter of actors Barry and Lindsay Otto , and the sister of actress Gracie Otto , Brisbane @-@ born Miranda began her acting career at age 18 in 1986 , and has appeared in a variety of independent and major studio films . Otto made her major film debut in Emma 's War , in which she played a teenager who moves to Australia 's bush country during World War II . 
 After a decade of critically acclaimed roles in Australian films , Otto gained Hollywood 's attention during the 1990s after appearing in supporting roles in the films The Thin Red Line and What Lies Beneath . She played Éowyn in Peter Jackson 's The Lord of the Rings trilogy . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Otto was raised in Newcastle and Brisbane , and briefly resided in Hong Kong following her parents ' 1974 divorce . She spent weekends and holidays with her father in Sydney and developed an interest in acting through him . 
 During her childhood , Otto and her friends wrote scripts and designed costumes and flyers in their spare time . She appeared in several plays at the Nimrod Theatre , which attracted the attention of casting director Faith Martin . Subsequently , Otto received a role in the 1986 World War II drama Emma 's War . 
 She had wanted to be a ballerina but was forced to abandon this goal due to moderate scoliosis . Otto graduated from the National Institute of Dramatic Art in Sydney in 1990 . Prior to graduation , she appeared in minor film roles including Initiation ( 1987 ) and The 13th Floor ( 1988 ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Otto 's first post @-@ graduation film role in 1991 , as Nell <unk> in The Girl Who Came Late , was her breakthrough role , which brought her to the attention of the Australian film industry and the general public . In the film , directed by Kathy Mueller , she starred as a young woman who could communicate with horses . Her appearance garnered Otto her first Australian Film Institute nomination for Best Actress the following year . 
 Otto 's next role was in the film The Last Days of Chez Nous , which portrayed the complex relationships between the members of an Australian family . The film earned Otto her second Australian Film Institute nomination , this time for Best Supporting Actress . In 1993 , Otto co @-@ starred with Noah Taylor in the sexually provocative comedy film The Nostradamus Kid , which was based on the memories of author Bob Ellis during the 1960s . Otto was drawn to the film because she was " fascinated by the period and the people who came out of it . " A small role in the independent film Sex Is a Four Letter Word followed in 1995 . 
 In 1995 , she began to doubt her career choice as she failed to get the parts for which she auditioned . She fled to her home in Newcastle for almost a year , during which she painted her mother 's house . In 1996 , director Shirley Barrett cast Otto as a shy waitress in the film Love Serenade . She played <unk> Hurley , a lonely young woman , who competes with her older sister Vicki @-@ Ann for the attention of a famous DJ from Brisbane . She starred in the 1997 films The Well and Doing Time for Patsy Cline . When Otto received the film script for The Well , she refused to read it , fearing that she would not get the part . Otto believed that she could not convincingly play the role of Katherine , who is supposed to be 18 , as she was 30 at the time . The film , directed by Samantha Lang , starred Otto as a teenager involved in a claustrophobic relationship with a lonely older woman . The Well received mixed reviews ; critic Paul Fisher wrote that Otto 's performance was not " convincing " as she was " playing another repetitious character about whom little is revealed " , while Louise Keller stated that Otto had delivered " her best screen performance yet . " Otto earned her third Australian Film Institute nomination for the film . Later that year , she co @-@ starred with Richard Roxburgh in the drama Doing Time for Patsy Cline . The low @-@ budget Australian film required Otto to perform country music standards and also received mixed reviews from film critics . 
 Soon after the release of The Well and Doing Time for Patsy Cline , magazines and other media outlets were eager to profile the actress . In 1997 , Otto began dating her Doing Time for Patsy Cline co @-@ star Richard Roxburgh . Her involvement with Roxburgh made her a regular subject of Australian tabloid magazines and media at the time , a role to which she was unaccustomed . 
 Otto 's next project was the romantic comedy Dead Letter Office ( 1998 ) . The film was Otto 's first with her father , Barry , who makes a brief appearance . In the Winter Dark , directed by James Bogle , followed later that year . Otto played Ronnie , a pregnant woman recently abandoned by her boyfriend . The film was a critical success in Australia , and Otto was nominated for her fourth Australian Film Institute Award . A small role in The Thin Red Line , led to further film roles outside of Australia , such as in Italy , where she co @-@ starred as Ruth in the low @-@ budget Italian film La <unk> a tre <unk> ( " The Three @-@ legged Fox " ) , produced in 2001 and broadcast for the first time on Italian television in March 2009 . 
 = = = Hollywood = = = 
 Otto 's first Hollywood role was opposite Harrison Ford and Michelle Pfeiffer in the suspense thriller What Lies Beneath in 2000 . She played Mary <unk> , a mysterious next @-@ door neighbor . The film was met with mixed reviews , but was an international success , grossing US $ 291 million . In 2001 , she was cast as a naturalist in the comedy Human Nature . Writer Charlie Kaufman , impressed by her audition two years earlier for his film Being John Malkovich , arranged for Otto to audition and meet with the film 's director Michel Gondry . Human Nature was both a commercial and critical disappointment . Critic Jeffrey M. Anderson criticized Otto 's French accent and wrote that she " doesn 't seem to mesh with what 's going on around her " . That same year , she also appeared in the BBC adaptation of Anthony Trollope 's The Way We Live Now , as a strong @-@ willed American Southerner determined to manipulate Cillian Murphy 's character into marrying her . 
 In 1999 , Otto was cast as Éowyn , a shieldmaiden of Rohan , in The Lord of the Rings film trilogy . Director Peter Jackson cast her immediately after viewing the audition video she had filmed in Australia . For the role , Otto spent six weeks learning stunt choreography and horseback riding . Otto 's character was introduced in the trilogy 's second film The Lord of the Rings : The Two Towers in 2002 and appeared in the third film , The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King , the following year . The Lord of the Rings trilogy was a critical and financial success , and the third film won the Academy Award for Best Picture in 2004 . Otto 's performance earned her an Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films nomination for Best Supporting Actress . 
 Otto 's next project was the Australian television miniseries Through My Eyes : The Lindy Chamberlain Story ( 2004 ) . The film is a drama that portrays the story of Lindy Chamberlain , who was convicted in 1982 of killing her baby daughter , Azaria , in one of Australia 's most publicized murder trials . Otto was cast as Chamberlain after her husband , Peter O 'Brien , had been cast as prosecutor Ian Barker . She was drawn to the role because it provided her with the " prospect of exploring an unconventional character . " At the 2005 Logie Awards , Otto won Most Outstanding Actress in a Drama Series for her role . 
 Director Steven Spielberg , impressed by Otto 's performance in The Lord of the Rings , called her to ask if she would play opposite Tom Cruise in the big @-@ budget science fiction film War of the Worlds ( 2005 ) . Otto , pregnant at the time , believed she would have to turn down the role , but the script was reworked to accommodate her . After giving birth to her daughter , she took a rest from films to concentrate on motherhood and theatre roles in Australia . 
 In 2007 , Otto starred as Cricket Stewart , the wife of a successful director , in the television miniseries The Starter Wife . That same year , she was cast in the American television series Cashmere Mafia . In the series she plays Juliet Draper , a successful female executive who must rely on her friends to juggle the demands of a career and family in New York City . Otto chose to star in the series because " American television at the moment is so interesting and , particularly , the characters for women are so fantastic " and she " liked the idea of having a character over a long period of time and developing it . " The series was cancelled in May 2008 . 
 Otto is attached to star opposite Stephanie Sigman in Annabelle 2 directed by David <unk> . The film is scheduled to be released on May 19 , 2017 . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 Otto made her theatrical debut in the 1986 production of The Bitter Tears of Petra Von Kant for the Sydney Theatre Company . Three more theatrical productions for the Sydney Theatre Company followed in the late 1980s and early 1990s . In 2002 , she returned to the stage playing Nora Helmer in A Doll 's House opposite her future husband Peter O 'Brien . Otto 's performance earned her a 2003 Helpmann Award nomination and the MO Award for " Best Female Actor in a Play " . 
 Her next stage role was in the psychological thriller Boy Gets Girl ( 2005 ) , in which she played Theresa , a journalist for a New York magazine . Otto committed to the project days before she found out she was pregnant . Robyn Nevin , the director , rescheduled the production from December 2004 to September 2005 so Otto could appear in it . In 2005 , Nevin began pre @-@ production on a play commissioned especially for Otto . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On 1 January 2003 , she married actor Peter O 'Brien , after the two had met while performing in A Doll 's House . Otto and O 'Brien have one child , a daughter named Darcey , who was born on 1 April 2005 . The pregnancy almost forced her to turn down her role in War of the Worlds . Since the birth of her daughter , Otto has limited her work so she can spend time with her family at their home in Australia . 
 In a 2004 interview , Otto stated that she hopes she would never be as famous as fellow Australian actress Nicole Kidman because she is " not sure [ she ] could ever deal with that . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Lawrie Wilson = 
 Lawrie Robert Wilson ( born 11 September 1987 ) is an English footballer who currently plays for Bolton Wanderers . 
 Wilson started his career at Charlton Athletic , and played regularly for the club 's Under @-@ 18 side and reserve team until he was released in 2006 . He joined Colchester United ahead of the 2006 – 07 season , but did not make any first @-@ team appearances during his one @-@ year stay with the club . During his time at Colchester he was loaned out to Conference South side Welling United , making a handful of appearances during his one @-@ month loan spell . 
 Wilson signed for Hertfordshire side Stevenage in August 2007 , and featured regularly for the club for two seasons , playing in the club 's successful FA Trophy campaign in May 2009 . However , he suffered a dislocated ankle and broken leg in three places in August 2009 , ruling him out for eight months , but returned to first @-@ team action in April 2010 as Stevenage won promotion to the Football League for the first time in the club 's history . Wilson played a key part during the club 's 2010 – 11 campaign , helping Stevenage earn promotion to League One . In July 2012 , Wilson rejoined Charlton for an undisclosed fee . On 5 August 2015 he signed for Bolton Wanderers on a two @-@ year deal . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Wilson began his career as a trainee with Charlton Athletic , and was a regular in the club 's Under @-@ 18 team , where he played in defence . He progressed through the club 's youth system , and featured in Charlton 's reserve side throughout the club 's 2005 – 06 campaign , making a total of 16 appearances for the reserve side as a second @-@ year scholar . However , he failed to make any first @-@ team appearances and was subsequently allowed to search for a new club . In February 2006 , he played for Luton Town 's reserve side in a match against Stevenage Borough reserves at Kenilworth Road , although no transfer materialised . He was officially released by Charlton in April 2006 . A month later , Wilson went on trial at League Two side Shrewsbury Town , and played the whole match in Shrewsbury 's 2 – 1 pre @-@ season friendly home win against Rotherham United , although he was unsuccessful in his attempt to earn a professional contract with the club . In August 2006 , Wilson signed a one @-@ year deal with Colchester United . Similarly to his time at Charlton , Wilson featured regularly for the club 's reserve side throughout the 2006 – 07 season , but failed to make any first @-@ team appearances , making the substitute 's bench once in a 1 – 0 loss to MK Dons in the League Cup . He was loaned out to Conference South side Welling United in December 2006 . He made his debut for Welling in the club 's 1 – 0 win away at Cambridge City , but was sent @-@ off after just 27 minutes for violent conduct . He returned to first @-@ team action in Welling 's 0 – 0 draw against Basingstoke Town in the FA Trophy , and also played the whole match in Welling 's 2 – 1 away win against Thurrock . Wilson played his last game for Welling in the club 's 2 – 0 win at home to Fisher Athletic in early January 2007 . He played a total of four times for Welling during his one @-@ month loan spell at the club . On returning to his parent club , Wilson was released at the end of the 2006 – 07 season , and failed to make a first @-@ team appearance for the club . Ahead of the 2007 – 08 season , Wilson spent pre @-@ season trialling at Brentford and Stockport County respectively , training with Stockport for a number of weeks and playing in several pre @-@ season friendlies , but was ultimately not offered a contract . 
 = = Stevenage = = 
 In August 2007 , Wilson signed for Stevenage on a one @-@ year contract . He made his Stevenage debut just a day after signing for the club , coming on as an 86th @-@ minute substitute in Stevenage 's 3 – 0 win against Weymouth . Wilson played in a total of 27 games during his first season at Stevenage , with the majority of his appearances coming in the second half of 2007 – 08 season . The following season under the new management of Graham Westley , Wilson featured regularly in both the full back position and at right midfield . In August 2008 , Wilson scored his first ever professional goal in Stevenage 's 3 – 1 away win at Barrow , taking advantage of a goalkeeping error in the 75th minute of the match to seal Stevenage 's first win of the 2008 – 09 campaign . He made assists in games against Burton Albion and Forest Green Rovers respectively . He was also sent @-@ off for the first time in Stevenage colours in the club 's 3 – 1 home defeat to Histon in November 2008 , picking up the red card for " offensive language " . Wilson returned to the first team at the start of December and remained in the first @-@ team until the end of the season , assisting goals in important wins against Woking and Cambridge United as Stevenage finished in the final play @-@ off spot . He subsequently played in both of Stevenage 's Conference Premier play @-@ off games against Cambridge United in April 2009 , as the club lost 4 – 3 on aggregate . Wilson 's versatility also came into use during the club 's successful FA Trophy campaign during the same season , as he played in four different positions in six of Stevenage 's FA Trophy fixtures . He was deployed at left midfield in Stevenage 's 2 – 0 win against York City in the Final at Wembley Stadium . 
 Wilson started in Stevenage 's first game of the 2009 – 10 season in a 1 – 1 draw against Tamworth , adopting a much more attacking midfield role on the right wing . In the following game , Wilson 's through pass assisted Andy Drury 's goal against Hayes & Yeading , and Wilson continued his impressive start to the season by assisting Chris Beardsley 's goal against Ebbsfleet United . In the same game , Wilson scored his first goal of the season , latching onto Ronnie Henry 's ball before lashing the ball past the goalkeeper to give Stevenage a three @-@ goal lead . Two weeks later , in Stevenage 's 2 – 1 victory against Rushden & Diamonds , Wilson suffered a " career threatening injury " following a tackle from Michael Corcoran , which resulted in Wilson suffering a dislocated ankle and broken leg in three places . Wilson had a " successful operation " the following day and was expected to miss the rest of the 2009 – 10 season . Wilson returned earlier than expected , playing in a reserve match against Ipswich Town in March 2010 , and he made his return to the first @-@ team a week later against Luton Town , coming on as a 65th @-@ minute substitute . Two days later , Wilson started his first game in just over eight months against AFC Wimbledon . He scored Stevenage 's second goal , scoring on the half volley from Joel Byrom 's chipped pass in Stevenage 's 3 – 0 win at Kingsmeadow . He also played in the club 's 2 – 0 win against Kidderminster Harriers at Aggborough in April 2010 – the game that secured Stevenage 's place in the Football League for the first time in the club 's history . Wilson played a total of 13 matches during the season , scoring twice . At the end of the season , it was announced that Wilson had signed a contract that keeps him at the club until July 2011 . 
 Wilson played in Stevenage 's first fixture of the 2010 – 11 season , playing 72 minutes in the club 's 2 – 2 draw with Macclesfield Town . In September 2010 , he was sent @-@ off in a game against Cheltenham Town at Whaddon Road , receiving a red card for two bookable offences . He subsequently missed Stevenage 's 0 – 0 draw against Torquay United as a result of the suspension . Shortly after , he signed a new contract with the club , keeping him at Stevenage until 2012 . He returned to the first @-@ team in Stevenage 's win against Lincoln City , and provided two assists in Stevenage 's 4 – 1 win away at Hereford United three days later . Wilson 's fine form continued , as he was on hand to assist both of Stevenage 's goals in a 2 – 1 win over Burton Albion – firstly being fouled in the area to earn Stevenage a penalty , and secondly crossing the ball into the box for Chris Holroyd to volley home . He scored his first goal of the 2010 – 11 season in Stevenage 's 2 – 2 draw against Accrington Stanley in February 2011 . A month later , Wilson scored both of Stevenage 's goals in a 2 – 1 home win against Lincoln City , his second goal coming from 25 yards out after a neat interchange with John Mousinho . He scored his fourth goal of the season on 9 April 2011 , netting an injury @-@ time equaliser in a 2 – 2 draw at Stockport County . Wilson scored his fifth goal of the season on 25 April 2011 , scoring the only goal of the game in Stevenage 's 1 – 0 home win against Port Vale . He scored five goals in 50 appearances during the club 's 2010 – 11 campaign , a season that witnessed Stevenage earn promotion to League One for the first time in their history . 
 Wilson was part of the starting eleven in Stevenage 's first ever League One fixture at the start of the 2011 – 12 season , playing the whole game as the club drew 0 – 0 at home to Exeter City . In Stevenage 's next game , Wilson provided the assist for Stacy Long 's goal in a 4 – 3 extra @-@ time defeat to Peterborough United in the League Cup . He also assisted Craig Reid in the club 's 3 – 1 away win at Bournemouth on 16 August 2011 . Three days later , on 19 August , Wilson signed a contract extension at the club . He added to his two previous assists by assisting Craig Reid 's first goal in the club 's 4 – 2 home win against Rochdale on 3 September . Wilson scored his first goal of the 2011 – 12 season in a 5 – 1 home win over Sheffield Wednesday , scoring Stevenage 's fourth goal of the match just before half @-@ time . In the same game , Wilson provided the run and pass to assist Darius Charles ' second @-@ half goal , Stevenage 's fifth of the game . He added a second goal to his goal tally in Stevenage 's Football League Trophy penalty loss against League Two side AFC Wimbledon — opening the scoring after seven minutes after Brett Johnson 's clearance <unk> off of Wilson 's leg and beat the stranded Seb Brown in the AFC Wimbledon goal . His fine form for the season continued , and he was pivotal in Stevenage 's 2 – 1 home win against Sheffield United , assisting Mark Roberts ' goal , before winning a penalty late @-@ on , which was duly converted by Scott Laird . He also set @-@ up Chris Beardsley 's 38th @-@ minute strike , to open the scoring , in an eventual 2 – 1 win against Tranmere Rovers at Broadhall Way . In the club 's last game of 2011 , on 31 December , Wilson scored the only goal of the game as Stevenage defeated Wycombe Wanderers 1 – 0 at Adams Park . The goal came in the 82nd minute of the match , with Wilson powerfully beating Nikki Bull from close @-@ range following Luke Freeman 's precise cross . He was also on hand to score two of Stevenage 's five goals in a 5 – 1 victory against Rochdale at Spotland on 14 January 2012 . Both of Wilson 's goals came in the second @-@ half ; the first came shortly after the interval , when he ran onto Chris Beardsley 's rolled pass to fire the ball into the net , with his second coming after he ran onto Mark Roberts ' clearance to calmly beat Péter <unk> in the Rochdale goal . Wilson scored one further goal during the campaign , scoring a diving header in injury @-@ time in a 1 – 0 win over Oldham Athletic at Broadhall Way . It took Wilson 's goal tally to six for the season , with the player being ever @-@ present during the campaign , playing in all 56 of the club 's games , as Stevenage narrowly lost in the play @-@ off semi @-@ finals . During Wilson 's five years at Stevenage , he made 191 appearances in all competitions , scoring 15 goals . 
 = = Charlton Athletic = = 
 In the summer of 2012 , Wilson was strongly linked to Peterborough United , as well as Charlton Athletic . Stevenage confirmed that they had received two bids for the player , both of which from Championship clubs . In July 2012 , Wilson signed for Charlton , the club he began his football career with , for an undisclosed fee . He made his debut for Charlton in the club 's opening game of the 2012 – 13 season , a 1 – 1 draw with Leyton Orient in the League Cup at The Valley on 14 August 2012 , which Charlton went on to lose 4 – 3 on penalties after extra @-@ time . During the match , Wilson gave away a penalty after fouling David Mooney , although Mooney missed the subsequent spot @-@ kick . He scored his first goal for Charlton in October 2012 , during his tenth league appearance , scoring from close range to restore parity in a 1 – 1 draw with Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux . After a month out of first @-@ team action , Wilson returned for Charlton 's 2 – 2 home draw with Brighton & Hove Albion on 8 December 2012 , and scored the first goal of the match courtesy of a glancing header from Dale Stephens ' cross . It turned out to be Wilson 's last goal of the season , a campaign in which he made 32 appearances as Charlton finished in ninth position in the Championship , just three points behind the final play @-@ off place . 
 = = Bolton Wanderers = = 
 On 5 August 2015 , Wilson signed for Bolton Wanderers on a two @-@ year deal . 
 = = = Peterborough United = = = 
 On 2 January 2016 , Wilson signed on loan for League One side Peterborough United . He said that re @-@ uniting with former manager Graham Westley was a factor in the move . Wilson played just 4 times for Peterborough , starting as a substitute in their game with Sheffield United , and made his final appearance in the 2 @-@ 2 draw with West Bromwich Albion in the FA Cup . 
 = = International career = = 
 In August 2009 , Wilson was called up to play for the England C team , who represent England at non @-@ league level , in a game against Hungary C in Budapest . However , he was forced to pull out of the team after suffering a dislocated ankle and broken leg just three days later . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Wilson attended the private co @-@ educational Millfield Preparatory School in Glastonbury , Somerset . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Stevenage 
 FA Trophy : 2008 – 09 
 Conference Premier : 2009 – 10 
 Football League Two play @-@ offs : 2010 – 11 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of 5 January 2016 
 = Chocolate ( Kylie Minogue song ) = 
 " Chocolate " is a song by Australian recording artist Kylie Minogue , taken from her ninth studio album Body Language ( 2003 ) . It was written by its producer Johnny Douglas and Karen Poole . The song is a ballad which uses a chocolate simile to describe Minogue 's obsession with love . It contains elements of disco and funk and employs breathy and whispery vocals . It was released as the third and final single from the album on 28 June 2004 by Parlophone . 
 Critical reception towards " Chocolate " varied from favourable to mixed ; some critics favoured its commercial appeal and Minogue 's vocals , while some criticised it for being dated . In Australia , the song failed to reach the top ten and peaked at number 14 . It found more success in the United Kingdom , where it became her 27th top @-@ ten hit after it debuted at number six on the UK Singles Chart . The single also charted inside the top twenty in Hungary and Italy . 
 A music video for " Chocolate " was directed by Dawn Shadforth and was envisioned as a tribute to Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer musicals . It chiefly features Minogue and numerous backup dancers , in a hall , performing a dance routine choreographed by Michael Rooney . The song was performed live by Minogue at the one @-@ off concert show Money Can 't Buy and TV show Top of the Pops . " Chocolate " was included on the set list of the singer 's Showgirl : The Greatest Hits and Showgirl : The Homecoming tours . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Following the global success of her eighth studio album Fever , Minogue began working on her ninth studio album Body Language . Aiming to create a dance @-@ pop album inspired by electronic music from the 1980s , Minogue enlisted collaborators such as Johnny Douglas ( who had previously worked with her on Light Years ) and Karen Poole . The duo wrote " Chocolate " together , while Douglas also handled the production of the song . According to Minogue 's official website , " Chocolate " was one of her favourites from the album . It was selected as the third single from Body Language and was released globally on 28 June 2004 by Parlophone . The Maxi CD version of the single contains the B @-@ side " City Games " , which was one of the first tracks recorded for the album . 
 " Chocolate " is a ballad that borrows influences from numerous genres including disco and funk music . Minogue 's vocals are synthesised and are delivered in a breathy and whispery manner . According to music magazine Spin , the song describes Minogue 's " addiction to love " through a chocolate simile . PopMatters critic Adrien Begrand called its lyrics " steamy , " citing the line " Hold me and control me and then / Melt me slowly down " as an example . Helen Pidd from The Guardian found the lyrics to be " packed with saccharine innuendo . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The A.V. Club critic Andy Battaglia felt the ballad was successful in terms of execution and described it as " a breeze of finger @-@ snap funk . " Adrien Begrand from PopMatters singled it out as a highlight from the second half of Body Language , commenting that it " keeps the last half of the album from being a complete waste of time . " <unk> Minogue 's vocal performance , Eric <unk> from Stylus Magazine wrote : " Kylie proves herself to be a consummate entertainer , breezing through the chill muzak of " Promises " and " Chocolate " ' s wild disco jam with equal ease . " Slant Magazine editor Sal Cinquemani likened Minogue 's vocals to that of British electronic music duo Mono and felt the tone of the song resembled the " gauzy melancholy " of Madonna 's 1994 album Bedtime Stories . A mixed review came from The Guardian critic Helen Pidd , who acknowledged the song 's commercial appeal but felt it " sounds too dated to pack any punch in the age of Beyoncé and Missy Elliott . " Spin magazine criticised the vocals for being over @-@ processed and the lyrics for lacking substance . The magazine also felt that the theme of the song had already been covered by " minor artists " like American singer – songwriter Mandy Moore . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 In Minogue 's native Australia , " Chocolate " debuted and peaked at number 14 on the ARIA Singles Chart , becoming her first single since " Your Disco Needs You " ( 2001 ) to miss the top ten . Its chart run was brief and lasted for four weeks . Similarly , it entered the top 20 of the Italian Singles Chart at number 14 and dropped out the next week . The single was more successful in the United Kingdom , entering and peaking at number six on the UK Singles Chart and spending a total of seven weeks inside the top 40 . It became Minogue 's 27th top ten hit in the country . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Chocolate " was directed by Dawn Shadforth , while the dance sequences were choreographed by Michael Rooney . Shadforth and Rooney had previously worked with Minogue on the video of her 2001 single " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " . The video was conceptualised as a tribute to old musicals produced by American media company Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer . It featured a 40 @-@ second long ballet routine for which Minogue was coached by Rooney for four days . She admitted that the practise sessions were exhausting , but felt the final product became " classy " as a result . The singer felt " lucky " to be able to incorporate a ballet routine in the video and opined that it was " a lot different " from the rest of her repertoire . Julie Aspinall , author of the book Kylie : Queen of the World , wrote that Minogue adopted a " Gallic chic style " for the video . Aspinall felt that Minogue " absolutely looked the part " and suggested it was due to her being influenced by then @-@ boyfriend Olivier Martinez , a French actor . At the 10th Annual American Choreography Awards in 2004 , Rooney was nominated for the " Outstanding Achievement in Choreography – Music Video " award for " Chocolate " . 
 The video begins with a shot of Minogue posing in a dark room , dressed in a sparkling costume on which rainbow @-@ lighting is projected . She is then shown in front of a wall wearing a flowing maroon dress . As the intro ends and the first verse commences , Minogue appears in a hall and performs various dance routine with numerous female dancers clad in nude bodysuits . The singer 's attire consists of a pleated red organza dress designed by Austrian fashion designer Helmut Lang ( in 2006 , Minogue donated this costume to the Arts Centre Melbourne museum , where it is displayed in the Kylie Minogue Collection ) . Shots of the dancers in kaleidoscopic arrangements are intercut . A few seconds later , Minogue and a man dance together alone in a hall . Their dance ends with the man slowly laying Minogue down on the floor and leaving . Twelve women in golden and pastel pink dresses are seen dancing on a dark brown floor , which is revealed to be Minogue 's hat as the camera pans out . She proceeds to wave to a distant person and then plucks the petals out of a pink rose she is holding . The rest of the video randomly intersperses all of the previous scenes . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 A one @-@ off concert show , Money Can 't Buy , was held at entertainment venue Hammersmith Apollo , London , on 15 November 2003 to promote Body Language . " Chocolate " was included on the set list of the concert and was performed during the second act " Bardello . " On 25 June 2004 , Minogue appeared on British music chart television programme Top of the Pops to perform the song live . She sang " Chocolate " for the second time on the programme on 9 July . 
 " Chocolate " was included on the set list of Minogue 's Showgirl : The Greatest Hits Tour in 2005 . Minogue was unable to complete the tour as she was diagnosed with early breast cancer and had to cancel the Australian leg of the tour . After undergoing treatment and recovery , she resumed the concert tour in the form of Showgirl : The Homecoming Tour in 2007 , and " Chocolate " was again added to the set list . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Weekly charts = = 
 = Alan Turing = 
 Alan Mathison Turing OBE FRS ( / <unk> / ; 23 June 1912 – 7 June 1954 ) was a pioneering English computer scientist , mathematician , logician , cryptanalyst and theoretical biologist . He was highly influential in the development of theoretical computer science , providing a formalisation of the concepts of algorithm and computation with the Turing machine , which can be considered a model of a general purpose computer . Turing is widely considered to be the father of theoretical computer science and artificial intelligence . 
 During the Second World War , Turing worked for the Government Code and Cypher School ( GC & CS ) at Bletchley Park , Britain 's codebreaking centre . For a time he led Hut 8 , the section responsible for German naval cryptanalysis . He devised a number of techniques for breaking German ciphers , including improvements to the pre @-@ war Polish bombe method and an electromechanical machine that could find settings for the Enigma machine . Turing played a pivotal role in cracking intercepted coded messages that enabled the Allies to defeat the Nazis in many crucial engagements , including the Battle of the Atlantic ; it has been estimated that this work shortened the war in Europe by as many as four years . 
 After the war , he worked at the National Physical Laboratory , where he designed the ACE , among the first designs for a stored @-@ program computer . In 1948 Turing joined Max Newman 's Computing Machine Laboratory at the Victoria University of Manchester , where he helped develop the Manchester computers and became interested in mathematical biology . He wrote a paper on the chemical basis of morphogenesis , and predicted oscillating chemical reactions such as the Belousov – Zhabotinsky reaction , first observed in the 1960s . 
 Turing was prosecuted in 1952 for homosexual acts , when such behaviour was still a criminal act in the UK . He accepted treatment with DES ( chemical castration ) as an alternative to prison . Turing died in 1954 , 16 days before his 42nd birthday , from cyanide poisoning . An inquest determined his death as suicide , but it has been noted that the known evidence is equally consistent with accidental poisoning . In 2009 , following an Internet campaign , British Prime Minister Gordon Brown made an official public apology on behalf of the British government for " the appalling way he was treated . " Queen Elizabeth II granted him a posthumous pardon in 2013 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Turing was born in Maida Vale , London , while his father , Julius Mathison Turing ( 1873 – 1947 ) , was on leave from his position with the Indian Civil Service ( ICS ) at <unk> , Bihar and Orissa Province , in British India . Turing 's father was the son of a clergyman , the Rev. John Robert Turing , from a Scottish family of merchants that had been based in the Netherlands and included a baronet . Turing 's mother , Julius ' wife , was Ethel Sara ( née Stoney ; 1881 – 1976 ) , daughter of Edward Waller Stoney , chief engineer of the Madras Railways . The Stoneys were a Protestant Anglo @-@ Irish gentry family from both County Tipperary and County Longford , while Ethel herself had spent much of her childhood in County Clare . 
 Julius ' work with the ICS brought the family to British India , where his grandfather had been a general in the Bengal Army . However , both Julius and Ethel wanted their children to be brought up in Britain , so they moved to Maida Vale , London , where Turing was born on 23 June 1912 , as recorded by a blue plaque on the outside of the house of his birth , later the Colonnade Hotel . He had an elder brother , John ( the father of Sir John Dermot Turing , 12th Baronet of the Turing baronets ) . 
 Turing 's father 's civil service commission was still active and during Turing 's childhood years Turing 's parents travelled between Hastings in England and India , leaving their two sons to stay with a retired Army couple . At Hastings , Turing stayed at Baston Lodge , Upper Maze Hill , St Leonards @-@ on @-@ Sea , now marked with a blue plaque . 
 Very early in life , Turing showed signs of the genius that he was later to display prominently . His parents purchased a house in Guildford in 1927 , and Turing lived there during school holidays . The location is also marked with a blue plaque . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = School = = = 
 Turing 's parents enrolled him at St Michael 's , a day school at 20 Charles Road , St Leonards @-@ on @-@ Sea , at the age of six . The headmistress recognised his talent early on , as did many of his subsequent educators . In 1926 , at the age of 13 , he went on to Sherborne School , an independent school in the market town of Sherborne in Dorset . The first day of term coincided with the 1926 General Strike in Britain , but he was so determined to attend that he rode his bicycle unaccompanied 60 miles ( 97 km ) from Southampton to Sherborne , stopping overnight at an inn . 
 Turing 's natural inclination towards mathematics and science did not earn him respect from some of the teachers at Sherborne , whose definition of education placed more emphasis on the classics . His headmaster wrote to his parents : " I hope he will not fall between two stools . If he is to stay at public school , he must aim at becoming educated . If he is to be solely a Scientific Specialist , he is wasting his time at a public school " . Despite this , Turing continued to show remarkable ability in the studies he loved , solving advanced problems in 1927 without having studied even elementary calculus . In 1928 , aged 16 , Turing encountered Albert Einstein 's work ; not only did he grasp it , but it is possible that he managed to deduce Einstein 's questioning of Newton 's laws of motion from a text in which this was never made explicit . 
 = = = Christopher Morcom = = = 
 At Sherborne , Turing formed a significant friendship with fellow pupil Christopher Morcom , who has been described as Turing 's " first love " . Their relationship provided inspiration in Turing 's future endeavours , but it was cut short by Morcom 's death , in February 1930 , from complications of bovine tuberculosis , contracted after drinking infected cow 's milk some years previously . 
 The event caused Turing great sorrow . He coped with his grief by working that much harder on the topics of science and mathematics that he had shared with Morcom . In a letter to Morcom 's mother Turing said : 
 I am sure I could not have found anywhere another companion so brilliant and yet so charming and <unk> . I regarded my interest in my work , and in such things as astronomy ( to which he introduced me ) as something to be shared with him and I think he felt a little the same about me ... I know I must put as much energy if not as much interest into my work as if he were alive , because that is what he would like me to do . 
 Some have speculated that Morcom 's death was the cause of Turing 's atheism and materialism , but this seems unlikely . Apparently , at this point in his life he still believed in such concepts as a spirit , independent of the body and surviving death . In a later letter , also written to Morcom 's mother , Turing said : 
 Personally , I believe that spirit is really eternally connected with matter but certainly not by the same kind of body ... as regards the actual connection between spirit and body I consider that the body [ can ] hold on to a ' spirit ' , whilst the body is alive and awake the two are firmly connected . When the body is asleep I cannot guess what happens but when the body dies , the ' mechanism ' of the body , holding the spirit is gone and the spirit finds a new body sooner or later , perhaps immediately . 
 = = = University and work on computability = = = 
 After Sherborne , Turing studied as an undergraduate from 1931 to 1934 at King 's College , Cambridge , whence he gained first @-@ class honours in mathematics . In 1935 , at the age of 22 , he was elected a fellow of King 's on the strength of a dissertation in which he proved the central limit theorem , despite the fact that the committee had failed to identify that it had already been proven in 1922 by Jarl Waldemar <unk> . 
 In 1936 , Turing published his paper " On <unk> Numbers , with an Application to the <unk> " ( 1936 ) . In this paper , Turing reformulated Kurt Gödel 's 1931 results on the limits of proof and computation , replacing Gödel 's universal arithmetic @-@ based formal language with the formal and simple hypothetical devices that became known as Turing machines . <unk> ( decision problem ) was originally posed by German mathematician David Hilbert in 1928 . Turing proved that his " universal computing machine " would be capable of performing any conceivable mathematical computation if it were representable as an algorithm . He went on to prove that there was no solution to the decision problem by first showing that the halting problem for Turing machines is undecidable : It is not possible to decide algorithmically whether a Turing machine will ever halt . 
 Although Turing 's proof was published shortly after Alonzo Church 's equivalent proof using his lambda calculus , Turing 's approach is considerably more accessible and intuitive than Church 's . It also included a notion of a ' Universal Machine ' ( now known as a universal Turing machine ) , with the idea that such a machine could perform the tasks of any other computation machine ( as indeed could Church 's lambda calculus ) . According to the Church – Turing thesis , Turing machines and the lambda calculus are capable of computing anything that is computable . John von Neumann acknowledged that the central concept of the modern computer was due to Turing 's paper . To this day , Turing machines are a central object of study in theory of computation . 
 From September 1936 to July 1938 , Turing spent most of his time studying under Church at Princeton University . In addition to his purely mathematical work , he studied cryptology and also built three of four stages of an electro @-@ mechanical binary multiplier . In June 1938 , he obtained his PhD from Princeton ; his dissertation , Systems of Logic Based on <unk> , introduced the concept of ordinal logic and the notion of relative computing , where Turing machines are augmented with so @-@ called oracles , allowing the study of problems that cannot be solved by Turing machines . 
 When Turing returned to Cambridge , he attended lectures given in 1939 by Ludwig Wittgenstein about the foundations of mathematics . Remarkably , the lectures have been reconstructed verbatim , including interjections from Turing and other students , from students ' notes . Turing and Wittgenstein argued and disagreed , with Turing defending formalism and Wittgenstein propounding his view that mathematics does not discover any absolute truths , but rather invents them . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 During the Second World War , Turing was a leading participant in the breaking of German ciphers at Bletchley Park . The historian and wartime codebreaker Asa Briggs has said , " You needed exceptional talent , you needed genius at Bletchley and Turing 's was that genius . " From September 1938 , Turing had been working part @-@ time with the GC & CS , the British code breaking organisation . He concentrated on cryptanalysis of the Enigma , with Dilly Knox , a senior GC & CS codebreaker . Soon after the July 1939 Warsaw meeting at which the Polish Cipher Bureau had provided the British and French with the details of the wiring of Enigma rotors and their method of decrypting Enigma code messages , Turing and Knox started to work on a less fragile approach to the problem . The Polish method relied on an insecure indicator procedure that the Germans were likely to change , which they did in May 1940 . Turing 's approach was more general , using crib @-@ based decryption for which he produced the functional specification of the bombe ( an improvement of the Polish Bomba ) . 
 On 4 September 1939 , the day after the UK declared war on Germany , Turing reported to Bletchley Park , the wartime station of GC & CS . Specifying the bombe was the first of five major <unk> advances that Turing made during the war . The others were : deducing the indicator procedure used by the German navy ; developing a statistical procedure for making much more efficient use of the bombes dubbed Banburismus ; developing a procedure for working out the cam settings of the wheels of the Lorenz SZ 40 / 42 ( Tunny ) dubbed Turingery and , towards the end of the war , the development of a portable secure voice scrambler at Hanslope Park that was codenamed Delilah . 
 By using statistical techniques to optimise the trial of different possibilities in the code breaking process , Turing made an innovative contribution to the subject . He wrote two papers discussing mathematical approaches , titled The Applications of Probability to Cryptography and Paper on Statistics of <unk> , which were of such value to GC & CS and its successor GCHQ that they were not released to the UK National Archives until April 2012 , shortly before the centenary of his birth . A GCHQ mathematician said at the time that the fact that the contents had been restricted for some 70 years demonstrated their importance . 
 Turing had something of a reputation for eccentricity at Bletchley Park . He was known to his colleagues as ' Prof ' and his treatise on Enigma was known as ' The Prof 's Book ' . Jack Good , a cryptanalyst who worked with him , is quoted by Ronald Lewin as having said of Turing : 
 In the first week of June each year he would get a bad attack of hay fever , and he would cycle to the office wearing a service gas mask to keep the pollen off . His bicycle had a fault : the chain would come off at regular intervals . Instead of having it mended he would count the number of times the pedals went round and would get off the bicycle in time to adjust the chain by hand . Another of his eccentricities is that he chained his mug to the radiator pipes to prevent it being stolen . 
 While working at Bletchley , Turing , who was a talented long @-@ distance runner , occasionally ran the 40 miles ( 64 km ) to London when he was needed for high @-@ level meetings , and he was capable of world @-@ class marathon standards . Turing tried out for the 1948 British Olympic team , hampered by an injury . His tryout time for the marathon was only 11 minutes slower than British silver medalist Thomas Richards ' Olympic race time of 2 hours 35 minutes . He was Walton Athletic Club 's best runner , a fact discovered when he passed the group while running alone . 
 In 1945 , Turing was awarded the OBE by King George VI for his wartime services , but his work remained secret for many years . 
 = = = Bombe = = = 
 Within weeks of arriving at Bletchley Park , Turing had specified an electromechanical machine that could help break Enigma more effectively than the Polish bomba <unk> , from which its name was derived . The bombe , with an enhancement suggested by mathematician Gordon Welchman , became one of the primary tools , and the major automated one , used to attack Enigma @-@ enciphered messages . 
 Jack Good opined : 
 Turing 's most important contribution , I think , was of part of the design of the bombe , the <unk> machine . He had the idea that you could use , in effect , a theorem in logic which sounds , to the untrained ear , rather absurd ; namely that , from a contradiction , you can deduce everything . 
 The bombe searched for possible correct settings used for an Enigma message ( i.e. , rotor order , rotor settings and plugboard settings ) , using a suitable crib : a fragment of probable plaintext . For each possible setting of the rotors ( which had on the order of 1019 states , or 1022 states for the four @-@ rotor U @-@ boat variant ) , the bombe performed a chain of logical deductions based on the crib , implemented electrically . The bombe detected when a contradiction had occurred and ruled out that setting , moving on to the next . Most of the possible settings would cause contradictions and be discarded , leaving only a few to be investigated in detail . The first bombe was installed on 18 March 1940 . 
 By late 1941 , Turing and his fellow cryptanalysts Gordon Welchman , Hugh Alexander , and Stuart Milner @-@ Barry were frustrated . Building on the work of the Poles , they had set up a good working system for decrypting Enigma signals , but they only had a few people and a few bombes , so they did not have time to translate all the signals . In the summer , they had had considerable success , and shipping losses had fallen to under 100 @,@ 000 tons a month , but they were still on a knife @-@ edge . They badly needed more resources to keep abreast of German adjustments . They had tried to get more people and fund more bombes through the proper channels , but they were getting nowhere . Finally , breaking all the rules , on 28 October they wrote directly to Winston Churchill spelling out their difficulties , with Turing as the first named . They emphasised how small their need was compared with the vast expenditure of men and money by the forces and compared with the level of assistance they could offer to the forces . 
 As Andrew Hodges , biographer of Turing , later wrote , " This letter had an electric effect . " Churchill wrote a memo to General Ismay , which read : " ACTION THIS DAY . Make sure they have all they want on extreme priority and report to me that this has been done . " On 18 November , the chief of the secret service reported that every possible measure was being taken . The cryptographers at Bletchley Park did not know of the Prime Minister 's response , but as Milner @-@ Barry later recalled , " All that we did notice was that almost from that day the rough ways began miraculously to be made smooth . " More than two hundred bombes were in operation by the end of the war . 
 = = = Hut 8 and the naval Enigma = = = 
 Turing decided to tackle the particularly difficult problem of German naval Enigma " because no one else was doing anything about it and I could have it to myself " . In December 1939 , Turing solved the essential part of the naval indicator system , which was more complex than the indicator systems used by the other services . That same night , he also conceived of the idea of Banburismus , a sequential statistical technique ( what Abraham Wald later called sequential analysis ) to assist in breaking the naval Enigma , " though I was not sure that it would work in practice , and was not , in fact , sure until some days had actually broken . " For this , he invented a measure of weight of evidence that he called the ban . Banburismus could rule out certain sequences of the Enigma rotors , substantially reducing the time needed to test settings on the bombes . 
 In 1941 , Turing proposed marriage to Hut 8 colleague Joan Clarke , a fellow mathematician and cryptanalyst , but their engagement was short @-@ lived . After admitting his homosexuality to his fiancée , who was reportedly " unfazed " by the revelation , Turing decided that he could not go through with the marriage . 
 Turing travelled to the United States in November 1942 and worked with US Navy cryptanalysts on the naval Enigma and bombe construction in Washington ; he also visited their Computing Machine Laboratory in Dayton , Ohio . His reaction to the American bombe design was far from enthusiastic : 
 It seems a pity for them to go out of their way to build a machine to do all this stopping if it is not necessary . I am now converted to the extent of thinking that , starting from scratch on the design of a bombe , this method is about as good as our own . The American bombe program was to produce 336 bombes , one for each wheel order . I used to smile inwardly at the conception of test ( of <unk> ) can hardly be considered conclusive , as they were not testing for the bounce with electronic stop finding devices . 
 During this trip , he also assisted at Bell Labs with the development of secure speech devices . He returned to Bletchley Park in March 1943 . During his absence , Hugh Alexander had officially assumed the position of head of Hut 8 , although Alexander had been de facto head for some time ( Turing having little interest in the day @-@ to @-@ day running of the section ) . Turing became a general consultant for cryptanalysis at Bletchley Park . 
 Alexander wrote as follows about his contribution : 
 There should be no question in anyone 's mind that Turing 's work was the biggest factor in Hut 8 's success . In the early days , he was the only cryptographer who thought the problem worth tackling and not only was he primarily responsible for the main theoretical work within the Hut , but he also shared with Welchman and Keen the chief credit for the invention of the bombe . It is always difficult to say that anyone is ' absolutely indispensable ' , but if anyone was indispensable to Hut 8 , it was Turing . The pioneer 's work always tends to be forgotten when experience and routine later make everything seem easy and many of us in Hut 8 felt that the magnitude of Turing 's contribution was never fully realised by the outside world . 
 = = = Turingery = = = 
 In July 1942 , Turing devised a technique termed Turingery ( or jokingly <unk> ) for use against the Lorenz cipher messages produced by the Germans ' new <unk> ( secret writer ) machine . This was a teleprinter rotor cipher attachment codenamed Tunny at Bletchley Park . Turingery was a method of wheel @-@ breaking , i.e. , a procedure for working out the cam settings of Tunny 's wheels . He also introduced the Tunny team to Tommy Flowers who , under the guidance of Max Newman , went on to build the Colossus computer , the world 's first programmable digital electronic computer , which replaced a simpler prior machine ( the Heath Robinson ) , and whose superior speed allowed the statistical decryption techniques to be applied usefully to the messages . Some have mistakenly said that Turing was a key figure in the design of the Colossus computer . Turingery and the statistical approach of Banburismus undoubtedly fed into the thinking about cryptanalysis of the Lorenz cipher , but he was not directly involved in the Colossus development . 
 = = = Delilah = = = 
 Following his work at Bell Labs in the US , Turing pursued the idea of electronic enciphering of speech in the telephone system , and in the latter part of the war , he moved to work for the Secret Service 's Radio Security Service ( later <unk> ) at Hanslope Park . There he further developed his knowledge of electronics with the assistance of engineer Donald Bayley . Together they undertook the design and construction of a portable secure voice communications machine codenamed Delilah . It was intended for different applications , lacking capability for use with long @-@ distance radio transmissions , and in any case , Delilah was completed too late to be used during the war . Though the system worked fully , with Turing demonstrating it to officials by encrypting and decrypting a recording of a Winston Churchill speech , Delilah was not adopted for use . Turing also consulted with Bell Labs on the development of <unk> , a secure voice system that was used in the later years of the war . 
 = = Early computers and the Turing test = = 
 From 1945 to 1947 , Turing lived in Hampton , London , while he worked on the design of the ACE ( Automatic Computing Engine ) at the National Physical Laboratory ( NPL ) . He presented a paper on 19 February 1946 , which was the first detailed design of a stored @-@ program computer . Von Neumann 's incomplete First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC had predated Turing 's paper , but it was much less detailed and , according to John R. Womersley , Superintendent of the NPL Mathematics Division , it " contains a number of ideas which are Dr. Turing 's own " . Although ACE was a feasible design , the secrecy surrounding the wartime work at Bletchley Park led to delays in starting the project and he became disillusioned . In late 1947 he returned to Cambridge for a sabbatical year during which he produced a seminal work on Intelligent Machinery that was not published in his lifetime . While he was at Cambridge , the Pilot ACE was being built in his absence . It executed its first program on 10 May 1950 , and a number of later computers around the world owe much to it , including the English Electric <unk> and the American Bendix G @-@ 15 . The full version of Turing 's ACE was not built until after his death . 
 According to the memoirs of the German computer pioneer Heinz Billing from the Max Planck Institute for Physics , published by Genscher , Düsseldorf , there was a meeting between Alan Turing and Konrad Zuse . It took place in Göttingen in 1947 . The interrogation had the form of a colloquium . Participants were Womersley , Turing , Porter from England and a few German researchers like Zuse , Walther , and Billing . ( For more details see Herbert <unk> , Konrad Zuse und die Schweiz ) . 
 In 1948 Turing was appointed Reader in the Mathematics Department at the Victoria University of Manchester . In 1949 , he became Deputy Director of the Computing Machine Laboratory there , working on software for one of the earliest stored @-@ programme computers — the Manchester Mark 1 . During this time he continued to do more abstract work in mathematics , and in " Computing Machinery and Intelligence " ( Mind , October 1950 ) , Turing addressed the problem of artificial intelligence , and proposed an experiment that became known as the Turing test , an attempt to define a standard for a machine to be called " intelligent " . The idea was that a computer could be said to " think " if a human interrogator could not tell it apart , through conversation , from a human being . In the paper , Turing suggested that rather than building a programme to simulate the adult mind , it would be better rather to produce a simpler one to simulate a child 's mind and then to subject it to a course of education . A reversed form of the Turing test is widely used on the Internet ; the <unk> test is intended to determine whether the user is a human or a computer . 
 In 1948 Turing , working with his former undergraduate colleague , D. G. Champernowne , began writing a chess program for a computer that did not yet exist . By 1950 , the programme was completed and dubbed the <unk> . In 1952 , he tried to implement it on a Ferranti Mark 1 , but lacking enough power , the computer was unable to execute the programme . Instead , Turing played a game in which he simulated the computer , taking about half an hour per move . The game was recorded . The program lost to Turing 's colleague Alick Glennie , although it is said that it won a game against Champernowne 's wife . 
 His Turing test was a significant , characteristically provocative and lasting contribution to the debate regarding artificial intelligence , which continues after more than half a century . He also invented the LU decomposition method in 1948 , used today for solving matrix equations . 
 = = Pattern formation and mathematical biology = = 
 Towards the end of his life , Turing turned to mathematical biology , publishing the " The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis " in 1952 . He was interested in morphogenesis , the development of patterns and shapes in biological organisms . His central interest in the field was understanding Fibonacci phyllotaxis , the existence of Fibonacci numbers in plant structures . He suggested that a system of chemicals reacting with each other and diffusing across space , termed a reaction @-@ diffusion system , could account for " the main phenomena of morphogenesis " . Instability in the system of partial differential equations used to model the system allows for small random perturbations to homogeneous initial state to drive the development of patterns . Though published before even the structure or role of DNA was understood , Turing 's work on morphogenesis remains relevant today , and is considered a seminal piece of work in mathematical biology . Experiments suggest that Turing 's work can partially explain growth of " feathers , hair follicles , the branching pattern of lungs , and even the left @-@ right asymmetry that puts the heart on the left side of the chest . " In 2012 , <unk> , et al. found that in mice , removal of Hox genes causes an increase in the number of digits without an increase in the overall size of the limb , suggesting that Hox genes control digit formation by tuning the wavelength of a Turing @-@ type mechanism . Later papers , though promised , were not available until Collected Works of A. M. Turing was published in 1992 . 
 = = Conviction for indecency = = 
 In January 1952 , Turing , then 39 , started a relationship with Arnold Murray , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old unemployed man . Turing had met Murray just before Christmas outside the Regal Cinema when walking down Manchester 's Oxford Road and invited him to lunch . On 23 January Turing 's house was burgled . Murray told Turing that the burglar was an acquaintance of his , and Turing reported the crime to the police . During the investigation he acknowledged a sexual relationship with Murray . Homosexual acts were criminal offences in the United Kingdom at that time , and both men were charged with gross indecency under Section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885 . Initial committal proceedings for the trial were held on 27 February during which Turing 's solicitor " reserved his defence " . 
 Later , convinced by the advice of his brother and his own solicitor , Turing entered a plea of guilty . The case , Regina v. Turing and Murray , was brought to trial on 31 March 1952 . Turing was convicted and given a choice between imprisonment and probation , which would be conditional on his agreement to undergo hormonal treatment designed to reduce libido . He accepted the option of treatment via injections of what was then called <unk> ( now known as <unk> or DES ) , a synthetic oestrogen ; this treatment was continued for the course of one year . The treatment rendered Turing impotent and caused <unk> , fulfilling in the literal sense Turing 's prediction that " no doubt I shall emerge from it all a different man , but quite who I 've not found out " . Murray was given a conditional discharge . 
 Turing 's conviction led to the removal of his security clearance and barred him from continuing with his cryptographic consultancy for the Government Communications Headquarters ( GCHQ ) , the British signals intelligence agency that had evolved from GC & CS in 1946 ( though he kept his academic job ) . He was denied entry into the United States after his conviction in 1952 , but was free to visit other European countries . At the time , there was acute public anxiety about homosexual entrapment of spies by Soviet agents , because of the recent exposure of the first two members of the Cambridge Five , Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean , as KGB double agents . Turing was never accused of espionage , but in common with all who had worked at Bletchley Park , he was prevented by the Official Secrets Act from discussing his war work . 
 = = Death = = 
 On 8 June 1954 , Turing 's housekeeper found him dead . He had died the previous day . A post @-@ mortem examination established that the cause of death was cyanide poisoning . When his body was discovered , an apple lay half @-@ eaten beside his bed , and although the apple was not tested for cyanide , it was speculated that this was the means by which a fatal dose was consumed . An inquest determined that he had committed suicide , and he was cremated at Woking Crematorium on 12 June 1954 . Turing 's ashes were scattered there , just as his father 's had been . Andrew Hodges and another biographer , David Leavitt , have both suggested that Turing was re @-@ enacting a scene from the Walt Disney film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) , his favourite fairy tale , both noting that ( in Leavitt 's words ) he took " an especially keen pleasure in the scene where the Wicked Queen immerses her apple in the poisonous brew " . 
 = = = Alternative death theories = = = 
 Philosophy professor Jack Copeland has questioned various aspects of the coroner 's historical verdict . He suggests an alternative explanation for the cause of Turing 's death , this being the accidental inhalation of cyanide fumes from an apparatus for gold electroplating spoons , which uses potassium cyanide to dissolve the gold . Turing had such an apparatus set up in his tiny spare room . Copeland notes that the autopsy findings were more consistent with inhalation than with ingestion of the poison . Turing also habitually ate an apple before bed , and it was not unusual for it to be discarded half @-@ eaten . In addition , Turing had reportedly borne his legal setbacks and hormone treatment ( which had been discontinued a year previously ) " with good humour " and had shown no sign of despondency prior to his death , setting down , in fact , a list of tasks he intended to complete upon return to his office after the holiday weekend . At the time , Turing 's mother believed that the ingestion was accidental , resulting from her son 's careless storage of laboratory chemicals . Biographer Andrew Hodges suggests that Turing may have arranged the cyanide experiment deliberately , to give his mother some plausible deniability . 
 = = Recognition and tributes = = 
 A biography published by the Royal Society shortly after Turing 's death , while his wartime work was still subject to the Official Secrets Act , recorded : 
 Three remarkable papers written just before the war , on three diverse mathematical subjects , show the quality of the work that might have been produced if he had settled down to work on some big problem at that critical time . For his work at the Foreign Office he was awarded the OBE . 
 Since 1966 , the Turing Award has been given annually by the Association for Computing Machinery for technical or theoretical contributions to the computing community . It is widely considered to be the computing world 's highest honour , equivalent to the Nobel Prize . 
 On 23 June 1998 , on what would have been Turing 's 86th birthday , his biographer , Andrew Hodges , unveiled an official English Heritage blue plaque at his birthplace and childhood home in Warrington Crescent , London , later the Colonnade Hotel . To mark the 50th anniversary of his death , a memorial plaque was unveiled on 7 June 2004 at his former residence , <unk> , in Wilmslow , Cheshire . 
 On 13 March 2000 , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines issued a set of postage stamps to celebrate the greatest achievements of the 20th century , one of which carries a portrait of Turing against a background of repeated 0s and 1s , and is captioned : " 1937 : Alan Turing 's theory of digital computing " . On 1 April 2003 , Turing 's work at Bletchley Park was named an IEEE Milestone . On 28 October 2004 , a bronze statue of Alan Turing sculpted by John W. Mills was unveiled at the University of Surrey in Guildford , marking the 50th anniversary of Turing 's death ; it portrays him carrying his books across the campus . 
 Turing was one of four mathematicians examined in the BBC documentary entitled Dangerous Knowledge ( 2008 ) . The Princeton Alumni Weekly named Turing the second most significant alumnus in the history of Princeton University , second only to President James Madison . A 1 @.@ 5 @-@ ton , life @-@ size statue of Turing was unveiled on 19 June 2007 at Bletchley Park . Built from approximately half a million pieces of Welsh slate , it was sculpted by Stephen Kettle , having been commissioned by the American billionaire Sidney Frank . 
 Turing has been honoured in various ways in Manchester , the city where he worked towards the end of his life . In 1994 , a stretch of the <unk> road ( the Manchester city intermediate ring road ) was named " Alan Turing Way " . A bridge carrying this road was widened , and carries the name Alan Turing Bridge . A statue of Turing was unveiled in Manchester on 23 June 2001 in Sackville Park , between the University of Manchester building on Whitworth Street and Canal Street . The memorial statue depicts the " father of computer science " sitting on a bench at a central position in the park . Turing is shown holding an apple . The cast bronze bench carries in relief the text ' Alan Mathison Turing 1912 – 1954 ' , and the motto ' Founder of Computer Science ' as it could appear if encoded by an Enigma machine : ' <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ' . 
 A plaque at the statue 's feet reads ' Father of computer science , mathematician , logician , wartime codebreaker , victim of prejudice ' . There is also a Bertrand Russell quotation : " Mathematics , rightly viewed , possesses not only truth , but supreme beauty — a beauty cold and austere , like that of sculpture . " The sculptor buried his own old Amstrad computer under the plinth as a tribute to " the godfather of all modern computers " . 
 In 1999 , Time magazine named Turing as one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century and stated , " The fact remains that everyone who taps at a keyboard , opening a spreadsheet or a word @-@ processing program , is working on an incarnation of a Turing machine . " 
 In 2002 , Turing was ranked twenty @-@ first on the BBC 's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons following a UK @-@ wide vote . In 2006 , British writer and mathematician Ioan James chose Turing as one of twenty people to feature in his book about famous historical figures who may have had some of the traits of Asperger syndrome . In 2010 , actor / playwright Jade Esteban Estrada portrayed Turing in the solo musical , <unk> : The Lesbian and Gay History of the World , Vol . 4 . In 2011 , in The Guardian 's " My hero " series , writer Alan Garner chose Turing as his hero and described how they had met whilst out jogging in the early 1950s . Garner remembered Turing as " funny and witty " and said that he " talked endlessly " . In 2006 , Alan Turing was named with online resources as an LGBT History Month Icon . In 2006 , Boston Pride named Turing their Honorary Grand Marshal . 
 The logo of Apple Inc. is often erroneously referred to as a tribute to Alan Turing , with the bite mark a reference to his death . Both the designer of the logo and the company deny that there is any homage to Turing in the design . Stephen Fry has recounted asking Steve Jobs whether the design was intentional , saying that Jobs ' response was , " God , we wish it were . " In February 2011 , Turing 's papers from the Second World War were bought for the nation with an 11th @-@ hour bid by the National Heritage Memorial Fund , allowing them to stay at Bletchley Park . 
 In 2012 , Turing was inducted into the Legacy Walk , an outdoor public display that celebrates LGBT history and people . 
 The francophone singer @-@ songwriter Salvatore Adamo made a tribute to Turing with his song " Alan et la Pomme " . Turing 's life and work featured in a BBC children 's programme about famous scientists – Absolute Genius with Dick and Dom – first broadcast on 12 March 2014 . 
 On 17 May 2014 , the world 's first work of public art to recognise Alan Turing as gay was commissioned in Bletchley , close by to Bletchley Park where his war @-@ time work was carried out . The commission was announced by the owners of Milton Keynes @-@ based LGBT venue and nightclub Pink <unk> to mark International Day Against Homophobia and <unk> . The work was unveiled at a ceremony on Turing 's birthday , 23 June 2014 , and is placed outside Pink Punter 's alongside the busy Watling Street , the old main road to London where Turing himself would have passed by on many occasions . On 22 October 2014 , Turing was inducted into the NSA Hall of Honor . 
 = = = Tributes by universities and research institutions = = = 
 The computer room at King 's College , Cambridge , Alan Turing 's alma mater , is called the Turing Room . 
 The Turing Room at the University of Edinburgh 's School of Informatics houses a bust of Turing by Eduardo Paolozzi , and a set ( No. 42 / 50 ) of his Turing prints ( 2000 ) . 
 The University of Surrey has a statue of Turing on their main piazza and one of the buildings of Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences is named after him . 
 Istanbul <unk> University organises an annual conference on the theory of computation called " Turing Days " . 
 The University of Texas at Austin has an honours computer science programme named the Turing Scholars . 
 In the early 1960s , Stanford University named the sole lecture room of the <unk> Hall Mathematics building " Alan Turing Auditorium " . 
 One of the amphitheatres of the Computer Science department ( <unk> ) at the University of Lille in northern France is named in honour of Alan M. Turing ( the other amphitheatre is named after Kurt Gödel ) . 
 The Department of Computer Science at Pontifical Catholic University of Chile , the University of Buenos Aires , the Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico , Los Andes University in Bogotá , Colombia , King 's College , Cambridge , Bangor University in Wales , the Universities of Ghent and Mons in Belgium , the University of Turin ( Università degli Studi di Torino ) , the University of Puerto Rico at Humacao , Keele University and the University of Washington have computer laboratories named after Turing . 
 The University of Manchester , the Open University , Oxford Brookes University and Aarhus University ( in Aarhus , Denmark ) all have buildings named after Turing . 
 Alan Turing Road in the Surrey Research Park and the Alan Turing Way , part of the Manchester inner ring road are named after Alan Turing . 
 Carnegie Mellon University has a granite bench , situated in the Hornbostel Mall , with the name " A. M. Turing " carved across the top , " Read " down the left leg , and " Write " down the other . 
 The University of Oregon has a bust of Turing on the side of Deschutes Hall , the computer science building . 
 The École Polytechnique <unk> de Lausanne has a road and a square named after Alan Turing ( Chemin de Alan Turing and Place de Alan Turing ) . 
 The Faculty of Informatics and Information Technologies Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava , Slovakia , has a lecture room named " Turing Auditorium " . 
 The Paris Diderot University has a lecture room named " <unk> Turing " . 
 The Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science at the University of Würzburg has a lecture hall named " Turing <unk> " . 
 The Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse has a lecture room named " <unk> Turing " ( <unk> U4 ) . 
 The largest conference hall at the Amsterdam Science Park is named <unk> . 
 King 's College London 's School of Natural and Mathematical Sciences awards the Alan Turing Centenary Prize . 
 The University of Kent named the Turing College after him at their Canterbury campus . 
 The campus of the École <unk> has a building named after Alan Turing ; it is a research centre whose premises are shared by the École Polytechnique , the <unk> and Microsoft . 
 The University of Toronto developed the Turing programming language in 1982 , named after Alan Turing 
 The Faculty of Exact Sciences at the University of Buenos Aires has a computer laboratory named after Alan Turing . 
 The campus of State University of Campinas in Brazil has an avenue , one of its largest , named after Turing . 
 = = Government apology and pardon = = 
 In August 2009 , John Graham @-@ Cumming started a petition urging the British Government to apologise for Turing 's prosecution as a homosexual . The petition received more than 30 @,@ 000 signatures . Prime Minister Gordon Brown acknowledged the petition , releasing a statement on 10 September 2009 apologising and describing the treatment of Turing as " appalling " : 
 Thousands of people have come together to demand justice for Alan Turing and recognition of the appalling way he was treated . While Turing was dealt with under the law of the time and we can 't put the clock back , his treatment was of course utterly unfair and I am pleased to have the chance to say how deeply sorry I and we all are for what happened to him ... So on behalf of the British government , and all those who live freely thanks to Alan 's work I am very proud to say : we 're sorry , you deserved so much better . 
 In December 2011 , William Jones created an e @-@ petition requesting the British Government pardon Turing for his conviction of " gross indecency " : 
 We ask the HM Government to grant a pardon to Alan Turing for the conviction of " gross indecency " . In 1952 , he was convicted of " gross indecency " with another man and was forced to undergo so @-@ called " organo @-@ therapy " – chemical castration . Two years later , he killed himself with cyanide , aged just 41 . Alan Turing was driven to a terrible despair and early death by the nation he 'd done so much to save . This remains a shame on the British government and British history . A pardon can go to some way to healing this damage . It may act as an apology to many of the other gay men , not as well @-@ known as Alan Turing , who were subjected to these laws . 
 The petition gathered over 37 @,@ 000 signatures , but the request was discouraged by Lord McNally , who gave the following opinion in his role as the Justice Minister : 
 A posthumous pardon was not considered appropriate as Alan Turing was properly convicted of what at the time was a criminal offence . He would have known that his offence was against the law and that he would be prosecuted . It is tragic that Alan Turing was convicted of an offence that now seems both cruel and absurd — particularly poignant given his outstanding contribution to the war effort . However , the law at the time required a prosecution and , as such , long @-@ standing policy has been to accept that such convictions took place and , rather than trying to alter the historical context and to put right what cannot be put right , ensure instead that we never again return to those times . 
 On 26 July 2012 , a bill was introduced in the House of Lords to grant a statutory pardon to Turing for offences under section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885 , of which he was convicted on 31 March 1952 . Late in the year in a letter to The Daily Telegraph , the physicist Stephen Hawking and 10 other signatories including the Astronomer Royal Lord Rees , President of the Royal Society Sir Paul Nurse , Lady Trumpington ( who worked for Turing during the war ) and Lord Sharkey ( the bill 's sponsor ) called on Prime Minister David Cameron to act on the pardon request . The Government indicated it would support the bill , and it passed its third reading in the Lords in October . 
 Before the bill could be debated in the House of Commons , the Government elected to proceed under the royal prerogative of mercy . On 24 December 2013 , Queen Elizabeth II signed a pardon for Turing 's conviction for gross indecency , with immediate effect . Announcing the pardon , Justice Secretary Chris Grayling said Turing deserved to be " remembered and recognised for his fantastic contribution to the war effort " and not for his later criminal conviction . The Queen officially pronounced Turing pardoned in August 2014 . The Queen 's action is only the fourth royal pardon granted since the conclusion of the Second World War . This case is unusual in that pardons are normally granted only when the person is technically innocent , and a request has been made by the family or other interested party . Neither condition was met in regard to Turing 's conviction . 
 In a letter to Prime Minister David Cameron after announcement of the pardon , human rights advocate Peter Tatchell criticised the decision to single out Turing due to his fame and achievements , when thousands of others convicted under the same law have not received pardons . Tatchell also called for a new investigation into Turing 's death : 
 A new inquiry is long overdue , even if only to dispel any doubts about the true cause of his death – including speculation that he was murdered by the security services ( or others ) . I think murder by state agents is unlikely . There is no known evidence pointing to any such act . However , it is a major failing that this possibility has never been considered or investigated . 
 = = Centenary celebrations = = 
 To mark the 100th anniversary of Turing 's birth , the Turing Centenary Advisory Committee ( <unk> ) co @-@ ordinated the Alan Turing Year , a year @-@ long programme of events around the world honouring Turing 's life and achievements . The <unk> , chaired by S. Barry Cooper with Alan Turing 's nephew Sir John Dermot Turing acting as Honorary President , worked with the University of Manchester faculty members and a broad spectrum of people from Cambridge University and Bletchley Park . 
 On 23 June 2012 , Google featured an interactive doodle where visitors had to change the instructions of a Turing Machine , so when run , the symbols on the tape would match a provided sequence , featuring " Google " in Baudot @-@ Murray code . 
 The Bletchley Park Trust collaborated with Winning Moves to publish an Alan Turing edition of the board game Monopoly . The game 's squares and cards have been revised to tell the story of Alan Turing 's life , from his birthplace in Maida Vale to Hut 8 at Bletchley Park . The game also includes a replica of an original hand @-@ drawn board created by William Newman , son of Turing 's mentor , Max Newman , which Turing played on in the 1950s . 
 In the Philippines , the Department of Philosophy at De La Salle University @-@ Manila hosted Turing 2012 , an international conference on philosophy , artificial intelligence , and cognitive science from 27 to 28 March 2012 to commemorate the centenary birth of Turing . Madurai , India held celebrations with a programme attended by 6 @,@ 000 students . 
 = = = UK celebrations = = = 
 There was a three @-@ day conference in Manchester in June , a two @-@ day conference in San Francisco , organised by the ACM , and a birthday party and Turing Centenary Conference in Cambridge organised at King 's College , Cambridge , and the University of Cambridge , the latter organised by the association <unk> in Europe . 
 The Science Museum in London launched a free exhibition devoted to Turing 's life and achievements in June 2012 , to run until July 2013 . In February 2012 , the Royal Mail issued a stamp featuring Turing as part of its " Britons of Distinction " series . The London 2012 Olympic Torch flame was passed on in front of Turing 's statue in Sackville Gardens , Manchester , on the evening of 23 June 2012 , the 100th anniversary of his birth . 
 On 22 June 2012 Manchester City Council , in partnership with the Lesbian and Gay Foundation , launched the Alan Turing Memorial Award , which will recognise individuals or groups who have made a significant contribution to the fight against homophobia in Manchester . 
 At the University of Oxford , a new course in Computer Science and Philosophy was established to coincide with the centenary of Turing 's birth . 
 Previous events have included a celebration of Turing 's life and achievements , at the University of Manchester , arranged by the British Logic Colloquium and the British Society for the History of Mathematics on 5 June 2004 . 
 = = Portrayal in adaptations = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 Breaking the Code is a 1986 play by Hugh Whitemore about Alan Turing . The play ran in London 's West End beginning in November 1986 and on Broadway from 15 November 1987 to 10 April 1988 . There was also a 1996 BBC television production ( broadcast in the United States by PBS ) . In all three performances Turing was played by Derek Jacobi . The Broadway production was nominated for three Tony Awards including Best Actor in a Play , Best Featured Actor in a Play , and Best Direction of a Play , and for two Drama Desk Awards , for Best Actor and Best Featured Actor . Turing was again portrayed by Jacobi in the 1996 television film adaptation of Breaking the Code . 
 In 2012 , in honour of the Turing Centennial , American Lyric Theater commissioned an operatic exploration of the life and death of Alan Turing from composer Justine F. Chen and librettist David <unk> . Titled The Life and Death ( s ) of Alan Turing , the opera is a historical fantasia on the life of the brilliant scientist . The opera will receive a concert performance in October 2015 in New York City . In November 2014 , the opera and several other artistic works inspired by Turing 's life were featured on Studio 360 . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 In William Gibson 's Neuromancer the Turing police have jurisdiction over AIs . ( 1984 ) 
 Turing is featured in the Neal Stephenson novel Cryptonomicon ( 1999 ) . 
 The 2006 novel A Madman Dreams of Turing Machines contrasts fictionalised accounts of the lives and ideas of Turing and Kurt Gödel . 
 The 2015 novel Speak , written by Louisa Hall , includes a series of fictional letters written from Turing to his best friend 's mother throughout his life , detailing his research about artificial intelligence . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Electronic music duo Matmos released an EP titled For Alan Turing in 2006 , which was based on material commissioned by Dr. Robert <unk> and David <unk> of the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute . In one of its tracks , an original Enigma Machine is sampled . 
 In 2012 , Spanish group <unk> dedicated their LP Un <unk> <unk> <unk> . Recital para Alan Turing ( A dubious binary digit . Concert for Alan Turing ) to the memory of the mathematician . 
 A musical work inspired by Turing 's life , written by Neil Tennant and Chris Lowe of the Pet Shop Boys , entitled A Man from the Future , was announced in late 2013 . It was performed by the Pet Shop Boys and Juliet Stevenson ( narrator ) , the BBC Singers , and the BBC Concert Orchestra conducted by Dominic Wheeler at the BBC Proms in the Royal Albert Hall on 23 July 2014 . 
 Codebreaker is also the title of a choral work by the composer James McCarthy . It includes settings of texts by the poets Wilfred Owen , Sara Teasdale , Walt Whitman , Oscar Wilde and Robert Burns that are used to illustrate aspects of Turing 's life . It was premiered on 26 April 2014 at the Barbican Centre in London , where it was performed by the Hertfordshire Chorus , who commissioned the work , led by David Temple with the soprano soloist Naomi Harvey providing the voice of Turing 's mother . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The drama @-@ documentary Codebreaker , about Turing 's life , was aired by UK 's Channel 4 in November 2011 and was released in the US in October 2012 . It is also known as Britain 's Greatest Codebreaker . The film features Ed Stoppard as Turing and Henry Goodman as Franz Greenbaum . 
 The historical drama film The Imitation Game , directed by Morten Tyldum and starring Benedict Cumberbatch as Turing and Keira Knightley as Joan Clarke , was released in the UK on 14 November 2014 and released theatrically in the US on 28 November 2014 . It is about Alan Turing breaking the Enigma code with other codebreakers in Bletchley Park . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Turing was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society ( FRS ) in 1951 . In addition , he has had several things named in his honour . 
 Good – Turing frequency estimation 
 Turing completeness 
 Turing degree 
 Turing Institute 
 Turing Lecture 
 Turing machine examples 
 Turing patterns 
 Turing reduction 
 Turing switch 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Copeland , B. Jack ( ed . ) . " The Mind and the Computing Machine : Alan Turing and others " . The Rutherford Journal . 
 Copeland , B. Jack ( ed . ) . " Alan Turing : Father of the Modern Computer " . The Rutherford Journal . 
 Hodges , Andrew ( 27 August 2007 ) . " Alan Turing " . In Edward N. Zalta ( ed . ) . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ( Winter 2009 ed . ) . Stanford University . Retrieved 10 January 2011 . 
 Hodges , Andrew ( 2004 ) . " Turing , Alan Mathison " . Oxford Dictionary of National Biography ( online ed . ) . Oxford University Press. doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / ref : <unk> / <unk> . ( Subscription or UK public library membership required . ) 
 Gray , Paul ( 29 March 1999 ) . " Computer Scientist : Alan Turing " . TIME . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Andrew Hodges ( 2014 ) . Alan Turing : The Enigma . Princeton University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . ( originally published in 1983 ) ; basis of the film The Imitation Game 
 George Dyson ( 2012 ) . Turing 's Cathedral : The Origins of the Digital Universe . Vintage . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Gleick , James , The Information : A History , a Theory , a Flood , New York : Pantheon , 2011 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 375 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 = = = Works of Turing = = = 
 List of publications from Microsoft Academic Search 
 Alan Turing 's publications indexed by Google Scholar , a service provided by Google 
 Turing , Alan ( October 1950 ) , " Computing Machinery and Intelligence " , Mind <unk> ( 236 ) : 433 – 460 , doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / mind / <unk> , ISSN 0026 @-@ <unk> , retrieved 2008 @-@ 08 @-@ 18 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Oral history interview with Nicholas C. Metropolis , Charles Babbage Institute , University of Minnesota . Metropolis was the first director of computing services at Los Alamos National Laboratory ; topics include the relationship between Alan Turing and John von Neumann 
 = Chlemoutsi = 
 Chlemoutsi ( Greek : <unk> or <unk> ) is a medieval castle in the northwest of the Elis regional unit in the Peloponnese peninsula of southern Greece , in the Kastro @-@ Kyllini municipality . 
 It was built in the early 1220s by the Crusader rulers of the Principality of Achaea as their main stronghold , and is perhaps the finest fortification of the early period of Frankish rule in Greece preserved in the country today . The castle is located on a small plateau 226 metres ( 741 ft ) above sea level , and comprises a central hexagonal keep , built around an inner courtyard and containing two @-@ storeyed halls along its entire length , and complemented by an outer wall enclosing an outer yard on its western side . The castle is largely preserved in its original 13th @-@ century state , with only minor later modifications for the installation of artillery . 
 Located near the Principality 's capital of Andravida and the chief port of Glarentza , Chlemoutsi played a central role in the Principality 's history , but was never actually besieged . After coming under Byzantine rule in 1427 , it was captured in 1460 by the Ottoman Empire , along with the rest of the Byzantine Despotate of the Morea . In Ottoman times , minor additions were made to provide platforms for artillery , but the castle progressively lost its significance and was completely deserted by the late 18th century . In 1825 , during the Greek War of Independence , part of its outer wall was demolished to prevent the Greek rebels from using it . Today it is a preserved monument open to the public . 
 = = History = = 
 The castle was built between 1220 and 1223 , during the rule of the Prince of Achaea Geoffrey I of Villehardouin , as a result of a dispute between the Prince and the clergy of the Principality . Geoffrey had asked the clergy , which owned almost a third of the Principality 's lands but was not obliged to render military service , for additional donations to help defend the realm . When the clergy refused , claiming that they owed allegiance only to the Pope , Geoffrey confiscated Church property , and began construction of Chlemoutsi with the new funds . The fortress was set on a new foundation , with no previous structure identifiable on this site . Its French name , Clairmont or Clermont , most probably gave rise to the Greek form of <unk> [ u ] <unk> , which more recently became Chlemoutsi , although various theories have been proposed as to the name 's origin , with suggestions of Greek , Albanian or Slavic roots pre @-@ dating the Frankish fortress . From the 15th century , Italian sources came to call it Castel <unk> , apparently through a confusion with the seat of the Principality 's mint in nearby Glarentza , which until the middle of the 14th century minted silver <unk> coins . 
 The new fortress was near the princely capital of Andravida , some 13 kilometres ( 8 mi ) away , and ca . 5 kilometres ( 3 mi ) from the Principality 's largest port and town , Glarentza . These three sites were the administrative heart of the Principality and , along with the fortress of Beauvoir or <unk> at Katakolo further south , served to secure control of the fertile plain of Elis , which formed a major part of the princely domain ( along with Corinthia and the Evrotas valley in Laconia ) . Despite its importance , however , throughout the history of the Principality of Achaea Chlemoutsi was never the object of major military operations ; rather , its main function seems to have been as a prison for distinguished captives , such as the Byzantine generals taken captive at the Battle of <unk> in c . 1263 , one of whom , Alexios Philes , died in captivity there . 
 When the Prince William II of Villehardouin died in 1278 , the princely domain , as well as the princely title , went to the King of Naples , Charles of Anjou , according to the provisions of the Treaty of Viterbo . Chlemoutsi , however , had been granted by William to his wife , Anna Komnene Doukaina , and she retained it , along with the <unk> ' hereditary Barony of Kalamata in Messenia . In 1280 , Anna married the baron Nicholas II of Saint Omer , lord of one half of Thebes . The latter 's acquisition of some of the " most fertile lands and the most powerful fortress in the Morea " , in the words of the French medievalist Antoine Bon , in addition to the wealth he had inherited from his first marriage , worried King Charles . On 25 September 1281 , an agreement was reached whereby Chlemoutsi and Kalamata were ceded to the princely domain in exchange for half the lands of the recently deceased Leonard of <unk> , comprising estates in both the Morea ( in Elis and Messenia ) and Italy . In the early 1290s , Thomas Komnenos Doukas , son and successor of the Despot of Epirus Nikephoros I Komnenos Doukas , was held at Chlemoutsi as a hostage for his father 's behaviour . 
 In c . 1311 , the sole surviving daughter of William II Villehardouin , Margaret , sought , by virtue of her descent , to claim the Principality , or at least a portion of it including Chlemoutsi and Kalamata , from the Angevin Kings of Naples who had controlled it since 1278 . To this end , in February 1314 she wedded her only daughter , Isabel of <unk> , to Ferdinand of Majorca , and passed her titles and claims to them . She then returned to Achaea , where she was imprisoned by the Angevin bailli at Chlemoutsi , where she died in February or March 1315 . Ferdinand landed at Glarentza in June 1315 , claiming the Principality from the Angevin nominee , Louis of Burgundy . Chlemoutsi and most of Elis fell rapidly under Ferdinand 's control , but he was eventually defeated and killed in the Battle of <unk> in July 1316 . The remaining <unk> troops ceded the fortresses they held in Elis and set sail for home shortly after . 
 In 1418 , Glarentza and Chlemoutsi passed into the hands of Carlo I Tocco , who began to expand his territories in the Morea at the expense of Prince Centurione II Zaccaria . After his defeat by the Byzantine navy in the 1427 Battle of the <unk> , however , Tocco was forced to cede his possessions to the Despot of the Morea , Constantine Palaiologos ( who would become the last Byzantine emperor ) , in the form of a dowry for his daughter Maddalena Tocco . Chlemoutsi now became Constantine 's residence and his base of operations against the last major Latin stronghold , the city of Patras , in 1428 – 30 . The castle remained in Byzantine hands until it was captured , along with the rest of the Morea , by the Ottoman Empire in 1460 . The bastard son of Centurione II , John Asen Zaccaria , was also imprisoned at Chlemoutsi , but managed to escape in 1453 and lead a rebellion against the Byzantine <unk> of the Morea . 
 With the Ottoman conquest , the castle lost much of its strategic significance , although it was occupied by the Venetians during the Ottoman – Venetian War of 1463 – 79 , and attacked by the Knights of Malta in 1620 . During the period of Venetian rule in the Peloponnese ( 1687 – 1715 ) after the Morean War , it served as the seat of a fiscal district . The reports of the Venetian governors at the time , however , dismiss Chlemoutsi as small in size and barely inhabited . In 1701 the provveditore generale Francesco Grimani proposed that it be destroyed , as it was too far from the sea — a vital concern for the maritime @-@ minded Republic — and difficult to defend , and recommended that Glarentza , by then abandoned and ruined , be rebuilt instead . In 1715 , the Morea returned to Ottoman control , and by the early 19th century , the fortress had been completely deserted . In 1825 , during the Greek War of Independence , the forces of Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt took the castle and dismantled a portion of its walls , so that it could not be used by the Greek rebels . 
 Today the castle is a preserved landmark , under the 6th <unk> of Byzantine Antiquities . It can be visited and is easily accessible by car from nearby Kyllini . 
 = = Location and architecture = = 
 Chlemoutsi remains " the most beautiful testimony of the military art in the Frankish principality " , according to A. Bon . Its location , on a small plateau of 226 metres ( 741 ft ) above sea level near the modern village of Kastro @-@ Kyllini , gives it a commanding view of the surrounding countryside , encompassing the coastal plain of Elis and reaching to the Ionian Islands of Zakynthos and Cephalonia and even to the coast of Aetolia @-@ Acarnania on the Greek mainland . The view from this location and the scale and quality of its construction prove , according to A. Bon , that Chlemoutsi was not built as a citadel for Glarentza , but that it fulfilled an independent military role , that of securing control over the wider region . 
 The castle is located on the top of an irregular plateau , whose southern , eastern and northern slopes are abrupt , with the softer western slope , towards the modern village of Kastro , offering the easiest access . The heart of the fortress consists of a large hexagonal keep , complemented towards the west , where the terrain is more accessible , by an additional outer wall , likewise of irregular polygonal outline , enclosing a second , much wider courtyard ( the outer ward ) . 
 = = = Outer ward = = = 
 The outer gate of the fortress lies in the northwestern side of the outer ward , originally within a small recess in the outer curtain wall , protected by a portcullis . The recess was later filled by the Turks with a smaller set of walls , so as to preserve unbroken the outer wall 's frontage . The Ottomans also added additional buttresses to the junctions of their wall with the original curtain wall , while the space between the original gate and the new , Ottoman entrance was left unroofed and open to the sky . From the gate , the outer wall continues east and then south , in three distinct stretches of walls , to the keep . The wall is built of limestone masonry , with little evidence of brick or tiles , topped by a small inner parapet and Ottoman @-@ built crenellations , now largely ruined . From the beginning , buildings were built leaning on the outer wall , as evidenced by the remnant of their foundations , side walls joining the curtain wall 's inner face , or the presence of fireplaces and lancet windows in the curtain wall . One of these buildings is largely preserved immediately next to the outer gate . Windows , fireplaces etc. display a uniformity of style that points to their construction at the same time as the fortress itself . At the point where the outer wall joins the keep , a small postern is located , as well as a stairway leading up to the outer wall 's chemin de ronde . 
 On the other side of the gate , the curtain wall continues in two stretches southwest and south , with a tower — probably an Ottoman addition — at their junction , before turning sharply to the east . A <unk> bastion was built behind this southwestern corner by the Turks as an artillery platform . Along the western wall too there is evidence of buildings erected adjoining the curtain wall . The southern wall shows evidence of later , probably Turkish , repairs , with broken tiles alternating with stone courses . It is in this stretch that the cannons of Ibrahim Pasha effected the breach in the wall in 1825 . Roughly halfway between the southwestern corner and the keep , the wall abruptly turns inwards for about 5 metres ( 16 ft ) around an Ottoman @-@ built tower , before continuing east and then northeast to join the keep . Another postern is located about 10 metres ( 33 ft ) from the junction of the two walls . 
 = = = Keep = = = 
 The keep is of an irregular hexagonal shape , measuring some 90 metres ( 300 ft ) from east to west and c . 60 metres ( 200 ft ) from south to north , with its six walls enclosing an inner courtyard of 61 metres by 31 metres ( 200 ft × 102 ft ) . Its walls hold a series of two @-@ storeyed halls , forming a ring of rooms around the central courtyard . The lower storey , separated from the upper by wooden floors — now mostly collapsed with only the niches for the support of beams testifying to their existence — has arches opening into the courtyard . The upper storey features large galleries with ovoid barrel vaults " of immaculate <unk> ashlar " ( Andrews ) , supported by side walls of limestone blocks and by regularly spaced transverse arches every 7 – 10 metres ( 23 – 33 ft ) . These have collapsed except for the pilasters , set into the wall and topped by Byzantine @-@ style chamfered imposts . 
 The galleries feature mostly a uniform style — common in 12th @-@ century French architecture — of double @-@ arched windows set within a vaulted depression in the walls , with banquettes on either side . The galleries also feature niches and fireplaces similar to those of the outer curtain wall and the associated buildings , reinforcing the " stylistic uniformity " ( Andrews ) of the castle . Chlemoutsi was well suited for a princely residence : its halls , arranged around the inner courtyard , were spacious , comfortable , and well @-@ lit , cool in the summer and provided with several fireplaces for the winter months . 
 The entrance to the keep was located in an avant @-@ corps on the northern side , with a vaulted passageway between two gates leading from the outer courtyard to the inner rooms of the keep . The keep itself features just two round towers of 5 m diameter with square bases , both located on the western side and within the outer ward . The more southern of the two is almost totally ruined , probably as a result of Ibrahim Pasha 's destruction . The more exposed eastern and southern sides featured no towers . According to the historian Kevin Andrews , this is perhaps because they were judged to be adequately protected by the steep terrain . 
 The roof of the keep appears to have originally been sloping or gable @-@ shaped , with a chemin de ronde and parapet on its outer face , but was latter rebuilt with the outer wall raised and the roof replaced by the current , platform @-@ like terrace . Access to the roof is given via a staircase from the courtyard , immediately next to the main entrance into the keep , and by a spiral staircase , now collapsed , in the western corner . The inner parapet of the new roof survives , but few traces of the outer parapet remain , except for a few Ottoman @-@ era merlons . No provision appears to have been made for the installation of guns here . 
 = = = Architecture and importance = = = 
 Judging by the relative uniformity of construction , the castle of Chlemoutsi appears to have been built within a few years , c . 1220 – 23 . Most of the architectural elements found in the castle are typical of French 12th @-@ century architecture ; as K. Andrews writes , " lacking purely Gothic features , it appears to be more a transition from the Romanesque " . A few native Byzantine elements are also apparent , as in the impost blocks or in the use of local material . 
 Chlemoutsi remains " one of the most important and best @-@ preserved castles in Greece " ( A. Ralli ) , and maintains its Frankish character intact . After the Frankish period and the decline of its military importance , occupiers made few additions or alterations ; the Byzantine rule left no traces , and only the Ottomans made some minor repairs and modifications for artillery . 
 = Dibatag = 
 The dibatag ( Ammodorcas clarkei ) , or Clarke 's gazelle , is a medium @-@ sized slender antelope endemic to Ethiopia and Somalia . Though not a true gazelle , it is similarly marked , with long legs and neck . It is often confused with the gerenuk due to their striking resemblance . The typical head @-@ and @-@ body length is about 103 to 117 cm ( 41 to 46 in ) . They stand up to about 80 to 90 cm ( 31 to 35 in ) . Male dibatag weigh between 20 and 35 kg ( 44 and 77 lb ) , whereas females range from 22 and 29 kg ( 49 and 64 lb ) . The length of the curved horns , present only on males , is typically between 10 and 25 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 and 9 @.@ 8 in ) . The upper parts are gray to fawn , while the dorsal and lateral areas are cinnamon to rufous ( reddish brown ) . The underparts , rump and the insides of the legs are all white . While markings are visible on the face , there are none on the flanks or the buttocks . 
 Dibatag are alert and secretive , and their brown coat provides an excellent camouflage , making the dibatag one of the antelopes most difficult to hunt . They are diurnal animals , and navigate in very small herds . Both sexes attain sexual maturity at 12 to 18 months . The species is polygynous . After a gestational period of six to seven months , a single offspring is born . Parturition usually occurs from September to November . The lifespan typically averages 10 to 12 years . Dibatag may maintain temporary territories demarcated by preorbital gland secretions , urine or faeces . Primarily browsers , the dibatag feed on foliage and young shoots and shrubs . Dibatag are well adapted to semi @-@ arid habitats , with the capability of surviving on very little or no water . 
 Several factors including human settlement , habitat degradation , large numbers of livestock , political unrest and armed conflicts in the areas covering its range and lack of conservation measures for two to three decades in the late 20th century have now reduced the population to only a few thousands . Significant populations still occur in southern Ogaden ( Ethiopia ) . The dibatag is listed by the IUCN as " Vulnerable " . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The dibatag was first described in 1891 by British zoologist Oldfield Thomas , who he gave it the scientific name Ammodorcas clarkei . It is the sole member of the genus Ammodorcas , and is placed in the family Bovidae . Some authors such as Rod East of the IUCN SSC Antelope specialist group have classified it under a separate tribe <unk> . When Thomas first studied specimens from Somalia in 1891 , he observed that the animal seemed to combine the horns of a reedbuck with the characteristic features of a gazelle ( muzzle , facial markings and <unk> glands ) . At first he considered it to be a reedbuck , though it appeared unnatural that a reedbuck should occur in the dry sandy plateau of Somalia . Thomas originally considered it a relative of the genus Redunca due to similarities in the morphology of horns , and placed it under the genus <unk> . However , after considering further specimens , he placed it under the separate genus Ammodorcas . No subspecies have been identified . 
 The dibatag , which holds its black tail straight up when it is fleeing , gets its common name from the Somali words for ' tail ' and ' erect ' : <unk> and tag . The dibatag is also known as Clarke 's gazelle , after T. W. H. Clarke , an Australian big game hunter who collected the type specimen . 
 = = Description = = 
 The dibatag is a medium @-@ sized antelope with a slim body and long neck and legs . The typical head @-@ and @-@ body length is about 103 to 117 cm ( 41 to 46 in ) . It stands up to about 80 to 90 cm ( 31 to 35 in ) at the shoulder . The male weighs between 20 and 35 kg ( 44 and 77 lb ) , whereas the female ranges from 22 and 29 kg ( 49 and 64 lb ) . The long dark tail ends in a rounded but indistinct tassel . The tail is nearly 30 to 36 cm ( 12 to 14 in ) long . The curved horns , resembling those of reedbuck , are present only on males , with the pointing tips facing forward . The length of horns is typically between 10 and 25 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 and 9 @.@ 8 in ) , though Rowland Ward recorded a length of 33 cm ( 13 in ) from Somalia . This antelope is sexually dimorphic , because females tend to be smaller than males and lack horns . 
 The species has a small , flat , pointed , wedge @-@ shaped head with large eyes and medium @-@ sized ears . A similarity to the gazelles is the black , branched structure in the interior of the ears . The mouth is very small and the upper lip slightly elongated . There are strong facial markings resembling those of a gazelle . A chestnut brown streak runs from the crown up to the nostrils along the nose , flanked on both sides by parallel white stripes that circle the eyes . A white spot marks the throat . The soft and smooth coat is gray to fawn in the upper parts . The ventral side , rump and the insides of the legs are completely white , and the flanks and the buttocks are unmarked . 
 The dibatag closely resembles the gerenuk , with which it is sympatric in eastern and central Somalia and southeastern Ethiopia . Both are <unk> and share several facial and cranial features , along with a two @-@ tone colouration of the pelage and strong thick horns ( only in males ) . However , there are also some features distinguishing it from the gerenuk , including major morphological differences in horns , horn cores , tail , postorbital area and <unk> processes . The gerenuk has a longer , heavier neck and a shorter tail . A finer point of difference is the absence of a inward @-@ curving lobe in the lower edge of the ear ( near its tip ) in the gerenuk . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Dibatag are diurnal animals ( they are active in the daytime ) . They navigate either in solitude or in very small herds , resembling the social behaviour of the gerenuk . Singles and pairs are most common , though groups of up to six individuals have been reported . Generally groups of over four individuals are rarely observed . The reaction of dibatag towards gerenuk is obscure , with there being reports of their loose associations as well as avoidance of each other . These territorial animals may maintain temporary territories demarcated by preorbital gland secretions , urine or faeces . They defecate at fixed points and form dung piles . Males fight one another to defend their territory . Sparring is a notable part of fighting behaviour : one male pushes and shoves against the neck and horns of the opponent , trying to throw him off balance . The stance is head down with the nose tucked between the forelegs for protection . 
 Dibatag are well adapted to semi @-@ arid habitats , with the capability of surviving on very little or no water . They meet most water requirements only from food . Their long neck and limbs enable them to place their forelegs on branches and reach higher branches . The brown pelage helps them hide in bushes . Alert and secretive , the dibatag hides in vegetation and remains motionless while watching for possible threats . When alarmed it flees in a slow and relaxed manner with the neck upright and tail erect . The antelope may even resort to stotting ( a behavior particular to the gazelles ) , a kind of leaping with all four limbs in the air , but this gait is most often used during play . It gallops only when in real danger . Predators include the cheetah , lion , spotted hyaena , black @-@ backed jackal , caracal , Cape hunting dog and large eagles . Eagles usually target juveniles . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The dibatag is a typical browser , whose diet consists of foliage and young shoots and shrubs . It limits itself to a small area for foraging . Dibatag have hardly been observed drinking water in the wild . The elongated upper lip assists in the ingestion of thorny vegetation , while leaves are plucked off by the front teeth and mobile lips . They prefer Commiphora , Acacia , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> species . They often gather in areas with leafy Commiphora stands due to the high water content of their leaves and shoots . In the rainy season young soft grasses are preferred , while in the dry season they feed on fry fruits , flowers , buds , shrubs and tall herbs . They choose a wide variety of species for browsing , hence no clear diet specialisation is identified . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Both sexes attain sexual maturity at 12 to 18 months . The species is polygynous . Rutting appears to be related to the onset of the wet season in several parts of the range . Observations in the Naples Zoo show much similarity between the courtship behaviour of the dibatag and that of the gerenuk . The male dibatag pursues the female ; during the march his body is upright and the nose is held high . The male uses preorbital gland secretions to mark the female on her chest and rump . Flehmen , leg @-@ tapping , urine testing and nosing of female genitalia are notable features of the courtship . Once in close contact with the female , he slowly raises his foreleg between her hindlegs ; this is followed by copulation . 
 After a gestational period of six to seven months , a single offspring is born . Parturition usually occurs from September to November , though births have been reported even in June and July . The infant remains in hiding for one or two weeks , with its mother close by . No further information of parental care is available . The lifespan of a dibatag averages 10 to 12 years . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Dibatag inhabit a mix of different habitat types . They may occasionally visit <unk> . They are thought to be more commonly found in areas where Commiphora shrubs grow . They occur within the altitude range of 200 to 1 @,@ 200 m ( 660 to 3 @,@ 940 ft ) . Habitat preference does not vary significantly with seasons . A study published in 1972 found a greater number of the dibatag in areas rich in red soil . 
 The dibatag is endemic to the evergreen bushland of the Ogaden region of southeastern Ethiopia and adjoining parts in northern and central Somalia . In the past their range extended from the southern parts of northern Somalia through southeastern Ethiopia and central Somalia ( between the coastline of the Indian Ocean and bounded by the <unk> River in the west and the Shebelle River in the southwest ) . Rock paintings of two dibatag were discovered on the west bank of the river Nile and north of the Aswan Dam in Egypt , suggesting a southward migration of the species in the Predynastic period in Egypt . 
 Nowadays , however , the dibatag has disappeared from majority of its historical range . From 1985 to 2006 , over two decades , the overall decline has been estimated at more than 30 percent of the original population . In the northern Ogaden , the animal has become very rare owing to high density of human settlements and large numbers of armed pastoralists and their livestock . However , in the southern Ogaden it is still common due to greater wealth of natural flora and fewer human settlements . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 Droughts and habitat degradation are the major threats across the range . In Somalia , conservation measures have been hindered by lack of political stability due to conflicts over two to three decades in the latter half of the 20th century . During this period its habitat was adversely affected by over @-@ exploitation of wildlife , prevalence of weapons and deforestation . In Ethiopia hunting is the most severe threat to the dibatag ; locals have claimed that dibatag meat is preferred due to its excellent taste . However its brown pelage and alertness and timidity make hunting for it in dense bushes considerably difficult compared to other antelopes . 
 The dibatag has been identified as Vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . It has not been listed under the Washington Convention ( CITES ) . There are no protected areas in its range . No population estimates or surveys could be made in the three decades from 1960s to the 1990s due to political unrest and armed conflicts in the areas covering the range . The total surviving population is not known . In 1998 , Rod East gave an estimate that the populations must be in only a few thousands given a total remaining range of 10 @,@ 000 km2 ( 3 @,@ 900 sq mi ) and a population density of 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 3 per square kilometre . In 2006 , the population in Ogaden was estimated at 1 @,@ 500 . The scenario is grim in Somalia : the dibatag have been overhunted , and their habitat faces destruction due to farming practices such as livestock grazing . They are also threatened by drought . It had nearly disappeared from most of the country by the early 1980s . Though locals claimed to have seen it in the central coastal hinterland even in the late 1980s , no clear surveys have been conducted since then to support this . Captive populations are not known . 
 = Admiral Clarey Bridge = 
 Admiral Clarey Bridge , also known as the Ford Island Bridge , is a pontoon bridge , commonly called a floating concrete drawbridge , providing access to Ford Island , a United States Navy installation situated in the middle of Pearl Harbor . The bridge provides access to Ford Island 's historic sites to the public via tour bus and provides access to O 'ahu for US military families housed on the island . Before the completion of the bridge , the island 's residents were required to use ferry boats operated by Naval personnel that operated on an hourly basis . The bridge is one of only a few floating bridges and its floating moveable span is the largest worldwide . Its namesake , Admiral Bernard A. Clarey , was one of the Navy 's most decorated officers . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the bridge being built , access to Ford Island was provided via ferryboats . Two diesel @-@ powered ferries served the island , Waa Hele Honoa ( YFB @-@ 83 ) and Moko Holo Hele ( YFB @-@ 87 ) . The Waa Hele Honoa , translated to " Canoe go to land " , was purchased in 1959 for $ 274 @,@ 000 . Later , the ferry was pressed into service by the Navy on 3 March 1961 . It is the older and larger of the two ferries at 181 feet long . It could carry 750 people and 33 vehicles . The other , Moko Holo Hele , translated to " boat go back and forth " , was purchased for $ 1 @.@ 1 million on 25 May 1970 . It is 162 feet long , but can hold 750 people and 42 vehicles . Both ferries were operated by U.S. Navy personnel . Access to the island was restricted to U.S. military personnel , their dependents , and invited guests . In addition to the two car ferries there were several smaller " foot ferries " that allowed pedestrians to transit between Ford Island and several alternate landings around Pearl Harbor . 
 = = = Funding = = = 
 Proposals to connect the island had been around since 1967 . A 1967 study suggested that there were only three ways to connect the island : a bridge , a tunnel , or a rubble @-@ filled causeway . The 1976 military construction budget included a proposal for a $ 25 million causeway but it was removed from the budget for being too expensive . Other proposals such as a steel bridge were considered but were never constructed because of the cost . Not until Sen. Inouye 's special legislation , 10 U.S.C. § 2814 , to authorize the Navy to sell land to fund the bridge did a real proposal come to fruition . The bridge was primarily funded through the " Manana deal " with Pearl City where the Navy sold 109 acres ( 44 ha ) , called the Manana storage site , to Pearl City for development for $ 94 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . The Navy was also able to lease and sell 34 acres ( 14 ha ) of Ford Island as part of Sen. Inouye 's renovation project to use private funds to redevelop the island . 
 = = = Rebirth of Ford Island = = = 
 Initially termed " the bridge to nowhere " , the Admiral Clarey bridge was instrumental in Senator Daniel Inouye 's " rebirth " of Ford Island and enabled over $ 500 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in development on the island . It connected 45 families and 3 @,@ 000 civilian workers to Kamehameha Highway . The completion of the bridge also enabled the Navy to further develop the island to include the $ 331 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 NOAA 's Senator Daniel Inouye Pacific Tsunami warning center . In addition , visitor access to the island with the bridge enabled the construction of the $ 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 16 @-@ acre ( 6 @.@ 5 ha ) Pacific Aviation Museum . 
 It was designed by Parsons Brinckerhoff Quade & Douglas , Inc and constructed by the joint venture of Dillingham @-@ Manson . Ground was broken on the causeway bridge on 10 January 1996 and was completed in 1998 and dedicated on 15 April of that year . The entire project cost $ 78 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to complete . The design of the bridge earned the 1999 American Society of Civil Engineers Outstanding Projects and leaders award of merit and the United States Department of Transportation 2000 Honor Award for design excellence . The project was completed ahead of time and under budget . 
 Future plans for the bridge include a plan by the city of Honolulu to build a second bridge from Ford Island to ' Ewa Beach to reduce the stress on existing highways caused by high traffic and congestion . Currently , Interstate H @-@ 1 provides the only access from the west side of the island to Honolulu . The plan would include a public use or toll roadway that would come near the Navy 's West Loch Naval Magazine , which stores ammunition for the military ; a concern for the Navy . The Navy also expressed concerns about the infrastructure of Pearl Harbor and Ford Island 's historical significance being affected by the project . 
 = = Design = = 
 The bridge has a total length of 4 @,@ 672 ft ( 1 @,@ 424 m ) , including a 930 ft ( 280 m ) pontoon section that can be retracted under the fixed bridge to allow the largest battleships and aircraft carriers to pass . The bridge consists of a 650 @-@ foot ( 200 m ) wide channel as well as a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) wide 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) high opening for smaller craft under an elevated span . The entry control point at the east end of the bridge provides room for two traffic lanes of entry , a single exit lane , and a guard tower with a turnaround . 
 = = = Design – build = = = 
 The project was developed using a design – build , operate and maintain ( <unk> ) approach . The Navy did pre @-@ planning and conducted an environmental impact statement and studied various bridge alternatives and had already settled on a combination fixed and floating bridge . The Navy then awarded contracts of $ 350 @,@ 000 to three major contractors to solicit designs for the bridge . On 19 August 1994 the Navy awarded a design @-@ build contract to Dillingham @-@ Manson , JV . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 350 to 400 24 @-@ inch prestressed concrete piles were used to support the bridge and constructed on site . The piles were driven at angles 137 feet ( 42 m ) into the seabed . In 2001 , three years after construction had completed , cracks were discovered in four pillars . Under a maintenance contract , the cracks were repaired with concrete sleeves at no cost to the Navy . 
 The majority of the pre @-@ cast girders and deck panels were constructed in Tacoma , Washington and shipped by 300 @-@ foot ( 91 m ) barge . The three concrete pontoons for the floating moveable span were also constructed in Tacoma by Concrete Technology Corporation in a graving dock and floated to Ford Island by barge in three shipments . They are 310 feet ( 94 m ) long , 50 feet ( 15 m ) wide , and 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) tall , and contain 21 water @-@ tight air @-@ filled cells with leak detectors to provide buoyancy . The three sections were assembled at the site using large steel bolts . 
 Because of the vulnerability of pontoon bridges , as they rest on water , they have to be designed to withstand not only stresses from traffic but from nature as well . A similar bridge in Washington , the Hood Canal bridge , sank in 1979 after flooding of the pontoons due to 80 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 130 km / h ) winds . Experience from the replacement for that bridge helped engineers better design the pontoons for wave load resistance for the Admiral Clarey bridge . The Admiral Clarey bridge was designed to withstand winds as high as 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) and waves as high as 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . 
 = = = Moveable span = = = 
 The bridge was designed with a movable floating pontoon . Steel transition spans connect the two ends of the fixed bridge to the pontoon . Two hydraulic rams , located on either side of the transition spans , lift the transition spans off the pontoon allowing the pontoon to retract under the fixed bridge . The transition spans accommodate 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) of tide movement and 4 @.@ 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) of pontoon movement . In addition , the spans sit on a central pivot that assists with the movement caused by waves . In the event that the transition spans are unable to bear the stress of movement of the pontoon , specifically in the case of seismic activity , the bridge has a breakaway feature that can be easily repaired . 
 The floating portion is then retracted under the O 'ahu side of the fixed bridge at a rate of 14 inches per second to create a 650 ft navigation channel . The entire process takes 25 minutes to complete . Retraction of the movable span is accomplished by two hydraulic winches located on the control pier on the southeast side of the bridge . Two @-@ inch steel cables are used to connect each winch to the pontoon : one is connected to the far and the other to the near end of the pontoon . The opening sequence consists of activating the warning lights and bells , lowering the warning gates and barriers , lifting the transition spans on both sides , and operating the winches . During the opening , winch connected to the west end pulls while the winch on the east end pays out . As the span nears fully open , the winch speeds are slowed to allow the pontoon to stop without snapping a cable . This entire operation is operated from a control room on the east section of the bridge at the highest point and monitored from wireless cameras . 36 post @-@ tensioned straddle bents span 60 @-@ ft under the elevated span to form a pocket for the movable span to rest while the bridge is open . 
 = = Public reception = = 
 Although access to the bridge is limited to those who hold a US military ID card , several events are hosted annually that are open to the public . The bridge is the location of the annual Ford Island 10K Bridge run which has been one of the largest runs in O 'ahu . Starting in 2012 , the Tripler Fisher House started its " Boots on the Bridge " event which honors fallen military members by placing boots with photos across Ford Island and the Admiral Clarey Bridge . More than 6 @,@ 000 boots line the route to remember each fallen soldier since the September 11 terrorist attacks in New York City . In 2009 , the American Cancer Society raised over $ 150 @,@ 000 from 3 @,@ 000 participating for breast cancer research through the Making Strides Against Breast Cancer walk over the bridge and in 2011 had over 8 @,@ 000 participants and raised over $ 200 @,@ 000 . 
 National Park Service officials criticized the construction of the Admiral Clarey bridge fearing that by connecting road traffic to the mainland , the increased flow of island visitors would raise the level of theft of historical artifacts from the USS Arizona and other memorials on or around Ford Island . 
 The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , which has a facility on Ford Island , criticized the US Navy 's hurricane and tsunami disaster plans which calls for closing the bridge to traffic and opening the channel to allow all ships to vacate the harbor . The NOAA 's concerns were that with the bridge outage , the tsunami warning center would not be able to operate effectively at a time when its need was greatest . The Navy 's plan calls for the use of the tour boats to act as ferries whenever the bridge would be unavailable for long periods of time and offered them as a solution to the NOAA 's concerns . However , an organization called Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility ( <unk> ) believed that the boats would be unable to provide for a speedy evacuation in a Tsunami . In the event of a storm , <unk> also noted that if the Navy was so concerned that they would evacuate their largest ships , that the small ferries would be unable to operate in those storm conditions . If the ferries were unable to operate , NOAA employees could not rotate shifts with fresh staff to relieve stranded employees sheltering in place . The NOAA assured its employees that a Tsunami affecting Ford Island was unlikely despite that O 'ahu is an area of high tsunami danger . 
 = = Namesake = = 
 The Admiral Clarey bridge was named after United States Navy Admiral Bernard A. Clarey . Admiral Clarey served as Commander U.S. Second Fleet ( <unk> ) and later was Commander U.S. Pacific Fleet . He was awarded three Navy Crosses for valor . Admiral Clarey is a survivor of the attack on Pearl Harbor while he was the executive officer of the submarine Dolphin ( SS @-@ 169 ) . After his service in the Navy , Clarey served as vice president for the Bank of Hawaii . He died at Tripler Army Medical Center in Hawaii on 15 June 1996 . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 The submarine Bowfin lies just south of the sentry tower . Visible from the Admiral Clarey bridge , also to the south but on the Ford Island side , are the USS Arizona Memorial and USS Missouri . While ferry boats still provide access to the USS Arizona memorial , the bridge is the only access to the Missouri tour , the USS Oklahoma memorial , the Pacific Aviation Museum Pearl Harbor , and USS Utah for the public via Roberts Hawaii tour bus . 
 The Navy Facilities Engineering Command required that the bridge be low @-@ profile to prevent any visual degradation to the USS Arizona memorial and to maintain Ford Island 's historical and cultural value . 
 = RAF Eastcote = 
 RAF Eastcote , also known over time as RAF Lime Grove , HMS Pembroke V and <unk> Eastcote , was a Ministry of Defence site in Eastcote , within the London Borough of Hillingdon . 
 The British Government first used the site during the Second World War , constructing a military hospital in preparation for casualties from the D @-@ Day landings . They were not required for the purpose and later became an outstation of the Bletchley Park codebreaking operations . During this time , Royal Air Force technicians and Navy Wrens supported the operations . The outstation closed soon after the end of the war , though became the first headquarters of Government Communications Headquarters ( GCHQ ) , when the Bletchley Park codebreaking operations , including two Colossus computers , were moved there and renamed in 1946 . These remained at Eastcote until 1954 when the new agency moved to its purpose @-@ built headquarters in Cheltenham . 
 Other buildings on the site were used by the General Post Office and to support the United States Air Forces in Europe 's ( USAFE ) Third Air Force and 7th Air Division ( SAC ) activities at RAF South Ruislip . 
 As part of the Ministry of Defence 's Project MoDEL , the site became surplus to military requirements and was sold in 2007 to be redeveloped for new housing . The site was cleared in 2008 and a total of 385 new homes were approved for construction . The name for the development , Pembroke Park , was chosen to reflect the heritage of the site . 
 = = History = = 
 Before coming under the ownership of the British Government , the land the site was built on was mainly open fields . A public footpath dating from around 1565 crossed the area from Eastcote High Road to Field End Road . In 1911 , cricket matches were played on the field by the Eastcote Institute . 
 During the Second World War , the land was requisitioned by the Government from the owners , Telling Brothers . The first buildings on the site were constructed for use as a military hospital in preparation for military casualties from the Normandy landings . Subsequently , it became clear they would not be required for that purpose and became barracks for Navy Wrens . Bletchley Park established an outpost at the Eastcote site , known during the Second World War as HMS Pembroke V , to house some of the Bombe codebreaker machines used to decode German Enigma messages . A total of 100 machines were operated at Eastcote , controlled by 800 Wrens and 100 RAF technicians . A detachment of American personnel were stationed in a separate area , operating their own Bombe machines . 
 The site was split into two blocks : A and B. Block A was sited near Lime Grove and housed personnel accommodation and administrative services , while Block B was protected by brick walls and military police since it contained the codebreaking computers . The public footpath passed between the two blocks . The level of security meant that support staff in the administrative block did not know of the activities in Block B , nor did local residents . 
 At the end of the war in 1945 , the Bombes were dismantled by the Wrens to be recycled , maintaining the secrecy of the operations . The operations at Bletchley Park under the name " Government Code and Cypher School " ( GCCS ) moved to Eastcote on 1 April 1946 . The Crown purchased the estate in 1947 . Eastcote 's proximity to Whitehall meant staff were not far from London , and the site became known as the " London Signals Intelligence Centre " . Six years later , in July 1952 , GCCS became " Government Communications Headquarters " ( GCHQ ) and began to move from Eastcote to new purpose @-@ built buildings in Cheltenham . The move was completed in February 1954 . 
 Aside from the GCCS operations , the General Post Office ( GPO ) established a training school , and a women 's teacher training college was opened in 1948 . The Ministry of Aviation also opened the <unk> training school on part of the site . The GPO had blocks built in the south @-@ east area of the site , and other blocks were adapted from their original conditions for new uses . The CTS division of GCHQ remained on the site within Blocks C and D until 1987 . Aerial masts which had been erected by the division became unusable after the nearby train line was electrified , and were removed the year CTS left . 
 In 1949 the United States Air Force established a non @-@ flying base at RAF South Ruislip to coordinate the USAFE 's Third Air Force and 7th Air Division ( SAC ) activities in Great Britain with the British Government . A school for the children of American service personnel was established on the Eastcote site in the 1950s . In the 1960s , this was joined by veterinary , dental , and mental health clinics , and also by a morgue . 
 The United States military continued to use buildings on the site until the closure in 2007 . 
 = = Redevelopment = = 
 The 19 @-@ acre ( 77 @,@ 000 m2 ) site was the first to be sold as part of the Ministry of Defence 's Project MoDEL ( Ministry of Defence Estates London ) , a programme to reduce the number of military sites in the Greater London area . George Wimpey purchased the site in 2007 , planning to build 385 new homes . The entire site was cleared in 2008 and building commenced . 
 George Wimpey became Taylor Wimpey through a corporate merger and submitted an application in 2010 to build a further 15 homes on the site . A report by the London Borough of Hillingdon 's planning department rejected the proposal in December that year on the grounds that the site was already overdeveloped . Local residents had raised this concern in November that year , which the leader of the council explained was out of the council 's control due to planning laws . 
 As of May 2011 the new development has not been completed entirely , although residents began to move into the first of the newly built houses in December 2009 . The development has been named " Pembroke Park " in recognition of the heritage of the site ; roads and the play area also received names related to the wartime codebreaking that went on there . 
 = Amanita daucipes = 
 Amanita daucipes is a species of fungus in the Amanitaceae family of the Agaricales order of mushrooms . Found exclusively in North America , the mushroom may be recognized in the field by the medium to large white caps with pale orange tints , and the dense covering of pale orange or reddish @-@ brown powdery conical warts on the cap surface . The mushroom also has a characteristic large bulb at the base of its stem with a blunt short rooting base , whose shape is suggestive of the common names carrot @-@ footed Lepidella , carrot @-@ foot Amanita , or turnip @-@ foot Amanita . The mushroom has a strong odor that has been described variously as " sweet and nauseous " , or compared to an old ham bone , or soap . Edibility is unknown for the species , but consumption is generally not recommended due its position in the Amanita subgroup Lepidella , which contains some poisonous members . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Amanita daucipes was first described in 1856 by the mycologists Miles Joseph Berkeley and Camille Montagne , who named it Agaricus daucipes . It was later renamed to Amanitopsis daucipes by Pier Andrea Saccardo , in 1887 . In 1899 , American mycologist Curtis Gates Lloyd transferred the species to the genus Amanita . It is in the section Lepidella of the genus Amanita , in the subgenus Lepidella , a grouping of related Amanita mushrooms characterized by their amyloid spores . Other North American species in this subgenus include A. abrupta , A. atkinsoniana , A. chlorinosma , A. cokeri , A. mutabilis , A. onusta , A. pelioma , A. polypyramis , A. ravenelii and A. rhopalopus . Its common names include the " carrot @-@ foot Amanita " , the " turnip @-@ foot Amanita " , or the " carrot @-@ footed Lepidella " . The specific epithet daucipes means " carrot foot " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The caps of the fruit bodies initially have a convex shape before flattening out in maturity , and measure 6 to 25 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 9 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter . The cap surface is dry to shiny , and white with a pale orange hue . It is densely covered with white to pale orange or reddish brown conical warts . The warts , remnants of the universal veil , are randomly distributed on the cap surface and become fluffier and cotton @-@ like ( flocculent ) near the edge ( or margin ) of the cap . Drier specimens may have the cap surface completely cracked around the bases of the individual warts . 
 The conical warts are <unk> , meaning they may be easily removed from the cap surface without leaving a residue or a scar . The margin of the cap does not have striations , and like other Lepidella members , may have irregular veil remnants hanging from it . The gills are free , crowded closely together , moderately narrow , and white to yellowish white in color . The short gills that do not extend the full distance from the stem to the cap edge ( known as lamellulae ) are rounded to attenuate ( gradually narrowing ) , and of varying lengths . 
 The stem is 7 @.@ 5 to 20 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 to 7 @.@ 9 in ) long , 0 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick , and is attached to the center of the cap . It tapers slightly towards the apex , and is solid , dry , white or sometimes with a pale orange tint , and covered with tufts of soft woolly hairs . If handled , the stem will slowly bruise and discolor to approximately the same color as the cap . The basal bulb is large , reaching up to 15 by 12 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 by 4 @.@ 7 in ) , and is broadly spindle- to turnip @-@ shaped . The bulb has a circular ridge on its upper part where the universal veil was previously attached , and the bulb may have longitudinal splits . It is covered with pinkish to reddish veil remains . The partial veil forms an ephemeral ring on the upper part of the stem . It is white to pale yellow , and usually falls off as the cap expands ; fragments of the ring may often be found lying on the ground near the base of the stem . The universal veil remnants , when present , are similar to that on the cap . The flesh is firm and white . Fruit bodies have an odor that is strong and unpleasant , described as " sweet and nauseous " . The odor has also been compared to that of " an old ham bone or soap " or " decaying protein " , especially older specimens . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 Viewed in deposit , such as with a spore print , the spores of A. daucipes are white , cream , or yellowish in color . Viewed with a microscope , they have an ellipsoid to elongate shape ( sometimes kidney @-@ shape , or reniform ) , and dimensions of 8 – 11 by 5 – 7 µm . They are translucent ( hyaline ) , with thin walls , and are amyloid , meaning that they absorb iodine when stained Melzer 's reagent . The basidia ( the spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 30 – 50 by 7 – 11 µm , club @-@ shaped , and 4 @-@ spored , with clamps at their bases . The cheilocystidia are abundant , small , roughly spherical to club @-@ shaped cells , with dimensions of 15 – 40 by 10 – 28 µm . The cap cuticle is between 75 and 180 µm thick , and consists of a dense layer of thin @-@ walled , interwoven , and slightly gelatinized hyphae that are 2 – 5 µm in diameter . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of this species . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 The edibility of A. daucipes is unknown , but the mushroom is not recommended for consumption because the Lepidella section of Amanita also contains several poisonous species . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Amanita daucipes is superficially similar to another related North American species , the chlorine Lepidella ( A. chlorinosma ) , but may be distinguished from the latter by its color and the large basal bulb . Further , A. daucipes has " tougher , more distinct volval scales that are tinged with orange @-@ yellow to orange @-@ brown or light reddish @-@ brown . " 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Amanita daucipes is a mycorrhizal species , and its fruit bodies may be found growing solitary or scattered on the ground in mixed coniferous and deciduous forests ( especially those dominated by oak trees ) in Maryland , North Carolina , New Jersey , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Tennessee , Virginia , West Virginia , Kentucky , and Texas ; other associated tree species include hickory ( genus Carya ) and birch ( Betula ) . A predilection for disturbed soil , such as roadsides , has been noted . Amanita authority Cornelis Bas , writing in his extensive 1969 monograph on the genus , claimed A. daucipes to be a rare species ; subsequent investigations have shown it to be common in oak forests in the eastern United States . The southern end of its distribution extends to Sonora , Mexico . 
 = Marco Polo = 
 Marco Polo ( / <unk> <unk> / ; Italian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 1254 – January 8 – 9 , 1324 ) was a Venetian merchant traveller whose travels are recorded in Livres des <unk> du monde ( Book of the Marvels of the World , also known as The Travels of Marco Polo , c . 1300 ) , a book that introduced Europeans to Central Asia and China . 
 He learned the mercantile trade from his father and uncle , Niccolò and Maffeo , who travelled through Asia and met Kublai Khan . In 1269 , they returned to Venice to meet Marco for the first time . The three of them embarked on an epic journey to Asia , returning after 24 years to find Venice at war with Genoa ; Marco was imprisoned and dictated his stories to a cellmate . He was released in 1299 , became a wealthy merchant , married , and had three children . He died in 1324 and was buried in the church of San Lorenzo in Venice . 
 Marco Polo was not the first European to reach China ( see Europeans in Medieval China ) , but he was the first to leave a detailed chronicle of his experience . This book inspired Christopher Columbus and many other travellers . There is a substantial literature based on Polo 's writings ; he also influenced European cartography , leading to the introduction of the Fra Mauro map . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Family origin = = = 
 Marco Polo was born in 1254 in Venice Republic . His exact date and place of birth are <unk> unknown . Some historians mentioned that he was born on September 15 but that date is not endorsed by mainstream scholarship . Marco Polo 's birthplace is generally considered Venice , but also varies between Constantinople , and the island of Korčula . There is dispute as to whether the Polo family is of Venetian origin , as Venetian historical sources considered them to be of Dalmatian origin . 
 The first recorded Polo is Venetian Domenico Polo who was mentioned in 971 regarding the prohibition of trade with the Arabs . Later other Polos were also mentioned in the service of the realm . Whether they were related with the family of Marco Polo is uncertain , but this could indicate that his ancestors traveled between Venice and Dalmatia . 
 Some of the first indications of where his family originated and were resident come from Venetian documents and manuscripts . In the 1280 testament of Marco Polo 's homonymous uncle it is said that the uncle previously lived in Constantinople , and that his son <unk> and daughter <unk> at the time of testament lived in family house in <unk> ( in Crimea ) . Some scholars argued that this account could go along with the note from Il <unk> that his father and uncle , Niccolò and Maffeo Polo , in 1250 stayed in Constantinople with merchandise from Venice . 
 The non @-@ Venetian i.e. Dalmatian origin of his family was considered by the Venetians themselves since the 14th century ; in the Chronicon Iustiniani ( 1385 ) his family was mentioned among immigrants in Venice , in the <unk> di Venezia ( 1446 ) along his family coat of arms it states " <unk> <unk> de Dalmatia " ( in ancient times came from Dalmatia ) , and the same again was recorded by Marino Sanuto the Younger in Le <unk> dei <unk> ( 1552 ) . Sanuto also mentioned a captain from Korčula , Antonio di Polo . Marco Barbaro in his <unk> <unk> ( 1566 ) mentioned a document from 1033 by which time the family arrived from Šibenik , but the year was probably symbolically chosen by Barbaro himself as in that is the year that Dalmatian cities were conquered by Venetian Doge Pietro II Orseolo . Arthur C. Moule cited two early 17th century Venetian manuscripts " <unk> <unk> de <unk> " , " Polo <unk> <unk> de Dalmatia " . 
 Scholars etymologically argued that his family name derives from Latin Paulus , the name of a certain bird species , or like Albert t <unk> considered - from Eastern origin . By the scholars is related to the three bird <unk> who in Old Croatian dialect from <unk> were called pol , while in the Old Venetian dialect <unk> / pole ; for the shorebird wader , and the jackdaw or chough , with all fitting the representation of the bird ( s ) in family coat of arms ( compared to Italian <unk> , rooster ) . However , the habitat of the shorebird is non @-@ existent on Korčula , and should be related to Venice <unk> or wetland areas of Dalmatia like that of Šibenik . The surname Polo seems related with other widespread Dalmatian surnames . The lack of evidence makes the Korčula theory ( probably under Ramusio influence ) as a specific birthplace strongly disputed , and even some Croatian scholars consider it justly invented . 
 = = = Early life and Asian travel = = = 
 In 1168 , his great @-@ uncle , Marco Polo , borrowed money and commanded a ship in Constantinople . His grandfather , Andrea Polo of the parish of San Felice , had three sons , Maffeo , yet another Marco , and the travelers father Niccolò . This genealogy , described by Ramusio , is not universally accepted as there 's no additional evidence to support it . 
 His father , Niccolò Polo , a merchant , traded with the Near East , becoming wealthy and achieving great prestige . Niccolò and his brother Maffeo set off on a trading voyage before Marco 's birth . In 1260 , Niccolò and Maffeo , while residing in Constantinople , then the capital of the Latin Empire , foresaw a political change ; they liquidated their assets into jewels and moved away . According to The Travels of Marco Polo , they passed through much of Asia , and met with the Kublai Khan , a Mongol ruler and founder of the Yuan dynasty . Their decision to leave Constantinople proved timely . In 1261 Michael VIII Palaiologos , the ruler of the Empire of Nicaea , took Constantinople , promptly burned the Venetian quarter and re @-@ established the Eastern Roman Empire . Captured Venetian citizens were blinded , while many of those who managed to escape perished aboard overloaded refugee ships fleeing to other Venetian colonies in the Aegean Sea . 
 Almost nothing is known about the childhood of Marco Polo until he was fifteen years old , excepting that he probably spent part of his childhood in Venice . Meanwhile , Marco Polo 's mother died , and an aunt and uncle raised him . He received a good education , learning mercantile subjects including foreign currency , appraising , and the handling of cargo ships ; he learned little or no Latin . His father later married with <unk> Polo ( née <unk> ) . 
 In 1269 , Niccolò and Maffeo returned to their families in Venice , meeting young Marco for the first time . In 1271 , during the rule of Doge Lorenzo Tiepolo , Marco Polo ( at seventeen years of age ) , his father , and his uncle set off for Asia on the series of adventures that Marco later documented in his book . They returned to Venice in 1295 , 24 years later , with many riches and treasures . They had travelled almost 15 @,@ 000 miles ( 24 @,@ 000 km ) . 
 = = = Genoese captivity and later life = = = 
 Marco Polo returned to Venice in 1295 with his fortune converted in gemstones . At this time , Venice was at war with the Republic of Genoa . Polo armed a galley equipped with a trebuchet to join the war . He was probably caught by Genoans in a skirmish in 1296 , off the Anatolian coast between Adana and the Gulf of Alexandretta and not during the battle of <unk> ( September 1298 ) , off the Dalmatian coast . The latter claim is due to a later tradition ( 16th Century ) recorded by Giovanni Battista Ramusio . 
 He spent several months of his imprisonment dictating a detailed account of his travels to a fellow inmate , Rustichello da Pisa , who incorporated tales of his own as well as other collected anecdotes and current affairs from China . The book soon spread throughout Europe in manuscript form , and became known as The Travels of Marco Polo . It depicts the Polos ' journeys throughout Asia , giving Europeans their first comprehensive look into the inner workings of the Far East , including China , India , and Japan . 
 Polo was finally released from captivity in August 1299 , and returned home to Venice , where his father and uncle in the meantime had purchased a large palazzo in the zone named <unk> San Giovanni <unk> ( Corte del Milion ) . For such a venture , Polo family probably invested profits from trading , and even many gemstones they brought from the East . The company continued its activities and Marco soon became a wealthy merchant . Marco and his uncle Maffeo financed other expeditions , but likely never left Venetian provinces , nor did return to the Silk Road and Asia . Somewhere before 1300 , his father Niccolò died . In 1300 , he married <unk> <unk> , the daughter of Vitale <unk> , a merchant . They had three daughters , Fantina ( married Marco <unk> ) , <unk> ( married <unk> <unk> ) , and <unk> . 
 In 1305 is mentioned in a Venetian document among local sea captains regarding the payment of taxes . His relation with certain Marco Polo , who in 1300 was mentioned with riots against the aristocratic government , and escaped the death penalty , as well riots from 1310 led by <unk> Tiepolo ( by mother side grandson of Trogir count <unk> Šubić ) and Marco <unk> , among whose rebels were <unk> and Francesco Polo from another family branch , is unclear . Polo after 1305 is certainly again mentioned in Maffeo 's testament from 1309 – 1310 , in 1319 document according which became owner of some estate of deceased father , and in 1321 , when from wife Donate bought part of her family property . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In 1323 , Polo was confined to bed , due to illness . On January 8 , 1324 , despite physicians ' efforts to treat him , Polo was on his deathbed . To write and certify the will , his family requested Giovanni Giustiniani , a priest of San <unk> . His wife , <unk> , and his three daughters were appointed by him as co @-@ <unk> . The church was entitled by law to a portion of his estate ; he approved of this and ordered that a further sum be paid to the convent of San Lorenzo , the place where he wished to be buried . He also set free Peter , a Tartar servant , who may have accompanied him from Asia , and to whom Polo bequeath 100 lire of Venetian denari . 
 He divided up the rest of his assets , including several properties , among individuals , religious institutions , and every guild and fraternity to which he belonged . He also wrote @-@ off multiple debts including 300 lire that his sister @-@ in @-@ law owed him , and others for the convent of San Giovanni , San Paolo of the Order of Preachers , and a cleric named Friar Benvenuto . He ordered 220 <unk> be paid to Giovanni Giustiniani for his work as a notary and his prayers . 
 The will , which was not signed by Polo , but was validated by the then relevant " <unk> manus " rule , by which the testator only had to touch the document to make it abide to the rule of law . Due to the Venetian law stating that the day ends at sunset , the exact date of Marco Polo 's death cannot be determined , but according to some scholars it was between the sunsets of January 8 and 9 , 1324 . Biblioteca Marciana , which holds the original copy of his testament , dates the testament in January 9 , 1323 , and gives the date of his death at some time in June 1324 . 
 = = Travels of Marco Polo = = 
 An authoritative version of Marco Polo 's book does not and cannot exist , for the early manuscripts differ significantly . The published editions of his book either rely on single manuscripts , blend multiple versions together , or add notes to clarify , for example in the English translation by Henry Yule . The 1938 English translation by A.C. Moule and Paul Pelliot is based on a Latin manuscript found in the library of the Cathedral of Toledo in 1932 , and is 50 % longer than other versions . Approximately 150 manuscript copies in various languages are known to exist , and before availability of the printing press discrepancies were inevitably introduced during copying and translation . The popular translation published by Penguin Books in 1958 by R.E. Latham works several texts together to make a readable whole . 
 Polo related his memoirs orally to Rustichello da Pisa while both were prisoners of the Genova Republic . Rustichello wrote <unk> du Monde in <unk> d <unk> , a lingua franca of crusaders and western merchants in the Orient . The idea probably was to create a handbook for merchants , essentially a text on weights , measures and distances . 
 = = = Narrative = = = 
 The book opens with a preface describing his father and uncle traveling to <unk> where Prince Berke Khan lived . A year later , they went to <unk> and continued to Bukhara . There , an envoy from the Levant invited them to meet Kublai Khan , who had never met Europeans . In 1266 , they reached the seat of Kublai Khan at Dadu , present day Beijing , China . Kublai received the brothers with hospitality and asked them many questions regarding the European legal and political system . He also inquired about the Pope and Church in Rome . After the brothers answered the questions he tasked them with delivering a letter to the Pope , requesting 100 Christians acquainted with the Seven Arts ( grammar , rhetoric , logic , geometry , arithmetic , music and astronomy ) . Kublai Khan requested that an envoy bring him back oil of the lamp in Jerusalem . The long sede vacante between the death of Pope Clement IV in 1268 and the election of his successor delayed the Polos in fulfilling Kublai 's request . They followed the suggestion of Theobald Visconti , then papal legate for the realm of Egypt , and returned to Venice in 1269 or 1270 to await the nomination of the new Pope , which allowed Marco to see his father for the first time , at the age of fifteen or sixteen . 
 In 1271 , Niccolò , Maffeo and Marco Polo embarked on their voyage to fulfill Kublai 's request . They sailed to Acre , and then rode on camels to the Persian port of Hormuz . The Polos wanted to sail straight into China , but the ships there were not seaworthy , so they continued overland through the Silk Road , until reaching Kublai 's summer palace in <unk> , near present @-@ day Zhangjiakou . In one instance during their trip , the Polos joined a caravan of travelling merchants whom they crossed paths with . Unfortunately , the party was soon attacked by bandits , who used the cover of a sandstorm to ambush them . The Polos managed to fight and escape through a nearby town , but many members of the caravan were killed or enslaved . Three and a half years after leaving Venice , when Marco was about 21 years old , the Polos were welcomed by Kublai into his palace . The exact date of their arrival is unknown , but scholars estimate it to be between 1271 and 1275 . On reaching the Yuan court , the Polos presented the sacred oil from Jerusalem and the papal letters to their patron . 
 Marco knew four languages , and the family had accumulated a great deal of knowledge and experience that was useful to Kublai . It is possible that he became a government official ; he wrote about many imperial visits to China 's southern and eastern provinces , the far south and Burma . His travels also brought him farther to the Bay of Bengal , where he possibly met and gave one of the earliest accounts of the hostile North <unk> tribe . Highly respected and sought after in the Mongolian court , Kublai Khan decided to decline the Polos ' requests to leave China . They became worried about returning home safely , believing that if Kublai died , his enemies might turn against them because of their close involvement with the ruler . In 1292 , Kublai 's great @-@ nephew , then ruler of Persia , sent representatives to China in search of a potential wife , and they asked the Polos to accompany them , so they were permitted to return to Persia with the wedding party — which left that same year from <unk> in southern China on a fleet of 14 junks . The party sailed to the port of Singapore , travelled north to Sumatra , sailed west to the Point Pedro port of Jaffna under <unk> and to Pandyan of <unk> . Eventually Polo crossed the Arabian Sea to Hormuz . The two @-@ year voyage was a perilous one — of the six hundred people ( not including the crew ) in the convoy only eighteen had survived ( including all three Polos ) . The Polos left the wedding party after reaching Hormuz and travelled overland to the port of Trebizond on the Black Sea , the present day Trabzon . 
 = = = Debate = = = 
 Skeptics have wondered if Marco Polo actually went to China or if he perhaps wrote his book based on hearsay . While Polo describes paper money and the burning of coal , he fails to mention the Great Wall of China , Chinese characters , chopsticks , or footbinding . In The Book of Marvels , Polo claimed that he was a close friend and advisor to Kublai Khan and that he was the governor of the city of Yangzhou for three years – yet no Chinese source mentions him as either a friend of the Emperor or as the governor of Yangzhou – indeed no Chinese source mentions Polo at all . Likewise , Polo claimed to have provided the Mongols with technical advice on building mangonels during the Siege of Xiangyang , a claim that cannot possibly be true as the siege was over before Polo had arrived in China . The Mongol army that besieged Xiangyang had several Chinese military engineers attached to it who would have known how to build catapults the equal of anything to be found in Europe . Polo 's leading latter @-@ day critic , Dr. Frances Wood in her 1995 book Did Marco Polo Go to China ? has argued that at best Polo never went further east than Persia ( modern Iran ) and that there is nothing in The Book of Marvels about China that could not be obtained via reading Persian books . Wood maintains that it is more probable that Polo only went to Constantinople ( modern Istanbul , Turkey ) and some of the Italian merchant colonies around the Black Sea , picking hearsay from those travelers who had been further east . 
 Supporters of the book 's basic accuracy have replied . Responses to skeptics have stated that if the purpose of Polo 's tales was to impress others with tales of his high esteem for an advanced civilization , then it is possible that Polo shrewdly would omit those details that would cause his listeners to scoff at the Chinese with a sense of European superiority ; Marco lived among the Mongol elite ; foot binding was rare even among Chinese during Polo 's time and almost unknown among the Mongols ; the Great Walls were built to keep out northern invaders , whereas the ruling dynasty during Marco Polo 's visit were those very northern invaders ; researchers note that the Great Wall familiar to us today is a Ming structure built some two centuries after Marco Polo 's travels ; and that the Mongol rulers whom Polo served controlled territories both north and south of today 's wall , and would have no reasons to maintain any fortifications that may have remained there from the earlier dynasties . Other Europeans who traveled to Khanbaliq during the Yuan Dynasty , such as Giovanni de ' Marignolli and Odoric of Pordenone , said nothing about the wall either . 
 The British historian David Morgan argued that Polo and / or his ghost @-@ writer Rustichello da Pisa certainly exaggerated and lied about his status in China , making him the friend of Kublai Khan , the governor of Yangzhou and helping the Mongols take Xiangyang , but these falsehoods do not prove that Polo never went to China . Morgan argued that it is possible that Polo served in the Imperial Salt Monopoly in Yangzhou , but he was never the governor of Yangzhou as a European ruling an important and wealthy city like Yangzhou would have been a sufficient novelty in 13th century China to merit a mention in the Chinese records , and there is none . In defense of Polo , Morgan noted that the voyage of the princess from China to Persia to marry the <unk> @-@ <unk> is confirmed by a 15th @-@ century Chinese encyclopedia and by the Persian historian Rashid @-@ al @-@ Din Hamadani in the Jami ' al @-@ <unk> @-@ through neither mentions Polo or indeed any European as part of the bridal party . Morgan argued that Polo as a mere Venetian merchant would not had been considered an important person in the Mongol Empire , so his omission is not surprising , especially if one considers that the bridal entourage numbered in the hundreds . Moreover , Rashid @-@ al @-@ Din had a strong dislike of " Franks " ( in the medieval Middle East , Muslims called Western Europe " <unk> " and all Western Europeans were " Franks " ) , having almost nothing positive to say about them in the Jami ' al @-@ <unk> , and so he may have omitted that " Franks " were given the honor of being members of the bridal party . Morgan maintained that since this marriage between a member of the Yuan dynasty of China and their cousins , the <unk> @-@ <unk> of Persia was known only in Asia that the only way that a European like Polo would had known of it would have been if he been in Asia . Morgan wrote that since much of what The Book of Marvels has to say about China is " demonstrably correct " that to claim that Polo did not go to China " creates far more problems than it solves " and so that the " balance of probabilities " strongly suggests that Polo really did go to China , even if he exaggerated somewhat his importance in China . 
 The British scholar Ronald Latham has pointed out that The Book of Marvels was in fact a collaboration written in 1298 – 1299 between Polo and a professional writer of romances , Rustichello of Pisa . Rustichello 's intention was to use today 's language , to write a best @-@ seller , and as such he preferred to stress the fantastic , bizarre and the romantic at the expense of accuracy . Latham has argued that today it is difficult to tell precisely just how much of The Book of Marvels was Polo and how much Rustichello . However , it is firmly established that the book was written in the same " leisurely , conversational style " that characterized Rustichello 's other books , which would very strongly suggest that The Book of Marvels was written by Rustichello with Polo just merely reminiscing about his travels to him . Likewise , the opening introduction in The Book of Marvels to " emperors and kings , dukes and marquises " was lifted straight out of an Arthurian romance Rustichello had written several years earlier , and many of the episodes in The Book of Marvels were taken out of the same Arthurian romance to be reset in China . For an example , in his Arthurian romance , Rustichello described the first arrival of Sir Tristan at the court of King Arthur at Camelot ; the first meeting described between Polo and Kublai Khan at the latter 's court is almost the same right down to the same words used in the Arthurian romance with only Polo inserted in place of Sir Tristan and Kublai Khan in place of King Arthur , and a few other adjustments . In the same way , much of the account of the Siege of Xiangyang is a reworked version of an epic siege by King Arthur described in Rustichello 's Arthurian romance . Latham wrote that many of the fantastic aspects in The Book of Marvels were added in by Rusticello who was giving what medieval European readers expected to find in a travel book . As such , the fantastic and bizarre accounts of people with heads of dogs or faces in their chests — which were staples of medieval travel literature — were almost certainly the work of Rustichello . In the same way , Rustichello may have dropped references to ordinary life in China that were presumably of little interest to a European audience . <unk> wrote : 
 " There are other features of the book that are as likely to be due to Rustichello as to Marco , such as the tendency to glamorize the status of the Polos at the Tartar court , particularly their relation to the princess entrusted to their care , the vein of <unk> that often accompanies references to their sexual customs and the eagerness to acclaim every exotic novelty as a ' marvel ' . It is likely that without the aid of Rustichello Marco would never have written a best @-@ seller . Conceivably he might have produced something not much more readable than <unk> 's Handbook . More probably he would never have written a book at all " 
 Latham noted that there are references to daily life , culture , geography and history of China and the Far East in general that would have been unknown to someone like Rusticello , and that could only had come from Polo . As far as it can be established , Rusticello had never been further east than the Holy Land , which he visited as a pilgrim ; as such , Rusticello would have known something of the Near East , and the rest of Asia would have been unknown to him . The University of Tübingen Sinologist and historian Hans Ulrich Vogel argued that Polo 's description of paper money and salt production supported his presence in China because he included details which he could not have otherwise known . Economic historian Mark Elvin , in his preface to Vogel 's 2013 monograph , concludes that Vogel " demonstrates by specific example after specific example the ultimately overwhelming probability of the broad authenticity " of Polo 's account . Many problems were caused by the oral transmission of the original text and the proliferation of significantly different hand @-@ copied manuscripts . For instance , did Polo exert " political authority " ( <unk> ) in Yangzhou or merely " sojourn " ( <unk> ) there . Elvin concludes that " those who doubted , although mistaken , were not always being casual or foolish , " but " the case as a whole had now been closed " : the book is , " in essence , authentic , and , when used with care , in broad terms to be trusted as a serious though obviously not always final , witness . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Further exploration = = = 
 Other lesser @-@ known European explorers had already travelled to China , such as Giovanni da Pian del <unk> , but Polo 's book meant that his journey was the first to be widely known . Christopher Columbus was inspired enough by Polo 's description of the Far East to want to visit those lands for himself ; a copy of the book was among his belongings , with handwritten annotations . Bento de Góis , inspired by Polo 's writings of a Christian kingdom in the east , travelled 4 @,@ 000 miles ( 6 @,@ 400 km ) in three years across Central Asia . He never found the kingdom but ended his travels at the Great Wall of China in 1605 , proving that Cathay was what Matteo Ricci ( 1552 – 1610 ) called " China " . 
 = = = Cartography = = = 
 Marco Polo 's travels may have had some influence on the development of European cartography , ultimately leading to the European voyages of exploration a century later . The 1453 Fra Mauro map was said by Giovanni Battista Ramusio ( disputed by historian / cartographer Piero <unk> , in whose work the quote appears ) to have been partially based on the one brought from Cathay by Marco Polo : 
 That fine illuminated world map on parchment , which can still be seen in a large cabinet alongside the choir of their monastery ( the Camaldolese monastery of San Michele di Murano ) was by one of the brothers of the monastery , who took great delight in the study of cosmography , diligently drawn and copied from a most beautiful and very old nautical map and a world map that had been brought from Cathay by the most honourable Messer Marco Polo and his father . 
 Though Marco Polo never produced a map that illustrated his journey , his family drew several maps to the Far East based on the wayward 's accounts . These collection of maps were signed by Polo 's three daughters : Fantina , <unk> and <unk> . Not only did it contain maps of his journey , but also sea routes to Japan , Siberia ’ s Kamchatka Peninsula , the Bering Strait and even to the coastlines of Alaska , centuries before the rediscovery of Americas by Europeans . 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 The Marco Polo sheep , a subspecies of Ovis ammon , is named after the explorer , who described it during his crossing of Pamir ( ancient Mount <unk> ) in 1271 . 
 In 1851 , a three @-@ masted Clipper built in Saint John , New Brunswick also took his name ; the Marco Polo was the first ship to sail around the world in under six months . 
 The airport in Venice is named Venice Marco Polo Airport . 
 The frequent flyer program of Hong Kong flag carrier Cathay Pacific is known as the " Marco Polo Club " . 
 = = = = Arts , entertainment , and media = = = = 
 = = = = = Games = = = = = 
 The game " Marco Polo " is a form of tag played in a swimming pool or on land , with slightly modified rules . 
 Polo appears as a Great Explorer in the strategy video game Civilization Revolution ( 2008 ) . 
 = = = = = Literature = = = = = 
 The travels of Marco Polo are fictionalised in a number works , such as : 
 Brian Oswald Donn @-@ Byrne 's Messer Marco Polo ( 1921 ) 
 Italo Calvino 's novel Invisible Cities ( 1972 ) , in which Polo appears as a pivotal character . 
 Gary Jennings ' novel The <unk> ( 1984 ) 
 James Rollins ' SIGMA Force Book 4 : The Judas Strain ( 2007 ) , in which facts about Polo 's travels and conjecture about secrets he kept are interleaved with modern @-@ day action . 
 = = = = = Television = = = = = 
 The television miniseries , Marco Polo ( 1982 ) , featuring Ken Marshall and <unk> Ying , and directed by Giuliano <unk> , depicts Polo 's travels , won two Emmy Awards , and was nominated for six more . 
 The television film , Marco Polo ( 2007 ) , starring Brian Dennehy as Kublai Khan , and Ian Somerhalder as Marco , portrays Marco Polo being left alone in China while his uncle and father return to Venice , to be reunited with him many years later . 
 In the Footsteps of Marco Polo ( 2009 ) is a PBS documentary about two friends ( Denis <unk> and Francis O 'Donnell ) who conceived of the ultimate road trip to retrace Marco Polo 's journey from Venice to China via land and sea . 
 Marco Polo is a television drama series about Marco Polo 's early years in the court of Kublai Khan which premiered on Netflix in December 2014 . 
 = Washington State Route 506 = 
 State Route 506 ( SR 506 ) is an 11 @.@ 53 @-@ mile ( 18 @.@ 56 km ) long state highway in Cowlitz and Lewis counties , part of the U.S. state of Washington , serving the communities of Ryderwood and Vader . SR 506 begins at the intersection of 2nd and Morse Street in Ryderwood , a community in Cowlitz County , traveling north into Lewis County and turning east past Vader to parallel the Cowlitz River and interchange Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) twice west of Toledo . Originating as Secondary State Highway 1P ( SSH 1P ) in 1937 , the highway was designated in its current form in 1964 and it shared its eastern terminus with SR 505 . SR 411 terminated at Vader and both SR 411 and SR 505 were moved away from SR 506 in 1991 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 506 begins as the continuation of Morse Street at the Second Street intersection in Ryderwood , a community located in the Campbell Creek valley in northern Cowlitz County . Traveling north to exit Ryderwood , the highway crosses Campbell Creek and enters Lewis County . The roadway parallels Stillwater Creek in its valley northeast and turns east to cross the creek into Vader . The street is named 7th Street after crossing <unk> Creek ; SR 506 crosses a railroad track owned by BNSF Railway and used by two Amtrak services , the Cascades and Coast Starlight , between the Kelso and Centralia stations . Traveling east through Vader , 7th Street intersects the West Side Highway , formerly SR 411 until 1991 , and leaves the city heading northeast , paralleling the Cowlitz River , to cross <unk> Creek , the busiest segment of the highway at a daily average of 1 @,@ 800 vehicles in 2008 . The roadway crosses Bear Creek near its confluence with the Cowlitz River and interchanges Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) southbound exit 59 ; the route turns north to interchange I @-@ 5 again at exit 60 in a full diamond interchange . Exit 60 is also the western terminus of the Toledo @-@ Vader Road , formerly SR 505 until 1991 . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 506 was established in 1964 , but was preceded by Secondary State Highway 1P ( SSH 1P ) , established in 1937 . Originally , SSH 1P traveled from Ryderwood , paralleling the Longview , Portland and Northern Railway line to Vader and paralleling the Cowlitz River to U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) in Toledo . The rail line , established in 1922 by Longview 's founder , Robert A. Long , was completed in 1929 . In 1953 , the rail line was removed , and in 1963 , SSH 1P was shortened and moved west to the newer US 99 freeway , later Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) . During the 1964 highway renumbering , SR 506 was created , SR 411 ended in Vader and SR 505 ended at the I @-@ 5 / SR 506 interchange . In 1991 , SR 411 was moved south to end in Castle Rock and SR 505 was moved onto former SR 603 to <unk> . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = 1904 FA Cup Final = 
 The 1904 FA Cup Final was a football match between Bolton Wanderers and Manchester City on 23 April 1904 at Crystal Palace in London . The showpiece match of English football 's primary cup competition , the Football Association Challenge Cup ( better known as the FA Cup ) , it was the 32nd Cup final , and the tenth at Crystal Palace . 
 Each team progressed through four rounds to reach the final . Manchester City were a First Division team chasing a league and cup double ; Bolton Wanderers were a mid @-@ table Second Division team . Consequently , most observers anticipated a Manchester City win . In a close match featuring strong defensive play , Manchester City won 1 – 0 . The goal , scored by Billy Meredith , was disputed by those with Bolton sympathies , who believed Meredith to be offside . The victory gave Manchester City their first major honour . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 The final was held at Crystal Palace , the tenth final played at the venue . Neither club had previously won the competition . Bolton reached the final in 1894 , but were beaten comfortably by Notts County , losing 4 – 1 at Goodison Park despite a strong performance by goalkeeper John Sutcliffe . 
 In their passage to the final Manchester City faced opposition from the top division in all but one round . Second Division Woolwich Arsenal , City 's opponents in the second round , were the exception . Sunderland were defeated 3 – 2 at Hyde Road in the first round , and the visit to Arsenal yielded a 2 – 0 win . A club record crowd of 30 @,@ 022 watched the quarter @-@ final against Middlesbrough , but a 0 – 0 draw meant a replay at Ayresome Park was required , which City won 3 – 1 to set up a semi @-@ final against The Wednesday . Two goals from Turnbull and one from Meredith gave City a 3 – 0 win at Goodison Park . 
 Bolton 's cup run started slowly , with a replay required to overcome non @-@ league Reading . A 4 – 1 victory over Southampton secured a quarter @-@ final berth at Sheffield United . As a Second Division team with a poor away record , Wanderers were clear underdogs in the quarter @-@ final , particularly in view of Sheffield United 's strong home form . Nevertheless , Bolton prevailed 2 – 0 courtesy of goals by Sam Marsh and Billy <unk> . At this point Marsh had scored in every round of the competition . A 1 – 0 defeat of Derby County in the semi @-@ final took Bolton to the final . 
 Though Lancashire was a football stronghold in the early years of the professional game , providing a large proportion of Football League teams , the cup final had never been contested between two Lancashire clubs until the 1904 final . 30 @,@ 000 supporters from the region travelled to London , sparking press reports of records for North @-@ South rail travel . Lacking alternative accommodation , several thousand slept on the platforms at Euston and St Pancras . A jovial atmosphere built up , with the Manchester Industrial Boys Band playing Hiawatha . However , in London itself , the match received less attention than a final featuring a southern team would have done . Tickets in an uncovered stand cost 5s . 
 Prior to the match the teams both stayed in the suburb of West Norwood , within walking distance of Crystal Palace . Manchester City arrived on 21 April , and were joined the following day by the Bolton Wanderers , who had spent the earlier part of the week at a training camp in <unk> , near Blackpool . London 's Morning Leader described the relaxed nature of the Manchester City players , commenting that " they might have been a tug of war eleven out for a holiday " . 
 The majority of observers , including the Times correspondent , expected a win for Manchester City , as they had performed strongly over the League season , lying second in the First Division on the day of the final , whereas Bolton were a mid @-@ table Second Division side whose most talented forward , Boyd , was sidelined through injury . Manchester City had one injury worry , Billy Holmes , who had missed the previous league match after sustaining an injury against Nottingham Forest . George Livingstone , initially a doubt , was passed fit well in advance . When the final line @-@ ups were announced , both teams had one change from the semi @-@ finals . For Bolton , Boyd was replaced by Clifford , who had not played in any of the previous rounds , and Archie Freebairn switched to Boyd 's usual flank " with a view to coping with Meredith " . For Manchester City , Sam Ashworth replaced Holmes . Both teams played 2 – 3 – 5 , the standard formation of the period . 
 = = Match = = 
 The match took place in good weather , with the crowd approximately 62 @,@ 000 . Dignitaries present included Prime Minister Arthur Balfour , Colonial Secretary Alfred Lyttelton , Postmaster General Lord Stanley and Lord Kinnaird . Also in attendance were cricketers WG Grace , GL Jessop and CB Fry , plus several members of the Australian cricket team . Manchester City entered the field of play first , led by captain Billy Meredith , with the Bolton team emerging shortly after . Manchester City won the toss , and elected to play towards the southern end of the ground in the first half , with the wind at their backs . The opening exchanges were fairly even , the Athletic News reporting that " For some time there was little to choose between the rivals " , but that " Manchester were the more systematic and scientific " . 
 Twenty minutes into the game , a pass to the right wing by George Livingstone eluded Bolton 's Archie Freebairn , and reached Meredith , who dribbled beyond Bob Struthers for a run on goal . He shot to goalkeeper Davies ' left , scoring the opening goal . Reporters with Bolton sympathies , such as ex @-@ Bolton secretary JJ Bentley , claimed the goal to be offside , though the Bolton players made no appeal to the referee . The goal led to one over @-@ exuberant Manchester City supporter invading the pitch , and subsequently being escorted away by police , though in contrast to the modern image of the football hooligan , the Sporting Chronicle reported that the man was then allowed back onto the terraces , as the police had been impressed by the level of devotion that he had demonstrated . 
 Bolton had the majority of possession in the second half , aside from a ten @-@ minute spell , but the performance of the Manchester City defence limited Bolton 's goalscoring opportunities . The Manchester Evening News singled out Herbert Burgess for particular praise in this respect , writing that City had " considerable reason to be thankful to their left @-@ back , Burgess ... ... the famous International played a game which has rarely been surpassed " . The Bolton Evening News took a rather different view , claiming that physical play by Burgess provoked the ire of the crowd . Bolton 's adoption of " kick and rush " tactics resulted in a spell of pressure , but to no avail . Bolton 's best chance came in the final five minutes , a shot by White which " missed by inches " . The match finished 1 – 0 , giving Manchester City their first major honour . 
 = = = Match details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Manchester City captain Meredith received the trophy from the serving prime minister , Arthur Balfour , a patron of the club . Alfred Lyttelton then made a speech praising the efforts of the two teams . Lyttelton , a former footballer himself , compared the play in the final with the match he played for the England team against Scotland in 1877 . Noting that " the game is a good deal changed " , he emphasised how the final had demonstrated the importance of teamwork , in contrast to his day when " each man played for himself " . 
 While most of those in attendance behaved well , with few reports of disturbances , later in the day several young men " with provincial accents " appeared at a west London police court charged with drunken disorder . Due to " offence caused by ' scrimmage ' " , they were issued with fines averaging 10s . 
 Manchester City did not return directly to Manchester , but instead went to Liverpool , as the club 's final league fixture was scheduled for Monday afternoon at Everton . At this point Manchester City were still in contention for the league title . However , a 1 – 0 defeat at Goodison Park eliminated City from the title race and confirmed The Wednesday as champions . The team arrived in Manchester in that evening , and travelled to the Town Hall to commence a victory parade . From the Town Hall , the parade travelled to Ardwick Conservative Club , via Deansgate , Market Street and Ardwick Green . The number of people lining the route was five times as many as had attended a recent visit by the Prince and Princess of Wales . 
 = Dick Tracy ( 1990 film ) = 
 Dick Tracy is a 1990 American action comedy film based on the 1930s comic strip character of the same name created by Chester Gould . Warren Beatty produced , directed , and starred in the film , which features supporting roles from Al Pacino , Charles Durning , Madonna , Dustin Hoffman , William Forsythe , Glenne Headly , Paul Sorvino , Dick Van Dyke , and Charlie Korsmo . Dick Tracy depicts the detective 's love relationships with Breathless Mahoney and Tess Truehart , as well as his conflicts with crime boss Alphonse " Big Boy " Caprice . Tracy also begins his upbringing of " The Kid . " 
 Development of the film started in the early 1980s with Tom Mankiewicz assigned to write the script . The screenplay would instead be crafted by Jim Cash and Jack Epps , Jr . , both of Top Gun fame . The project also went through directors Steven Spielberg , John Landis , Walter Hill , and Richard Benjamin before the arrival of Beatty . Filming was mostly at Universal Studios . Danny Elfman was hired to compose the film score , and the music was featured on three separate soundtrack albums . 
 Dick Tracy was released in 1990 to mixed reviews , but was a success at the box office and at awards time . It picked up seven Academy Award nominations and won in three of the categories : Best Original Song , Best Makeup and Best Art Direction . A sequel was planned , but a controversy over the film rights ensued between Beatty and Tribune Media Services . The lawsuit was resolved in Beatty 's favor in October 2013 . However , no plans for a sequel or follow @-@ up have been publicly disclosed as of June 2014 . Beatty created The Dick Tracy TV Special in 2008 , which featured him reprising the character to be interviewed by film critic Leonard Maltin . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At an illegal card game , a young street urchin witnesses the massacre of a group of mobsters at the hands of Flattop and Itchy , two of the hoods on the payroll of Alphonse " Big Boy " Caprice . Big Boy 's crime syndicate is aggressively taking over small businesses in the city . Detective Dick Tracy catches the urchin ( who calls himself " Kid " ) in an act of petty theft . After rescuing him from a ruthless host , Tracy temporarily adopts him with the help of his girlfriend , Tess Truehart ( Glenne Headly ) . 
 Meanwhile , Big Boy coerces club owner Lips Manlis into signing over the deed to Club Ritz . He then kills Lips with a cement overcoat ( referred to onscreen as " The Bath " ) and steals his girlfriend , the seductive and sultry singer , Breathless Mahoney . After Lips is reported missing , Tracy interrogates his three hired guns Flattop , Itchy , and Mumbles , then goes to the club to arrest Big Boy for Lips ' murder . Breathless is the only witness . Instead of providing testimony , she unsuccessfully attempts to seduce Tracy . Big Boy cannot be indicted and he is released from jail . Big Boy 's next move is to try to bring other criminals , including Spud Spaldoni , Pruneface , Influence , <unk> Garcia , Ribs <unk> , and Numbers , together under his leadership . Spaldoni refuses and is intentionally killed , leaving Dick Tracy , who discovered the meeting and was attempting to spy on it , wondering what is going on . The next day , Big Boy and his henchmen kidnap Tracy and attempt to bribe him ; Tracy refuses , prompting the criminals to attempt to kill him . However , Tracy is saved by Kid , who gets prized by the police with a Honorary Detective Certificate , which will remain temporary until he decides a name for himself . 
 Breathless shows up at Tracy 's apartment , once again in an attempt to seduce him . Tracy shows he is only human by allowing her to kiss him . Tess witnesses this and eventually leaves town . Tracy leads a seemingly unsuccessful raid on Club Ritz , but it is actually a diversion so officer " Bug " Bailey can enter the building to operate a secretly installed listening device so the police can hear in on Big Boy 's criminal activities . The resultant raids all but wipe out Big Boy 's criminal empire . However , Big Boy discovers Bug and captures him for a trap planned by Influence and Pruneface to kill Tracy in the warehouse . In the resulting gun battle , a stranger with no face called " The Blank " steps out of the shadows to save Tracy after he is cornered and kills Pruneface . Influence escapes as Tracy rescues Bug from the same fate given to Lips Manlis , and Big Boy is enraged upon hearing that The Blank foiled the hit . Tracy tries again to get the testimony from Breathless he needs to put Big Boy away . She agrees to testify only if Tracy agrees to give in to her advances . Tess eventually has a change of heart , but before she can tell Tracy , she is kidnapped by The Blank , with the help of Big Boy 's club piano player , 88 Keys . Tracy is drugged and rendered unconscious by The Blank , framed for murdering the corrupt District Attorney John Fletcher , and is detained . The Kid , meanwhile , adopts the name " Dick Tracy , Jr . " 
 Big Boy 's business thrives until the Blank frames him for Tess ' kidnapping . Released by his colleagues on New Year 's Eve , Tracy interrogates Mumbles and arrives at a shootout outside Big Boy 's club where his men are killed by the police and Tracy . Abandoning his crew , Big Boy flees to a drawbridge and ties Tess to the gears before he is confronted by Tracy . Their fight is halted when the Blank appears and holds both men at gunpoint , offering to share the city with Tracy after Big Boy is dead . Big Boy takes advantage of a distraction and opens fire before Tracy sends him falling to his death in the bridge gears . Mortally wounded , the Blank is revealed to be Breathless Mahoney , who kisses Tracy before dying . All charges against Tracy are dropped . 
 Later , Tracy proposes to Tess when he is interrupted by the report of a robbery in progress . He leaves her with a ring before heading away with Dick Tracy , Jr . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Main characters 
 Warren Beatty as Dick Tracy : A square @-@ jawed , fast @-@ shooting , hard @-@ hitting , and intelligent police detective sporting a yellow overcoat and fedora . He is heavily committed to break the organized crime that infests in the city . In addition , Tracy is in line to become the chief of police , which he scorns as a " desk job " . 
 Al Pacino as Alphonse " Big Boy " Caprice : The leading crime boss of the city . Although he is involved with numerous criminal activities , they remain unproven , as Tracy has never been able to catch him in the act or find a witness to testify . 
 Madonna as Breathless Mahoney : An entertainer at Club Ritz who wants to steal Tracy from his girlfriend . She is also the sole witness to several of Caprice 's crimes . 
 Glenne Headly as Tess Trueheart : Dick Tracy 's girlfriend . She feels that Tracy cares more for his job than for her . 
 Charlie Korsmo as The Kid : A scrawny street orphan who survives by eating out of garbage cans . He falls into the life of both Tracy and Trueheart and becomes an ally . 
 Law enforcement 
 James Keane as Pat Patton : Tracy 's closest associate and second @-@ in @-@ command . 
 Seymour Cassel as Sam <unk> : Tracy 's closest associate and third @-@ in @-@ command . 
 Michael J. Pollard as Bug Bailey : A surveillance expert . 
 Charles Durning as Chief Brandon : The chief of police who supports Tracy 's crusade . 
 Dick Van Dyke as District Attorney John Fletcher : A district attorney who refuses to prosecute Caprice . 
 Frank Campanella as Judge Harper 
 The mob 
 Dustin Hoffman as Mumbles : Caprice 's fast @-@ talking henchman . 
 William Forsythe as Flattop : Caprice 's top hitman . His most distinguishing feature is his square , flat cranium and matching haircut . 
 Ed O <unk> as Itchy : Caprice 's other hitman . He is usually paired with Flattop . 
 James <unk> as Numbers : Caprice 's accountant . 
 Mandy Patinkin as 88 Keys : A piano player at Club Ritz who becomes The Blank 's minion . 
 R. G. Armstrong as Pruneface : A deformed crime boss who becomes one of Caprice 's minions . 
 Henry Silva as Influence : Pruneface 's sinister top gunman who accompanies Pruneface in siding with Caprice . 
 Paul Sorvino as Lips Manlis : The original owner of Club Ritz and Caprice 's mentor . 
 Lawrence Steven Meyers as Little Face : A criminal with a big head and a small face . 
 James Caan as Spud Spaldoni : A crime boss who refuses to submit to Caprice . 
 Catherine O 'Hara as <unk> Garcia : A female criminal who submits to Caprice . 
 Robert Beecher as Ribs <unk> : A criminal who submits to Caprice . 
 Hamilton Camp appears as a store owner and Bing Russell plays a Club Ritz patron . Robert Costanzo cameos as Lips Manlis ' bodyguard . Allen Garfield , John Schuck , and Charles Fleischer make cameos as reporters . Walker Edmiston , John Moschitta , Jr . , and Neil Ross provide the voices of each radio announcer . Mike Mazurki ( who played <unk> in the original Dick Tracy film ) appears in a small cameo . The 94 @-@ year @-@ old veteran character actor Ian Wolfe plays his last film role as " Munger " . 
 = = Development = = 
 Warren Beatty had a concept for a Dick Tracy film in 1975 . At the time , the film rights were owned by Michael Laughlin , who gave up his option from Tribune Media Services after he was unsuccessful in pitching Dick Tracy to Hollywood studios . Floyd Mutrux and Art Linson purchased the film rights from the Tribune in 1977 , and , in 1980 , United Artists became interested in financing / distributing Dick Tracy . Tom Mankiewicz was under negotiations to write the script , based on his previous success with Superman ( 1978 ) and Superman II ( 1980 ) . The deal fell through when Chester Gould insisted on strict financial and artistic control . 
 That same year , Mutrux and Linson eventually took the property to Paramount Pictures , who began developing screenplays , offered Steven Spielberg the director 's position , and brought in Universal Pictures to co @-@ finance . Universal put John Landis forward as a candidate for director , courted Clint Eastwood for the title role , and commissioned Jim Cash and Jack Epps , Jr. to write the screenplay . " Before we were brought on , there were several failed scripts at Universal , " reflected Epps , " then it went dormant , but John Landis was interested in Dick Tracy , and he brought us in to write it . " Cash and Epps ' simple orders from Landis were to write the script in a 1930s pulp magazine atmosphere and center it with Alphonse " Big Boy " Caprice as the primary villain . For research , Epps read every Dick Tracy comic strip from 1930 to 1957 . The writers wrote two drafts for Landis ; Max Allan Collins , then writer of the Dick Tracy comic strip , remembers reading one of them . " It was terrible . The only positive thing about it was a thirties setting and lots of great villains , but the story was paper @-@ thin and it was uncomfortably campy . " 
 In addition to Beatty and Eastwood , other actors who were considered for the lead role included Harrison Ford , Richard Gere , Tom Selleck , and Mel Gibson . Landis left Dick Tracy following the controversial on @-@ set accident on Twilight Zone : The Movie ( 1983 ) , in which actor Vic Morrow was killed . Walter Hill then came on board to direct with Joel Silver as producer . Cash and Epps wrote another draft , and Hill approached Warren Beatty for the title role . Pre @-@ production had progressed as far as set building , but the film was stalled when artistic control issues arose with Beatty , a fan of the Dick Tracy comic strip . Hill wanted to make the film violent and realistic , while Beatty envisioned a stylized homage to the 1930s comic strip . The actor also reportedly wanted $ 5 million plus fifteen percent of the box office gross , a deal which Universal refused to accept . 
 Hill and Beatty left the film , which Paramount began developing as a lower @-@ budget project with Richard Benjamin directing . Cash and Epps continued to rewrite the script , but Universal was unsatisfied . The film rights eventually reverted to Tribune Media Services in 1985 . However , Beatty decided to option the Dick Tracy rights himself , along with the Cash / Epps script . When Jeffrey Katzenberg moved from Paramount to the Walt Disney Studios , Dick Tracy resurfaced with Beatty as director , producer and leading man . He considered hiring Martin Scorsese to direct the film , but changed his mind . " It never occurred to me to direct the movie , " Beatty admitted , " but finally , like most of the movies that I direct , when the time comes to do it , I just do it because it 's easier than going through what I 'd have to go through to get somebody else to do it . " 
 Beatty 's reputation for directorial profligacy — notably with the critically acclaimed Reds ( 1981 ) , did not sit well with Disney . As a result , Beatty and Disney reached a contracted agreement whereby any budget overruns on Dick Tracy would be deducted from Beatty 's fee as producer , director , and star . Beatty and regular collaborator Bo Goldman significantly rewrote the dialogue but lost a Writers Guild arbitration and did not receive screen credit . 
 Disney greenlighted Dick Tracy in 1988 under the condition that Warren Beatty keep the production budget within $ 25 million , which began to rise once filming started . It quickly jumped to $ 30 million and then $ 47 million as its final production budget . Disney spent an additional $ 54 million on the marketing campaign , resulting in a total of $ 101 million spent overall . The financing for Dick Tracy came from Disney and Silver Screen Partners IV , as well as Beatty 's own production company , Mulholland Productions . Disney was originally going to release the film under the traditional Walt Disney Pictures banner , but chose instead to release and market the film under the adult @-@ oriented Touchstone Pictures label leading up to the film 's theatrical debut , because the studio felt it had too many mature themes for a Disney @-@ branded film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Although Al Pacino was Warren Beatty 's first choice for the role of Alphonse " Big Boy " Caprice , Robert De Niro was under consideration . Madonna pursued the part of Breathless Mahoney , offering to work for scale to avoid any appearance of nepotism . Her resulting paycheck for the film was just $ 35 @,@ 000 . Sean Young claims she was forced out of the role of Tess Truehart ( which eventually went to Glenne Headly ) after rebuffing sexual advances from Beatty . In a 1989 statement , Beatty said , " I made a mistake casting Sean Young in the part and I felt very badly about it . " Mike Mazurki , who had appeared in Dick Tracy ( 1945 ) had a cameo . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for Dick Tracy began on February 2 , 1989 . The filmmakers considered shooting the film on @-@ location in Chicago , Illinois , but production designer Richard Sylbert believed Dick Tracy would work better using sound stages and backlots at Universal Studios in Universal City , California . Other filming took place at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank . In total , 53 interior and 25 exterior sets were constructed . Beatty , being a perfectionist , often filmed dozens of takes of every scene . 
 As filming continued , Disney and Max Allan Collins conflicted over the novelization . The studio rejected his manuscript : " I wound up doing an eleventh hour rewrite that was more faithful to the screenplay , even while I made it much more consistent with the strip , " Collins continued , " and fixed as many plot holes as I could . " Disney did not like this version either , but accepted based on Beatty 's insistence to incorporate some of Collins ' writing into the shooting script , which solved the plot hole concerns . Through post @-@ production dubbing , some of Collins ' dialogue was also incorporated into the film . Principal photography for Dick Tracy ended in May 1989 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Early in the development of Dick Tracy , Warren Beatty decided to make the film using a palette limited to just seven colors , primarily red , green , blue and yellow — to evoke the film 's comic strip origins ; furthermore each of the colors was to be exactly the same shade . Beatty 's design team included production designer Richard Sylbert , set decorator Rick Simpson , cinematographer Vittorio Storaro ( whom Beatty had worked with on his previous film as producer and lead actor , Ishtar ) , visual effects supervisors Michael Lloyd and Harrison <unk> , prosthetic makeup designers John Caglione , Jr. and Doug Drexler , and costume designer Milena Canonero . Their main intention was to stay close to Chester Gould 's original drawings from the 1930s . Other influences came from the Art Deco movement and German Expressionism . 
 For Storaro , the limited color palette was the most challenging aspect of production . " These are not the kind of colors the audience is used to seeing , " he noted . " These are much more dramatic in strength , in saturation . Comic strip art is usually done with very simple and primitive ideas and emotions , " Storaro theorized . " One of the elements is that the story is usually told in vignette , so what we tried to do is never move the camera at all . Never . Try to make everything work into the frame . " For the matte paintings , <unk> and Lloyd executed over 57 paintings on glass , which were then optically combined with the live action . For a brief sequence in which The Kid dashes in front of a speeding locomotive , only 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) of real track was laid ; the train itself was a 2 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) scale model , and the surrounding train yard a matte painting . 
 Caglione and Drexler were recommended for the prosthetic makeup designs by Canonero , with whom they had worked on The Cotton Club ( 1984 ) . The rogues gallery makeup designs were directly taken from Gould 's drawings , with the exception of Al Pacino ( Big Boy Caprice ) , who improvised his own designs , ignoring the rather overweight character of the strip . His makeup took 3 @.@ 5 hours to apply . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Warren Beatty hired Danny Elfman to compose / write the film score based on his previous success with Batman ( 1989 ) . Elfman enlisted the help of Oingo Boingo lead guitarist Steve Bartek and Shirley Walker to arrange compositions for the orchestra . " In a completely different way , " Elfman commented , " Dick Tracy has this unique quality that Batman had for me . It gives an incredible sense of non @-@ reality . " In addition , Beatty hired acclaimed songwriter Stephen Sondheim to write five original songs : " Sooner or Later ( I Always Get My Man ) , " " More , " " Live Alone and Like It , " " Back in Business , " and " What Can You Lose ? " . " Sooner or Later " and " More " were performed by Madonna , with " What Can You Lose ? " being a duet with Mandy Patinkin . Mel Tormé sang " Live Alone and Like It , " and " Back in Business " was performed by Janis Siegel , Cheryl Bentyne , and Lorraine Feather . " Back in Business " and " Live Alone and Like It " were both used as background music during montage sequences . " Sooner or Later " and " Back in Business " would be featured in the original 1992 production of the Sondheim revue Putting It Together in Oxford , England , and four of the five Sondheim songs from Dick Tracy ( the exception being " What Can You Lose ? " ) were used in the 1999 Broadway production of Putting It Together . 
 Dick Tracy is also the first film to use digital audio . In a December 1990 interview with The New York Times , Elfman criticized the growing tendency to use digital technology for sound design and dubbing purposes . " I detest contemporary scoring and dubbing in cinema . Film music as an art took a deep plunge when Dolby stereo hit . Stereo has the capacity to make orchestral music sound big and beautiful and more expansive , but it also can make sound effects sound four times as big . That began the era of sound effects over music . " 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Disney modeled its marketing campaign after the 1989 success of Batman , which was based on high concept promotion . This included a McDonald 's promotional tie @-@ in and a Warren Beatty interview conducted by Barbara Walters on 20 / 20 . " I find the media 's obsession with promotion and demographics upsetting , " Beatty said . " I find all this anti @-@ cultural . " In attempting to market Dick Tracy to young children , Disney added a new Roger Rabbit cartoon short ( Roller Coaster Rabbit ) and made two specific television advertisements centered on The Kid ( Charlie Korsmo ) . In total , Disney commissioned 28 TV advertisements . Playmates Toys manufactured a line of 14 Dick Tracy figures . 
 It was Madonna 's idea to include the film as part of her Blond Ambition World Tour . Prior to the June 1990 theatrical release , Disney had already featured Dick Tracy in musical theatre stage shows in both Disneyland and the Walt Disney World Resort , using Stephen Sondheim and Danny Elfman 's music . The New York Times also wrote in June 1990 of Disney Stores " selling nothing but Tracy @-@ related merchandise . " Max Allan Collins lobbied to write the film 's novelization long before Disney had even greenlighted Dick Tracy in 1988 . " I hated the idea that anyone else would write a Tracy novel , " Collins explained . After much conflict with Disney , leading to seven different printings of the novelization , the book was released in May 1990 , published by Bantam Books . It sold almost one million copies prior to the film 's release . A graphic novel adaptation of the film was also released , written and illustrated by Kyle Baker . Reruns of The Dick Tracy Show began airing to coincide with the release of the film , but stations in Los Angeles and New York pulled and edited the episodes when Asian and Hispanic groups protested that the characters Joe Jitsu and Go Go Gomez were offensive stereotypes . A theme park ride for Disneyland , Disney @-@ MGM Studios and Euro Disney Resort called Dick Tracy 's Crime Stoppers was planned but ultimately never built . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Dick Tracy had its premiere at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando , Florida . The film was released in the United States in 2 @,@ 332 theaters on June 15 , 1990 , earning $ 22 @.@ 54 million in its in opening weekend . This was the third @-@ highest opening weekend of 1990 . Dick Tracy eventually grossed $ 103 @.@ 74 million in US totals and $ 59 million elsewhere , coming to a worldwide total of $ 162 @.@ 74 million . Dick Tracy was also the ninth @-@ highest grossing film of America in 1990 , and number twelve in worldwide totals . 
 Although Disney was impressed by the opening weekend gross , studio chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg expressed disappointment . He suggested that Dick Tracy had cost about $ 100 million in total to produce , market and promote . " We made demands on our time , talent and treasury that , upon reflection , may not have been worth it , " Katzenberg reported . Disney , in particular , was expecting the film 's earnings to match Batman ( 1989 ) . By 1997 , Dick Tracy had made an additional $ 60 @.@ 61 million in rental figures . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Dick Tracy has received mixed reviews from critics . Based on 45 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 64 % of the critics enjoyed Dick Tracy . The consensus reads : " Dick Tracy is stylish , unique , and an undeniable technical triumph , but it ultimately struggles to rise above its two @-@ dimensional artificiality . " Roger Ebert gave the film four stars in his review , arguing that Warren Beatty succeeded in creating the perfect tone of nostalgia for the film . Ebert mostly praised the matte paintings , art direction and prosthetic makeup design . " Dick Tracy is one of the most original and visionary fantasies I 've seen on a screen , " he wrote . 
 Vincent Canby of The New York Times reviewed : " Dick Tracy has just about everything required of an extravaganza : a smashing cast , some great Stephen Sondheim songs , all of the technical wizardry that money can buy , and a screenplay that observes the fine line separating true comedy from lesser camp . " Owen Gleiberman from Entertainment Weekly gave a mixed review , but was impressed by Madonna 's performance . " Dick Tracy is an honest effort but finally a bit of a folly . It could have used a little less color and a little more flesh and blood , " Gleiberman concluded . 
 In his heavily negative review for The Washington Post , Desson Thomson criticized Disney 's hyped marketing campaign , and the film in general . " Dick Tracy is Hollywood 's annual celebration of everything that 's wrong with Hollywood , " he stated . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone magazine cited that Warren Beatty , at 52 years old , was too old for the part . He also found similarities with Batman ( 1989 ) , in which both films involve " a loner hero , a grotesque villain , a blond bombshell , a marketable pop soundtrack and a no @-@ mercy merchandising campaign , " Travers continued . " But Batman possesses something else : a psychological depth that gives the audience a stake in the characters . Tracy sticks to its eye @-@ <unk> brilliant surface . Though the film is a visual knockout , it 's emotionally impoverished . " 
 Although Max Allan Collins ( then a Dick Tracy comic @-@ strip writer ) had conflicts with Disney concerning the novelization , he gave a positive review for the finished film . He praised Beatty for hiring an elaborate design team and his decision to mimic the strip 's limited color palette . Collins also enjoyed Beatty 's performance , both the prosthetic makeup and characterization of the rogues gallery , as well as the Stephen Sondheim music . However , he believed the filmmakers still sacrificed the storyline in favor of the visual design . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 63rd Academy Awards , production designer Richard Sylbert and set decorator Rick Simpson won Best Art Direction , while John Caglione , Jr. and Doug Drexler won Best Makeup . Stephen Sondheim was also awarded with Best Original Song for " Sooner or Later ( I Always Get My Man ) " , which Madonna sang live at the awards ceremony . Dick Tracy , with three Oscars , is the comic book film with the most wins , followed by The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) with two . Nominations included Al Pacino for Best Supporting Actor , Vittorio Storaro ( Cinematography ) , Milena Canonero ( Costume Design ) , and the sound designers ( Sound - Thomas Causey , Chris Jenkins , David E. Campbell and Doug Hemphill ) . Storaro was also honored for his work by both the American Society of Cinematographers and British Society of Cinematographers . 
 The British Academy of Film and Television Arts gave awards to Sylbert , Caglione and Drexler at the 44th British Academy Film Awards . Pacino , Canonero , editor Richard Marks , and both the sound design and visual effects departments received nominations . At the 48th Golden Globe Awards , Pacino and Sondheim ( for both " Sooner of Later ( I Always Get My Man ) " and " What Can You Lose " ) were nominated for their work , while Dick Tracy lost the Best Motion Picture ( Musical or Comedy ) to Green Card ( 1990 ) and the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film to Ghost ( 1990 ) . <unk> and Drexler ended up winning Best Make @-@ up , while Warren Beatty ( Best Actor ) , Madonna ( Best Actress ) , Pacino ( Supporting Actor ) , and Charlie Korsmo ( Performance by a Younger Actor ) received nominations . Canonero was also nominated once more for her costume design . Film score composer Danny Elfman and Sondheim ( " More " ) received individual nominations at the Grammy Awards . 
 American Film Institute recognition : 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 Dick Tracy — Nominated Hero 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The film was released on VHS on December 19 , 1990 , and was first released on DVD in Europe in 2000 , but domestic release in the US was delayed until April 2 , 2002 , and without any special features . Rumors circulated over the web shortly after the US DVD release that Warren Beatty had planned to release a director 's cut under Disney 's " Vista Series " label ; including at least ten extra minutes of footage . 
 The Blu @-@ ray was released in the US and Canada on December 11 , 2012 . This release also lacked special features , save for a digital copy . 
 = = Sequel and legal issues = = 
 Disney had hoped Dick Tracy would launch a successful franchise , like the Indiana Jones series , but a disappointing box office performance halted Disney 's plans . In addition , executive producers Art Linson and Floyd Mutrux sued Beatty shortly after the release of the film , alleging that they were owed profit participation from the film . 
 Beatty purchased the Dick Tracy film and television rights in 1985 from Tribune Media Services . He then took the property to the Walt Disney Studios , who optioned the rights in 1988 . According to Beatty , in 2002 , Tribune attempted to reclaim the rights and notified Disney — but not through the process outlined in the 1985 agreement . Beatty , who commented he had " a very good idea " for a sequel , believed Tribune violated various notification procedures that " clouded the title " to the rights and made it " commercially impossible " for him to produce a sequel . He approached the Tribune in 2004 to settle the situation , but the company said they had met the conditions to get back the rights . 
 Disney , which had no intention of producing a sequel , rejected Tribune 's claim and gave Beatty back most of the rights in May 2005 . That same month , Beatty filed a lawsuit in the Los Angeles , California Superior Court seeking $ 30 million in damages against the Tribune and a declaration over the rights . Bertram Fields , Beatty 's lawyer , said the original 1985 agreement with the Tribune was negotiated specifically to allow Beatty a chance to make another Dick Tracy film . " It was very carefully done and they just ignored it , " he stated . " The Tribune is a big , powerful company and they think they can just run roughshod over people . They picked the wrong guy . " 
 The Tribune believed the situation would be settled quickly and was confident enough to begin developing a Dick Tracy live action television series with Lorenzo di Bonaventura , Robert <unk> and Outlaw Productions . The TV show was to have a contemporary setting , comparable to Smallville , and Di Bonaventura commented that if the TV show was successful , a feature film would likely follow . However , an August 2005 ruling by federal judge Dean D. Pregerson cleared the way for Beatty to sue the Tribune . The April 2006 hearing ended without a ruling , but in July 2006 , a Los Angeles judge ruled that the case can go to trial ; Tribune 's request to end the suit in their favor was rejected . The legal battle between Beatty and the Tribune continued to ensue . 
 In 2008 , Beatty convinced cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki and film critic Leonard Maltin to make The Dick Tracy TV Special for Turner Classic Movies , which featured Beatty as Tracy having a retrospective interview with Maltin . Maltin explicitly asks the fictional Tracy if Warren Beatty is planning on making a sequel to the 1990 film and he responds that he 's heard about that but Maltin needs to ask Beatty himself . By March 2009 , Tribune was in Chapter 11 bankruptcy and lawyers for the company began to declare their ownership of television and film rights to Dick Tracy . " Mr. Beatty 's conduct and wrongful claims have effectively locked away certain motion picture and television rights to the Dick Tracy property , " lawyers for Tribune wrote in a filing . Fields responded that it was " a nuisance lawsuit by a bankrupt company and they should be ashamed of themselves . " 
 On March 25 , 2011 , U.S. District Court Judge Dean D. Pregerson granted Beatty 's request for a summary judgment and ruled in the actor 's favor . Judge Pregerson wrote in his order that " Beatty 's commencement of principal photography of his television special on November 8 , 2008 was sufficient for him to retain the Dick Tracy rights . " 
 In June 2011 , Beatty confirmed his intention to make a sequel to Dick Tracy , but he refused to discuss details . He said : " I 'm gonna make another one [ but ] I think it 's dumb talking about movies before you make them . I just don 't do it . It gives you the perfect excuse to avoid making them . " When asked when the sequel would get made , he replied : " I take so long to get around to making a movie that I don ’ t know when it starts . " 
 The lawsuit was resolved in Beatty 's favor , with a US District judge ruling that Beatty did everything contractually required of him to keep the rights to the character . 
 While there have not been any sequels in either television or motion picture form , there have been sequels in novel form . Shortly after the release of the 1990 film , Max Allan Collins wrote Dick Tracy Goes To War . The story is set after the opening of World War II and involves Dick Tracy 's enlistment into the U.S. Navy , working for their Military Intelligence Division ( as he did in the comic strip ) . In the story , Nazi saboteurs Black Pearl and Mrs. Pruneface ( Pruneface 's widow ) set up a sabotage / espionage operation out of Caprice 's old headquarters in the Club Ritz . For their activities , they recruit B.B. Eyes , The Mole , and Shakey . Their reign of terror , culminating in an attempt to bomb a weapons plant , is averted by Tracy . A year after " War " was released , Collins wrote a third novel entitled Dick Tracy Meets His Match , in which Dick Tracy finally follows through in his marriage proposal to Tess Trueheart . 
 In April 2016 , Beatty again mentioned the possibility of doing a sequel when he attended CinemaCon . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 A <unk> <unk> <unk> illustration shows a poster for the film , depicting Dick Tracy firing a machine gun , and the text " Warren Beatty Dick Tracy " appearing above , as Bert in mid @-@ October accidentally drops Nadja into the floor at the cinema lobby room . 
 = Rand Paul = 
 Randal Howard " Rand " Paul ( born January 7 , 1963 ) is an American politician and physician . Since 2011 , Paul has served in the United States Senate as a member of the Republican Party representing Kentucky . He is the son of former U.S. Representative Ron Paul of Texas . 
 Born in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , Paul attended Baylor University and is a graduate of the Duke University School of Medicine . Paul began practicing ophthalmology in 1993 in Bowling Green , Kentucky , and established his own clinic in December 2007 . Throughout Paul 's life , he volunteered for his father 's campaigns . In 2010 , Paul entered politics by running for a seat in the United States Senate . Paul has described himself as a Constitutional conservative and a supporter of the Tea Party movement and has advocated for a balanced budget amendment , term limits , and privacy reform . 
 On April 7 , 2015 , Paul officially announced his candidacy for the Republican nomination at the 2016 U.S. presidential election . He suspended his campaign on February 3 , 2016 , shortly after the Iowa caucus . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Randal Howard Paul was born on January 7 , 1963 , in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , to Carol ( née Wells ) and Ron Paul , who is also a politician and physician . The elder Paul was a U.S. Representative from Texas and ran for President three times . The middle child of five , his siblings are Ronald " Ronnie " Paul Jr . , Lori Paul Pyeatt , Robert Paul , and Joy Paul @-@ LeBlanc . Paul was baptized in the Episcopal Church and identified as a practicing Christian as a teenager . Despite his father 's libertarian views and strong support for individual rights , the novelist Ayn Rand was not the inspiration for his first name . Growing up , he went by " Randy " , but his wife shortened it to " Rand . " 
 The Paul family moved to Lake Jackson , Texas , in 1968 , where he was raised and where his father began a medical practice and for an extent of time was the only obstetrician in Brazoria County . When he was 13 , his father was elected to the United States House of Representatives . That same year , Paul attended the 1976 Republican National Convention , where his father headed Ronald Reagan 's Texas delegation . The younger Paul often spent summer vacations interning in his father 's congressional office . In his teenage years , Paul studied the Austrian economists that his father respected , as well as the writings of Objectivist philosopher Ayn Rand . Paul went to <unk> High School and was on the swimming team and played defensive back on the football team . Paul attended Baylor University from fall 1981 to summer 1984 and was enrolled in the honors program . During the time he spent at Baylor , he was involved in the swim team and the Young Conservatives of Texas and was a member of a secret organization known as the <unk> Brotherhood . Paul also regularly contributed to The Baylor Lariat student newspaper . Paul dropped out of Baylor without completing his Bachelor 's degree in either biology or English , when he was accepted into his father 's alma mater , the Duke University School of Medicine . At the time , Duke did not require an undergraduate degree for admission to its graduate school . He earned an M.D. degree in 1988 and completed his residency in 1993 . 
 = = Medical career = = 
 After completing his residency in ophthalmology , Paul moved to Bowling Green , Kentucky . He has held a state @-@ issued medical license since moving there in 1993 . He received his first job from John Downing of Downing McPeak Vision Centers , which brought him to Bowling Green after completing his residency . Paul worked for Downing for about five years before parting ways . Afterwards , he went to work at the Graves Gilbert Clinic , a private medical group in Bowling Green , for 10 years before creating his own practice in a converted one @-@ story house across the street from Downing 's office . After his election to the U.S. Senate , he merged his practice with Downing 's medical practice . Paul has faced two malpractice lawsuits between 1993 and 2010 ; he was cleared in one case while the other was settled for $ 50 @,@ 000 . His medical work has been praised by Downing and he has medical privileges at two Bowling Green hospitals . Paul specializes in cataract and glaucoma surgeries , LASIK procedures , and corneal transplants . As a member of the Bowling Green Noon Lions Club , Paul founded the Southern Kentucky Lions Eye Clinic in 2009 to help provide eye surgery and exams for those who cannot afford to pay . Paul won the Melvin Jones Fellow Award for Dedicated Humanitarian Services from the Lions Club International Foundation for his work establishing the Southern Kentucky Lions Eye Clinic . 
 = = = National Board of Ophthalmology = = = 
 In 1995 , Paul passed the American Board of Ophthalmology ( ABO ) boards on his first attempt and earned board @-@ certification under the ABO for 10 years . 
 Prior to this , in 1992 , the ABO had changed their certification program , which had previously awarded lifetime certifications , instead requiring doctors to recertify every 10 years . Those who had already been given lifetime certification were allowed to keep it ( according to the ABO , they would not legally have been able to rescind these certifications ) . Shortly after this change , Paul began a campaign to protest it . This effort culminated in 1997 with him creating , " along with 200 other young ophthalmologists " , the National Board of Ophthalmology ( NBO ) to offer an alternative certification system , at a cost substantially lower than that of the ABO . Its certification exam , an open book take @-@ home test , was described by one taker as " probably harder " and " more clinically relevant " than the ABO 's exam . 
 Named board members were Paul , his wife , and his father @-@ in @-@ law . The NBO was never itself accepted as an accrediting entity by organizations such as the American Board of Medical <unk> , and its certification was considered invalid by many hospitals and insurance companies . Paul let his own ABO certification lapse in 2005 , which did not affect his practice in Kentucky , since the state does not require board certification . 
 By Paul 's estimate , about 50 or 60 doctors were certified by the NBO . The NBO was incorporated in 1999 , but Paul allowed it to be dissolved in 2000 when he did not file the required paperwork with the Kentucky Secretary of State 's office . He later recreated the board in 2005 , but it was again dissolved in 2011 . 
 = = Political activism = = 
 Paul served as the head of the local chapter of the Young Conservatives of Texas during his time at Baylor University . In 1984 , Paul took a semester off to aid his father 's primary challenge to Republican Senator Phil Gramm . While attending Duke Medical School , Paul volunteered for his father 's 1988 Libertarian presidential campaign . In response to President Bush breaking his election promise to not raise taxes , Paul founded the North Carolina Taxpayers Union in 1991 . In 1994 , Paul founded the anti @-@ tax organization Kentucky Taxpayers United ( KTU ) , serving as chair of the organization from its inception . He has often cited his involvement with KTU as the foundation of his involvement with state politics . Described as " ideological and conservative " by the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader , the group considered itself nonpartisan , examining Kentucky legislators ' records on taxation and spending and encouraging politicians to publicly pledge to vote uniformly against tax increases . Paul managed his father 's successful 1996 Congressional campaign , in which the elder Paul returned to the House after a twelve @-@ year absence . The elder Paul defeated incumbent Democrat @-@ turned @-@ Republican Greg Laughlin in the Republican primary , despite Laughlin 's support from the NRCC and Republican leaders such as Newt Gingrich and George W. Bush . 
 The Wall Street Journal reported in 2010 that although Paul had told a Kentucky television audience as recently as September 2009 that KTU published ratings each year on state legislators ' tax positions and that " we 've done that for about 15 years " , the group had stopped issuing its ratings and report cards after 2002 and had been legally dissolved by the state in 2000 after failing to file registration documents . 
 Paul spoke on his father 's behalf when his father was campaigning for office , including throughout the elder Paul 's run in the 2008 presidential election , during which Rand campaigned door @-@ to @-@ door in New Hampshire and spoke in Boston at a fundraising rally for his father on the 234th anniversary of the Boston Tea Party . 
 In February 2014 , Paul joined the Tea Party @-@ affiliated conservative advocacy group FreedomWorks in filing a class @-@ action lawsuit charging that the federal government 's bulk collection of Americans ' phone records metadata is a violation of the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution . Commenting on the lawsuit at a press conference , Paul said , " I 'm not against the NSA , I 'm not against spying , I 'm not against looking at phone records .... I just want you to go to a judge , have an individual 's name and [ get ] a warrant . That 's what the Fourth Amendment says . " He also said there was no evidence the surveillance of phone metadata had stopped terrorism . Critics , including Harvard University law professor Alan Dershowitz and Steven <unk> , the director of the American Scientists ' Project on Government Secrecy , called the lawsuit a political " stunt " . Paul 's political campaign organization said that the names of members of the public who went to Paul 's websites and signed on as potential class @-@ action participants would be available in the organization 's database for future campaign use . On the announcement of the filing of the lawsuit , Mattie Fein , the spokeswoman for and former wife of attorney Bruce Fein , complained that Fein 's intellectual contribution to the lawsuit had been stolen and that he had not been properly paid for his work . Paul 's representatives denied the charge , and Fein issued a statement saying that Mattie Fein had not been authorized to speak for him on the matter and that he had in fact been paid for his work on the lawsuit . 
 Paul is co @-@ author of a book entitled The Tea Party Goes to Washington ( 2011 ) and also the author of Government Bullies : How Everyday Americans Are Being Harassed , Abused , and Imprisoned by the Feds ( 2012 ) . Paul was included in Time magazine 's world 's 100 most influential people , for 2013 and 2014 . 
 = = Election to U.S. Senate = = 
 = = = Primary campaign = = = 
 At the beginning of 2009 , there was movement by political supporters of his father to draft Paul in a bid to replace beleaguered Republican Kentucky senator Jim Bunning . Paul 's potential candidacy was discussed in the Los Angeles Times and locally in the Kentucky press . Paul 's father said , " Should Senator Bunning decide not to run , I think Rand would make a great U.S. Senator . " On April 15 , 2009 , Paul gave his first political speech as a potential candidate at a Tea Party rally held in his town of Bowling Green , Kentucky , where more than 700 people had gathered in support of the Tea Party movement . 
 On May 1 , 2009 , Paul said that if Bunning , whose fundraising in 2009 matched his poor numbers in opinion polling for the 2010 election , declined to seek a third term , he would almost certainly run in the Republican Party primary to succeed him , and formed an exploratory committee soon after , while still promising to stay out of the race if Bunning ultimately decided to run for reelection . Paul made this announcement on MSNBC 's The Rachel Maddow Show , though a Kentucky news site first broke the news . 
 On July 28 , 2009 , Bunning announced that he would not run for reelection in the face of insufficient fundraising . The announcement left only Paul and Secretary of State Trey Grayson as the remaining candidates for the Republican nomination , with Paul announcing on August 5 , 2009 , that he would officially run for the U.S. Senate as a Republican . The announcement was made through a series of national TV events , radio , and other programs , as well as newspapers in Kentucky . 
 On August 20 , 2009 , Paul 's supporters planned a moneybomb to kick off his campaign . The official campaign took in $ 433 @,@ 509 in 24 hours . His website reported that this set a new record in Kentucky 's political fundraising history in a 24 @-@ hour period . A second " moneybomb " was held on September 23 , 2009 , to counter a D.C. fundraiser being held for primary opponent Trey Grayson , by 23 Republican United States Senators . The theme was a UFC " fight " between " We the People " and the " D.C. Insiders " . Later in the campaign , Paul claimed his pledge to not take money from lobbyists and Senators who had voted for the bailout was only a " primary pledge " ; he subsequently held a DC fundraiser with the same Senators who had been the target of the September 23 , 2009 , " moneybomb " . Paul ended up raising some $ 3 million during the primary period . Paul 's fundraising was aided by his father 's network of supporters . 
 Although Grayson was considered the frontrunner in July 2009 , Paul found success characterizing Grayson as a " career politician " and challenging Grayson 's conservatism . Paul ran an ad in February that made an issue out of Grayson 's September 2008 admission that he voted for Bill Clinton when he was 20 years old . James Dobson , a Christian evangelical figure , endorsed Grayson on April 26 based on the advice of what Dobson described as " senior members of the GOP " , but on May 3 the Paul campaign announced that Dobson had changed his endorsement to Paul after Paul and some Paul supporters had lobbied Dobson insisting on Paul 's social conservative bona fides . 
 On May 18 , Paul won the Republican Senatorial primary by a 23 % margin , meaning he would face the Kentucky Attorney General Jack Conway , in the November 2 general election . 
 = = = General campaign = = = 
 In the 2010 general election , Paul faced Kentucky Attorney General Jack Conway . The campaign attracted $ 8 @.@ 5 million in contributions from outside groups , of which $ 6 million was spent to help Paul and $ 2 @.@ 5 million to help Conway . This money influx was in addition to the money spent by the candidates themselves : $ 6 million by Paul and $ 4 @.@ 7 million by Conway . On June 28 , 2010 , Paul supporters held their first post @-@ primary online fundraising drive , this time promoted as a " money blast " . 
 Paul 's campaign got off to a rough start after his comments on the Civil Rights Act of 1964 stirred controversy . Paul stated that he favored 9 out of 10 titles of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , but that had he been a senator during the 1960s , he would have raised some questions on the constitutionality of Title II of the Act . Paul said that he abhors racism , and that he would have marched with Martin Luther King Jr. to repeal Jim Crow Laws . He later released a statement declaring that he would have voted for the Act and stated " unequivocally ... that I will not support any efforts to repeal the Civil Rights Act of 1964 " . Later he generated more controversy by characterizing statements made by Obama Administration officials regarding the BP oil spill cleanup as sounding " un @-@ American " . 
 Paul defeated Conway in the general election with 56 % of the vote to 44 % for Conway . 
 = = U.S. Senate career = = 
 = = = 112th Congress ( 2011 – 13 ) = = = 
 Paul was sworn in on January 5 , 2011 , along with his father , who simultaneously served in the House of Representatives . 
 Paul was assigned to serve on the Energy and Natural Resources , Health , Education , Labor and Pensions , Homeland Security and Government Affairs , and Small Business committees . Paul also formed the Senate Tea Party Caucus with Jim DeMint and Mike Lee as its inaugural members . His first legislative proposal was to cut $ 500 billion from federal spending in one year . This proposal included cutting the Department of Education by 83 percent and the Department of Homeland Security by 43 percent , as well as folding the Department of Energy into the Department of Defense and eliminating the Department of Housing and Urban Development . Seven independent agencies would be eliminated and food stamps would be cut by 30 percent . Under Paul 's proposal , defense spending would be reduced by 6 @.@ 5 percent and international aid would be eliminated . He later proposed a five @-@ year budget plan intended to balance the budget . 
 In February , Paul was one of two Republicans to vote against extending three key provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act ( roving wiretaps , searches of business records , and conducting surveillance of " lone wolves " — individuals not linked to terrorist groups ) . 
 On March 2 , Paul was one of nine senators to vote against a stopgap bill that cut $ 4 billion from the budget and temporarily prevent a government shutdown , saying that it did not cut enough from the budget . One week later , he voted against the Democratic and Republican budget proposals to keep funding the federal government , saying that both bills did not cut enough spending . Both bills failed to pass the Senate . He later voted against stopgap measures on March 17 and April 8 , both of which passed the senate . On April 14 , He was one of 19 senators to vote against a budget that cut $ 38 @.@ 5 billion from the budget and fund the government for the remainder of the fiscal year . Paul voiced opposition to U.S. intervention in the Libyan civil war and has criticized President Obama for not gaining congressional consent for Operation Odyssey Dawn . During the debt ceiling crisis , the Senator stated that he would only support raising the debt ceiling if a balanced budget amendment was enacted . Paul was a supporter of the Cut , Cap and Balance Act , which was tabled by Democratic opposition . On August 3 , Paul voted against a bill that would raise the debt ceiling . 
 On September 7 , Paul called for a vote of no confidence in U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner . Later that month , Paul blocked legislation that would strengthen safety rules for oil and gas pipelines because he stated the bill was not strong enough . In October , Paul blocked a bill that would provide $ 36 million in benefits for elderly and disabled refugees , saying that he was concerned that it could be used to aid domestic terrorists . This was in response to two alleged terrorists who came to the United States through a refugee program and were receiving welfare benefits when they were arrested in 2011 in Paul 's hometown of Bowling Green . Paul lifted his hold on the bill after Democratic leaders promised to hold a Congressional hearing into how individuals are selected for refugee status and request an investigation on how the two suspects were admitted in the country through a refugee program . In June 2012 , Paul endorsed Mitt Romney after it became apparent that he would be the Republican nominee for the 2012 presidential election . However , he was later vocal about his disagreements with Romney on a number of policies . 
 = = = 113th Congress ( 2013 – 15 ) = = = 
 For the 113th Congress , Paul was added to the Foreign Relations committee and retained his spot on the Health , Education , Labor and Pensions , Homeland Security and Government Affairs , and Small Business committees . 
 On March 6 – 7 , 2013 , Paul engaged in a filibuster to delay voting on the nomination of John O. Brennan as the Director of the CIA . Paul questioned the Obama administration 's use of drones and the stated legal justification for their potential use within the United States . Paul held the floor for 12 hours and 52 minutes . He ceded to several Republican senators and Democratic senator , Ron Wyden , who generally also questioned drone usage . Paul said his purpose was to challenge drone policy in general and specifically as it related to noncombatants on U.S. soil . He requested a pledge from the Administration that noncombatants would not be targeted on U.S. soil . Attorney General Eric Holder responded that the President is not authorized to deploy extrajudicial punishment without due process , against non @-@ combatant citizens . Paul answered that he was " quite happy " with the response . The filibuster was ended with a cloture vote of 81 to 16 , and Brennan was confirmed by the Senate with a vote of 63 to 34 . 
 In March 2013 , Paul , with Senators Ted Cruz and Mike Lee , threatened another filibuster , this one opposing any legislative proposals to expand federal gun control measures . The filibuster was attempted on April 11 , 2013 , but was dismissed by cloture , in a 68 – 31 vote . Also in March 2013 , Paul endorsed fellow Kentucky Republican Senator Mitch McConnell 's 2014 re @-@ election campaign . McConnell had previously hired Paul 's 2010 campaign manager , Jesse Benton , as his own campaign manager . Paul 's endorsement was seen as a major win for McConnell in avoiding a challenge in the Republican primary . 
 In response to Detroit 's declaration of bankruptcy , Paul stated he would not allow the government to attempt to bail out Detroit . In a phone interview with <unk> on July 19 , 2013 , Paul said , " I basically say he is bailing them out over my dead body because we don 't have any money in Washington . " Paul said he thought a federal bailout would send the wrong message to other cities with financial problems . 
 In September , Paul stated that the United States should avoid military intervention in the ongoing Syrian civil war . In an op @-@ ed , Paul disputed the Obama administration 's claims that the threat of military force caused Syria 's government to consider turning over its chemical weapons , instead arguing that the opposition to military action in Syria , and the delay that it caused , led to diplomatic progress . 
 In October 2013 , Paul was the subject of some controversy when it was discovered that he had plagiarized from Wikipedia part of a speech in support of Virginia gubernatorial candidate Ken Cuccinelli . Referencing the movie Gattaca , Paul quoted almost verbatim from the Wikipedia article about the film without citing the source . Evidence soon surfaced that Paul had copied sentences in a number of his other speeches nearly verbatim from other authors without giving credit to the original sources , including in the speech he had given as the Tea Party rebuttal to the president 's 2013 State of the Union address . In addition , a three @-@ page @-@ long passage of Paul 's book Government Bullies was taken directly from an article by the conservative think tank The Heritage Foundation . When it became apparent that Paul 's Washington Times op @-@ ed on mandatory minimums and related testimony he had given before the Senate Judiciary Committee both contained material that was virtually identical to an article that had been published by another author in The Week a few days earlier , the Washington Times said that the newspaper would no longer publish the weekly column Paul had been contributing to the paper . After a week of almost daily news reports of new allegations of plagiarism , Paul said that he was being held to an " unfair standard " , but would restructure his office in order to prevent mistakes in the future , if that would be what it would take " to make people leave me the hell alone . " 
 In response to political turmoil in Ukraine in early 2014 , Paul initially said that the US should remain mindful of the fact that although the Cold War is over , Russia remains a military power with long @-@ range nuclear missiles . He said that the US should try to maintain a " respectful relationship with Russia " and avoid taking actions that the Russians might view as a provocation , such as seeking to have Ukraine join NATO or otherwise interfering in Russia 's relationship with Ukraine . Two weeks later , after the Russian parliament authorized the use of military force in Ukraine and Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered military exercises along Russia 's border with Ukraine , Paul began taking a different tone . He wrote : " Vladimir Putin 's invasion of Ukraine is a gross violation of that nation 's sovereignty and an affront to the international community .... Putin must be punished for violating the Budapest Memorandum , and Russia must learn that the U.S. will isolate it if it insists on acting like a rogue nation . " He said that the US and European allies could retaliate against Russia 's military aggression without any need for military action . He urged that the US impose economic sanctions on Russia and resume an effort to build defensive anti @-@ missile installations in Poland and the Czech Republic . He also called for the US to take steps as a counterweight to Russia 's strategic influence on Europe 's oil and gas supply , such as lifting restrictions on new exploration and drilling for fossil fuels in the United States along with immediate approval of the controversial Keystone Pipeline , which he said would allow the US to ship more oil and gas to Europe if Russia attempts to cut off its own supply to Europe . 
 Paul played a leading role in blocking a treaty with Switzerland that would enable the IRS to conduct tax evasion probes , arguing that the treaty would infringe upon Americans ' privacy . Paul received the 2014 Distinguished Service Award from the Center for the National Interest ( formally called the Nixon Center ) for his public policy work . 
 In response to reports that the CIA infiltrated the computers of the Senate Intelligence Committee , Paul called for the firing of CIA Director John O. Brennan . In December 2014 , Paul supported the actions to change the US policy towards Cuba and trade with that country taken by the Obama administration . 
 = = = 114th Congress ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 In the beginning of 2015 , Senator Paul re @-@ introduced the Federal Reserve Transparency Act . Senator Paul also introduced the FAIR Act , or Fifth Amendment Integrity Restoration Act , which would restrict civil forfeiture proceedings . 
 On May 20 , 2015 , Paul spoke for ten and a half hours in opposition to the reauthorization of Section 215 of the Patriot Act . Sections of the Patriot Act were prevented from being reauthorized on June 1 . 
 After the death of Antonin Scalia in February 2016 , on February 15 , Paul indicated that he would oppose any nomination by President Obama to replace the late Supreme Court Justice . 
 During a press briefing on May 6 , 2016 , President Obama called on Paul to stop " blocking the implementation of tax treaties that have been pending for years " , arguing that they assisted law enforcement in off shore investigations into tax evasion . 
 On June 6 , Paul spoke of introducing legislation to cease Selective Service , three days after the passing of Muhammed Ali , who he intended to name the legislation after in tribute . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 Current 
 Committee on Foreign Relations ( starting 2013 ) 
 United States Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on International Operations and Organizations , Human Rights , Democracy and Global Women 's Issues ( Chairman ) 
 United States Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on African Affairs 
 United States Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on International Development and Foreign Assistance , Economic Affairs and International Environmental Protection , and Peace Corps 
 United States Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere and Global Narcotics Affairs 
 Committee on Health , Education , Labor , and Pensions ( starting 2011 ) 
 United States Senate Health Subcommittee on Children and Families 
 United States Senate Health Subcommittee on Employment and Workplace Safety 
 Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs ( starting 2011 ) 
 United States Senate Homeland Security Subcommittee on Emergency Management , Intergovernmental Relations , and the District of Columbia ( Chairman ) 
 Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations 
 United States Senate Homeland Security Subcommittee on the Efficiency and Effectiveness of Federal Programs and the Federal Workforce 
 Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship ( starting 2011 ) 
 Previous 
 Committee on Energy and Natural Resources ( 2011 – 13 ) 
 = = 2016 presidential campaign = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Paul was considered a potential candidate for the Republican nomination for the Presidency of the United States since at least January 2013 . He delivered the Tea Party response to President Barack Obama 's State of the Union address on February 13 , 2013 , while Marco Rubio gave the official Republican response . This prompted some pundits to call that date the start of the 2016 Republican primaries . That year , he spoke at the Conservative Political Action Conference in Washington D.C. , where he won the 2016 Presidential straw poll . Paul went on to win the straw poll for the next two years as well , leading to some considering Paul to be a front runner for the nomination , although CPAC attendees are typically considered younger and more libertarian @-@ minded than average Republican voters . 
 In a speech at the GOP Freedom Summit in April 2014 , Paul insisted that the GOP has to broaden its appeal in order to grow as a party . To do so , he said it cannot be the party of " fat cats , rich people and Wall Street " and that the conservative movement has never been about rich people or privilege , " we are the middle class " , he said . Paul also said that conservatives must present a message of justice and concern for the unemployed and be against government surveillance to attract new people to the movement , including the young , Hispanics , and blacks During the 2014 election , Paul launched a social media campaign titled " Hillary 's Losers " which was meant to highlight many of the Democratic candidates that lost their bids for the U.S. Senate despite endorsements from Hillary Clinton . Clinton is also a candidate for President and is considered a front runner for the Democratic Party 's nomination . 
 Paul began to assemble his campaign team , setting up campaign offices and hiring his campaign manager in the beginning of 2015 , fueling speculation that he was preparing to enter the Presidential race . In February 2015 , Paul said he would make an announcement about whether or not he would be running in late March or early April . 
 Paul officially announced his presidential candidacy on April 7 , 2015 . Within a day of his announcement , Paul raised $ 1 million . 
 = = = Senate reelection = = = 
