 Elizabeth ( 1466 – 1503 ) — queen consort to Henry VII of England 
 Mary ( 1467 – 1482 ) 
 Cecily ( 1469 – 1507 ) — initially married John Welles , 1st Viscount Welles , and later married Thomas Kyme ( or <unk> ) following John 's death . 
 Edward ( 1470 – c . 1483 ) — briefly succeeded his father as King Edward V. 
 Margaret ( 1472 ; died that year ) 
 Richard ( 1473 – c . 1483 ) 
 Anne ( 1475 – 1511 ) — married Thomas Howard 
 George ( 1477 – 1479 ) 
 Catherine of York ( 1479 – 1527 ) — married William Courtenay , 1st Earl of Devon . 
 Bridget of York ( 1480 – 1517 ) — became a nun — possibly had an illegitimate daughter called Agnes of Eltham 
 Dynastic infighting and misfortune quickly brought about the demise of the House of York . George Plantagenet , 1st Duke of Clarence , plotted against his brother and was executed . Following Edward 's premature death in 1483 , his brother Richard had Parliament declare Edward 's two sons illegitimate on the pretext of an alleged prior pre @-@ contract to Lady Eleanor Talbot , leaving Edward 's marriage invalid . Richard seized the throne , and the Princes in the Tower were never seen again . Richard 's son predeceased him and Richard was killed in 1485 after an invasion of foreign mercenaries led by Henry Tudor , who claimed the throne through his mother Margaret Beaufort . Tudor assumed the throne as Henry VII , founding the Tudor dynasty and bringing the Plantagenet line of kings to an end . 
 = = House of Tudor and other Plantagenet descendants = = 
 = = = Tudor = = = 
 When Henry Tudor seized the throne there were eighteen Plantagenet descendants who might today be thought to have a stronger hereditary claim , and by 1510 this number had been increased further by the birth of sixteen Yorkist children . Henry mitigated this situation with his marriage to Elizabeth of York . She was the eldest daughter of Edward IV , and all their children were his cognatic heirs . Indeed , Polydore Vergil noted Henry VIII 's pronounced resemblance to his grandfather Edward : " For just as Edward was the most warmly thought of by the English people amongst all English kings , so this successor of his , Henry , was very like him in general appearance , in greatness of mind and generosity and for that reason was the most acclaimed and approved of all . " 
 This did not deter Margaret of York , Duchess of Burgundy — Edward 's sister and Elizabeth 's aunt — and members of the de la Pole family — children of Edward 's sister and John de la Pole , 2nd Duke of Suffolk — from frequent attempts to destabilise Henry 's regime . Henry imprisoned Margaret 's nephew Edward , Earl of Warwick , the son of her brother George , in the Tower of London , but in 1487 Margaret financed a rebellion led by Lambert Simnel pretending to be Edward . John de la Pole , 1st Earl of Lincoln , joined the revolt , probably anticipating that it would further his own ambitions to the throne , but he was killed in the suppression of the uprising at the Battle of Stoke Field in 1487 . Warwick was implicated by two further failed invasions supported by Margaret using Perkin Warbeck pretending to be Edward IV 's son Richard of Shrewsbury , and Warbeck 's later planned escape for them both ; Warwick was executed in 1499 . Edward 's execution may simply have been a precondition for the marriage of Arthur , Prince of Wales to Katherine of Aragon in 1501 . 
 = = = De La Pole = = = 
 John de la Pole 's attainder meant that his brother Edmund inherited their father 's titles , but much of the wealth of the duchy of Suffolk was forfeit . Edmund did not possess sufficient finances to maintain his status as a duke , so as a compromise he accepted the title of earl of Suffolk . Financial difficulties led to frequent legal conflicts and Edmund 's indictment for murder in 1501 . He fled with his brother Richard , while their remaining brother , William , was imprisoned in the Tower — where he would remain until his death 37 years later — as part of a general suppression of Edmund 's associates Philip the Fair had been holding Edmund and in 1506 he returned him to Henry . Edmund was imprisoned in the Tower . In 1513 , he was executed after Richard de la Pole , whom Louis XII of France had recognised as king of England the previous year , claimed the kingship in his own right . Richard , known as the White Rose , plotted an invasion of England for years but was killed in 1525 at the Battle of Pavia while fighting as the captain of the French landsknechts during François I of France 's invasion of Italy . 
 = = = Pole = = = 
 Warwick 's sister , and therefore Edward IV 's niece , Margaret Pole , Countess of Salisbury , was executed by Henry VIII in 1541 . By then , the cause was more religious and political rather than dynastic . The attainder of her father , Clarence , was a legal bar to any claims to the throne by his children . Additionally her marriage , arranged by Henry VII , to Sir Richard Pole , his half @-@ cousin and trusted supporter , was not auspicious . Nevertheless , it did allow the couple to be closely involved in court affairs . Margaret 's fortunes improved under Henry VIII and in February 1512 she was restored to the earldom of Salisbury and all the Warwicks ' lands . This made her the first and , apart from Anne Boleyn , the only woman in 16th @-@ century England to hold a peerage title in her own right . 
 Her daughter Ursula married the son of Edward Stafford , 3rd Duke of Buckingham . Buckingham 's fall after arguments with the king over property , and Margaret 's open support for Catherine of Aragon and Princess Mary began the Poles ' estrangement from the king . Hope of reconciliation was dashed by De <unk> , the letter that Margaret 's son Reginald Pole wrote to Henry VIII , in which Reginald declared his opposition to the royal supremacy . In 1538 evidence came to light that Pole family members in England had been in communication with Reginald . Margaret 's sons Geoffrey and Henry were arrested for treason along with several friends and associates , including Henry 's wife and brother @-@ in @-@ law — Edward Neville . Among those arrested was the king 's cousin Henry Courtenay , 1st Marquess of Exeter , his wife and 11 @-@ year @-@ old son . Courteney 's wife was released two years later , but their son spent 15 years in the Tower until Queen Mary released him . Except for the surviving Geoffrey Pole , all the others implicated were beheaded . 
 Margaret was attainted . The possibility of an invasion involving Reginald via her south coast estates and her embittered relationship with Henry VIII precluded any chance of pardon . However , the decision to execute her seems a spontaneous , rather than a premeditated , act . According to the Calendar of State Papers her execution was botched at the hands of " a wretched and blundering youth ... who literally hacked her head and shoulders to pieces in the most pitiful manner " . In 1886 she was beatified by Pope Leo XIII on the grounds she had laid down her life for the Holy See " and for the truth of the orthodox Faith " . 
 = = = Stafford = = = 
 Edward Stafford , Duke of Buckingham , combined multiple lines of Plantagenet descent : from Edward III by his son Thomas of Woodstock , from Edward III via two of his Beaufort children , and from Edward I from Joan of Kent and the Holland family . His father failed in his rebellion against Richard III in 1483 but was restored to his inheritance on the reversal of his father 's attainder late in 1485 . His mother married Henry VII 's uncle Jasper Tudor , and his wardship was entrusted to the king 's mother , Lady Margaret Beaufort . In 1502 , during Henry VII 's illness , there was debate as to whether Buckingham or Edmund de la Pole should act as regent for Henry VIII . There is no evidence of continuous hostility between Buckingham and Henry VIII , but there is little doubt of the duke 's dislike of Thomas Wolsey , whom he believed to be plotting to ruin the old nobility . Therefore , Henry VIII instructed Wolsey to watch Buckingham , his brother Henry Stafford , 1st Earl of Wiltshire , and three other peers . Neither Henry VIII nor his father planned to destroy Buckingham because of his lineage and Henry VIII even allowed Buckingham 's son and heir , Henry Stafford , 1st Baron Stafford , to marry Ursula Pole , giving the Staffords a further line of royal blood descent . Buckingham himself was arrested in April 1521 ; he was found guilty on 16 May and executed the next day . Evidence was provided that the duke had been listening to prophecies that he would be king and that the Tudor family lay under God 's curse for the execution of Warwick . This was said to explain Henry VIII 's failure to produce a male heir . Much of this evidence consisted of ill @-@ judged comments , speculation and bad temper , but it underlined the threat presented by Buckingham 's descent . 
 = = = Tudor succession = = = 
 As late as 1600 , with the Tudor succession in doubt , older Plantagenet lines remained as possible claimants to a disputed throne , and religious and dynastic factors gave rise to complications . Thomas Wilson wrote in his report The State of England , Anno Domini 1600 that there were 12 " competitors " for the succession . At the time of writing ( about 1601 ) , Wilson had been working on intelligence matters for Lord Buckhurst and Sir Robert Cecil . The alleged competitors included five descendants of Henry VII and Elizabeth , including the eventual successor James I of England , but also seven from older Plantagenet lines : 
 Henry Hastings , 3rd Earl of Huntingdon 
 George Hastings , 4th Earl of Huntingdon 
 Charles Neville , 6th Earl of Westmorland 
 Henry Percy , 9th Earl of Northumberland 
 António , Prior of Crato 
 Ranuccio I Farnese , Duke of Parma 
 Philip III of Spain and his infant daughter 
 Ranulph Crewe , Chief Justice of the King 's Bench , argued that by 1626 the House of Plantagenet could not be considered to remain in existence in a speech during the Oxford Peerage case , which was to rule on who should inherit the earldom of Oxford . It was referred by Charles I of England to the House of Lords , who called for judicial assistance . Crewe said : 
 I have labored to make a covenant with myself , that affection may not press upon judgment ; for I suppose there is no man that hath any apprehension of gentry or nobleness , but his affection stands to the continuance of a house so illustrious , and would take hold of a twig or twine @-@ thread to support it . And yet time hath his revolutions ; there must be a period and an end to all temporal things — <unk> rerum — an end of names and dignities , and whatsoever is <unk> ; and why not of de Vere ? For where is Bohun ? Where is Mowbray ? Where is Mortimer ? Nay , which is more , and most of all , where is Plantagenet ? They are entombed in the urns and sepulchres of mortality ! yet let the name of de Vere stand so long as it pleaseth God . 
 = = Further information = = 
 = Bandslam = 
 Bandslam also known as High School Rock is a 2009 American musical and romantic comedy film produced by Summit Entertainment and Walden Media . Written by Josh A. <unk> and Todd Graff , it stars Aly Michalka , Vanessa Hudgens , Gaelan Connell , Lisa Kudrow , Scott Porter , Ryan Donowho , and Tim Jo . The story revolves around Will and Charlotte , who form an unlikely bond through their shared love of music . Assembling a like @-@ minded crew of misfits , the friends form a rock group and perform in a battle of the bands competition called " Bandslam " . Bandslam was shot in Austin , Texas , with additional scenes filmed in New York City . The film generated mostly positive reviews but it failed to chart in the top 10 when it was released on August 14 , 2009 in the US , where it grossed only $ 2 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 on the weekend . In a brief cameo , this was David Bowie 's final film appearance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Will Burton ( Gaelan Connell ) is a music enthusiast and a David Bowie fan with a hint of rock and roll and boy next door . Throughout the movie , Will writes journal @-@ like e @-@ mails to Bowie every day , although Bowie never answers . When Will 's mother Karen ( Lisa Kudrow ) finds a new job , he switches to a new school , which he is eager to do since he was bullied at his previous one . During lunch one day at his new school , he meets a girl who says her name is written Sa5m but pronounced Sam , the 5 is silent ( Vanessa Hudgens ) . She tells him about Bandslam , an annual music competition in which the winning band gets a recording contract . Will and Sa5m quickly become friends but , shortly after , he is sought after by another girl named Charlotte Barnes ( Aly Michalka ) . One afternoon , Charlotte asks Will to join her in an after @-@ school day @-@ care center . When she starts inviting him to hang out with her , the teenager is stunned — as is his single mother Karen . Impressed by his eclectic knowledge of music , Charlotte , who is a gifted singer @-@ songwriter , asks Will to manage her rock / ska band . Her goal is apparently to take revenge on her egocentric musician ex @-@ boyfriend Ben Wheatley ( Scott Porter ) during Bandslam . 
 Unsure of what he is getting himself into , Will agrees to help Charlotte 's band ( later called I Can 't Go On , I 'll Go On ) which includes Bug ( Charlie Saxton ) and Omar ( Tim Jo ) , eventually expanding it with more like @-@ minded outcasts . Against all odds , the group 's sound starts to come together and their prospects for success look bright . Will starts losing his " loser @-@ status " , but the band gets in the way of completing a project he was going to do with Sa5m . After spending a day with Sa5m , Charlotte teaches Will how to properly kiss a girl , by demonstrating on him ; after an awkward start , Will kisses Sa5m at the Overlook . Will stands Sa5m up , breaking the date for a concert with Charlotte . After that , Sa5m starts ignoring Will at school ; he visits her house , hoping to apologize . Her mom shows him a video of a younger Sa5m performing " Everything I Own " , leading Sa5m to be outraged and order Will to leave . As an apology , he makes a touching documentary short about her for his Human Studies project ( with the song " Young Folks " included in it ) and she eventually forgives him . 
 After Will accidentally ruins Ben 's attempt to reconcile with Charlotte , Ben decides to do a little research on him , in order to ruin his image . He finds out about Will 's father , who was sent to prison years ago when he accidentally killed a child while driving drunk . Ben then starts to call Will " Dewey " ( just as other students did at his old school ) , which stands for " DWI " ( " Driving While Intoxicated " ) . Will detests this nickname because it reminds him of his father , whom he is ashamed of . What is more , Charlotte 's father dies and she decides to quit the band . As she explains to Will , her father hated how she acted when she was with her ex @-@ boyfriend , so after he got sick , she decided to change her image and be nicer to " people like [ Will ] " , meaning outcasts , hoping that this good behavior would cause her dad to get well . The band members are hurt by this discovery , as it means she did not genuinely like them , but they decide to go on nonetheless , with Sa5m taking over as lead singer . 
 On the night of Bandslam , Charlotte comes backstage in order to apologize to the band , and after a moment of hesitation , Will accepts her apology . Right before going on stage , however , they discover that Ben 's band ( the " Glory Dogs " ) have decided to play the song that I Can 't Go On , I 'll Go On were originally to perform , forcing them to change their act at the last minute . Will suddenly remembers the video Sa5m 's mother showed him earlier and suggests that they perform " Everything I Own " , since it is the only other song Sa5m knows . To buy some time , Will comes out first onstage , but at first he is embarrassingly silent . The students begin to chant " Dewey ! Dewey ! Dewey ! " . He starts to walk off the stage , but then comes back and decides to chant with them instead . After carrying the chant for a while , he finally changes it to , " Do we wanna ROCK ? ! " . The band then shows up and fires up the crowd with an upbeat ska version of " Everything I Own " . 
 Although they fail to win the competition , a YouTube video of their performance gains the band popularity at school . David Bowie ( portraying himself ) sees the video and sends an e @-@ mail to Will , explaining that he is starting an indie music label and is interested in having the band as one of their first artists . Will is so excited and overwhelmed that he falls down in the middle of the school hallway ( close to the same position as the front cover of Bowie 's Lodger album ) . The last scene takes place during Charlotte 's graduation ceremony where Will and Sa5m are confirmed as dating . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Aly Michalka as Charlotte Barnes , popular ex @-@ cheerleader and senior at the high school that Will attends . We are told later in the film that her ailing father does not approve of how she only runs with the " <unk> " in school . Charlotte makes a vow to forsake the <unk> and run with the <unk> teens like Will and Sa5m in hopes that this good behavior will cause her dad to get well . She terms this an " experiment " . Her efforts to start a new band ( " I Can 't Go On , I 'll Go On " ) , include making Will the manager and coach of the eight musicians that make up their newly formed group . Old boyfriend , Ben Wheatley , surfaces several times in the movie attempting to woo Charlotte back . 
 Gaelan Connell as Will Burton , the male protagonist . Will is an avid fan of David Bowie and writes regular emails to the latter . Will is also a music enthusiast and well acquainted with the mechanics of well produced , pop music . After relocating to New Jersey and a new high school , he finds himself managing Charlotte 's new rock band . They hope to compete in the East Coast , " Battle of the Bands " contest called " Bandslam . " He lives with his single parent mother . 
 Vanessa Hudgens as Sa5m ( the 5 is silent ) . She is Will 's first friend at his new school in Lodi , New Jersey . She talks in a monotone and slowly because she says that " emotion is overrated " and she used to stutter when she was young . She develops a relationship with Will , but " breaks up " with him when she is stood up for a date and discovers that Will was at an event with Charlotte . We discover later that she is a gifted singer . After she reconciles with Will , she is appointed the new lead vocalist in their band . She recognizes long before Will that Charlotte is " hard wired " to run with the high rollers . Sa5m suspects that Charlotte 's " experiment " might have wider scope in that a higher intelligence could be controlling their actions ( " Charlotte times a trillion " ) . 
 Lisa Kudrow as Karen Burton ( Will 's single parent mother ) . She is concerned with Will 's involvement with other kids at school because they pick on him due to the fact that his dad was sent to prison . She is a good mom and tries to protect him from the likes of Charlotte . 
 Scott Porter as Ben Wheatley , the boastful and show @-@ off lead vocalist in the original band , " Glory Dogs " , which is now competing against Charlotte 's new band , " I Can 't Go On , I 'll Go On " . He is Charlotte 's ex @-@ boyfriend as well . In the later part of the movie , he reconciles with Charlotte . He serves as the main antagonist . 
 The film 's fictional band , " I Can 't Go On , I 'll Go On " members include : 
 Charlie Saxton as Bug , the bassist . 
 Ryan Donowho as Basher Martin , the drummer . Basher has anger management issues , and initially dislikes the concept of Bandslam . He decides to join after Will tells he has an older sister who is often around — in fact his mother . 
 Tim Jo as Omar , the guitarist . 
 Lisa Chung as Kim Lee , the keyboardist . 
 Elvy Yost as Irene Lerman , the cellist . 
 David Bowie officially began talks in early February 2009 to be in the film . Bowie has a vital role as Will Burton 's idol , to whom Burton frequently writes e @-@ mails . He makes a short cameo in the end of the film . Liam Aiken was originally chosen to play Will , but ultimately the role was given to Gaelan Connell . Actually , when Connell auditioned for " Will " , he was recommended to try out for the cellist part since he plays cello . Director Todd Graff watched his cello audition , and decided to give him the starring role as " Will . " Originally , Vanessa Hudgens wanted to play the role of Charlotte , but she was cast for the role of Sa5m on January 12 , 2008 . Hudgens sang " Rehab " for her audition . In order to pursue the role , Hudgens watched The Addams Family and tapped into Wednesday 's character . 
 = = Production = = 
 Bandslam was bought by a studio back in 2004 , but in late January 2007 , Walden Media and Summit Entertainment announced that they would co @-@ finance Bandslam , co @-@ written by Todd Graff and Josh A. <unk> and directed by Graff . Graff was hired to direct in early March 2007 and rewrote the screenplay . Before filming , they had two weeks of music rehearsals . The actors and actresses were designated to play their instruments . Donowho and Michalka had extensive experience with the drums and guitar , respectively , so they were used to their instruments , but Lisa Chung , Scott Porter and Vanessa Hudgens were not . Hudgens told MTV News she didn 't expect there to be as much music , and " they are like , ' We are going to have two weeks of music rehearsals , ' and I was like , ' What ? ' But it was really cool . It 's definitely not the kind of music I do normally . " Principal photography began on February 9 , 2008 in Austin , Texas . Although the film is set in New Jersey , Graff felt strongly that it was important to shoot in a place with a wide array of great live music to choose from . " I 'm a big believer in local scenes , " he says . " I think it 's the lifeblood of music . Austin is renowned as a music town , and rightly so . They have a ton of really great bands just trying to get their music out there . So , it 's great we had an opportunity to use several unsigned local Texas bands . " In an interview with Los Angeles Times , director Todd Graff admitted there were cultural incongruities underlying the film . " I know , it 's demented . Every once in a while on set I would think to myself , ' I can 't believe we got away with this ' . I always thought if it only sent one kid to listen to a Velvet Underground record , it would be worth it to me . " All of the vocals were filmed live by each of the singing cast members , as mentioned by director Graff . One of the requirements for the film was that all actors had to be able to provide their own vocals . Because Aly Michalka was on tour with her sister AJ Michalka and Miley Cyrus , she did not arrive in Austin until midway through rehearsals . Conveniently , the tour 's last stop was in Austin , where rehearsal and filming for the movie took place . All of the instruments and singing in the movie were recorded by the actors , with the exception of the guitar parts of Vanessa Hudgens and Scott Porter , as well as Lisa Chung 's piano parts . Although Hudgens and Porter learned how to play their songs , they were dubbed by guitarists Jason <unk> and JW Wright . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Summit Entertainment spent an estimated $ 10 million to produce and market Bandslam . The full @-@ length trailer was released in the internet on March 25 , 2009 . On June 3 , 2009 , the official poster was released . A novelization of the movie written by Aaron Rosenberg was released on July 9 , 2009 . Michalka , Hudgens and Connell , hosted a Bandslam Reel Thinking event at the Grammy Museum to promote the importance of music to middle @-@ schoolers . In partnership with Magic 106 @.@ 7 , Summit Entertainment conducted a band contest in Boston suburb 's Burlington Mall . Hudgens and Connell attended the contest as judges . Mike Ryan won the contest and performed his original song on August 1 , 2009 . On August 7 , 2009 , Hudgens and Michalka were inducted as an honorary girl scouts by the Girl Scouts of Greater Los Angeles . During the induction , a special screening was held for the scouts present . In the UK , browser game Stardoll started a campaign which lets users dress Vanessa Hudgens in Bandslam outfits , view the film trailer , create their own band using Stardoll scenery and virtual guitar gifts to give to friends . Summit Entertainment 's marketing strategies have been criticized . The studio apparently received many calls and e @-@ mails from other studios ' heads of marketing , saying the film 's campaign may be the worst job they have seen from positioning , title , marketing tie @-@ ins , and targeting audiences . Deadline.com editor Nikki Finke released an e @-@ mail from a Bandslam insider who pointed out that Summit 's marketing have basically sold it on to their stars Hudgens and Michalka instead of selling the concept . The e @-@ mail also claims that " they Disneyfied this movie with glitter paint " . The insider commented that the bad marketing was particularly unfortunate , a result of the good reviews . Yale Daily News marked that the film had the " Worst Marketing " , pointing out that " Summit Entertainment , which has a done an admirable job marketing the Twilight films , completely ruined what should have been a sleeper hit . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Despite receiving positive reviews , the film was not a box office success . In its opening weekend , Bandslam grossed $ 2 @,@ 231 @,@ 273 million in 2 @,@ 121 theaters in the United States and Canada , ranking # 13 at the box office , was the best debut for a musical film that week . By the end of its run , Bandslam grossed $ 5 @,@ 210 @,@ 988 domestically and $ 7 @,@ 014 @,@ 035 internationally , totaling $ 12 @,@ 225 @,@ 023 worldwide . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Bandslam was well @-@ received critically , before and after it was released . The Broadcast Film Critics Association gave it an 81 rating score and a 3 / 4 stars rating . As of August 15 , 2009 , based on 20 reviews collected , Metacritic gave the film a 66 % " <unk> " score , indicating generally favorable reviews . Rotten Tomatoes gives a score of 81 % " fresh " rating based on 96 reviews collected ; 77 " fresh " and 19 " rotten " with the reported consensus " Bandslam is an intelligent teen film that avoids teen film cliches , in an entertaining package of music and coming @-@ of @-@ age drama . " With the positive critical response from the review Rotten Tomatoes collected , it ranked # 9 in the 10 <unk> of the Summer . Comparatively , Yahoo ! Movies gives a grade of " B- " averaged from 7 critic reviews . Entertainment Weekly critic , Lisa Schwarzbaum gave the film a " B " , and praised Hudgens ' and Michalka 's performances as well . Variety said that " Bandslam " will make its cracking voice heard amid the summer 's boy @-@ based blockbuster clique while Joe Williams remarked , " Although it 's the wimpy teen musical that prevails , it 's the misfit coming @-@ of @-@ age story that leaves an impression . " Roger Ebert wrote on his review , that though this isn 't a breakthrough movie , it 's charming , and not any more innocuous than it has to be . Fort Worth Weekly revealed in the review , " The comedy subsides into some unusually heavy drama in the second half , and only Graff 's assured direction keeps it from tipping over into <unk> . " Empire and Digital Spy all gave Bandslam a three out of five rating while Independent Weekly and the Deseret News both gave the film two out of four . Rene Rodriguez of The Miami Herald revealed that the film was from " the John Hughes playbook of high @-@ school comedies but lack the heart and insight Hughes invested in his pictures . " , but still praised the teenage cast saying " The performances in Bandslam are uniformly strong -- good enough to make you wish this bunch of charismatic , talented kids had been given better material . " Time Out reviewer Derek Adams said that Bandslam is far from exceptional , but is saved by decent character development , a cluster of engaging performances and several amusing deadpan moments . Canada 's The Globe and Mail reviewer 's conclusion follows : " Bandslam offers some nice observational and comedy moments , and director and co @-@ writer Todd Graff deftly deliver the coming @-@ of @-@ age goods for the three main characters . " The Daily Telegraph 's reviewer Leight <unk> says that the film gives the genre a right old spin thanks to some lively performances and sharp pacing . Bandslam was The Washington Post 's critic choice , having a perfect score of 4 / 4 stars . Bandslam was somehow associated with High School Musical in a couple of reviews . However , the reviews concluded the comparisons positively , saying that Bandslam was " actually a lot quirkier than the posters would have you believe . " New Jersey 's local newspaper , The Star Ledger says that the plot is nicely skewed : " Basically , it 's the standard teen picture -- girl torn between bad boy and nice guy -- with a gender switch . " Michael Phillips of The Los Angeles Times praised the film by saying : " Bandslam is a pretty good movie given that the odds of it having been a pretty bad movie were steep . " Critic Andy Webster of The New York Times said that Bandslam may not entirely break new teen @-@ movie ground , but it does offer intriguing glimpses of performers ready to bolt from the Disney stable . Hudgens received an amount of praise from reviewers , emphasizing her transition from being associated with her previous commercial character , Gabriella Montez , multiple times . Reviewers also cited her impressive performance in the film . Even though Connell and Michalka each received their fair amount of enthusiastic press , David Waddington of North Wales Pioneer claims that Hudgens " outshines the rest of the cast , failing to fit in with the outcast narrative and making the inevitable climactic ending all the more expected . " Hudgens was praised with her performance in the film that The Observer critic , Philip French said that she looks like the young Thandie Newton and " wisecracks like Dorothy Parker . " French then adds that " Bandslam is a witty , touching , cleverly plotted film with excellent music . " Eye Weekly reviewer Will Sloan says , " Bandslam is like a teenybopper version of Adventureland , and if its PG limitations keep it from being quite as insightful or funny as that film , it 's still a serviceable , surprisingly intelligent bit of <unk> . " Reviewers asserted that the film 's music mainly lifted to the success of Bandslam from reviews , especially the ska version of Everything I Own , that the film is full of unexpected pleasures set to a surprisingly retro soundtrack . Similarly , Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter emphasized the effect of the film 's music @-@ driven comedy set against the backdrop of a high school battle of the bands competition which manages to come up with a fresh backbeat for the familiar alienated teen refrain , boosted by a talented cast and authentic soundtrack . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Bandslam was released on August 12 , 2009 , in the UK , Ireland , and France ; August 13 , 2009 in Australia ; August 14 in the US , and Canada ; August 20 , 2009 in some parts of Asia ; August 26 , 2009 in the Philippines . Earlier , the film 's tentative date was April 10 , 2009 listed by The Numbers around the time Liam Aiken was involved in the film . It then switched to be on July 31 , 2009 , which was the original release date once production started . But with unknown reasons , Box Office Mojo confirms the push back to its current US release date which is on August 14 , 2009 . The film was titled as " High School Band " in Brazil , The film was previously titled as " Will " , based on early reports , and then it was renamed to " Rock On " , ultimately ending up being called " Bandslam . " A premiere night , which was attended by the rest of the cast including the main actors of the film , was held at Westwood , California on August 6 , 2009 . The film was rated PG in the US for some thematic elements and mild language . In the Philippines , it is rated GP . Bandslam was critically successful but did not do well commercially . Debuting at 2 @,@ 121 theaters , the film only grossed $ 890 @,@ 000 on its first day and failed to chart in the top 10 . The film eventually reached the top 10 and grossed $ 50 @,@ 000 more on the same day . For its opening weekend , Bandslam didn 't chart in the US weekend box office top 10 , where it only grossed $ 2 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 . It only reached the number 12 spot . As of October 1 , 2009 , the film has a domestic gross of $ 5 @,@ 210 @,@ 988 , with a foreign gross of $ 7 @,@ 014 @,@ 035 totaling an international gross of $ 12 @,@ 225 @,@ 023 . 
 = = Home media = = 
 Bandslam was slated to be released in standard DVD and Blu @-@ ray in the UK on December 7 , 2009 . However , due to unknown circumstances , UK label E1 Entertainment were unable to release the film on Blu @-@ ray at that time . In the United States , the DVD was released on March 16 , 2010 . In the rest of Europe , the DVD was also released between December 2009 and June 2010 . 
 The DVD contains , aside from the movie itself , some extras : 
 Bandslam : Making the Band documentary 
 Audio commentary by the Director and the cast 
 Deleted scenes 
 Music video : " Honor Society " – " Where Are You Now " . 
 Music video : " I Can 't Go On , I 'll Go On " featuring Vanessa Hudgens – " Everything I Own " . 
 Additionally : 
 International releases included a trailer in the local language . 
 Also , the UK DVD includes an The Twilight Saga : New Moon <unk> . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack was released under Hollywood Records on August 11 , 2009 . The soundtrack features tracks from Wilco , The Burning Hotels , Velvet Underground , Peter Bjorn and John , Seventeen Evergreen , Honor Society , the Daze , Nick Drake and David Bowie . 
 = Seasons ( Ayumi Hamasaki song ) = 
 " Seasons " ( capitalized as " <unk> " ) is a song recorded by Japanese recording artist Ayumi Hamasaki for her third studio album , Duty ( 2000 ) . It was written by Hamasaki , while production was handled by Max Matsuura . It premiered on June 7 , 2000 as the third single from the album . The song is the final part of a trilogy from Duty ; the other two singles being " Vogue " and " Far Away " . 
 Musically , " Season " is a Japanese pop song . The lyrics highlights theme of the hopelessness , describing Hamasaki 's future . Upon its release , the track garnered positive reviews from music critics , who praised Hamasaki 's songwriting , the songs composition and selected it as an album and career stand out track . It also achieved success in Japan , peaking at number one on the Oricon Singles Chart and on the TBS Count Down TV chart . " Seasons " has sold over 1 @.@ 367 million units in Japan , making it Hamasaki 's best selling single . 
 The accompanying music video for " Seasons " was directed by Wataru Takeishi , and leads on from the videos of " Vogue " and " Far Away " ; it features Hamasaki in a black gown in the middle of a post @-@ apocalypse city . Both the music video and the song has appeared on several compilations by Hamasaki , including A Best ( 2001 ) and A Complete : All Singles ( 2008 ) . For additional promotion , the song was featured on several concert tours by Hamasaki . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Seasons " " was recorded in 2000 at Nowadays Studios and Prime Sound Studios in Tokyo , Japan . As part of the trilogy set with " Vogue " and " Far Away " , " Seasons " highlights theme of hopelessness and predicts Hamasaki 's future . With this , " Vogue " details Hamasaki 's presence , whilst " Far Away " discusses her past . Based on her song writing , she described her feelings after the writing all the tracks from Duty as " unnatural " and was constantly " nervous " for the final result . A staff reviewer from Amazon Japan noticed that the trilogy set had a " healing effect " that was absent on Hamasaki 's two previous studio albums . 
 " Seasons " was written by Hamasaki , while production was handled by Japanese businessman and musician Max Matsuura . The song was composed by long @-@ term collaborators Dai Nagao , whilst arrangement was handled by Naoto Suzuki . For the track 's instrumentation , Suzuki played the keyboards , Naoki <unk> played the guitar , Takahiro Iida programmed and mixed the final composition , and Junko <unk> provided background vocals . 
 It was selected as the second single from Duty , and was released on June 7 , 2000 by Avex Trax . The maxi CD of the single contains the original composition and its instrumental version , plus nine remixes . As a single from the Duty trilogy , which included Hamasaki 's singles " Vogue " and " Far Away " , the singles were released as a DVD single and VHS . It included the three mini @-@ music videos , alongside the making @-@ of videos and a TV commercial . The CD and digital cover sleeve have an image of Hamasaki holding a polaroid of the cover artwork for " Far Away " . The song 's title , " Seasons " , is present on cover . The standalone CD cover was used as the digital EP cover for the iTunes Store and Amazon.com. 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Seasons " received favourable reviews from music critics . Alexey Eremenko , who had written her extended biography at AllMusic , highlighted the song as an album and career stand out track . Morimosa from Nifty.com complimented Hamasaki 's songwriting in the song . A staff reviewer from Yahoo ! GeoCities was positive towards the song , and selected it as one of the best tracks from the album . Hamasaki hosted an online voting poll for fans to choose their favourite tracks to be featured on her Ayumi Hamasaki 15th Anniversary Tour Best Live Tour . As a result , " Seasons " was included on the list . In early 2014 , in honor of Hamasaki 's sixteenth @-@ year career milestone , Japanese website Goo.ne.jp hosted a poll for fans to rank their favourite songs by Hamasaki out of thirty positions ; the poll was held in only twenty @-@ four hours , and thousands submitted their votes . As a result , " Seasons " was ranked at the top spot . According to their separate review , the website commented on its win ; " ' Seasons ' was an instant classic ... Fans cite the song 's heartfelt and resonating lyrics as some of her best . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In Japan , " Seasons " was a success on the Oricon Singles Chart . It debuted at the top spot of the chart , lasted for 21 weeks on the chart , and sold 1 @.@ 367 million units by the end of 2000 . This is Hamasaki 's best selling single ; as of today , the song is Hamasaki 's second best selling single according to Oricon Style . The DVD single , released under the title of Vogue / Far Away / Seasons reached number one on the Oricon DVD Chart , spending seventeen weeks in the top fifty . It is Hamasaki 's second best selling DVD single , and her eighth best seller overall . " Seasons " was certified million by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipments of one million units . In August 2014 , the song was certified gold by RIAJ for digital sales of 100 @,@ 000 units . The single entered at number one on Japan 's TBS Count Down TV Chart ; it stayed there for two consecutive weeks , and lasted 21 weeks in the chart . It was placed at number seven on their Annual Count Down TV chart in 2000 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Wataru Takeishi . Because the music video was part of the trilogy set with " Vogue " and " Far Away " , only a portion of the song was shot for the video . As a result , the video for " Seasons " lasts for two minutes and 27 seconds . Two outtake shots from the " Vogue " video were then used for the artworks of " Far Away " and " Seasons " . The music video was included on the DVD and VHS formats of " Seasons " . The music video also appeared on Hamasaki 's DVD compilation box sets : A Clips Vol.2 ( 2002 ) , Complete Clip Box ( 2004 ) , A Clip Box 1998 – 2011 ( 2011 ) , and the bonus DVD version with A Complete : All Singles . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video opens with a cover of a photo album , superimposed with a scene of two children from the videos of " Vogue " and " Far Away " . It then has a blurry image of Hamasaki in the post @-@ apocalyptic city , which has now left behind a series of hills . As Hamasaki walks towards the camera , the photo album opens with the city before its destruction . Hamasaki stands in the middle of a grainy surface , with projectile flames coming from underneath the ground . As she sings , scenes from the " Vogue " and " Far Away " videos appear in the photo album . She walks through the hill surface , finding the photo album the two children left behind . She opens the book , and witnesses the " Vogue " video . The final scene has Hamasaki close the book , which its back cover is a title @-@ less shot of the artwork to " Vogue " . 
 = = Live performances and other appearances = = 
 Hamasaki has performed " Seasons " on several concert tours throughout Asia . The song was performed on Hamasaki 's 2000 concert in Japan , where it was included during the first segment . It was included on the live DVD , released on September 27 , 2000 . It was performed on her 2000 @-@ 2001 New Years countdown concert tour , where it was included during the last segment . It was included on the live DVD , released on June 20 , 2001 . It was performed on her Dome Tour ( 2001 ) , where it was included during the last segment . It was included on the live DVD , released on December 12 , 2001 . It was performed on her Stadium tour ( 2002 ) , where it was included as an encore track . It was included on the live DVD , released on January 29 , 2003 . 
 It was performed on her A Museum tour ( 2004 ) , where it was included as an encore track . It was included on the live DVD , released on February 25 , 2004 . It was performed on her Tours of Secret concert tour ( 2007 ) , where it was included as an encore track . It was included on the live DVD , released on March 12 , 2008 . The song was performed on her Power of Music tour ( 2011 ) in Japan , where it was included in the trilogy segment with " Vogue " and " Far Away " . It was included on the live DVD , released on March 21 , 2012 . The song was performed on her 15th Anniversary tour ( 2013 ) in Japan , where it was included in the trilogy segment with " Vogue " and " Far Away " . It was included on the live DVD , released on October 30 , 2013 . The song has been included on three of her greatest hits compilations : A Best ( 2002 ) , A Complete : All Singles ( 2008 ) , and A Summer Best ( 2012 ) . The 2000 vol . 2 live performance was included on Hamasaki 's live DVD compilation , A 50 Singles : Live Selection ( 2011 ) , and the DVD edition of A Summer Best . 
 " Seasons " has been remixed by several professional disc jockeys and producers , and has appeared on several remix albums by Hamasaki : the Hex Hector and Bump and Flex remix on ayu @-@ mi @-@ x III Non @-@ Stop Mega Mix Version ( 2001 ) and Ayu @-@ mi @-@ x 4 + Selection Non @-@ Stop Mega Mix Version ( 2002 ) , the A Eurobeat remix on Super Eurobeat Presents Ayu @-@ ro Mix 2 ( 2001 ) , and the John O 'Callaghan ( musician ) remix on Ayu @-@ mi @-@ x 7 Presents Ayu Trance 4 ( 2011 ) . The orchestral acoustic remix , and its instrumental version , was included on her third orchestral remix album , ayu @-@ mi @-@ x III Acoustic Orchestra Version ( 2001 ) . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the singles liner notes : 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Arlen Specter = 
 Arlen Specter ( February 12 , 1930 – October 14 , 2012 ) was an American lawyer and politician who served as United States Senator from Pennsylvania . Specter was a Democrat from 1951 to 1965 , then a Republican from 1965 until 2009 , when he switched back to the Democratic Party . First elected in 1980 , he represented his state in the Senate for 30 years . 
 Specter was born in Wichita , Kansas , to emigrant Russian Jewish parents . He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and served with the United States Air Force during the Korean War . Specter later graduated from Yale Law School and opened a law firm with Marvin Katz , who would later become a federal judge . Specter served as assistant counsel for the Warren Commission investigating the assassination of John F. Kennedy and helped devise the " single @-@ bullet theory " . In 1965 , Specter was elected District Attorney of Philadelphia , a position that he would hold until 1973 . 
 During his 30 @-@ year senate career , Specter staked out a spot in the political center . In 2006 , he was selected by Time as one of America 's Ten Best Senators . Specter lost his reelection bid in 2010 to Joe Sestak in the primary election , who then lost to Pat Toomey in the general election . Toomey succeeded Specter on January 3 , 2011 . 
 Diagnosed with Hodgkin 's lymphoma in early 2005 , he continued his work in the Senate while undergoing chemotherapy . He later died of complications of non @-@ Hodgkin 's lymphoma on October 14 , 2012 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Specter was born in Wichita , Kansas , the youngest child of Lillie ( née <unk> ) and Harry Specter , who grew up in the <unk> village of <unk> Oblast , Ukraine . Specter was Jewish , and wrote in his memoir , Passion for Truth , that his father 's family was the only Jewish family in the village . The family lived at 940 South Emporia Street in Wichita before moving to Russell , Kansas , where he graduated from Russell High School in 1947 . Russell is also the hometown of fellow politician Bob Dole ( who graduated from Russell High School in 1941 ) . Specter said that his father weighed items from his junkyard on a scale owned by Dole 's father Doran Dole ( who owned a granary ) . He said his brother Morton and Dole 's brother Kenny were contemporaries and friends . 
 Specter 's father served in the U.S. infantry during World War I , and was badly wounded . During the Great Depression , Specter 's father was a fruit peddler , a tailor , and a junkyard owner . After graduating from Russell High School , Arlen Specter studied first at the University of Oklahoma . He transferred to the University of Pennsylvania , majored in international relations , and graduated Phi Beta Kappa in 1951 . While at Penn , Specter was a member of the Pi Lambda Phi fraternity , as well as the Philomathean Society . Specter said the family moved to Philadelphia when his sister Shirley was of a marriageable age because there were no other Jews in Russell . 
 = = = Military career = = = 
 During the Korean War , he served stateside in the United States Air Force from 1951 to 1953 and obtained the rank of first lieutenant as an officer in the Air Force Office of Special Investigations Corps . 
 = = = Early legal career and personal life = = = 
 In 1953 , he married Joan Levy . In 1979 , she was elected to one of the two allotted minority party at @-@ large seats on the Philadelphia City Council . She held the seat for four terms , until she was defeated for re @-@ election in 1995 by Frank Rizzo , Jr .. The couple had two sons . Specter graduated from Yale Law School in 1956 , while serving as editor of the Yale Law Journal . Afterward , Specter opened a law practice , Specter & Katz , with Marvin Katz , who served as a Federal District Court Judge in Philadelphia , until his death in October 2010 . Specter became an assistant district attorney under District Attorney James C. Crumlish , Jr . , and was a member of the Democratic Party . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 = = = Involvement with the Warren Commission = = = 
 Specter worked for Lyndon Johnson 's Warren Commission , which investigated the assassination of John F. Kennedy , at the recommendation of Representative Gerald Ford , who was then one of the Commissioners . As an assistant for the commission , he co @-@ wrote the proposal of the " single bullet theory , " which suggested the non @-@ fatal wounds to Kennedy and wounds to Texas Governor John Connally were caused by the same bullet . This was a crucial assertion for the Warren Commission , since if the two had been wounded by separate bullets within such a short time frame , that would have demonstrated the presence of a second assassin and therefore a conspiracy . The United States House Select Committee on Assassinations published their report in 1979 stating that their " forensic pathology panel 's conclusions were consistent with the so @-@ called single bullet theory advanced by the Warren Commission . " 
 = = = His quests for political offices = = = 
 In 1965 , Specter ran for Philadelphia district attorney against his former boss , incumbent James C. Crumlish , Jr . However , the city 's Democratic leaders , such as Peter Camiel , did not want Specter as their candidate , so he switched parties and ran as a Republican , prompting Crumlish to call him " Benedict Arlen . " Specter defeated Crumlish by 36 @,@ 000 votes . Though he was a supporter of capital punishment , as a prosecutor , he questioned the fairness of the Pennsylvania death penalty statute in 1972 . 
 In 1967 , he was the Republican Party standard bearer , together with City Controller candidate , Tom Gola , in the Philadelphia mayoral campaign against the Democratic incumbent James Tate . Two of their slogans were , " We need THESE guys to watch <unk> guys " and " They 're younger , they 're tougher , and nobody owns them ! " He served two four @-@ year terms as district attorney for the city of Philadelphia , but was handily defeated in his bid for a third term in 1973 by noted criminal defense attorney Emmett Fitzpatrick . 
 In 1976 , Specter ran in the Republican primary for the U.S. Senate and was defeated by John Heinz . In 1978 , he was defeated in the primary for Governor of Pennsylvania by Dick Thornburgh . After several years in private practice with the Philadelphia law firm <unk> , Price & Rhoads , Specter ran again for the U.S. Senate in 1980 . This time , he won . He assumed office in January 1981 . 
 = = Senate career = = 
 In 1988 , he co @-@ sponsored an amendment to the Fair Housing Act of 1968 , which prohibited discrimination in the rental , sale , marketing , and financing of the nation 's housing . The amendment strengthened the ability of the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity to enforce the Fair Housing Act and expanded the protected classes to include disabled persons and families with children . In 1998 and 1999 , Specter criticized the Republican Party for the impeachment of President Bill Clinton . Believing that Clinton had not received a fair trial , Specter cited Scots law to render a verdict of " not proven " on Clinton 's impeachment . However , his verdict was recorded as " not guilty " in the Senate records . 
 On October 11 , 2002 , Specter voted in favor of <unk> authorizing the Iraq War . 
 In a 2002 PoliticsPA Feature story designating politicians with yearbook superlatives , he was named the " Toughest to Work For . " In 2003 , the Pennsylvania Report , a subscription @-@ based political newsletter , described Specter as one of the " vanishing breed of Republican moderates " and described his political stance as " ' Pennsylvania first ' middle of @-@ the @-@ road politics " even though he was known as an " avid Republican partisan . " 
 Soon after the 2004 election , Specter stepped into the public spotlight as a result of controversial statements about his views of the future of the Supreme Court . At a press conference , he stated : 
 When you talk about judges who would change the right of a woman to choose , overturn Roe v. Wade , I think [ confirmation ] is unlikely . The president is well aware of what happened , when a number of his nominees were sent up , with the filibuster .... And I would expect the president to be mindful of the considerations which I am mentioning . 
 Activist groups interpreted his comments as warnings to President George W. Bush about the implications of nominating Supreme Court justices who were opposed to the Roe v. Wade decision . Specter maintained that his comments were a prediction , not a warning . He met with many conservative Republican senators , and based on assurances he gave them , he was recommended for the Judiciary Committee 's chairmanship in late 2004 . He officially assumed that position when the 109th Congress convened on January 4 , 2005 . 
 On March 9 , 2006 , a revision of the USA PATRIOT Act was signed into law . It amended the process for interim appointments of U.S. Attorneys , a clause Specter wrote during his chairmanship of the Senate Judiciary Committee . The change allowed the Bush Administration to appoint interim U.S. attorneys without term limits , and without confirmation by the Senate . The Bush administration used the law to place at least eight interim attorneys into office in 2006 . Specter claimed that the changes were added by staff member Brett Tolman . For more information , see dismissal of U.S. Attorneys controversy . 
 Specter was very critical of Bush 's wiretapping of U.S. citizens without warrants . When the story first broke , he called the effort " inappropriate " and " clearly and categorically wrong . " He said that he intended to hold hearings into the matter early in 2006 , and had Alberto Gonzales appear before the Senate Judiciary Committee to answer for the program . ( However , Specter declined to force Gonzales to testify under oath . ) On January 15 , 2006 , Specter mentioned impeachment and criminal prosecution as potential remedies if Bush proved to have broken the law , though he downplayed the likelihood of such an outcome . 
 On April 9 , 2006 , speaking on Fox News about the Bush administration 's leaking of classified intelligence , Specter stated : " The President of the United States owes a specific explanation to the American people . " However , he did vote for the 2008 amendments to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act , which placed federal electronic searches almost entirely within the executive branch . 
 During the 2007 – 2008 National Football League season , Specter wrote to NFL commissioner Roger Goodell concerning the destruction of New England Patriots “ <unk> ” tapes , wondering if there was a link between the tapes and their Super Bowl victory over the Philadelphia Eagles . On February 1 , 2008 , Goodell stated that the tapes were destroyed because " they confirmed what I already knew about the issue . " Specter released a follow @-@ up statement : 
 My strong preference is for the NFL to activate a Mitchell @-@ type investigation , I have been careful not to call for a Congressional hearing because I believe the NFL should step forward and embrace an independent inquiry and Congress is extraordinarily busy on other matters . If the NFL continues to leave a vacuum , Congress may be tempted to fill it . 
 Starting in 2007 , Specter sponsored legislation to fix a long @-@ standing inequity in American law that shut out a majority of U.S. Armed Forces service members from equal access to the U.S. Supreme Court . 
 In 2007 , Specter co @-@ sponsored the Equal Justice for United States Military Personnel Act of 2007 with Senators Dianne Feinstein ( D @-@ Calif . ) , Hillary Clinton ( D @-@ NY ) and Russ Feingold ( D @-@ Wis . ) . But the bill failed in the 110th Congress , and Specter again co @-@ sponsored the measure in the 2009 111th Congress . In December 2008 , Specter was involved in a controversy as a result of telling " Polish jokes " at New York 's Rainbow Room while speaking at the annual meeting of the Commonwealth Club . 
 Specter voted in favor of the Senate 's version of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 on February 10 , 2009 ; he was one of only three Republicans to break ranks with the party and support the bill , which was favored by President Barack Obama and was unanimously supported by the Democratic senators . As a result of his support , many in the Republican mainstream began calling for his removal from office . 
 Specter was instrumental in ensuring that the act allocated an additional $ 10 billion to the National Institutes of Health over the next two years . In late April 2009 , facing a tough Republican primary , Specter switched to the Democratic party giving Democrats a super @-@ majority . He was then denied seniority on Senate committees by his Democratic colleagues . 
 In October 2009 , Specter called for the repeal of the Defense of Marriage Act , which he had supported in 1996 . In November 2009 , Specter introduced a bill to require televising U.S. Supreme Court proceedings , and explained that " [ t ] he Supreme Court makes pronouncements on constitutional and federal law that have direct impacts on the rights of Americans . Those rights would be substantially enhanced by televising the oral arguments of the Court so that the public can see and hear the issues presented . " 
 Specter 's career in the United States Senate ended on January 3 , 2011 , after his primary defeat to Joe Sestak . He was succeeded by Pat Toomey , who won the general election against Sestak . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 Specter was chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence from 1995 , when the Republicans gained control of the Senate , until 1997 , when he became chairman of the Committee on Veterans Affairs . He chaired that committee until 2001 and again from 2003 to 2005 , during the times the Republicans controlled the Senate . He also chaired the Judiciary Committee from 2005 to 2007 . 
 = = Campaigns = = 
 In 1980 , Specter became the Republican nominee for Senate when Republican incumbent Richard <unk> announced his retirement . He faced the former Mayor of Pittsburgh , Pete Flaherty . Specter won the election by a 2 @.@ 5 % margin . He was later reelected in 1986 , 1992 , 1998 , and 2004 , despite 1992 and 1998 being bad years for Republicans . Specter ran for reelection in 2010 , for the first time as a Democrat , but was defeated in the Primary . 
 = = = 1996 presidential bid = = = 
 On March 31 , 1995 , Specter announced his candidacy for President of the United States , to challenge the incumbent Bill Clinton . He entered the race as an alternate to the stereotypical religious conservative image . He was critical of Pat Buchanan , Pat Robertson , and Ralph Reed , saying all three were far too conservative . 
 His campaign focused on balancing the federal budget , strict crime laws , and establishing relations with North Korea . His candidacy was not expected to succeed in winning the Republican nomination due to the overwhelmingly large number of social conservatives in the Republican Party . He was , however , able to gain support . Fellow Pennsylvania Senator Rick Santorum was supportive of his candidacy . Other supportive Republicans were hopeful Specter could trim the party 's " far @-@ right fringe " . Although his campaign was ultimately unsuccessful at wooing conservatives , it was widely believed he could have had a strong showing among independents . On November 23 , 1995 , before the start of the primaries , Specter suspended his campaign to endorse Kansas Senator Bob Dole . 
 = = = 2004 campaign = = = 
 In 2004 , Specter faced a challenge in the Republican primary election from conservative Congressman Pat Toomey , whose campaign theme was that Specter was not fiscally conservative enough . The match @-@ up was closely watched nationally , being seen as a symbolic clash between the conservative and moderate wings of the Republican Party . However , most of the state and national Republican establishment , including the state 's other senator at the time , Rick Santorum , closed ranks behind Specter . Specter was supported by President George W. Bush . Specter narrowly avoided a major upset with 51 % of the primary vote . Once Specter defeated the challenge from the right , he was able to enjoy great support from independents and some Democrats in his race against <unk> . <unk> trailed Specter in name recognition , campaign funds and poll results . Although the two minor candidates were seen as more conservative than Specter , they were only able to take 4 % of the vote and Specter was easily reelected . 
 = = = 2010 campaign = = = 
 Specter was up for re @-@ election to the Senate in 2010 , and expressed his plans to run again . On March 18 , 2009 , Specter said that he was not considering running as an independent . He said , " To eliminate any doubt , I am a Republican , and I am running for reelection in 2010 as a Republican on the Republican ticket . " Subsequently Specter 's 2004 conservative GOP primary challenger , Pat Toomey , announced he would again run for the Republican nomination in the Republican senatorial primary . 
 However , on April 28 , 2009 , Specter stated that " As the Republican Party has moved farther and farther to the right , I have found myself increasingly at odds with the Republican philosophy and more in line with the philosophy of the Democratic Party . " He said that he was switching party affiliation and would run as a Democrat in the 2010 election . 
 In the same announcement , Specter also said that he had " surveyed the sentiments of the Republican Party in Pennsylvania and public opinion polls , observed other public opinion polls and have found that the prospects for winning a Republican primary are bleak " . A March 2009 Quinnipiac poll indicated that Specter trailed his likely primary challenger , Pat Toomey , by 14 % ( 41 % for Toomey , 27 % for Specter ) . Additional polling found that 70 % of Pennsylvania Republicans disapproved of his vote in favor of the Stimulus Bill and that 52 percent of Pennsylvania Republicans disapproved of the job he was doing . Following Specter 's switching parties , Republican National Committee chairman Michael Steele criticized his leaving the Republican Party , claiming that Specter had " flipped the bird " at the GOP . 
 On February 6 , 2010 , the Pennsylvania Democratic Party overwhelmingly endorsed U.S. Senator Arlen Specter at the Democratic State Committee 's annual endorsement convention , which was held in Lancaster County , Pennsylvania . He received more votes than Joe Sestak , winning more than 77 % of the Pennsylvania Democratic State Committee members vote , far in excess of the 2 / 3 threshold needed to claim the endorsement . Sestak , however , went on to win the Democratic primary nomination on May 18 . 
 Following the primary , Specter endorsed Sestak in the general election . Sestak would go on to lose the general election to Toomey . 
 = = Political views = = 
 According to the National Journal , Specter voted with Democrats 90 % of the time after switching parties , while , as a Republican , he split his votes between both parties . According to <unk> , during January – March 2009 Specter voted with the Democrats 58 % of the time . Following the support of the stimulus package and the entrance of Pat Toomey in the Republican primary , Specter began to vote 16 % with Democrats . When switching to become a Democrat , he voted 69 % with his new party initially , until Joe Sestak entered the Democratic primary and Specter started to vote 97 % of the time . 
 = = = Abortion = = = 
 Specter stated that he was " personally opposed to abortion , " but was " a supporter of a woman 's right to choose . " He received a 20 % rating from NARAL Pro @-@ Choice America in 2005 based on certain votes related to the regulation of abortion ; in 2008 , he received 100 % . 
 = = = LGBT issues = = = 
 Specter supported some LGBT rights . He voted to prohibit job discrimination based on sexual orientation , and was a co @-@ sponsor of the Matthew Shepard Hate Crimes Prevention Act . Specter was opposed to same @-@ sex marriage , but was also opposed to a federal ban and supported civil unions . He also became opposed to the Defense of Marriage Act which he once supported . Specter voted in favor of repealing Don 't Ask , Don 't Tell in the lame @-@ duck session of the 111th Congress . 
 = = = Gun control = = = 
 Specter strongly opposed most gun control , voting against the Brady Bill , background checks at gun shows , the ban on assault weapons , and trigger locks for handguns . 
 = = = Affirmative action = = = 
 He supported affirmative action and voted for the Civil Rights Act of 1991 , receiving a 76 percent rating from the NAACP in 2008 . 
 = = = Tax cuts and minimum wage = = = 
 In 1995 he was the only Republican to vote to limit tax cuts to individuals with incomes of less than one million dollars . He voted against CAFTA . Specter also supported an increase in the federal minimum wage . He was a leading supporter of the U.S. Public Service Academy . 
 = = = Illegal immigration = = = 
 On immigration , Specter supported a " pathway to citizenship " and a " guest worker program " , which opponents call amnesty . He introduced Senate bill S. <unk> ( the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2006 ) on April 6 , 2006 , which was passed by the Senate on May 25 , 2006 before reaching a stalemate in the House . 
 = = = Health care reform = = = 
 = = = = Public option = = = = 
 On May 3 , 2009 Specter went on Meet the Press and was asked " Would you support health care reform that puts up a government run public plan to compete with a private plan issued by a private insurance company ? " Specter said no . Two months later , he changed his position . 
 = = = = Single @-@ payer = = = = 
 Specter believed a single @-@ payer healthcare system should not be " taken off the table " , according to an interview he had with John King on CNN . 
 = = = = Votes = = = = 
 On health care reform , Specter was a cosponsor of the Healthy Americans Act , a proposal he supported during both the 110th and 111th Congresses . Specter voted for the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , the healthcare bill passed through the Senate by every Democratic senator , on a party @-@ line vote . 
 In May 2012 , New York @-@ Presbyterian Hospital , Columbia University Medical Center and Weill Cornell Medical College presented Specter with the annual Public Service Award for his work in expanding mental health care . 
 = = = Card check = = = 
 Specter has received a 61 % rating from the AFL @-@ CIO . He voted for cloture on the Employee Free Choice Act in 2007 . In early 2009 , Specter announced he would not be voting for cloture on the same act in the 111th Congress . After Specter switched parties , he changed his position on the issue again , and wrote a letter to the unions indicating he supported card check legislation . 
 = = = Privacy ; computers = = = 
 Spurred by the 2010 Robbins v. Lower Merion School District case , in which two high schools admitted to secretly taking 66 @,@ 000 webcam photos and screenshots of students in their homes on school @-@ issued laptops , Specter held a hearing of the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime and Drugs on March 29 , 2010 . He said : " The issue is one of surreptitious eavesdropping . Unbeknownst to people , their movements and activities were under surveillance . " He said that Lower Merion 's use of laptop cameras for surveillance convinced him that new federal legislation was needed to regulate electronic privacy . 
 Specter then introduced legislation in April 2010 to amend the federal <unk> Act to clarify that it is illegal to capture silent visual images inside another person 's home . He said : " This is going to become law . You have a very significant invasion of privacy with these webcams , as more information is coming to light . " Speaking on the floor of the Senate , he said : 
 Many of us expect to be subject to ... video surveillance when we leave our homes and go out each day — at the ATM , at traffic lights , or in stores , for example . What we do not expect is to be under visual surveillance in our homes , in our bedrooms , and , most especially , we do not expect it for our children in our homes . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The Jewish daily newspaper The Forward reported in the wake of the July 2009 organ trafficking scandal in the U.S. involving Rabbi Levy <unk> Rosenbaum of Brooklyn that an Organ Trafficking Prohibition Act of 2009 , sponsored by Specter , had yet to be officially introduced in the U.S. 
 Specter criticized the federal government 's policy on cancer , stating the day after Jack Kemp — the 1996 Republican vice presidential nominee and former congressman — died of cancer , that Kemp would still be alive if the federal government had done a better job funding cancer research . 
 On February 16 , 2011 , Specter wrote a letter to President Obama . He stated that as Chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee , Jonathan Pollard should be pardoned . He stated , " Unfortunately , spying is not an uncommon practice even between allies and friendly nations . " 
 Marking Specter 's entire career in the Senate and , indeed , in all his public offices was one overriding fact : First and foremost , he considered himself essentially a trial attorney rather than a professional politician . During his tenures on Senate committees , his approach to their hearings was very similar to courtroom examinations of trial witnesses . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = = Post @-@ senate career = = 
 During the fall of 2011 , Specter was an adjunct professor at the University of Pennsylvania Law School , where he taught a course on the relationship between Congress and the U.S. Supreme Court , focusing on separation of powers and the confirmation process . For this course the National Jurist named him as one of the " 23 professors to take before you die " . 
 = = = Arlen Specter Center for Public Service at Philadelphia University = = = 
 On December 21 , 2011 , former Senator Arlen Specter donated to Philadelphia University nearly 2 @,@ 700 boxes of historical papers and memorabilia dating from his career as a Philadelphia district attorney to his service as a United States senator , including materials associated with his role as assistant counsel on the Warren Commission . The collection will be jointly managed by the University of Pittsburgh , which will house , organize , and manage the collection . The universities will collaborate on related education programing that will consequently provide access to the archives on both ends of the state . The Specter Collection will also support The Arlen Specter Center for Public Policy at Philadelphia University . 
 The Center will be a nonpartisan initiative dedicated to promoting greater understanding of public policy issues both foreign and domestic . The Center will strive to accomplish these goals through support for research , educational programming , and exhibitions inspired , in part , by the senator 's career and the permanent collection of his historic papers . The Center will be managed by the Paul J. Gutman Library at Philadelphia University will be located in Roxboro House , which is located nearby on campus . 
 Parts of Roxboro House date back to 1799 . The Georgian period house constructed of frame and clapboard was expanded in 1810 . At one point in its history , Roxboro House was owned by Dr. Caspar Wistar who published the first American textbook of anatomy in 1811 . Wistar was president of the American Philosophical Society and his friend , Thomas Nuttall , a famous botanist , named the Wisteria vine after him . In 1965 the Philadelphia Historical Commission added this house to its list of registered buildings ( No. 141 ) . Prior to the University 's purchase of the property in 1998 , the house was being used as a bed and breakfast establishment . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 On February 16 , 2005 , Specter announced that he had been diagnosed with an advanced form of Hodgkin 's lymphoma , a type of cancer . Despite this , Specter continued working during chemotherapy . He ended treatment on July 22 . Senator John Sununu ( R @-@ NH ) shaved his head to show solidarity with Specter , who was temporarily bald while undergoing chemotherapy . On April 15 , 2008 , Specter announced his cancer had returned , at a stage " significantly less advanced than his Hodgkin 's disease when it was originally diagnosed in 2005 " . He underwent a second round of chemotherapy , which ended on July 14 , 2008 . 
 On August 28 , 2012 , it was announced that Specter was battling a " serious form of cancer " and hospitalized . He was diagnosed six weeks earlier with a new form of the disease . On September 7 , 2012 , he was released from a Philadelphia hospital , but was expected to return there for additional treatment . 
 Specter died from complications of non @-@ Hodgkin 's lymphoma , aged 82 , on October 14 , 2012 , at his home in Philadelphia . Statements of condolence were issued by President and Mrs. Obama , Vice President and Mrs. Biden , the Office of the Governor of Pennsylvania , and by many of his colleagues and former opponents in the U.S. Congress , the Pennsylvania legislature , and the city of Philadelphia , among many others . Senator Specter , while he had been accused of alienating both parties due to certain positions he took and due to the two times he switched parties , among other issues , was nonetheless respected by many as a principled statesman who did much for his state and country , including by those in politics and the legislature , both in Pennsylvania and his home state , Kansas , as well as across the U.S. and beyond . He was the longest @-@ serving of Pennsylvania 's U.S. Senators , and it was said that he had done more for the state than anyone else , with the possible exception of Benjamin Franklin himself . As a sign of this respect and out of mourning , President Obama ordered U.S. flags to be lowered to half @-@ staff at public institutions and military bases in Washington , D.C. and the rest of the country on his day of interment . 
 = Petrillo Music Shell = 
 James C. Petrillo Music Shell or simply Petrillo Music Shell or Petrillo Bandshell as it is more commonly known , is an outdoor amphitheater / bandstand in Grant Park in the Loop community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States . It serves as host to many large annual music festivals in the city such as Chicago Blues Festival , Chicago Jazz Festival , Taste of Chicago and Lollapalooza . It is also the former host of several smaller ( less than 10 @,@ 000 ) attendance annual events that have moved to the newer Jay Pritzker Pavilion such as the Grant Park Music Festival , Chicago Gospel Music Festival , and Chicago Latin Music Festival . It was formerly located at the South end of Grant Park and was relocated in 1978 . 
 The shell was commissioned in 1931 by Mayor of Chicago Anton Cermak in the wake of the Great Depression to help lift the spirits of the citizenry with free concerts . The music shell was named after James C. Petrillo , president of the Chicago Federation of Musicians from 1922 to 1962 and president of the American Federation of Musicians from 1940 to 1958 , who created a free concert series in Grant Park in 1935 . Petrillo was a commissioner of the Chicago Park District from 1934 to 1945 . Until the 1990s , the music shell was known for a traditional Independence Day concert celebration coordinated with the city 's fireworks display on July 3 . 
 = = Location and layout = = 
 In 1915 , the commissioners of South Park ( Grant Park 's predecessor ) located a temporary wooden bandshell in the Park near Michigan and Congress Avenues . It hosted large events as well as band performances and remained in place for five or six years . In 1931 , Cermak suggested free concerts to lift spirits of Chicagoans during the Great Depression . The Depression and the proliferation of new technological innovations such as records , radios and sound films led to a declining demand for live music and a shrinking job market for musicians . That year , as buildings were being built for the 1933 Century of Progress International Exposition , the Chicago Concert Band Association offered to organize a seventy @-@ person concert band to give free summer concerts if the Park commissioners would build a band shell that had electric lighting and dressing rooms . Construction on the wood and fiber E. V. <unk> design began on a budget of $ 12 @,@ 500 ( $ 194 @,@ 502 in today 's dollars ) , and the opening of free concerts commenced on August 24 , 1931 . Construction was completed in three weeks . 
 On July 1 , 1935 , Petrillo oversaw the beginning of free concerts in Grant Park at the original bandshell located on the south end of the park across Lake Shore Drive from the Field Museum of Natural History . Originally referred to as the Grant Park Band Shell , the bandshell was renamed and dedicated in honor of Petrillo in 1975 . 
 There were numerous plans and proposals to replace the original band shell beginning almost as soon as the Festival began . Among the most prominent was a post @-@ WWII ( 1946 ) plan to have a fifteen @-@ thousand @-@ seat butterfly @-@ design <unk> canopy band shell on the block immediately east of the Art Institute of Chicago that eventually came to host the second incarnation of the Petrillo Music Shell . In 1953 a referendum was almost held on the November 3 Election Day ballot for a $ 3 million ( $ 26 @.@ 5 ) structure , but at the last minute a bond issue was denied . In 1963 , a plan for a ten thousand seat music bowl was propounded . By the 1970s the original bandshell had deteriorated to the point where " stagehands , performers and even a grand piano had fallen through the stage floor . " Amid the catastrophes , the musicians joked about the need for hard hats . Despite $ 77 @,@ 000 ( $ 300 @,@ 685 ) in 1977 repair expenditures by the city , the performers were considering cancelling the 1978 season . 
 Protected by legislation that has been affirmed by four previous Illinois Supreme Court rulings , Grant Park has been " forever open , clear and free " since 1836 , which was a year before the city of Chicago was incorporated . In 1839 , United States Secretary of War Joel Roberts Poinsett declared the land between Randolph Street and Madison Street east of Michigan Avenue " Public Ground forever to remain vacant of buildings . Aaron Montgomery Ward , who is known both as the inventor of mail order and the protector of Grant Park , twice sued the city of Chicago to force it to remove buildings and structures from Grant Park and to keep it from building new ones . As a result , the city has what are termed the Montgomery Ward height restrictions on buildings and structures in Grant Park . 
 In 1972 , plans were in place to build a C. F. Murphy Associates @-@ designed $ 31 million ( $ 112 @.@ 5 million ) concrete @-@ and @-@ fiberglass band shell atop a new underground parking garage , but community groups defended the Ward restrictions , which necessitated the less expensive demountable band shell in at Butler Field . The newly relocated bandshell was built at its current location in 1978 .75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) north of the original location . The bandshell was designed to be temporary , but the Park District has never dismantled it . The " semi @-@ permanent " designation averted the Ward prohibitions and cost only $ 3 million ( $ 10 @.@ 9 million ) . 
 With an official street address at 235 S. Columbus Drive , the music shell encompasses the entire block bounded by Lake Shore Drive to the east , Columbus Drive to the west , East Monroe Street to the north and East Jackson Street to the South . The places it a block east of the Art Institute of Chicago , a block north of Buckingham Fountain , a block south of Daley Bicentennial Plaza and southeast of Millennium Park . The amphitheater and paved surface for public seating is in the southwest corner of the block . This has served as one of the main stages for recent Lollapalooza celebrations . 
 = = History = = 
 Concerts began at the band shell in August 1931 . In July 1932 , Franklin Delano Roosevelt made a campaign stop at the bandshell on his way to make his acceptance speech as the Democratic nominee for president at the 1932 Democratic National Convention at Chicago Stadium . 
 In 1934 , the twenty @-@ two separate parks merged under the Park Consolidation Act , in order to gain New Deal federal funding . Mayor Edward Kelley named Chicago Federation of Musicians President Petrillo to the board of the Chicago Park District . Petrillo suggested a free symphonic concert series in Grant Park . Under the agreement , Petrillo would raise money for the first season and if it was highly attended , the Park District would continue the program . The 1935 first season of the Grant Park Music Festival began on July 1 , 1935 and ran until Labor Day for a total of sixty @-@ five concerts . The Chicago Symphony Orchestra , the Women 's Symphony Orchestra and the Civic Opera Orchestra each performed five or six times . Large concert bands led by <unk> Kryl , Armin Hand , Max Bendix , George <unk> , Glenn <unk> , and Victor <unk> also performed . By the end of the summer crowds of up to 35 @,@ 000 were attending nightly free concerts . The summer 's total attendance was estimated at 1 @.@ 9 million . This was viewed as a sufficient success that the Park District committed to assuming financial responsibility for the entire ongoing annual outdoor concert series . The concerts for the first season were broadcast on nationwide radio broadcasts . 
 In 1937 following the death of George Gershwin , the Grant Park Music Festival performed a tribute concert that was aired on a 109 @-@ station nationwide radio network . The Chicago Philharmonic played Pyotr Tchaikovsky 's Pathétique Symphony , Gershwin 's Rhapsody in Blue , and Siegfried 's death music from Richard Wagner 's Götterdämmerung . 
 The bandshell hosted symbolic events at the time of World War II . The July 1942 celebration of the city 's 10,000th United States Navy recruit with a 500 @-@ sailor representation from Navy Pier to salute the color guard was held at the band shell . In 1944 , a public address system was added and following the war Grant Park usage increased heavily . 
 Between the scheduling of Van Cliburn 's 1958 Grant Park Music Festival appearance and his actual July 16 appearance , he won the quadrennial International Tchaikovsky Competition in Moscow that April . He was catapulted to international fame for winning one of the world 's elite music competitions . As a result , he was greeted with a celebration that included a ticker tape parade down Michigan Avenue , and his Grant Park Music Festival appearance was a major event . The following year , the band shell served as the host location for three concerts for the opening celebration of the 1959 Pan American Games . 
 In 1968 , the final Grant Park Music Festival concert , which featured Beverly Sills as Violetta in Verdi 's La Traviata was the backdrop for the formation of the protester demonstrations during the 1968 Democratic National Convention . As Richard J. Daley attempted to negotiate with the protesters regarding their march route , he attempted to encourage them to march to the band shell , but the protesters decided to march directly to the host International Amphitheatre . 
 In 1978 , the relocated band shell began hosting the annual Independence Day fireworks concert featuring the Grant Park Symphony Orchestra . The newly relocated bandshell was able to host new festivals such as Taste of Chicago , an annual July 3 Independence Day fireworks celebration , The Chicago Blues , Jazz and Gospel Festivals . In October 1979 , Pope John Paul II presided over the largest public mass ever held in Chicago on a terraced altar platform that was erected next to the band shell . Joseph Bernardin delivered a homily on the same kind of platform after being promoted to Archbishop of Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago . The Dalai Lama has held an event at the band shell and rallies celebrating the National Basketball Association championships by the Chicago Bulls occurred at the band shell . In 1998 , at a Grant Park Music Festival performance , the miniature prototype of the Talaske @-@ designed audio system that would eventually be used at the Jay Pritzker Pavilion was tested . 
 Since 2005 , the Music Shell has been used as a stage for the annual Lollapalooza festival . 
 Among the artists who performed with the Grant Park Music Festival at the pavilion in the first decade of the 21st Century are sopranos Kathleen Battle and Dawn Upshaw , and violinists Rachel Barton Pine . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 When the Pritzker Pavilion was built members of the Petrillo family wanted it named after James Petrillo . There has been much debate about which concerts and festivals should remain at the Petrillo and which should be moved to the Pritzker Pavilion . The initial plan was that the larger annual music festivals such as the Blues and Jazz Festivals and Taste of Chicago would continue to be held in Petrillo Music Shell because they are too large to be hosted at the Pavilion . However , smaller festivals such as the Chicago Gospel Music Festival have been hosted at the Pavilion since 2005 . There has been public opinion that some of the Blues and Jazz Festival smaller events should be moved to the better and more modern acoustics of the Pavilion . By 2009 , as the city grappled with a budget deficit , it considered realigning parts of the larger festivals with the more modern venue and made definite plans to move some of the smaller ones there . 
 = Roy Roundtree = 
 Roy Randolph Roundtree ( born March 7 , 1989 ) is an American football wide receiver for the Colorado Crush of the Indoor Football League ( IFL ) . He was a 2013 preseason member of the Cincinnati Bengals and played college football for the Michigan Wolverines football team where he spent his redshirt senior season with the 2012 team . In 2012 , he was an All @-@ Big Ten honorable mention selection . He was a 2011 Fred Biletnikoff Award preseason watchlist honoree . He was a Fred Biletnikoff Award preseason watchlist honoree in 2010 , and set Michigan 's single @-@ game receiving record with nine catches for 246 yards against Illinois that November . Roundtree was the team 's leading receiver in both the 2009 and 2010 seasons . He finished first in the Big Ten Conference in receiving yards in 2010 for Conference games , and was a second team All Conference selection . While in high school , he was named the 2007 Ohio Division II Offensive Player of the Year . 
 = = Early life and high school = = 
 Roundtree started playing football on the Pee @-@ Wee Dayton Flames in first grade . He played on the team until junior high , joined by his Michigan teammate Michael Shaw , who , because he was eight months older than Roundtree , played in a different level . Roundtree was a two @-@ year starter at Belmont High School in Dayton , Ohio before he transferred to Trotwood @-@ Madison High School , where the team 's head football coach was retired National Football League player Maurice Douglass . 
 As a freshman , he earned Dayton Daily News Athlete of the Week honors , but in 2004 – 05 , Belmont was classified as an " academic emergency " by the state of Ohio because over a 25 % of the students were considered to be " students with disabilities " , and the school 's standardized test scores were over 50 percent lower than the state benchmarks . With the dismal academic situation and a mediocre athletic program , Belmont left Roundtree dissatisfied , and he transferred to Trotwood before his junior year , where coach Douglass had earned a reputation for developing college ready football players , and where former Flames teammate <unk> Britt was playing quarterback . 
 At Trotwood , he was a teammate of Shaw and Brandon Moore who would later join him at Michigan . As a junior in 2006 , he posted 48 receptions for 851 yards , and as a senior , he totalled 868 on 52 catches . His four @-@ year totals were 165 receptions for 2 @,@ 637 yards and 28 touchdowns . As a senior , he was selected to the Division II first @-@ team all @-@ state squad , and named Ohio 's offensive player of the year . He was also chosen to play in the Big 33 Football Classic , and ranked as the number 44 , 89 , and 104 wide receiver in the nation by Rivals.com , Scout.com , and ESPN , respectively . In that same year , Trotwood won their first playoff game since 1981 , led by Roundtree 's 13 receptions , 203 yards , and game @-@ winning touchdown . Roundtree feels that his best game in high school was a 12 @-@ reception , 221 @-@ yard , 2 @-@ touchdown performance that helped his team overcome a 21 – 0 deficit . 
 Roundtree had scholarship offers from Eastern Michigan , Illinois , Purdue , Nebraska and Miami . He was considered a Purdue commit until getting a late scholarship offer from Michigan , which was his preferred school . On signing day , his uncle convinced him to go to Michigan because of its winning tradition . The late switch led Purdue head coach Joe Tiller to cast aspersions on Michigan coach Rich Rodriguez , referring to him as a snake oil salesman . 
 = = College = = 
 Roundtree redshirted for the 2008 season . He made his college debut on September 5 , 2009 against the Western Michigan Broncos at Michigan Stadium as a slot receiver . That year he roomed with Trotwood teammates Shaw and Moore . He had just two receptions in the first eight games of the season while playing as a backup . He became a starter for the team 's final four games , and finished as the leading receiver for the 2009 Michigan Wolverines football team in terms of both yards and receptions per game , despite the limited playing time . One of the two early @-@ season receptions occurred on October 3 against Michigan State in the Paul Bunyan Trophy game when he caught the game @-@ tying touchdown with two seconds left in regulation to send the game into overtime . He made his first start on October 31 against the Illinois Fighting Illini as a slot receiver . On November 7 , against Purdue he had ten receptions for 126 yards . He also had nine receptions for 116 yards in the November 21 , 2009 game against the rival Ohio State Buckeyes . Following the season , he was named a CollegeFootballNews.com Freshman All @-@ America honorable mention , and a Sporting News Freshman All @-@ Big Ten selection . 
 Roundtree made the 2010 preseason watchlist for the Biletnikoff Award , which honors the nation 's top wide receiver . He led Michigan 's 2010 team in both receptions , and receiving yards . In the September 11 game versus the rival Notre Dame Fighting Irish , his 15 @-@ yard reception late in the fourth quarter put the ball on the Notre Dame 2 @-@ yard @-@ line . On the next play , Denard Robinson ran in for the game @-@ winning touchdown with 27 seconds remaining . He posted back @-@ to @-@ back 100 @-@ yard receiving games on September 25 , and October 2 , 2010 , recording nine receptions for 119 yards in a home game against the Bowling Green Falcons , and five receptions for 126 yards and a touchdown versus the Indiana Hoosiers . At the midpoint of Michigan 's 12 @-@ game regular season schedule , he ranked fifth in the Big Ten in receptions per game , and seventh in receiving yards . In Michigan 's 67 – 65 victory over Illinois on November 6 , Roundtree broke Jack Clancy 's all @-@ time Michigan single @-@ game receiving yards record when he caught nine passes for 246 yards and two touchdowns , including a 75 @-@ yard touchdown reception on the game 's first play from scrimmage . The record stood until October 19 , 2013 , when Jeremy Gallon posted a Big Ten record 369 yards against Indiana . The performance raised him to fourth in the conference in both yards and receptions ( tied ) per game , and earned him Co @-@ Big Ten Offensive Player of the Week honors . He ended the 2010 regular season third in the Conference in receiving yards , and fourth in receptions for all games . After a slow start , which included negative one yards receiving in the team 's first game , and a total of less than 100 yards in their first three contests , Roundtree led the Big Ten with 83 @.@ 9 receiving yards per conference game . After the regular season , he was named to the All Conference second team by the media . He finished the year , third in the conference in receiving yards per game ( 71 @.@ 92 ) and fourth in receptions per game ( 5 @.@ 54 ) for all games . 
 Roundtree repeated as a Biletnikoff Award preseason watchlist honoree in 2011 . On September 10 , against Notre Dame , during the first night game ever played at Michigan Stadium , his only reception was the game @-@ winning 16 @-@ yard touchdown with two seconds remaining in the game . After leading Michigan in pass receptions in 2009 and 2010 , his production fell off in 2011 . In 2011 , Roundtree ranked fourth in receptions for Michigan with 19 catches and third in receiving yards with 355 yards . Following the season , he had offseason knee surgery . 
 Roundtree followed Junior Hemingway as the second person to wear Desmond Howard 's " Michigan Football Legend " jersey number 21 . On November 10 , 2012 , Roundtree recorded 139 receiving yards against Northwestern , including a 53 @-@ yard reception to set up the game tying field goal and then a 17 @-@ yard reception on the game @-@ winning drive in overtime . Playing in his final game at Michigan Stadium , a 42 @-@ 17 victory over Iowa , Roundtree caught five passes for 83 yards and a touchdown . Roundtree was an All @-@ Big Ten honorable mention by both the coaches and the media . He posted his four highest receiving yardage totals of the season after Devin Gardner replaced Denard Robinson at quarterback . Roundtree was the second leading receiver on the team with 31 receptions for 580 yards , leading the team with an average of 18 @.@ 7 yards per catch . Following the season , Roundtree participated in the January 19 , 2013 Raycom College Football All @-@ Star Classic , making a 39 @-@ yard catch and returning 2 punts . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Roy Roundtree signed an undrafted free agent contract with the Cincinnati Bengals following the 2013 NFL Draft . He was released during the final roster cut on August 31 . 
 In 2015 , Roundtree signed with the Colorado Ice of the Indoor Football League ( IFL ) . Roundtree made his professional debut on March 15 , 2015 , catching 3 touchdowns , during a 40 @-@ 59 loss to the Sioux Falls Storm . 
 = = Personal = = 
 His father was one of his pee wee football coaches . His mother is Sheila Roundtree . Some of his Michigan teammates call him " Tree " , for short . He is the nephew of Jeff Graham . Roundtree was second on the team in receptions ( 46 ) , receiving yards ( 664 ) and receiving touchdowns ( 9 ) . 
 = Da 'Rel Scott = 
 Da 'Rel Scott ( born May 26 , 1988 ) is an American football running back for the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats of the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) . He was selected in the seventh round of the 2011 NFL Draft by the New York Giants . He played college football for the University of Maryland , where he was a starting running back . During the 2008 season , he was the second @-@ leading rusher in the Atlantic Coast Conference , behind Jonathan Dwyer of Georgia Tech . 
 Scott played interscholastic football as a running back and free safety at Plymouth @-@ Whitemarsh High School . He was moderately recruited , but Scout.com thought he was more suited to the position of wide receiver or cornerback at the intercollegiate level . In 2006 , he enrolled at the University of Maryland , where he was moved to wide receiver , but he spent the entire season on redshirt status . The following season , he saw limited action as a reserve running back behind starters Lance Ball and Keon Lattimore . He also played on special teams as a kickoff returner , which was the coaching staff 's attempt to get him on the field in some capacity because of his speed ( 4 @.@ 31 seconds in the 40 @-@ yard dash and sub 10 @.@ 5 seconds in the 100 meters ) 
 In 2008 , Scott took over as Maryland 's starting running back and spent much of the season as the leading rusher in the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) . He was eventually surpassed by Dwyer , although both players were named to the All @-@ ACC first team at the season 's end . Scott also became the 2008 Humanitarian Bowl most valuable player when he broke the University of Maryland bowl game rushing record , and he finished the season with 1 @,@ 133 rushing yards , the seventh Terrapin player to surpass a thousand yards in a single season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Scott was born on May 26 , 1988 in Conshohocken , Pennsylvania to Gloria and Lee Scott , Sr. He has two older brothers , Lee Scott , Jr . , who played football as a defensive back at La Salle , and James , who ran track at Saint Joseph 's . When Da 'Rel Scott was eight years old , his parents had a falling out , which prompted his father to leave the family . Thereafter , Lee Scott , Sr. was no longer involved in raising his sons and would often miss scheduled visits . Da 'Rel Scott said , " He just kept letting me down . Just day by day , I was thinking , ' I need a father figure in my life . ' " In high school , his attitude changed , and he said , " I don 't need him . " Despite the absence of his biological father , Scott grew up with the support of his mother , two brothers Lee and James , cousin Leroy , family friend and youth football coach Mike Shaw , and high school athletic director Charlie Foster . 
 He attended Plymouth Whitemarsh High School in Plymouth Meeting , Pennsylvania , where he was a four @-@ year <unk> in football , track , and basketball . In football , Scott was a three @-@ year starter and played as both a tailback and free safety . During his senior year , he rushed for 2 @,@ 523 yards and 38 touchdowns on 232 attempts . As both a junior and senior , he received the Maxwell Award for the conference player of the year . As a senior , The Times Herald named him the area player of the year , the Associated Press named him an all @-@ state player , and he was invited to the Big 33 Football Classic all @-@ star game . SuperPrep named him an all @-@ region player . Rivals.com rated him a four @-@ star prospect and assessed him as the 21st @-@ ranked " athlete " recruit in the nation . Scout.com assessed him as a three @-@ star prospect , and wrote of him , " This kid can flat out fly . He runs a sub 10 @.@ 5 100 meters , and a sub 21 @.@ 0 200 meters . Scott needs to get physically bigger to be a college running back ; he may project better as a wide receiver or cornerback . " Scott received scholarship offers from Georgia Tech , Penn State , Virginia , and his ultimate choice , Maryland . In 2006 , he enrolled at the University of Maryland , where he studied kinesiology . 
 = = = Track and field = = = 
 Scott was also a standout track athlete . During his junior year , he won the state championship in the 100 meters , with a time of 10 @.@ 56 seconds . He lettered four years in track and field . As a senior in 2010 , he competed in the 60 meters , posting a personal best of 6 @.@ 87 seconds . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = 2006 season = = = 
 Scott sat out the 2006 season as a redshirt . After summer training camp , the coaching staff moved Scott to wide receiver , a position that lacked depth , but head coach Ralph Friedgen said that Scott had some difficulty making the adjustment . He was , however , named the offensive scout team player of the week for his performance in the practices before the Florida State game . 
 = = = 2007 season = = = 
 During 2007 spring practice , Scott was third on the depth chart , but suffered a left knee injury , which forced him to miss most of camp . During the 2007 season , he played in nine games as a reserve tailback behind Lance Ball and Keon Lattimore and as a kickoff returner . Despite the team 's abundance of running backs , Friedgen wanted to utilize Scott in some capacity because of his speed , which had been recorded at 4 @.@ 25 seconds in the 40 @-@ yard dash . Maryland wide receiver Darrius Heyward @-@ Bey said , " On paper it says I 'm faster , but Da 'Rel , he 's just a different type of animal . " Against Wake Forest , he saw his first action when he returned four kickoffs for 101 yards . Scott 's special teams performance in that game sufficiently impressed head coach Friedgen that he said , " I think I 've got to try to get him involved within the offense . I think he 's a guy that can make some plays for us . " The following week , unranked Maryland upset 10th @-@ ranked Rutgers , and Scott made his first career appearance as a tailback . He had three carries for 29 yards . After sitting out the Georgia Tech game because of an ankle injury , he returned four kicks for 68 yards against Virginia , three for 56 yards against Clemson , and two for 40 yards against North Carolina . Against eighth @-@ ranked Boston College , Scott caught a short screen pass from quarterback Chris Turner and ran 57 yards for a touchdown . It was his first career reception and first career touchdown . It was one of just two offensive plays for Scott in that game , and incidentally , he was not intended to be in it . Friedgen said : 
 " When he was in the game , I didn 't even know he was in the game . I called a screen pass . I looked up , and it was Da 'Rel in there . I figured we were just giving Lance a rest , but I asked [ running backs coach Phil ] Zacharias about it Sunday and he started laughing . I said ' Did you put Da 'Rel in for that screen pass ? ' He said , ' Lance 's equipment was broken , so he had to go in the game . ' " 
 In the loss to Florida State , Scott rushed twice for 17 yards and returned four kickoffs for 132 yards . On one return , Scott gained 60 yards and nearly broke away for a touchdown , but Maryland was unable to capitalize on the gain during the subsequent possession . The next week , Maryland secured bowl eligibility by winning its regular season finale against NC State . Scott returned the opening kickoff 36 yards and recorded 89 yards on eight carries to lead the team in rushing . In the 2007 Emerald Bowl against Oregon State , Scott had one carry for no gain and returned two kickoffs for 36 yards . Scott finished the season as the team 's all @-@ purpose yardage leader with 84 @.@ 2 yards per game and kick return leader with 566 yards , which set a school record for a freshman . Rivals.com named him a freshman All @-@ ACC all @-@ purpose player . 
 = = = 2008 season = = = 
 After the graduation of running backs Ball and Lattimore , Scott competed with Morgan Green for the starting position . At the conclusion of spring practice , it appeared they would share the duties , as they had complementary running styles : Scott had breakaway speed , while Green was a hard runner for short @-@ yardage gains . However , Green suffered a quadriceps injury that caused him to fall to the third @-@ string position behind true freshman Davin Meggett . 
 During the season , Scott played in 12 of 13 games , including 11 starts , and recorded 1 @,@ 133 rushing yards and eight touchdowns . In the first game of the 2008 season against Delaware , Scott ran for 197 yards in his first career start , which was enough to place sixteenth on the list for school all @-@ time single @-@ game rushing . The following week , underdog Middle Tennessee stunned Maryland , 24 – 14 , but Scott set the game @-@ high for rushing with 123 yards . He tallied his career @-@ first rushing touchdown with a 63 @-@ yard run on the second play of the game . Scott " dominated early " against 23rd @-@ ranked California with 19 carries for 87 yards and two touchdowns , but in the third quarter , he suffered a game @-@ ending shoulder injury . His first @-@ half effort helped Maryland take a quick lead and eventually upset California , 35 – 27 . Scott sat out the next game against Eastern Michigan , but returned for the road game at 20th @-@ ranked Clemson . Scott made 23 carries but gained only 39 yards , a mark that was surpassed by receiver Heyward @-@ Bey on one reverse that gained 76 yards to spark a second @-@ half comeback . Head coach Friedgen said : 
 " I told Da 'Rel he needed to run a little more north – south . Clemson has such good team speed . If you go east – west on them , you 're not going to go very far . I thought he had a couple runs when he tried to bounce it outside . Normally , Da 'Rel can do that . Not against this team . . . I told him this is a game where three yards is a good running play . . . I don 't know if Da 'Rel has been in a game like this , playing the whole game that way in a tough environment . He came out in the second half and said ' I 'm going to go , coach . ' He patted me on the butt . ' Just get me the ball . ' " 
 Scott tallied the go @-@ ahead touchdown to complete Maryland 's comeback , 20 – 17 . The following week , Maryland fell to a heavy underdog again when a reeling Virginia team engineered a 31 – 0 shutout . Scott , then the leading rusher in the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) , had 11 carries but was held to just 36 yards . Despite the setback , Scott retained the lead in the ACC with 96 @.@ 4 rushing yards per game . After a bye week , Maryland shutout 21st @-@ ranked Wake Forest , 26 – 0 . Scott had 18 carries for a game @-@ high of 73 yards , threw a nine @-@ yard touchdown pass , and had three fumbles . In the first quarter , Scott fumbled at the Wake Forest 25 @-@ yard line , but was able to recover the ball . Two plays later , he executed a halfback option , where he took the handoff and threw a nine @-@ yard pass to Heyward @-@ Bey for a touchdown . It was Scott 's first pass attempt and completion . Scott fumbled twice more in the first half , and Wake Forest recovered only to miss a field goal attempt each time . Against NC State , Scott had 23 carries for 163 yards and a 24 @-@ yard touchdown . In the fourth quarter , after the third play of Maryland 's game @-@ winning drive , Meggett replaced Scott , who had re @-@ injured his shoulder . With the sixth win , Maryland attained bowl eligibility . Scott remained the ACC leading rusher with 102 @.@ 6 yards per game . He was deemed questionable before the Virginia Tech game , but did see action . However , the Virginia Tech line held Scott to 11 yards on 10 carries , although he did manage five receptions for 57 yards . Against 17th @-@ ranked North Carolina , Scott recorded 129 rushing yards and a three @-@ yard touchdown run . Maryland entered its penultimate regular season game against Florida State still within reach of the Atlantic Division title , and with it , a berth in the ACC Championship Game . Florida State , however , dashed Maryland 's title hopes in a 37 – 3 rout in which Scott recorded 82 rushing yards , but fumbled twice . In the fourth quarter , defensive end Everette Brown forced Scott to fumble , which was seen as the end to any potential comeback . Against a tough Boston College line , the Maryland rushing attack faltered , which forced quarterback Chris Turner to resort mostly to the pass . Scott rushed 13 times for a gain of just 19 yards . 
 In the postseason , Maryland accepted an invitation to the Humanitarian Bowl to play the Western Athletic Conference runner @-@ up , Nevada . Before the game , however , head coach Ralph Friedgen caught Scott and six other players breaking curfew . Scott declined to comment to the media about why he had missed curfew , and Friedgen said only that Scott had tried to " help somebody and got put in a bad situation . " Friedgen initially intended to send the offenders back to College Park by bus , but athletic director Deborah Yow convinced him to issue partial @-@ game suspensions instead . Scott was benched until halfway through the third quarter . He said , " I made a bad decision . I felt I had to run with a purpose . " Scott was put into the game on Maryland 's third possession of the half but did not receive a carry until the following series . On his first attempt , he ran for 14 yards and then ran 11 yards on his second . During the next drive , he broke free on a 49 @-@ yard touchdown run . On the next possession , Scott rushed on all four plays and gained 66 yards and another touchdown . Maryland won , 42 – 35 , and Scott was named the Terrapins ' most valuable player of the game . Nevada head coach Chris Ault said , " He just ran through us like we weren 't there . They ran the weak @-@ side gap , we knew that was one of their base plays , and he did a great job . He 's a heck of a back , no question about it . He was breaking tackles , and that 's not only a difference @-@ maker but a morale @-@ changer . " He ran for 174 yards , which broke the school record for rushing in a bowl game previously set by Lu Gambino in the 1948 Gator Bowl . Scott also became just the seventh Maryland player to surpass the 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard single @-@ season rushing benchmark . Earlier in the season , Scott set that mark as one of his goals , and he adorned his room with the statistics of the Terrapins who accomplished that feat in the past , such as Chris Downs in 2002 . 
 Scott spent much of the season as the leading rusher in the ACC , but he was eventually surpassed by Jonathan Dwyer of Georgia Tech and finished second in the conference . In early October , Scott was added to the Maxwell Award watch list . The Atlantic Coast Conference named Scott to the All @-@ ACC first team alongside Dwyer . 
 = = = 2009 season = = = 
 During a practice in April 2009 , Scott and cornerback Nolan Carroll collided , which injured both players . Scott suffered a sprained knee which forced him to sit out the Red – White spring game . He entered summer practice at the top of the depth chart , but Davin Meggett 's camp performance was impressive enough to earn a share of the number @-@ one position . In its 2009 preseason issue , Phil Steele 's listed Scott as the 23rd @-@ ranked draft eligible college running back , a preseason first @-@ team All @-@ ACC running back , and one of 19 " <unk> " contenders for the Heisman Trophy . Athlon Sports named him to their preseason All @-@ ACC second team . Before the season , he was added to the Doak Walker Award and Maxwell Award watch lists . 
 In the season opener at 12th @-@ ranked California , Scott recorded 13 carries for 90 yards . He scored the Terrapins ' only touchdown on a 39 @-@ yard rush in the third quarter of the 52 – 13 rout , Maryland 's worst opening loss since 1892 . The following week , Scott had 17 carries for 68 yards and a touchdown in an overtime win against James Madison . He recorded a 48 @-@ yard touchdown run against Middle Tennessee , but also two fumbles in the first quarter . Scott finished the game with 13 attempts for 117 yards . , but coach Friedgen relied mostly on Meggett after the second turnover . Scott suffered a broken wrist against Clemson , a game that also saw Maryland left tackle Bruce Campbell injured . He sat out the next five games , before he returned in the penultimate game against Florida State , in which he ran 83 yards on 19 attempts and also had two receptions for 21 yards . The performance prompted Scout.com to note , " It 's almost like this stud running back never missed a game for the Terps … it is impressive to see the junior hard at work and making up for lost time . " In the season finale against Boston College , Maryland opened the game with Scott attempting a pass to wide receiver Torrey Smith on a halfback option play ; it fell incomplete but drew a defensive pass interference call . Scott rushed for 45 yards and a touchdown on 11 attempts , and caught three passes for 20 yards . 
 = = = 2010 season = = = 
 In the winter , Scott competed on the indoor track team and ran a 60 @-@ yard dash in 6 @.@ 87 seconds , and he claimed to have regained the speed he had in high school . During spring football camp , he recorded the fastest 40 @-@ yard dash time among the running backs at 4 @.@ 33 seconds . Head coach Ralph Friedgen praised Scott for the strength and size he added in the offseason , and offensive coordinator James Franklin described Scott as a " complete back " . Before the season , Scott was added to the Maxwell Award and Doak Walker Award watch lists . 
 Maryland entered the 2010 season with Scott and Meggett sharing time as the number @-@ one running back . Head coach Friedgen said , " At this point in time , I would say Scott and Meggett are 1A and 1B . " In the season opener against Navy , Scott recorded 58 yards on ten carries , which included five touches on the opening drive for 36 yards and a five @-@ yard touchdown run . The following week against Division I FCS Morgan State , Scott , Meggett , and redshirt freshman running back D. J. Adams all averaged over five yards per carry in the 62 – 3 rout . Scott amassed eight carries for 42 yards and three receptions for 31 yards . Maryland 's rushing attack struggled in the 31 – 17 loss to West Virginia , and Scott had four carries for six yards and three catches for 26 yards . Against Florida International , he gained 103 yards and scored two touchdowns on 15 carries . Scott scored on a 56 @-@ yard run and a nine @-@ yard run in which he broke three arm tackles . Duke held Scott to 26 yards in the first half , but in the third quarter , he caught a short pass from quarterback Danny O 'Brien and ran down the sideline for a 71 @-@ yard touchdown . O 'Brien said he repeatedly checked down through his available receivers and Scott was his final option . Scott finished with 14 carries for 50 yards . 
 At Clemson , Scott threw a four @-@ yard touchdown pass to quarterback Danny O 'Brien on a trick play for Maryland 's only score in a 31 – 7 loss . He had four rushing attempts for 18 yards . During that game , Scott became the tenth player in school history to amass 3 @,@ 000 all @-@ purpose yards . At Boston College , Scott rushed nine times for 19 yards and caught one pass for four yards . He also filled in for injured kickoff returner Torrey Smith and had one return for 25 yards . Against Wake Forest , he had eleven carries for 50 yards and one reception for ten yards . At Miami , Scott rushed nine times for 30 yards and had a 12 @-@ yard reception . At Virginia , he carried the ball 11 times for 55 yards and had two catches for eight yards including a two @-@ yard reception for a touchdown . Against 25th @-@ ranked Florida State , Scott rushed ten times for 87 yards and caught two passes for eight yards . Scott was held to negative ten rushing yards on four touches by 23rd @-@ ranked North Carolina State in his final home game on Senior Night , but Maryland still won , 38 – 31 . 
 In the Military Bowl against East Carolina , Scott rushed for a career @-@ high 200 yards on 13 carries , including two touchdowns on <unk> and 91 @-@ yard runs , and was named the game 's Most Valuable Player . He broke the school record for rushing in a bowl game that he previously set in 2008 . His performance was described as " utterly electrifying " , and left his " stock among draft @-@ eligible running backs soaring with NFL scouts " . His 15 @.@ 4 yards per carry was the best single @-@ game performance in school history . Scott ended the 2010 season with 708 rushing yards on 122 attempts and five touchdowns . He finished his college career with 2 @,@ 401 rushing yards on 430 attempts and 17 touchdowns , and 3 @,@ 509 all @-@ purpose yards . Scott ranked seventh in school history in career rushing yards and second in career yards per carry with an average of 5 @.@ 58 . 
 Scott was invited to play in the East – West Shrine Game on January 22 , 2011 in Orlando . He also participated in the Senior Bowl , and The New York Times praised him for his practice leading up to the game . In the Senior Bowl , Scott recorded five carries for 15 yards , including a touchdown on a one @-@ yard run . 
 = = = College statistics = = = 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2011 NFL Combine = = = 
 = = = New York Giants = = = 
 The New York Giants selected Scott with the 221st overall pick in the 2011 NFL Draft . Giants general manager Jerry Reese said , " We took a flyer on the guy because he is big and fast … We hope this guy develops into a Willie Parker , one of those kinds of things . " At the NFL Combine , Scott ran the 40 @-@ yard dash in 4 @.@ 34 seconds , the fastest time recorded by any of the participating running backs . 
 Scott secured a spot on the active roster behind Ahmad Bradshaw and Brandon Jacobs with a strong preseason performance . In the game against the Chicago Bears , he had one carry for a 97 @-@ yard touchdown . Against the New England Patriots , Scott took a snap on a fake punt , which he ran 65 yards for a touchdown . He made his regular season debut in Week 1 against the Washington Redskins , but recorded no statistics . Scott only recorded five carries for 15 yards in 11 games played . He was a member of the Super Bowl XLVI champion team that defeated the New England Patriots by a score of 21 – 17 . 
 On October 20 , 2012 , Scott was placed on season @-@ ending injured reserve due to a knee injury . 
 On October 1 , 2013 , the Giants waived him after his first career start in the Week 4 loss against the Kansas City Chiefs . 
 On October 8 , 2013 , the Giants re @-@ signed Scott after running back David Wilson was out with a neck injury . 
 On October 15 , 2013 , the Giants waived him again after he injured his hamstring in the Week 6 loss against the Chicago Bears . 
 = = = Winnipeg Blue Bombers = = = 
 Scott signed with the Winnipeg Blue Bombers in April 2015 . He was released by the Blue bombers on January 6 , 2016 . 
 = = = Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats = = = 
 Scott was signed by the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats on May 28 , 2016 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Scott motivates himself for games by channeling the anger at his father 's abandonment . He said , " I am always going to have anger because of how he did me . It is always going to be there . It is not going away . No way at all . " While basketball player Michael Jordan was Scott 's childhood sports idol , he says Jordan was not the inspiration for his jersey number of 23 . Scott chose it as a combination of his older brothers ' high school numbers : James wore number 20 , and Lee , Jr. wore number 3 . Scott said , " They were my father . " 
 = Ian Kinsler = 
 Ian Michael Kinsler ( born June 22 , 1982 ) is an American professional baseball second baseman for the Detroit Tigers of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He formerly played for the Texas Rangers . He is listed at 6 ft 0 in ( 183 cm ) and 200 lb ( 91 kg ) . 
 Despite having been drafted in only the 17th round out of college , Kinsler has risen to become a four @-@ time All Star , and a member of the Sporting News ' 2009 list of the 50 greatest current players in baseball . He is known as a five @-@ tool player , hitting for average and power , and excelling in baserunning , throwing , and fielding . 
 Kinsler has twice hit 30 home runs and stolen 30 bases in the same season ( 2009 and 2011 ) , and is one of 12 ballplayers in major league history who have had multiple 30 – 30 club seasons . In 2011 , he also joined the 20 – 20 club for the third time , one season shy of the major league record for a second baseman . He hit for the cycle in a game in 2009 , while getting hits in all six of his at @-@ bats . 
 Through 2013 , Kinsler led the Texas Rangers , all @-@ time , career @-@ wise , in stolen bases and power @-@ speed number . In November 2013 , Kinsler was traded to the Detroit Tigers for Prince Fielder . Through 2014 , on defense Kinsler had the best career range factor of any active second baseman in Major League Baseball . 
 = = Early life and high school = = 
 Kinsler 's father , Howard , was a warden at a state prison on Tucson 's southeast side . He has been a major influence on Kinsler . When Kinsler was four his father would toss him fly balls , and his dad says Kinsler would " get under them like he 'd been doing it his whole life . " 
 His father coached him until high school , and was especially tough . When Kinsler was 13 years old , and the best player on a PONY league team coached by his father that was playing for a championship , his dad caught Kinsler rolling his eyes as he gave the team orders . " I benched him , without hesitation " , said his father . With Kinsler on the bench , the team lost the game . 
 Kinsler had a physical challenge to overcome . " I 've had asthma my whole life " , Kinsler said . " That was tough when I was younger . I woke up a lot and couldn 't breathe , and had to go to the hospital in the middle of the night . It kind of held me back from athletics . I still have it , but I control it . Now I use an atomizer or an inhaler . When I was younger , I used this breathing machine … I hated that thing . I always wanted to run around and be active . " 
 He graduated in 2000 from Canyon del Oro High School in the Tucson suburb of Oro Valley , Arizona . Kinsler helped lead the baseball team to state titles in 1997 and 2000 . He hit .380 as a junior , to earn second @-@ team All @-@ League honors , and <unk> with 5 home runs and 26 stolen bases during his senior year , in which he was named first @-@ team All @-@ State and first @-@ team All @-@ League . Four of his high school teammates have also made it to the major leagues : Brian Anderson ( his best friend in high school ) , Scott Hairston , Chris Duncan , and Shelly Duncan . 
 = = Draft and college = = 
 Kinsler was drafted by his home @-@ state Arizona Diamondbacks after high school in 2000 ( 29th round ) , but did not feel ready for the pros . He opted instead to take a college tour . First ( because he had not been recruited by any Division I programs ) he attended Central Arizona College , where he hit .405 with 17 doubles , 37 RBIs , and 24 stolen bases , was named second @-@ team All @-@ ACCAC , and played shortstop alongside future major leaguers Scott Hairston and Rich Harden . The Diamondbacks drafted him again in 2001 ( 26th round ) , but he declined to sign because he felt that playing college baseball a little longer would help him develop his game . 
 Arizona State coach Pat Murphy then convinced him to transfer to ASU in his sophomore year , promising that he would play shortstop for the Sun Devils . But while he started briefly alongside fellow middle infielder Dustin Pedroia , he ended up spending much of the season on the bench . He was also teammates with Andre Ethier . 
 University of Missouri Tigers coach Tim Jamison spotted him in a summer league , and convinced him to head east for his junior year . Jamison said : " I saw him take ground balls and thought , defensively , he was as good a middle infielder as I had ever seen . As for his bat , I didn 't really care . " While there , Kinsler had a .335 batting average , <unk> on @-@ base percentage , and <unk> slugging percentage , with 16 steals in 17 attempts . He was named to the All @-@ Big 12 Conference second team . Jamison noted , " From the day Ian stepped through the doors here , you could see it on his face : He was on a mission . " Playing for the Tigers during the 2002 Fall World Series , he led all hitters with a <unk> average ( 13 @-@ for @-@ 21 ) . 
 Kinsler was then drafted a third time , by the Texas Rangers in the 17th round ( <unk> overall ) in 2003 as a shortstop , at the urging of area scout Mike Grouse . Grouse liked Kinsler 's tools , makeup , desire , and gritty approach . In Grouse 's scouting report , he wrote that Kinsler had a great feel for the game , athleticism , solid defensive skills , intensity , and leadership qualities . Grouse knew that Kinsler was probably being underrated by rival scouts , who did not know that Kinsler had played with a foot stress fracture while at Missouri , " so [ Kinsler ] really couldn 't run like I knew he could . I 'd seen him in Wichita the year before , so I knew he was a plus runner . Most people ... didn 't know that , so they probably downgraded him . But I knew it , and I wasn 't telling anybody . " Kinsler , for his part , says : " I thought I was a lot better than a 17th round pick . I thought I belonged in the top 10 rounds . " Kinsler nonetheless agreed to sign with the Rangers on his 21st birthday , for $ 30 @,@ 000 . 
 Five years later , John Sickels wrote : " Only a handful of players from the 2003 draft are as good as Kinsler , and he 's certainly outperformed many more heralded talents . Scouting and drafting will always be an inexact science / art . " The pick was later lauded as " one of the greatest 17th round picks of all time . " 
 = = Minor league career ( 2003 – 05 ) = = 
 = = = 2003 : Entering the pros = = = 
 Kinsler signed quickly , and broke in as a shortstop in 2003 . He batted .277 in 188 at @-@ bats in his pro debut for the Spokane Indians in the Short @-@ season Northwest League , while leading the team in steals ( 11 ) and triples ( 6 ) . He then spent the 2003 – 04 winter in Arizona , working out with the Rangers ' strength and conditioning coaches . He said : " I was probably 170 pounds , and I decided I needed to lift , put on some weight , and eat as much as I could . And I learned how to hit . " 
 = = = 2004 : Breakout season = = = 
 By early 2004 , Kinsler had vaulted to the # 1 spot on Baseball America 's Prospect Hot Sheet . John Sickels of ESPN described him as having " great plate discipline , power , and ... [ being ] a reasonably good defensive shortstop . " 
 He had a breakout year in 2004 . He split the season between two teams , beginning with the Low @-@ A Clinton <unk> , for which he hit .402 / .465 / <unk> in 224 at bats . Kinsler was voted to start at shortstop for the Midwest League Western Division All Star team , while he was leading the league in batting , on @-@ base percentage , slugging percentage , hits , doubles , extra @-@ base hits , and runs scored , but did not play as he was promoted . Baseball America rated him the most exciting ballplayer and the # 8 prospect in the league . When a friend asked him what the secret was to his success , he responded : " Dude , I have no idea . " 
 Kinsler was promoted two levels on June 12 to the Double @-@ A Frisco RoughRiders . " When I first got called up , there were a million things running through my head " , he said . " I was nervous , my hands were sweating . It was really exciting , but I didn 't know what to expect . I was a little nervous that ... all of a sudden I wouldn 't be able to hit . " In June he was named the Rangers ' Minor League Player of the Month . Frisco manager Tim Ireland observed : 
 I think he 's succeeding because his swing is graceful and effortless . It 's just a smooth swing , and he hits for power because he lets his swing work for him . Defensively , so far he 's shown a real feel for shortstop . He 's got good feet and soft hands , and he throws well enough .... He seems pretty legit to me . 
 In July , the Rangers agreed to send Kinsler and prospect right @-@ hander Erik Thompson to the Colorado Rockies for Larry Walker , but Walker vetoed the trade . 
 He ended up hitting .300 / .400 / .480 for Frisco , in 277 at @-@ bats . Those numbers would have placed him fourth in OBP , seventh in slugging percentage , and eighth in the league 's batting race had he received enough plate appearances to qualify for the title ( he was short by about 60 ) . Baseball America rated Kinsler the # 9 prospect in the Texas League . 
 Overall , in 501 at @-@ bats , Kinsler tied for first in the minor leagues in doubles ( 51 ) , and was seventh in batting average ( .345 ) and ninth in hits ( 173 ) . He also had 20 home runs , 103 runs , 98 RBIs , 18 HBP , and 23 steals . Rangers manager Buck Showalter marveled at Kinsler 's 51 doubles , saying : " Fifty ... A lot of guys don 't have 50 singles . " 
 Baseball America rated him the No. 4 Rangers prospect , the No. 11 prospect in the minors , and a second @-@ team Minor League All Star . Kinsler was also named a Sports Weekly All Star , and the Rangers ' Tom Grieve Minor League Player of the Year . In addition , he was awarded the first annual Diamond in the Rough Award , which recognizes a minor leaguer who " defies the odds " and rises from obscurity to play himself into prospect status during a breakout season . For his part , Kinsler noted simply : " It is fun to come to the ballpark every day when you are playing good baseball . " 
 Towards the end of the season , Sickels augmented his scouting report on Kinsler by reporting that he was : 
 a good athlete , not super @-@ <unk> , but strong for his size with speed a notch above average . His swing looked short , quick , and sharp . Although I 'm told that some people worry that his swing is too long , it looked fine to me . " Long swings " usually show up in the stat line as excessive strikeout totals , but Kinsler is not a whiff king . He works the count well , controlling the strike zone without trouble and not swinging at pitches outside the plate area . His bat has some pop in it , particularly to the gaps , where he rifles frequent extra @-@ base shots . He already has above @-@ average power for a player his size , and I think he has enough bat speed to keep hitting home runs at higher levels . Defensively , he shows slightly above @-@ average range and good hands . His arm strength is average , but he 's accurate with his throws and seems fundamentally sound , although his error rate is higher than ideal ( 20 in 71 games at Frisco ) . He might end up at second base eventually . Kinsler 's running speed is a bit better than average , but he 's fairly aggressive on the bases and will steal if the opportunity is there . Overall , he is a solid all @-@ around player who makes the most of his natural ability . 
 Kinsler spent the winter of 2004 – 05 playing for the Peoria <unk> of the Arizona Fall League , improving his versatility by getting work in at second base . There , he hit .306 / .369 / .500 . One scout in Arizona noted that his swing was so effortless , yet generated so much line drive power , that : " It 's like he 's swinging a <unk> bat out there . " 
 = = = 2005 : Transitioning to second base = = = 
 Invited to the parent club 's 2005 spring training , he hit .327 while slugging <unk> . Kinsler spent 2005 at Triple @-@ A with the Oklahoma RedHawks , transitioning from shortstop to second base because that is where the organization anticipated he would play in the future , in the event that Alfonso Soriano no longer played second base for the major league team . That was tough on Kinsler 's ego initially , but the most difficult part of the switch for him was the double play . He was selected to the mid @-@ season Pacific Coast League All Star team in June , and came in a close second to Mitch Jones in the 2005 Triple @-@ A Home Run Derby . 
 For the season , in 530 at bats he hit .274 with 23 home runs , 102 runs ( tied for tenth in the minor leagues ) , 94 RBIs , and 12 steals in 14 attempts . Kinsler cracked the Baseball America Top 100 Prospects list , ranking 98th . On the side , during the season he kept an on @-@ line journal for <unk> 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = Texas Rangers ( 2006 – 13 ) = = = 
 = = = = 2006 : Rookie = = = = 
 With Alfonso Soriano having been traded in the off @-@ season , Kinsler won the Rangers ' starting second base job in spring training in 2006 over Mark DeRosa . " Ian Kinsler came as advertised " , said Showalter . 
 He made his major league debut against the Boston Red Sox on Opening Day on April 3 , 2006 , and got his first major league hit in his first major league at bat , off Curt Schilling . Kinsler said : 
 The crowd was full ; I had the butterflies going , so to get that hit was huge . The family was in town .... To go out there and face one of the best pitchers of all time , you 've got to be locked in . It 's your first game , your first big league experience — it was unbelievable to face that guy . 
 He was hitting .476 when he dislocated his left thumb sliding head @-@ first into second base on April 11 , 2006 , and was placed on the disabled list . " I knew it wasn 't good when I looked down and I saw the top part of the thumb pointing in at me " , Kinsler said . He came back 41 games later on May 25 , and went 3 – 4 with a single and two home runs , to lead the Rangers to an 8 – 7 victory over the Oakland Athletics . " I hope the fans don 't expect that much every night " , he joked . 
 While Kinsler started off the season batting ninth in the lineup , in June Showalter moved him up to seventh . " I think as Ian 's career progresses , he 'll move up in the batting order " , predicted Showalter . For the season , he started 31 games batting seventh , 30 batting eighth , 20 batting sixth , 19 batting ninth , 12 batting second , 3 batting leadoff , 2 batting third , and 1 batting fifth . 
 Kinsler finished 2006 with a .286 batting average , 14 home runs , 55 RBIs , and a team @-@ leading 11 stolen bases in 423 at @-@ bats . He batted .300 with runners in scoring position , and .300 when the game was tied . He led all AL rookies with 27 doubles , and his .454 slugging percentage was the seventh @-@ best in a season since 2000 by an AL rookie with at least 400 at bats . Defensively , in August he tied a team record by recording five double plays in one game . He also led all American League ( AL ) second basemen in both range factor ( 5 @.@ 58 ) and errors ( 18 ) . He was named Texas Rangers 2006 Rookie of the Year . 
 = = = = 2007 : 20 – 20 season = = = = 
 During the 2006 – 07 off @-@ season , Kinsler focused on building up his legs to improve his speed , durability , and agility . In spring training in 2007 , he hit .429 , led the AL in RBIs ( 19 ) , and was sixth in the major leagues in hits ( 27 ) . 
 His torrid hitting continued into the season , and Kinsler was named the AL Player of the Week for the period ending April 15 . He batted .476 ( 10 @-@ for @-@ 21 ) that week with four home runs , eight RBIs , seven runs scored , and a 1 @.@ 095 slugging percentage . His nine home runs in April tied the team record for that month ( shared by Iván Rodríguez ( 2000 ) , Alex Rodriguez ( 2002 ) , and Carl Everett ( 2003 ) ) , and were the most ever in the season 's first month by a Major League second baseman . Kinsler said : " I 'm trying to put good swings on the ball , and if it goes out , it goes out . " He batted .298 with 22 RBIs for the month , and was also voted the Rangers ' Player of the Month for April . 
 On July 2 , Kinsler went on the disabled list with a stress fracture in his left foot ; he did not come back until July 31 , and missed 26 games . He tied a major league record on August 25 , when he had eight plate appearances in a nine @-@ inning game ( a 30 – 3 win over Baltimore ) . 
 In 2007 , Kinsler hit 20 home runs ( leading all AL second basemen ) and was 23 @-@ for @-@ 25 in stolen base attempts ( a 92 % success rate ) . He was one of only six batters in the AL to have at least 20 home runs and 20 stolen bases , along with Alex Rodriguez , Gary Sheffield , Grady Sizemore , B.J. Upton , and Curtis Granderson . He also became the sixth player in franchise history to reach the 20 – 20 plateau , joining Alfonso Soriano ( 2005 ) , Iván Rodríguez ( 1999 ) , Rafael Palmeiro ( 1993 ) , Bobby Bonds ( 1978 ) , and Toby Harrah ( 1975 and 1977 ) . He did it despite his stress fracture , which kept him under 500 at bats . His 23 stolen bases and 96 runs led the Rangers . 
 Kinsler finished the season seventh in the AL in power / speed number ( 21 @.@ 4 ) , ninth in sacrifice hits ( 8 ) and steals of third base ( 4 ) , and tied for tenth in bunt hits ( 5 ) . He was also tied for fourth in the league in steals of third ( 4 ) , eighth in line drive percentage ( 23 % ) , and tied for ninth in sacrifice hits ( 8 ) . He began to hit higher in the batting order , as he batted second in 48 games , leadoff in 26 , seventh in 24 , sixth in 19 , ninth in 10 , and eighth in 2 . On defense , Kinsler led all major league second basemen in range factor ( 5 @.@ 69 ) , leading the league for the second straight year . 
 = = = = 2008 : All @-@ Star = = = = 
 In February 2008 , Kinsler signed a five @-@ year deal worth $ 22 million guaranteed . It will jump to $ 32 million if the Rangers exercise their $ 10 million option for 2013 . He received a raise to $ 500 @,@ 000 in 2008 , and a $ 1 million signing bonus . The contract went to $ 3 million in 2009 and $ 4 million in 2010 , and will go to $ 6 million in 2011 and $ 7 million in 2012 . If the Rangers choose not to exercise their $ 10 million option , Kinsler will receive a $ 500 @,@ 000 buyout . If he is traded , both the buyout and the option year will increase by $ 500 @,@ 000 . If the option is exercised , the commitment will have been the largest the Rangers have ever made to a player whom they drafted and developed . " Ian represents the past , present , and future of this organization " , said assistant general manager Thad Levine . 
 " It 's a lot of money " , Kinsler said . " I 've never imagined being in this position in my life . " " This is a big day for me and my family " , he reflected . " I 've been working my whole life to get to this point , since my dad first started taking me out in the backyard and started throwing the baseball with me . " 
 Asked what impact the money would have on him , Kinsler said : 
 I 'm going to play the same regardless of whether I 'm making five dollars or $ 1 trillion . It really doesn 't make a difference to me . I 'm going to go out there and play hard , and money doesn 't bring respect . The way you play the game brings respect . When I finish playing the game , it 's not how much money I made that is going to be my legacy . It 's how I played the game , and what I did on the field . 
 Kinsler was delighted when Rangers manager Ron Washington ultimately committed to Kinsler being the team 's leadoff hitter in 2008 . " I didn 't think he was the prototype leadoff hitter , but the guy proved me wrong " , Washington said . " He 'll take a walk , or get one run for us with one swing of the bat . He can bunt , he can run , and he can hit the ball to the other side . " 
 Through mid @-@ May 2008 , Kinsler had the best career stolen @-@ base percentage ( 88 @.@ 5 % ) of anyone in Rangers / Senators history with at least 40 attempts . " It 's part of my game " , said Kinsler . " It 's not one of the first things I 'm known for . " According to scouts , his ability on the basepaths is due to innate instincts and his " twitch speed " rather than his pure running speed . Grouse , who signed him , says that Kinsler also " goes from first to third faster than anyone , because he has that God @-@ given ability to read the ball so well off the bat . " 
 During a mid @-@ June rain delay at Shea Stadium , Kinsler hopped to his feet , raced from the dugout and dove head @-@ first across the wet tarp covering the infield as though it was a giant Slip ' n Slide . Four teammates followed , receiving a large ovation from the New York Mets fans . Shea Stadium security ushered them off the field , drawing a chorus of boos . " We had some good routines going " , said Kinsler . " It was awesome . " 
 Kinsler was a 2008 AL All Star at the 79th All Star Game at Yankee Stadium . It was his most exciting moment in baseball to that point . He was a reserve voted in by his peers . In the fan balloting , Dustin Pedroia , who finished with nearly 1 @.@ 3 million votes , beat him by 34 @,@ 243 votes . In the game , Kinsler hit 1 @-@ for @-@ 5 and stole a base . He was called out attempting to steal another base , though replays demonstrated that the umpire had missed the call . The Washington Post and ESPN baseball writer Jayson Stark picked Kinsler as the AL MVP for the first half of the season . 
 Kinsler had an MLB @-@ best 25 @-@ game hitting streak in June and July . The team @-@ best hitting streak of 28 belongs to Gabe Kapler . 
 Through July 28 , Kinsler was leading the AL in batting average ( .331 ) , runs ( 90 ) , hits ( 145 ) , total bases ( 232 ) , extra base hits ( 55 ) , at bats ( 438 ) , and plate appearances ( 499 ) . He was also second in doubles ( 37 ) and power / speed number ( 17 @.@ 9 ) , third in sacrifices ( 7 ) , fourth in singles ( 90 ) , sixth in sacrifice flies ( 6 ) , seventh in stolen bases ( 26 ) , triples ( 4 ) , and on @-@ base percentage ( .392 ) , and eighth in OPS ( .922 ) . " Kinsler " , said Seattle Mariners left fielder Raúl Ibáñez , " is the engine that makes that offense go . " 
 However , on August 17 he injured the left side of his groin on a defensive play , suffering a sports hernia that ultimately required season @-@ ending surgery . He missed the last 37 games of the season . " I really didn 't have a decision " , Kinsler said . " If I want to fix this injury , then I have to have surgery . " 
 In 2008 , despite missing the last six weeks of the season , Kinsler was third in the AL in times advanced from first to third on a single ( 17 ) , fourth in batting average ( .319 ) and power / speed number ( 21 @.@ 3 ) , fifth in steals of third base ( 8 ) and " bases taken " ( 23 ; advanced on fly balls , passed balls , wild pitches , balks , etc . ) , sixth in line drive percentage ( 24 % ) and in extra base hit percentage ( 10 @.@ 8 % of all plate appearances ) , eighth in runs ( 102 ) and OPS ( .892 ) , ninth in sacrifice hits ( 8 ) and home runs on the road ( 14 ) , and tenth in stolen bases ( 26 ; while only being caught twice — a 93 % success rate ) and lowest strikeout percentage ( 11 @.@ 5 % of at bats ) . 
 He hit .413 with runners in scoring position . He was one of only three batters in the AL to have at least 18 home runs and 18 stolen bases in both 2007 and 2008 , along with Alex Rodriguez and Grady Sizemore . His 41 doubles ranked second in franchise history to Alfonso Soriano 's 43 in 2005 . He had a .377 on @-@ base percentage as a leadoff hitter , the third @-@ best mark in the AL , and his <unk> slugging percentage was the highest for a leadoff batter in the American League . Kinsler 's .381 on @-@ base percentage as a leadoff hitter over the 2005 – 08 seasons was the fourth @-@ highest in the major leagues . 
 " Most hitters have [ a location ] that you can exploit " , said All Star pitcher Justin <unk> . " This guy has trouble with fastballs in . This guy has trouble with breaking balls down . [ Kinsler ] doesn 't have a hole like that . " In the field , he led all major league second basemen with a 5 @.@ 77 range factor and 123 double plays , but also in errors with 18 . 
 Kinsler was mentioned as an MVP candidate before his injury by writers at ESPN , the Dallas News , the Los Angeles Times , and the Washington Post . He could have conceivably rivaled Pedroia for MVP , if not for the sports hernia that cut his 2008 campaign short a month and a half . " I think he just missed having an MVP year " , manager Ron Washington said . " If luck [ had been ] on our side and he [ had stayed ] healthy , he would have run away with it . " In the end , he received a single 10th @-@ place vote from Jeff Wilson of the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram . 
 = = = = 2009 : Hitting for the cycle , and joining the 30 – 30 club = = = = 
 In 2009 , Kinsler was named # 24 on the Sporting News ' list of the 50 greatest current players in baseball . A panel of 100 baseball people , many of them members of the Baseball Hall of Fame and winners of major baseball awards , was polled to arrive at the list . 
 On April 15 , 2009 , in a game against the Baltimore Orioles , Kinsler hit for the cycle , becoming only the fourth Ranger to do so ( and , at the time , the only right @-@ handed Ranger ) . In the same game , Kinsler became only the second player in Ranger history to get 6 hits in a single game ( the first having been Alfonso Soriano , on May 8 , 2004 ) , and the first to do so in a 9 @-@ inning game . His five runs and four extra base hits in the game matched two other team records . 
 " It was a thing of beauty " , teammate Marlon Byrd said . " I loved it . " Kinsler 's dual feat was the first in the modern baseball era . The last major league player to have six hits in a game while hitting for the cycle was William Farmer Weaver , for the Louisville Colonels on August 12 , 1890 . Kinsler 's 13 total bases were also one base shy of Jose Canseco 's June 13 , 1994 , team record . Only three other players in the prior 55 years had had six hits , five runs , and four extra @-@ base hits in a game , the most recent having been Shawn Green of the Los Angeles Dodgers in 2002 . 
 Kinsler was named AL co @-@ Player of the Week on April 20 , 2009 . For the week , in 30 plate appearances he led the major leagues in batting average ( .556 ) , hits ( 15 ) , extra base hits ( 7 ) , and runs ( 9 ) , and tied for the lead in doubles ( 4 ) . He also had a .600 on @-@ base percentage and 1 @.@ 000 slugging percentage , with a triple , two home runs , and six stolen bases . " He 's incredible " , said teammate Hank Blalock . 
 On June 16 against Houston , Kinsler opened the first inning with his ninth career leadoff homer , surpassing the club record of eight , shared by Mike Hargrove , <unk> McDowell , and Michael Young . On May 21 , Kinsler stole third base in the fifth inning , setting a club record for career steals of third at 18 . Furthermore , at the time Kinsler had never been caught trying to steal third . Rick <unk> of ESPN called Kinsler his " first quarter MVP . " 
 Through July 1 , Kinsler led the AL in power @-@ speed number ( 17 @.@ 5 ) , was third in home runs ( 19 ) , fourth in runs ( 55 ) and total bases ( 160 ) , sixth in extra base hits ( 38 ) and at bats ( 307 ) , seventh in sacrifice flies ( 4 ) , and ninth in stolen bases ( 16 ) and sacrifices ( 8 ) , while batting .359 against left @-@ handers and .333 with runners on base . 
 Kinsler narrowly missed making the AL All @-@ Star team . First , though he had led all AL second basemen as of June 30 , with 2 @,@ 170 @,@ 100 fan votes ( fifth @-@ most votes of all AL players , just ahead of Dustin Pedroia 's 2 @,@ 163 @,@ 270 ) , Pedroia passed him on the last day in last @-@ minute voting . Then , he just missed making the team as a reserve in player voting , coming in second again , this time to Toronto 's Aaron Hill . He missed in his third chance , as AL All Star team and Tampa Bay manager Joe Maddon did not pick him as a reserve . He missed a fourth opportunity to make the team , in the Sprint Final Vote competition for the final spot on the team , coming in second to Brandon Inge of the Tigers . A fifth opportunity presented itself when Pedroia pulled out of the All Star Game to spend time with his pregnant wife — and as Kinsler had finished second in fan voting , in player voting , and in the Final Vote competition , he appeared a likely candidate to replace his fellow second baseman . But Maddon went with one of his own to replace Pedroia , Tampa Bay 's first baseman Carlos Peña , who was leading the league in homers but batting .228 ( and who had come in fourth in the Final Vote competition , behind Kinsler and <unk> Figgins ) . A sixth and final opportunity presented itself when Evan Longoria withdrew because of a finger infection ; but again Maddon ( a former Angels coach ) chose someone else as a replacement , this time Figgins of the Angels , who had come in third in the Final Vote competition ( behind Kinsler ) . 
 Bleacher Reports ' Andrew <unk> observed : " Maddon spent his tenure as the AL All Star manager finding new and inventive ways to give Ian Kinsler the middle finger . " And Sports Illustrated 's Jacob <unk> took note , writing : 
 It is an absolute travesty that Ian Kinsler is not the starting second baseman for the American League . Dustin Pedroia , who IS the starting second baseman , has hit only three home runs and has 36 RBIs . Kinsler , on the other hand , has hit 20 home runs and has 63 RBIs . The fact that Kinsler isn 't even a reserve makes it hard to take the All Star Game seriously . 
 At the All Star Game , as a tribute to Kinsler , his teammate and close friend Michael Young wore wristbands with Kinsler 's number 5 . 
 On July 11 , Kinsler stole third base for the 21st time in his career , building on his team record , without ever having been thrown out . On July 19 , he led off the bottom of the first inning with a home run , and 12 innings later he broke a 3 – 3 tie with a two @-@ run , walk @-@ off home run . Only four times before in major league history had the same batter led off the bottom of the first inning with a home run , and ended the game with another homer . Kinsler suffered a strained left hamstring on July 28 , and missed 11 games while on the disabled list . 
 Kinsler , who already had 30 stolen bases , hit his 30th home run on September 25 , becoming the only major leaguer to join the 30 – 30 club in 2009 , and the 34th major leaguer ever . He became only the second player in Rangers ' history to have a 30 – 30 season ( joining Alfonso Soriano , who did it in 2005 ) , and joined Soriano ( who also had 30 – 30 seasons in 2002 and 2003 for the Yankees ) and Brandon Phillips ( 2007 ) as the only 30 – 30 second basemen in Major League history . " It 's an incredible accomplishment " , said Michael Young . " I 've played with guys who have had some incredible seasons here , but 30 – 30 is something special . He deserves a lot of credit . He battled all season long . That 's what separates the great players from the good ones . " 
 He led the AL in power @-@ speed # , with a 31 @.@ 0 . Through 2009 , he had the second @-@ highest steal success rate among active players with at least 100 attempts , at 87 @.@ 5 % ( 91 @-@ of @-@ 104 ) . Carlos Beltrán was the best , at 88 @.@ 3 % . Sharing his philosophy on stealing bases , he said : " It takes the art of stealing away if you do it when you 're four runs up or four runs down , and the opposing team is just worried about getting outs , not stolen bases . The idea is to steal them when you need them . " 
 He also showed a good eye at the plate . Of 15 Rangers who had at least 100 at bats , his rate of only one strikeout per 8 @.@ 31 at @-@ bats was the best on the team . Similarly , he made contact on 87 % of his swings , the best contact rate on the team . 
 Playing 144 games , he also had 13 home runs against lefties ( 2nd in the league ) , stole third base 11 times ( 3rd ) , hit 47 % of his hits for extra bases ( 7th @-@ best in the AL ) , was 7th in the AL in stolen bases , scored 101 runs ( 10th ) , and had 5 bunt hits ( 10th ) . On defense he led AL second baseman in " zone runs " s ( 17 ) , was 2nd in assists ( 451 ) and range factor / game ( 4 @.@ 86 ) , and was 5th in putouts ( 249 ) . 
 = = = = 2010 : All @-@ Star = = = = 
 In December 2009 , Washington said Kinsler would bat second in 2010 . " I think Kinsler performs better when he 's in the mix hitting at the top of the lineup in the first inning " , Washington said . " When he has to wait to hit , I think it takes a lot away from him . " But by early March , it was reported that he would bat fifth . Washington said , however , that that would not keep Kinsler from running : " I will not slow him down . He is a threat . I will not take away that threat . I 'm not stopping <unk> . " On days when Julio <unk> was not batting leadoff , Kinsler was to move up to the top of the lineup . In the end , Kinsler started 60 games batting 3rd , 20 games batting 5th , 16 games batting 6th , and 6 games leading off . 
 In spring training , while he was batting .400 , Kinsler slipped on a patch of wet grass during pre @-@ game warm @-@ ups . He rolled his right ankle , and suffered a sprain of the ligaments above it ( referred to as a " high ankle sprain " ) , as well as a small bone bruise at the tip of his tibia at the back of his ankle . He missed three weeks of spring training , and began the season on the disabled list . Washington said : " We miss his presence . We miss his threat . We miss what he brings on the defensive end . We miss his leadership . " He made his initial 2010 appearance on April 30 , after having missed the first 20 games of the season . 
 Batting .304 at the time with a .412 on @-@ base percentage ( 4th in the AL ) , he was selected as a reserve to the 2010 American League All Star team , his second All Star Game . An appreciative Kinsler said : " It 's a huge honor . " He had finished third among AL second basemen in fan voting behind Robinson Canó and Pedroia , but Pedroia was injured , and Kinsler was picked to replace him . He had also finished second among AL second basemen in voting by AL players . On July 29 he went on the disabled list again , this time for a strained left groin , and was not reactivated until September 1 . 
 Kinsler finished the season batting .286 , with a career @-@ high on @-@ base percentage of .382 . His .985 fielding percentage was 5th @-@ best in the league , and he had the highest career range factor / game of all active major league second basemen ( 5 @.@ 201 ) . With his two stints on the disabled list , he played in only 103 games . 
 In the first round of the playoffs , against the Tampa Bay Rays , Kinsler batted .444 / .500 / .944 in five games , leading the majors with 3 home runs ( tied ) and 6 RBIs in the division series . He hit safely and scored a run in all five games , joining Boston 's Nomar Garciaparra as the only two players to start their post @-@ season careers with at least one hit — and with at least one hit and one run — in each of five consecutive games . As teammate Nelson Cruz also hit three home runs , it marked the second time in Major League history that two teammates each hit three homers in a postseason series of five games or fewer ( the other two to do it were Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig , in the 1928 World Series ) . For the first two rounds of the playoffs , Kinsler hit safely in 9 of 11 games , and batted .342 with 3 HRs , a playoff @-@ high 9 RBIs , 6 runs , 2 stolen bases , an OBP of .409 , and an OPS of 1 @.@ 067 . 
 = = = = 2011 : 30 – 30 club , redux = = = = 
 On April 2 , 2011 , Kinsler became the first player in major league history to hit a lead @-@ off home run in the first two games of a season ( giving him a total of 15 lead @-@ off homers in his career ) . In his next game against the Red Sox , he hit another home run in the third inning . Kinsler and Nelson Cruz also became the first two teammates to homer in each of the first three games in a season . The two also joined Dean Palmer ( 1992 ) as the only Texas ballplayers to ever homer in the first three games of the season . 
 In September Kinsler tied his own Rangers record , which he set in 2009 , with his seventh leadoff home run of the season . He also hit his 20th career leadoff homer , becoming the 34th player in major league baseball history to have hit at least 20 . Since his first season in 2006 , his 20 lead @-@ off homers were the 6th @-@ most behind Alfonso Soriano ( 31 ) , Hanley Ramírez ( 25 ) , Jimmy Rollins ( 24 ) , Curtis Granderson ( 24 ) , and Rickie Weeks ( 24 ) . 
 He stole 28 consecutive bases without being caught , breaking his own club record , which he had set in 2007 – 08 . 
 Kinsler joined the 30 – 30 club , for the second time . He became the 12th player in major league history to have multiple 30 – 30 seasons . The only other infielders in major league history who had had multiple 30 – 30 seasons as of 2011 were Alfonso Soriano , Howard Johnson , and Jeff Bagwell . He also joined the 20 ( home runs ) / 20 ( steals ) club for the third time in his career . Joe Morgan , who did it four seasons , is the only second baseman to have joined the 20 – 20 club more times . 
 In 2011 Kinsler was 2nd in the American League in runs scored ( 121 ; the fifth @-@ highest season total in Rangers ' history ) , 5th in home runs ( 32 ; a career high ) and walks ( 89 ) , and 9th in stolen bases ( 30 ) and extra base hits ( 70 ) . He was also third in power @-@ speed # ( 31 @.@ 0 ; behind Jacoby <unk> and Curtis Granderson ) , and had the best walks @-@ to @-@ strikeouts ratio in the major leagues , with 1 @.@ 25 walks per each strikeout . On defense , his career range factor of 5 @.@ 092 was the highest among active major league second basemen , and in 2011 he led AL second basemen in double plays , with 103 . 
 His 136 career stolen bases through season @-@ end were third @-@ most in Rangers history , behind Bump Wills ( 161 ) and Toby Harrah ( 143 ) , and his career stolen @-@ base percentage was the third @-@ best rate among active players with at least 120 attempts . 
 His 124 career home runs were the 5th @-@ most in the first six years of any second baseman 's career , behind Dan Uggla ( 183 ) , Joe Gordon ( 142 ) , Chase Utley ( 130 ) , and Alfonso Soriano ( 126 ) . 
 On October 4 , in Game 4 of the playoff series against the Rays , Kinsler led off the game with a home run , sparking the Rangers 4 – 3 victory over Tampa Bay to send them to the ALCS . 
 = = = = 2012 : All @-@ Star = = = = 
 Kinsler was an All Star again in 2012 , for the third time . For the season , he was second in the AL in plate appearances ( 731 ) , third in at bats ( 655 ) and runs ( 105 ) , fifth in power @-@ speed number ( 20 @.@ 0 ) , sixth in doubles ( 42 ) , and eighth in hit by pitch ( 10 ) . 
 = = = = 2013 : Rangers ' all @-@ time stolen base leader = = = = 
 In 2013 , Kinsler struck out once every 10 @.@ 4 plate appearances , making him the third @-@ toughest batter to strike out in the American League , and was the sixth @-@ toughest batter to double up in the league ( 109 @.@ 0 at bats / double play ) . He finished the season tied for fifth among active players in leadoff home runs . He led the Texas Rangers , all @-@ time , career @-@ wise , in stolen bases ( 172 ) , hit by pitch ( 57 ) , and power @-@ speed number ( 163 @.@ 6 ) , and was fifth in runs ( 748 ) , seventh in doubles ( 249 ) and walks ( 462 ) , eighth in home runs ( 156 ) , and ninth in hits ( 1 @,@ 145 ) and RBIs ( 539 ) . Fangraphs ranked him as the 56th @-@ best baserunner in baseball history . 
 = = = Detroit Tigers ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 In November 2013 , Kinsler was traded to the Detroit Tigers for Prince Fielder in a one @-@ for @-@ one trade of All @-@ Stars , with the Tigers sending Texas $ 30 million to cover part of the difference in the players ' salaries . There was an ESPN Sunday Night Baseball commercial in 2010 where Kinsler and Fielder were talking about trading each other for Tim Lincecum . 
 = = = = 2014 : All @-@ Star = = = = 
 In 2014 , Kinsler was named to his fourth All @-@ Star team , as a replacement for an injured Victor Martinez . For the season he led the American League in at bats ( 684 ) , was 4th in hits ( 188 ) and doubles ( 40 ) , 5th in runs scored ( 100 ; scoring 100 runs for the fifth time in his career ) , and 7th in power @-@ speed number ( 15 @.@ 9 ) . He was the 10th @-@ toughest batter in the American League to strike out ( once per every 9 @.@ 19 plate appearances ) , and was one of seven AL players to hit at least 15 home runs and steal at least 15 bases . On defense , he led the AL in putouts ( 290 ) and was third in assists ( 467 ) and fielding percentage ( .988 ) , among all second basemen . Through 2014 , Kinsler had the best career range factor of any active second baseman in Major League Baseball , at 4 @.@ 881 . 
 On November 5 , 2014 , Kinsler was awarded the Wilson Defensive Player of the Year Award for second base . 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 On September 10 , Kinsler recorded his 1,500th career hit , a single off of Bryan Shaw of the Cleveland Indians . For the 2015 season , he hit .296 , his best batting average since posting a career @-@ high .319 mark in 2008 , while collecting 11 home runs and 73 RBIs . 
 Following the 2015 season , Kinsler was awarded the Fielding Bible Award as the best fielding second baseman in MLB . His 19 Defensive Runs Saved were six better than any other Major League second baseman this season , according to Fangraphs . His 6 @.@ 3 Ultimate Zone Rating was the best in the American League and second only to Miami 's Dee Gordon . His 2 @.@ 6 defensive Wins Above Replacement , according to the Baseball Reference formula , ranked him eighth among all Major League players regardless of position . Kinsler has put up 50 Defensive Runs Saved over the last three seasons , according to The Fielding Bible . The next @-@ best total among Major League second basemen is 29 from Colorado 's DJ <unk> . 
 = = = = 2016 = = = = 
 On July 3 , 2016 , Kinsler hit his 200th career home run off Danny Farquhar of the Tampa Bay Rays . Kinsler became the third active Major League player , and the 40th overall , with 200 home runs , 1 @,@ 000 runs scored , 1 @,@ 600 hits and 200 stolen bases . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Kinsler , who is Jewish , and whose father is Jewish while his mother is Catholic , has become a prominent figure in the Jewish community , and enjoys the attention that he attracts from it . He was featured in the 2008 Hank Greenberg 75th Anniversary edition of Jewish Major Leaguers Baseball Cards , licensed by Major League Baseball , commemorating the Jewish major leaguers from 1871 through 2008 . He joined , among others , teammate Scott Feldman , Brad Ausmus , Kevin Youkilis , Ryan Braun , Gabe Kapler , Jason Marquis , Jason Hirsh , John Grabow , Craig Breslow , and Scott Schoeneweis . Kinsler was one of three Jewish players in the 2008 All Star Game , joining Youkilis and Braun . He says that " Youkilis will always say something to me on the bases [ referring to the fact that they are both Jewish ] . ' Happy Passover , ' he 'll throw something at me . " In July 2013 he passed Shawn Green with his 163rd steal , to become the all @-@ time career steals leader among Jewish major leaguers . 
 Kinsler , who would have been eligible to play for Israel in the 2013 World Baseball Classic because of his Jewish heritage , said : " Wow , I would be happy to play for Team Israel .... The truth is that if a proposal comes from Team USA to play for them , I will have a very difficult decision to make . Youk [ Kevin Youkilis ] , Braun [ Milwaukee 's Ryan Braun ] , and I could make a fantastic team . I am sure that I 'll talk it over with Youk – we always laugh about things like this . " 
 Kinsler married Tess Brady , his high school sweetheart , on November 18 , 2006 . Their daughter , Rian <unk> Kinsler , was born December 5 , 2008 . On June 8 , 2011 , his wife gave birth to a son , Jack <unk> Kinsler . He was put on paternity leave due to the birth . 
 In 2008 Kinsler won the Rangers ' Jim Sundberg Community Achievement Award , in recognition of his having devoted a great deal of his personal time to the community . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus = 
 " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " is the fifth episode of the fifth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files and originally aired on the Fox network on November 30 , 1997 . Written and directed by series creator Chris Carter , " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " episode , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the overarching mythology of The X @-@ Files . " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 5 , being watched by 18 @.@ 68 million viewers upon its initial broadcast . The episode was nominated for seven awards at the 1998 Emmys and won one . The entry generally received positive reviews ; some reviewers called it a classic , with others calling it the most striking stand @-@ alone episode of the show 's fifth season . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully was initially assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate reports of a mysterious creature that has impregnated a middle @-@ aged woman . They find that the " monster " , nicknamed The Great Mutato , is the genetic creation of a Frankenstein @-@ like doctor . The Great Mutato is at first ostracized , but later accepted , by his community . 
 Carter 's story draws heavily on Mary Shelley 's Frankenstein and particularly on James Whale 's 1931 film version of the story . The script had been written specifically with singer Cher and actress Roseanne Barr in mind , but both were unavailable at the time of shooting . Talk @-@ show host Jerry Springer appeared as himself , and Chris Owens — who appeared in later episodes as FBI agent Jeffrey Spender — played The Great Mutato . The episode was filmed in black @-@ and @-@ white , with a sky backdrop created to imitate the style of old Frankenstein films . Owens wore makeup and prosthetics that took several hours to apply . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins in the guise of a comic book ; FBI special agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) receives a letter from Shaineh Berkowitz ( Pattie Tierce ) , a single mother who claims to have been mysteriously impregnated , while unconscious , by an unknown presence 18 years ago , resulting in the birth of her son , Izzy ( Stewart Gale ) . Now , following a similarly unexplained attack , she is pregnant again . She has heard about Mulder 's expertise in the paranormal from The Jerry Springer Show and wants him to investigate . Mulder and his partner , special agent Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , travel to rural Albion , Indiana . They meet Shaineh and her son Izzy and learn that the description of the creature that attacked her , with a lumpy head and two mouths , is very similar to a comic book character invented by Izzy . His monstrous creation , called The Great Mutato , is inspired by a mysterious creature that has been seen by many of the locals . Izzy and his friends take the agents to a wooded area where they see Mutato ( Chris Owens ) from a distance . 
 They meet an old man who angrily tells them that there are no monsters and sends them to see his son , a geneticist named Francis Pollidori ( John O 'Hurley ) . Dr. Pollidori shows them his experiments studying the Hox gene using the fruit fly Drosophila . This presentation includes images of a fly with legs growing out of its mouth . He tells the agents that the same kind of experiment could , in theory , be performed on humans . Afterward , Mulder tells Scully that he believes that Dr. Pollidori , acting as a modern @-@ day Victor Frankenstein , has created The Great Mutato . Later , Dr. Pollidori 's wife Elizabeth ( Miriam Smith ) is knocked unconscious and is attacked in the same manner as Shaineh . At the crime scene , Mulder and Scully find a chemical residue from an agricultural agent used to anesthetize animals , which leads them to suspect Dr. Pollidori 's father , who is a farmer . Dr. Pollidori comes to his father 's house , angrily confronts him , and murders him . Later , Mutato , who lives with Pollidori Sr. , finds his dead body and tearfully buries it in a barn . 
 Mulder and Scully go looking for Pollidori Sr. and find a shallow grave and photographs of the dead man with Mutato . Meanwhile , Dr. Pollidori leads an angry mob of townspeople to his father 's house , demanding that Mulder and Scully turn the alleged murderer over to them . The agents find Mutato hiding in the basement as the crowd gathers upstairs . Someone accidentally sets the barn alight and in the ensuing confusion , the mob realize that the agents are protecting the monster in the basement . Mutato speaks to the crowd and explains that he was created 25 years before , and that he is the result of a genetic experiment by Dr. Pollidori . Unbeknownst to his son , Pollidori Sr. rescued Mutato and cared for him , but was unable to provide a friend or a mate for the boy . The old man attempted to emulate his scientist son 's experiments , and tried to create hybrids from his farm animals . Mutato asks Dr. Pollidori to create a female companion for him , but the scientist says that he cannot — that Mutato was a mistake . The townspeople realize that The Great Mutato is not a monster after all and Dr. Pollidori is arrested for the murder of his father . Mulder feels that it is unjust for Mutato not to get a mate and so he demands to see the writer : Izzy . In a fanciful , if not imagined , scene , Mulder and Scully take matters into their own hands and take Mutato , along with the townspeople , to a Cher concert . The episode ends with a shot of Mulder and Scully dancing , which slowly turns back into the comic book seen at the beginning of the episode . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Going into the fifth season of The X @-@ Files , series creator Chris Carter noted , " we knew we were going to be hitting these very dramatic marks which were the mythology episodes , and we wanted to lighten , or leaven , the season with quirky episodes . " Carter wanted to write a Frankenstein @-@ inspired episode , but found it difficult to reconcile Mary Shelley 's unbelievable tale with the style of the show . To achieve his vision , he wrote a script that blurred the real world with the X @-@ Files reality and that had a distinct fantasy element . Carter combined elements of the original story with fairy tales and elements of folk tales . In order to make the episode " as moving " as possible , Carter sought to echo elements of James Whale 's 1931 film version of Frankenstein . He later noted that , by " using modern science , I took an old style , which is black and white , and an old approach , which is a kind of James Whale approach to science fiction , and came up with a story about a love @-@ lorn monster " . 
 The idea for the genetic engineering story was developed with the help of the series ' science adviser , Anne Simon . Carter visited a friend of Simon , a scientist at Indiana University in Bloomington , who had been able to genetically manipulate flies so that they grew legs from their eyes . After Carter had created the character of The Great Mutato , he discovered that cartoonist Matt Groening had already created a character with the same name — although with different pronunciation — for a comic book entry of The Simpsons . Carter contacted Groening , who gave Carter permission to use the name . Like two @-@ thirds of the episodes of the series , " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " episode , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the overarching mythology of The X @-@ Files . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Cher 's music plays a large role in " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " , Chris Carter having written the episode after spending a summer listening to Cher records and developing a fixation on the singer . Carter knew that Cher 's half @-@ sister Georganne LaPiere was a major X @-@ Files fan , and Carter learned through LaPiere that Cher herself was intrigued by the show and would be interested in making an X @-@ Files guest appearance . Sitcom star Roseanne Barr also expressed an interest in guesting on The X @-@ Files , and Carter wrote the part of Shaineh Berkowitz specifically for her . Barr , however , was unavailable at the time of shooting — her projected role was filled by Pattie Tierce — while Cher passed on the proffered cameo appearance performing as herself , a decision for which she later expressed regret : " I wanted them to ask me to come on and act — then they just wanted me to come on and sing ... Just to come on and be myself wasn 't anything I 'd want to do until I saw [ the finished episode ] " — " Had I [ foreseen ] the quality of [ it ] I would have done it in a heartbeat . " Cher did authorize the use of three of her tracks on the episode 's soundtrack including " Walking in Memphis " heard at the episode 's conclusion while ostensibly performed onstage by celebrity impersonator Tracey Bell — filmed in longshot or from the back or overheard — as Cher . Although Bell was credited for the role , Cher 's fans responded to the episode 's premiere with online speculation as to whether the singer had pseudonymously appeared in the episode . Tabloid talk show host Jerry Springer appeared as himself . These casting choices went against a long @-@ standing tradition on The X @-@ Files of only casting actors who were not well @-@ known . 
 Seinfeld regular John O 'Hurley had auditioned for several roles on the show but Carter had not previously thought of him as " an X @-@ Files actor " . For the part of Dr. Pollidori , however , Carter considered him " the absolute perfect casting choice " . Stewart Gale , who played Izzy Berkowitz , was a non @-@ actor who was sitting on the back of a truck when Carter passed . Carter convinced Gale 's father — who was initially suspicious of the director 's credentials — to let Gale travel to Vancouver to take part in the episode . The characters of Izzy 's friends were also played by inexperienced actors . One was a snake handler on the set of The X @-@ Files feature film — the shooting of which overlapped that of season five — and the other worked at a Vancouver coffee shop that Carter frequented . 
 The Great Mutato was played by Chris Owens , unrecognizable in heavy makeup . Owens had played a younger version of The Smoking Man in two episodes of season four and was later cast as the recurring character of FBI special agent Jeffrey Spender . During his audition , Owens noted , " Chris said , ' Okay , did you ever see Elephant Man ? ... What I 'm looking for is dignity . He 's got dignity . But he 's definitely mutated ' " . After Owens heeded Carter 's instructions and attempted to bring dignity to the audition , Carter requested that he try it again " with less autism " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The first five seasons of The X @-@ Files , including " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " , were filmed in Vancouver . It was the third episode of the program that Carter directed ; He decided to film the episode in black @-@ and @-@ white — in homage to James Whale — which brought more challenges than he expected . The director of photography , Joel Ransom , had to spend longer than usual lighting each scene because of the grayscale . The stormy skies in the episode , added to emulate the atmosphere of old Frankenstein movies , were a visual effect . Carter also used a wide @-@ angle camera lens throughout the episode , which forced the actors to act directly to the camera , rather than to each other . According to Carter , it also enabled him to give scenes in the episode a more surreal staging than was usual for the show . 
 The makeup for the character of The Great Mutato was designed and created by special effects supervisor Tony Lindala . The Mutato mask went through several design iterations on paper , including 10 – 15 drawings and a color rendition . Constructed from latex , and containing an articulated second mouth , it cost $ 40 @,@ 000 and took between five and seven hours to apply . In addition to the mask , Chris Owens wore contact lenses and dentures . Owens later recalled that " the makeup had taken seven hours , and then I had sat around for three or four . And now I was going to sit in the dark , and I could only see out of one eye . They put a big contact lens in . " Initial versions of the costume were deemed " too human looking " and so a newer design was chosen . 
 Lindala also created " Baby Mutato " costumes for the twin infants featured in the The Jerry Springer Show scene , but the production crew had difficulty keeping the costumes on the children . Lindala later said , " [ t ] he little babies kept tearing their hair off , we kept gluing it back on " . Lindala was happy that the episode was filmed in black and white because it helped " the prosthetic [ because ] it is difficult to work in a foam piece that long and not recognize it as a painted , opaque , false translucency . " Lindala later called the filming technique the " saving grace " of the episode . In addition , he later submitted his makeup for the episode to the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences in an attempt to be nominated for an Emmy Award . 
 = = = Music and cultural references = = = 
 The episode was scored by series composer Mark Snow , and was , according to him , his best episode score of the fifth season . He described the main theme as " a very dark , macabre , insidious sort of nasty waltz " . The episode 's main theme is also greatly inspired by The Elephant Man 's theme song by John Morris . Three songs are heard in the versions sung by Cher during the episode : " The Sun Ain 't Gonna Shine Anymore " , " Gypsies , Tramps & Thieves " and " Walking in Memphis " . The latter is played at the end of the episode when the agents take The Great Mutato to a Cher concert . In the episode , the character watches Cher 's 1985 movie Mask , and derives comfort from the loving relationship between Cher 's character and her son , who has a disfiguring genetic bone disorder . At the end of the episode , Mulder and Scully take The Great Mutato from his small town to a Cher concert , where she picks him out of the crowd to dance . 
 The episode contains several cultural references . First , the episode 's title is a reference to both the subtitle for Shelley 's original novel , The Modern Prometheus , and to the postmodernist school of thought . Postmodernism has been described as a " style and concept in the arts , architecture , and criticism , [ that ] is characterized by the self @-@ conscious use of earlier styles and conventions , a mixing of different artistic styles and media , and a general distrust of theories . " Furthermore , the Frankenstein @-@ like doctor shares the name — albeit with a slightly different spelling — of Shelley 's contemporary , John William Polidori , who was present at the conception of her novel . Several lines in the episode come directly from James Whale 's 1931 movie Frankenstein . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " is the most obvious reference to Frankenstein made by the series , although traces of the story are seen elsewhere in the first season episode " Young at Heart " and the sixth season episode " The Beginning " . In addition , the series ' overarching mythology revolves around shadowy Syndicate leaders who salvage alien spacecraft for their own technological use and create human @-@ alien hybrids . The episode contains themes relating to motherhood and sexuality . According to film studies writer Linda Badley , this episode , and season four 's " Home " , foreshadow Scully 's impending motherhood and her realization , in following episodes " Christmas Carol " and " Emily " , that she has been used to create a human @-@ alien hybrid , Emily . Diane Negra , in her book Off @-@ White Hollywood : American Culture and Ethnic Female Stardom , points out that while The Great Mutato impregnates both Shaineh Berkowitz and Elizabeth Pollidori without their consent or knowledge , it is " an oversimplification " to label the monster as a rapist , because both Berkowitz and Pollidori " desire for children through unconventional means " . Thus , Mutato 's acts allow for the two women to get what they desperately desire in a moment of " magical resolution " . 
 Eric Bumpus and Tim <unk> , in their book Cease Fire , the War Is Over ! , propose that the episode — and by extension , the series as a whole — is a rejection of " modernity 's naturalism " and an acceptance of " post @-@ modernity 's mystic supernaturalism " . The two argue that , while in stereotypical " great science fiction " the monster created usually runs amok , in " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " , the creature is " a lovable success " . Furthermore , the Indiana townspeople represent " the religious nuts [ who ] in the end ... turn out to be right " . Bumpus and <unk> consider them the " secondary heroes " of the episode , right after The Great Mutato himself . 
 Despite her physical absence from the entry , Cher 's presence can be felt throughout the narrative . Negra argues that Cher 's " flamboyant and self @-@ authored body " is used as a metaphor for " the possibility of self @-@ transformation " . In addition , her voice , heard via songs like " Walking in Memphis " , is associated with the idea of " circumvent [ ing ] patriarchy . " Negra notes that Cher 's music is used in scenes during The Great Mutato 's sexual encounters with women . Negra asserts that " this juxtaposition of sound and image cues our perception that we have entered the realm of carnival where the normal order of things is inverted . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club reasons that the ending was not the actual conclusion of the episode , but rather the fanciful and elaborate happy ending that was concocted by Izzy Berkowitz , the writer of the comic book , after talking to Mulder . In this manner , VanDerWeff notes , " the episode abandons logic and reality and , for lack of a better word , transcends . " Meghan Deans from Tor.com postulates that the entire episode never happened " [ f ] rom a canonical perspective " due to the entry 's comic book setting , the various meta @-@ references and the " happy ending " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " was first broadcast in the United States on November 30 , 1997 , on the Fox network , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on March 29 , 1998 , on Sky One . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 5 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 5 percent of all television @-@ equipped households and 16 percent of households watching television were tuned in . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States . It was viewed by 18 @.@ 68 million viewers . " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " was the eleventh most watched television program for the week ending November 30 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " received generally positive reviews from critics . Mike Duffy , a Knight Ridder correspondent , wrote a largely positive article on the episode , noting that although the episode was special , this did not make it feel like a gimmick . He wrote , " when most shows blow promotional smoke about ' a very special episode , ' it 's best to check the Hollywood Hype @-@ O @-@ Meter for wretched , excessive buzzing [ but ] what sounds like a gimmick — ' a very special black @-@ and @-@ white episode ' loosely based on the horror movie classic Frankenstein actually turns out to be a ripping good ride on ' X @-@ Files ' creator Chris Carter 's wigged @-@ out storytelling train . " A review from the Mobile Register wrote that " Like the very best X @-@ Files episodes , this one combines a generous amount of humor with its horror . " In a review of the entire fifth season , Michael Sauter of Entertainment Weekly said that " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " was the " most striking " of the season 's stand @-@ alone episodes . Todd VanDerWerff awarded the episode with an " A " grade , and , despite noting the silliness of the story and the fact that most of the characters function as stereotypes , wrote that " ' Prometheus ' just works " . In a 2000 review of season five for the New Straits Times , Francis Dass called " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " a " fun episode " . 
 Lionel Green of the Sand Mountain Reporter named the entry the greatest episode of the series and called the ending " one of the most uplifting finales in the series . " Writing for the Daily News , Eric Mink gave the episode a rating of four stars and praised it as an outstanding episode in a weak early fifth season of the show . He said that the two leads acted flawlessly and that Chris Owens ' performance as The Great Mutato was especially touching . He concluded that , " [ w ] ith Shelley 's classic as inspiration , Carter and company have created a classic of their own . " Elaine <unk> from the Corpus Christi Caller @-@ Times called the episode " brilliantly written " and named it " a classic among many for this always @-@ intriguing , ever @-@ inventive series . " She particularly praised the " heart @-@ tugging , romantic " ending . Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe called the episode " a memorable X @-@ Files from start to finish " , due in part to its " extraordinary visual flair " and " atmospheric black and white " footage . Furthermore , Gilbert positively critiqued Carter 's writing and directing , saying he " keeps his balance between drama , low @-@ key humor , [ and ] allusive wit " . Margaret Lyons of New York called the entry " one of the great TV episodes of all time " . Nick De Semlyen and James White of Empire named it the fifth " greatest " episode of the series and wrote that " [ Chris Carter ] plays with style and form , turning the entire episode into a loving homage to Universal monster movies in general and James Whale 's 1931 Frankenstein in particular " . In the 1999 FX Thanksgiving Marathon , containing fan @-@ selected episodes , " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " was presented as the " Best Stand @-@ Alone Episode " . Connie Ogle from The Miami Herald named The Great Mutato one of " the greatest monsters " that were featured on The X @-@ Files . 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five and criticized various elements of the episode 's direction . They wrote , " Chris Carter the writer has come up with something playful and light and charming . And Chris Carter the director has stamped all over it and made it so arch and obvious and dull that it kills it stone dead . " Shearman and Pearson praised the idea of " a town which feels like an X @-@ Files audience " , but derided the episode 's comic book setting and wrote that " this play on post @-@ modernism just doesn 't make any sense [ in that format , because ] a comic has action , a way of jumping from frame to frame ... this is languorous and self @-@ indulgent . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a moderately negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . She wrote that the episode " falls flatter than the chemical pancakes used to anesthetize the victims of this episode " due to its " collection of situations and observances that bear little relation to each other . " Vitaris also criticized the scene wherein various characters are compared to animals , and commented , " the mean spiritedness of [ the plot ] is mind @-@ boggling " . Finally , she called the episode 's conclusion a " false ending " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The episode was nominated for seven awards at the 1998 Emmys by the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences , including Outstanding Directing and Outstanding Writing for Chris Carter . Graeme Murray , Greg Loewen and Shirley <unk> won the award for Outstanding Art Direction . Carter was also nominated for an award for Outstanding Directing by the Directors Guild of America . 
 = Tropical Storm Charley ( 1998 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Charley was the third named storm of the 1998 Atlantic hurricane season . Charley was the first of two tropical storms to make landfall in Texas during that season ( Frances being the other ) . The storm originated with a tropical wave that moved off the West African coast on August 9 . The wave moved generally west @-@ northwestward , producing occasional bursts of convection , finally arriving in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico by August 19 , when animated satellite images began to indicate it had possibly developed a low pressure center . Hurricane Hunter investigations into the system the next day revealed that this was not the case . The system lingered for two days , lacking an organized low level center of circulation until early on the morning of August 21 , when advisories were initiated on the tropical depression , 185 miles ( 298 km ) east of Brownsville , Texas . The depression became a tropical storm later that day , as it moved steadily west @-@ northwestward , strengthening , and then weakening again before making landfall the next morning around Port Aransas , Texas . The storm moved slowly inland and finally dissipated on the morning of the August 24 near the town of Del Rio , Texas . 
 Charley 's impacts in Texas and Mexico were locally severe . In Texas , over 2000 homes were destroyed by the locally severe flooding , and 13 people died . In Mexico , over 12 inches ( 300 mm ) of rain fell in northern areas near the Texas @-@ Mexico border , and seven people were killed . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Charley originated with a large swirl of clouds which parted off of the west coast of Africa on August 9 . Lacking deep convection or a well defined center , the wave continued west @-@ northwestward without developing . Ten days later , on August 19 , satellite images indicated the disturbance was beginning to rotate cyclonically over the southeastern Gulf of Mexico . A reconnaissance aircraft flew into the system the next day . While strong winds were recorded , no circulation center was present . The following morning , a second flight reported that a center had formed , and the disturbance was designated a tropical depression . Initially , the center was disorganized . However , convection over the depression blossomed , mostly concentrated over the northern semicircle . During the evening of August 21 , the system was named Tropical Storm Charley . 
 As the system continued west @-@ northwestward , more organized banding features developed , and the storm began to intensify . On August 22 , it reached its peak intensity of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) . Subsequent reconnaissance reports indicated that winds had decreased , and the storm made landfall near Corpus Christi , Texas early on August 23 , with maximum sustained winds of 45 miles per hour ( 72 km / h ) . Within hours , Charley was downgraded to tropical depression status as it continued to weaken . By August 24 , Charley had dissipated over the Rio Grande near Del Rio , Texas . Although surface winds had diminished and a closed surface circulation no longer existed , a slow @-@ moving remnant circulation aloft persisted in the Del Rio area and generated flooding rains that were most devastating in that area on August 23 and the 24 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Tropical storm warnings were issued by the National Hurricane Center coincidentally with the first advisory on the depression , from High Island , Texas to Brownsville . Six hours later , these were extended eastward to Cameron , Louisiana . At landfall on August 22 , the warnings north of Sabine Pass , Texas were expired , and the rest were dropped later that day . 
 In advance of the storm , thousands of oil workers were evacuated from Gulf of Mexico oil rigs . In Del Rio , some highways and roads were closed after the initial flooding , in anticipation of more flooding as the system stalled over the area . Of the 2000 Laredo , Texas residents ordered to leave their homes in anticipation of the Rio Grande overflowing its banks , only 600 actually did so . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Being relatively weak , the storm 's main impact was its heavy rainfall . Prolific , sometimes record amounts fell over much of south central Texas and northern Mexico . Few areas received sustained tropical storm force winds , and the storm surge was insignificant . There were no confirmed tornadoes . Twenty people died , all from drowning , and the storm caused $ 50 million ( 1998 USD ; $ 64 million USD in 2007 ) in damage . 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 The storm 's major impact was its very heavy rain . A 90 mile ( 140 km ) wide swath of over 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of rainfall extended from the Middle Texas Coast west to the Texas @-@ Mexico border . Charley produced 17 inches ( 430 mm ) of rain in Del Rio in a 24 @-@ hour period , a new record daily rainfall for the city . Refugio , Texas received 7 @.@ 2 inches ( 180 mm ) of rain , and Woodsboro , Texas recorded 5 inches ( 130 mm ) . The storm surge on areas of the Texas coast was small . Port O 'Connor recorded a storm surge of 2 @.@ 3 feet ( .7 m ) , while Pleasure Pier was subjected to a 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) surge . There were two reports of sustained tropical storm force winds , 41 miles per hour ( 66 km / h ) and 39 miles per hour ( 63 km / h ) from Rockport , Texas and Galveston , Texas respectively . The maximum wind gust was 63 miles per hour ( 101 km / h ) at Port O 'Connor , Texas . No tornadoes were confirmed by any NWS offices , although one suspected tornado did prompt a tornado warning . 
 Damage from the storm , while generally light , was severe locally . In Val Verde County , Texas , which took the vast majority of the damage , roughly 2000 houses , mobile homes , and apartments combined were destroyed by flooding . At one point , two @-@ thirds of Del Rio was underwater after a natural dam broke in the San Felipe Creek , flooding the city with a sudden surge of water . The coastal storm surge destroyed several of the dunes on San Jose and Mustang Islands . There was also slight damage on Matagorda Island , where two shelters were destroyed by the surge flooding . Four people , including two toddlers , died when their truck was swept away by floodwaters and nine more drowned in flooding along the San Felipe Creek . Thirteen people died in Texas , all drownings . Charley left $ 50 million ( 1998 USD ; $ 64 million USD in 2007 ) in flood damage across southern Texas . Eight counties in Texas were declared disaster areas . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 While Mexico was not severely impacted by winds from the storm , heavy rain caused serious flooding in places . <unk> received maximum sustained winds of 52 miles per hour ( 84 km / h ) and recorded a minimum pressure of 1 @,@ 003 millibars ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . Jimenez received 14 @.@ 53 inches ( 369 mm ) of rainfall . In Ciudad Acuña , Coahuila , 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of flooding occurred as a result of the heavy rains . 450 houses were damaged in the city , and over 2000 people were injured . In Nuevo Laredo , Tamaulipas , heavy rains swelled the Rio Grande and caused significant flooding . 350 families were evacuated , and the city lost power and phone service . 
 Seven people died in Ciudad Acuña while they were trying to cross a flooded gully . 
 = = = Louisiana = = = 
 Several inches of rain fell in parts of Louisiana . Lake Charles , Louisiana received the most , with 1 @.@ 2 inches ( 30 mm ) . Isolated wind gusts reached tropical storm force , and Lake Charles recorded a 43 miles per hour ( 69 km / h ) gust . Charley did not cause any significant damage in Louisiana . 
 = Blank Page = 
 " Blank Page " is a song recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter Christina Aguilera , taken from her seventh studio album , Lotus ( 2012 ) . It was written by Aguilera , Chris Braide and Sia Furler , with production done by Braide . Aguilera had worked with Furler on her previous two albums Bionic and Burlesque , both released in 2010 . Following the release of Lotus , Aguilera revealed that Furler is one of her favorite people to work with and that she is very inspiring . 
 " Blank Page " is a minimalist piano @-@ driven ballad which received frequent comparisons to Aguilera 's 2002 single " Beautiful " . It garnered strong critical acclaim from music critics , who praised its simplistic arrangement as well as Aguilera 's raw and strong vocal performance on the song . Following the release of Lotus , it peaked at number 53 on the South Korea international singles chart . Aguilera performed the song live for the first time at the 39th People 's Choice Awards , where she was awarded with the People 's Voice Award . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Following the release of her sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) , Aguilera filed for divorce from her husband Jordan Bratman , starred in her first feature film , Burlesque and recorded the accompanying soundtrack . She then became a coach on NBC 's singing competition show The Voice and appeared as a featured artist on Maroon 5 's single " Moves Like Jagger " ( 2011 ) , which spent four weeks atop the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . Following these events , Aguilera announced that had plans to begin production of her seventh album , stating that she wanted high quality and " personal " songs for the record . Regarding the creative direction , she revealed that the album would be a " culmination of everything I 've experienced up until this point ... I 've been through a lot since the release of my last album , being on ( ' The Voice ' ) , having had a divorce ... This is all sort of a free rebirth for me . " She further said " I 'm embracing many different things , but it 's all feel @-@ good , super @-@ expressive [ and ] super @-@ vulnerable . " Aguilera continued to say that the album would be about " self – expression and freedom " because of the personal struggles she had overcome during the last couple of years . Speaking about her new material during an interview on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 2012 , Aguilera said that the recording process for Lotus was taking a while because " I don 't like to just get songs from producers . I like them to come from a personal place ... I 'm very excited . It 's fun , exciting , introspective , it 's going to be great " . " Blank Page " was written by Aguilera , Sia Furler and Chris Braide , the latter of whom also produced the song . Aguilera 's vocals were recorded by Oscar Ramirez at The Red Lips Room in Beverly Hills in California . Braide provided the programming , string arrangement , piano and keyboards . 
 = = Development = = 
 Lotus is the third album in which Aguilera and Furler have collaborated on material together for . They first worked together on Aguilera 's sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) , on the songs " You Lost Me " and " I Am " , along with Samuel Dixon . " You Lost Me " was released as the final single from Bionic , and peaked at number one on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart and number 28 on the Adult Contemporary . Later that year , they reunited to create a song to be included on the Burlesque soundtrack , which is called " Bound to You " . It was nominated in the category of Award for Best Original Song at the 68th Golden Globe Awards in January 2011 . In an interview with VEVO , Aguilera explained the collaborative process between Furler and herself , and why she likes to work with her : Sia and I always done amazing collaborations , she worked with me on the movie soundtrack ' Burlesque , ' which we got a Golden Globe nomination for , we also did a lot of work on my ' Bionic ' record , that was so sentimental , intimate and vulnerable feeling , and that 's what I love about working with her " . Aguilera was interviewed by Billboard when she attended the Billboard Film & TV Music Conference . She revealed that she views " Blank Page " as a more " vulnerable " version of her 2002 song , " Beautiful " . When she was asked by the interviewer who her favorite people were to collaborate with , she responded by solely mentioning Furler and explained what led to her to enjoy working with her : 
 Sia is one of them . She comes in , singer @-@ songwriter , she just writes the most beautiful amazing ballads . Now she is making a name for herself on a more broad commercial scale with a lot of more dance @-@ driven stuff , and she is just an incredible singer . She came in and she just writes such serious songs , I was like ' Oh she is gunna [ sic ] be such a serious person , and I 'm nervous to meet her , and I just want her to get me and understand that I 'm not a cheesy pop star ' . She comes in and she was all nervous , and she is the most <unk> person in the world , but once she starts singing and getting into her thing , you 're just sucked into this world of ' wow ' and it 's inspiring to be around people with such creative energy . I love that , that 's the best experience . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Blank Page " is a simplistic piano arranged ballad , which lasts for a duration of 4 : 04 ( four minutes and four seconds ) . Lyrically , the song is about how Aguilera wishes to " wipe the slate clean " with a former lover and " reconcile an old romance " . She knows that she has wronged him , but is asking to be given a second chance . Andrew Hampp for Billboard noted that this sentiment is revealed by Aguilera in the lyrics " If I could do undo that I hurt you / I would do anything for us to make it through " . The song begins with the chords of a piano as Aguilera sings " I know there 's hurt / I know there 's pain / But people change / Lord , knows I 've been no saint / In my own way / Regret choices I 've made / How I do I say I 'm sorry ? / How do I say I 'm sorry ? . " On the chorus , the lyrics are hopeful that she can right any wrongs she may have committed : " Draw me a smile , and save me tonight / I 'll be your blank page waiting for you to bring me to life / Paint me a heart , let me be your art / I am a blank page waiting for life to start / Let our hearts start and beat as one together / Let our hearts start and beat as one forever " . The arrangement of the minimalist piano composition is " fiery " yet " spare " . Aside from garnering innumerable comparisons to Aguilera 's own song " Beautiful " , the composition of " Blank Page " was subject to critique by Jim Farber writing for New York Daily News . He criticised the song for replicating the structure and lyrical content of " Someone Like You " , a song performed by English singer @-@ songwriter Adele : 
 Only two of the disc 's 11 tracks attempt a genuine expression of vulnerability . Just one , ' Blank Page , ' finds her looking inside and taking some blame . It 's a pretty song , if one that blatantly rides Adele 's coattails . Not only does ' Page ' employ the same piano / voice arrangement as that star 's ' Someone Like You , ' Aguilera apes the precise length of Adele 's notes . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Blank Page " garnered strong critical acclaim from music critics , many of whom praised the its simplicity . Writing on behalf of 4Music , Chris Younie wrote that although " Blank Page " is followed by " Sing for Me " , another ballad , the former is " utterly brilliant " and is " ten times better " than the latter . The continued to describe " Blank Page " as being " elegant and confessional " . He praised her raw vocal performance and thought that should it be released as a single , it would have no problem matching the success of " Beautiful " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic complimented the simplicity of the song , writing that Aguilera " seizes the spotlight " and is accompanied by a " spare " piano arrangement . PopCrush critic Michael Gallucci described the song as a " showstopper " and compared it to " Beautiful " due to its minimalist structure . He further that it is a " classic Aguilera performance " as she employs vocal acrobatics . Writing for Billboard , Andrew Hampp thought that " Blank Page " is more likely to reach a wider audience rather than the songs Aguilera wrote with Furler on Bionic ( " You Lost Me " and " I Am " , which he described as " underrated " ) , because of how both of their celebrity profiles have been raised since Bionic 's release in 2010 . Mesfin Fekadu for The Huffington Post concurred with Hampp in the respect that she also thought that " Blank Page " was reminiscent of the songs co @-@ written by Furler on Bionic , which she also described " that album 's highlight " . 
 Jon Caramanica of The New York Times thought that " Blank Page " , along with " Sing for Me " , depicted " flashes of the old Aguilera " and that her " voice veers volcanic " on the songs as she raise the key as the songs progress . Annie Zaleski of The A.V. Club praised ' Blank Page ' and ' Sing for Me ' , writing that " they are minimal piano ballads on which Aguilera discusses working through regret and reclaiming her sense of self , respectively . The spare music lets her still @-@ powerful voice dominate , and her impassioned delivery conveys how meaningful these songs are to her . " Sarah Godfrey of Washington Post commented that the song " is about hackneyed metaphors and big notes — just the sort of combination that will appeal to fans of Aguilera 's signature song ' Beautiful ' " . Idolator critic Mike Wass complimented Aguilera 's ability to " tone it down " on the song , but he was surprised at the level of simplicity considering Furler 's " alternative leanings " . He did , however , describe it as the album 's most straightforward ballad and as a song which could have been written in 1972 , with its " with its yearning lyrics and sparse production " . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Aguilera performed " Blank Page " for the first time live at the 39th People 's Choice Awards on January 9 , 2013 . She was surrounded by white candles , and she wore a white blaze with black leggings . According to reports published by Us Weekly , Aguilera was very emotional prior to her performance , and that the audience was in tears during her rehearsals of the song . Lauren Moraski of CBS News called it a " heart @-@ wrenching performance . " Amy Sciarretto for PopCrush wrote that it was a " simple and unfettered " performance that allowed her to " show off " her vocals . She continued to write that although she occasionally sounded strained , she sounded better than most singers on their good day . After her performance , she was presented with the People 's Voice Award , where she also gave an acceptance speech . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Vocals recorded at The Red Lips Room , Beverly Hills , CA ; Human Feel , Los Angeles , CA . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Christina Aguilera , Chris Braide , Sia Furler 
 Production – Chris Braide 
 Vocal recording – Oscar Ramirez 
 Programming , string arrangement , piano and keyboards – Chris Braide 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Lotus , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Following the release of Lotus , " Blank Page " debuted on the South Korea International Singles Chart at number 53 during the week of November 11 to 17 , 2012 , with digital download sales of 4 @,@ 299 . 
 = Lynn de Silva = 
 Lynn Alton de Silva ( 16 June 1919 – 22 May 1982 ) was a Sri Lankan theologian and Methodist minister . He was the founder and editor of one of the first theological journals on Buddhist @-@ Christian encounter called Dialogue ( 1961 – 1981 ) , chief translator for the revision of the Old Testament of the Sinhalese Bible published as New Sinhala Bible ( 1973 – 1982 ) , and director of the Ecumenical Institute for Study and Dialogue ( EISD ) in Sri Lanka ( 1962 – 1982 ) . Lynn de Silva is widely regarded as one of the foremost Christian practitioners of Buddhist @-@ Christian dialogue in Sri Lanka , and also as one of the pioneers in this dialogue . 
 Lynn de Silva 's book titled Buddhism : Beliefs and Practices in Sri Lanka ( de Silva 1974 ) was mentioned in two journals in the early 1980s as being unparalleled as an introduction to Buddhism in Sri Lanka . Possibly his most notable contribution to theology is the book titled The Problem of the Self in Buddhism and Christianity ( de Silva 1979 ) , in which he points out an age @-@ old misconception held by Buddhists and Christians that the notion of an immortal soul is a biblical teaching . This book is considered by Schmidt @-@ Leukel to be one of the classics in Buddhist @-@ Christian dialogue , and one which has become well known among those actively involved in this dialogue . The book was also included in John Hick 's Library of Philosophy and Religion series . 
 Lynn de Silva 's father and three of his brothers were Methodist ministers . According to Walter Small , Lynn de Silva and his brothers Fred and Denzil were among the most significant Methodist writers during the period 1931 – 1964 in Sri Lanka . After entering active service in the Methodist ministry in 1946 , de Silva pursued his tertiary education , obtaining qualifications including a Bachelor of Divinity degree , two Master 's degrees , and a Doctor of Theology degree . In addition to serving in the ministry , de Silva participated for twenty years in the <unk> and ecumenical activities of the World Council of Churches , and he was Executive President of the Presidium of the National Council for Religion and Peace in Sri Lanka ( 1979 – 1980 ) . He died shortly after this role while addressing an audience at a conference , having continued to work until the end . In 1999 , the Study Center building of the EISD was dedicated to the memory of Lynn de Silva and Rev. G. B. Jackson , the first director of the EISD . 
 = = Family , education and career = = 
 Lynn Anton de Silva was born to a Methodist family on 16 June 1919 , in the town of <unk> in <unk> , Sri Lanka . His father , John Simon de Silva ( 1868 @-@ 1940 ) , was a Methodist minister , and his mother , Clara de Silva , was a housewife . Lynn de Silva was the second youngest out of one sister : Pearl ( ? <unk> ) , and five brothers : Frederick Stanley ( 1904 @-@ 1980 ) , Roy , George Denzil ( ? <unk> ) , Eric and Hugh . Little is known about de Silva 's childhood , except that he had a Christian upbringing , growing up under the influence of pious parents . Lynn de Silva and three of his brothers — Fred , Denzil , and Roy — grew up to become Methodist ministers . Hugh de Silva died whilst studying to be ordained . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Before being accepted as a candidate for the ministry , de Silva was a teacher from 1938 to 1942 . In 1942 , he trained for the ministry at the United Theological College in Bangalore , and entered active service in the Methodist ministry in 1946 . He served as a minister in stations including <unk> , <unk> , Kandy , <unk> , Galle , <unk> , <unk> and Seeduwa ; he served a total of two years at the first two stations , half a year at Kandy , two years at <unk> , three years at <unk> , and three and half years at Seeduwa . In September 1950 , de Silva was ordained as a Methodist minister . 
 A few months after being ordained , Lynn de Silva married Lakshmi Mendis , on 3 February 1951 , at the <unk> Methodist Church in Colombo . Toward the end of the year , on 16 November 1951 , Lynn and Lakshmi had their first son , Lahan <unk> de Silva . 
 Starting from the 1950s , de Silva pursued his tertiary education . He obtained a Bachelor of Divinity ( B.D. ) degree from Serampore College in India ; a Master of Sacred Theology ( <unk> ) degree from the Union Theological Seminary in the City of New York ; a Diploma in Buddhism , with a specialisation in Theravada Buddhism , from the <unk> University in Sri Lanka ; a Master of Arts ( M.A. ) degree from University of Birmingham in England ; and a Doctor of Theology ( Th.D. ) degree from Senate of Serampore College . He also took a study course in Mahayana Buddhism at the <unk> University in Sri Lanka . During his studies , Lynn and Lakshmi had their second son , <unk> <unk> de Silva , on 16 September 1954 . 
 = = = Career and activities = = = 
 Lynn de Silva 's pioneering work in Buddhist @-@ Christian dialogue , and his work in Bible translation , began in the early 1960s after he had completed his service at Seeduwa . In 1962 , de Silva was appointed to serve the National Christian Council at the Study Centre for Religion and Society in <unk> , which later became the Ecumenical Institute for Study and Dialogue — an important center for Buddhist studies . It was shortly before starting work at the Study Center that Lynn and Lakshmi had their third child , <unk> <unk> de Silva ( later Rodrigo ) , on 3 September 1961 . 
 Whilst managing the Study Center , de Silva was appointed co @-@ translator of the Sinhala Bible Revision Committee in 1964 . The committee consisted of around forty scholars , including Protestant and Roman Catholic clergy , Buddhist monks , and academics . From 1964 to 1973 , the committee focused on translating the Greek version of the New Testament of the Bible into Sinhalese . In the same year in which de Silva started working with the translation committee , Lynn and Lakshmi had their last child and third son , <unk> <unk> de Silva , on 6 March 1964 . 
 Around the age of fifty , in the late 1960s , de Silva experienced a severe heart attack . During his recovery , Lakshmi managed the home , watched over his health , and moderated his appointments . Furthermore , she guided the work at the Study Center by handling most of the administrative duties , organisation of conferences , and publication related tasks . She continued to take these responsibilities even after de Silva 's recovery , so that he could focus on his research , writing and travel . 
 From 1970 to 1971 , de Silva lived in England with Lakshmi while he served the World Churches as William Paton Lecturer at Selly Oak Colleges in Birmingham . While in England , de Silva was also a Visiting Lecturer in Asian Religions at University of Bristol . 
 After his return to Sri Lanka , de Silva continued with Bible translation work , and he was appointed chief translator of the Old Testament into Sinhala in 1973 . Fr . Aloysius <unk> S.J. states the following in relation to de Silva 's new position as chief translator : 
 His proficiency in his own mother @-@ tongue coupled with his familiarity with Greek and Hebrew , as well as a thorough grounding in biblical theology , gave him an eminent position in the team that made the new Sinhala translation of the Bible . It was thanks to his ruthless criticism that many traditional Christian terms in Sinhala ... were eliminated from Biblical and liturgical use . He pointed out as nobody did before , such words when uttered in a Buddhist context , distort the Gospel message whilst doing violence also to the Sinhala language . 
 Lakshmi de Silva also played an important role in the Bible translation work . After three months of training , she was appointed secretary of the translation committee . Her role in the committee involved technical work such as proofreading , and clerical work such as typing and dealing with the press . She possessed sufficient knowledge in Greek and Hebrew to be able to check the accuracy and consistency of the Bible translation , which she continued at a full @-@ time capacity even after she had fallen ill toward the latter part of her life . With the experience she had gained , Lakshmi compiled valuable material for use in future bible translations . Although she possessed the skills necessary to become a scholar in her own right , she was content to take a back seat to support her husband 's work . She died in 1980 , just over a year before the Sinhala Bible translation was completed . 
 Lynn de Silva 's ecumenical responsibilities included membership in the Committees of the World Council of Churches ( WCC ) that focused on the Christian approach to other faiths . In particular , he was a WCC committee member ( Paris 1962 , Geneva 1967 and 1973 ) ; a member of the working group of the Division of World Mission and Evangelism ( Mexico 1963 , Zurich 1966 and <unk> 1969 ) ; and member of the working group on Dialogue with Faiths and Ideologies ( DFI ) since 1969 . Some of his other significant ecumenical activities were visits to Buddhist study centres in Germany , England and the USA , and study tours of Buddhism in Burma , Thailand , Singapore , Hong Kong and Japan . 
 Lynn de Silva 's quest for unity stretched beyond his dialogue with Buddhists . He was among a group of people that led the movement for the " <unk> and <unk> of the Gospel , " and also among those who " advocated and struggled for Church Union in Sri Lanka . " After interracial riots in 1977 between the Sinhalese and Tamils , de Silva became deeply involved in issues of unity and reconciliation between the two cultures . He led a team of Sinhalese leaders for dialogue with the Tamils in Jaffna , and wrote articles on the history of the conflict as well as his analysis of it , in an effort to promote interracial understanding . In 1979 , de Silva was appointed to the Presidium of the National Council for Religion and Peace in Sri Lanka , where he was Executive President for one year . Some of his other non @-@ ecumenical activities included serving as editor of the Methodist Witness and Suba <unk> Sinhalese journals . 
 Lynn de Silva 's interests included writing Sinhalese short stories ( e.g. , <unk> ( de Silva 1952a ) and <unk> <unk> ( de Silva 1952b ) ) and painting . One of his paintings had appeared at an exhibit held at the Lionel Wendt Gallery in Colombo , Sri Lanka . In addition to his proficiency in English and Sinhalese , de Silva was familiar with Greek and Hebrew , and literate in Pali . 
 = = History of Buddhist @-@ Christian relations in Sri Lanka = = 
 Ever since the 16th century , during colonisations of Sri Lanka by the Portuguese , Dutch and English , Christian missionaries had attempted to convert the Buddhist population into Christianity , with the general belief during this period being that there was nothing worthy of study in non @-@ Christian religions . In the early 19th century , this view started to change , into the conviction that every evangelist should have sound knowledge in Buddhism . The most prominent Christian scholars supporting this conviction were Daniel John <unk> , C. H. S. Ward , and Robert Spence Hardy . 
 Despite their belief that knowledge in Buddhism was essential , their attitude toward Buddhism was still negative . Through their polemical writings , they revealed their negative attitudes and beliefs that Buddhism was in error and that Christianity should replace Buddhism . This antagonised the Buddhists , and eventually led to a national Buddhist movement , starting from controversies held at <unk> ( 1865 ) , <unk> ( 1866 ) and Gampola ( 1871 ) . The last and most popular of these controversies was the historic debate <unk> <unk> , held in <unk> ( 1873 ) , between Rev. David de Silva and <unk> <unk> Thera . One of the rules of the debate was that Christians should try to prove that Buddhism is false , and vice versa . 
 Gradually , this negative attitude between Buddhists and Christians started to change . The main influences responsible for the change included ( 1 ) more accurate knowledge of Buddhism than was available in the past ; ( 2 ) interest in and appreciation for Buddhism shown by Western scholars such as Arthur Schopenhauer , whose philosophy was similar to that of the Buddha ; ( 3 ) the book by Edwin Arnold titled The Light of Asia , which created a popular interest in Buddhism ; ( 4 ) the Edinburgh Missionary Conference of 1910 , which set the tone for a new Christian ecumenical movement ; ( 5 ) missionary activities of Buddhists such as <unk> Dharmapala in the West ; and ( 6 ) the Tambaram Missionary Conference in 1938 , where one of the main themes for discussion was Christian message in a non @-@ Christian world . 
 Perhaps the first Methodist missionary to practice this more positive attitude toward Buddhism was Rev. Stanley Bishop , who made his attitude evident in a book titled Gautama or Jesus ( 1907 ) . In the introductory chapter , Bishop states : 
 The apparently wide differences between the teachings of Gautama Buddha and of Jesus Christ have led many to suppose that there is very little in common between the two systems . Some have even been entrapped into the statement that Buddhist doctrine is in direct opposition to Christianity , or vice versa , and that there is no common ground upon which the Buddhist and the Christian may meet for mutual help . It is hard for anyone who is at all conversant with Buddhism to maintain the position so often adopted – that the Christian has nothing to learn and all to teach . Neither statement is based on anything surer than ignorance .... These pages are written in an attempt to show that although the Christian may receive much light and stimulus from the teaching of the Buddha , the Buddhist may receive from Christ what Gautama was never in a position to give . 
 Another significant step toward dialogue between Christians and Buddhists was by Daniel T. Niles , in his book Eternal Life Now ( 1946 ) . The purpose of this book is twofold : ( 1 ) to convey the Christian message in the Buddhist context , by using terms such as <unk> , <unk> , samsara , <unk> , anatta , <unk> , samadhi , <unk> , and <unk> ; and ( 2 ) to convey Buddhist truths within the context of Christianity . 
 With the resurgence of Buddhism after Sri Lankan independence , the conviction grew even stronger for the need to consider Christianity in the light of a culture and heritage that is predominantly Buddhist , which led to an increased need for dialogue between the two religions . Consequently , the Study Center for Religion and Society , which was later renamed to Ecumenical Institute for Study and Dialogue ( EISD ) , was established in Colombo in 1951 . The center was initially managed by Rev. G. B. Jackson , and later directed by Lynn de Silva , whose focus was on Buddhist studies . 
 = = = Ecumenical Institute for Study and Dialogue = = = 
 Lynn de Silva was the director of the Study Center for Religion and Society from 1962 . The center was organised into two divisions : Division of Buddhist Studies , and Division of Frontier Studies . The purpose of the former division was to promote study and research in Buddhism , while the purpose of the latter division was to explore the theological and social implications of the Christian faith in Sri Lanka . The center was involved in successfully organising a number of dialogues , meetings , and seminaries , and it became an internationally recognised center for dialogue with Buddhism and other ecumenical concerns . Furthermore , the center was recognised in the 1970s and 1980s as one of the most active of all similar study centres worldwide . 
 In 1977 , the center was renamed to Ecumenical Institute for Study and Dialogue ( EISD ) , and set up as an autonomous body separate from the control of religious bodies and institutions . Although the primary focus was maintained on Buddhist @-@ Christian studies and dialogue , a third additional division called Division of Studies of other Faiths and Ideologies was established to initiate studies in other religions . In addition to publishing books and papers on dialogue between Christianity and other religions , the EISD published the Dialogue journal on a quarterly basis , which was founded and initially edited by Lynn de Silva . 
 = = = World Council of Churches assembly at Nairobi = = = 
 The assembly at Nairobi in 1975 of the World Council of Churches was an important milestone in the history of inter @-@ religious dialogue . For the first time , representatives from five different faiths were present at the gathering , and the discussions were centred around the topic of inter @-@ religious dialogue . 
 At a session that emphasised " seeking community " with people of other faiths , cultures and ideologies , the presentations were driven by , as the former director of the WCC sub @-@ unit Dialogue with People of Living Faiths and Ideologies ( DFI ) – S. J. Samartha – put it : " fear of losing the ' uniqueness ' of Christ , fear of weakening the sense of ' mission ' , and the persistent fear of ' syncretism ' . " Presentations at this session were marked by conflicting opinions between a group of European theologians and a group of Asian and African theologians , which resulted from the conflicting viewpoints between the theologies practised by the two groups . While the Europeans voiced their fear of inter @-@ religious dialogue , the African and Asian participants called for a more definite endorsement of dialogue . 
 According to Sperber and de Alwis , de Silva was , in this debate , one of the leading voices in the Asian viewpoint . S. J. Samartha notes de Silva 's contribution as " one of the most powerful interventions in the Assembly in support of dialogue , " and Carl <unk> describes it as " the personal witness of an experienced theologian from Sri Lanka . " 
 In his speech to the general assembly at Nairobi , de Silva asserted that his concern was to alleviate the fear voiced by Europeans about dialogue which , he claimed , arises in people who have not lived among people of other faiths . He argued that the spirituality of others can be shared without diminishing one 's loyalty to one 's own faith . Further , he argued that dialogue is a safeguard against syncretism , not a temptation to syncretism , and that Asian Christians should overcome the obstacles that separate one religion from another , and seek to express the Christian faith in the thought @-@ forms and life @-@ forms of Asia . 
 In a publication titled Freedom from Teutonic Captivity ( Dialogue , New Series , Vol . 3 , No. 1 ) , de Silva shared his thoughts on the Nairobi debate , and he presented the significance of the debate as follows : 
 1 . It revealed the strength of the Afro @-@ Asian solidarity in their commitment to dialogue ; 2 @.@ it revealed more clearly than ever before that the Third World Churches will no longer tolerate being dictated to by the Western Churches ; 3 @.@ it revealed their determination to break away from <unk> captivity and discover the Christ who " <unk> and Unites " in the living context of Asian and African religions . 
 = = The Asian theology of Lynn de Silva = = 
 Lynn de Silva gained an interest in Buddhism and its culture at an early stage in his ministry . He believed that the credibility of Christianity depended on its ability to relate to Buddhism , which was the faith of the majority of the Sri Lankan population . His objective was to develop a richer appreciation of the similarities between Buddhism and Christianity , in particular , to communicate the Christian message in a manner that the Sri Lankan culture understood , and to construct a theology that is focused towards the Buddhist cultural environment . To this end , he used Buddhist concepts to communicate Christian beliefs in a language understood from the Buddhist context , and he aimed at extending Christian theology with Buddhist concepts to gain a more thorough understanding of Christianity . 
 To obtain the necessary background in Sri Lankan Buddhist practices , de Silva consulted reputed Buddhist monks and scholars , visited Buddhist places of worship , and consulted written sources on Sri Lankan Buddhism . Although most of his studies were completed in English , he took a special effort to master Sinhalese and the Sri Lankan culture . Furthermore , he became proficient in Pali , the language of the Buddhist scriptures . His findings eventually led to the book titled Buddhism : Beliefs and Practices in Sri Lanka ( de Silva 1974 ) , which is widely cited in religious literature ( e.g. , ) . According to two journals , this book was unparalleled as an introduction to Buddhism in Sri Lanka in the early 1980s , and it was also the most complete , thorough and sensitive book on Buddhism in Sri Lanka , resulting in it generally being recommended by professors and monks as a standard book on Buddhist practices in Sri Lanka . 
 = = = <unk> @-@ Pneuma = = = 
 In 1979 de Silva released a book titled The Problem of the Self in Buddhism and Christianity ( de Silva 1979 ) , which has since been cited extensively ( e.g. , ) and attracted reviews from international journals ( e.g. , ) . This book was also considered by Aloysius Pieris to be de Silva 's most outstanding contribution to Theology , and by Perry Schmidt @-@ Leukel to be one of the classics in Buddhist @-@ Christian dialogue , and one that has become well known among those actively involved in this dialogue . Furthermore , this book was included in John Hick 's Library of Philosophy and Religion series . In this book , de Silva compares the biblical notion of " the soul " ( pneuma ) or " the self , " with the Buddhist doctrine of " no soul " ( anattā ) or " no self . " Contrary to popular belief , de Silva shows that modern Christian scholarship does not support the notion of a soul as an immortal entity separate from the body . He argues that such a misconception arose as a consequence of the translation of the Bible into Greek . Based on his observation , de Silva shows how the Buddhist doctrine of anattā is complementary to the Christian notion of personal identity – pneuma . He distinguishes that , while pneuma focuses on man as a relational entity , anattā focuses on man as an isolated entity . Furthermore , de Silva infers that if we do consider anattā to be real in Buddhism or Christianity , pneuma must also be real for <unk> or the Kingdom of God to be a positive ideal . 
 In his review of de Silva 's book , Joseph Kitagawa argues that de Silva is too narrow in his analysis of the anatta doctrine ; he claims that a better analysis would have been for de Silva to take into consideration the broader implication of the anattā doctrine , and to challenge the very basis of Greek philosophy which had influenced much of Christian theology . Furthermore , Kitagawa argues that de Silva could have entertained the possibility that Theravada Buddhism might look for Ultimate Reality more readily in the Mahayana Buddhist tradition , rather than turning towards Christianity . In Donald Mitchell 's analysis of the same book by de Silva , he states that a better framework for dialogue with Hindu traditions could be allowed if de Silva considered an expanded <unk> circle that includes a more positive notion of soul that is compatible with the biblical understanding of man . By doing so , Mitchell argues , de Silva would be able to " include inherently valuable insights from the Christian tradition on the nature of man . " 
 From the evangelical theologians , Tissa <unk> believed that de Silva needs to put more emphasis on the " glaring disharmony " between Christianity and Buddhism that their differing views on the biblical notion of soul suggest . In relation to de Silva 's treatment of this notion , <unk> states that insights into the biblical picture of human life apart from God cannot be found by a dialogue with Buddhism , but by Christian Asians carefully considering the Scriptures and their own Asian setting . A similar perspective is taken by Lim et al . , who insist that de Silva should communicate the Christian message to the Buddhists , instead of giving Buddhist meanings to Christian concepts and harmonising in a syncretistic way the concepts belonging to the two religions . In a publication that aims at an evangelical approach to religions and cultures , Yung interprets de Silva 's contribution as not so much an able exercise in dialogue , but , rather , a brilliant Christian apologetic , addressed to Theravada Buddhists . 
 = = = Salvation = = = 
 With an <unk> view on religion in the early stages of his career , Lynn de Silva believed that salvation does not only apply to Christians , but also to other religions . He maintained that while Christians can use Christ as their means for salvation , other religions can use their own means for salvation . Later in his life , de Silva developed more of a pluralistic view on religion , believing that neither of the two religions is superior to the other . Perry Schmidt @-@ Leukel notes how this change of view is evident in de Silva 's posthumous article Buddhism and Christianity <unk> , in volume 9 of the Dialogue journal . 
 In her PhD thesis containing a chapter on de Silva 's work , Damayanthi Niles claims that there is a problem with de Silva 's argument in relation to salvation , in that it " reconciles the exclusive Christ @-@ event and the inclusive vision of God 's salvific plan purely on Christian terms , " and that it does not take the " religious visions and commitments of other faiths seriously . " Furthermore , she argues that de Silva 's understanding of salvation , as found in his paper Non @-@ Christian Religions and God 's Plan of Salvation ( de Silva <unk> ) , borrows a religious idea from other religions and uses the idea to make Christianity more palatable to other religions and to Christians sensitive to pluralism . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In the last few years before his death , de Silva focused his study towards the study of human death , namely , the field of <unk> . His quest was motivated mainly by the death of his wife Lakshmi in December 1980 , but also by his curiosity about the meaning of resurrection . With this frame of mind , de Silva studied the beliefs and practices of people with respect to death , such as the phenomenon of mediums , with help from Buddhist exponents of reincarnation . Although traces of his findings can be seen in his last writings , de Silva died before completing his study . His last findings were published posthumously by his friend and colleague , Fr . Aloysius Pieris S.J. , in the paper Buddhism and Christianity <unk> , which appeared in volume 9 of the Dialogue journal . 
 In this paper , de Silva talks about " Life Beyond Death , " and writes that theologians should not ignore data from Parapsychology . He urges that evidence about the paranormal is compelling , and that it is a field that merits careful study . Regarding Purgatory , de Silva states in this paper that the Hindu / Buddhist view , where Ultimate Reality is reached through a process of purification through liberation from self and elevation to stages of spiritual development , is more acceptable than the belief in a single life on earth and an everlasting hell or heaven after death . Furthermore , he insists that the Hindu / Buddhist view conforms to modern theological as well as psychical research . In agreement with the Hindu / Buddhist view , de Silva , in this paper , regards Purgatory to be a place of cleansing , which ultimately makes a person ready for eternal life in Heaven . 
 Tissa de Alwis , in his Th.D. thesis studying the works of Lynn de Silva , argues that " de Silva 's attempt to harmonise Rebirth , Purgatory , and an intermediate state , which is a kind of a continuum in which one passes from a near state of annihilation to the closest union with God , is inconsistent with the radical picture of Biblical anatta " ; furthermore , de Alwis states that de Silva " fails to define <unk> in the final sense and slides into an unrestricted universalism . " 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On 22 May 1982 , while addressing the audience at a conference , Lynn de Silva succumbed to cardiac arrest . The conference was organised by the National Christian Council on the theme " Jesus Christ , Life of the World . " Being the third and final speaker , he completed his discourse on 2 Timothy 3 : 15 – 17 and he stood up again to answer a question from the audience , but he was barely able to formulate a reply and sat back in his chair . He died soon afterward , having continued to work until the end . 
 After Lynn de Silva 's death , the EISD was directed by Rev. Kenneth Fernando , and currently ( as of 2008 ) directed by Marshal Fernando . Fr . Aloysius Pieris S. J. , who had been collaborating with de Silva since 1968 , and who in partnership with de Silva had officially been responsible for editing the New Series of Dialogue , continued to work as editor of the journal after de Silva 's death . A sister @-@ in law of Lynn de Silva , <unk> Mendis , who was trained by de Silva as his secretary after the death of his wife Lakshmi , continues to work ( as of 2008 ) as the Administrative Secretary at the institute . Mrs. Mendis is credited as being the main person responsible for the uninterrupted functioning of the institute after Lynn de Silva 's death . Furthermore , she was considered by Pieris in 2003 to be " a tower of strength [ for the Ecumenical Institute ] for well over 20 years . " 
 In March 1999 , the Study Center building of the EISD was dedicated to the memory of Rev. G. B. Jackson and Lynn de Silva , by Rt. Rev. Andrew Oliver <unk> ( Bishop of <unk> ) . This building is used by a number of institutions and church @-@ related organisations to provide accommodation for participants involved in study programs at the EISD . On 17 November 2009 , an article in the Daily News newspaper promoting World Philosophy Day featured a picture and short description of Lynn de Silva , alongside other Sri Lankan philosophers such as K. N. Jayatilleke and Ananda Coomaraswamy . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Selected books and papers = = = 
 de Silva , Lynn A. ( 1950 ) , Purana <unk> ( Sinhalese ) , Colombo , Sri Lanka : M.D. <unk> 
 de Silva , Lynn A. ( 1961 ) , <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Sinhalese ) , Colombo , Sri Lanka : Committee for Publication of Christian Literature 
 de Silva , Lynn A. ( 1964 ) , Creation , Redemption and <unk> in Buddhist and Christian Thought , Chiang Mai , Thailand : Thailand Theological Seminary 
 de Silva , Lynn A. ( 1968 ) , Reincarnation in Buddhist and Christian Thought , Colombo , Sri Lanka : Christian Literature Society , ASIN <unk> 
 de Silva , Lynn A. ( 1974 ) , Buddhism : Beliefs and Practices in Sri Lanka , Colombo , Sri Lanka : Wesley Press , ASIN <unk> 
 de Silva , Lynn A. ( 1979 ) , The Problem of the Self in Buddhism and Christianity ( Second Ed . ) [ First edition published by the Study Center for Religion and Society , Colombo , 1975 ] , London : Macmillan Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 333 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 de Silva , Lynn A. ( 1980 ) , <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Sinhalese ) , Colombo , Sri Lanka : Ecumenical Institute for Study and Dialogue 
 de Silva , Lynn A. ( 1952a ) , <unk> ( Sinhalese ) , Colombo , Sri Lanka : Liberty Press 
 de Silva , Lynn A. ( 1952b ) , <unk> <unk> ( Sinhalese ) , Colombo , Sri Lanka : Salvation Army Press 
 de Silva , Lynn A. ( <unk> ) , Hayward , Victor E. W. , ed . , " Non @-@ Christian Religions and God 's Plan of Salvation " , Study Encounter , 2 ( WCC ) 3 : 61 – 67 
 = = = Lynn de Silva as subject = = = 
 de Alwis , Tissa Brian ( 1982 ) , " Christian @-@ Buddhist Dialogue in the Writings of Lynn A. de Silva " , Th.D. Thesis ( Andrews University , USA : University <unk> International ) 
 <unk> , Ulrich ( 1992 ) , " Lynn A. de Silva " , Searching through the crisis : Christians , contextual theology and social change in Sri Lanka in the 1970s and 1980s ( Colombo : Center for Society and Religion ) : 137 – 140 
 Balasundaram , Franklyn J. ( 1994 ) . The prophetic voices of Asia . Colombo : Center for Society and <unk> pp. 107 – 115 . 
 <unk> , Petrus ( 1998 ) . Mit Buddha und Christus auf dem Weg ( an anthology of six major writings of Lynn de Silva ) . Freiburg <unk> : Herder . 
 Niles , Damayanthi Mercy <unk> ( 1998 ) , " Religion and the Christian Faith in South Asia : A Critical Enquiry into the Writings of Hendrik Kraemer , Lynn de Silva & M. M. Thomas with Regard to the use of Understandings of Religion in the Theological Task " , PhD Thesis ( University of Chicago , USA : University <unk> International ) : 50 
 = Space opera in Scientology = 
 Church of Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard included space opera narratives in his writings , wherein thetans ( the name given to human souls ) were reincarnated periodically over <unk> of years , retaining memories of prior lives , to which Hubbard attributed complex narratives about life throughout the universe . The most controversial of these myths is the story of Xenu , to whom Hubbard attributed responsibility for many of the world 's problems . 
 Some space opera doctrines of Scientology are only provided by the church to experienced members , who church leaders maintain are the only ones able to correctly understand them . Several former members of the church have exposed these secret documents , leading to lengthy court battles with the church , which failed to keep the secret . Critics of the church have noted that some of the narratives are scientifically impossible , and have thus assailed the church as untrustworthy for teaching them . The space opera teachings have also been satirized in popular culture . Scholars of religion have described the space opera narratives as a creation myth designed to encourage reverence of Hubbard as a supreme messenger . Several academics have drawn attention to the similarity of the space opera myths to themes of the 1950s Cold War culture in which they were constructed . 
 = = Origins = = 
 L. Ron Hubbard created a form of therapy known as Dianetics , which he promoted as a scientific , not religious , teaching . Until the early 1950s , he had a negative view of organized religions , but thereafter discussed spiritual topics . In these teachings , he identified subconscious memories of past events , which he called " engrams " , as causes of human dissatisfaction . By 1950 , he had begun to ponder past lives , believing that they could be recalled ; he attempted to use these recollections to develop a comprehensive narrative of the universe . He founded the Church of Scientology in 1953 , advancing his beliefs as religious doctrines . The church was distinct from Dianetics @-@ based groups but incorporated some of their views . Hubbard saw Dianetics as focused on the physical body but viewed Scientology as a way to address spiritual matters . 
 In Hubbard 's efforts to shift from a psychotherapeutic to a spiritual program , he introduced the concept of thetans : a set of godlike , non @-@ corporeal entities capable of creating and shaping universes , later trapped in the <unk> and confined , by reincarnation , to physical bodies . Hugh Urban of Ohio State University states that these teachings bear similarities to Gnosticism , although he doubts that Hubbard was well versed in Gnostic thought . 
 In the 1950s , as Hubbard 's followers recalled their past lives , he recorded many details of these recollections . With this as his source , he constructed an intricate history of the universe , identified as " space opera " . Although Hubbard believed that he had developed a comprehensive history , Urban cites the isolated and incomplete record of the statements , wherein Hubbard identified a thetan universe , separate from the material universe , created by its inhabitants . The material universe , in Hubbard 's view , began when other universes created by thetans collided , from which they entered the material universe in six invasion groups roughly 60 trillion years ago . Hubbard also described a series of events , called the " incidents " , that divorced the thetans from their self @-@ knowledge , but maintained that thetans could regain their former divinity , and referred to thetans that freed themselves from the material world as " operating thetans " . 
 = = Narratives and civilizations = = 
 Hubbard located his first ' incident ' four quadrillion years ago , in which a thetan encountered ' loud cracks and brightness ' and then observed a cherub and chariot before experiencing total darkness . In Scientology , this is known as " Incident 1 " . Another important event in Scientology 's chronology of the universe , occurred on a space city known as <unk> , the inhabitants of whom brought about an incident when capturing thetans . 
 The most controversial portion of Scientology 's space opera is the myth of Xenu , known as " Incident 2 " , in which Hubbard described a group of 76 planets , orbiting stars visible from Earth , organized in a Galactic Confederacy c . 75 million years ago , ruled by the dictator Xenu . The confederacy having become overpopulated , Xenu sent several billion of his citizens onto DC 8 planes to the planet Teegeeack ( Earth ) , ostensibly for tax audition . There , hydrogen bombs were detonated inside volcanoes , killing the exiles , whose thetans were brainwashed on Hawaii and the Canary Islands , introducing various myths , such as the myth of Jesus , to conceal the thetans ' origins . Eventually , officers of the Galactic Confederacy launched a rebellion against Xenu , which continued six years before capturing him and placing him in an electrified prison in the center of a mountain . Hubbard taught that the thetans brainwashed by Xenu 's forces remained on Earth , where the " body thetans " , attached to human psyches , contribute to human problems ; and that individuals could be freed from these brainwashed thetans and thus attain a type of salvation . 
 Hubbard also taught that , upon the deaths of humans , thetans continued to " implant stations " , including locations on planets near Earth , where their memories were erased and new memories emplaced . On grounds that some " implant stations " were better than others , Hubbard advised his followers to avoid the one on Venus . After passing an implant station , he taught , the thetan returned to Earth , where it was incarnated . Hubbard taught the Christian concept of heaven was based on a physical location on another planet , which he claimed to have visited . He compared its appearance to Busch Gardens in Pasadena , California , and noted it contained effigies of characters from the New Testament . Over time , he recalled , the location fell into disrepair . A town nearby contained an implant station , at which thetans were convinced to return there . 
 Another significant encounter in Hubbard 's narrative occurred when a large group of planets formed the <unk> Confederacy , described as in search of slaves , and called a " decadent " society . The author related that this civilization caused a significant implant upon their encounter with thetans . 
 Hubbard discussed the history of human civilizations on Earth , and the lives of ancient sea monsters and fish people , as well . He also said humans could recover memories of previous lives , such as the experiences of clams and Neanderthals . In his mythos , Atlantis was a completely electronic civilization , whose inhabitants possessed disintegration technology ; in contrast , Earth was invaded by multiple groups around 1200 BCE , including the " fifth invader force from Martian Command " against the " fourth invasion force from Space Command " in battle . 
 On premise that thetans are forced to believe various faulty ideas , the church teaches that their courses allow " theta beings " to be freed from these beliefs and regain their former abilities . Committed Scientologists pursue courses and procedures offered by the church in the hope of gaining freedom and enlightenment , allegedly permitting travel around the solar system . The author referred to the process of a thetan leaving its human body as " exteriorization " , which he said allowed for space travel . Urban notes that this is similar to Aleister Crowley 's teachings of astral projection , although he adds that Hubbard did not use that term . 
 = = Space opera and Scientologists = = 
 A glossary on the Scientology website defined the term " space opera " as a description of actual events : 
 " Space opera has space travel , spaceships , spacemen , intergalactic travel , wars , conflicts , other beings , civilizations and societies , and other planets and galaxies . It is not fiction and concerns actual incidents . " 
 The Scientology publication Have You Lived Before This Life contains some space opera , describing past lives — including some on warlike planets — which were recalled through auditing . In the 1960s , Hubbard introduced a series of questions , known as " security checks " , to verify members ' loyalty . Mikael Rothstein , associate professor of religious history at the University of Copenhagen , sees the Xenu myth as building off of , and the culmination of , these accounts . The Xenu myth was released to Scientologists in the late 1960s , after teachings about thetans and their relationship to the physical body had been disseminated ; its release provided the cause and origin of many of the group 's teachings . Rothstein describes " space opera " as " Hubbard 's introduction of a new reality , and new foundation for everything " . 
 Although Hubbard spoke openly about space opera in the 1950s , Scientology eventually became an esoteric faith : some teachings are withheld until followers reach a certain point in their spiritual development , and the mythological foundation of the courses are unknown to many members . Over a decade of auditing and study — and donations of tens of thousands of dollars — are required for a member to reach the highest echelons of hidden knowledge . Followers below a certain level ( OT III ) of growth are denied access to the church 's cosmological teachings , and they are given different explanations for the church 's teachings . German scholar Gerald <unk> notes that in addition to the esoteric foundations , Scientology cites practical justifications for its rituals , so they can be pursued without knowledge of advanced teachings . The Church of Scientology has attempted to prevent the public release of their esoteric teachings , but , through the internet , their confidential aspects have been widely released . The church considers public discussion of their space opera teachings offensive and has asked academics not to publish their details . Scientologists maintain that the true meaning of these texts is only accessible to those who have progressed through their courses , and that those who read them prematurely risk damage to their spiritual and physical conditions . Church leaders have sometimes outright refused to discuss the subject with journalists . Rothstein observes that the church also has a strong financial motivation to keep members from accessing higher level courses , as devotees are required to make large payments to obtain them . Free Zone Scientologists , however , are sometimes more open about space opera . Some Free Zone Scientologists believe that the Church of Scientology has been hijacked by undercover agents of the <unk> Confederacy . 
 During auditing , Scientology members sometimes recall details of life in space . Rothstein states that this is part of a " mythological paradigm " that members initially partake of through Scientology 's scriptures . He notes , however , that some Scientologists do not believe that there are space opera myths in the group 's teachings , and that others have left the group after learning about the higher @-@ level doctrines . Reitman relates that some members accept the space opera teachings by seeing them as similar to seemingly implausible stories of popular religions or simply remain quiet about their doubts . 
 Rothstein states that space opera is a " part of the total fabric of Scientological thinking and narrative , but not of prime importance . " He argues that these teachings are a " second order belief " , in that they exist to support the group 's core teachings about thetans . Mike Rinder , a former spokesman of the Church of Scientology , stated that extraterrestrial auditing is merely " a small percent " of their canon . 
 = = Criticism and leaking = = 
 Scientology 's space opera teachings were publicized in accounts given by former church members , most notably during court cases . One such case was filed by a former Scientologist , Larry Wollersheim , against the church in 1980 . Five years later , Wollersheim offered confidential Scientology materials , including space opera teachings , to the court as evidence , a move that was vigorously protested by the church 's attorneys . They were unable to prevent disclosure , however , and the documents were published by the Los Angeles Times in November 1985 . This was the first time that some aspects of Scientology 's space opera teachings were offered as public evidence about the church . In the mid @-@ 1990s , Wollersheim published some of the materials on a website , prompting the church to sue his organization , <unk> . The Church attested that the space opera narratives were trade secrets ; this claim was rejected by the court . 
 In 1990 , after being sued for libel by the Church of Scientology , Steven Fishman , a former member turned critic , offered a large amount of the group 's highly confidential teachings in court . The documents , contained in what is known as the Fishman <unk> , included detailed accounts of the church 's space opera narratives . This material was subsequently posted on alt.religion.scientology and a website of Dutch journalist Karin Spaink . The church filed suits against those who posted the documents , claiming copyright violations . Lengthy court battles ensued , but the church was unable to prevent the materials ' dissemination over the internet . 
 Former Scientologists and members of the anti @-@ cult movement often discuss Scientology 's space opera teachings . They generally take a rationalistic approach to the narratives and see them as absurd , or even as drug @-@ fueled delusions , using them as a source of humor . The doctrines have been satirized in popular culture , most notably in the South Park episode " Trapped in the Closet " . The anti @-@ Scientology website Operation Clambake prominently uses space opera doctrines in their criticisms of the church , casting the implausibility of the stories as a clear reason to reject the group . Anti @-@ cult critics of Scientology argue that the content of these teachings demonstrates that Scientology misleads its followers ; many aspects of the narratives , such as the age of the volcanoes that Xenu is said to have used , contradict scientific consensus . The space opera teachings are , in fact , incompatible with scientific consensus on the age of the universe : around 14 billion years . Rothstein notes that scholars of religion usually do not pursue this line of analysis because all myths contain unscientific content ; he notes that cultural conditioning determines whether religious narratives appear reasonable . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Rothstein argues that in the construction of the space opera narratives , Hubbard drew from tropes common to his audience . The concept of a Galactic Confederation , Rothstein observes , was present in other UFO religions of the 1950s ; 
 In contrast to the overpopulation and atomic bombs were often discussed therein . Urban cites UFO encounters and alien invasions as popular themes during the Cold War ; 
 Rothstein draws parallels between Hubbard 's teachings and the beliefs of UFO religions , citing similarities between thetans trapped in human bodies and the walk @-@ in hypothesis of the Ashtar Command . Andreas Grünschloß notes Scientology 's space opera teachings place them in the tradition of the ancient astronaut hypothesis ; he states the group 's teachings about thetans bears similarities to " star seeds " found in UFO religions . 
 Grünschloß speculates the UFO @-@ contact narratives may have played a role in the group 's development of space opera , specifically citing the resemblance of Hubbard 's description of life in Xenu 's time to statements by George Adamski , a UFO contactee of the 1950s . Rothstein notes the group 's teachings about extraterrestrials varies greatly from most of the UFO movement , particularly in Hubbard 's descriptions of demonic characters . 
 Hubbard was a science fiction writer before starting Scientology , and some aspects of the church 's space opera bear similarities to his previous writings . Noting similarities between Hubbard 's fiction writing and creation of religious myths , Rothstein argues ; " perhaps no division between such categories should be made " . Kent posits some of his cosmology , such as the priests and psychiatrists loyal to Xenu , were modeled after events in Hubbard 's life , such as his distaste for Christianity and clashes with the psychiatric establishment . Hubbard theorized science fiction writers sometimes recalled portions of events from past lives and incorporated it into their works , and Urban writes Hubbard 's science fiction writings " contain more than a few seeds of Hubbard 's religious movement , the Church of Scientology " . 
 Rothstein argues Scientology 's space opera identify Xenu as the root of evil and Hubbard as the hero , for having uncovered the mysteries of the universe . Rothstein states the group 's teachings about " salvation " may be a means to encourage reverence of Hubbard . In addition , Rothstein notes the space opera teachings also provide fundamental justifications for some practical aspects of Scientology , including the rejection of psychiatry and the formation of the Sea Org . He sees space opera as similar to most types of mythology , involving superhuman beings in the far distant past . <unk> states the mythology of Scientology differs from many other religions because it focuses on material beings ; but argues the Xenu myth is a religious narrative , although the Church of Scientology has never used this claim in their efforts to be recognized as a religion . 
 = Etal Castle = 
 Etal Castle is a ruined medieval fortification in the village of Etal , Northumberland , England . It was built around 1341 by Robert Manners , and comprised a residential tower , a gatehouse and a corner tower , protected by a curtain wall . The castle was involved both in local feuding and the border wars between England and Scotland . There was a battle between the rival Manners and Heron families outside the walls in 1428 , and in 1513 it was briefly captured by King James IV of Scotland during his invasion of England . 
 The castle passed into the hands of the Crown in 1547 and was garrisoned as part of the border defences , but fell into disrepair and was abandoned as a military fortification after 1603 . In the 18th century it ceased to be used as a domestic dwelling and became ruinous . In the 21st century the castle is owned by the Joicey family , but managed by English Heritage . Open to the public , it is protected under UK law as an ancient monument and a Grade I listed building . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 14th – 15th centuries = = = 
 Etal Castle was built around 1341 by Robert Manners in the village of Etal , after Robert was granted a licence to crenellate by King Edward III in order to defend the location against the Scots . The Manners family had owned the manor since at least 1232 . 
 The earliest part of the castle was its residential tower . This tower may have been built around 1341 on the site of an older , unfortified house owned by the family on the same site , incorporating part of the structure into the new , crenellated tower . Alternatively , the central tower may have been built at some point between the late 13th and early 14th centuries , complete with crenellations , in which case the licence from Edward III served only to allow Manners to extend the perimeter fortifications . By the 1350s , the castle was surrounded by a manor which included mills for corn and fulling , lime kilns and coal mines . 
 Work continued under Robert 's son , John Manners , who inherited the property as a minor in 1354 . In 1355 , when Sir Edward de Letham acquired the wardship of the property , the site was described as a <unk> , a weakly defended location , but by 1368 , when the wardship passed to Joan , his widow , it was considered to be a fully @-@ fledged castle . De Letham was a powerful regional figure , and may have been granted the wardship by Edward III in order to retain his loyalty in the face of military advances by the Scots ; he and his wife allegedly ran down the surrounding estate , resulting in a commission being established to investigate the abuses . 
 John Manners died in 1402 , probably leaving the castle to his son , Robert , who in turn left the property to his own son , another John Manners . John was involved in a long @-@ running feud with the neighbouring Heron family , who owned the neighbouring Ford Castle , and on 20 January 1428 there was a fight between the two sides outside Etal Castle , in which William Heron died . The precise events are unclear and formed the basis of a subsequent lawsuit , but John argued that William had assaulted the castle , during which attack he had died , and that John had no direct involvement in his death . William 's widow blamed John and his eldest son , also called John , for William 's death and demanded compensation . After arbitration by the Church , eventually John agreed to pay for 500 masses for William 's soul , and to give 250 marks to his widow . 
 In 1438 , another of John Manners ' sons , Robert , inherited the castle and the estates . The lands had fallen in value considerably over the preceding years , as a result of the wars with the Scots , the feuding with the Herons and the poverty of the lands . Robert 's son , another Robert Manners , inherited the property in 1464 , and passed the castle onto his son , George , on his death in 1495 . George inherited the title of Baron de Ros from his mother 's side of the family and the castle was abandoned as a residence by the family around the end of the 15th century when the Manners moved closer to the royal court . 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 In the absence of the Manners , Etal Castle was managed by the Collingwood family , who gradually became the castle 's hereditary constables , renting the demesne lands on the estate from the family as well . The castle was heavily involved in the border wars with Scotland , usually holding a garrison of 100 men and forming an important strategic defensive location , one step removed from the fortifications along the border itself . 
 In August 1513 , James IV of Scotland invaded England with a large army ; equipped with modern artillery , he took the border castles of Norham and Wark , and then moved south against Etal Castle . Etal surrendered quickly in the hope of avoiding being pillaged by James ' army , but nonetheless it was at least partially slighted - deliberately damaged to prevent it being used as a defence . 
 After the English victory at the Battle of Flodden the following month , the castle was retaken , garrisoned and used by Lord Dacre to store the captured Scottish artillery , under the guard of Sir Philip Tilney . Lord Dacre went on to use the castle extensively in 1515 and 1516 . In 1541 , a royal commission reported that the castle and its buildings were " in very great decaye " , recommending that the fortification should be repaired . 
 The Crown bought the castle from the Manners in 1547 in exchange for other estates in England , putting Sir John <unk> in charge of the property , along with a garrison of 100 horsemen and 200 foot soldiers . Within two years , however , the <unk> were once more acting as the castle constables , a position they would retain for the rest of the century . The castle remained important to the defence of the border but fell into in poor repair : in 1564 it was described as in poor condition , " scant able to lodge the captain " ; in 1580 another report reiterated similar problems ; and in 1584 commissioners wrote that the poor maintenance over many years had left it need of repairs in the order of £ 200 . 
 = = = 17th – 21st centuries = = = 
 In 1603 James VI of Scotland inherited the kingdom of England , uniting the two thrones , and Etal Castle lost its military value and soon passed into private ownership . In the 18th century it ceased to be used as a residence , and the ruins were painted in watercolour by Thomas Girtin in 1797 , based upon his visit to the castle in the autumn of 1796 . 
 Lord Joicey bought the castle in 1908 , and by 1922 the ruins had been cleaned of ivy and <unk> . The castle was placed into the guardianship of the state in 1975 , and archaeological excavations and surveys were carried out on the site in 1978 , 1983 , 1994 and 1998 . In the 21st century it is managed by English Heritage , and protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building and as an ancient monument . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Etal Castle originally overlooked a bridge over the River Till , and was protected by the steep banks running to the river . The castle forms a rectangular enclosure , approximately 182 by 162 feet ( 55 by 49 m ) , protected by a well @-@ made , but relatively thin , stone curtain wall , mostly 4 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 37 m ) thick . Most of the wall above ground has since been destroyed , with only the foundations remaining . 
 The residential tower in the north @-@ east corner was entered by a forebuilding , unusual in this region , 17 feet 6 inches by 7 feet 10 inches ( 5 @.@ 33 by 2 @.@ 39 m ) in size and protected by a portcullis . Four storeys tall , each floor of the tower was reached by a spiral staircase and comprised two rooms , one large and one small chamber . The tower is built from sandstone ; the forebuilding and uppermost floor are made of a lighter sandstone than the lower floors and may have been added retrospectively . The ground floor is 46 by 32 feet ( 14 @.@ 0 by 9 @.@ 8 m ) and originally had a vaulted ceiling . The upper floors were well @-@ lit with large , transomed windows , complete with window seats ; the first and second floors were probably used by the Manners family and had large fireplaces , with the third floor used by the castle staff . The tower was possibly linked to a neighbouring hall complex by a doorway on the first floor , although any such complex has since been lost . 
 The gatehouse in the south @-@ east corner is 36 feet ( 11 m ) square , and its vaulted passageway was originally protected by a portcullis , gate and a drawbridge . On either side of the passageway were two vaulted guardrooms , 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) long and up to 6 feet 8 inches ( 2 @.@ 03 m ) wide . On the first floor , since lost , there was a large chamber , 22 by 19 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 by 5 @.@ 8 m ) wide , with an ancillary room , 7 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 29 m ) square , and a doorway that led onto some form of forebuilding or platform . The gatehouse has what architectural historian Anthony Emery has described as " flamboyant window tracing " , and the Manners ' coat of arms are carved above the entrance to the gatehouse . 
 The north @-@ west corner tower is 14 feet by 10 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 3 by 3 @.@ 20 m ) across on the inside , with an entrance door on the east side , and originally had a loft floor . It remains uncertain if there was a second corner tower built in the south @-@ east corner of the castle complex ; excavations in 1978 in one possible location failed to find any traces , and a geophysical survey in 1998 proved inconclusive . 
 = Night of the Dead Living = 
 " Night of the Dead Living " is the ninth episode and first season finale of the American police drama television series Homicide : Life on the Street . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 31 , 1993 . In the episode , the homicide squad works the night shift on a summer evening , but no calls come in , leaving the detectives to brood over their personal matters . The teleplay was written by Frank Pugliese based on a story he wrote along with executive producer Tom Fontana . It was directed by Michael Lehmann . 
 " Night of the Dead Living " was originally intended to be the third episode of the season , but NBC programmers moved it to the end of the season because they felt its slow pace and lack of traditional action was inappropriate early in the series , when the show was trying to woo viewers . The broadcast schedule change led to some consistency and time @-@ line errors , which Homicide producers addressed by adding the words " One hot night , last September ... " to the beginning of the episode . Actress N 'Bushe Wright makes a guest appearance as a cleaning woman who loses her baby in the police station . 
 Since ratings for Homicide had gradually declined throughout the season , NBC announced a decision about whether the series would be renewed would depend on the Nielsen ratings of the final four episodes , including " Night of the Dead Living " . Nevertheless , it was seen by 6 @.@ 7 million household viewers , marking one of the lowest <unk> of the season . It received generally positive reviews upon its original broadcast , although some mainstream television audiences were turned off by its minimalist approach . It marked the last original episode of Homicide for nine months until the second season premiere , " Bop Gun " . The episode 's teleplay won a Writers Guild of America Award for Outstanding Achievement in Television Writing for Episodic Drama . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The episode begins with an unknown person lighting a candle in the homicide <unk> . One by one , the detectives arrive for the night shift on an unusually hot September evening . A furious Gee ( Yaphet Kotto ) calls maintenance to complain about the non @-@ working air conditioner and learns it has been shut off for the night . Felton ( Daniel Baldwin ) and Lewis ( Clark Johnson ) try to find out who secretly lights the candle every night ; they blow it out a number of times , but it always ends up lit again without anyone noticing . Munch ( Richard Belzer ) loudly complains about his ex @-@ girlfriend breaking up with him . While the other detectives sweat and complain about the heat , a calm and comfortable Pembleton ( Andre Braugher ) wears a tie and drinks hot tea without sweating . Bayliss ( Kyle Secor ) , who acts uncooperative with his partner Pembleton , says he has found the fingerprints of a man named James Hill who he believes is the murderer in the Adena Watson case . Officer Thormann ( Lee Tergesen ) brings in Hill , who turns out to be a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy ( Kenny Blank ) , much to the amusement of the other detectives . 
 The detectives are shocked at the lack of homicide @-@ related calls they are receiving throughout the night . Bolander ( Ned Beatty ) tries several times throughout the night to call Medical Examiner Blythe ( Wendy Hughes ) and ask her out on a date , but he cannot build up the courage . With encouragement from Howard ( Melissa Leo ) , he finally asks Blythe out and is shocked when she accepts . Crosetti ( Jon Polito ) gets agitated when his daughter calls and wants her boyfriend to sleep over . Gee comforts Crosetti and lets him go home to take care of her . Gee finds a baby boy in a small animal carrier @-@ like cage on the bottom floor of the police department . The baby is very popular with the detectives , who take care of him while they wait for social services to arrive . After the social services worker takes the baby , the cleaning lady Loretta Kenyatta ( N 'Bushe Wright ) hysterically screams somebody kidnapped her baby . The detectives get the baby back for her while Bayliss , infatuated with Loretta , listens to her talk about her life . 
 Howard gets a call from her sister , who has recently found a tumor on her breast . The sister has just learned her husband has been having an affair . Although Howard is initially hesitant to confide in Felton , he eventually surprises her by offering genuine words of comfort . A drunken man dressed as Santa Claus ( Cleve Wall ) is arrested for threatening his wife and a crowd of people with a water pistol . Later , the detectives get a call that Santa Claus has escaped from custody in the department , and he is found after falling through the ceiling and landing on Munch 's desk . Meanwhile , Pembleton and Bayliss discuss the Watson murder scene . Bayliss insists he has already gone over the information repeatedly , but Pembleton tells him he needs to think outside the box and approach it with from the mind @-@ frame of a criminal . Later , Bayliss reexamines the information and realizes the killer brought Watson down a fire escape , offering a new lead in the case . As the new day dawns , Gee has the detectives assemble on the roof so he can spray them with a garden hose to cool them off . 
 The episode ends with Munch revealing to Thormann that he lights the candle each night " for all the ones who have been killed , " while Thormann admits that he re @-@ lit it in Munch 's absence because he knew it meant something to him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Night of the Dead Living " was directed by Michael Lehmann . The teleplay was written by Frank Pugliese based on a story he wrote along with executive director Tom Fontana . It was originally intended to be the third episode of the first season , but NBC programmers felt it was too slow @-@ paced to run so early in the season . The episode takes place entirely within the squad room and lacks the traditional action of a typical police series , which NBC executives felt was not appropriate for an early stage when the series was still trying to woo viewers . The programmers also preferred to end the series on the upbeat note of the final scenes in " Night of the Dead Living " , which includes the detectives happily smiling and laughing on the roof of the police department building as Gee sprays them with a hose to relieve the summer heat . In contrast , the originally @-@ planned season finale , " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " , which Homicide producers felt had a sense of resolving season storylines , was a somber episode which ended with a sad image of Bolander quietly singing to himself at a bar over a beer . 
 Running the episode out of sequence produced several notable continuity errors . For example , Bayliss and Pembleton are still working on the Adena Watson murder , which they had stopped actively investigating in the earlier episode " Three Men and Adena " . Additionally , Officer Thormann is seen onscreen working and healthy , although he was blinded in the earlier episode " Son of a Gun " as a result of a gunshot wound to the head that forced him to leave the police department . These consistency errors were addressed by Homicide producers by adding the words " One hot night , last September ... " to the beginning of the episode , thus establishing the events of the episode took place within the correct timeline of the series , even though the episodes are shown out of order . The Watson case depicted in the episode was based on the real @-@ life 1988 Baltimore slaying of Latonya Kim Wallace , which is chronicled in Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , the 1991 David Simon non @-@ fiction book about a Baltimore Police Department , which was adapted into the Homicide series . 
 During " Night of the Dead Living " , Crosetti displays an overriding concern for the safety and welfare of his daughter Beatrice . After Crosetti was revealed to have killed himself in the third season episode " Crosetti " , many viewers claimed suicide was unrealistic for his character based on his feelings about his daughter displayed in this episode . Beatrice is referred to only by name in " Night of the Dead Living " , and would not appear onscreen until she grieved over her father 's death in " Crosetti " . While discussing the mysterious candle with Lewis in the episode , Felton said he generally solves cases with physical evidence , witnesses and confessions , not by investigating motives . This insight into detective work is consistent with the conclusions Simon drew in Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , and reviewers have praised Homicide for its realism in portraying detective work from this perspective , which is in stark contrast to other typical police dramas . 
 N 'Bushe Wright , best known to this point for playing the student activist Claudia Bishop in the NBC drama series I 'll Fly Away , made a guest appearance in " Night of the Dead Living " as the cleaning woman Loretta Kenyatta . Wright was cast in the role based on her performance in Zebrahead ( 1992 ) , a drama film about an interracial romance . A number of songs play on radios in the squad room throughout " Night of the Dead Living " . Among the music featured in the episode were the songs " Lay Down My Life " by Carole King , " Texas Slide " by Jean @-@ Jacques <unk> , " <unk> ( Can You Believe This City ? ) " by Charles and Eddie , " Little Boy Blues " and " Break Up " by Gary Fitzgerald , and " Tropic Call " by Mitchell <unk> and Andrew Snitzer . 
 = = Ratings = = 
 Ratings for Homicide : Life on the Street gradually declined since the series first premiered . In response , NBC announced to fans that a decision about whether Homicide would be renewed or canceled would depend on how the last four episodes of the season fared in the ratings , including " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " . In its original American broadcast on March 31 , 1993 , the episode was watched by 6 @.@ 7 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research , earning the episode a 7 @.@ 2 rating . It was one of the lowest ratings of the first season of Homicide : Life on the Street , continuing the downward trend of the season . By comparison , the previous episode , " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " , was seen by 7 @.@ 08 million households , while the season premiere , " Gone for Goode " , was watched by more than 18 million households due to a lead @-@ in from Super Bowl XXVII . Homicide ranked low in the Nielsen ratings compared to other shows the week of " Night of the Dead Living " , while its time @-@ slot competitor , the ABC comedy Home Improvement , ranked second for the week with 20 @.@ 39 million household viewers . 
 At the time that the season finale aired , Homicide producers still did not know whether their show would be renewed for a second season . After the season finale , Homicide : Life on the Street went on a hiatus while the network decided whether the series would be renewed . That hiatus ultimately lasted nine months until the premiere of the second season premiere , " Bop Gun " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from commentators , although David P. Kalat , author of Homicide : Life on the Street : The Unofficial Companion , said mainstream television audiences were " somewhat turned off by the minimalist approach " . USA Today writer Matt Roush gave the episode four out of four stars , comparing it to David Mamet 's Glengarry Glen Ross and calling it " minimalist drama ( with ) maximum impact " . Roush wrote , " Imagine a crime show during which no crime occurs . Next to nothing happens . Yet every second counts . " Lon Grahnke of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times also gave it four out of four stars . He wrote , " If Life on the Street winds up dead after tonight 's episode – the victim of low Nielsen ratings – at least the nine superb actors in the squad will know they made a grand exit . " 
 The Salt Lake Tribune writer Harold Schindler praised the episode , particularly the " excellent writing , great acting [ and ] super atmosphere " . Rocky Mountain News writer Dusty Saunders called the series " superb " and described Night of the Dead Living as " fascinating character studies of police officers in the squad room " . In a 2007 article , Star Tribune writer Neal Justin included " Night of the Dead Living " in a list of 10 excellent network television episodes dating back 40 years . Justin said the episode proved it was not acting that made for good television , but rather strong writing and acting . Not all reviews were positive . John J. O 'Connor of The New York Times praised the series in general , but said the various overlapping subplots in " Night of the Dead Living " – like the Santa Claus suspect , the pre @-@ teen murder suspect and the cleaning woman 's missing baby – felt like gratuitous " oddball routines " . O 'Connor added , " Too much cleverness can be grating . " 
 Frank Pugliese and Tom Fontana won a Writers Guild of America award for Outstanding Achievement in Television Writing for Episodic Drama for the " Night of the Dead Living " teleplay . The script competed in that category against another Homicide episode , the first season premiere " Gone for Goode " . The " Night of the Dead Living " teleplay also defeated scripts for the shows I 'll Fly Away , Life Goes On , Picket Fences , TriBeCa and Reasonable Doubts . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The first and second season episodes were included in the four @-@ DVD box @-@ set " Homicide : Life on the Street : The Complete Seasons 1 & 2 " , which was released by A & E Home Video on May 27 , 2003 . 
 = Mine ( Taylor Swift song ) = 
 " Mine " is a song written and performed by American singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift . Produced by Swift along with Nathan Chapman , it was released as the lead single from Swift 's third studio album , Speak Now ( 2010 ) by Big Machine Records . Following an unauthorized internet leak , the song was released on August 4 , 2010 , two weeks earlier than the intended release date . Swift was inspired to write " Mine " after reflecting on one of her unnamed crushes and explained that the song is about her tendency to run from love . The song contains elements of power @-@ pop and its lyrics speak of the ups and downs of a young love . 
 Critical reception for " Mine " was mostly positive . Swift was praised for her ability to show a mature perspective on love , although some critics called the song " formulaic " for resonating her earlier works , notably " Love Story " . The song was commercially successful , as well ; it became a top ten hit in Australia , Canada and Japan . The single was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . In the United States , the song entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number three , making Swift the second female artist in the history of the Hot 100 to debut multiple tracks in the top five during a calendar year after Mariah Carey did so in 1995 . 
 The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Roman White . The video chronicles the romantic relationship between Swift and her love interest played by British actor Toby Hemingway which ends with a marriage . The music video was met with great appraise from contemporary critics who deemed it as " rather sweet , " and " heartwarming . " The song was performed live at numerous venues to promote Speak Now . The music video received the coveted Video of the Year Award in the CMT Music Awards 2011 . 
 The song was featured on an episode of Glee titled " The Break Up " sung by Naya Rivera ( Santana Lopez ) and was also covered by Maroon 5 . 
