 = = Background and release = = 
 In an interview with Rolling Stone , Swift revealed that " Mine " was inspired by an unnamed crush in mind , saying " I was reflecting back on a boy I liked at a certain time . " She also told MTV that the song is about what it would be like if she actually let her guard down . During a live Ustream chat with fans on July 20 , 2010 , Swift explained that the song is about " her tendency to run from love " after seeing many relationships end in goodbye and breakups . She continued , " I think I 've developed this pattern of sort of running away when it comes time to fall in love and to stay in a relationship . The song is sort of about finding the exception to that and finding someone who would make you believe in love and realize that it could work out . " 
 " Mine " was one of the fourteen tracks in Speak Now that was written solely by Swift . She also co @-@ produced the song with Nathan Chapman , who co @-@ produced all of Swift 's studio albums . It was originally planned to be released on August 16 , 2010 , however , after the leak of an unauthorized low @-@ quality mp3 file of the song , Big Machine Records decided to ship the song to country radio and iTunes twelve days earlier than planned on August 4 , 2010 . Swift commented that " a leak is so out of my comfort zone , but it ended up good in the end . It made me so emotional that I started crying . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Mine " is a country @-@ pop song with a length of three minutes and 52 seconds . <unk> @-@ FM described " Mine " as " an uptempo song that 's unmistakably Taylor " with " a big chorus and [ is ] very singable . " Blake Boldt of Engine 145 explained that the song " is a mishmash of ideas bolted together by a terrific power @-@ pop chorus that will stick in your brain after the second or third listen . " The song is set in the time signature of common time , and has a moderate tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is written in the key of G major and Swift 's vocals span one octave , from G3 to D5 . It follows the chord progression of C2 – G5 – D5 – C2 – D5 . Alan Macpherson of The Guardian noted that the song " reprises the joyous rush of Swift 's breakthrough hit , " Love Story " , but depicts love as an adult process rather than a teenage dream . " 
 Dave Heaton of PopMatters described the song as a " song of rebirth " with a " fairly complex " narrative . He summarized the content of the lyrics , writing " [ i ] t starts in the past , at the start of a relationship , and then lets us know it ’ s a flashback . They ’ re sitting on the couch reminiscing . It then jumps back to the beginning and steps us through the couple ’ s years together , but all the while shifting perspective , jumping between their separate memories . " James Dinh of MTV noted that the song " features an uplifting country / pop melody and a big chorus " and it talks about " the wonders of being in a happy relationship after surviving a rocky past . " Priya Elan of The Guardian believed that " Mine " depicts " a stop @-@ start relationship between a normal guy and girl " . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly interpreted the song 's message to be about " young love blossoming — in this specific case , young college love . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received mostly positive reviews by music critics . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone praised Swift 's lyrical craftsmanship , calling the song 's couplets " You made a rebel of a careless man 's careful daughter " as a " brilliant throwaway detail . " Bobby Peacock of Roughstock gave the song three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , lauding its catchy yet melodious hook . However , he pointed out that the song reflects her earlier works in the first two albums and he wished that Swift would " try something a little more out of the ordinary . " Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song four stars out of five , commenting that although the song was " formulaic , " the formula was executed convincingly . Chrissie Dickinson of the Chicago Tribune noted that " Mine " is an epitome of Swift 's classic song @-@ craft , calling it " simple but honest expressions of emotion . " Anthony Benigno of the Daily News said that although the track is reminiscent of Swift 's previous hits , he added , " the song 's origins are grounded more in failed relationships than storybook ones . " 
 Blake Boldt of Engine 145 gave the song a thumbs @-@ down , criticizing Swift 's failure to deliver an expected " big payoff " through the song . He contended that this failure proves that " Swift 's songwriting skills are still raw , still needing that one last polish in order to shine . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Two days after its official release , it was estimated that " Mine " would sell approximately 350 @,@ 000 digital downloads with a possible debut in the top three on the Billboard Hot 100 . On the week ending August 21 , 2010 , the song debuted at number one on the Hot Digital Songs due to 297 @,@ 000 digital downloads , which led to its appearance on the Billboard Hot 100 at number three . This consequently made Swift the second female artist in the history of the Hot 100 to have multiple tracks debut in the top five during a calendar year ( the first being Mariah Carey ) . With 297 @,@ 000 downloads , " Mine " became the eighth @-@ biggest debut sales week ever for a digital song , and the fourth @-@ best of 2010 . The song also debuted at number 26 on the Hot Country Songs on the week ending August 21 , 2010 , where it peaked at number two , having been blocked by Darius Rucker 's " Come Back Song " at number one on the week ending November 13 , 2010 . " Mine " also reached number one on the Adult Contemporary , number seven on the Adult Pop Songs and number 12 on the Pop Songs . At the end of 2010 , " Mine " was ranked at number 46 on the Billboard Hot 100 song of the year . On August 21 , 2014 , the song was certified triple platinum by the RIAA . As of November 2014 , " Mine " has sold 2 @.@ 2 million copies in the United States . 
 " Mine " achieved moderate success outside the United States . The song debuted and peaked at number seven in Canada with 15 @,@ 000 digital downloads sold in the week of August 2 , 2010 . It was certified platinum by Music Canada . On the week ending August 22 , 2010 , the song entered in Australia and peaked at number nine . It was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments exceeding 35 @,@ 000 copies . On the week ending August 9 , 2010 , it debuted at number 30 in New Zealand , and peaked at number 16 the following week after its release . The song debuted and peaked at number 30 on the week ending October 30 , 2010 , on the United Kingdom . In Ireland , it peaked at number 38 and spent a total of two weeks on the chart . In mainland Europe , " Mine " peaked at number 70 on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles Chart , number 48 on Belgium ( Flanders ) and number 48 on Sweden . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and release = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Mine " was co @-@ directed by Swift and Roman White , who had directed Swift 's previous music videos such as " You Belong With Me " and " Fifteen . " White explained that the video features " a lot of time travel , which would explain how those two crazy kids end up with kids of their own in the end . " He further added that " the song has a lot of dark elements , but it also has a lot of happy elements " and he praised Swift for her involvement with the production of the music video . Swift chose her friend Jaclyn Jarrett , the daughter of professional wrestler Jeff Jarrett , to play the younger version of herself in the video . Kyra Angle , the daughter of professional wrestler Kurt Angle , also made an appearance in the music video . The music video was shot in Kennebunkport , Maine , where several scenes took place in Ram Island Farm , Cape Elizabeth , and Christ Church on Dane Street . Christ Church served as the venue for the wedding scene . The video features Swift getting married to a groom , played by British actor Toby Hemingway , who was cast by Swift after watching Feast of Love . She was impressed with Hemingway and thought " it would be perfect to put him in the video . " The video premiered on August 27 , 2010 , on CMT , in a live half @-@ hour special event which included a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes look of the video . Swift returned to Kennebunkport , Maine to share the premiere with local residents , which attracted approximately 800 people , including former President George H. W. Bush , who brought his grandchildren to see Swift . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with Swift entering the coffee shop . As she sits down , she notices that couple , opposite where she is sitting , is arguing , reminding Swift about her parents arguing when she was very young . Then the waiter ( Toby Hemingway ) comes by , just to take Swift 's order , who looks up and she <unk> him , resulting in a romantic relationship between the two . They are seen moving in together and unpacking boxes . After some time of dating , he proposes to her on a rowboat , who then cheerfully accepts it . Later , the two are seen arguing , resulting in Swift running away from the house , crying , just like she did when she was younger as she saw her parents arguing . The boyfriend follows her , and the two reconcile the relationship . They get married and have two sons . In the end , time returns to when Swift was ordering her food at coffee shop Throughout the video , there are some scenes of Swift singing the verses of the song while walking barefoot on a green pasture amongst photos of her and her family . The photos are hanging on a white string in between two large trees . Swift is seen with her hair loose and wearing a white dress with a thin belt around the waist . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video was met with great praise from critics . Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly felt the video was " rather sweet " and " heartwarming " in a sense that the song " seems to have a happy ending . " Leah Collins of the <unk> lamented the video for its typical fairytale element even though the plot ended with a blissful marriage . She concluded her review by writing , " Swift happens to include dirty diapers and recreating scenes from The Notebook . " Tamar Anitai of MTV described the video as " a coming @-@ of @-@ age story " where Swift is depicted to endure " many adult life cycle events and major milestones . " In a different perspective , James Montgomery of MTV compared the music video with Katy Perry 's " Teenage Dream , " writing that although both videos are " essentially about the same thing : the fantasies of young , thoroughly modern women , " the fantasies are " about as different as the women presenting them . " The Improper reviewer also compared the music video with Perry 's " Teenage Dream " and noticed that the two music videos presented two contrasting end points , writing " for Swift , it ’ s a marriage , a home and babies . For Perry , it 's independence and the ability to define your own life . " To date , the video has over 212 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On June 11 , 2010 , Swift performed the song for the first time at a small , intimate concert that aired as a part of CMA Music Festival : Country ’ s Night to Rock on ABC on September 1 , 2010 . She also performed " Mine " and " You Belong With Me " at the 2010 NFL Opening Kickoff event . On October 5 , 2010 , Swift performed the song live on the Italian X Factor . On October 9 , 2010 , she performed an acoustic version of " Mine " during Grand Ole Opry 's 85th birthday celebration . She later performed the song as well as an acoustic cover of Coldplay 's " Viva la Vida " in the BBC Radio 2 studio on October 21 , 2010 . 
 Swift sang " Mine " on several other occasions . On October 24 , 2010 , Swift appeared on The Paul O 'Grady Show , where she performed the song . On October 25 , 2010 , Swift sang " Mine " with two other songs from Speak Now on Speak Now : Taylor Swift Live From New York City , a special programme which was streamed live on <unk> , MTV.com , VH1.com and other MTV Networks websites in Europe , Asia , Australia and Latin America to celebrate the release of her new album . She performed the song on Today show concert on October 26 , 2010 . She was scheduled to give a live performance at JetBlue 's T5 Terminal at New York John F. Kennedy International Airport where she sang " Mine " and several songs from Speak Now . 
 On October 27 , 2010 , she visited Scholastic Corporation headquarters to talk about the importance of reading and writing and perform the song to a 200 grade @-@ schoolers and middle @-@ schoolers at the publisher 's downstairs auditorium . She later performed the song on Live With Regis and Kelly . On November 2 , 2010 , Swift made an appearance on Dancing With the Stars where she performed " Mine " and " White Horse " for the show 's 200th episode . Swift was invited to perform in BBC Radio 1 's first Teen Awards in London , where she sang " Mine , " " Love Story " and " Speak Now . " On November 19 , 2010 , she performed the song on the Japanese program Music Station . " Mine " is the second song on the set for the Speak Now World Tour . On December 8 , 2015 , Swift dedicated a performance of " Mine " to 17 @-@ year old Rachel <unk> , who had died in a car crash before she was able to attend Swift 's Australian leg of her 1989 World Tour in Brisbane . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Mine " – 3 : 49 
 European digital download and UK digital download 1 
 " Mine " – 3 : 49 
 UK digital download 2 
 " Mine " – 3 : 49 
 " Mine " ( Music Video ) – 3 : 55 
 Pop Mix digital download 
 " Mine " ( Pop Mix Version ) – 3 : 50 
 German and UK CD single 
 " Mine " – 3 : 49 
 " Mine " ( US version ) – 3 : 51 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Living for Love = 
 " Living for Love " is a song recorded by American singer Madonna for her thirteenth studio album , Rebel Heart ( 2015 ) . It was written and produced by Madonna , Diplo and Ariel Rechtshaid , with additional writing from MoZella and Toby Gad . Originally intended for a Valentine 's Day 2015 release , the song was rush @-@ released as the lead single from the album on December 20 , 2014 , by Interscope Records , after demos recorded for the album leaked on to the internet . An EDM and house track on which Madonna experimented with different musical genres , " Living for Love " contains instrumentation from percussion and piano by singer Alicia Keys , along with a gospel choir . Madonna composed the track as a break @-@ up song , however she wanted to deviate and make the lyrics as uplifting in nature , talking about counteracting negative thoughts with positive responses . 
 " Living for Love " received positive reviews from critics , who praised its rhythm and lyrics , comparing it to her earlier works . They also considered the song a step @-@ up from her last two lead singles . In the United States , it failed to enter the Billboard Hot 100 , but became Madonna 's 44th number @-@ one hit on the Dance Club Songs chart , tying her with country singer George Strait as the act with most number @-@ one singles on any Billboard chart . Although United Kingdom 's BBC Radio 1 decided not to play it , the song entered the UK Singles Chart at number 26 , becoming Madonna 's 71st top @-@ forty single , extending her record as the female artist with the most top @-@ forty UK singles . " Living for Love " reached the top @-@ twenty of the charts in Finland , Hungary , Israel , Japan and Lebanon , but was commercially unsuccessful in other nations . 
 An accompanying music video was directed by the French duo Julien Choquart and Camille Hirigoyen , together known as J.A.C.K. , and was released in February 2015 . The storyline incorporates mythological elements and shows Madonna as a matador , fighting her dancers dressed like minotaurs in a red circular stage . It had numerous costume changes , and was critically appreciated for its empowering theme and transcending gender roles . Madonna first performed the song in a similar matador theme at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards ; it became the most @-@ watched moment of the night . The second performance was at the 2015 Brit Awards , which made headlines due to the singer 's wardrobe malfunction causing her to be pulled down a flight of stairs that made up part of the stage . Alternate versions of " Living for Love " were performed on Le Grand Journal , The Ellen DeGeneres Show and on Madonna 's 2015 – 16 Rebel Heart Tour . 
 = = Writing and development = = 
 " Living for Love " was written and produced by Madonna , Diplo and Ariel Rechtshaid , with additional writing from MoZella and Toby Gad . Madonna 's collaboration with Diplo was revealed in May 2014 through an image on her Instagram showing her working on her laptop with him . She had invited him for her annual Oscar party , and he could not make it . So he began texting with her about music and sent some music . Madonna replied with a 20 @-@ page text containing her anecdotes on the music . Following this they started collaborating for the album . In an interview with Idolator , Diplo explained that Madonna had asked him to provide his " craziest record " for the album . Together they wrote and recorded seven songs and Diplo added that " Those records are gonna be crazy @-@ sounding . We really pushed the envelope with some of the stuff we were doing ... [ S ] he was up for anything . I love when an artist gives a producer the confidence he needs to work with them , and Madonna was very open @-@ minded to my ideas ... she was down from day one . " According to Diplo , " Living for Love " had almost 20 versions ranging from a piano ballad to an EDM composition , ultimately Madonna and Diplo compromising on a middle level . Rechtshaid and British singer MNEK also joined for writing sessions with them , improving the verse of the song . Madonna denied that there were 20 versions of the song , admitting it " might be a little too high " , and commented on how she wanted it to sound : 
 We knew we wanted to make a dance record . But you know , there 's so many different levels of dance music and even different categories of house music . So , it was really like , what 's the bass line gonna sound like ? Is it gonna be really stripped down and sparse , or is it going to be loaded up ? Is it gonna be Chicago house ? Is it gonna be U.K. house ? It 's like , all over the place . Is it gonna be a little bit of one vocal line ? Is it gonna be a whole choir singing ? So we were experimenting and trying out different things . They all sounded good , but at the end of the day , we wanted it to sound timeless , also . Not just something of the moment . 
 In October 2014 , American singer Alicia Keys confirmed that she worked on Madonna 's upcoming studio album , saying " It was good . I was in here doing a meeting or something and [ Madonna ] was working with Diplo . They were like , ' Oh , maybe you can play some piano on this thing ' . And I was like , ' Alright . I 'll try . If you hate it , you can take it off ' . It was just like that , casual and cool . " Annie from the London Community Gospel Choir provided the female background vocals throughout the song . Madonna also mentioned that new versions would be " coming out , but just not yet " . Describing the song as " one of [ Diplo 's ] more mellow productions " , Madonna composed " Living for Love " as a break @-@ up song , commenting , " lots of people write about being in love and being happy or they write about having a broken heart and being inconsolable . But nobody writes about having a broken heart and being hopeful and triumphant afterwards . So I thought , how can I do this ? I didn 't want to share the sentiment of being a victim . This scenario devastated me , but it just made me stronger " . She complemented saying that " Living for Love " was " kind of like the old me and the new me all mixed in together " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The demo version of " Living for Love " leaked onto the Internet in December 2014 , alongside the other twelve demo recordings for Madonna 's then untitled thirteenth studio album . On December 20 , 2014 , the album 's title was confirmed to be Rebel Heart and became available for pre @-@ order on iTunes along with six tracks , including " Living for Love " as the album 's lead single . Madonna stated that the songs were meant to be " an early Christmas gift " . Originally , " Living for Love " was intended to be released on Valentine 's Day 2015 , with the rest of the record slated for a spring release . However , due to the leak of materials , the release date had to be pushed up . She went on to say she would prefer her fans hear the completed versions of some of the songs instead of the incomplete tracks that were circulating . 
 Gordon Murray from Billboard reported that two versions of the song were sent to US club DJs on December 21 , 2014 : the original version and the instrumental . Interscope sent the song as a " soft sell " on December 22 to radio outlets , and it failed to receive airplay at the Top 40 formats , garnering a total of 10 plays due to the rushed out release and being on a Christmas week , when most programmers were on vacation . The label decided to re @-@ service it to radio after 2015 started , with an official adds date to Top 40 / Mainstream radio stations on February 10 . " Living for Love " was commercially released on February 25 in the United Kingdom . A number of remixes were released for streaming , namely those by Djemba Djemba , Offer Nissim , Mike Rizzo and Drew G. 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Living for Love " is an EDM and house song which starts as Madonna sings over a " regal " piano line which is eventually joined by percussion . The song is set in the simple time signature of 4 / 4 , with a tempo of 123 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of F minor , with Madonna 's vocals spanning the range from E ♭ 3 to C5 . " Living for Love " has a I – IV – V – I sequence as its chord progression , with the rhythm flowing as Fm – Cm – D ♭ – A ♭ – E ♭ / A ♭ . The song was engineered by Demacio " Demo " Castellon and Nick Rowe , while the former also mixed it . Angie Teo did the additional recording and mixing of the track , with Ann Mincieli . Along with The London Community Gospel Choir , MNEK and Santell also provided backing vocals on the track , while Keys and Gad acted as additional musicians . Dean Piper from The Daily Telegraph explained that the song has " some classic Madonna traits : religious references , a gospel choir , 1990s piano beats and a whirling bass " , and was compared to her 1989 singles , " Like a Prayer " and " Express Yourself " , by Jason Lipshutz from Billboard . Keys ' piano tracks are added alongside the electronic music , up to the gospel chorus , and Madonna counteracting negative thoughts with positive lyrics . 
 Unlike Madonna 's previous two lead singles , " 4 Minutes " ( 2008 ) and " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " ( 2012 ) , " Living for Love " puts the emphasis on the lyrics and vocals , with the lines on the bridge going like " Took me to heaven , let me fall down / Now that it 's over , I 'm gonna carry on " and a " throbbing drop " in the middle . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine described the song as <unk> meets " Like a Prayer " , and noted that there were many changes from the leaked demo version : the throwback house music being replaced by an 808 pulse sound and Keys ' piano , as well as handclaps and gospel riffing being removed towards the end of the song . For Jon Lisi from PopMatters , " Living for Love " fitted with contemporary pop music releases and the DIY ethic they displayed , starting from Taylor Swift 's " Shake It Off " , to Ariana Grande 's " Break Free " and Katy Perry 's " Roar " . The survivor anthem @-@ like nature of the track was evocative of Madonna 's survival in her music career . With NRJ the singer herself explained the meaning behind the lyrics : " It 's a song having your heart broken but it 's about saying you know what I 'm going to my life goes on , I will carry on , I won 't stop believing in love , I 'll pick up my crown , put it back on my head and I will walk through life proudly believing that love , true love does exist . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Following its release , " Living for Love " earned critical praise . Lipshutz was appreciative of the song , commending Madonna 's " confident " vocal delivery . He said that the song sounded " like a giddy combination of Madonna 's past and present , and represents an encouraging sign for a 2015 project that was unexpectedly thrown into jeopardy at the end of 2014 . " Stern compared the song to Madonna 's 1992 single " Deeper and Deeper " , noting that unlike the UK dance acts and the teen @-@ pop groups paying homage to 1990s house music , Madonna had lived through that era . Calling the song a " total beast of a collaborative effort " , and ended his review saying " Fuck singing about Tanqueray in the club : This is the Madonna we 've always known and lived to love , with flares of the future and nostalgic nods to the past . " Time 's Jamieson Cox observed that " Living for Love " was tailor @-@ made for radio , with the increase in popularity of house music and the crossover success of British house musicians . Giving the song a rating of three out of five stars , Hardeep Phull from New York Post complimented it for being an " euphoric , gospel @-@ tinged dance track that will rejuvenate even the most beaten @-@ down of souls thanks to its ' love 's gonna lift me up ' refrain . " Phull expected the song to be a hit on the dance and pop charts . 
 Writing for USA Today , Brian Mansfield complimented the optimistic and " self @-@ assured " nature of the song , adding that " it 's the sort of determined dance anthem Madonna does so well " . The Dallas Morning News ' Hunter Hauk described the song as a " solid melding " of different club musics and appreciated the dance break , and Madonna 's singing attitude , calling it " less prickly or defiant than we see on Instagram these days " . Jeff Miers from The Buffalo News compared " Living for Love " to earlier club anthems , songs which had become commercial success for Madonna . Writing for i @-@ D , Nick Levine described the song as a " perfectly @-@ pitched comeback single : rather than returning with a cheap EDM banger ... When she sings ' I picked up my crown , put it back on my head ' , it feels like a statement of intent . " Lewis Corner from Digital Spy listed it as one of the top ten tracks of the week , adding that the composition made it " an euphoric first cut from ... Rebel Heart " . Jed Gottlieb from Boston Herald described the track 's beats as contemporary , while found the chorus and the hooks to be reminiscent of " old school " Top 40 songs . " True Blue fans will hear a joy and nostalgia in [ the song ] " . Jon Pareles from The New York Times commended " Living for Love " ' s ability to transform " the breakup emotions into an uplifting redemption " . He called it " one of Madonna 's best singles in a decade " . Writing for PopMatters , Lisi found the track to be Madonna 's " most joyous " release since " Express Yourself " . 
 Daryl Deino from The Inquisitr praised the song for being " epic and uplifting " , believing that it would open up Madonna 's music to a new generation . Jim Farber of New York Daily News found the song to be a return to form for the singer , describing it as " prime mix of club and pop music , with an old @-@ school R & B piano , soaring backup vocals and a melody that keeps lifting you higher . " Zel McCarthy from Vice believed that the song reflected the personalities of its songwriters , feeling that the production and the personable lyrics made it a success . Bernard Zuel from The Sydney Morning Herald believed that " Living for Love " embodied every aspect of Madonna 's life , a mixture of her past , present and future . This view was shared by Lindsay Zoladz from New York , who had criticized the other five songs from the album , but called " Living for Love " as " an unexpectedly perfect balance between the ghosts of Madge past and future " . Dean Piper from The Daily Telegraph called it the " most original " among the songs released , however he was critical of the lyrics saying that they failed " to penetrate your soul " . Cinquemani complemented the changes in the song from the demo version , calling it Madonna 's " most rousing lead single in years " , but lamented the nasal vocals of the singer . Michael Jose Gonzalez from Danish music magazine , Gaffa , found the song to be melodic but reminiscent of the music from Madonna 's tenth studio album , Confessions on a Dance Floor ( 2005 ) . 
 At their year end ranking of the Top 25 Singles of 2015 , Slant Magazine listed " Living for Love " at number 25 , saying " Overworked and overthought , for sure , but the song 's essence remains in tact , and if Madonna 's message of life after love didn 't register as a commercial comeback on the scale of , say , Cher 's ' Believe ' , it remains a pop @-@ gospel sequel of the highest order . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Following the pre @-@ order release of Rebel Heart , " Living for Love " entered the Dance / Electronic Songs chart at number 16 and the Dance / Electronic Digital Songs chart at numbers 12 , with 10 @,@ 000 digital downloads . The next week , " Living for Love " moved to number 13 on the Dance / Electronic Songs chart , with further sales of 11 @,@ 000 copies , and has since peaked at number 9 , thereby becoming the singer 's first top @-@ ten single on the chart . It achieved 587 @,@ 000 streams after the music video premiere and further sales of 17 @,@ 000 copies , becoming the greatest gainer on the Dance / Electronic Digital Songs chart . In January 2015 , " Living for Love " debuted at number 32 on the Dance Club Songs chart , making it the singer 's first appearance since her previous single " Turn Up the Radio " . It then climbed to number 18 and the following week to number 11 as the greatest gainer on the chart for both weeks . 
 For the issue dated March 7 , 2015 , " Living for Love " became Madonna 's 44th number @-@ one song on the chart . She equaled George Strait — who collected 44 chart @-@ toppers on the Hot Country Songs — as the act with most number @-@ one singles on any Billboard chart . " Living for Love " did not enter the Billboard Hot 100 but debuted at number 8 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . It became Madonna 's 29th entry in the Pop Songs chart , debuting at number 36 on February 24 , 2015 . Billboard reported that the debut was due to an increased radio spins from iHeartMedia stations . It also debuted at number 35 on Dance / Mix Show Airplay chart . Madonna became the oldest female artist to enter the Pop Songs chart , since Carly Simon , who reached number 20 as the featured artist on Janet Jackson 's 2002 single , " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " . 
 Across Europe , the song debuted at number 50 in France , number 12 in Hungary and number 21 in Spain , alongside the other tracks from Rebel Heart . In Japan , the song debuted at number 80 on the Japan Hot 100 for the week ending January 12 , 2015 , climbing to number 26 the following week . In Spain it debuted at number 21 on the Spanish Singles Chart ; after the release of the remixes , they charted separately on the albums chart at number 93 . 
 In the United Kingdom , BBC Radio 1 decided not to play Madonna 's single as their playlist committee did not think the record was good enough for heavy airplay and because their head of music , George <unk> , thought her fans were older than their target demographic . " The vast majority of people who like Madonna , who like her music now , are over 30 and frankly , we 've moved on from Madonna , " he said . The station was criticized by Madonna herself for promoting age discrimination , and in tweets from musicians Diplo , Madonna 's collaborator on the record , and Boy George . Representatives from Radio 1 said that the songs chosen for their playlist were not chosen on the basis of an artist 's age . " Living for Love " was instead added to the playlist of BBC Radio 2 , which caters to audiences aged 35 and more . BBC News explained that the BBC Trust had asked Radio 1 to cater to younger audiences . According to the Official Charts Company , the song moved towards the top @-@ twenty of the UK Singles Chart with two days of available sales as reported in their mid @-@ week chart report . It ultimately debuted at number 26 on the chart with sales of 17 @,@ 936 copies , becoming Madonna 's 71st top @-@ forty single , extending her record as the female artist with the most top @-@ forty UK singles . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In December 2014 , Madonna 's manager Guy Oseary announced that a music video was scheduled to be released in early February 2015 . The video was directed by the French duo Julien Choquart and Camille Hirigoyen , together known as J.A.C.K. It was edited by Danny B. Tull , styled by B. Akerlund and choreographed by Megan Lawson . According to Madonna , she wanted to have a cinematic and storytelling aspect with the video adding that : 
 The thing about that song , it 's such a passionate song . I had to present it in a passionate way , and I used mythology to tell the story , with the story of the Minotaur , the matador , fighting for love . And the color red . And flowers . Horns , and death . And naked men . You know , the important things in life . I don 't want to make every video the same . But I did love the richness of that video . To me it felt like a painting that came to life . That 's what I was trying to do . 
 Verena Dietzel , creator of the fashion label V @-@ Couture , who specializes in different kinds of corsets , were enlisted to create clothing for the video , as well as a Grammy Awards performance . Dietzel explained that she had initially thought Madonna 's e @-@ mail as spam , however after confirmation from the singer 's assistant stylist , B. Åkerlund , she started working on the designs . Within 48 hours she sewed a new corset , as well as created two new ones , by basing them on the only information provided to her , that of Madonna 's bra @-@ size . She had to search on Google for deducing the rest of the singer 's proportions . In total four different corsets were shipped off to Madonna . Lebanese designer Shady <unk> was also contacted by Åkerlund , who visited the designer 's press conference in Los Angeles , and asked him to send his ideas and sketches for the video . After the deal was finalized , he created a custom made matador jacket which Madonna wore in the video . Another dress was a bodysuit , featuring a nude satin @-@ stretch corset covered in three different types of lace , a black chiffon silk top and a satin tie . There was also a red velvet bolero jacket . 
 The corset was described by <unk> <unk> from Style.com as " masculine @-@ feminine mix ... it 's the sort of tight , sexy , gender @-@ bending thing we 've come to expect from [ Madonna ] " . The singer and her team had sent matador references to <unk> , who wanted to give a feminine touch to the designs , utilizing numerous laces and nude color palette to highlight the singer 's body curves . Amber <unk> from Style.com explained that Madonna 's make @-@ up in the video was inspired by recent runway shows of Christian Dior and Givenchy . The singer had applied parallel eye liner with her bolero jacket look , as well as sported bobby pin and Princess Leia like buns on her hair . Designer Riccardo Tisci approved of the Minotaur costumes used by the dancers , which used crystal masks designed by Marianna <unk> and leather horns . He also gave his approval of the gemstones applied on the singer 's face for one sequence in the video . 
 = = = Release and synopsis = = = 
 The music video was released on picture messaging application Snapchat on February 5 , 2015 , where it was available for viewing on the application 's " Snap Channel " platform . Madonna became the first artist to premiere her video on Snapchat . The video was deleted after 24 hours , in lieu of Snapchat 's self @-@ destructing ethos , and was later uploaded on Madonna 's Vevo channel . Sara <unk> from Marketing Week commended the decision , believing it to be " a major move for Snapchat and the decision by Madonna 's label could pave the way for other label giants to host content on the app as well as other branded content . " 
 The video begins with a focus light on Madonna 's hand which gradually reveals a circular red stage surrounded by red curtains . Madonna , wearing the red velvet jacket moves around the stage throwing off a cape and does choreographed dance moves . Interspersed are visuals of a male dancer as a Minotaur wearing the horned mask , dancing on the ground and Madonna in the matador dress . She entices the male dancer with the cape as the chorus ends . A flock of male dancers wearing similar horned mask appear and surround Madonna around the stage . 
 Throughout the second verse Madonna chase the dancers and defeat them in mock fight . One of them pick her up and together they perform a second choreography atop the stage . Madonna is also shown in the bejeweled corset flapping around a red cape . For the final verses and chorus , Madonna in the nude corset dances among the Minotaurs , and ultimately slays them all . The last visual shows the singer standing among the slain bodies of the Minotaurs , throwing off the cape while holding a pair of horns in her left hand . Red roses fall around her and sound of applause is heard as a quote by German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche flashes on screen , " Man is the cruelest animal . At tragedies , bullfights and crucifixions he has felt best on earth ; and when he invented hell for himself that was his very heaven . " 
 = = = Reception and analysis = = = 
 Hugh McIntyre from Forbes commended Madonna 's decision to partner with Snapchat for the video release , because he considered it to be a profit for both parties . For Madonna it would enable her to connect with the younger audience , while for Snapchat , release of a new Madonna video would lead to an older demographic to download the app . Matthew Jacobs from The Huffington Post believed that the music video and its imagery matched with the uplifting nature of the song . He compared parts of the video with " Express Yourself " and " Hung Up " , saying that Madonna emerging victorious among a flock of men dressed as bulls , evoked the leaks of Rebel Heart 's songs . Recalling the self @-@ referential undertones in the videos for " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " and " Girl Gone Wild " , Jacobs explained that " Madonna presents herself as queen of the big top without relying on allusions to her own résumé to prove she is the master of the postmodern pop scene ... This is the Madonna video we 've waited a decade for . " Houston Chronicle 's Joey Guerra gave another positive review , saying " we haven 't already learned time and again – never underestimate Madonna " and describing the video as a " nice fit " for the song . A writer for The Guardian described the video as a " straightforward performance clip " and believed that the simplistic nature of the video suggested that it was designed for being viewed on mobile devices . 
 Louis Virtel from HitFix called " Living for Love " as Madonna 's " best video since ' Hung Up ' " . He found references to older Madonna videos , like " Express Yourself " in the " unusual choreography with all of its masculine posturing and grappling " , " Take a Bow " with its bullfighting theme and playing on a familiar imagery from her career , and " Open Your Heart " during the sequences where Madonna fends off the Minotaur dancers . Virtel also commended the choreography , costumes , Madonna 's looks and the cinematography of the video . Along with the " Take a Bow " reference , Billboard 's Joe Lynch called the video as incredible and " lush , arresting " but criticized for the misspelling of Nietzsche at the end . " Rita <unk> from InStyle said that the video was " just as good as you could have expected ... And while we were completely transfixed by her killer moves and insane physique , we were equally in awe of her outfits . " 
 Nathan Smith from Out found the video to be transcending gender roles , with Madonna assuming the role of a matador , a title generally reserved for a man . Also he noted that Madonna demonstrated her " toned and lean physique , demonstrating her unique and unparalleled mastery of the male species " . For Alyssa <unk> from E ! , Madonna " transforms into a fierce and sexy matador in the clip " and dances " her butt off with some seriously acrobatic moves " . Jim Farber from New York Daily News found a contrast with the song 's title and the " battlefield " like portrayal in the video , saying " While it 's sonically exuberant , the song 's lyrics reflect the aftermath of a hard @-@ won battle . " Rachel Pilcher from Yahoo ! found the video to be strange , but believed that it was to be expected from Madonna . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna first performed " Living for Love " at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards on February 8 , 2015 . She confirmed her appearance at the ceremony , by uploading an image of the Grammy trophy wrapped with black strings like the Internet memes for the cover art of Rebel Heart . The singer was dressed in a one @-@ piece outfit in matador red , surrounded by male dancers as Minotaurs similar to the song 's music video . It was developed by designer Riccardo Tisci for Givenchy and styled by Akerlund . The performance was described as a " beautiful story for why the matadors fight the bulls and that also reflects life " . After being introduced by singers Miley Cyrus and Nicki Minaj , the performance began with images of Madonna on a kabuki screen talking about starting a revolution . She emerged from the screen and started singing , surrounded by the dancers . Near the end , the singer encouraged the audience to sing @-@ along with her , finally being pulled atop the stage on a wire . Dina <unk> from Forbes reported that Madonna 's performance was the most @-@ watched moment of the night . Brittany Spanos from Rolling Stone described it as " the legendary singer was out for blood with her first live performance [ of the song ] " . Shauna Murphy from MTV News observed Illuminati symbolism with the performance , including rituals , organized religion homage and a metaphor for death . MuuMuse 's Bradley Stern listed it as the best performance of the Grammys , saying that " this is how a major pop performance should really look " . Her effort to sing live without Auto @-@ Tune during the choreographed performance was also heavily praised . 
 Madonna also performed the song at the 2015 Brit Awards , on February 25 . However , in the early stages of the performance , a wardrobe malfunction caused her to be pulled down a flight of stairs that made up part of the stage . It was later revealed that since her cape was tied tightly , when her dancers attempted to remove it from her neck , she fell down to the floor . However Madonna then continued the performance as planned . She later took to Instagram to confirm that she was well , posting " Thanks for the good wishes ! I 'm fine " . Richard Smirke from Billboard praised the performance and Madonna 's recovery , saying that " [ the singer ] didn 't let the fall affect her performance and quickly recovered to deliver a slickly choreographed routine that mirrored the matador theme of her recent Grammy Awards performance . " Madonna explained on The Jonathan Ross Show that she was told to start walking towards the stage further than originally planned . Hence her team thought that the cape could have slid off and tied it tightly round her neck . The singer had two choices when the cape did not come undone , " I could either be strangled or fall , and I chose to fall " . Madonna endured a whiplash and added that she " smacked the back of my head . And I had a man standing over me with a flashlight until about 3 am to make sure I was <unk> mentis " . The singer jokingly added that she would not use any cape for further performances and attributed her prompt recovery to having good core strength and her daily exercise routine . The accident led to an increase in viewership of the awards show . According to the British Phonographic Industry , the event resulted a 95 % increase in Twitter activity about the show compared with the previous year , with an exchange of 7 @.@ 8 million tweets , while 6 @.@ 8 million viewers tuned in to watch the performance . The singer 's fall was voted the most shocking " Celebrity Moment of 2015 " by UK 's Channel 5 . 
 On February 26 , 2015 , Madonna appeared on The Jonathan Ross Show in England , which aired on March 14 . She performed an edited version of " Living for Love " wearing a black matador dress . On March 2 , Madonna appeared on France 's Le Grand Journal show , where an edited version of " Living for Love " was also performed . Lionel Nicaise from MCM observed that Madonna did not wear any cape during the performance . Writing for Idolator , Bradley Stern noted that the performance used an " energetic remix " of the song , with MNEK 's vocals in the background . There was also voguing and during one segment Madonna climbed atop a piano to sing the song . Two weeks later , similar performance aired on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in the US , where she was joined by DeGeneres onstage at the end of the performance . Madonna added the song on the third section of the set list of her 2015 – 16 Rebel Heart Tour . The singer had enlisted a Spanish tailoring company from Zaragoza for creating two bullfighter <unk> de <unk> costume , along with a cape and matador related costumes for her backing dancers . Set to a remix of the song , the performance had the same choreography as that of the Brit Awards . Jordan Zivitz of Montreal Gazette said that the performance was one of " the evening ’ s minor victories " calling it a " sulphur @-@ scented campiness " , although he saw a smooth transition from " Living for Love " to the next section of the tour . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 MNEK appears courtesy of Virgin EMI Records , a division of Universal Music Operations . 
 Alicia Keys appears courtesy of RCA Records 
 Webo Girl Publishing , Inc . ( ASCAP ) / Songs Music Publishing , LLC , " I Like Turtles " Music and Songs of SMP ( ASCAP ) / EMI April Music , Inc . , MoZella Mo Music ( ASCAP ) / Atlas Music Publishing and Gadfly Songs ( ASCAP ) / Lion of God Publishing Co . ( ASCAP ) , Kobalt Songs Music Publishing 
 Personnel 
 Personnel adapted from Madonna official website . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Tracy Flick = 
 Tracy Enid Flick is a fictional character , originating in the 1998 novel Election by Tom Perrotta and portrayed by Reese Witherspoon in the 1999 film adaptation of the same title . Tracy is a smart , ambitious high school student , whose quest to win a school election is nearly derailed by her own ruthlessness and desperation . In both the novel and the film , she is the main antagonist . 
 Witherspoon 's performance as Tracy was widely acclaimed by critics and garnered her multiple awards and nominations , including a Golden Globe nod . The character has since become an icon , as her driven , focused personality and unpopularity among her peers have led to comparisons with many real @-@ life public figures , particularly female politicians such as Hillary Clinton . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Tracy is an overachieving high school junior , preparing for an easy election to the office of student body president after three years of extracurricular toil . Her assumptions of an unopposed victory are dashed when two unexpected challengers enter the race : friendly and popular athlete Paul Metzler ( Chris Klein ) , sidelined from the football team by a skiing accident , and Paul 's younger adopted sister Tammy ( Jessica Campbell ) , a moody , sarcastic rebel . Paul has been coaxed into running by election supervisor Jim McAllister ( Matthew Broderick ) , a well @-@ liked civics teacher nursing a deep resentment towards Tracy since her affair with Jim 's best friend and fellow teacher cost the man his job and family . 
 As the race continues and Paul 's effortless popularity continues to jeopardize Tracy 's once @-@ sure victory , Tracy 's frustration drives her to commit an act of sabotage against Paul 's campaign by ripping down his posters right before election day . Despite Jim McAllister 's conviction of her guilt , she escapes punishment again through a stroke of pure luck when Tammy claims responsibility for the crime and is subsequently expelled , which was her objective in " confessing . " Tracy wins the election and goes on to attend Georgetown University , her dream school , though she had difficulty fitting in and was disenchanted with her schoolmates . She is later seen working closely alongside a congressman , named Mike Geiger , a Republican from Nebraska , in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Reception = = 
 Roger Ebert began his review of Election by noting , " I remember students like Tracy Flick , the know @-@ it @-@ all who always has her hand in the air , while the teacher desperately looks for someone else to call on . In fact , I was a student like Tracy Flick . " He goes on to compare Tracy to Elizabeth Dole : " a person who always seems to be presenting you with a logical puzzle for which she is the answer ... She is always perfectly dressed and groomed , and is usually able to conceal her hot temper behind a facade of maddening cheerfulness . But she is ruthless . She reminds me of a saying attributed to David Merrick : ' It is not enough for me to win . My enemies must lose . ' " 
 A 2006 profile of the character in The Washington Post called her " wonderfully monstrous . " " In [ director Alexander Payne ] ' s study of her pathologies , Tracy 's will is so fiery and her perfection so total that no one dares stand against her in her goal . " The Stranger wrote , " Like Humbert Humbert , the Reverend Harry Powell , and Baby Jane Hudson before her , Tracy Flick is a real and lasting contribution to the cinematic understanding of the villain , and the feather in Witherspoon 's cap . " 
 = = Witherspoon 's portrayal = = 
 In the late 1990s , following her starring roles in the 1996 dramas Fear and Freeway , Witherspoon found herself in an unexpected career slump that led her towards a change in direction . " All my serious dramatic performances suddenly weren 't getting me the jobs or opportunities that I really wanted , " she said in a 2005 interview . " I have stacks and stacks of letters from great directors saying I can 't cast you because you don 't mean anything to the studios . That 's why I turned the boat toward comedy . " 
 Election 's director Alexander Payne was anxious to cast Witherspoon as Tracy , based on her performances in Freeway and the 1991 film The Man in the Moon , and Witherspoon was equally eager to sign on to the project — but not to play Tracy . Witherspoon was drawn to the part of Tammy Metzler , the cynical outcast who becomes the election 's dark horse presidential candidate . Referring to the scene in which Tammy delivers a shocking campaign speech denouncing the school 's administration and the entire concept of elected student government , Witherspoon said , " That speech alone made me want to play Tammy ! So I was terribly conflicted . " ( Tammy was eventually portrayed by Jessica Campbell . ) 
 To play Tracy , Witherspoon developed a distinct speech pattern combining strident intonations with a chipper Midwestern accent . She also worked on clenching her facial muscles and maintaining a clipped walking pace . " That was just Tracy , it so escapes me how it came out ! " she said . " I just imagined how uptight people carry themselves , and they grind their teeth at night and they clench their jaw because everything has to be just perfect . " Praising her performance , her co @-@ star Matthew Broderick said , " From the first she knew exactly what she <unk> very aggressive person in a small and cute package ... she comes out very funny and very scary at the same time . " 
 Witherspoon 's performance as Tracy Flick received widespread critical acclaim , as well as her first Golden Globe Award nomination and several other accolades ( see below ) . However , she later said that her career struggles continued after Election due to public confusion between the character and the actress . " I 'm not Tracy Flick . I couldn 't get jobs for a year after that because people thought I was that crazy and angry and controlling and strange . But yeah , um , I 'm not . " It wouldn 't be until after the box office smash success of Legally Blonde two years later that her career would fully take off . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = = Comparisons = = 
 Tracy Flick has been a frequent point of comparison in commentary on real @-@ world political figures . Hillary Clinton has more than once been compared to the character . In a January 2008 video mashup produced by Slate , campaign footage of Clinton was combined with clips from Election to draw a comparison between Clinton 's and Tracy 's feelings about the inferiority of their opponents . The video was widely circulated and praised . 
 A Christian Science Monitor review of Clinton 's 2003 biography , Living History , quoted an excerpt in which Clinton discussed her participation during high school in a Cultural Values Committee and noted , " There is obviously some truth here , but the tone of the passage reeks of Tracy Flick , the overachieving , overly serious high school student from the film " Election . " Not to belittle the efforts of the Cultural Values Committee , but a brief aside to show that Clinton understands that high school <unk> is not exactly on par with race relations would be nice . " 
 Later in 2008 , following Clinton 's defeat for the Democratic presidential nomination , multiple commentators likened Tracy to the Republican vice @-@ presidential nominee , Alaska governor Sarah Palin . Actress and comedian Tina Fey credited Witherspoon 's performance as Tracy as an influence for Fey 's extremely popular Emmy @-@ winning impersonation of Palin on Saturday Night Live . 
 Other political figures compared to Tracy include former U.S. vice @-@ president and presidential candidate Al Gore ; Seattle City Council member Heidi Wills ; , Texas senator and 2016 U.S. Presidential candidate Ted Cruz , and New York senator Kirsten Gillibrand , whom Maureen Dowd wrote was nicknamed Tracy Flick by her colleagues for her " opportunistic and sharp @-@ elbowed " manner . 
 Outside the political arena , several reviews of the 2007 film Rocket Science noted similarities between that film 's character of Ginny , portrayed by Anna Kendrick , and Tracy . 
 = = As a cultural icon = = 
 Tracy Flick has been included on a 2007 list on <unk> of " our 10 favorite high school archetypes from the movies " ( as " The Annoying <unk> " ) ; a 2008 New York Daily News list of " high @-@ school fast @-@ talkers before Charlie Bartlett " ; and a 2008 E ! Online list of " the top 9 creepiest movie bad guys . " TV writer Dan Harmon has also mentioned in interviews and on his podcast that Tracy Flick was the inspiration for the character of Annie Edison on Community . 
 = BK Chicken Fries = 
 BK Chicken Fries are a fried chicken product sold by the international fast @-@ food restaurant chain Burger King . At the time of their introduction in 2005 , the company had intended Chicken Fries to be one of their larger , adult oriented products made with higher quality ingredients than their standard menu items . Additionally , the product further targeted the snacking and convenience food markets with a specific packaging design that was intended to be easier to handle and fit into automotive cup holders . The product was part of a series of product introductions designed to expand Burger King 's menu with both more sophisticated fare and present a larger , meatier product that appealed to 24- to 36 @-@ year @-@ old adult males . Along with this series of larger , more complex group of menu products , the company intended to attract a larger , more affluent adult audience who would be willing to spend more on the better quality products . They were discontinued in the United States in 2012 , but continued to be sold in some markets , such as Italy . In August 2014 , they were reintroduced for a limited time offering ( LTO ) in North America , leading to their permanent re @-@ addition to the menu in March 2015 in over 30 countries globally . 
 As one of the company 's major offerings , the chicken fries are sometimes the center of product advertising for the company . The original advertisements were created by the firm of Crispin , Porter + Bogusky and were the subject of both criticism and legal action by the nu metal band Slipknot over claims of intellectual property rights , while later advertising programs started the company on new direction of digital @-@ based , multi @-@ media advertising . With the product 's North American reintroduction in 2014 and 2015 , Burger King utilized a heavy social media campaign to help entice fans of the product back into restaurants . The company has also relied heavily on product tie @-@ ins with the NFL , NCAA and NASCAR to promote the product across different demographic groups . Even though the product has been a prominent part of the menu for the better part of a decade , Burger King has released very few limited @-@ time ( LTO ) variants of the product – its first one being released in the summer of 2015 . Despite being a major product line in the company 's portfolio , Burger King has registered very few , if any , global trademarks to protect its investment in the product . 
 = = History = = 
 BK Chicken Fries were introduced in 2005 as part of a menu expansion that was designed to cater to a more adult demographic looking for dishes that went beyond the standard fast food fare . At the time of the introduction , Burger King was targeting a demographic group it identified as the " super fan " , a group consisting of males between the ages of 18 – 34 that ate at fast food restaurants several times a week . Additionally , the chain was also adding other fare such as its TenderGrill , TenderCrisp and Angus sandwiches , that were designed to offer more complex menu items that would raise average check prices and expand the breadth of its offerings in the fast food market place . The product was discontinued in January 2012 , replaced with Burger King 's version of chicken strips in March of that year . 
 Following Chicken Fries ' discontinuation , there was a call for the product 's reinstatement from fans of the product on forums such as Reddit ; Business Insider noted that they are one of the 17 most requested fast products that people would like to see returned to menus . Fans of the product also established several social media accounts dedicated to Chicken Fries ' return on Facebook , Twitter , and Tumblr . Additionally , a Change.org petition was created that called on Burger King to reinstate the product to its menu . Perez Hilton 's web site declared that Chicken Fries are one product of many that will never come back , while comedian Daniel Tosh featured a skit during one of the segments of his show , Tosh.0 , to the product 's return . They were re @-@ released in August 2014 as a limited time offering ( LTO ) . The return of the product met with a favorable reaction from those who were advocating for Chicken Fries to return to the Burger King menu . There was disappointment from these groups as well because of the product 's status as a limited time offering . In March 2015 , Burger King permanently re @-@ added Chicken Fries to the menu in a large , international menu expansion in thirty countries . 
 The product garnered large amounts of attention on the internet after its discontinuation – at its peak the product was being mentioned in one form or another on average once every 40 seconds . In its third @-@ quarter 2014 earnings report , Burger King admitted that the massive social media attention was one of the primary reasons it brought the product back . The positive reaction to the reintroduction included over one million mentions on Twitter . This tied into a major push by the company to utilize social media as a free marketing tool to <unk> , who overwhelmingly utilize interactive media to communicate and prefer companies that utilize these tools . 
 Besides customer demand for the product , another major reason for the reintroduction was due to a significant rise in the cost of beef . During the previous few months leading up to the reintroduction of Chicken Fries , the available cattle stocks had declined since the USDA began record keeping in 1973 . This shortage of ground beef caused a spike in the price of beef to all @-@ time highs in June 2014 , according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics . Additionally , increasing competition from McDonald 's , Wendy 's and other chains in the fast food industry drove Burger King to boost sales by introducing new products along similar lines . Two major competitors had been revamping their menus with products such as variations on the <unk> from McDonald 's and sandwiches based on pretzel @-@ style buns from Wendy 's . 
 The third reason the product was brought back was because of a new approach by the company was taking regarding LTO products ; instead of putting out large numbers of products that may only appeal to a small audience , it instead would only add a smaller amount of products that have broader market appeal . Chicken Fries were part of that goal , with the re @-@ introduction utilizing a three prong approach : its stated intention to introduce products to those that will have most impact , a bid to appeal to Millennials utilizing social media focused campaigns , and to utilize a former product from its portfolio that the company probably should have thought about before discontinuing . The idea of reintroducing older products is appealing to companies such as Burger King and McDonald 's because it is operationally easier than launching a completely new product by allowing a company to utilize older advertising along with its existing supply chain already which is already established to deliver the product ingredients . The limited @-@ time offers allow chains to bring " new " product the menu without adding permanent complexity to their kitchen operations . 
 The reintroduction of Chicken Fries proved to be a fortuitous decision for Burger King , the resulting sales bump provided an increase in profits each time they were added to the menu . The 2014 reintroduction was a resounding success for the company , helping Burger King achieve domestic same @-@ store comparable sales rise of 3 @.@ 1 % in 2014 . On the opposite side , McDonald ’ s reported a 4 % decrease for the same period in its domestic same @-@ store sales , which the competitor attributed to " ongoing aggressive competitive activity . " The success of the 2015 reintroduction again helped the chain post positive financial numbers , with the company reporting that the Chicken Fries reintroduction was one of a trio of factors that helped drive second quarter 2015 same @-@ store comparable sales growth up by 7 @.@ 9 % . Again , arch rival McDonald 's reported that its same @-@ store comparable sales fell 2 % for the same time period in the US as its promotions failed to meet financial analysts predictions . 
 = = Product description = = 
 BK Chicken Fries are breaded and fried chicken strips , and were available in three sizes during their initial availability period : six- , nine- , and twelve @-@ piece servings . Three and thirty @-@ six @-@ piece sizes were available as limited time offers ( LTO ) . The smaller size was sold à la carte , while larger portion could be purchased as a meal option . While its core audience was adults such as soccer moms or commuters , a children 's meal option was at one time available U.S. that included a six @-@ piece order of the product . The 2014 reissued product was only available in a nine @-@ piece serving , at a recommended price point of USD $ 2 @.@ 89 . 
 A summer 2015 LTO introduced a spicy variant , called Fiery Chicken Fries , in addition to the standard offering ; the product featured a spicy , pepper @-@ based breading featuring a mix of cayenne pepper , black pepper and other spices that replaced the normal coating . The product was the first variant of BK Chicken Fries added to the company 's menu . In developing the product , Burger King 's chief marketing officer stated that once taste testers described the product as " spicy as shit " , the company realized it had the correct spice mix . Sale of the product would be limited to a one @-@ month period , but the company stated if sales were successful enough it would consider extending the availability beyond the initial time frame . 
 To accompany the 2015 re @-@ introduction of the product , the chain released a new sauce simply called Chicken Fry Sauce . The new condiment was not widely advertised , with almost all promotion being done through the company 's social media accounts on Twitter and Facebook . The sauce is described as a combination of BBQ sauce and honey mustard , and described by Burger King as " The sauce of all sauces . " The company 's posts were accompanied by the hashtag <unk> . 
 = = = Packaging = = = 
 Part of the product 's format was in its packaging , which was designed to fit in a car cup holder . The BK Chicken Fry box , while square in shape , will sit comfortably in the cup holder and its top , when opened , forms a small tray that is designed to hold dipping sauce . Burger King credits the design of this box with helping to make its Chicken Fries the most popular adult @-@ oriented chicken product in the United States at the time . Since most of the fast food industry 's business is take @-@ out or drive @-@ thru traffic , this allowed the convenience food purchaser to drive and eat with little effort . With the introduction of the BK Chicken Fries , BK began adapting some of its other product packaging so that it could also be placed in an automotive cup holder . In addition to the Chicken Fries container , the company added a trademarked and patented , round French fry container which it calls the " FryPod " , which is a paper cup made from 50 percent recycled materials that is also designed to fit in an automotive cup holder . The package design won an honorable mention at a packaging industry design competition hosted by the Quick Service Restaurant division of the <unk> and Packaging Institute in 2007 . 
 The 2015 Fiery Chicken Fries promotion introduced a packaging variant that featured new graphics . The image featured on the box is an angry looking chicken in a Lucha libre @-@ style mask . Other packaging variants that have appeared over the years have included tie @-@ ins to the NFL and SpongeBob SquarePants . 
 = = Advertising = = 
 = = = Coq Roq = = = 
 Coq Roq , also spelled <unk> <unk> , was an advertising program created in late 2004 for Burger King by the Miami @-@ based advertising firm Crispin Porter + Bogusky ( CP + B ) . Coq Roq was a fictional " rooster metal " group ( albeit composed of various real @-@ life musicians ) with its own website and associated content . The band 's musical " style " was classified as punk @-@ sounding rock n ' roll , thrash or nu metal . The campaign featured a viral marketing website , television and print campaigns and a fictional MySpace page . The program was similar to other marketing campaigns created by CP + B for Burger King , including the Subservient Chicken , <unk> , and Sith Sense . 
 According to CP + B employee Tom <unk> , The fictional background information for the band was that they signed with Burger King instead of a major record label . As part of the promotion , a four song LP record was recorded , two music videos produced , and a national ( US ) tour planned . The tour had to be cancelled because the actor playing the lead singer , a Canadian citizen , was unable to enter the United States because he had a criminal record in his home country . 
 = = = = Members = = = = 
 Fowl Mouth : vocals 
 The Talisman : lead guitar 
 Kabuki : rhythm guitar 
 Free Range : bass 
 Sub @-@ Sonic : drums 
 Firebird : fire breather 
 = = = 2014 reintroduction = = = 
 The 2014 reintroduction of the product featured a first for the company , a primarily digital @-@ focused promotion headed by the company 's online media agency Code and Theory . To start off the promotion , the company announced the forthcoming reintroduction a few weeks before the product was set to be released with the simple tweet " You asked . We answered . <unk> . " The company also expanded its social media footprint specifically for the Chicken Fries promotion , adding new Tumblr and Snapchat accounts to their stable of social media outlets . The idea behind the large social media push was monetary , instead of spending capital on a traditional multi @-@ week , multi @-@ media advertising campaign the company would have product @-@ loyalists spread the word at a fraction of the cost of traditional advertising . 
 Instead of producing a new series of spots on the television front , the chain reused the commercials originally produced by Crispin , Porter + Bogusky from the initial product run . These commercials were only played on Thursdays , specifically for the social media meme known as Throwback Thursday , events that feature historical personal stories or happenings that are routinely run on various sites such as Facebook or Instagram . The only major change to the advertisements was the addition of the hashtag TBT to the lower left @-@ hand corner of the video . 
 After the end of the promotional period , Burger King received numerous complaints from fans of Chicken Fries through social media sites such as Twitter and Facebook . One of the major ways the company responded was through personalized responses to these posts . Instead of using an automated response that would paste a standardized message on people 's Twitter feeds , the company instead employed several staff to personally respond to customers voicing displeasure on the LTO nature of the 2014 introduction . The entire 2014 Chicken Fries promotion represented a major shift in the attitude towards advertising for Burger King , moving from a more traditional advertising structure to one focused almost entirely on digitally @-@ based media . This change happened fairly quickly , falling into place over the twelve to eighteen @-@ month period preceding the reintroduction of Chicken Fries to the chain 's menu . Along with the new advertising firm , a new director of digital marketing and social media was newly hired from cosmetics firm L 'Oréal was added , increasing the clout of the digital advertising team within the chain . 
 = = = 2015 reintroduction = = = 
 Advertising for the permanent reintroduction of Chicken Fries in early 2015 was again shaped around a large digital @-@ media push headed by its new advertising firm David . However , unlike the 2014 promotion that was almost exclusively digitally @-@ oriented , the 2015 promotion was accompanied with a sizable television and media tie @-@ in to the annual NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Championship tournament . In the host city of Indianapolis , Burger King sponsored Chicken Fries @-@ branded SUVs that would give free rides to visitors . A series of advertisements for the product and the company 's 2 for $ 5 sandwich promotion ran during the tournament featuring the hash tag <unk> , along with a series of NCAA co @-@ branded kid 's meals . 
 On the digital @-@ front , the company utilized a viral marketing strategy starring a chicken named Gloria . Gloria would be brought to local restaurants to decide if the particular location would sell Chicken Fries that day ; she would be given two feed bowls labeled " Yes " and " no " and depending on which bowl she ate from would decide if the product would be sold there that day . Gloria the chicken had her own truck with her own custom @-@ designed coop . There was a social media presence accompanying the tour with the hashtags <unk> and <unk> . Additionally , each of the events were live streamed on the product 's webpage , which also included other things such as Gloria 's bio , a map of upcoming events and links to corporate web sites . The Gloria tour did raise the ire of animal rights organization PETA . The group initially responded to the promotion with a one @-@ word tweet , " <unk> , " with the follow up " @ <unk> forcing a chicken to decide if her friends will become # <unk> . " PETA stated that the concept behind the tour made their jaws drop over perceived cruelty . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 = = = = Sexual innuendo = = = = 
 The CP + B produced Coq Roq advertisements followed a pattern of controversy for the company , as previous advertisements produced by CP + B had come under fire for perceived or overt sexual innuendo . An earlier example of this type of advertisement was a promotion for a LTO version of Burger King 's TenderCrisp sandwich which featured Darius Rucker in a commercial singing a variant of Burger King 's Have It Your Way jingle that featured a line about " a train of ladies with a nice caboose , " where caboose was not referring to the last car of a train , but the buttocks of the actresses featured in the commercial . The issues raised by public interest groups in this instance came from complaints over the double entendres and sexual innuendo on the Coq Roq website . Pictures of scantily clad women posing as groupies of the band were featured in one section of the site and sported comments such as " groupies love the Coq " and " Groupies love Coq " . Protests from the public over the sexual innuendo of the comments forced BK to request CB + P to have content be changed to something more appropriate for a family oriented restaurant . 
 = = = = Slipknot lawsuit = = = = 
 In August 2005 , CP + B and Burger King became the target of lawyers of the band Slipknot , who alleged the mask @-@ wearing rooster rockers were a blatant copy of the band 's style . The band claimed that CP + B had approached Slipknot 's record company , Roadrunner Records , with an offer to appear in another commercial for Burger King . The band declined on the grounds that they did not want to be associated with a burger chain and they felt that the Coq Roq advertisements were deliberately co @-@ opting the band 's signature look and style in order to influence its fans to purchase the chain 's products . The band issued a cease and desist letter to CP + B and BK requesting the advertisements be pulled . When the two parties declined , the band sued for an undisclosed amount . 
 CP + B and Burger King then filed counter @-@ suit against Slipknot , stating that the Coq Roq band was fictitious , visually and musically bore little resemblance to Slipknot 's style , and at best was a general parody of heavy metal bands that wear masks or try to achieve a mask @-@ like effect , such as Mushroomhead , KISS or GWAR . Partly mentioned in the counter @-@ suit included the notion that Slipknot were parodies of bands themselves , further citing the specific example of Mushroomhead , who wore near identical style masks and jumpsuits , and had been playing several years before Slipknot even formed , let alone went mainstream . Both suits were eventually dropped , and Burger King ended the campaign shortly after . 
 = = = Tie @-@ ins = = = 
 As a product tie @-@ in with the 2005 – 2006 NFL season , Burger King introduced a 36 piece party pack as a limited time offer . This promotion was more general and featured the BK mascot , the Burger King , digitally superimposed into NFL game footage so appeared to be involved in the game . Some of the players the King replaced include Steve Young , Deion Sanders , and Moe Williams . He was also been depicted performing the Lambeau Leap and dumping Gatorade on the head of former Miami Dolphins head coach Don Shula . The primary packaging was altered to include the NFL logo ; the party pack designed to mimic the texture of a football , included the NFL logo and a humorous comment along the line of those found on BK packaging at the time . 
 During the summer of 2006 , BK introduced the 12 piece size as a product tie @-@ in with NASCAR and its new sponsorship of a NASCAR team . The promotion was part of the company 's new sponsorship deal with NASCAR and the new BK / Michael Waltrip Racing team featuring Waltrip 's 00 car number . Several television ads were produced featuring BK Chicken Fries and Waltrip 's racing team with a fictional pit crew member , the chicken server . 
 During 2007 , Burger King had another product tie @-@ in with a Nickelodeon show , SpongeBob SquarePants . Again the box was altered , this time so the design of the looked like the character SpongeBob . Later in @-@ store promotions in the U.S. have urged customers to add a six @-@ piece portion to their meal as a snack option . 
 = = Naming and trademarks = = 
 The name " BK Chicken Fries " is not registered as a trademark in the markets the product is sold ( US , Canada , the UK , and Europe ) , [ Notes 1 ] however the acronym " BK " is a trademark of Burger King Holdings and is displayed with the " circle @-@ R " ( ® ) symbol in the United States , Europe and New Zealand . [ Notes 2 ] The term " chicken fries " has been trademarked in the United States several times , but never by Burger King . In Canada , " chicken fries " was owned by KFC parent , Yum ! Brands , but its registration was expunged from the records . [ Notes 3 ] 
 = Off @-@ Road Velociraptor Safari = 
 Off @-@ Road Velociraptor Safari is a free downloadable vehicle combat video game released on January 29 , 2008 by Flashbang Studios . The game requires the Unity plug @-@ in to run , and can be downloaded from the developers ' website . Players assume the role of a Velociraptor wearing a pith helmet and monocle , driving a jeep with a spiked flail attached , and must accrue as many points as possible in a four @-@ minute period by performing stunts and running down other Velociraptor . Each time a Velociraptor is struck , the game 's speed is reduced to slow motion and its catapulted body becomes the focus of the in @-@ game camera . The game operates a global <unk> , after each game the player is given a rank for that day and a separate rank compared to the highest ever scores , along with a breakdown of the bonuses they were awarded during play . 
 The game was developed over a period of eight weeks by a small team of developers , using the Unity game engine . The idea was originally drawn onto a whiteboard , after the drawing remained in the developer 's office for a few days it was decided that it would be the next project undertaken by the team . Off @-@ Road Velociraptor Safari received positive reviews from gaming websites for its macabre humor and gameplay , though it was noted that the game had not been fully optimized on release , causing the game to run slowly on less modern machines . 
 A sequel ( working title " Off @-@ Road Velociraptor Safari HD " ) was in development , but the project was put to rest in 2010 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players control a <unk> and pith helmet – wearing Velociraptor driving a jeep . The aim of the game is to attain a high score by performing stunts , damaging the jeep during collisions , collecting orbs , and killing the other Velociraptor which run around the area . The vehicle is equipped with a spiked ball and chain which can be deployed from the tailgate as many times as the player wishes . Deploying the spiked ball increases the difficulty of maneuvering the vehicle . The ball can be released from the chain at any time , if done so during a turn the weapon is launched forward . Players kill other Velociraptor by ramming them with the jeep or crushing them with the spiked ball which is dragged behind the vehicle . Slain dinosaurs can be dragged to exporters by the spiked ball and chain to gain extra points . <unk> are teleporting devices which transport the slain dinosaurs to the future . 
 Bonuses can be earned by achieving specific goals . If stunts or actions are repeated within a time limit , a score multiplier is earned and repeated actions boost the player 's score further . Gameplay takes place in a single tropical jungle area , at the beginning of a game the jeep appears in a random location within the jungle . Stunt ramps are set up throughout the game area , along with the hills and valleys these facilitate long @-@ distance jumps and other stunts . Each game takes four minutes , after the timer counts down to zero , the total score and any bonuses earned are shown . The player 's ranking compared to other games played that day and the all @-@ time <unk> are also shown . Specific achievements can be gained by players , which are saved to their online profile , though the game can be played as a ' guest ' , which doesn 't require a game profile to be created . 
 = = Development = = 
 Flashbang Studios had planned to earn money from creating casual games so that they could create a quirky game without having to worry about sales and sustaining the studio . Although the company failed to create a financially successful casual game , by creating software for other companies they managed to acquire enough money to undertake an unusual project of their own choosing . 
 The original concept was drawn on a white board , after the image had been left on the board for several days , the developers decided that it " pretty much had to be the next game . " Initially the studio had intended to incorporate weapons into the game , but first developed the tow chain which would be used to transport slain Velociraptor . The use of a chain was inspired by the controversial game <unk> . The chain was designed to be a place @-@ holder , to be replaced by a skinned rope . However , it was decided that the chain itself was acceptable without further modification . Plans to include additional weapons were dropped ; the flail alone proved to be effective enough . 
 When development began in December 2007 , the studio had employed five full @-@ time team members . Development took eight weeks , though creation of the Velociraptor and jeep models had already been started before development began . Other staff were working on the title before then , but two key members were involved in the Independent Games Festival . A teaser trailer was released on January 18 , 2008 ; quickly garnering interest from gaming blogs such as Kotaku and Destructoid . In an interview the developers hinted that a non @-@ free downloadable version with extra content may be produced , or that advertisements may be introduced to the site . The company also revealed plans to continue developing free games with a development time of four to eight weeks . The most popular of these games will be further developed and released on platforms such as WiiWare , PlayStation Network or Xbox Live Arcade . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Off @-@ Road Velociraptor Safari received a positive reception , reviewers praised the game as fun to play and addictive , particularly in relation to the short development time . Reviewers found issues with slowdown and variable frame rates , though the game was updated after reviewers highlighted the problems . Atomic Gamer 's Brian Beck awarded the game a score of 90 % , calling it " a fun , rewarding game " and citing the lack of restraints with the exception of the time limit . Games journalist John Walker , writing for Rock Paper Shotgun , described the game as " a stupid amount of fun " and found himself " ... fairly stunned it can be played in a browser window . " Reviewers noted some technical problems , John <unk> described the game 's controls as " a bit clunky " and noted that even after installing the Unity plug @-@ in the game has " a long load time " regardless of internet connection speed . Brian Beck stated that the game was not " fully optimized " , resulting in players using less modern computers being unable to run the game smoothly . 
 Jay Is Games ' John <unk> found the game 's unusual premise to be the source of its playability , " The raw dose of driving , destruction and dinosaurs is enough to get just about any gamer 's blood pumping " . Despite this , he found the game 's premise of crushing Velociraptor slightly disturbing , but added " there 's just enough fiction to the setting to keep realism at bay . " Bit @-@ tech 's Joe Martin suggested that though longevity could be an issue for serious players , Off @-@ Road Velociraptor Safari is " unmatched " as a game which can be played for short periods of time . Channel 4 described the game as " a real laugh " and " one of our favourite coffee @-@ break games of the moment . " Destructoid 's Hamza Aziz enjoyed the game , " it 's hard not to love it " , but found the slow motion " gets old and frustrating after a while . " 
 = = Planned sequel = = 
 A sequel called " Off @-@ Road Velociraptor HD " was planned with a Q4 , 2010 release date . It was available to pre @-@ order off the official site and anyone who purchased the downloadable version of the original received an automatic free pre @-@ order . Later <unk> announced " Off @-@ Road Velociraptor HD " had been canceled due to financial problems and will most likely not see the light of the day . 
 = Justin Boren = 
 Justin Matthew Boren ( born April 28 , 1988 ) is an American football guard for the Denver Broncos of the National Football League ( NFL ) . Though a guard in the NFL , Boren played both guard and center during his high school and college football career . In high school , he was widely regarded as one of the top offensive linemen in the country and one of the top football prospects in the state of Ohio . He was selected to play in the U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl and was a Parade All @-@ American and an Associated Press All @-@ Ohio selection . The son of 1982 and 1983 Michigan Wolverines tackles leader Mike Boren , Justin was widely recruited by the nation 's top schools , including both his father 's alma mater , the University of Michigan and its archrival , Ohio State University , Boren 's hometown school . 
 After an intense recruitment , Boren choose to play at Michigan despite leaning towards attending Ohio State early in his recruitment . He played in several games as a true freshman , making one start . As a sophomore , he became a regular starter , earning 2007 All @-@ Big Ten Conference honorable mention . When head coach Lloyd Carr retired and was replaced by Rich Rodriguez , Boren became unhappy with the new staff and transferred to Ohio State . After transferring he had to sit 2008 NCAA Division I FBS football season and was also required to pay his own tuition , per Big Ten conference rules . He earned recognition as a selection to the 2009 and 2010 All @-@ Big Ten team by both the coaches ( second @-@ team ) and the media ( first @-@ team ) . He was also a 2010 College Football All @-@ America Team second team selection by several selectors . In 2009 , he became the third player ( following Howard Yerges and J. T. White ) to play for both sides of the Michigan – Ohio State rivalry . He was also teammates with his brother , Zach Boren , who was a starting fullback and linebacker for the Buckeyes . His other brother , Jacoby Boren , is currently the starting center at Ohio State . 
 He was signed by the Baltimore Ravens of the National Football League as an undrafted free agent in 2011 . He has since played for the Ravens , Detroit Lions , and Denver Broncos . 
 = = Early life and high school = = 
 Boren is Jewish , and was born in Pickerington , Ohio . He was a freshman starter at Pickerington High School Central before transferring to Pickerington High School North the following year . As a high school sophomore , Boren played guard and was an honors student . During his high school years , his father was his harshest critic . As a junior he was listed as a nose guard on defense and an offensive tackle . That season , he earned Division I Associated Press All @-@ Ohio High School Football Team special mention . By the time he was a junior , he was being recruited by both Ohio State , the local school , and Michigan , where his father played . As a senior who bench pressed 450 pounds ( 204 kg ) and squatted 660 pounds ( 299 kg ) , he was regarded as Central Ohio 's most sought after high school football recruit . As a result , he was selected to participate as one of 78 players in the 2006 U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl where he started at left offensive guard for the East team . He was also selected to the Associated Press first @-@ team Division I All @-@ Central District and All @-@ Ohio high school football teams as an offensive lineman . After committing to Michigan , he enrolled in classes at the University of Michigan in January of what would have been the end of his senior year in high school along with roommate Carlos Brown . Of all the football prospects from the state of Ohio , Boren was the only one that Ohio State was not able to lure . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Michigan = = = 
 Having enrolled in January 2006 , Boren ( and roommate Brown ) were available to participate in 2006 Spring Football . Both players participated in spring practice , which was part of a national trend of more high schoolers enrolling early . Although early enrollment had been occurring for several years , Kevin Grady had been the first at Michigan in 2005 . As a freshman during the 2006 NCAA Division I FBS football season for the 2006 Michigan Wolverines , Boren was injured during training camp , and he did not dress in the season opener . He had suffered a broken leg . Despite being injured through the entire month of September , Boren decided not to redshirt and debuted during the Paul Bunyan Trophy rivalry game against Michigan State on October 7 . Two weeks later , when Rueben Riley got injured against the Iowa Hawkeyes , he played the entire second half . On October 28 , with Riley still injured , he became only the fourth true freshman to start on the Michigan offensive line in the modern era during a victory against Northwestern . The following week against Ball State , Boren saw action after Jake Long got kicked in the helmet . Boren 's final action of the season came against the Indiana Hoosiers on November 11 . During the 2006 season , all of his appearances were at guard . During 2007 Rose Bowl practices at the end of the 2006 season , Boren had practiced exclusively at center . 
 Boren had been recruited as either a center or a guard , but he preferred to play guard . In spring practice the following year , Boren was moved to center . At the end of the National Collegiate Athletic Association @-@ sanctioned 15 days of spring football practice , he was announced as the starting center , replacing Mark Bihl . This decision was confirmed when training camp started in the fall , even though Boren had never before played center . Thus , the starting offensive line was composed of veterans Long and Adam Kraus on the left and then Boren , right guard Jeremy Ciulla and right tackle Stephen Schilling neither of whom had ever started a game . The 2007 NCAA Division I FBS football season was eagerly anticipated for the 2007 Wolverines with returning seniors Long , Mike Hart and Chad Henne in key roles , but the season quickly began to fall apart when the team lost to the two @-@ time defending FCS champion Appalachian State Mountaineers in the opening game . When Ryan Mallett played in place of Henne during the September 15 , Notre Dame rivalry game , left @-@ handed snapper Boren switched positions with right @-@ handed snapper Kraus who otherwise played left guard . The switch occurred after Mallett fumbled two snaps from Boren , whose left @-@ handed snaps were foreign to the right @-@ handed Mallett . The switch caused a little confusion with official starting lineups the following week when Mallett started . On September 22 against Penn State , both Boren and Kraus had casts on their snapping hands and Boren played center despite the fact that Mallett was starting . During Mallett 's October 27 start in the Little Brown Jug game against Minnesota , Kraus started at center . The following week during the Paul Bunyan Trophy against Michigan State , the position switch was made permanent . After the regular season , Boren was recognized as an honorable mention All @-@ Big Ten selection . Prior to the 2008 Capital One Bowl , Boren was expected to return to center because Henne had returned to full strength . However , during the game , Boren played guard and Kraus played center . After the season , both Boren and Kraus were named to Jewish Sports Review 's 2007 College Football All @-@ America Team . 
 After the season , head coach Lloyd Carr was replaced by Rich Rodriguez . Rodriguez ' no huddle spread option offense , which used zone blocking , was a major adjustment for Boren . By the tenth day of spring practice Boren had left the team . Boren made a statement to the press regarding his decision , which included the following excerpt : " Michigan football was a family , built on mutual respect and support for each other from ( former ) Coach ( Lloyd ) Carr on down . We knew it took the entire family , a team effort , and we all worked together . . I have great trouble accepting that those family values have eroded in just a few months . . <unk> I am unable to perform under these circumstances at the level I expect of myself , and my teammates and Michigan fans deserve , is why I have made the decision to leave . " A month later , Ohio State coach Jim Tressel announced Boren would redshirt for the 2008 NCAA Division I FBS football season and become the first player to transfer from Michigan to play for arch rival Ohio State since at least World War II . According to Section <unk> of the Rules of Eligibility in the Big Ten handbook , Boren is ineligible to be a scholarship athlete after transferring . A little more than a week after Justin announced his transfer , his younger brother Zach committed to Ohio State . Later that summer , Detroit Free Press writer Michael Rosenberg , backed up Boren 's statement about family values : " Rodriguez 's staff uses some of the foulest , most degrading language imaginable . I know coaches curse , and I 'm no prude , but this goes way beyond a few dirty words . He belittles his players . This is a big part of why offensive lineman Justin Boren left the team . He felt his dignity was at stake . " 
 = = = Ohio State = = = 
 When Boren arrived at Ohio State at 6 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) and 310 pounds ( 140 kg ) , he was one of the smallest offensive linemen on the team . During his redshirt season , he wore the number 56 . In order to bond with his new teammates such as Alex Boone , he shaved lightning bolts into his head . While <unk> , he stood out in practice where he performed on the scout team . In fact , during the week leading up to the final regular season game against Michigan , he wore the Winged Football Helmet that Michigan is known for as part of the scout team . The 2008 Ohio State Buckeyes football team included three seniors on the offensive line : Boone , Steve <unk> and Ben Person . 
 A total of 28 seniors graduated from the football team leaving the 2009 Ohio State Buckeyes football team with five returning starters on offense for the 2009 NCAA Division I FBS football season . However , the team had the number one recruiting class in the nation according to the Chicago Sun @-@ Times . Both Scout.com and Rivals.com agreed with this number one ranking prior to the final signing period and although the offensive line had been the team 's problem in 2008 , the highly touted class included three tackles and a guard plus transfer Boren . 
 In the spring of 2009 , Hope Boren spoke at signing day about her two sons prospects for at Ohio State : " As a parent , you always try to raise kids who are happy and successful . . . And I know my kids are happy and I think they 'll be successful . " Zach Boren said , " Everyone in the whole family is an Ohio State fan now . . <unk> one cares about Michigan at all anymore . That was in the past and we 're all looking forward to being Buckeyes and staying Buckeyes for the rest of our lives . " During spring practice , Boren impressed his coaches and teammates ; however , he refused all interview requests . During the summer , when asked about the impending Michigan – Ohio State game he said " My attitude is there are 11 games before that game , . . <unk> can 't let myself get worked up thinking about that game . I don 't want to take a chance of being unprepared for any of the first 11 games . The week that game gets here , it will be my primary focus . " By then , he was projected to be the starting left guard , and he was expected to be an important part of the team . 
 Prior to the 2009 season , Boren suffered a knee injury . The injury was not severe because of the knee brace that he was wearing . He recovered in time to be in the starting lineup at left guard along with his younger brother who started at fullback for the September 5 season opener against Navy . The media portrayed Boren as a nasty and intense player , which Boren downplayed . Early in the season , the offensive line struggled . But as the season progressed guards Boren and Bryant Browning teamed up with second @-@ year linemen Michael Brewster , J.B. <unk> and Mike Adams to form a unit that worked effectively . Boren missed the October 31 non @-@ conference game against New Mexico State due to an unspecified foot injury . When he returned to Michigan Stadium for the season finale , Michigan defensive end Brandon Graham was very vocal about Boren 's departure . At the conclusion of the 2009 Big Ten season , he was named to the All @-@ Big Ten Conference team by both the coaches ( second @-@ team ) and the media ( first @-@ team ) . The following 2010 season , he repeated as a first team media and second team coaches All @-@ Big Ten Conference selection . He was named as a second team All @-@ American selection by Associated Press , CBS Sports , Rivals.com and Scout.com. 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ draft = = = 
 Boren was one of 56 offensive linemen invited to participate in the February 24 – March 1 , 2011 NFL Scouting Combine . He ranked thirteenth in the bench press with a total of 28 repetitions . He ranked eleventh in the three cone drill with a time of 7 @.@ 57 . Following the draft and the 2011 NFL lockout , Boren was regarded as one of the best available free agents . 
 = = = Baltimore Ravens = = = 
 Boren was signed by the Baltimore Ravens on July 26 , 2011 . Boren 's former University of Michigan offensive line coach Andy Moeller was a coach with Baltimore at the time of his signing . He was waived by the team on September 3 , 2011 , but he was signed to the practice squad on September 5 . On January 3 , 2012 , during the first round bye week of the 2011 – 12 NFL playoffs , Boren was activated . On September 1 , 2012 , Boren was assigned to injured reserve . Boren reached an injury settlement with the team before being removed from the roster later that week . 
 = = = Detroit Lions = = = 
 Boren was named to the practice squad of the Detroit Lions on November 20 , 2012 . 
 = = = Denver Broncos = = = 
 On January 7 , 2013 , the Denver Broncos signed Boren to a futures contract . On August 7 , 2013 , Boren was waived / injured by the Broncos . On August 8 , 2013 , he cleared waivers and was placed on the Broncos ' injured reserve list . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Boren 's father , Mike Boren , played football for Michigan from 1980 – 83 and his mother , Hope , ran track there from 1979 – 82 . Boren attended 2005 Michigan Summer Football Camp . Mike led the Wolverines in tackles in 1982 and 1983 . Justin 's youngest brother , Jacoby , was a sophomore at Pickerington Central High School in 2009 . By December 2010 , Jacoby had committed to Ohio State . 
 = Russian battleship Imperator Pavel I = 
 Imperator Pavel I ( Russian : Император <unk> I - Czar Paul I ) was an Andrei Pervozvanny @-@ class predreadnought battleship built for the Imperial Russian Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . The ship 's construction was seriously extended by design changes as a result of the Russo @-@ Japanese War and labor unrest after the 1905 Revolution and she took nearly six years to build . Imperator Pavel I was not very active during World War I and her bored sailors were the first to mutiny in early 1917 . The ship was laid up in 1918 and she was scrapped in 1923 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Imperator Pavel I was 454 feet ( 138 @.@ 4 m ) long at the waterline and 460 feet ( 140 @.@ 2 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 80 feet ( 24 @.@ 4 m ) and a draft of 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced 18 @,@ 902 long tons ( 19 @,@ 205 t ) at deep load . Her hull was subdivided by 17 transverse watertight bulkheads and the engine rooms were divided by a centerline longitudinal bulkhead . She had a double bottom and a metacentric height of 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) . 
 Imperator Pavel I had two 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines with a total designed output of 17 @,@ 600 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 100 kW ) . Twenty @-@ five Belleville boilers provided steam to the engines at a working pressure of 285 pounds per square inch ( 1 @,@ 970 kPa ; 20 @.@ 0 kgf / cm2 ) . On sea trials , the engines produced 18 @,@ 596 ihp ( 13 @,@ 867 kW ) and a top speed of 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ; 21 @.@ 3 mph ) . She carried a normal load of 800 long tons ( 810 t ) of coal that provided a range of 1 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ; 1 @,@ 500 mi ) at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) and a maximum load of 1 @,@ 500 long tons ( 1 @,@ 500 t ) that gave 2 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 400 km ; 2 @,@ 800 mi ) at the same speed . 
 The main armament consisted of two pairs of 12 @-@ inch Model 1895 40 @-@ caliber guns mounted in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft . These guns had a maximum elevation of 35 ° and could depress to -5 ° . 80 rounds per gun were carried and they could fire one round per minute . Eight of the fourteen 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) Model 1905 45 @-@ caliber guns were mounted in four twin @-@ gun turret at the corners of the superstructure while six were mounted in casemates in the superstructure . For defense against torpedo boats , Imperator Pavel I carried twelve 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns mounted in casemates above the 8 @-@ inch guns in the superstructure . Two underwater 457 @-@ millimeter ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes were mounted , one on each side , and they were provided with six spare torpedoes . 
 Based on the Russian experience at the Battle of Tsushima , the sides of the ship 's hull were completely protected by Krupp cemented armor . The main waterline belt had a maximum thickness of 8 @.@ 5 inches ( 216 mm ) and the upper belt was 5 inches ( 127 mm ) at its thickest . The sides of the main gun turrets were 8 inches ( 203 mm ) thick and the armor of the casemates ranged from 3 @.@ 1 to 5 inches ( 79 to 127 mm ) in thickness . The greatest thickness of deck armor was 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Imperator Pavel I was built by the Baltic Works in Saint Petersburg . Construction began on 27 October 1904 and was slowed by labor trouble in the shipyard from the 1905 Revolution . She was launched on 7 September 1907 and began her sea trials in October 1910 . The ship entered service on 10 March 1911 before her trials were completed in October 1911 . Imperator Pavel I joined the Baltic Fleet on completion and she made a port visit to Copenhagen in September 1912 . The following September she visited Portland , Cherbourg , and Stavanger . At the beginning of World War I she covered Russian minelaying operations at the entrance of the Gulf of Finland . She did little else for the rest of the war as the Russian naval strategy in the Baltic was defensive ; the four Gangut @-@ class dreadnoughts and the two Andrei Pervozvanny @-@ class predreadnoughts were to defend the entrance to the Gulf of Finland . The ship 's lattice masts were cut down in late 1914 and light topmasts were added . Torpedo nets were fitted in early 1915 and the ship 's torpedoes were removed in January 1916 . In late 1916 , four 76 @-@ millimeter ( 3 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns were added . 
 Disgruntled sailors aboard Imperator Pavel I instigated the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet in Helsinki on 16 March 1917 , after they received word of the February Revolution in Saint Petersburg , and the ship was renamed Respublika ( Republic ) on 29 April . The Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk required the Soviets to evacuate their naval base at Helsinki in March 1918 or have their ships interned by newly independent Finland even though the Gulf of Finland was still frozen over . Respublika and her sister ship Andrei Pervozvanny led the second group of ships on 5 April and reached Kronstadt five days later in what became known as the ' Ice Voyage ' . The ship was laid up in October 1918 for lack of manpower and she was scrapped beginning on 22 November 1923 . Curiously , Respublika was not formally stricken from the Navy List until 21 November 1925 . Two of the 8 @-@ inch turrets were installed at the coastal battery № 9 ( later № 333 ) near Leningrad ( Saint Petersburg ) at thirties . Both turrets are scrapped today , but some parts remained inside the concrete shafts . 
 = Rosaline = 
 Rosaline ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) is an unseen character and niece of Capulet in William Shakespeare 's tragedy Romeo and Juliet ( 1597 ) . Although silent , her role is important . Romeo is at first deeply in love with Rosaline and expresses his dismay at her not loving him back . Romeo first spots Juliet while trying to catch a glimpse of Rosaline at a gathering hosted by the Capulet family . 
 Scholars generally compare Romeo 's short @-@ lived love of Rosaline with his later love of Juliet . The poetry Shakespeare writes for Rosaline is much weaker than that for Juliet . Scholars believe Romeo 's early experience with Rosaline prepares him for his relationship with Juliet . Later performances of Romeo and Juliet have painted different pictures of Romeo and Rosaline 's relationship , as filmmakers have experimented with making Rosaline a more visible character . 
 = = Role in the play = = 
 Before Romeo meets her cousin Juliet , he loves Rosaline , Capulet 's niece . He describes her as wonderfully beautiful : " The all @-@ seeing sun / ne 'er saw her match since first the world begun . " Rosaline , however , chooses to remain chaste ; Romeo says : " She hath forsworn to love , and in that vow / Do I live dead that live to tell it now . " This is the source of his depression , and he makes his friends unhappy ; Mercutio comments : " That same pale , hard @-@ hearted wench , that Rosaline , torments him so that he will sure run mad . " Benvolio urges Romeo to sneak into a Capulet gathering where , he claims , Rosaline will look like " a crow " alongside the other beautiful women . Romeo agrees , but doubts Benvolio 's assessment . After Romeo sees Juliet his feelings suddenly change : " Did my heart love till now ? <unk> it , sight / For I ne 'er saw true beauty till this night . " Because their relationship is sudden and secret , Romeo 's friends and Friar Laurence continue to speak of his affection for Rosaline throughout much of the play . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Name = = = 
 Rosaline is a variant of Rosalind , a name of Old French origin : ( <unk> 
 = " horse " , <unk> = 
 " soft , tender " ) . When it was imported into English it was thought to be from the Latin rosa <unk> ( " lovely rose " ) . Romeo sees Rosaline as the embodiment of the rose because of her name and her apparent perfections . The name Rosaline commonly appears in Petrarchan sonnets , a form of poetry Romeo uses to woo Juliet and to describe both Rosaline and Juliet . Since Rosaline is unattainable , she is a perfect subject for this style ; but Romeo 's attempt at it is forced and weak . By the time he meets Juliet his poetic ability has improved considerably . 
 Gender studies critics have argued that Rosaline 's name suggests that Romeo never really forgets her but rather replaces her with Juliet . Thus , when Juliet cries " What 's in a name ? A rose by any other name would smell as sweet , " she is ironically expressing Romeo 's own view of her as a substitute for Rosaline . That is to say , Rosaline , replaced in name only by Juliet , is just as sweet to Romeo . Gender critics also note that the arguments used to dissuade Romeo from pursuing Rosaline are similar to the themes of Shakespeare 's procreation sonnets . In these sonnets Shakespeare urges the man ( who can be equated with Romeo ) to find a woman with whom to procreate — a duty he owes to society . Rosaline , it seems , is distant and unavailable except in the mind , similarly bringing no hope of offspring . As Benvolio argues , she is best replaced by someone who will reciprocate . Rosaline reveals similarities to the subject of the sonnets when she refuses to break her vow of chastity . Her name may be referred to in the first sonnet when the young man is described as " beauties Rose . " This line ties the young man to both Rosaline and Romeo in Juliet 's " What 's in a name ? " soliloquy . When Juliet says " ... that which we call a rose / By any other name would smell as sweet " , she may be raising the question of whether there is any difference between the beauty of a man and the beauty of a woman . 
 Rosaline is used as a name for only one other Shakespearean character — the one of the main female figures in Love 's Labours Lost ( 1598 ) . Scholars have found similarities between them : both are described as beautiful , and both have a way of avoiding men 's romantic advances . Rosaline in Love 's Labours Lost constantly rebuffs her suitor 's advances and Romeo 's Rosaline remains distant and chaste in his brief descriptions of her . These similarities have led some to wonder whether they are based on a woman Shakespeare actually knew , possibly the Dark Lady described in his sonnets , but there is no strong evidence of this connection . 
 = = = Rosaline as plot device = = = 
 Analysts note that Rosaline acts as a plot device , by motivating Romeo to sneak into the Capulet party where he will meet Juliet . Without her , their meeting would be unlikely . Rosaline thus acts as the impetus to bring the " star @-@ cross 'd lovers " to their deaths — she is crucial in shaping their fate ( a common theme of the play ) . Ironically , she remains oblivious of her role . 
 = = = Rosaline and Juliet = = = 
 Literary critics often compare Romeo 's love for Rosaline with his feelings for Juliet . Some see Romeo 's love for Rosaline as childish as compared with his true love for Juliet . Others argue that the apparent difference in Romeo 's feelings shows Shakespeare 's improving skill . Since Shakespeare is thought to have written early drafts of the play in 1591 , and then picked them up again in 1597 to create the final copy , the change in Romeo 's language for Rosaline and Juliet may mirror Shakespeare 's increased skill as a playwright : the younger Shakespeare describing Rosaline , and the more experienced describing Juliet . In this view , a careful look at the play reveals that Romeo 's love for Rosaline is not as petty as usually imagined . 
 Critics also note the ways in which Romeo 's relationship with Rosaline prepares him for meeting Juliet . Before meeting Rosaline , Romeo despises all Capulets , but afterwards looks upon them more favorably . He experiences the dual feelings of hate and love in the one relationship . This prepares him for the more mature relationship with Juliet — one fraught by the feud between Montagues and Capulets . Romeo expresses the conflict of love and hate in Act 1 , Scene 1 , comparing his love for Rosaline with the feud between the two houses : 
 Here 's much to do with hate , but more with love . 
 Why , then , O brawling love ! O loving hate ! 
 O any thing , of nothing first create ! 
 O heavy lightness ! serious vanity ! 
 Mis @-@ <unk> chaos of well @-@ seeming forms ! 
 Feather of lead , bright smoke , cold fire , sick health ! 
 Still @-@ waking sleep , that is not what it is ! 
 This love feel I , that feel no love in this . 
 Dost thou not laugh ? 
 Psychoanalytic critics see signs of repressed childhood trauma in Romeo 's love for Rosaline . She is of a rival house and is sworn to chastity . Thus he is in an impossible situation , one which will continue his trauma if he remains in it . Although he acknowledges its ridiculous nature , he refuses to stop loving her . <unk> view this as a re @-@ enactment of his failed relationship with his mother . Rosaline 's absence is symbolic of his mother 's absence and lack of affection for him . Romeo 's love for Juliet is similarly hopeless , for she is a Capulet and Romeo pursues his relationship with her ; the difference being that Juliet reciprocates . This does not seem likely seeing as his mother died of grief after his banishment , indicating that she probably loved him deeply . 
 = = Performances = = 
 Rosaline has been portrayed in various ways over the centuries . Theophilus Cibber 's 1748 version of Romeo and Juliet replaced references to Rosaline with references to Juliet . This , according to critics , took out the " love at first sight " moment at the Capulet feast . In the 1750s , actor and theatre director David Garrick also eliminated references to Rosaline from his performances , as many saw Romeo 's quick replacement of her as immoral . However , in Franco Zeffirelli 's 1968 film version of Romeo and Juliet , Romeo sees Rosaline ( played by Paola Tedesco ) first at the Capulet feast and then Juliet , of whom he becomes immediately enamored . This scene suggests that love is short and superficial . Rosaline also appears in Renato Castellani 's 1954 film version . In a brief non @-@ Shakespearean scene , Rosaline ( Dagmar <unk> ) gives Romeo a mask at Capulet 's celebration , and urges him to leave disguised before harm comes to him . Other filmmakers keep Rosaline off @-@ camera in stricter accordance with Shakespeare 's script . Robert Nathan 's 1966 romantic comedy , Juliet in Mantua , presents Rosaline as a fully developed character . In this sequel , in which Romeo and Juliet did not die , the pair live ten years later in exile in Mantua . When Rosaline shows up in Mantua with her husband County Paris , both couples must confront their disillusionment with their marriages . Another play , After Juliet , written by Scottish playwright Sharman Macdonald , tells the story of Rosaline after Romeo dies . A main character in this play , she struggles with her loss and turns away the advances of Benvolio , who has fallen in love with her . Macdonald 's daughter , Keira Knightley , played Rosaline in the play 's 1999 premiere . The 2012 young adult novel " When You Were Mine " by Rebecca <unk> sets Rosaline 's story in a contemporary high school . Rosaline and Romeo ( renamed Rob ) have been best friends since childhood and are just beginning to fall in love when Rosaline 's cousin , Juliet , moves back into town and sets her sights on Rob . Rosaline also appears in the 2013 film adaptation of Romeo & Juliet . 
 = Nevermind = 
 Nevermind is the second studio album by the American rock band Nirvana , released on September 24 , 1991 . Produced by Butch Vig , Nevermind was the group 's first release on DGC Records . Lead singer Kurt Cobain sought to make music outside the restrictive confines of the Seattle grunge scene , drawing influence from groups such as the Pixies and their use of " loud / quiet " dynamics . It is their first album to feature drummer Dave Grohl . 
 Despite low commercial expectations by the band and its record label , Nevermind became a surprise success in late 1991 , largely due to the popularity of its first single , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . By January 1992 , it had replaced Michael Jackson 's album Dangerous at number one on the Billboard 200 chart . The album also produced three other successful singles : " Come as You Are " , " Lithium " , and " In Bloom " . The Recording Industry Association of America has certified the album diamond ( at least 10 million copies shipped ) , and the album has sold at least 24 million copies worldwide . Nevermind was in part responsible for bringing both alternative rock and grunge to a large , mainstream audience , and has been ranked highly on lists of the greatest albums of all time by publications such as Rolling Stone and Time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Nirvana was a band from Olympia , Washington , formed by Kurt Cobain and Krist Novoselic , that had signed to Seattle independent record label Sub Pop . The group released its debut album Bleach in 1989 , with Chad Channing on drums . However , Channing left Nirvana in 1990 , and the band was in need of a permanent drummer . During a show by hardcore punk band Scream , the group 's drummer , Dave Grohl , impressed Novoselic and Cobain . When Scream unexpectedly disbanded , Grohl contacted Novoselic , made his way to Seattle , and was soon invited to join the band . Novoselic said in retrospect that when Grohl joined the band , everything " fell into place " . 
 Meanwhile , Cobain was writing a number of new songs . At the time Cobain was listening to bands like The Melvins , R.E.M. , The Smithereens , and the Pixies . Feeling disillusioned by the heavy detuned rock popular in the Seattle grunge scene upon which Sub Pop had built its image , Cobain — inspired by his contemporary listening habits — began writing songs that were more melodic . A key development was the single " Sliver " , released on Sub Pop in 1990 ( before Grohl joined the band ) , which Cobain said " was like a statement in a way . I had to write a pop song and release it on a single to prepare people for the next record . I wanted to write more songs like that . " Grohl said that the band at that point often made the analogy of likening their music to children 's music , in that the band tried to make its songs as simple as possible . 
 By the start of the 1990s , Sub Pop was experiencing financial difficulties . With rumors that Sub Pop would sign up as a subsidiary for a major label , the band decided to " cut out the middleman " and start to look for a major label . A number of labels courted the band , but Nirvana ultimately signed with Geffen Records imprint DGC Records based upon repeated recommendations from Kim Gordon of Sonic Youth ( an influential alternative rock band who Nirvana idolised ) and their management company Gold Mountain . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 In early 1990 , Nirvana began planning its second album for Sub Pop , tentatively titled Sheep . For the album , Sub Pop head Bruce Pavitt suggested Butch Vig as a potential producer . Nirvana particularly liked Vig 's work with <unk> and called Vig up to tell him , " We want to sound as heavy as that record . " In April 1990 , the band traveled out to Vig 's Smart Studios in Madison , Wisconsin to begin work on the album . Most of the basic song arrangements were completed by that time , but Cobain was still working on lyrics and the band was unsure of which songs to record . Ultimately , eight songs were recorded : " <unk> " ( later renamed " Breed " ) , " Dive " ( later released as the B @-@ side to " Sliver " ) , " In Bloom " , " Pay to Play " ( eventually renamed " Stay Away " and given a new set of lyrics ) , " Sappy " , " Lithium " , " Here She Comes Now " ( released on Velvet Underground Tribute Album : Heaven and Hell Volume 1 ) , and " Polly " . The band had planned to record more tracks , but Cobain severely strained his voice on " Lithium , " forcing Nirvana to shut down recording . Vig was told that the group would come back to record more songs , but the producer did not hear anything for a while . Instead , Nirvana used the sessions as a demo tape to shop for a new label . Within a few months , the tape was circulating amongst major labels , creating a buzz around the group . 
 After signing to DGC , a number of producers for the album were suggested , including Scott Litt , David Briggs , and Don Dixon , but Nirvana still wanted Butch Vig . Novoselic noted in 2001 that the band was already nervous about recording on a major label , and the producers suggested by DGC wanted percentage points for working on the album . Instead , the band held out for Vig , with whom they felt comfortable collaborating . Afforded a budget of $ 65 @,@ 000 , Nirvana recorded Nevermind at Sound City Studios in Van Nuys , California in May and June 1991 . Nirvana was originally set to record the album during March and April 1991 , but the date kept getting pushed back in spite of the band 's eagerness to begin the sessions . To earn gas money to get to Los Angeles , Nirvana played a show where they performed " Smells Like Teen Spirit " for the first time . The band sent Vig some rehearsal tapes prior to the sessions that featured songs recorded previously at Smart Studios , along with some new ones including " Smells Like Teen Spirit " and " Come as You Are " . 
 When the group arrived in California , Nirvana did a few days of pre @-@ production where the band and Vig tightened up some of the song arrangements . The only recording carried over from the Smart Studios sessions was the song " Polly " , which included cymbal crashes performed by Chad Channing . Once recording commenced , the band worked eight to ten hours a day . The band members tended to take two or three tries at instrumental takes ; if the takes were not satisfactory at that point , they would move on to something else . The group had rehearsed the songs so much before recording started that often only a few takes were needed . Cobain used a variety of guitars , from <unk> to jaguars , and Novoselic used a black 1979 and natural 1976 Gibson Ripper . Novoselic and Grohl finished their bass and drum tracks in a matter of days , but Cobain had to work longer on guitar overdubs , singing , and particularly lyrics ( which sometimes were finished mere minutes before recording ) . Cobain 's phrasing was so consistent on various takes that Vig would mix the takes together to create overdubs . Vig says that he often had to trick Cobain into recording additional takes for overdubs since the singer was averse to performing multiple takes . In particular , Vig convinced Cobain to double @-@ track his vocals on the song " In Bloom " by telling him " John Lennon did it . " While the sessions went well generally , Vig said Cobain would become moody and difficult at times : " He 'd be great for an hour , and then he 'd sit in a corner and say nothing for an hour . " 
 After the recording sessions were completed , Vig and the band set out to mix the album . However , after a few days , both Vig and the band members realized that they were unhappy with how the mixes were turning out . As a result , they decided to call in someone else to oversee the mixing , with Geffen Records imprint DGC supplying a list of possible options . The list contained several familiar names , including Scott Litt ( known for his work with R.E.M. ) and Ed Stasium ( known for his work with The Ramones and The Smithereens ) . However , Cobain feared that bringing in known mixers would result in the album sounding like the work of those bands . Instead , Cobain chose Andy Wallace ( who had co @-@ produced Slayer 's 1990 album Seasons in the Abyss ) from the bottom of the list . Novoselic recalled , " We said , ' right on , ' because those Slayer records were so heavy . " Wallace ran the songs through various special effects boxes and tweaked the drum sounds , completing about one mix per day . Both Wallace and Vig noted years later that upon hearing Wallace 's work the band loved the mixes . After the album 's release , however , members of Nirvana expressed dissatisfaction with the polished sound the mixer had given Nevermind . Cobain said in Come as You Are , " Looking back on the production of Nevermind , I 'm embarrassed by it now . It 's closer to a Mötley Crüe record than it is a punk rock record . " 
 Nevermind was mastered on the afternoon of August 2 at The Mastering Lab in Hollywood , California . Howie Weinberg started working alone when no one else showed up at the appointed time in the studio ; by the time Nirvana , Andy Wallace , and Gary Gersh arrived , Weinberg had mastered most of the album . One of the songs mastered at the session , a hidden track called " Endless , Nameless " intended to appear at the end of " Something in the Way " , was accidentally left off initial pressings of the album . Weinberg recalled , " In the beginning , it was kind of a verbal thing to put that track at the end . Maybe I misconstrued their instructions , so you can call it my mistake if you want . Maybe I didn 't write it down when Nirvana or the record company said to do it . So , when they pressed the first twenty thousand or so CDs , albums , and cassettes , it wasn 't on there . " When the band discovered the song 's omission after listening to its copy of the album , Cobain called Weinberg and demanded he rectify the mistake . Weinberg complied and added about ten minutes of silence between the end of " Something in the Way " and the start of the hidden track on future pressings of the album . 
 = = Music = = 
 Cobain , Nirvana 's main songwriter , fashioned chord sequences using primarily power chords and wrote songs that combined pop hooks with dissonant guitar riffs . His aim for Nevermind 's material was to sound like " The Knack and the Bay City Rollers getting molested by Black Flag and Black Sabbath " . Many of the songs on Nevermind feature shifts in dynamics , where the band changes from quiet verses to loud choruses . Dave Grohl said this approach originated during a four @-@ month period prior to the recording of the album , where the band would experiment with extreme dynamics during regular jam sessions . 
 Guitar World wrote , " Kurt Cobain 's guitar sound on Nirvana 's Nevermind set the tone for Nineties rock music . " On Nevermind , Cobain played a 1960s Fender Mustang , a Fender Jaguar with DiMarzio pickups , and a few Fender <unk> with humbucker bridge pickups . The guitarist used distortion and chorus pedals as his main effects , the latter used to generate a " watery " sound on " Come as You Are " and the pre @-@ choruses of " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . Krist Novoselic tuned down his bass guitar one and a half steps to D flat " to get this fat @-@ ass sound . " 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Grohl said that Cobain told him , " Music comes first and lyrics come second , " and Grohl believes that above all Cobain focused on the melodies of his songs . Cobain was still working on the album 's lyrics well into the recording of Nevermind . Additionally , Cobain 's phrasing on the album is often difficult to understand . Vig asserted that clarity of Cobain 's singing was not paramount . Vig said , " Even though you couldn 't quite tell what he was singing about , you knew it was intense as hell . " Cobain would later complain when rock journalists attempted to decipher his singing and extract meaning from his lyrics , writing " Why in the hell do journalists insist on coming up with a second @-@ rate Freudian evaluation of my lyrics , when 90 percent of the time they 've transcribed them incorrectly ? " 
 Charles R. Cross asserted in his 2001 biography of Kurt Cobain , Heavier Than Heaven , that many of the songs written for Nevermind were about Cobain 's dysfunctional relationship with Tobi Vail . After their relationship ended , Cobain began writing and painting violent scenes , many of which revealed hatred for himself and others . Songs written during this period were less violent , but still reflected anger absent from Cobain 's earlier songs . Cross wrote " In the four months following their break @-@ up , Kurt would write a half dozen of his most memorable songs , all of them about Tobi Vail . " " Drain You " begins with the line " One baby to another said ' I 'm lucky to have met you , ' " quoting what Vail had once told Cobain , and the line " It is now my duty to completely drain you " refers to the power Vail had over Kurt in their relationship . According to Novoselic , " ' Lounge Act ' is about Tobi , " and the song contains the line " I 'll arrest myself , I 'll wear a shield , " referring to Cobain having the K Records logo tattooed on his arm to impress Vail . Though " Lithium " had been written before Cobain knew Vail , the lyrics of the song were changed to reference her . Cobain also said in an interview with Musician that " some of my very personal experiences , like breaking up with girlfriends and having bad relationships , feeling that death void that the person in the song is feeling – very lonely , sick . " 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The album 's tentative title Sheep was something Cobain created as an inside joke directed towards the people he expected to buy the record . He wrote a fake advertisement for Sheep in his journal that read " Because you want to not ; because everyone else is . " Novoselic said the inspiration for the title was the band 's cynicism about the public 's reaction to Operation Desert Storm . As recording sessions for the album were completed , Cobain grew tired of the title and suggested to Novoselic that the new album be named Nevermind . Cobain liked the title because it was a metaphor for his attitude on life and because it was grammatically incorrect . 
 The Nevermind album cover shows a naked baby boy , alone underwater with a US dollar bill on a fishhook just out of his reach . According to Cobain , he conceived the idea while watching a television program on water births with Grohl . Cobain mentioned it to Geffen 's art director Robert Fisher . Fisher found some stock footage of underwater births but they were too graphic for the record company . Also , the stock house that controlled the photo of a swimming baby that they subsequently settled on wanted $ 7 @,@ 500 a year for its use , so instead Fisher sent a photographer to a pool for babies to take pictures . Five shots resulted and the band settled on the image of a four @-@ month @-@ old infant named Spencer Elden , the son of the photographer 's friend . However , there was some concern because Elden 's circumcised penis was visible in the image . Geffen prepared an alternate cover without the penis , as they were afraid that it would offend people , but relented when Cobain made it clear that the only compromise he would accept was a sticker covering the penis that would say , " If you 're offended by this , you must be a closet pedophile . " 
 The back cover of the album features a photograph of a rubber monkey in front of a collage created by Cobain . The collage features photos of raw beef from a supermarket advertisement , images from Dante 's Inferno , and pictures of diseased vaginas from Cobain 's collection of medical photos . Cobain noted , " If you look real close , there is a picture of Kiss in the back standing on a slab of beef . " The album 's liner notes contain no complete song lyrics ; instead , the liner contains random song lyrics and unused lyrical fragments that Cobain arranged into a poem . However , the single for " Lithium " contains lyrics for each song in Nevermind . 
 = = Release = = 
 Nevermind was released on September 24 , 1991 . American record stores received an initial shipment of 46 @,@ 251 copies , while 35 @,@ 000 copies were shipped in the United Kingdom , where Bleach had been successful . The lead single " Smells Like Teen Spirit " had been released on September 10 with the intention of being a base @-@ building cut among alternative rock fans , while the next single " Come as You Are " would be the song that would possibly garner more attention . The band set out on a short American tour four days before the release date to support the album . Geffen Records hoped that Nevermind would sell around 250 @,@ 000 copies , which was the same level the record company had achieved with Sonic Youth 's Geffen debut Goo . The best estimate was that if all involved worked hard , the record could possibly be certified Gold by September 1992 . 
 The album debuted on the Billboard 200 at number 144 . Geffen shipped about half of the initial US pressing to the American Northwest , where it sold out quickly and was unavailable for days . Geffen reputedly put production of all other albums on hold in order to fulfill demand in the region . Nevermind was already selling well but , over the next few months , the momentum increased significantly as " Smells Like Teen Spirit " unexpectedly became more and more popular . The song 's video had received a world premiere on MTV 's late night alternative show 120 Minutes but it soon proved so popular that the channel began playing it during the day . The record was soon certified gold , but the band was relatively uninterested in the achievement . Novoselic recalled , " Yeah I was happy about it . It was pretty cool . It was kind of neat . But I don 't give a shit about some kind of achievement like that . It 's cool — I guess . " 
 As the band set out for their European tour at the start of November 1991 , Nevermind entered the Billboard Top 40 for the first time at number 35 . By this point , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " had become a genuine hit and the album was selling so fast none of Geffen 's marketing strategies aimed at different sales levels could be enacted . Geffen president Ed Rosenblatt told The New York Times , " We didn 't do anything . It was just one of those ' Get out of the way and duck ' records . " Nirvana found as they toured Europe during the end of 1991 that the shows were dangerously oversold , television crews became a constant presence onstage , and " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was almost omnipresent on radio and music television . 
 Nevermind became Nirvana 's first number one album on January 11 , 1992 , replacing Michael Jackson at the top of the Billboard charts . By this time , Nevermind was selling approximately 300 @,@ 000 copies a week . " Come as You Are " was finally released as the second single in March 1992 , also becoming a hit ; it peaked at number nine on the UK Singles Chart and at number 32 on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart . Two more singles , " Lithium " and " In Bloom " , were released from the album , which peaked at number 11 and 28 on the UK Singles Chart respectively . 
 Nevermind was certified gold and platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America in November 1991 , and was certified Diamond in March 1999 . It was also certified Diamond in Canada ( 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units sold ) by the Canadian Recording Industry Association in March 2001 and four times Platinum in the United Kingdom . In 1996 , Mobile Fidelity Sound Labs released Nevermind on vinyl as part of its <unk> 200 series , and as a 24 @-@ carat gold Compact Disc . The CD pressings included " Endless , Nameless " . The LP version quickly sold out its limited pressing but the CD edition stayed in print for years . In 2009 Original Recordings Group released Nevermind on limited edition 180g blue vinyl and regular 180g black vinyl mastered and cut by Bernie Grundman from the original analogue tapes . It has been praised in reviews for sound quality . 
 = = = 2011 Deluxe and Super Deluxe Editions = = = 
 In September 2011 , in honor of the album 's 20th anniversary , Universal Music Enterprises released a 2 @-@ CD Deluxe Edition and a 4 @-@ CD / 1 @-@ DVD Super Deluxe Edition of Nevermind . The first disc on both editions feature the original album with studio and live b @-@ sides . The second disc on both editions features early recordings of sessions that featured songs that would later appear on the album , including the Smart Studio sessions and some band rehearsals recorded with a boombox . The second disc is rounded out by two BBC session recordings . The third disc , exclusive to the Super Deluxe Edition , features alternate mixes made by Butch Vig , dubbed the ' Devonshire Mixes ' , of all the songs on the album except " Polly " and " Endless , Nameless " . The fourth and fifth discs on the Super Deluxe Editions are CD and DVD versions of Live at the Paramount . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Geffen 's press promotion for Nevermind was lower than that typical of a major record label . The label 's publicist primarily targeted music publications with long lead times for publication as well as magazines in the Seattle area . The unexpectedly positive feedback from critics who had received the album convinced the label to consider increasing the album 's original print run . 
 At first , Nevermind did not receive many reviews , and many publications ignored the album . Months after its release and after " Smells Like Teen Spirit " garnered airplay , print media organizations were " scrambling " to cover the phenomenon the album had become . However , by that point much of the attention fell on Cobain rather than the album itself . The reviews that did initially appear were largely positive . Karen Schoemer of The New York Times wrote , " With ' Nevermind , ' Nirvana has certainly succeeded . There are enough intriguing textures , mood shifts , instrumental snippets and inventive word plays to provide for hours of entertainment . " Schoemer concluded , " ' Nevermind ' is more sophisticated and carefully produced than anything peer bands like Dinosaur Jr. and Mudhoney have yet offered . " Entertainment Weekly gave Nevermind an A – rating , and reviewer David Browne argued that on Nevermind , Nirvana " never entertain the notion " of wanting to sound " normal , " compared to other contemporary alternative bands . Concluding his very enthusiastic review for the British Melody Maker , Everett True wrote that " When Nirvana released Bleach all those years ago , the more <unk> among us figured they had the potential to make an album that would blow every other contender away . My God have they proved us right . " Spin gave Nevermind a favorable review stating that " you 'll be humming all the songs for the rest of your life — or at least until your CD @-@ tape @-@ album wears out . " Select compared the band to Jane 's Addiction , Sonic Youth , and the Pixies , stating that the album " proves that Nirvana truly belong in such high company . " 
 Some of the reviews were not entirely positive . Rolling Stone originally gave the album three out of five stars . Reviewer Ira Robbins wrote , " If Nirvana isn 't onto anything altogether new , Nevermind does possess the songs , character and confident spirit to be much more than a reformulation of college radio 's high @-@ octane hits . " The Boston Globe was less enthusiastic about the album ; reviewer Steve Morse wrote , " Most of Nevermind is packed with generic punk @-@ pop that had been done by countless acts from Iggy Pop to the Red Hot Chili Peppers , " and added " the band has little or nothing to say , settling for moronic ramblings by singer @-@ lyricist Cobain . " 
 Nevermind was voted as the best album of the year in The Village Voice Pazz & Jop critics ' poll ; " Smells Like Teen Spirit " also topped the single of the year and video of the year polls . Nevermind topped the poll by a large majority , and Village Voice critic Robert Christgau wrote in his companion piece to the poll , " As a modest pop surprise they might have scored a modest victory , like De La Soul in 1990 . Instead , their multi @-@ platinum takeover constituted the first full @-@ scale public validation of the Amerindie values — the noise , the toons , the ' tude — the radder half of the [ Pazz & Jop poll ] electorate came up on . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Nevermind not only popularized the Seattle grunge movement , but also brought alternative rock as a whole into the mainstream , establishing its commercial and cultural viability . Nevermind 's success surprised Nirvana 's contemporaries , who felt dwarfed by its impact . Fugazi 's Guy <unk> later commented : " It was like our record could have been a hobo pissing in the forest for the amount of impact it had . [ ... ] It felt like we were playing ukuleles all of a sudden because of the disparity of the impact of what they did " . Karen Schoemer of the New York Times added that , " What 's unusual about Nirvana 's " Nevermind " is that it caters to neither a mainstream audience nor the indie rock fans who supported the group 's debut album . " In 1992 , Jon Pareles of The New York Times described that in the aftermath of the album 's breakthrough , " Suddenly , all bets are off . No one has the inside track on which of dozens , perhaps hundreds , of ornery , obstreperous , unkempt bands might next appeal to the mall @-@ walking millions " . Record company executives offered large advances and record deals to bands , and previous strategies of building audiences for alternative rock bands had been replaced by the opportunity to achieve mainstream popularity quickly . 
 Michael Azerrad argued in his Nirvana biography Come as You Are : The Story of Nirvana ( 1993 ) that Nevermind marked an epochal generational shift in music similar to the rock @-@ and @-@ roll explosion in the 1950s and the end of the baby boomer generation 's dominance of the musical landscape . Azerrad wrote , " Nevermind came along at exactly the right time . This was music by , for , and about a whole new group of young people who had been overlooked , ignored , or condescended to . " In its citation placing it at number 17 in its 2003 list of the 500 greatest albums of all time , Rolling Stone said , " No album in recent history had such an overpowering impact on a generation — a nation of teens suddenly turned punk — and such a catastrophic effect on its main creator . " Gary Gersh , who signed Nirvana to Geffen Records , added that , " There is a pre @-@ Nirvana and post @-@ Nirvana record business ... ' Nevermind ' showed that this wasn 't some alternative thing happening off in a corner , and then back to reality . This is reality . " 
 Nevermind has continued to garner critical praise since its release . The album was listed at number 17 on Rolling Stone 's list " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . Rolling Stone also rated Nevermind as the number one best album of the 1990s , calling it the " album that guaranteed the nineties would not suck . " Time placed Nevermind , which writer Josh Tyrangiel called " the finest album of the 90s " , on its 2006 list of " The All @-@ TIME 100 Albums " . Pitchfork named the album the sixth best of the decade , noting that " anyone who hates this record today is just trying to be cool , and needs to be trying harder . " In 2006 , readers of Guitar World ranked Nevermind 8th on a list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Recordings . Entertainment Weekly named it the 10th best album of all time on their 2013 list . In 2005 , the Library of Congress added Nevermind to the National Recording Registry , which collects " culturally , historically or aesthetically important " sound recordings from the 20th century . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 Later pressings include " Endless , Nameless , " which begins as a hidden track at the 3 : 46 mark , making track 12 's length 10 : 29 . 
 = = = 20th anniversary edition bonus tracks = = = 
 Disc one 
 " Even in His Youth " ( " Smells Like Teen Spirit " b @-@ side ) – 3 : 03 
 " Aneurysm " ( Cobain , Novoselic , Grohl ) ( " Smells Like Teen Spirit " b @-@ side ) – 4 : 46 
 " Curmudgeon " ( Cobain , Novoselic , Grohl ) ( " Lithium " b @-@ side ) – 2 : 59 
 " D @-@ 7 " ( Greg Sage ) ( " Lithium " b @-@ side ) – 3 : 45 
 " Been a Son " ( Live , " Lithium " b @-@ side ) – 2 : 31 
 " School " ( Live , " Come as You Are " b @-@ side ) – 2 : 33 
 " Drain You " ( Live , " Come as You Are " b @-@ side ) – 3 : 53 
 " Sliver " ( Live , " In Bloom " b @-@ side ) – 2 : 04 
 " Polly " ( Live , " In Bloom " b @-@ side ) – 2 : 47 
 Disc two – Smart Sessions , Boombox Rehearsals , BBC Sessions 
 " In Bloom " ( April 1990 , Smart Studios ) – 4 : 32 
 " <unk> ( Breed ) " ( April 1990 , Smart Studios ) – 3 : 15 
 " Lithium " ( April 1990 , Smart Studios ) – 4 : 31 
 " Polly " ( April 1990 , Smart Studios ) – 2 : 59 
 " Pay to Play " ( April 1990 , Smart Studios ) – 3 : 29 ( Originally released on the DGC Rarities Vol . 1 compilation album in 1994 , this song was recorded in 1990 and eventually evolved into " Stay Away " on Nevermind in 1991 with new lyrics ) . 
 " Here She Comes Now " ( John Cale , Lou Reed , Maureen Tucker , Sterling Morrison ) ( April 1990 , Smart Studios ) – 5 : 01 ( Originally released on the Heaven & Hell : A Tribute to The Velvet Underground compilation album in 1990 ) . 
 " Dive " ( April 1990 , Smart Studios ) – 3 : 54 
 " Sappy " ( April 1990 , Smart Studios ) – 3 : 57 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " ( March 1991 , Tacoma rehearsal space ) – 5 : 40 
 " Verse Chorus Verse " ( March 1991 , Tacoma rehearsal space ) – 3 : 14 
 " Territorial Pissings " ( March 1991 , Tacoma rehearsal space ) – 2 : 12 
 " Lounge Act " ( March 1991 , Tacoma rehearsal space ) – 2 : 38 
 " Come as You Are " ( March 1991 , Tacoma rehearsal space ) – 4 : 12 
 " Old Age " ( March 1991 , Tacoma rehearsal space ) – 4 : 32 
 " Something in the Way " ( March 1991 , Tacoma rehearsal space ) – 5 : 31 
 " On a Plain " ( March 1991 , Tacoma rehearsal space ) – 3 : 21 
 " Drain You " ( September 1991 , BBC Studios ) – 4 : 04 
 " Something in the Way " ( November 1991 , BBC Studios ) – 3 : 23 
 = = = Super Deluxe Edition bonuses = = = 
 Disc three – Nevermind : The Devonshire Mixes 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " – 5 : 02 
 " In Bloom " – 4 : 16 
 " Come as You Are " – 3 : 40 
 " Breed " – 3 : 04 
 " Lithium " – 4 : 18 
 " Territorial Pissings " – 2 : 14 
 " Drain You " – 3 : 41 
 " Lounge Act " – 2 : 37 
 " Stay Away " – 3 : 27 
 " On a Plain " – 3 : 28 
 " Something in the Way " – 3 : 55 
 Disc four and DVD – Live at the Paramount 
 " Jesus Don 't Want Me for a Sunbeam " ( Eugene Kelly , Frances McKee ) – 3 : 29 
 " Aneurysm " – 4 : 49 
 " Drain You " – 3 : 46 
 " School " – 2 : 51 
 " Floyd the Barber " – 2 : 27 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " – 4 : 45 
 " About a Girl " – 3 : 13 
 " Polly " – 3 : 03 
 " Breed " – 3 : 10 
 " Sliver " – 2 : 11 
 " Love Buzz " ( Robbie van Leeuwen ) – 3 : 34 
 " Lithium " – 4 : 38 
 " Been a Son " – 2 : 15 
 " Negative Creep " – 2 : 43 
 " On a Plain " – 3 : 04 
 " Blew " – 4 : 09 
 " Rape Me " – 2 : 59 
 " Territorial Pissings " – 2 : 55 
 " Endless , Nameless " – 6 : 25 
 DVD music videos 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " – 4 : 38 
 " Come as You Are " – 3 : 46 
 " Lithium " – 4 : 15 
 " In Bloom " – 4 : 59 
 NOTE : The first disc of the deluxe edition was issued individually as a Target exclusive . The deluxe edition was later issued as a special limited 4 @-@ LP set . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Nirvana 
 Kurt Cobain ( credited for the " Monkey Photo " as Kurdt <unk> ) – lead and backing vocals , guitar , acoustic guitar on " Polly " and " Something in the Way " , photography 
 Krist Novoselic ( credited as Chris Novoselic ) – bass , voice on intro of " Territorial Pissings " 
 Dave Grohl – drums , backing vocals 
 Additional musicians 
 Chad Channing – cymbals on " Polly " ( uncredited ) , drums on the " Smart Studio Sessions " ( Deluxe Edition ) 
 Kirk Canning – cello on " Something in the Way " 
 Technical staff and artwork 
 Craig Doubet – assistant engineering , mixing 
 Spencer Elden – infant in cover photo 
 Robert Fisher – artwork , art direction , design , cover design 
 Michael Lavine – photography 
 Bob Ludwig – mastering on 20th Anniversary Edition 
 Jeff Sheehan – assistant engineer 
 Butch Vig – co @-@ producer , engineer 
 Andy Wallace – mixing 
 Howie Weinberg – mastering 
 Kirk Weddle – cover photo 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Otaku = 
 Otaku ( おたく / <unk> ) is a Japanese term for people with obsessive interests , commonly the anime and manga fandom . Its contemporary usage originated with Akio Nakamori 's 1983 essay in Manga <unk> . Otaku may be used as a pejorative ; its negativity stems from the stereotypical view of otaku and the media 's reporting on Tsutomu Miyazaki , " The Otaku Murderer " , in 1989 . According to studies published in 2013 , the term has become less negative , and an increasing number of people now self @-@ identify as otaku . 
 Otaku subculture is a central theme of various anime and manga works , documentaries and academic research . The subculture began in the 1980s as changing social mentalities and the nurturing of otaku traits by Japanese schools combined with the resignation of such individuals to become social outcasts . The subculture 's birth coincided with the anime boom , after the release of works like Mobile Suit Gundam before it branched into Comic Market . The definition of otaku subsequently became more complex , and numerous classifications of otaku emerged . In 2005 , the Nomura Research Institute divided otaku into twelve groups and estimated the size and market impact of each of these groups . Other institutions have split it further or focus on a single otaku interest . These publications classify distinct groups including anime , manga , camera , automobile , idol and electronics otaku . The economic impact of otaku has been estimated to be as high as ¥ 2 trillion ( $ 18 billion ) . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Otaku is derived from a Japanese term for another person 's house or family ( <unk> , otaku ) . This word is often used metaphorically , as an honorific second @-@ person pronoun . In this usage , its literal translation is " you " . For example , in the anime Macross , first aired in 1982 , the character Lynn <unk> uses the term this way . The modern slang form , which is distinguished from the older usage by being written only in hiragana ( おたく ) , katakana ( <unk> or , less frequently , <unk> ) or rarely in <unk> , first appeared in public discourse in the 1980s , through the work of humorist and essayist Akio Nakamori . His 1983 series An Investigation of " Otaku " ( 『 おたく 』 <unk> , " Otaku " no <unk> ) , printed in the lolicon magazine Manga <unk> , applied the term to unpleasant fans in caricature . Animators Haruhiko <unk> and Shōji Kawamori had used the term among themselves as an honorific second @-@ person pronoun since the late 1970s . Supposedly , some fans used it past the point in their relationships where others would have moved on to a less formal style . Because this misuse indicated social awkwardness , Nakamori chose the word itself to label the fans . Morikawa <unk> , an author and lecturer at Meiji University , identified this as the origin of its contemporary usage . 
 Another claim for the origin of the term comes from the works of science fiction author Motoko Arai , who used the word in her novels as a second @-@ person pronoun and the readers adopted the term for themselves . However , a different claim points to a 1981 Variety magazine essay . 
 In 1989 , the case of Tsutomu Miyazaki , " The Otaku Murderer " , brought the fandom , very negatively , to national attention . Miyazaki , who randomly chose and murdered four girls , had a collection of 5 @,@ 763 videotapes , some containing anime and slasher films that were found interspersed with videos and pictures of his victims . Later that year , the contemporary knowledge magazine Bessatsu <unk> dedicated its 104th issue to the topic of otaku . It was called Otaku no Hon ( <unk> , lit . The Book of Otaku ) and delved into the subculture of otaku with 19 articles by otaku insiders , among them Akio Nakamori . This publication has been claimed by scholar Rudyard <unk> to have popularized the term . 
 = = Usage = = 
 In modern Japanese slang , the term otaku is mostly equivalent to " geek " or " nerd " , but in a more derogatory manner than used in the West . However , it can relate to any fan of any particular theme , topic , hobby or form of entertainment . " When these people are referred to as otaku , they are judged for their behaviors - and people suddenly see an “ otaku ” as a person unable to relate to reality " . The word entered English as a loanword from the Japanese language . It is typically used to refer to a fan of anime / manga but can also refer to Japanese video games or Japanese culture in general . The American magazine Otaku USA <unk> and covers these aspects . The usage of the word is a source of contention among some fans , owing to its negative connotations and stereotyping of the fandom . Widespread English exposure to the term came in 1988 with the release of Gunbuster , which referred to anime fans as otaku . Gunbuster was released officially in English in March 1990 . The term 's usage spread throughout <unk> with discussions about Otaku no Video 's portrayal of otaku before its 1994 English release . Positive and negative aspects , including the pejorative usage , were intermixed . The term was also popularized by William Gibson 's 1996 novel Idoru , which references otaku . 
 = = Subculture = = 
 Morikawa <unk> identifies the subculture as distinctly Japanese , a product of the school system and society . Japanese schools have a class structure which functions as a caste system , but clubs are an exception to the social hierarchy . In these clubs , a student 's interests will be recognized and nurtured , catering to the interests of otaku . Secondly , the vertical structure of Japanese society identifies the value of individuals by their success . Until the late 1980s , unathletic and unattractive males focused on academics , hoping to secure a good job and marry to raise their social standing . Those unable to succeed socially focused instead on their interests , often into adulthood , with their lifestyle centering on those interests , furthering the creation of the otaku subculture . 
 Even prior to the coinage of the term , the stereotypical traits of the subculture were identified in a 1981 issue of Fan Rōdo ( Fan road ) about " culture clubs " . These individuals were drawn to anime , a counter @-@ culture , with the release of hard science fiction works like Mobile Suit Gundam . These works allowed a congregation and development of obsessive interests that turned anime into a medium for unpopular students , catering to obsessed fans . After these fans discovered Comic Market , the term was used as a self @-@ confirming and self @-@ mocking collective identity . 
 The 1989 " Otaku Murderer " case gave a negative connotation to the fandom from which it has not fully recovered . The usage of " ( interest ) otaku " , however , is used for teasing or self @-@ deprecation , but the unqualified term remains negative . The identification of otaku turned negative in late 2004 when Kaoru Kobayashi kidnapped , sexually assaulted , and murdered a seven @-@ year @-@ old first @-@ grade student . Japanese journalist Akihiro Ōtani suspected that Kobayashi 's crime was committed by a member of the figure moe <unk> even before his arrest . Although Kobayashi was not an otaku , the degree of social hostility against otaku increased . Otaku were seen by law enforcement as possible suspects for sex crimes , and local governments called for stricter laws controlling the depiction of eroticism in otaku materials . 
 Not all attention has been negative . In his book , Otaku , Hiroki Azuma observed : " Between 2001 and 2007 , the otaku forms and markets quite rapidly won social recognition in Japan " , citing the fact that " [ i ] n 2003 , Hayao Miyazaki won the Academy Award for his Spirited Away ; around the same time Takashi Murakami achieved recognition for otaku @-@ like designs ; in 2004 , the Japanese pavilion in the 2004 International Architecture exhibition of the Venice Biennale ( Biennale Architecture ) featured “ otaku ” . In 2005 , the word moe - one of the keywords of the present volume - was chosen as one of the top ten “ buzzwords of the year . " The former Prime Minister of Japan Taro Aso has also claimed to be an otaku , using this subculture to promote Japan in foreign affairs . In 2013 , a Japanese study of 137 @,@ 734 people found that 42 @.@ 2 % self @-@ identify as a type of otaku . This study suggests that the stigma of the word has vanished , and the term has been embraced by many . 
 = = = Places = = = 
 The district of Akihabara in Tokyo , where there are maid cafes featuring waitresses who dress up and act like maids or anime characters , is a notable attraction center for otaku . Akihabara also has dozens of stores specializing in anime , manga , retro video games , figurines , card games and other collectibles . Another popular location is Otome Road in Ikebukuro , Tokyo . In Nagoya , students from Nagoya City University started a project on ways to help promote hidden tourist attractions related to the otaku culture to attract more otaku to the city . 
 = = = Subtypes = = = 
 There are specific terms for different types of otaku , including <unk> ( <unk> , lit . " rotten girl " ) , a self @-@ mockingly pejorative Japanese term for female fans of yaoi , which focuses on homosexual male relationships . <unk> @-@ jo are female otaku who are interested in Japanese history . Some terms refer to a location , like Akiba @-@ kei , a slang term meaning " Akihabara @-@ style " which applies to those familiar with Akihabara 's culture . Another is <unk> or <unk> ( <unk> or <unk> ) , a type of cheering that is part of Akiba @-@ kei . Other terms , such as <unk> ( <unk> ) , literally " painful car " , describe vehicles who are decorated with fictional characters , especially bishōjo game or eroge characters . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Otaku often participate in self @-@ mocking through the production or interest in humor directed at their subculture . Anime and manga otaku are the subject of numerous self @-@ critical works , like Otaku no Video , which contains a live @-@ interview mockumentary that pokes fun at the otaku subculture and includes Gainax 's own staff as the interviewees . Other works depict otaku subculture less critically , like <unk> and Comic Party . A well @-@ known novel @-@ cum @-@ manga @-@ cum @-@ anime is Welcome to the <unk> , which focuses on the subcultures popular with otaku and highlights other social outcasts like the hikikomori and <unk> . Works that focus on an otaku character include <unk> , the story of an unattractive and unsociable otome game otaku who exhibits delusions about her social status . <unk> is a self @-@ mocking insight that follows the heroine 's delusion and attempts to reform herself only by facing reality with comedic results on the path to popularity . An American documentary , Otaku Unite ! , focuses on the American side of the otaku culture . 
 = = Types and classification of Japanese otaku = = 
 The Nomura Research Institute ( NRI ) has made two major studies into otaku , the first in 2004 and a revised study with a more specific definition in 2005 . The 2005 study defines twelve major fields of otaku interests . Of these groups , manga ( Japanese comics ) was the largest , with 350 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 83 billion market scale . Idol otaku were the next largest group , with 280 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 61 billion . Travel otaku with 250 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 81 billion . PC otaku with 190 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 36 billion . Video game otaku with 160 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 21 billion . Automobile otaku with 140 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 54 billion . Animation ( anime ) otaku with 110 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 20 billion . The remaining five categories include Mobile IT equipment otaku , with 70 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 8 billion ; Audio @-@ visual equipment otaku , with 60 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 12 billion ; camera otaku , with 50 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 18 billion ; fashion otaku , with 40 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 13 billion ; and railway otaku , with 20 @,@ 000 individuals and ¥ 4 billion . These values were partially released with a much higher estimation in 2004 , but this definition focused on the consumerism and not the " unique psychological characteristics " of otaku used in the 2005 study . 
 NRI 's 2005 study also put forth five archetypes of otaku . The first is the family @-@ oriented otaku , who has broad interests and is more mature than other otaku ; their object of interest is secretive and they are " closet otaku " . The second is the serious " leaving my own mark on the world " otaku , with interests in mechanical or business personality fields . The third type is the " media @-@ sensitive multiple interest " otaku , whose diverse interests are shared with others . The fourth type is the " outgoing and assertive otaku " , who gain recognition by promoting their hobby . The last is the " fan magazine @-@ obsessed otaku " , which is predominately female with the a small group of males being the " moe type " ; the secret hobby is focused on the production or interest in fan works . The <unk> Research Institute found that moe @-@ related content was worth ¥ 88 @.@ 8 billion ( $ 807 million ) in 2005 , and one analyst estimated the market could be as much as ¥ 2 trillion ( $ 18 billion ) . Japan based Tokyo Otaku Mode a place for news relating to Otaku has been liked on Facebook almost 10 million times . 
 Other classifications of otaku interests include <unk> , cosplay , figures and professional wrestling as categorized by the Yano Research Institute . Yano Research reports and the tracks market growth and trends in sectors heavily influenced by otaku consumerism . In 2012 , it noted around 30 % growth in dating sim and online gaming otaku , while <unk> , cosplay , idols and maid services grew by 10 % , confirming its 2011 predictions . 
 = Bicycle and motorcycle dynamics = 
 Bicycle and motorcycle dynamics is the science of the motion of bicycles and motorcycles and their components , due to the forces acting on them . Dynamics is a branch of classical mechanics , which in turn is a branch of physics . Bike motions of interest include balancing , steering , braking , accelerating , suspension activation , and vibration . The study of these motions began in the late 19th century and continues today . 
 Bicycles and motorcycles are both single @-@ track vehicles and so their motions have many fundamental attributes in common and are fundamentally different from and more difficult to study than other wheeled vehicles such as <unk> , tricycles , and <unk> . As with unicycles , bikes lack lateral stability when stationary , and under most circumstances can only remain upright when moving forward . Experimentation and mathematical analysis have shown that a bike stays upright when it is steered to keep its center of mass over its wheels . This steering is usually supplied by a rider , or in certain circumstances , by the bike itself . Several factors , including geometry , mass distribution , and gyroscopic effect all contribute in varying degrees to this self @-@ stability , but long @-@ standing hypotheses and claims that any single effect , such as gyroscopic or trail , is solely responsible for the stabilizing force have been discredited . 
 While remaining upright may be the primary goal of beginning riders , a bike must lean in order to maintain balance in a turn : the higher the speed or smaller the turn radius , the more lean is required . This balances the roll torque about the wheel contact patches generated by centrifugal force due to the turn with that of the gravitational force . This lean is usually produced by a momentary steering in the opposite direction , called countersteering . <unk> skill is usually acquired by motor learning and executed via procedural memory rather than by conscious thought . Unlike other wheeled vehicles , the primary control input on bikes is steering torque , not position . 
 Although longitudinally stable when stationary , bikes often have a high enough center of mass and a short enough wheelbase to lift a wheel off the ground under sufficient acceleration or deceleration . When braking , depending on the location of the combined center of mass of the bike and rider with respect to the point where the front wheel contacts the ground , bikes can either skid the front wheel or flip the bike and rider over the front wheel . A similar situation is possible while accelerating , but with respect to the rear wheel . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of the study of bike dynamics is nearly as old as the bicycle itself . It includes contributions from famous scientists such as Rankine , Appell , and Whipple . In the early 19th century Karl von <unk> , credited with inventing the two @-@ wheeled vehicle variously called the <unk> , velocipede , <unk> , and dandy horse , showed that a rider could balance his device by steering the front wheel . In 1869 , Rankine published an article in The Engineer repeating von <unk> 's assertion that balance is maintained by steering in the direction of a lean . 
 In 1897 , the French Academy of Sciences made understanding bicycle dynamics the goal of its Prix <unk> competition . Thus , by the end of the 19th century , Carlo <unk> , Emmanuel <unk> , and Francis Whipple had showed with rigid @-@ body dynamics that some safety bicycles could actually balance themselves if moving at the right speed . <unk> won the Prix <unk> , and Whipple won the Cambridge University Smith Prize . It is not clear to whom should go the credit for tilting the steering axis from the vertical which helps make this possible . 
 In 1970 , David E. H. Jones published an article in Physics Today showing that gyroscopic effects are not necessary to balance a bicycle . Since 1971 , when he identified and named the wobble , weave and capsize modes , Robin Sharp has written regularly about the behavior of motorcycles and bicycles . While at Imperial College , London , he worked with David <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 In the early 1970s , Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory ( CAL , later Calspan Corporation in Buffalo , NY USA ) was sponsored by the <unk> Bicycle Company and others to study and simulate bicycle and motorcycle dynamics . Portions of this work have now been released to the public and scans of over 30 detailed reports have been posted at this TU Delft Bicycle Dynamics site . 
 Since the 1990s , <unk> , et al . , have been researching motorcycle dynamics at the University of Padova . Their research , both experimental and numerical , has covered weave , wobble , chatter , simulators , vehicle modelling , tire modelling , handling , and minimum lap time maneuvering . 
 In 2007 , <unk> , et al . , published the canonical linearized equations of motion , in the Proceedings of the Royal Society A , along with verification by two different methods . These equations assumed the tires to roll without slip , that is to say , to go where they point , and the rider to be rigidly attached to the rear frame of the bicycle . 
 In 2011 , <unk> , et al . , published an article in Science showing that neither gyroscopic effects nor so @-@ called caster effects due to trail are necessary for a bike to balance itself . They designed a two @-@ mass @-@ skate bicycle that the equations of motion predict is self @-@ stable even with negative trail , the front wheel contacts the ground in front of the steering axis , and with counter @-@ rotating wheels to cancel any gyroscopic effects . Then they constructed a physical model to validate that prediction . This may require some of the details provided below about steering geometry or stability to be re @-@ evaluated . Bicycle dynamics was named 26 of Discover 's 100 top stories of 2011 . 
 In 2013 , Eddy Merckx Cycles was awarded over € 150 @,@ 000 with Ghent University to examine bicycle stability . 
 = = Forces = = 
 If the bike and rider are considered to be a single system , the forces that act on that system and its components can be roughly divided into two groups : internal and external . The external forces are due to gravity , inertia , contact with the ground , and contact with the atmosphere . The internal forces are caused by the rider and by interaction between components . 
 = = = External forces = = = 
 As with all masses , gravity pulls the rider and all the bike components toward the earth . At each tire contact patch there are ground reaction forces with both horizontal and vertical components . The vertical components mostly counteract the force of gravity , but also vary with braking and accelerating . For details , see the section on longitudinal stability below . The horizontal components , due to friction between the wheels and the ground , including rolling resistance , are in response to propulsive forces , braking forces , and turning forces . Aerodynamic forces due to the atmosphere are mostly in the form of drag , but can also be from crosswinds . At normal bicycling speeds on level ground , aerodynamic drag is the largest force resisting forward motion . At faster speed , aerodynamic drag becomes overwhelmingly the largest force resisting forward motion . 
 Turning forces are generated during maneuvers for balancing in addition to just changing direction of travel . These may be interpreted as centrifugal forces in the accelerating reference frame of the bike and rider ; or simply as inertia in a stationary , inertial reference frame and not forces at all . Gyroscopic forces acting on rotating parts such as wheels , engine , transmission , etc . , are also due to the inertia of those rotating parts . They are discussed further in the section on gyroscopic effects below . 
 = = = Internal forces = = = 
 Internal forces , those between components of the bike and rider system , are mostly caused by the rider or by friction . In addition to pedaling , the rider can apply torques between the steering mechanism ( front fork , handlebars , front wheel , etc . ) and rear frame , and between the rider and the rear frame . Friction exists between any parts that move against each other : in the drive train , between the steering mechanism and the rear frame , etc . In addition to brakes , which create friction between rotating wheels and non @-@ rotating frame parts , many bikes have front and rear suspensions . Some motorcycles and bicycles have a steering damper to dissipate undesirable kinetic energy , and some bicycles have a spring connecting the front fork to the frame to provide a progressive torque that tends to steer the bicycle straight ahead . On bikes with rear suspensions , feedback between the drive train and the suspension is an issue designers attempt to handle with various linkage configurations and dampers . 
 = = Motions = = 
 Motions of a bike can be roughly grouped into those out of the central plane of symmetry : lateral ; and those in the central plane of symmetry : longitudinal or vertical . Lateral motions include balancing , leaning , steering , and turning . Motions in the central plane of symmetry include rolling forward , of course , but also <unk> , wheelies , brake diving , and most suspension activation . Motions in these two groups are linearly decoupled , that is they do not interact with each other to the first order . An uncontrolled bike is laterally unstable when stationary and can be laterally self @-@ stable when moving under the right conditions or when controlled by a rider . Conversely , a bike is longitudinally stable when stationary and can be longitudinally unstable when undergoing sufficient acceleration or deceleration . 
 = = Lateral dynamics = = 
 Of the two , lateral dynamics has proven to be the more complicated , requiring three @-@ dimensional , <unk> dynamic analysis with at least two generalized coordinates to analyze . At a minimum , two coupled , second @-@ order differential equations are required to capture the principal motions . Exact solutions are not possible , and numerical methods must be used instead . Competing theories of how bikes balance can still be found in print and online . On the other hand , as shown in later sections , much longitudinal dynamic analysis can be accomplished simply with planar kinetics and just one coordinate . 
 = = = Balance = = = 
 When discussing bike balance , it is necessary to distinguish carefully between " stability " , " self @-@ stability " , and " controllability " . Recent research suggests that " rider @-@ controlled stability of bicycles is indeed related to their self @-@ stability . " 
 A bike remains upright when it is steered so that the ground reaction forces exactly balance all the other internal and external forces it experiences , such as gravitational if leaning , inertial or centrifugal if in a turn , gyroscopic if being steered , and aerodynamic if in a crosswind . Steering may be supplied by a rider or , under certain circumstances , by the bike itself . This self @-@ stability is generated by a combination of several effects that depend on the geometry , mass distribution , and forward speed of the bike . Tires , suspension , steering damping , and frame flex can also influence it , especially in motorcycles . 
 Even when staying relatively motionless , a rider can balance a bike by the same principle . While performing a track stand , the rider can keep the line between the two contact patches under the combined center of mass by steering the front wheel to one side or the other and then moving forward and backward slightly to move the front contact patch from side to side as necessary . Forward motion can be generated simply by pedaling . Backwards motion can be generated the same way on a fixed @-@ gear bicycle . Otherwise , the rider can take advantage of an opportune slope of the pavement or lurch the upper body backwards while the brakes are momentarily engaged . 
 If the steering of a bike is locked , it becomes virtually impossible to balance while riding . On the other hand , if the gyroscopic effect of rotating bike wheels is cancelled by adding counter @-@ rotating wheels , it is still easy to balance while riding . One other way that a bike can be balanced , with or without locked steering , is by applying appropriate torques between the bike and rider similar to the way a gymnast can swing up from hanging straight down on uneven parallel bars , a person can start swinging on a swing from rest by pumping their legs , or a double inverted pendulum can be controlled with an actuator only at the elbow . 
 = = = = Forward speed = = = = 
 The rider applies torque to the handlebars in order to turn the front wheel and so to control lean and maintain balance . At high speeds , small steering angles quickly move the ground contact points laterally ; at low speeds , larger steering angles are required to achieve the same results in the same amount of time . Because of this , it is usually easier to maintain balance at high speeds . Also , self @-@ stability usually only occurs at speeds above some minimum , and so going faster increases the chances that a bike is contributing to its own stability . 
 = = = = Center of mass location = = = = 
 The farther forward ( closer to front wheel ) the center of mass of the combined bike and rider , the less the front wheel has to move laterally in order to maintain balance . Conversely , the further back ( closer to the rear wheel ) the center of mass is located , the more front wheel lateral movement or bike forward motion will be required to regain balance . This can be noticeable on long @-@ wheelbase recumbents , choppers , and wheelie bikes . It can also be an issue for touring bikes with a heavy load of gear over or even behind the rear wheel . Mass over the rear wheel can be more easily controlled if it is lower than mass over the front wheel . 
 A bike is also an example of an inverted pendulum . Just as a broomstick is easier to balance than a pencil , a tall bike ( with a high center of mass ) can be easier to balance when ridden than a low one because its lean rate will be slower . However , a rider can have the opposite impression of a bike when it is stationary . A top @-@ heavy bike can require more effort to keep upright , when stopped in traffic for example , than a bike which is just as tall but with a lower center of mass . This is an example of a vertical second @-@ class lever . A small force at the end of the lever , the seat or handlebars at the top of the bike , more easily moves a large mass if the mass is closer to the fulcrum , where the tires touch the ground . This is why touring cyclists are advised to carry loads low on a bike , and panniers hang down on either side of front and rear racks . 
 = = = = Trail = = = = 
 A factor that influences how easy or difficult a bike will be to ride is trail , the distance that the front wheel ground contact point trails behind the steering axis ground contact point . The steering axis is the axis about which the entire steering mechanism ( fork , handlebars , front wheel , etc . ) pivots . In traditional bike designs , with a steering axis tilted back from the vertical , positive trail tends to steer the front wheel into the direction of a lean , independent of forward speed . This can be simulated by pushing a stationary bike to one side . The front wheel will usually also steer to that side . In a lean , gravity provides this force . The dynamics of a moving bike are more complicated , however , and other factors can contribute to or detract from this effect . 
 Trail is a function of head angle , fork offset or rake , and wheel size . Their relationship can be described by this formula : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is wheel radius , <formula> is the head angle measured clock @-@ wise from the horizontal and <formula> is the fork offset or rake . Trail can be increased by increasing the wheel size , decreasing the head angle , or decreasing the fork rake . 
 The more trail a traditional bike has , the more stable it feels , although too much trail can make a bike feel difficult to steer . Bikes with negative trail ( where the contact patch is in front of where the steering axis intersects the ground ) , while still rideable , are reported to feel very unstable . Normally , road racing bicycles have more trail than touring bikes but less than mountain bikes . Mountain bikes are designed with reduced head angles than road bikes to improve stability for descents , and therefore have greater trail . Touring bikes are built with small trail to allow the rider to control a bike weighed down with baggage . As a consequence , an unloaded touring bike can feel unstable . In bicycles , fork rake , often a curve in the fork blades forward of the steering axis , is used to diminish trail . Bikes with negative trail exist , such as the Python <unk> , and are rideable , and an experimental bike with negative trail has been shown to be self @-@ stable . 
 In motorcycles , rake refers to the head angle instead , and offset created by the triple tree is used to diminish trail . 
 A small survey by Whitt and Wilson found : 
 touring bicycles with head angles between 72 ° and 73 ° and trail between 43 mm and 60 mm 
 racing bicycles with head angles between 73 ° and 74 ° and trail between 28 mm and 45 mm 
 track bicycles with head angles of 75 ° and trail between 23 @.@ 5 mm and 37 mm . 
 However , these ranges are not hard and fast . For example , LeMond Racing Cycles offers both with forks that have 45 mm of offset or rake and the same size wheels : 
 a 2006 Tete de Course , designed for road racing , with a head angle that varies from 71 ¼ ° to 74 ° , depending on frame size , and thus trail that varies from 51 @.@ 5 mm to 69 mm . 
 a 2007 Filmore , designed for the track , with a head angle that varies from 72 ½ ° to 74 ° , depending on frame size , and thus trail that varies from 51 @.@ 5 mm to 61 mm . 
 The amount of trail a particular bike has may vary with time for several reasons . On bikes with front suspension , especially telescopic forks , compressing the front suspension , due to heavy braking for example , can <unk> the steering axis angle and reduce trail . Trail also varies with lean angle , and steering angle , usually decreasing from a maximum when the bike is straight upright and steered straight ahead . Trail can decrease to zero with sufficiently large lean and steer angles , which can alter how stable a bike feels . Finally , even the profile of the front tire can influence how trail varies as the bike is leaned and steered . 
 A measurement similar to trail , called either mechanical trail , normal trail , or true trail , is the perpendicular distance from the steering axis to the centroid of the front wheel contact patch . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 A factor that influences the directional stability of a bike is wheelbase , the horizontal distance between the ground contact points of the front and rear wheels . For a given displacement of the front wheel , due to some disturbance , the angle of the resulting path from the original is inversely proportional to wheelbase . Also , the radius of curvature for a given steer angle and lean angle is proportional to the wheelbase . Finally , the wheelbase increases when the bike is leaned and steered . In the extreme , when the lean angle is 90 ° , and the bike is steered in the direction of that lean , the wheelbase is increased by the radius of the front and rear wheels . 
 = = = = Steering mechanism mass distribution = = = = 
 Another factor that can also contribute to the self @-@ stability of traditional bike designs is the distribution of mass in the steering mechanism , which includes the front wheel , the fork , and the handlebar . If the center of mass for the steering mechanism is in front of the steering axis , then the pull of gravity will also cause the front wheel to steer in the direction of a lean . This can be seen by leaning a stationary bike to one side . The front wheel will usually also steer to that side independent of any interaction with the ground . Additional parameters , such as the fore @-@ to @-@ aft position of the center of mass and the elevation of the center of mass also contribute to the dynamic behavior of a bike . 
 = = = = Gyroscopic effects = = = = 
 The role of the gyroscopic effect in most bike designs is to help steer the front wheel into the direction of a lean . This phenomenon is called precession and the rate at which an object precesses is inversely proportional to its rate of spin . The slower a front wheel spins , the faster it will precess when the bike leans , and vice versa . The rear wheel is prevented from precessing as the front wheel does by friction of the tires on the ground , and so continues to lean as though it were not spinning at all . Hence gyroscopic forces do not provide any resistance to tipping . 
 At low forward speeds , the precession of the front wheel is too quick , contributing to an uncontrolled bike ’ s tendency to oversteer , start to lean the other way and eventually oscillate and fall over . At high forward speeds , the precession is usually too slow , contributing to an uncontrolled bike ’ s tendency to understeer and eventually fall over without ever having reached the upright position . This instability is very slow , on the order of seconds , and is easy for most riders to counteract . Thus a fast bike may feel stable even though it is actually not self @-@ stable and would fall over if it were uncontrolled . 
 Another contribution of gyroscopic effects is a roll moment generated by the front wheel during countersteering . For example , steering left causes a moment to the right . The moment is small compared to the moment generated by the out @-@ tracking front wheel , but begins as soon as the rider applies torque to the handlebars and so can be helpful in motorcycle racing . For more detail , see the section countersteering , below , and the countersteering article . 
 = = = = Self @-@ stability = = = = 
 Between the two unstable regimes mentioned in the previous section , and influenced by all the factors described above that contribute to balance ( trail , mass distribution , gyroscopic effects , etc . ) , there may be a range of forward speeds for a given bike design at which these effects steer an uncontrolled bike upright . It has been proven that neither gyroscopic effects nor positive trail are sufficient by themselves or necessary for self @-@ stability , although they certainly can enhance hands @-@ free control . 
 However , even without self @-@ stability a bike may be ridden by steering it to keep it over its wheels . Note that the effects mentioned above that would combine to produce self @-@ stability may be overwhelmed by additional factors such as headset friction and stiff control cables . This video shows a riderless bicycle exhibiting self @-@ stability . 
 = = = = Longitudinal acceleration = = = = 
 Longitudinal acceleration has been shown to have a large and complex effect on lateral dynamics . In one study , positive acceleration eliminates self stability , and negative acceleration ( deceleration ) changes the speeds of self stability . 
 = = = Turning = = = 
 In order for a bike to turn , that is , change its direction of forward travel , the front wheel must aim approximately in the desired direction , as with any front @-@ wheel steered vehicle . Friction between the wheels and the ground then generates the centripetal acceleration necessary to alter the course from straight ahead as a combination of cornering force and camber thrust . The radius of the turn of an upright ( not leaning ) bike can be roughly approximated , for small steering angles , by : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the approximate radius , <formula> is the wheelbase , <formula> is the steer angle , and <formula> is the caster angle of the steering axis . 
 = = = = Leaning = = = = 
 However , unlike other wheeled vehicles , bikes must also lean during a turn to balance the relevant forces : gravitational , inertial , frictional , and ground support . The angle of lean , θ , can easily be calculated using the laws of circular motion : 
 <formula> 
 where v is the forward speed , r is the radius of the turn and g is the acceleration of gravity . This is in the idealized case . A slight increase in the lean angle may be required on motorcycles to compensate for the width of modern tires at the same forward speed and turn radius . 
 For example , a bike in a 10 m ( 33 ft ) radius steady @-@ state turn at 10 m / s ( 36 km / h , 22 mph ) must be at an angle of 45 @.@ 6 ° . A rider can lean with respect to the bike in order to keep either the torso or the bike more or less upright if desired . The angle that matters is the one between the horizontal plane and the plane defined by the tire contacts and the location of the center of mass of bike and rider . 
 This lean of the bike decreases the actual radius of the turn proportionally to the cosine of the lean angle . The resulting radius can be roughly approximated ( within 2 % of exact value ) by : 
 <formula> 
 where r is the approximate radius , w is the wheelbase , θ is the lean angle , δ is the steer angle , and φ is the caster angle of the steering axis . As a bike leans , the tires ' contact patches move farther to the side causing wear . The portions at either edge of a motorcycle tire that remain unworn by leaning into turns is sometimes referred to as chicken strips . 
 The finite width of the tires alters the actual lean angle of the rear frame from the ideal lean angle described above . The actual lean angle between the frame and the vertical must increase with tire width and decrease with center of mass height . Bikes with fat tires and low center of mass must lean more than bikes with skinnier tires or higher centers of mass to negotiate the same turn at the same speed . 
 The increase in lean angle due to a tire thickness of <unk> can be calculated as 
 <formula> 
 where φ is the ideal lean angle , and h is the height of the center of mass . For example , a motorcycle with a 12 inch wide rear tire will have t = 6 inches . If the combined bike and rider center of mass is at a height of 26 inches , then a 25 ° lean must be increased by 7 @.@ 28 ° : a nearly 30 % increase . If the tires are only 6 inches wide , then the lean angle increase is only 3 @.@ 16 ° , just under half . 
 It has been shown that the couple created by gravity and the ground reaction forces is necessary for a bicycle to turn at all . On a custom built bicycle with spring @-@ loaded outriggers that exactly cancel this couple , so that the bicycle and rider may assume any lean angle when traveling in a straight line , riders find it impossible to make a turn . As soon as the wheels deviate from a straight path , the bicycle and rider begin to lean in the opposite direction , and the only way to right them is to steer back onto the straight path . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 In order to initiate a turn and the necessary lean in the direction of that turn , a bike must momentarily steer in the opposite direction . This is often referred to as countersteering . With the front wheel now at a finite angle to the direction of motion , a lateral force is developed at the contact patch of the tire . This force creates a torque around the longitudinal ( roll ) axis of the bike , and this torque causes the bike to lean away from the initially steered direction and toward the direction of the desired turn . Where there is no external influence , such as an opportune side wind to create the force necessary to lean the bike , countersteering is necessary to initiate a rapid turn . 
 While the initial steer torque and steer angle are both opposite the desired turn direction , this may not be the case to maintain a steady @-@ state turn . The sustained steer angle is usually in the same direction as the turn , but may remain opposite to the direction of the turn , especially at high speeds . The sustained steer torque required to maintain that steer angle is usually opposite the turn direction . The actual magnitude and orientation of both the sustained steer angle and sustained steer torque of a particular bike in a particular turn depend on forward speed , bike geometry , tire properties , and combined bike and rider mass distribution . Once in a turn , the radius can only be changed with an appropriate change in lean angle , and this can be accomplished by additional countersteering out of the turn to increase lean and decrease radius , then into the turn to decrease lean and increase radius . To exit the turn , the bike must again <unk> , momentarily steering more into the turn in order to decrease the radius , thus increasing inertial forces , and thereby decreasing the angle of lean . 
 = = = = Steady @-@ state turning = = = = 
 Once a turn is established , the torque that must be applied to the steering mechanism in order to maintain a constant radius at a constant forward speed depends on the forward speed and the geometry and mass distribution of the bike . At speeds below the capsize speed , described below in the section on Eigenvalues and also called the inversion speed , the self @-@ stability of the bike will cause it to tend to steer into the turn , righting itself and exiting the turn , unless a torque is applied in the opposite direction of the turn . At speeds above the capsize speed , the capsize instability will cause it to tend to steer out of the turn , increasing the lean , unless a torque is applied in the direction of the turn . At the capsize speed no input steering torque is necessary to maintain the steady @-@ state turn . 
 = = = = Steering angle = = = = 
 Several effects influence the steering angle , the angle at which the front assembly is rotated about the steering axis , necessary to maintain a steady @-@ state turn . Some of these are unique to single @-@ track vehicles , while others are also experienced by automobiles . Some of these may be mentioned elsewhere in this article , and they are repeated here , though not necessarily in order of importance , so that they may be found in one place . 
 First , the actual kinematic steering angle , the angle projected onto the road plane to which the front assembly is rotated is a function of the steering angle and the steering axis angle : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the kinematic steering angle , <formula> is the steering angle , and <formula> is the caster angle of the steering axis . 
 Second , the lean of the bike decreases the actual radius of the turn proportionally to the cosine of the lean angle . The resulting radius can be roughly approximated ( within 2 % of exact value ) by : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the approximate radius , <formula> is the wheelbase , <formula> is the lean angle , <formula> is the steering angle , and <formula> is the caster angle of the steering axis . 
 Third , because the front and rear tires can have different slip angles due to weight distribution , tire properties , etc . , bikes can experience understeer or oversteer . When <unk> , the steering angle must be greater , and when oversteering , the steering angle must be less than it would be if the slip angles were equal to maintain a given turn radius . Some authors even use the term counter @-@ steering to refer to the need on some bikes under some conditions to steer in the opposite direction of the turn ( negative steering angle ) to maintain control in response to significant rear wheel slippage . 
 Fourth , camber thrust contributes to the centripetal force necessary to cause the bike to deviate from a straight path , along with cornering force due to the slip angle , and can be the largest contributor . Camber thrust contributes to the ability of bikes to negotiate a turn with the same radius as automobiles but with a smaller steering angle . When a bike is steered and leaned in the same direction , the camber angle of the front tire is greater than that of the rear and so can generate more camber thrust , all else being equal . 
 = = = = No hands = = = = 
 While countersteering is usually initiated by applying torque directly to the handlebars , on lighter vehicles such as bicycles , it can also be accomplished by shifting the rider ’ s weight . If the rider leans to the right relative to the bike , the bike leans to the left to conserve angular momentum , and the combined center of mass remains nearly in the same vertical plane . This leftward lean of the bike , called counter lean by some authors , will cause it to steer to the left and initiate a right @-@ hand turn as if the rider had <unk> to the left by applying a torque directly to the handlebars . This technique may be complicated by additional factors such as headset friction and stiff control cables . 
 The combined center of mass does move slightly to the left when the rider leans to the right relative to the bike , and the bike leans to the left in response . The action , in space , would have the tires move right , but this is prevented by friction between the tires and the ground , and thus pushes the combined center of mass left . This is a small effect , however , as evidenced by the difficulty most people have in balancing a bike by this method alone . 
 = = = = Gyroscopic effects = = = = 
 As mentioned above in the section on balance , one effect of turning the front wheel is a roll moment caused by gyroscopic precession . The magnitude of this moment is proportional to the moment of inertia of the front wheel , its spin rate ( forward motion ) , the rate that the rider turns the front wheel by applying a torque to the handlebars , and the cosine of the angle between the steering axis and the vertical . 
 For a sample motorcycle moving at 22 m / s ( 50 mph ) that has a front wheel with a moment of inertia of 0 @.@ 6 kg · m2 , turning the front wheel one degree in half a second generates a roll moment of 3 @.@ 5 N · m . In comparison , the lateral force on the front tire as it tracks out from under the motorcycle reaches a maximum of 50 N. This , acting on the 0 @.@ 6 m ( 2 ft ) height of the center of mass , generates a roll moment of 30 N · m . 
 While the moment from gyroscopic forces is only 12 % of this , it can play a significant part because it begins to act as soon as the rider applies the torque , instead of building up more slowly as the wheel out @-@ tracks . This can be especially helpful in motorcycle racing . 
 = = = = Two @-@ wheel steering = = = = 
 Because of theoretical benefits , such as a tighter turning radius at low speed , attempts have been made to construct motorcycles with two @-@ wheel steering . One working prototype by Ian Drysdale in Australia is reported to " work very well . " Issues in the design include whether to provide active control of the rear wheel or let it swing freely . In the case of active control , the control algorithm needs to decide between steering with or in the opposite direction of the front wheel , when , and how much . One implementation of two @-@ wheel steering , the Sideways bike , lets the rider control the steering of both wheels directly . Another , the Swing Bike , had the second steering axis in front of the seat so that it could also be controlled by the handlebars . 
 Milton W. Raymond built a long low two @-@ wheel steering bicycle , called " X @-@ 2 " , with various steering mechanisms to control the two wheels independently . Steering motions included " balance " , in which both wheels move together to steer the tire contacts under the center of mass ; and " true circle " , in which the wheels steer equally in opposite directions and thus steering the bicycle without substantially changing the lateral position of the tire contacts relative to the center of mass . X @-@ 2 was also able to go " <unk> " with the wheels parallel but out of line with the frame , for instance with the front wheel near the roadway center line and rear wheel near the curb . " Balance " steering allowed easy balancing despite long wheelbase and low center of mass , but no self @-@ balancing ( " no hands " ) configuration was discovered . True circle , as expected , was essentially impossible to balance , as steering does not correct for misalignment of the tire patch and center of mass . <unk> cycling at angles tested up to about 45 ° did not show a tendency to fall over , even under braking . X @-@ 2 is mentioned in passing in Whitt and Wilson 's Bicycling Science 2nd edition . 
 = = = = Rear @-@ wheel steering = = = = 
 Because of the theoretical benefits , especially a simplified front @-@ wheel drive mechanism , attempts have been made to construct a rideable rear @-@ wheel steering bike . The Bendix Company built a rear @-@ wheel steering bicycle , and the U.S. Department of Transportation commissioned the construction of a rear @-@ wheel steering motorcycle : both proved to be unrideable . Rainbow Trainers , Inc. in Alton , Illinois , offered US $ 5 @,@ 000 to the first person " who can successfully ride the rear @-@ steered bicycle , Rear Steered Bicycle I " . One documented example of someone successfully riding a rear @-@ wheel steering bicycle is that of L. H. <unk> at Massachusetts Institute of Technology , on a specially designed recumbent bike . The difficulty is that turning left , accomplished by turning the rear wheel to the right , initially moves the center of mass to the right , and vice versa . This complicates the task of compensating for leans induced by the environment . Examination of the eigenvalues for bicycles with common geometries and mass distributions shows that when moving in reverse , so as to have rear @-@ wheel steering , they are inherently unstable . Other , purpose @-@ built designs have been published , however , that do not suffer this problem . 
 = = = = Center steering = = = = 
 Between the extremes of bicycles with classical front @-@ wheel steering and those with strictly rear @-@ wheel steering is a class of bikes with a pivot point somewhere between the two , referred to as center @-@ steering , and similar to articulated steering . An early implementation of the concept was the Phantom bicycle in the early 1870s promoted as a safer alternative to the penny @-@ farthing . This design allows for simple front @-@ wheel drive and current implementations appear to be quite stable , even rideable no @-@ hands , as many photographs illustrate . 
 These designs , such as the Python <unk> , a recumbent , usually have very lax head angles ( 40 ° to 65 ° ) and positive or even negative trail . The builder of a bike with negative trail states that steering the bike from straight ahead forces the seat ( and thus the rider ) to rise slightly and this offsets the destabilizing effect of the negative trail . 
 = = = = Reverse steering = = = = 
 Bicycles have been constructed , for investigation and demonstration purposes , with the steering reversed so that turning the handlebars to the left causes the front wheel to turn to the right , and <unk> versa . It is possible to ride such a bicycle , but it has been found that riders experienced with normal bicycles find it very difficult to learn , if they can manage it at all . 
 = = = = Tiller effect = = = = 
 Tiller effect is the expression used to describe how handlebars that extend far behind the steering axis ( head tube ) act like a tiller on a boat , in that one moves the bars to the right in order to turn the front wheel to the left , and vice versa . This situation is commonly found on cruiser bicycles , some recumbents , and some motorcycles . It can be troublesome when it limits the ability to steer because of interference or the limits of arm reach . 
 = = = = Tires = = = = 
 Tires have a large influence over bike handling , especially on motorcycles , but also on bicycles . Tires influence bike dynamics in two distinct ways : finite crown radius and force generation . Increase the crown radius of the front tire has been shown to decrease the size or eliminate self stability . Increasing the crown radius of the rear tire has the opposite effect , but to a lesser degree . 
 Tires generate the lateral forces necessary for steering and balance through a combination of cornering force and camber thrust . Tire inflation pressures have also been found to be important variables in the behavior of a motorcycle at high speeds . Because the front and rear tires can have different slip angles due to weight distribution , tire properties , etc . , bikes can experience understeer or oversteer . Of the two , understeer , in which the front wheel slides more than the rear wheel , is more dangerous since front wheel steering is critical for maintaining balance . Also , because real tires have a finite contact patch with the road surface that can generate a scrub torque , and when in a turn , can experience some side slipping as they roll , they can generate torques about an axis normal to the plane of the contact patch . 
 One torque generated by a tire , called the self aligning torque , is caused by asymmetries in the side @-@ slip along the length of the contact patch . The resultant force of this side @-@ slip occurs behind the geometric center of the contact patch , a distance described as the pneumatic trail , and so creates a torque on the tire . Since the direction of the side @-@ slip is towards the outside of the turn , the force on the tire is towards the center of the turn . Therefore , this torque tends to turn the front wheel in the direction of the side @-@ slip , away from the direction of the turn , and therefore tends to increase the radius of the turn . 
 Another torque is produced by the finite width of the contact patch and the lean of the tire in a turn . The portion of the contact patch towards the outside of the turn is actually moving rearward , with respect to the wheel 's hub , faster than the rest of the contact patch , because of its greater radius from the hub . By the same reasoning , the inner portion is moving rearward more slowly . So the outer and inner portions of the contact patch slip on the pavement in opposite directions , generating a torque that tends to turn the front wheel in the direction of the turn , and therefore tends to decrease the turn radius . 
 The combination of these two opposite torques creates a resulting yaw torque on the front wheel , and its direction is a function of the side @-@ slip angle of the tire , the angle between the actual path of the tire and the direction it is pointing , and the camber angle of the tire ( the angle that the tire leans from the vertical ) . The result of this torque is often the suppression of the inversion speed predicted by rigid wheel models described above in the section on steady @-@ state turning . 
 = = = = High side = = = = 
 A <unk> , <unk> , or high side is a type of bike motion which is caused by a rear wheel gaining traction when it is not facing in the direction of travel , usually after slipping sideways in a curve . This can occur under heavy braking , acceleration , a varying road surface , or suspension activation , especially due to interaction with the drive train . It can take the form of a single slip @-@ then @-@ flip or a series of violent oscillations . 
 = = = <unk> and handling = = = 
 Bike maneuverability and handling is difficult to quantify for several reasons . The geometry of a bike , especially the steering axis angle makes kinematic analysis complicated . Under many conditions , bikes are inherently unstable and must always be under rider control . Finally , the rider 's skill has a large influence on the bike 's performance in any maneuver . Bike designs tend to consist of a trade @-@ off between maneuverability and stability . 
 = = = = Rider control inputs = = = = 
 The primary control input that the rider can make is to apply a torque directly to the steering mechanism via the handlebars . Because of the bike 's own dynamics , due to steering geometry and gyroscopic effects , direct position control over steering angle has been found to be problematic . 
 A secondary control input that the rider can make is to lean the upper torso relative to the bike . As mentioned above , the effectiveness of rider lean varies inversely with the mass of the bike . On heavy bikes , such as motorcycles , rider lean mostly alters the ground clearance requirements in a turn , improves the view of the road , and improves the bike system dynamics in a very low @-@ frequency passive manner . In motorcycle racing , leaning the torso , moving the body , and projecting a knee to the inside of the turn relative to the bike can also cause an aerodynamic yawing moment that facilitates entering and rounding the turn . 
 = = = = Differences from automobiles = = = = 
 The need to keep a bike upright to avoid injury to the rider and damage to the vehicle even limits the type of maneuverability testing that is commonly performed . For example , while automobile enthusiast publications often perform and quote <unk> results , motorcycle publications do not . The need to " set up " for a turn , lean the bike to the appropriate angle , means that the rider must see further ahead than is necessary for a typical car at the same speed , and this need increases more than in proportion to the speed . 
 = = = = Rating schemes = = = = 
 Several schemes have been devised to rate the handling of bikes , particularly motorcycles . 
 The roll index is the ratio between steering torque and roll or lean angle . 
 The acceleration index is the ratio between steering torque and lateral or centripetal acceleration . 
 The steering ratio is the ratio between the theoretical turning radius based on ideal tire behavior and the actual turning radius . Values less than one , where the front wheel side slip is greater than the rear wheel side slip , are described as under @-@ steering ; equal to one as neutral steering ; and greater than one as over @-@ steering . Values less than zero , in which the front wheel must be turned opposite the direction of the curve due to much greater rear wheel side slip than front wheel have been described as counter @-@ steering . Riders tend to prefer neutral or slight over @-@ steering . Car drivers tend to prefer under @-@ steering . 
 The Koch index is the ratio between peak steering torque and the product of peak lean rate and forward speed . Large , touring motorcycles tend to have a high Koch index , sport motorcycles tend to have a medium Koch index , and scooters tend to have a low Koch index . It is easier to maneuver light scooters than heavy motorcycles . 
 = = = Lateral motion theory = = = 
 Although its equations of motion can be linearized , a bike is a nonlinear system . The variable ( s ) to be solved for cannot be written as a linear sum of independent components , i.e. its behavior is not expressible as a sum of the behaviors of its descriptors . Generally , nonlinear systems are difficult to solve and are much less understandable than linear systems . In the idealized case , in which friction and any flexing is ignored , a bike is a conservative system . Damping , however , can still be demonstrated : under the right circumstances , side @-@ to @-@ side oscillations will decrease with time . Energy added with a sideways jolt to a bike running straight and upright ( demonstrating self @-@ stability ) is converted into increased forward speed , not lost , as the oscillations die out . 
 A bike is a <unk> system because its outcome is path @-@ dependent . In order to know its exact configuration , especially location , it is necessary to know not only the configuration of its parts , but also their histories : how they have moved over time . This complicates mathematical analysis . Finally , in the language of control theory , a bike exhibits non @-@ minimum phase behavior . It turns in the direction opposite of how it is initially steered , as described above in the section on countersteering 
 = = = = Degrees of freedom = = = = 
 The number of degrees of freedom of a bike depends on the particular model being used . The simplest model that captures the key dynamic features , called the " Whipple model " after Francis Whipple who first developed the equations for it , has four rigid bodies with knife edge wheels rolling without slip on a flat smooth surface , and has 7 degrees of freedom ( configuration variables required to completely describe the location and orientation of all 4 bodies ) : 
 x coordinate of rear wheel contact point 
 y coordinate of rear wheel contact point 
 orientation angle of rear frame ( yaw ) 
 rotation angle of rear wheel 
 rotation angle of front wheel 
 lean angle of rear frame ( roll ) 
 steering angle between rear frame and front end 
 Adding complexity to the model , such as rider movement , suspension movement , tire compliance , or frame flex , adds degrees of freedom . While the rear frame does pitch with leaning and steering , the pitch angle is completely constrained by the requirement for both wheels to remain on the ground , and so can be calculated geometrically from the other seven variables . If the location of the bike and the rotation of the wheels are ignored , the first five degrees of freedom can also be ignored , and the bike can be described by just two variables : lean angle and steer angle . 
 = = = = Equations of motion = = = = 
 The equations of motion of an idealized bike , consisting of 
 a rigid frame , 
 a rigid fork , 
 two knife @-@ edged , rigid wheels , 
 all connected with frictionless bearings and rolling without friction or slip on a smooth horizontal surface and 
 operating at or near the upright and straight @-@ ahead , unstable equilibrium 
 can be represented by a single fourth @-@ order linearized ordinary differential equation or two coupled second @-@ order differential equations , the lean equation 
 <formula> 
 and the steer equation 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> is the lean angle of the rear assembly , 
 <formula> is the steer angle of the front assembly relative to the rear assembly and 
 <formula> and <formula> are the moments ( torques ) applied at the rear assembly and the steering axis , respectively . For the analysis of an uncontrolled bike , both are taken to be zero . 
 These can be represented in matrix form as 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> is the symmetrical mass matrix which contains terms that include only the mass and geometry of the bike , 
 <formula> is the so @-@ called damping matrix , even though an idealized bike has no dissipation , which contains terms that include the forward speed <formula> and is asymmetric , 
 <formula> is the so @-@ called stiffness matrix which contains terms that include the gravitational constant <formula> and <formula> and is symmetric in <formula> and asymmetric in <formula> , 
 <formula> is a vector of lean angle and steer angle , and 
 <formula> is a vector of external forces , the moments mentioned above . 
 In this idealized and linearized model , there are many geometric parameters ( wheelbase , head angle , mass of each body , wheel radius , etc . ) , but only four significant variables : lean angle , lean rate , steer angle , and steer rate . These equations have been verified by comparison with multiple numeric models derived completely independently . 
 The equations show that the bicycle is like an inverted pendulum with the lateral position of its support controlled by terms representing roll acceleration , roll velocity and roll displacement to steering torque feedback . The roll acceleration term is normally of the wrong sign for self @-@ stabilization and can be expected to be important mainly in respect of wobble oscillations . The roll velocity feedback is of the correct sign , is gyroscopic in nature , being proportional to speed , and is dominated by the front wheel contribution . The roll displacement term is the most important one and is mainly controlled by trail , steering rake and the offset of the front frame mass center from the steering axis . All the terms involve complex combinations of bicycle design parameters and sometimes the speed . The limitations of the benchmark bicycle are considered and extensions to the treatments of tires , frames and riders , and their implications , are included . Optimal rider controls for stabilization and path @-@ following control are also discussed . 
 = = = = Eigenvalues = = = = 
 It is possible to calculate eigenvalues , one for each of the four state variables ( lean angle , lean rate , steer angle , and steer rate ) , from the linearized equations in order to analyze the normal modes and self @-@ stability of a particular bike design . In the plot to the right , eigenvalues of one particular bicycle are calculated for forward speeds of 0 – 10 m / s ( 22 mph ) . When the real parts of all eigenvalues ( shown in dark blue ) are negative , the bike is self @-@ stable . When the imaginary parts of any eigenvalues ( shown in cyan ) are non @-@ zero , the bike exhibits oscillation . The eigenvalues are point symmetric about the origin and so any bike design with a self @-@ stable region in forward speeds will not be self @-@ stable going backwards at the same speed . 
 There are three forward speeds that can be identified in the plot to the right at which the motion of the bike changes qualitatively : 
 The forward speed at which oscillations begin , at about 1 m / s ( 2 @.@ 2 mph ) in this example , sometimes called the double root speed due to there being a repeated root to the characteristic polynomial ( two of the four eigenvalues have exactly the same value ) . Below this speed , the bike simply falls over as an inverted pendulum does . 
 The forward speed at which oscillations do not increase , where the weave mode eigenvalues switch from positive to negative in a Hopf bifurcation at about 5 @.@ 3 m / s ( 12 mph ) in this example , is called the weave speed . Below this speed , oscillations increase until the uncontrolled bike falls over . Above this speed , oscillations eventually die out . 
 The forward speed at which non @-@ oscillatory leaning increases , where the capsize mode eigenvalues switch from negative to positive in a pitchfork bifurcation at about 8 m / s ( 18 mph ) in this example , is called the capsize speed . Above this speed , this non @-@ oscillating lean eventually causes the uncontrolled bike to fall over . 
 Between these last two speeds , if they both exist , is a range of forward speeds at which the particular bike design is self @-@ stable . In the case of the bike whose eigenvalues are shown here , the self @-@ stable range is 5 @.@ 3 – 8 @.@ 0 m / s ( 12 – 18 mph ) . The fourth eigenvalue , which is usually stable ( very negative ) , represents the <unk> behavior of the front wheel , as it tends to turn towards the direction in which the bike is traveling . Note that this idealized model does not exhibit the wobble or shimmy and rear wobble instabilities described above . They are seen in models that incorporate tire interaction with the ground or other degrees of freedom . 
 Experimentation with real bikes has so far confirmed the weave mode predicted by the eigenvalues . It was found that tire slip and frame flex are not important for the lateral dynamics of the bicycle in the speed range up to 6 m / s . The idealized bike model used to calculate the eigenvalues shown here does not incorporate any of the torques that real tires can generate , and so tire interaction with the pavement cannot prevent the capsize mode from becoming unstable at high speeds , as Wilson and <unk> suggest happens in the real world . 
 = = = = Modes = = = = 
 Bikes , as complex mechanisms , have a variety of modes : fundamental ways that they can move . These modes can be stable or unstable , depending on the bike parameters and its forward speed . In this context , " stable " means that an uncontrolled bike will continue rolling forward without falling over as long as forward speed is maintained . Conversely , " unstable " means that an uncontrolled bike will eventually fall over , even if forward speed is maintained . The modes can be differentiated by the speed at which they switch stability and the relative phases of leaning and steering as the bike experiences that mode . Any bike motion consists of a combination of various amounts of the possible modes , and there are three main modes that a bike can experience : capsize , weave , and wobble . A lesser known mode is rear wobble , and it is usually stable . 
 = = = = = Capsize = = = = = 
 Capsize is the word used to describe a bike falling over without oscillation . During capsize , an uncontrolled front wheel usually steers in the direction of lean , but never enough to stop the increasing lean , until a very high lean angle is reached , at which point the steering may turn in the opposite direction . A capsize can happen very slowly if the bike is moving forward rapidly . Because the capsize instability is so slow , on the order of seconds , it is easy for the rider to control , and is actually used by the rider to initiate the lean necessary for a turn . 
 For most bikes , depending on geometry and mass distribution , capsize is stable at low speeds , and becomes less stable as speed increases until it is no longer stable . However , on many bikes , tire interaction with the pavement is sufficient to prevent capsize from becoming unstable at high speeds . 
 = = = = = Weave = = = = = 
 Weave is the word used to describe a slow ( 0 – 4 Hz ) oscillation between leaning left and steering right , and vice versa . The entire bike is affected with significant changes in steering angle , lean angle ( roll ) , and heading angle ( yaw ) . The steering is 180 ° out of phase with the heading and 90 ° out of phase with the leaning . This AVI movie shows weave . 
 For most bikes , depending on geometry and mass distribution , weave is unstable at low speeds , and becomes less pronounced as speed increases until it is no longer unstable . While the amplitude may decrease , the frequency actually increases with speed . 
 = = = = = Wobble or shimmy = = = = = 
 Wobble , shimmy , tank @-@ slapper , speed wobble , and death wobble are all words and phrases used to describe a rapid ( 4 – 10 Hz ) oscillation of primarily just the front end ( front wheel , fork , and handlebars ) . Also involved is the yawing of the rear frame which may contribute to the wobble when too flexible . This instability occurs mostly at high speed and is similar to that experienced by shopping cart wheels , airplane landing gear , and automobile front wheels . While wobble or shimmy can be easily remedied by adjusting speed , position , or grip on the handlebar , it can be fatal if left uncontrolled . 
 Wobble or shimmy begins when some otherwise minor irregularity , such as fork asymmetry , accelerates the wheel to one side . The restoring force is applied in phase with the progress of the irregularity , and the wheel turns to the other side where the process is repeated . If there is insufficient damping in the steering the oscillation will increase until system failure occurs . The oscillation frequency can be changed by changing the forward speed , making the bike stiffer or lighter , or increasing the stiffness of the steering , of which the rider is a main component . 
 = = = = = Rear wobble = = = = = 
 The term rear wobble is used to describe a mode of oscillation in which lean angle ( roll ) and heading angle ( yaw ) are almost in phase and both 180 ° out of phase with steer angle . The rate of this oscillation is moderate with a maximum of about 6 @.@ 5 Hz . Rear wobble is heavily damped and falls off quickly as bike speed increases . 
 = = = = = Design criteria = = = = = 
 The effect that the design parameters of a bike have on these modes can be investigated by examining the eigenvalues of the linearized equations of motion . For more details on the equations of motion and eigenvalues , see the section on the equations of motion above . Some general conclusions that have been drawn are described here . 
 The lateral and torsional stiffness of the rear frame and the wheel spindle affects wobble @-@ mode damping substantially . Long wheelbase and trail and a flat steering @-@ head angle have been found to increase weave @-@ mode damping . Lateral distortion can be countered by locating the front fork torsional axis as low as possible . 
 Cornering weave tendencies are amplified by degraded damping of the rear suspension . Cornering , camber <unk> and relaxation length of the rear tire make the largest contribution to weave damping . The same parameters of the front tire have a lesser effect . Rear loading also amplifies cornering weave tendencies . Rear load assemblies with appropriate stiffness and damping , however , were successful in damping out weave and wobble oscillations . 
 One study has shown theoretically that , while a bike leaned in a turn , road undulations can excite the weave mode at high speed or the wobble mode at low speed if either of their frequencies match the vehicle speed and other parameters . Excitation of the wobble mode can be mitigated by an effective steering damper and excitation of the weave mode is worse for light riders than for heavy riders . 
 = = = Riding on treadmills and rollers = = = 
 Riding on a treadmill is theoretically identical to riding on stationary pavement , and physical testing has confirmed this . <unk> have been developed specifically for indoor bicycle training . Riding on rollers is still under investigation . 
 = = = Other hypotheses = = = 
 Although bicycles and motorcycles can appear to be simple mechanisms with only four major moving parts ( frame , fork , and two wheels ) , these parts are arranged in a way that makes them complicated to analyze . While it is an observable fact that bikes can be ridden even when the gyroscopic effects of their wheels are canceled out , the hypothesis that the gyroscopic effects of the wheels are what keep a bike upright is common in print and online . 
 Examples in print : 
 " Angular momentum and motorcycle counter @-@ steering : A discussion and demonstration " , A. J. Cox , Am . J. Phys . 66 , 1018 – 1021 ~ 1998 
 " The motorcycle as a gyroscope " , J. Higbie , Am . J. Phys . 42 , 701 – 702 
 The Physics of Everyday Phenomena , W. T. Griffith , McGraw – Hill , New York , 1998 , pp. 149 – 150 . 
 The Way Things Work . , Macaulay , Houghton @-@ Mifflin , New York , NY , 1989 
 = = Longitudinal dynamics = = 
 Bikes may experience a variety of longitudinal forces and motions . On most bikes , when the front wheel is turned to one side or the other , the entire rear frame pitches forward slightly , depending on the steering axis angle and the amount of trail . On bikes with suspensions , either front , rear , or both , trim is used to describe the geometric configuration of the bike , especially in response to forces of braking , accelerating , turning , drive train , and aerodynamic drag . 
 The load borne by the two wheels varies not only with center of mass location , which in turn varies with the amount and location of passengers and luggage , but also with acceleration and deceleration . This phenomenon is known as load transfer or weight transfer , depending on the author , and provides challenges and opportunities to both riders and designers . For example , motorcycle racers can use it to increase the friction available to the front tire when cornering , and attempts to reduce front suspension compression during heavy braking has spawned several motorcycle fork designs . 
 The net aerodynamic drag forces may be considered to act at a single point , called the center of pressure . At high speeds , this will create a net moment about the rear driving wheel and result in a net transfer of load from the front wheel to the rear wheel . Also , depending on the shape of the bike and the shape of any fairing that might be installed , aerodynamic lift may be present that either increases or further reduces the load on the front wheel . 
 = = = Stability = = = 
 Though longitudinally stable when stationary , a bike may become longitudinally unstable under sufficient acceleration or deceleration , and Euler 's second law can be used to analyze the ground reaction forces generated . For example , the normal ( vertical ) ground reaction forces at the wheels for a bike with a wheelbase <formula> and a center of mass at height <formula> and at a distance <formula> in front of the rear wheel hub , and for simplicity , with both wheels locked , can be expressed as : 
 <formula> for the rear wheel and <formula> for the front wheel . 
 The frictional ( horizontal ) forces are simply 
 <formula> for the rear wheel and <formula> for the front wheel , 
 where <formula> is the coefficient of friction , <formula> is the total mass of the bike and rider , and <formula> is the acceleration of gravity . Therefore , if 
 <formula> 
 which occurs if the center of mass is anywhere above or in front of a line extending back from the front wheel contact patch and inclined at the angle 
 <formula> 
 above the horizontal , then the normal force of the rear wheel will be zero ( at which point the equation no longer applies ) and the bike will begin to flip or loop forward over the front wheel . 
 On the other hand , if the center of mass height is behind or below the line , such as on most tandem bicycles or long @-@ wheel @-@ base recumbent bicycles , as well as cars , it is less likely that the front wheel can generate enough braking force to flip the bike . This means they can decelerate up to nearly the limit of adhesion of the tires to the road , which could reach 0 @.@ 8 g if the coefficient of friction is 0 @.@ 8 , which is 40 % more than an upright bicycle under even the best conditions . Bicycling Science author David Gordon Wilson points out that this puts upright bicyclists at particular risk of causing a rear @-@ end collision of they tailgate cars . 
 Similarly , powerful motorcycles can generate enough torque at the rear wheel to lift the front wheel off the ground in a maneuver called a wheelie . A line similar to the one described above to analyze braking performance can be drawn from the rear wheel contact patch to predict if a wheelie is possible given the available friction , the center of mass location , and sufficient power . This can also happen on bicycles , although there is much less power available , if the center of mass is back or up far enough or the rider lurches back when applying power to the pedals . 
 Of course , the angle of the terrain can influence all of the calculations above . All else remaining equal , the risk of pitching over the front end is reduced when riding up hill and increased when riding down hill . The possibility of performing a wheelie increases when riding up hill , and is a major factor in motorcycle <unk> competitions . 
 = = = Braking according to ground conditions = = = 
 When braking , the rider in motion is seeking to change the speed of the combined mass m of rider plus bike . This is a negative acceleration a in the line of travel . F = ma , the acceleration a causes an inertial forward force F on mass m . The braking a is from an initial speed u to a final speed v , over a length of time t . The equation u - v 
 = at implies that the greater the acceleration the shorter the time needed to change speed . The stopping distance s is also shortest when acceleration a is at the highest possible value compatible with road conditions : the equation s = 
 ut + 1 / 2 <unk> makes s low when a is high and t is low . 
 How much braking force to apply to each wheel depends both on ground conditions and on the balance of weight on the wheels at each instant in time . The total braking force cannot exceed the gravity force on the rider and bike times the coefficient of friction µ of the tire on the ground. <unk> > 
 = Ff + Fr . A skid occurs if the ratio of either Ff over <unk> or Fr over Nr is greater than µ , with a rear wheel skid having less of a negative impact on lateral stability . 
 When braking , the inertial force ma in the line of travel , not being co @-@ linear with f , tends to rotate m about f . This tendency to rotate , an overturning moment , is resisted by a moment from mg . 
 Taking moments about the front wheel contact point at an instance in time : 
 When there is no braking , mass m is typically above the bottom bracket , about 2 / 3 of the way back between the front and rear wheels , with Nr thus greater than <unk> . 
 In constant light braking , whether because an emergency stop is not required or because poor ground conditions prevent heavy braking , much weight still rests on the rear wheel , meaning that Nr is still large and Fr can contribute towards a . 
 As braking a increases , Nr and Fr decrease because the moment mah increases with a . At maximum constant a , clockwise and anti @-@ clockwise moments are equal , at which point Nr = 
 0 . Any greater Ff initiates a <unk> . 
 Other factors : 
 Downhill it is much easier to topple over the front wheel because the incline moves the line of mg closer to f . To try to reduce this tendency the rider can stand back on the pedals to try to keep m as far back as possible . 
 When braking is increasing the center of mass m may move forward relative to the front wheel , as the rider moves forward relative to the bike , and , if the bike has suspension on the front wheel , the front forks compress under load , changing the bike geometry . This all puts extra load on the front wheel . 
 At the end of a brake maneuver , as the rider comes to a halt , the suspension decompresses and pushes the rider back . 
 Values for µ vary greatly depending on a number of factors : 
 The material that the ground or road surface is made of . 
 Whether the ground is wet or dry . 
 The smoothness or roughness of the ground . 
 The firmness or looseness of the ground . 
 The speed of the vehicle , with friction reducing above 30 mph ( <unk> ) . 
 Whether friction is rolling or sliding , with sliding friction at least 10 % below peak rolling friction . 
 = = = Braking = = = 
 Most of the braking force of standard upright bikes comes from the front wheel . As the analysis above shows , if the brakes themselves are strong enough , the rear wheel is easy to skid , while the front wheel often can generate enough stopping force to flip the rider and bike over the front wheel . This is called a <unk> if the rear wheel is lifted but the bike does not flip , or an endo ( abbreviated form of end @-@ over @-@ end ) if the bike flips . On long or low bikes , however , such as cruiser motorcycles and recumbent bicycles , the front tire will skid instead , possibly causing a loss of balance . Assuming no loss of balance , it is possible to calculate optimum braking performance depending on the bike 's geometry , the location of center of gravity of bike and rider , and the maximum coefficient of friction . 
 In the case of a front suspension , especially telescoping fork tubes , the increase in downward force on the front wheel during braking may cause the suspension to compress and the front end to lower . This is known as brake diving . A riding technique that takes advantage of how braking increases the downward force on the front wheel is known as trail braking . 
 = = = = Front wheel braking = = = = 
 The limiting factors on the maximum deceleration in front wheel braking are : 
 the maximum , limiting value of static friction between the tire and the ground , often between 0 @.@ 5 and 0 @.@ 8 for rubber on dry asphalt , 
 the kinetic friction between the brake pads and the rim or disk , and 
 pitching or looping ( of bike and rider ) over the front wheel . 
 For an upright bicycle on dry asphalt with excellent brakes , pitching will probably be the limiting factor . The combined center of mass of a typical upright bicycle and rider will be about 60 cm ( 24 in ) back from the front wheel contact patch and 120 cm ( 47 in ) above , allowing a maximum deceleration of 0 @.@ 5 g ( 5 m / s2 or 16 ft / s2 ) . If the rider modulates the brakes properly , however , pitching can be avoided . If the rider moves his weight back and down , even larger <unk> are possible . 
 Front brakes on many inexpensive bikes are not strong enough so , on the road , they are the limiting factor . Cheap cantilever brakes , especially with " power modulators " , and Raleigh @-@ style side @-@ pull brakes severely restrict the stopping force . In wet conditions they are even less effective . Front wheel slides are more common off @-@ road . Mud , water , and loose stones reduce the friction between the tire and trail , although knobby tires can mitigate this effect by grabbing the surface irregularities . Front wheel slides are also common on corners , whether on road or off . Centripetal acceleration adds to the forces on the tire @-@ ground contact , and when the friction force is exceeded the wheel slides . 
 = = = = Rear @-@ wheel braking = = = = 
 The rear brake of an upright bicycle can only produce about 0 @.@ 25 g ( ~ 2 @.@ 5 m / s2 ) deceleration at best , because of the decrease in normal force at the rear wheel as described above . All such bikes with only rear braking are subject to this limitation : for example , bikes with only a coaster brake , and fixed @-@ gear bikes with no other braking mechanism . There are , however , situations that may warrant rear wheel braking 
 Slippery surfaces or bumpy surfaces . Under front wheel braking , the lower coefficient of friction may cause the front wheel to skid which often results in a loss of balance . 
 Front flat tire . Braking a wheel with a flat tire can cause the tire to come off the rim which greatly reduces friction and , in the case of a front wheel , result in a loss of balance . 
 Front brake failure . 
 <unk> bicycles . Long @-@ wheelbase recumbents require a good rear brake as the CG is near the rear wheel . 
 = = = = Braking technique = = = = 
 Expert opinion varies from " use both levers equally at first " to " the fastest that you can stop any bike of normal wheelbase is to apply the front brake so hard that the rear wheel is just about to lift off the ground , " depending on road conditions , rider skill level , and desired fraction of maximum possible deceleration . 
 = = Suspension = = 
 Bikes may have only front , only rear , full suspension or no suspension that operate primarily in the central plane of symmetry ; though with some consideration given to lateral compliance . The goals of a bike suspension are to reduce vibration experienced by the rider , maintain wheel contact with the ground , and maintain vehicle trim . The primary suspension parameters are stiffness , damping , sprung and unsprung mass , and tire characteristics . Besides irregularities in the terrain , brake , acceleration , and drive @-@ train forces can also activate the suspension as described above . Examples include bob and pedal feedback on bicycles , the shaft effect on motorcycles , and squat and brake dive on both . 
 = = Vibration = = 
 The study of vibrations in bikes includes its causes , such as engine balance , wheel balance , ground surface , and aerodynamics ; its transmission and absorption ; and its effects on the bike , the rider , and safety . An important factor in any vibration analysis is a comparison of the natural frequencies of the system with the possible driving frequencies of the vibration sources . A close match means mechanical resonance that can result in large amplitudes . A challenge in vibration damping is to create compliance in certain directions ( vertically ) without sacrificing frame rigidity needed for power transmission and handling ( <unk> ) . Another issue with vibration for the bike is the possibility of failure due to material fatigue Effects of vibration on riders include discomfort , loss of efficiency , Hand @-@ Arm Vibration Syndrome , a secondary form Raynaud 's disease , and whole body vibration . <unk> instruments may be inaccurate or difficult to read . 
 = = = In bicycles = = = 
 The primary cause of vibrations in a properly functioning bicycle is the surface over which it rolls . In addition to pneumatic tires and traditional bicycle suspensions , a variety of techniques have been developed to damp vibrations before they reach the rider . These include materials , such as carbon fiber , either in the whole frame or just key components such as the front fork , <unk> , or handlebars ; tube shapes , such as curved seat stays ; and special inserts , such as <unk> by Specialized , and <unk> by <unk> . 
 = = = In motorcycles = = = 
 In addition to the road surface , vibrations in a motorcycle can be caused by the engine and wheels , if unbalanced . Manufacturers employ a variety of technologies to reduce or damp these vibrations , such as engine balance shafts , rubber engine mounts , and tire weights . The problems that vibration causes have also spawned an industry of after @-@ market parts and systems designed to reduce it . Add @-@ ons include handlebar weights , isolated foot pegs , and engine counterweights . At high speeds , motorcycles and their riders may also experience aerodynamic flutter or buffeting . This can be abated by changing the air flow over key parts , such as the windshield . 
 = = Experimentation = = 
 A variety of experiments have been performed in order to verify or disprove various hypotheses about bike dynamics . 
 David Jones built several bikes in a search for an unrideable configuration . 
 Richard Klein built several bikes to confirm Jones 's findings . 
