 Richard Klein also built a " Torque Wrench Bike " and a " Rocket Bike " to investigate steering torques and their effects . 
 Keith Code built a motorcycle with fixed handlebars to investigate the effects of rider motion and position on steering . 
 Schwab and <unk> have performed measurements with an instrumented bike . 
 Hubbard and Moore have performed measurements with an instrumented bike . 
 = Piper Maru = 
 " Piper Maru " is episode 15 of season 3 of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on February 9 , 1996 . The episode was written by executive producer Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Rob Bowman . " Piper Maru " is one of those which helped to explore the series ' overarching mythology . Its introduction of the black oil became a storyline milestone for the series . The black oil would later go on to play a much larger role in the series , including playing a pivotal role in the 1998 X @-@ Files movie . " Piper Maru " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 6 , being watched by 16 @.@ 44 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , a French salvage ship sends a diving crew to recover a mysterious wreckage from World War II , but the crew falls prey to a bizarre illness forcing FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) to investigate the source . Their investigation brings them face @-@ to @-@ face with Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) . 
 " Piper Maru " was written to showcase two visual images Chris Carter had wanted to include in a script " since the beginning of the show " . The first of these was that of a deep @-@ sea diver finding a still @-@ living pilot trapped in the wreckage of a World War II @-@ era fighter plane and the second was that of a black @-@ and @-@ white flashback taking place in a submarine . The title of the episode is a reference to the first and middle name of Gillian Anderson 's daughter , who had been born during the production of the second season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Piper Maru , a French salvage vessel , is exploring the Pacific Ocean . Gauthier , a member of the ship 's crew , dives down into the sea and finds a sunken fighter plane from World War II . He is shocked to find a man alive in the plane 's cockpit , with what looks like black oil in his eyes . When Gauthier returns to the surface , he has become possessed by the black oil . 
 In Washington , Walter Skinner tells agent Dana Scully that the FBI 's investigation into her sister 's murder has been made inactive , despite the evidence that had been recovered . Fox Mulder tells Scully about the Piper Maru , which had laid anchor at the same coordinates as another ship believed to have salvaged a UFO ; when the Piper Maru came to port in San Diego , her crew was found suffering from radiation burns . Aboard the ship , the agents find traces of the black oil on Gauthier 's diving suit . Upon viewing a video of the dive , Scully identifies the sunken plane as a P @-@ 51 Mustang . Meanwhile , Gauthier returns home and searches for something . When his wife Joan arrives , the black oil passes itself along to her . 
 Scully visits an old friend of her father 's , Commander Christopher Johanson , seeking information about the plane . Johanson admits that he had been sent to find a sunken bomber aboard the submarine Zeus Faber , and recalls how many aboard the sub suffered from radiation burns while he joined a mutiny against his commanding officer , who succumbed to the black oil . Meanwhile , Mulder visits Gauthier 's home and finds him passed out , covered in the black oil ; he has no memory of his experience . Mulder finds a letter from a salvage broker , and visits the broker 's " secretary " Jeraldine . Mulder follows Jeraldine after her office is invaded by several armed men . 
 Both Mulder and Joan follow Jeraldine to Hong Kong , where Mulder learns that she is a middleman selling government secrets . Mulder tracks down Jeraldine and handcuffs himself to her . Arriving at her office , Mulder finds Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) waiting inside , having been selling the contents of the digital tape . Krycek escapes through a window while Jeraldine is shot by a group of men coming down the hallway . Mulder unlocks the handcuffs and escapes . Meanwhile , Joan walks down the hall and encounters the men , creating a flash that causes them all to suffer from the radiation burns . 
 Meanwhile , Skinner is initially confronted by several men , including the Gray @-@ Haired Man , and is told not to pursue Melissa Scully 's case any further . Skinner is later shot by Luis Cardinal . After Mulder catches Krycek in an airport , he tells him the tape is in a locker back in Washington and that he 'll give it to him in exchange for letting him go . Mulder lets Krycek go to the bathroom , where he is confronted by Joan . As he departs the bathroom to leave with Mulder , Krycek 's eyes show he is now infected with the black oil . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Conception of the episode originated in two visual images series creator Chris Carter had wanted to include in a script " since the beginning of the show " . The first of these was that of a deep @-@ sea diver finding a still @-@ living pilot trapped in the wreckage of a World War II @-@ era fighter plane ; and the second was that of a black @-@ and @-@ white flashback taking place in a submarine . Director Rob Bowman shared with Carter his experiences diving , feeling that an episode based on finding " something creepy " underwater would be a good idea . Carter also wanted the episode to feature the re @-@ emergence of the " MJ documents " last seen in the earlier " Paper Clip " . 
 Frank Spotnitz began working on the episode immediately after writing the earlier third season episode " 731 " , fleshing out the rest of the concept while on a flight out of Minneapolis . Spotnitz ended up writing his ideas on a magazine , not having brought paper with him , and included in his outline the investigation of Scully 's sister 's murder and the reintroduction of Alex Krycek . The title of the episode is a reference to the first and middle name of Gillian Anderson 's daughter , who had been born during the production of the second season . The name Gauthier , used for the French diver and his wife , was a reference to special effects producer David Gauthier . 
 = = = Filming and post @-@ production = = = 
 The episode 's cold open was filmed in a water tank , using a replica P @-@ 51 Mustang plane which had been designed by the art director . Bowman also needed to direct a scene in which Gillian Anderson would react to a memory of playing with her sister as a child ; the scene involved digitally compositing the children playing into Anderson 's footage . Bowman asked Anderson to act towards a tree as though it were her sister , later telling her " I 'm going to tell everybody I can that you just did that great reaction to a tree " . Bowman also reshot the episode 's ending , as originally Duchovny and Lea were to walk past the camera and continue off @-@ screen . Feeling this was not effective , he replaced this with a walking shot which continued straight towards and into the camera , noting that " Nick will jump in front of a truck if he think it will make a scene better " . 
 The on @-@ screen appearances of the black oil were achieved through visual effects , with the shimmering oil effect being digitally placed over the actors ' corneas in post @-@ production . The crew went through various iterations to find the two " right " types of fluids . According to physical effects crewman David Gauthier , they used a mix of oil and acetone , which he believed gave the substance a more globular look . Special effects technician Mat Beck was able to digitally bend the oil effect around the shape of the actors ' eyes . 
 The man in the plane in the teaser , Robert Maier , worked as a construction coordinator on the show , and felt that his part in the episode fulfilled a " life @-@ long dream " of working as a stuntman . Nicholas Lea 's name was purposely left until the ending credits in order to preserve the sense of surprise . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Piper Maru " premiered on the Fox network on February 9 , 1996 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on November 27 , 1996 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 6 with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 16 @.@ 44 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Piper Maru " received positive reviews from critics . In an overview of the third season in Entertainment Weekly , the episode was rated an A. The review described " Piper Maru " as featuring " a tough and sentimental Scully " , noting that " action @-@ packed detective work by Mulder enhance [ s ] an already crackling scenario . " Reviewer Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode an A and wrote positively of the unfolding mythology , noting that the " great thing about " Piper Maru " is that it still belongs to the period of time when the mythology episodes were exposing us to more pieces of the puzzle , fitting in various things that we were meant to incorporate into the whole . This is the first time we meet the black oil , but it 's obvious that others know all about it " . Critical Myth 's John Keegan gave the episode eight out of ten , and complimented the introduction of the black oil , writing " this episode is a good introduction to the black oil virus , providing a bridge from the mythology elements earlier in the season to the larger scope of the conspiracy to be revealed . " Nick De Semlyen and James White of Empire named it the sixth " greatest " episode of the series , describing it as " thrilling " , " pacey " and " balanced " . 
 The introduction of the sentient black oil in this episode has also been met with positive criticism . The oil has been described as " the most original and frightening creation of The X @-@ Files ' mythology " , as " one of the best parts of the show " and has been listed as number two on Den of Geek 's " Top 10 X @-@ Files Baddies " countdown , where it was described as " a central part " of the series ' mythology . 
 Gillian Anderson considered the episode an emotionally difficult one , saying " Piper Maru was challenging . There was something about it – having to pull from the past ... how it brought the present and the past together . It was just good to play . " Director Kim Manners complimented Anderson 's performance , stating " you look at season one and look at season three and that girl exploded as an actress in terms of talent and capability . " The 2004 film Alien vs. Predator featured an icebreaker named the Piper Maru , the naming of the ship being a nod to this episode . 
 = British anti @-@ invasion preparations of the Second World War = 
 British anti @-@ invasion preparations of the Second World War entailed a large @-@ scale division of military and civilian mobilisation in response to the threat of invasion by German armed forces in 1940 and 1941 . The British army needed to recover from the defeat of the British Expeditionary Force in France , and 1 @.@ 5 million men were enrolled as part @-@ time soldiers in the Home Guard . The rapid construction of field fortifications transformed much of the United Kingdom , especially southern England , into a prepared battlefield . The German invasion plan , Operation Sea Lion , was never taken beyond the preliminary assembly of forces . Today , little remains of Britain 's anti @-@ invasion preparations . Only reinforced concrete structures such as pillboxes are common . 
 = = Political and military background = = 
 On 1 September 1939 , Germany invaded Poland ; two days later , Britain and France declared war on Germany , launching the Second World War . Within three weeks , the Red Army of the Soviet Union invaded the eastern regions of Poland in fulfilment of the secret Molotov @-@ Ribbentrop Pact with Germany . A British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) was sent to the Franco @-@ Belgian border , but Britain and France did not take any direct action in support of the Poles . By 1 October , Poland had been completely overrun . 
 There was little fighting over the months that followed . In a period known as the Phoney War , soldiers on both sides trained for war and the French and British constructed and manned defences on the eastern borders of France . 
 On 9 April 1940 , Germany invaded Denmark and Norway . This operation preempted the British ' own plans to invade Norway . Denmark surrendered immediately , and , after a short @-@ lived attempt by the British to make a stand in the northern part of the country , Norway also fell . The invasion of Norway was a combined forces operation in which the German war machine projected its power across the sea ; this German success would come to be seen by the British as a dire portent . 
 On 7 and 8 May 1940 , in the British House of Commons , the Norway Debate revealed intense dissatisfaction with and outright hostility toward the government of Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain . Two days later , with events moving swiftly , Chamberlain resigned and was succeeded by Winston Churchill . 
 On 10 May 1940 , Germany invaded France . By that time , the BEF consisted of 10 infantry divisions in three corps , a tank brigade and a Royal Air Force detachment of around 500 aircraft . The BEF was pinned by a German diversionary attack through Belgium and then isolated by the main attack that came through the Ardennes forest . Well @-@ equipped and highly mobile Panzer divisions of the Wehrmacht overran the prepared defences . There was some fierce fighting , but most of the BEF withdrew to a small area around the French port of Dunkirk . 
 As things had gone badly for the allies in France , it became evident that some thought needed to be given to the possibility of having to resist an attempted invasion of Britain by German forces . 
 = = British armed forces = = 
 = = = British Army = = = 
 The evacuation of British and French forces ( Operation Dynamo ) began on 26 May with air cover provided by the RAF at heavy cost . Over the following ten days , 338 @,@ 226 French and British soldiers were evacuated to Britain . Most of the personnel were brought back to Britain , but many of the army 's vehicles , tanks , guns , ammunition and heavy equipment and the RAF 's ground equipment and stores were left behind in France . Some soldiers even returned without their rifles . A further 215 @,@ 000 were evacuated from ports south of the Channel in Operation Ariel during June . 
 In June 1940 the British Army had 22 infantry divisions and one armoured division . The infantry divisions were , on average , at half strength , had only one @-@ sixth of their normal artillery , ( over 600 medium guns , both 18 / 25 and 25 pounder , and 280 howitzers were available , with a further 100 25 pounders manufactured in June , over 300 4 @.@ 5 inch howitzers – 900 were modified in 1940 alone – and a number of 60 pounder howitzers and their modified 4 @.@ 5 inch version as well as antiquated examples of the 6 inch howitzer recovered from reserve after the loss of current models in France , with several hundred additional 75 @-@ mm M1917 guns and their ammunition arriving from the US ) , and were almost totally lacking in transport ( just over 2 @,@ 000 carriers were available , rising to over 3 @,@ 000 by the end of July ) . There was a critical shortage of ammunition such that none could be spared for practice . However , records show that the British possessed over 290 million rounds of .303 ammunition of various types on 7 June , rising to over 400 million in August . VII Corps was formed to control the Home Forces ' general reserve , and included the 1st Armoured Division . In a reorganisation in July , the divisions with some degree of mobility were placed behind the " coastal crust " of defended beach areas from The Wash to Newhaven in Sussex . The General Headquarters Reserve was expanded to two corps of the most capable units . VII Corps was based at Headley Court in Surrey to the south of London and comprised 1st Armoured and 1st Canadian Divisions with the 1st Army Tank Brigade . IV Corps was based at Latimer House to the north of London and comprised 2nd Armoured , 42nd and 43rd Infantry divisions . 
 Estimates of the numbers of tanks in Britain after the fall of France vary ; Viscount Cranbourne stated in the House of Lords ( in 1942 ) that Britain only had 50 infantry tanks and 200 light tanks armed only with machine guns , and these figures have become the basis of the myth that the British Army in June 1940 had very few tanks . But Churchill stated that there were 102 cruiser tanks , 132 infantry tanks and 252 light tanks left in Britain after the fall of France . Churchill also stated " in the last half of September we were able to bring into action on the south coast front sixteen divisions of high quality of which three were armoured divisions or their equivalent in brigades " . An official history gave the figures for tank numbers on 10 June 1940 as 103 cruisers and 142 infantry tanks . Other sources indicate that these had more than doubled by the end of July . Whatever the exact numbers in August 1940 the British Government felt sufficiently confident in Britain 's ability to repel an invasion ( and in its tank production factories ) that it sent 52 cruiser and 50 infantry tanks to Egypt . At this time Britain 's factories were almost matching Germany 's output in tanks and by 1941 they would surpass them . 
 = = = Home Guard = = = 
 On 14 May 1940 , Secretary of State for War Anthony Eden announced the creation of the Local Defence Volunteers ( LDV ) — later to become known as the Home Guard . Far more men volunteered than the government expected and by the end of June , there were nearly 1 @.@ 5 million volunteers . There were plenty of personnel for the defence of the country , but there were no uniforms ( a simple armband had to suffice ) and equipment was in critically short supply . At first , the Home Guard was armed with guns in private ownership , a knife or bayonet on a pole , Molotov cocktails and improvised flamethrowers . 
 By July 1940 the situation had improved somewhat with uniforms , a modicum of training and the arrival of hundreds of thousands of rifles and millions of rounds of ammunition from the USA . New weapons were developed that could be produced cheaply without consuming materials that were needed to produce armaments for the regular units . An early example was the No. 76 Special Incendiary Grenade ( a glass bottle filled with highly flammable material of which more than six million were made ) , and the No. 73 Grenade ( an anti @-@ tank grenade resembling a Thermos flask ) . 
 The sticky bomb was a glass flask filled with nitroglycerin and given an adhesive coating allowing it to be glued to a passing vehicle . In theory , it could be thrown , but in practice it would most likely need to be placed — thumped against the target with sufficient force to stick — requiring courage and good fortune to be used effectively . An order for one million sticky bombs was placed in June 1940 , but various problems delayed their distribution in large numbers until early 1941 , and it is likely that fewer than 250 @,@ 000 were produced . 
 A measure of mobility was provided by bicycles , motorcycles , private vehicles and horses . A small number of units were equipped with armoured cars , some of which were of standard design , but many were improvised locally from commercially available vehicles by the attachment of steel plates . 
 Later in 1941 , more sophisticated weapons were made available such as the Blacker Bombard anti @-@ tank weapon , the Northover Projector ( a black @-@ powder mortar ) , and the Smith Gun ( a small artillery gun that could be towed by a private motorcar ) . 
 = = = Royal Air Force = = = 
 In mid @-@ 1940 , the principal concern of the Royal Air Force , together with elements of the Fleet Air Arm , was to contest the control of British airspace with the German Luftwaffe . For the Germans , achieving at least local air superiority was an essential prerequisite to any invasion . 
 If the German air force had prevailed and attempted a landing , a much @-@ reduced Royal Air Force would have been obliged to operate from airfields well away from the southeast of England . Any airfield that was in danger of being captured would have been made inoperable and there were plans to remove all portable equipment from vulnerable radar bases and completely destroy anything that could not be moved . Whatever was left of the RAF would have been committed to intercepting the invasion fleet in concert with the Royal Navy — to fly in the presence of an enemy that enjoys air superiority is very dangerous . However , the RAF would have kept several advantages , such as being able to operate largely over friendly territory , as well as having the ability to fly for longer as , until the Germans were able to operate from airfields in England , Luftwaffe pilots would still have to fly significant distances to reach their operational area . 
 A contingency plan called Operation Banquet required all available aircraft to be committed to the defence . In the event of invasion almost anything that was not a fighter would be converted to a bomber – student pilots , some in the very earliest stages of training , would use around 350 Tiger Moth and Magister trainers to drop 20 lb ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) bombs from rudimentary bomb racks . 
 Shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War the Chain Home radar system began to be installed in the south of England , with three radar stations being operational by 1937 . Although the German High Command suspected that the British may have been developing these systems , Zeppelin test flights had proved inconclusive . As a result , the expanding Chain Home radar system , and aircraft @-@ based radar first fielded in 1940 , became a vital piece of Britain 's defensive capabilities during the Battle of Britain . 
 = = = Royal Navy = = = 
 Although much larger in size and with many more ships , the Royal Navy , unlike the Kriegsmarine , had many commitments , including against Japan and the defence of Scotland and Northern England . The Royal Navy could overwhelm any force that the German navy could muster but would require time to get its forces in position since they were dispersed , partly because of the aforementioned commitments and partly to reduce risk of air attack . On 1 July 1940 , one cruiser and 23 destroyers were committed to escort duties in the Western Approaches , plus 12 destroyers and one cruiser on the Tyne and the aircraft carrier Argus ( <unk> ) . More immediately available were ten destroyers at the south coast ports of Dover and Portsmouth , a cruiser and three destroyers at Sheerness on the River Thames , three cruisers and seven destroyers at the Humber , 9 destroyers at Harwich , and two cruisers at Rosyth . The rest of the Home Fleet — five battleships , three cruisers and nine destroyers — was based far to the north at Scapa Flow . There were , in addition , many corvettes , minesweepers , and other small vessels . By the end of July , a dozen additional destroyers were transferred from escort duties to the defence of the homeland , and more would join the Home Fleet shortly after . 
 At the end of August , the battleship HMS Rodney was sent south to Rosyth for anti @-@ invasion duties . She was joined on 13 September by her sister ship HMS Nelson , the battlecruiser HMS Hood , three anti @-@ aircraft cruisers and a destroyer flotilla . On 14 September , the old battleship HMS Revenge was moved to Plymouth , also specifically in case of invasion . In addition to these major units , by the beginning of September the Royal Navy had stationed along the south coast of England between Plymouth and Harwich , 4 light cruisers and 57 destroyers tasked with repelling any invasion attempt , a force many times larger than the naval escorts that the Germans had available . 
 = = Field fortifications = = 
 The British engaged upon an extensive programme of field fortification . 
 On 27 May 1940 a Home Defence Executive was formed under General Sir Edmund Ironside , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Home Forces , to organise the defence of Britain . At first defence arrangements were largely static and focused on the coastline ( the coastal crust ) and , in a classic example of defence in depth , on a series of inland anti @-@ tank ' stop ' lines . The stop lines were designated Command , Corp and Divisional according to their status . The longest and most heavily fortified was the General Headquarters anti @-@ tank line , GHQ Line , which ran across southern England , wrapped around London and then ran north to Yorkshire . It was intended to protect the capital and the industrial heartland of England . Another major line was the Taunton Stop Line , which defended against an advance from England 's south @-@ west peninsula . London and other major cities were ringed with inner and outer stop lines . Some 50 known stop lines were constructed in Britain , though some of the less important lines were just demolition belts and not all lines were completed . 
 Military thinking shifted rapidly . Given the lack of equipment and properly trained men , Ironside had had little choice but to adopt a strategy of static warfare , but it was soon perceived that this would not be sufficient . Ironside has been criticised for having a siege mentality , but some consider this unfair , as he is believed to have understood the limits of the stop lines and never expected them to hold out indefinitely . 
 However , Prime Minister Churchill was not satisfied with Ironside 's progress , especially with regard to the creation of a mobile reserve . Anthony Eden , the Secretary of State for War , suggested that Ironside should be replaced by General Brooke ( later Viscount Alanbrooke ) . On 17 July 1940 Churchill spent an afternoon with Brooke and was soon convinced that they were in close agreement as to how best to defend the nation . On 19 July Brooke replaced Ironside . 
 Brooke 's appointment coincided with more trained men and better equipment becoming available . Under Brooke , new strategies and tactics were devised . More concentration was placed on defending the coastal crust , while inland a hedgehog defence strategy of defended localities and anti @-@ tank islands was established , each having all @-@ round defence . Many of these anti @-@ tank islands were established along the already constructed stop lines , where existing defences could be integrated into the new strategy and , especially , at towns and villages where there was a Home Guard to provide personnel . 
 = = = Coastal crust = = = 
 Any German invasion of Britain would have to involve the landing of troops and equipment somewhere on the coast , and the most vulnerable areas were the south and east coasts of England . Here , Emergency Coastal Batteries were constructed to protect ports and likely landing places . They were fitted with whatever guns were available , which mainly came from naval vessels scrapped since the end of the First World War . These included 6 inch ( 152 mm ) , 5 @.@ 5 inch ( 140 mm ) , 4 @.@ 7 inch ( 120 mm ) and 4 inch ( 102 mm ) guns . These had little ammunition , sometimes as few as ten rounds apiece . At Dover , two 14 inch ( 356 mm ) guns known as Winnie and Pooh were employed . There were also a small number of land based torpedo launching sites . 
 Beaches were blocked with entanglements of barbed wire , usually in the form of three coils of concertina wire fixed by metal posts , or a simple fence of straight wires supported on waist @-@ high posts . The wire would also demarcate extensive minefields , with both anti @-@ tank and anti @-@ personnel mines on and behind the beaches . On many of the more remote beaches this combination of wire and mines represented the full extent of the passive defences . 
 Portions of the Romney Marsh , which was the planned invasion site of Operation Sea Lion , were flooded and there were plans to flood more of the Marsh if the invasion were to materialise . 
 Piers , ideal for landing of troops , and situated in large numbers along the south coast of England , were disassembled , blocked or otherwise destroyed . Many piers were not repaired until the late 1940s or early 1950s . 
 Where a barrier to tanks was required , Admiralty scaffolding ( also known as beach scaffolding or obstacle <unk> ) was constructed . Essentially , this was a fence of scaffolding tubes 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) high and was placed at low water so that tanks could not get a good run at it . Admiralty scaffolding was deployed along hundreds of miles of vulnerable beaches . 
 An even more robust barrier to tanks was provided by long lines of anti @-@ tank cubes . The cubes were made of reinforced concrete 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) to a side . Thousands were cast in situ in rows sometimes two or three deep . 
 The beaches themselves were overlooked by pillboxes of various types ( see British hardened field defences of the Second World War ) . These were sometimes placed low down to get maximum advantage from enfilading fire whereas others were placed high up making them much harder to capture . Searchlights were installed at the coast to illuminate the sea surface and the beaches for artillery fire . 
 Many small islands and peninsulas were fortified to protect inlets and other strategic targets . In the Firth of Forth in east central Scotland , Inchgarvie was heavily fortified with several gun emplacements , which can still be seen . This provided invaluable defence from seaborne attacks on the Forth Bridge and Rosyth Dockyard , approximately a mile upstream from the bridge . Further out to sea , Inchmickery , 1 @.@ 6 miles ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) north of Edinburgh , was similarly fortified . The remnants of gun emplacements on the coast to the north , in North Queensferry , and south , in Dalmeny , of Inchmickery also remain . 
 = = = Lines and islands = = = 
 The primary purpose of the stop lines and the anti @-@ tank islands that followed was to hold up the enemy , slowing progress and restricting the route of an attack . The need to prevent tanks from breaking through was of key importance . Consequently , the defences generally ran along pre @-@ existing barriers to tanks such as rivers and canals ; railway embankments and cuttings ; thick woods ; and other natural obstacles . Where possible , usually well @-@ drained land was allowed to flood , making the ground too soft to support even tracked vehicles . 
 Thousands of miles of anti @-@ tank ditches were dug , usually by mechanical excavators , but occasionally by hand . They were typically 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) wide and 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) deep and could be either trapezoidal or triangular in section with the defended side being especially steep and revetted with whatever material was available . 
 Elsewhere , anti @-@ tank barriers were made of massive reinforced concrete obstacles , either cubic , pyramidal or cylindrical . The cubes generally came in two sizes : 5 or 3 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 or 1 @.@ 1 m ) high . In a few places , anti @-@ tank walls were constructed — essentially continuously abutted cubes . 
 Large cylinders were made from a section of sewer pipe 3 to 4 feet ( 91 to 122 cm ) in diameter filled with concrete typically to a height of 4 to 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 5 m ) , frequently with a dome at the top . Smaller cylinders cast from concrete are also frequently found . 
 <unk> , popularly known as Dragon 's teeth , were pyramid shaped concrete blocks designed specifically to counter tanks which , attempting to pass them , would climb up exposing vulnerable parts of the vehicle and possibly slip down with the tracks between the points . They ranged in size somewhat , but were typically 2 feet ( 61 cm ) high and about 3 feet ( 91 cm ) square at the base . There was also a conical form . 
 Cubes , cylinders and pimples were deployed in long rows , often several rows deep , to form anti @-@ tank barriers at beaches and inland . They were also used in smaller numbers to block roads . They frequently sported loops at the top for the attachment of barbed wire . There was also a tetrahedral or <unk> @-@ shaped obstacle , although it seems these were rare . 
 Where natural anti @-@ tank barriers needed only to be augmented , concrete or wooden posts sufficed . 
 Roads offered the enemy fast routes to their objectives and consequently they were blocked at strategic points . Many of the road @-@ blocks formed by Ironside were semi @-@ permanent . In many cases , Brooke had these removed altogether , as experience had shown they could be as much of an impediment to friends as to foes . Brooke favoured removable blocks . 
 The simplest of the removable roadblocks consisted of concrete cylinders of various sizes but typically about 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) high and 2 feet ( 61 cm ) in diameter ; these could be manhandled into position as required . However , these would be insufficient to stop armoured vehicles . One common type of removable anti @-@ tank roadblock comprised a pair of massive concrete buttresses permanently installed at the roadside ; these buttresses had holes and / or slots to accept horizontal railway lines or rolled steel joists ( <unk> ) . Similar blocks were placed across railway tracks because tanks can move along tracks almost as easily as they can along roads . These blocks would be placed strategically where it was difficult for a vehicle to go around — anti @-@ tank obstacles and mines being positioned as required — and they could be opened or closed within a matter of minutes . 
 There were two types of socket roadblocks . The first comprised vertical lengths of railway line placed in sockets in the road and was known as hedgehog . The second type comprised railway lines or <unk> bent or welded at around a 60 ° angle , known as hairpins . In both cases , prepared sockets about 6 inches ( 152 @.@ 40 mm ) square were placed in the road , closed by covers when not in use , allowing traffic to pass normally . 
 Another removable <unk> system used mines . The extant remains of such systems superficially resemble those of hedgehog or hairpin , but the pits are shallow : just deep enough to take an anti @-@ tank mine . When not in use , the sockets were filled with a wooden plug allowing traffic to pass normally . 
 Bridges and other key points were prepared for demolition at short notice by preparing chambers filled with explosives . A Depth Charge Crater was a site in a road ( usually at a junction ) prepared with buried explosives that could be detonated to instantly form a deep crater as an anti @-@ tank obstacle . The Canadian pipe mine ( later known as the McNaughton Tube after General Andrew McNaughton ) was a horizontally bored pipe packed with explosives – once in place this could be used to instantly ruin a road or runway . Prepared demolitions had the advantage of being undetectable from the air — the enemy could not take any precautions against them , or plot a route of attack around them . 
 Crossing points in the defence network – bridges , tunnels and other weak spots – were called nodes or points of resistance . These were fortified with removable road blocks , barbed wire entanglements , and land mines . These passive defences were overlooked by trench works , gun and mortar emplacements , and pillboxes . In places entire villages were fortified using barriers of scaffolding , sandbagged positions and loopholes in existing buildings . 
 Nodes were designated ' A ' , ' B ' or ' C ' depending upon how long they were expected to hold out . Home Guard troops were largely responsible for the defence of nodal points and other centres of resistance such as towns and defended villages . Category ' A ' nodal points and anti @-@ tank islands usually had a garrison of regular troops . 
 The rate of construction was frenetic : by the end of September 1940 , 18 @,@ 000 pillboxes and countless other preparations had been completed . 
 = = = Airfields and open areas = = = 
 Open areas were considered vulnerable to invasion from the air : a landing by paratroops , glider @-@ borne troops or powered aircraft which could land and take off again . Open areas with a straight length of 500 yards ( 460 m ) or more within five miles ( 8 km ) of the coast or an airfield were considered vulnerable . These were blocked by trenches or , more usually , by wooden or concrete obstacles , as well as old cars . 
 Securing an airstrip would be an important objective for the invader . Airfields , considered extremely vulnerable , were protected by trench works and pillboxes which faced inwards towards the runway , rather than outwards . Many of these fortifications were specified by the Air Ministry and defensive designs were unique to airfields — these would not be expected to face heavy weapons so the degree of protection was less and there was more emphasis on all @-@ round visibility and sweeping fields of fire . It was difficult to defend large open areas without creating impediments to the movement of friendly aircraft . Solutions to this problem included the pop @-@ up Picket Hamilton fort — a light pillbox that could be lowered to ground level when the airfield was in use . 
 Another innovation was a mobile pillbox that could be driven out onto the airfield . This was known as the Bison and consisted of a lorry with a concrete armoured cabin and a small concrete pillbox on the flat bed . Constructed in Canada , a ' runway plough ' , assembled in Scotland , survives at Eglinton Country Park . It was purchased by the army in World War II to rip up aerodrome runways and railway lines if an invasion took place as means of causing disruption , making them useless to the occupying forces . It was used at the old Eglinton Estate , which had been commandeered by the army , to provide its army operators with the necessary experience . It was hauled by a powerful Foden Trucks tractor , possibly via a pulley and cable system . 
 = = = Hardened field defences = = = 
 The field fortifications constructed throughout Britain included large numbers of hardened field defences : mostly in the form of pillboxes . 
 In May 1940 , the Directorate of Fortifications and Works ( FW3 ) was set up at the War Office . Its purpose was to provide a number of basic pillbox designs which could be constructed by soldiers and local labour at appropriate defensive locations . In the following June and July FW3 issued 6 basic designs for rifle and light machine gun pillboxes , designated Type 22 to Type 27 . In addition , there were designs for gun emplacements suitable for either the Ordnance QF 2 pounder or the Hotchkiss 6 pounder gun ( designated Type 28 ) and a design for a hardened medium machine gun emplacement . 
 There were also designs for pillbox @-@ like structures for various purposes including light anti @-@ aircraft positions , observation posts and searchlight positions to illuminate the shoreline . 
 A small number of pillboxes had been constructed in the First World War and where possible these were integrated into the defence plans . Some pillboxes may pre @-@ date the publication of the FW3 designs , but in any case some local commanders introduced modifications to the standard FW3 designs or introduced designs of their own . These non @-@ standard design pillboxes may be produced in some numbers or completely ad hoc designs suited to local conditions . Other designs were produced as commercial ventures . 
 About 28 @,@ 000 pillboxes and other hardened field fortifications were constructed in the United Kingdom of which about 6 @,@ 500 still survive . 
 = = Other defensive measures = = 
 Other basic defensive measures included the removal of signposts , milestones ( some had the carved details obscured with cement ) and railway station signs making it more likely that an enemy would become confused . Petrol pumps were removed from service stations near the coast and there were careful preparations for the destruction of those that were left . Detailed plans were made for destroying anything that might prove useful to the invader such as port facilities , key roads and rolling stock . In certain areas non @-@ essential citizens were evacuated . In the county of Kent , 40 % of the population was relocated ; in East Anglia , the figure was 50 % . 
 Perhaps most importantly , the population was told what was expected from them . In June 1940 , the Ministry of Information published If the Invader Comes , what to do — and how to do it . It began : 
 The first instruction given quite emphatically is that , unless ordered to evacuate , " THE ORDER IS ' <unk> PUT ' " [ capitalisation as in original ] . The roads were not to be blocked by refugees . Further warnings were given not to believe rumours and not to spread them , to be distrustful of orders that might be faked and even to check that an officer giving orders really is British . Further : keep calm and report anything suspicious quickly and accurately ; deny useful things to the enemy such as food , fuel , maps or transport ; be ready to block roads — when ordered to do so — " by felling trees , wiring them together or blocking the roads with cars " ; to organise resistance at shops and factories ; and , finally : 
 On 13 June 1940 the ringing of church bells was banned ; henceforth they would only be rung by the military or the police to warn that an invasion — generally meaning by parachutists — was in progress . 
 It is clear that more than merely passive resistance was expected — or at least hoped for — from the population . Churchill considered the formation of a Home Guard Reserve , given only an armband and basic training on the use of simple weapons such as Molotov cocktails . The reserve would only have been expected to report for duty in an invasion . Later , Churchill wrote how he envisaged the use of the sticky bomb : " We had the picture in mind that devoted soldiers or civilians would run close up to the tank and even thrust the bomb upon it , though its explosion cost them their lives [ Italics added for emphasis ] . " He also later recorded how he intended to use the slogan " You can always take one with you . " 
 In 1941 , in towns and villages invasion committees were formed to cooperate with the military and plan for the worst should their communities be isolated or occupied . The members of committees typically included representatives of the local council , the Air Raid Precautions service , the fire service , the police , the Women 's Voluntary Service and the Home Guard , as well as officers for medicine , sanitation and food . Plans of these committees were kept in secret War Books although few remain . Detailed inventories of anything useful were kept : vehicles , animals and basic tools , and lists were made of contact details for key personnel . Plans were made for a wide range of emergencies , including improvised mortuaries and places to bury the dead . Instructions to the Invasion Committees stated : " ... every citizen will regard it as his duty to hinder and frustrate the enemy and help our own forces by every means that ingenuity can devise and common sense suggest . " 
 When the UK went to war on 3 September 1939 , the strength of the Metropolitan Police stood at 18 @,@ 428 , which was 900 officers short of full strength . Due to the threat of invasion three reserve groups were mobilised , the first consisted of 2 @,@ 737 police pensioners who were re @-@ engaged , a second reserve of 5 @,@ 380 Special Constables serving on a temporary full @-@ time basis for the duration of the war , and 18 @,@ 868 War Reserve Constables employed on the same basis as the Special Constables . On the same day as the Battle of Dunkirk , Scotland Yard issued a memorandum detailing the police use of firearms in wartime . This detailed the planned training for all officers in the use of pistols and revolvers , as it was decided that even though the police were non @-@ combatant , they would provide armed guarding at sites deemed a risk from enemy sabotage , and would assist the British Armed Forces in the event of an invasion . Because of the possibility of the police assisting the armed forces , firearms and ammunition supplied to divisions were increased . On 1 June 1940 , 3 @,@ 500 Ross Rifles , which had last seen service in 1916 , and 72 @,@ 384 rounds of .303 ammunition were received from the military and were distributed among divisions . Thames division had the smallest rifle allocation with 61 , and " S " Division the largest with 190 . Fifty rifles were also issued to the London Fire Brigade , and Port of London Authority Police . 
 = = Guns , petroleum and poison = = 
 In 1940 , weapons were critically short ; there was a particular scarcity of anti @-@ tank weapons , many of which had been left in France . Ironside had only 170 2 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank guns , but these were supplemented by 100 Hotchkiss 6 @-@ pounder guns dating from the First World War , improvised into the anti @-@ tank role by the provision of solid shot . By the end of July 1940 , an additional 900 75mm field guns had been received from the USA , — the British were desperate for any means of stopping armoured vehicles . The Sten submachine gun was developed to replace infantry weapons left in France , and to supplement supplies from America of the Thompson submachine gun . 
 One of the few resources not in short supply was petroleum oil ; supplies intended for Europe were filling British storage facilities . Considerable effort and enthusiasm was put into making use of petroleum products as a weapon of war . The Army had not had flame @-@ throwers since the First World War , but a significant number were improvised from pressure greasing equipment acquired from automotive repair garages . Although limited in range , they were reasonably effective . 
 There were many ideas for using petroleum on a larger scale and although many proved fruitless a number of practical weapons were developed . 
 A mobile flame trap comprised surplus bulk storage tanks on trucks , the contents of which could be hosed into a sunken road and ignited . A static flame trap was prepared with perforated pipes running down the side of a road connected to a 600 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 2 @,@ 730 L ; 720 US gal ) elevated tank . Usually gravity sufficed but in a few cases a pump assisted in spraying the mixture of oil and petrol . 
 A flame fougasse comprised a 40 gallon light steel drum filled with petroleum mixture and a small , electrically detonated explosive . This was dug into the roadside with a substantial overburden and camouflaged . <unk> provided the propellant charge , it was placed behind the barrel and , when triggered , caused the barrel to rupture and shoot a jet of flame 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) wide and 30 yards ( 27 m ) long . They were usually deployed in batteries of four barrels and would be placed at a location such as a corner , steep incline or roadblock where vehicles would be obliged to slow . 
 Variants of the flame fougasse included the demigasse , a barrel on its side and left in the open with explosive buried underneath ; and the hedge hopper : a barrel on end with explosive buried underneath a few inches deep and slightly off centre . On firing , the hedge hopper barrel was projected ten feet ( 3 m ) into the air and over a hedge or wall behind which it had been hidden . 50 @,@ 000 flame fougasse barrels were installed at 7 @,@ 000 sites mostly in southern England and at a further 2 @,@ 000 sites in Scotland . 
 Early experiments with floating petroleum on the sea and igniting it were not entirely successful : the fuel was difficult to ignite , large quantities were required to cover even modest areas and the weapon was easily disrupted by waves . However , the potential was clear . By early 1941 a flame barrage technique was developed . Rather than attempting to ignite oil floating on water , nozzles were placed above high @-@ water mark with pumps producing sufficient pressure to spray fuel which produced a roaring wall of flame over , rather than on , the water . Such installations consumed considerable resources and although this weapon was impressive , its network of pipes was vulnerable to pre @-@ landing bombardment ; General Brooke did not consider it effective . Initially ambitious plans were cut back to cover just a few miles of beaches . 
 It seems likely the British would have used poison gas against troops on beaches . General Brooke , in an annotation to his published war diaries , stated that he " ... had every intention of using sprayed mustard gas on the beaches " . Mustard gas was manufactured as well as chlorine , phosgene and Paris Green . Poison gases were stored at key points for use by Bomber Command and in smaller quantities at many more airfields for use against the beaches . Bombers and crop sprayers would spray landing craft and beaches with mustard gas and Paris Green . 
 = = Deception and disinformation = = 
 In addition to hiding real weapons and fortifications , steps were taken to create the impression of the existence of defences that were not real . Drain pipes stood in place of real guns , dummy pillboxes were constructed , and uniformed mannequins kept an unblinking vigil . 
 Volunteers were encouraged to use anything that would delay the enemy . A young member of the Home Guard ( LDV ) recalled : 
 In the villages use was made of any existing walls or buildings , loopholes for firing or passing heavy chains and cables through to form barriers strong enough to slow down or stop soft skinned vehicles . The chains and cables could also be made into psychological barriers to tanks by attaching an imitation bomb to them , an impression which could be augmented by running a length of cable from it to a position out of sight of a tank commander . These positions could be made even more authentic by breaking up the surface immediately in front of the obstacle and burying an old soup plate , or similar object . For occasions where time did not permit the passing of cables and chains we had concrete cylinders the size of a 45 gallon oil or tar barrel ready to roll into a roadway or other gap . These generally had a large metal loop cemented into one end through which a cable could be passed to link several together . Again , suspicious looking parcels could be attached to strengthen the illusion . 
 In 1938 , a section funded by MI6 was created for propaganda , headed by Sir Campbell Stuart . It was allocated premises at Electra House and was dubbed Department EH . On 25 September 1939 the unit was mobilised to Woburn Abbey where it joined a subversion team from MI6 , known as Section D , and by July these teams became a part of the newly created Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) . These SOE elements went on to form the core of the Political Warfare Executive in 1941 . Their task was to spread false rumours and conduct psychological warfare . Inspired by a demonstration of petroleum warfare , one false rumour stated that the British had a new bomb : dropped from an aircraft , it caused a thin film of volatile liquid to spread over the surface of the water which it then ignited . Such rumours were credible and rapidly spread . American broadcaster William Shirer recorded large numbers of burns victims in Berlin ; though it is not clear what he personally saw , it seems likely his reports were influenced by rumours . The interrogation of a Luftwaffe pilot revealed the existence of such weapons was common knowledge , and documents found after the war showed the German high command were deceived . The rumour seemed to take on a life of its own on both sides leading to persistent stories of a thwarted German invasion , in spite of official British denials . On 15 December 1940 , The New York Times ran a story claiming that tens of thousands of German troops had been ' consumed by fire ' in two failed invasion attempts . 
 = = Planned resistance = = 
 The War Office did not treat the threat of invasion seriously until the collapse of France in May 1940 . The Secret Intelligence Service had , however , been making plans for this eventuality since February 1940 , creating the core of a secret resistance network across the country . This remained in existence until at least 1943 and comprised both intelligence and sabotage units . In May 1940 , SIS also began to distribute arms dumps and recruit for a larger civilian guerrilla organisation called the Home Defence Scheme . This was deeply resented by the War Office who created the Auxiliary Units as a more respectable military alternative . 
 Auxiliary Units were a specially trained and secret organisation that would act as uniformed commandos to attack the flanks and rear of an enemy advance . They were organised around a core of regular army ' scout sections ' , supported by patrols of 6 - 8 men recruited from the Home Guard . Although approval for the organisation had been given in June 1940 , recruiting only began in early July . Each patrol was a self @-@ contained cell , expected to be self @-@ sufficient . There was , however , no means of communicating with them once they had gone to ground , which greatly reduced their strategic value . Each patrol was well @-@ equipped and was provided with a concealed underground operational base , usually built in woodland and camouflaged . Auxiliary Units were only expected to operate during an organised military campaign , with an expected lifespan of 14 days . They were not , therefore , intended to operate as a long term resistance organisation . The latter was the responsibility of the Secret Intelligence Service Section VII , which would have only begun to expand its operations once the country had actually been occupied , thus confining knowledge of its existence only to those men and women who would have been available at the time . 
 In addition , the Auxiliary Units included a network of civilian Special Duties personnel , recruited to provide a short @-@ term intelligence gathering service , spying on enemy formations and troop movements . Reports were to be collected from dead letter drops and , from 1941 , relayed by civilian radio operators from secret locations . The wireless network did , however , only become operational from 1941 and was based upon a very rigid system which meant that it was unlikely to survive more than a few days following invasion . More important in 1940 for intelligence gathering were the mobile patrols of the GHQ Liaison Unit ( ' Phantom ' ) , which were staffed by skilled linguists and equipped with powerful wireless sets for direct communication with GHQ . 
 = = Offensive anti @-@ invasion operations = = 
 The War Cabinet and the Chiefs of Staff Committee were not content to sit and wait for the Germans to make the first move ; considerable efforts were to attack by air and sea the enemy shipping which had been assembled in occupied ports between The Hague and Cherbourg , starting in July 1940 . These attacks became known as the " Battle of the Barges " . Some notable operations are shown below : 
 12 August : Five Handley Page Hampdens attacked the <unk> Aqueduct on the Dortmund @-@ Ems Canal . The waterway was blocked for ten days , impeding the movement of barges towards the Channel ports . 
 8 September : Two cruisers and ten destroyers swept along the French coast and bombarded Boulogne harbour . In a separate operation , 3 Motor Torpedo Boats attacked a convoy of small vessels off Ostend ; two of the MTBs then entered the harbour and torpedoed two transport ships . 
 10 September : Three destroyers found a convoy of invasion transports off Ostend and sank an escort vessel , two trawlers that were towing barges and one large barge . 
 13 September : Three destroyers sent to bombard Boulogne but the operation was cancelled due to bad weather . A further twelve destroyers swept parts of the French coast . 
 15 September : Sergeant John Hannah gained the Victoria Cross during a raid by RAF bombers on invasion barges at Antwerp . 
 17 September : A major attack by Bomber Command on ports along the occupied coast . 84 barges were damaged at Dunkirk . 
 26 September : Operation Lucid , a plan to send fire ships into the harbours at Calais and Boulogne to destroy invasion barges , was abandoned when one of the old tankers that were to be used had engine failure . 
 30 September : The monitor HMS Erebus fired seventeen 15 @-@ inch shells into Calais docks . 
 4 October : Second attempt at Operation Lucid , this time cancelled because of bad weather . 
 7 October : Third attempt at Lucid , cancelled when the destroyer carrying the force commander hit a mine and had to be towed home . 
 10 – 11 October : Operation Medium , the bombardment of invasion transports in Cherbourg . During the 18 minute bombardment , 120 15 @-@ inch shells were fired by the battleship HMS Revenge , and a total of 801 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch shells were fired by her escorting destroyers . German coastal artillery replied for 30 minutes without hitting any of the warships . 
 Between 15 July and 21 September , German sources stated that 21 transport vessels and 214 barges had been damaged by British air raids . These figures may have been under @-@ reported . 
 = = The threat recedes = = 
 After the evacuation of Dunkirk , people believed that the threatened invasion could come at almost any time . Churchill was at times personally pessimistic about Britain 's chances for victory , telling Hastings Ismay on 12 June 1940 that " [ y ] ou and I will be dead in three months ' time " . German preparations would require at least a few weeks , but all defensive precautions were made with an extreme sense of urgency . In the summer of 1940 , an invasion attempt could have occurred at any time , but some times were more likely than others : the phase of the moon , the tides and , most of all , the weather were considerations . The weather usually deteriorates significantly after September , but an October landing was not out of the question . On 3 October , General Brooke wrote in his diary : " Still no invasion ! I am beginning to think that the Germans may after all not attempt it . And yet ! I have the horrid thought that he may still bring off some surprise on us . " 
 The Battle of Britain had been won , and on 12 October 1940 , unknown to the British , Hitler rescheduled Sealion for the spring of 1941 . By that spring , the state of Britain 's defences had much improved , with many more trained and equipped men becoming available and field fortifications reaching a high state of readiness . With national confidence rising , Prime Minister Churchill was able to say : " We are waiting for the long promised invasion . So are the fishes ... " 
 When Germany invaded the Soviet Union , on 22 June 1941 , it came to be seen as unlikely that there would be any attempted landing as long as that conflict was undecided — from the British point of view at the time , the matter hung in the balance . In July 1941 , construction of field fortifications was greatly reduced and concentration given to the possibility of a raid in force rather than a full @-@ scale invasion . 
 On 7 December 1941 , a Japanese carrier fleet launched a surprise air attack on the American fleet at Pearl Harbor ; the USA entered the war on Britain 's side . With America 's Germany first strategic policy , resources flooded into the UK , effectively ending the danger of invasion after two years . 
 = = Effectiveness = = 
 General Brooke frequently confided his concerns to his private diary . When published , he included additional annotations written many years later : 
 ... I considered the invasion a very real and probable threat and one for which the land forces at my disposal fell far short of what I felt was required to provide any degree of real confidence in our power to defend these shores . It should not be construed that I considered our position a helpless one in the case of an invasion . Far from it . We should certainly have a desperate struggle and the future might well have hung in the balance , but I certainly felt that given a fair share of the fortunes of war we should certainly succeed in finally defending these shores . It must be remembered that if my diary occasionally gave vent to some of the doubts which the heavy responsibility generated , this diary was the one and only outlet for such doubts . 
 The question of whether the defences would have been effective in invasion is vexed . In mid @-@ 1940 , the preparations relied heavily upon field fortifications . The First World War made it clear that assaulting prepared defences with infantry was deadly and difficult , but similar preparations in Belgium had been overrun by well @-@ equipped German Panzer divisions in the early weeks of 1940 and with so many armaments left at Dunkirk , British forces were woefully ill @-@ equipped to take on German armour . On the other hand , while British preparations for defence were ad hoc , so were the German invasion plans : a fleet of 2 @,@ 000 converted barges and other vessels had been hurriedly made available and their fitness was debatable ; in any case , the Germans could not land troops with all their heavy equipment . Until the Germans captured a port , both armies would have been short of tanks and heavy guns . 
 The later experiences of the Canadian Army during the disastrous Dieppe Raid of 1942 , American forces on Omaha Beach on D @-@ Day and taking on Japanese defenders on Pacific Islands showed that under the right conditions , a defender could exact a terrible price from assaulting forces , significantly depleting and delaying enemy forces until reinforcements could be deployed to appropriate places via the sea and inland . 
 In the event of invasion , the Royal Navy would have sailed to the landing places , possibly taking several days . It is now known that the Germans planned to land on the southern coast of England ; one reason for this site was that the narrow seas of the English Channel could be blocked with mines , submarines and torpedo boats . While German naval forces and the Luftwaffe could have extracted a high price from the Royal Navy , they could not have hoped to prevent interference with attempts to land a second wave of troops and supplies that would have been essential to German success — even if , by then , the Germans had captured a port essential for bringing in significant heavy equipment . In this scenario , British land forces would have faced the Germans on more equal terms than otherwise and it was only necessary to delay the German advance , preventing a collapse until the German land forces were , at least temporarily , isolated by the Royal Navy and then mounting a counterattack . 
 Scholarly consideration of the likely outcome of invasion , including the 1974 Royal Military Academy Sandhurst war game , agree that while German forces would have been able to land and gain a significant beachhead , intervention of the Royal Navy would have been decisive and , even with the most optimistic assumptions , the German army would not have penetrated further than GHQ Line and would have been defeated . 
 Following the failure to gain even local air superiority in the Battle of Britain , Operation Sea Lion was postponed indefinitely . Hitler and his generals were aware of the problems of an invasion . Hitler was not ideologically committed to a long war with Britain and many commentators suggest that German invasion plans were a feint never to be put into action . 
 While Britain may have been militarily secure in 1940 , both sides were aware of the possibility of a political collapse . If the Germans had won the Battle of Britain , the Luftwaffe would have been able to strike anywhere in southern England and with the prospect of an invasion , the British government would have come under pressure to come to terms : the extensive anti @-@ invasion preparations demonstrated to Germany and to the people of Britain that whatever happened in the air , the United Kingdom was both able and willing to defend itself . 
 = = = Official documents = = = 
 Consolidated Instructions to Invasion Committees in England and Wales ( July 1942 ) HM Government . 
 Barrel Flame Traps , Flame Warfare . Military Training Pamphlet No. 53 . Part 1 . War Office . July 1942 . 
 = = = Collections = = = 
 " The National Archives " . Repository of UK government records . Retrieved 3 August 2010 . 
 " WW2 People 's War " . BBC . Retrieved 3 August 2010 . – an online archive of wartime memories contributed by members of the public and gathered by the BBC . 
 Sylvester , Rachel ; Coates , Sam . " The Times and The Sunday Times Archive " . London . Retrieved 3 August 2010 . – subscription required 
 = <unk> = 
 alt.tv.simpsons ( called " <unk> " by regular readers ) is a usenet newsgroup dedicated to discussing the American television program The Simpsons . Created in 1990 , the newsgroup became a popular community in the early 1990s , and continues to exist as of 2014 . It is known for reviewing episodes and nitpicking minor details on the show . 
 The writers of The Simpsons know about the forum and have on several occasions read the comments made on it . The character Comic Book Guy is often used in the show to lampoon and respond to the newsgroups fans . In interviews some writers have admitted that they do not like being scrutinized , but other writers have participated in the discussions on the forum . Independent commentators call the forum an example of an " active audience " and have claimed The Simpsons is tailor @-@ made for such a forum . 
 = = History = = 
 The newsgroup was created by Gary D. <unk> during the third week of March 1990 , four months after the first airing of a regular episode of the program , which was the episode " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " – a Christmas special that aired on December 17 , 1989 . The newsgroup was created before there was a world wide web , which emerged in 1993 , so those earliest discussions were held on text @-@ only platforms . According to Chris Turner , a Canadian journalist and writer of the book Planet Simpson , the newsgroup was among the most trafficked newsgroups of the early 1990s . In that period it became a popular community on the Internet . According to Brian Reid , a computer scientist who has been tracking newsgroup traffic since 1985 , alt.tv.simpsons was the most popular television newsgroup in May 1994 , ahead of a discussion newsgroups about general television newsgroup ( <unk> ) , Monty Python ( <unk> @-@ python ) , the Late Show with David Letterman ( <unk> ) and soap operas ( <unk> ) . Since there is no official method for measuring newsgroup traffic , the list is considered unofficial . 
 = = Discussions = = 
 From its inception , users would use the newsgroup to discuss the quality of the episode , as well as to talk about continuity errors and trivia . They would also discuss cultural references , usually related to pop culture . Another common topic is freeze frame gags , which are jokes that can only be seen when the viewer tapes the episode and freezes the image . All of these many discussions were compiled and submitted to The Simpsons Archive , which contains at least 330 episode guides as well as other guides . The newsgroup also provides The Simpsons Archive with information on the characters and the setting , as well as a compilation of articles about the show and interview with its cast and crew . 
 Among the most frequent topics of discussion are the real @-@ life location of Springfield , the sexuality of Waylon Smithers and " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " , a two @-@ episode publicity stunt in which Mr. Burns was shot by an unknown character . The writers inserted many secret clues into the episode and implemented a contest in which whoever first discovered the shooter would be animated on an episode of the show . Although the alt.tv.simpsons community debated this mystery to an extreme degree , no one officially guessed the right answer , and therefore no one was ever animated on the show . Due to contest regulations , a winner had to be selected out of a random sample of entries . The sample did not contain any correct answers , so the winner who was chosen did not have the right answer and was paid a cash prize in lieu of being animated . 
 = = Relationship with the writers = = 
 The writers of the show are aware of the newsgroup and sometimes make jokes at its expense . Within the series , the character Comic Book Guy is often used to represent a stereotypical inhabitant of alt.tv.simpsons. The first such instance occurred in the seventh season episode " Radioactive Man , " in which Comic Book Guy is logging on to his favorite newsgroup <unk> Comic Book Guy 's oft @-@ repeated catchphrase , " Worst episode ever , " first appeared on alt.tv.simpsons in an episode review and David S. Cohen decided to use this fan response to lampoon the passion and the fickleness of the fans . 
 The eighth season episode " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " is largely seen as a satire of the " hardcore fans " that make up the newsgroup , as well as a response to the viewer backlash and obsession with internal consistency those fans commonly express . When Comic Book Guy sees the Poochie episode , he immediately goes on the Internet and writes , “ Worst episode ever ” on a message board ; a commentary on how the active audience nitpicks the episode . The writers respond by using the voice of Bart Simpson : 
 Comic Book Guy : Last night 's Itchy & Scratchy was , without a doubt , the worst episode ever . Rest assured I was on the Internet within minutes registering my disgust throughout the world . 
 Bart : Hey , I know it wasn ’ t great , but what right do you have to complain ? 
 Comic Book Guy : As a loyal viewer , I feel they owe me . 
 Bart : What ? They ’ re giving you thousands of hours of entertainment for free . What could they possibly owe you ? If anything , you owe them . 
 Comic Book Guy : [ pause ] Worst episode ever . 
 The catchphrase further appears in the eleventh season episode " Saddlesore Galactica , " and as the title of the twelfth season episode " Worst Episode Ever . " The catchphrase can also be used for describing other things by saying , " Worst . ( Noun ) . Ever . " 
 The writers also use the newsgroup to test how observant the fans are . In the seventh season episode " Treehouse of Horror VI " , the writer of segment Homer3 , David S. Cohen , deliberately inserted a false equation into the background of one scene . The equation that appears is 178212 + 184112 = 192212 . Although a false statement , it appears to be true when evaluated on a typical calculator with 10 digits of precision . If it were true , it would disprove Fermat 's last theorem , which had just been proven when this episode first aired . Cohen generated this " Fermat near @-@ miss " with a computer program . After the episode aired , Cohen lurked on the newsgroup to see the response ; at first there was astonishment when users tested it , but later there was despair when they found out it was only accurate to eight decimal places when expressed in scientific notation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The comments of alt.tv.simpsons have been quoted or cited in the writings of mass media commentators . This has led to situations in which relations between writers and viewers have become strained . In 1994 , Simpsons creator Matt Groening acknowledged he and the other show runners have been reading the newsgroup and in frustration said , " Sometimes I feel like knocking their electronic <unk> together " . In another case , writer Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham made comments about the fans on the Internet in an interview with The Independent , calling them " beetle @-@ browed " and saying , " That 's why they 're on the Internet and we 're writing the show . " Writer Bill Oakley used to respond to select Simpsons fans through e @-@ mail in a friendly manner , but by 1996 claimed " [ t ] here are people who take it seriously to the point of absurdity " . In a 1994 Life in Hell cartoon Matt Groening implied that he read the newsgroup . 
 In the chapter " Who Wants Candy " in the book Leaving Springfield , Robert Sloane finds alt.tv.simpsons an example of an " active audience ... who struggle to make their own meaning out of the show " . He mentions that in this context , the fans nitpick the show to an extreme and allow no room for error , where the writers believe that nitpicking leads to an under appreciation of the show 's qualities . Chris Turner writes in the book Planet Simpson : How a Cartoon Masterpiece Documented an Era and Defined a Generation that The Simpsons appeared tailor @-@ made for a newsgroup in the early 1990s because it includes minor details that reward attentive viewing and can be easily scrutinized . 
 = WrestleMania III = 
 WrestleMania III was the third annual WrestleMania professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . The event was held on March 29 , 1987 , at the Pontiac Silverdome in Pontiac , Michigan . There were twelve matches , with the final event being WWF World Heavyweight Champion Hulk Hogan successfully defending his title against André the Giant . 
 WrestleMania III is particularly notable for the WWF 's claiming a record attendance of 93 @,@ 173 and the largest recorded attendance of a live indoor event in North America at the time . This record itself stood until February 14 , 2010 when it was surpassed by the 2010 NBA All @-@ Star Game , and the only WWF / E event with an official higher attendance was WrestleMania 32 . Both of the latter events were held at AT & T Stadium . The event is considered to be the pinnacle of the 1980s wrestling boom . The WWF generated $ 1 @.@ 6 million in ticket sales . Almost one million fans watched the event at 160 closed circuit locations in North America . The number of people watching via pay @-@ per @-@ view was estimated at several million , and pay @-@ per @-@ view revenues were estimated at $ 10 @.@ 3 million , setting a record for the time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Like all other WrestleMania events , WrestleMania III was promoted for several months in advance . The main feud stemmed from André the Giant 's turn and betrayal of his ally , the WWF Champion Hulk Hogan , which began when Hogan was presented a trophy for being the WWF Champion for three years , and André , his good friend , came out to congratulate him . Shortly afterwards , André was presented a slightly smaller trophy for being " undefeated in the WWF for 15 years " and Hogan came out to congratulate André , but ended up being the focal point of the interview . Annoyed by this , André walked out during Hogan 's congratulation speech and not long after that , on an edition of the interview segment Piper 's Pit , Bobby Heenan , a long @-@ time Hogan adversary , announced himself to be André 's new manager . André then challenged Hogan to a title match at WrestleMania III and attacked Hogan , ripping off Hogan 's T @-@ shirt and crucifix necklace . 
 Another main feud leading up to the event was between Ricky Steamboat and the Intercontinental Champion Randy Savage . The feud began during a title match between the two when Savage attacked Steamboat as he greeted fans at ringside . Savage then pushed Steamboat over the security rail and delivered an elbow shot that thrust Steamboat 's throat into the rail and dropped the ring bell onto his throat from the top rope , injuring his larynx and sending him to the hospital . This resulted in a long , bitter feud that lasted for six months , included several bloody match @-@ ups and finally culminated at WrestleMania . George " The Animal " Steele was in Steamboat 's corner , having developed a crush on Savage 's valet , Miss Elizabeth . 
 Billy Jack Haynes and Hercules Hernandez ' feud started when Bobby Heenan continuously taunted Haynes , telling him that Hercules was the real master of the full nelson ; which came to a boiling point when Hercules attacked Haynes on an edition of Superstars of Wrestling , which led to their match at WrestleMania . This battle was advertised as the " Full Nelson Challenge . " 
 Another heated feud leading up to this event was between Harley Race and the Junkyard Dog . When The WWF Wrestling Classic became the King of the Ring tournament , Harley Race went on to win the tournament and began referring to himself as " King " Harley Race , and coming to the ring in a royal crown and cape to the ceremonial accompaniment of the classical music piece " Great Gates of Kiev " by Modest Mussorgsky . After each of his victories , Race forced his defeated opponent to " bow and kneel " before him . Usually , Race 's manager , Bobby Heenan , forced the defeated opponent to " bow and kneel " by grabbing his hair . Junkyard Dog protested Race 's self @-@ proclaimed monarchy in the WWF and stated there would never be a complete ruler in the WWF , which led to a match on Saturday Night 's Main Event , in which the King and his manager both tried to make Junkyard Dog bow for them . This set the stage for the WrestleMania match , which included the stipulation that the loser had to bow to the winner . 
 On January 26 , 1987 , The British Bulldogs lost the WWF Tag Team Championship to The Hart Foundation in a match that saw the Dynamite Kid so debilitated with a back injury that he was virtually carried to the ring by Davey Boy Smith and did not see much physical action . Danny Davis was the referee and allowed The Hart Foundation to use illegal double @-@ team maneuvers . After being given some time off to recuperate , the Bulldogs continued their rivalry with The Hart Foundation when they teamed up with Tito Santana against the Foundation and the referee @-@ turned @-@ wrestler Danny Davis in a six @-@ man tag team match at WrestleMania III . The match was billed as a revenge match with Santana 's inclusion due to Davis being the referee in the Boston Garden in early 1986 when he had lost the Intercontinental title to the Macho Man who used a foreign object to get the win . 
 Rock singer and Detroit native Alice Cooper was in Jake Roberts ' corner during his match with The Honky Tonk Man . The Honky Tonk Man had attacked Roberts with a guitar on Roberts ' interview segment The Snake Pit , which legitimately injured Roberts ' neck . This event began Roberts ' turn into a babyface as well as the feud between the wrestlers , which culminated in their WrestleMania match . 
 The feud between Adrian Adonis and Roddy Piper began when , following a leave of absence from the WWF , Piper returned to find his Piper 's Pit segment replaced by The Flower Shop , a segment hosted by then @-@ effeminate wrestler Adrian Adonis . Piper , who returned as a face , spent weeks crashing Adonis ' show and trading insults , leading to a " showdown " between the two segments that ended with Piper being assaulted and humiliated by Adonis , Piper 's former bodyguard Bob Orton , and Don Muraco . The trio left Piper with his face covered in red lipstick , lying in the middle of the remnants of the destroyed Piper 's Pit set . In response , Piper stormed the set of Adonis ' show and destroyed it with a baseball bat . This led to their Hair vs. Hair match at WrestleMania III , which was billed as Piper 's retirement match from wrestling before becoming a full @-@ time actor . 
 = = Event = = 
 Vince McMahon claims that as he was about to announce " Welcome to WrestleMania III , " he felt the spirit of his father Vincent J. McMahon , who had died three years earlier . After McMahon welcomed the audience , he introduced Aretha Franklin , who opened the show singing a rendition of " America the Beautiful . " 
 The first match of the night was The Can @-@ Am Connection versus Bob Orton and The Magnificent Muraco ( with Mr. Fuji ) . This match ended when Rick Martel gave Don Muraco a high cross @-@ body with Zenk on his hands and knees giving Muraco what Gorilla Monsoon called " A little schoolboy trip from behind " allowing Martel to get the win for his team . 
 The next match that aired was Hercules ( with Bobby Heenan in his corner ) against Billy Jack Haynes in the " Full Nelson Challenge . " The match ended when Haynes locked Hercules in the full nelson outside the ring and both were counted out . After the match , Bobby Heenan assaulted Haynes by kneeing him in the back , and Haynes chased Heenan into the ring , where Hercules then blindsided Haynes with his chain , hitting him a number of times with it before locking him in a full nelson of his own . 
 The Mixed Tag Team Match between King Kong Bundy and his midget team of Lord <unk> and Little Tokyo against Hillbilly Jim and his own midget team of The Haiti Kid and Little Beaver was next . King Kong Bundy 's team was disqualified when Bundy attacked Little Beaver , because Bundy was not supposed to be in the ring with the midgets . Bundy attacked Little Beaver after Beaver had " attacked " him on occasion during the match and finally got caught . 
 The " Loser Must Bow " match between the Junkyard Dog and Harley Race ( with Bobby Heenan and The Fabulous Moolah ) followed . Prior to the match Gene Okerlund interviewed Heenan , Race , and Moolah backstage , where Moolah predicted that Junkyard Dog would have to bow to the King as he is supposed to do . Bobby gave Moolah the crown and told her to put it on the King 's head after the match , " As only the Queen of Wrestling can do " . Junkyard Dog came out to the ring to a big ovation in the Silverdome . During the match , the two battled back and forth , with Race even trying unsuccessfully to give the prone Dog a falling headbutt which naturally failed . Following this Race recovered enough to give the Junkyard Dog a belly to belly suplex when he was distracted by Bobby Heenan to get the win . Due to the pre @-@ match stipulation , he did a little bow and then hit Harley Race with a steel chair . After attacking Race , Junkyard Dog took the King 's royal robe and left the ring with it in hand to a standing ovation . 
 The next match was The Dream Team ( with Luscious Johnny V and Canadian strong man Dino Bravo ) against The Fabulous Rougeaus . Raymond Rougeau started off the match by locking up with Brutus Beefcake . The two men later tagged out , and Greg Valentine brawled with Jacques Rougeau as Bravo looked on from the outside of the ring . Raymond performed a sleeper hold on Valentine and was followed by Beefcake jumping off the ropes and accidentally hitting the Hammer with a double axe handle . The Rougeau Brothers gave Valentine a double team move , but the referee was arguing with Beefcake . The match ended when Dino Bravo jumped off the top rope and hit Raymond while he was pinning Valentine , then rolling Valentine on top of him for the win . The Dream Team argued for most of the match , which led to Greg Valentine and Dino Bravo departing together , without Beefcake . 
 Footage of an interview with Roddy Piper was aired as Piper made his way to the ring to face Adrian Adonis , who was accompanied by Jimmy Hart , in Piper 's retirement match . Piper and Adonis began the match by attacking each other with Piper 's belt . Adonis put a sleeper hold on Piper in the middle of the ring and released the hold thinking that he won the match . When Jimmy Hart got in the ring to celebrate with Adonis , Brutus Beefcake came to the ring to help Piper recover , and Piper attacked Adonis and performed a sleeper hold of his own . Piper got the victory , and after the match was over , Brutus got in the ring and cut Adrian Adonis ' hair as Piper held Jimmy Hart down . After being woken by Beefcake and seeing himself in the mirror he had brought to the ring that Piper was holding , Adonis hit the mirror and chased Piper around the ring before leaving the ring in embarrassment with Hart using his jacket to cover Adonis ' head . 
 Up next was a six @-@ man tag team match featuring former referee Danny Davis ( in his debut as a WWF wrestler ) and the WWF Tag Team Champions , The Hart Foundation , against The British Bulldogs and Tito Santana . As a referee Davis ' bias towards heel wrestlers had led to the Bulldogs losing the tag titles to the Harts and also led to Santana losing the WWE Intercontinental Championship to Randy Savage . The Bulldogs had many near @-@ falls , yet Jim Neidhart broke up most of them . After all three members of the Bulldogs / Santana team had got a measure of revenge on Davis , all six wrestlers ended up brawling in the ring . Danny Davis recovered and hit Davey Boy Smith with Jimmy Hart 's megaphone and pinned him for the win . 
 Butch Reed 's pay @-@ per @-@ view debut against Koko B. Ware , was the following match . Reed won the match with a <unk> after a high cross @-@ body from Koko . After the contest , Reed 's manager Slick got in the ring and attacked Koko B. Ware with his cane , but Tito Santana quickly rushed to the ring and stopped Slick , ripped some of his clothes off . Slick retreated as Reed got back in the ring , only for Reed to get a double drop kick from Koko and Santana . 
 The next contest was a title match involving reigning WWF Intercontinental Champion Randy Savage ( with Miss Elizabeth ) and Ricky Steamboat ( with George Steele ) . The match itself lasted for nearly fifteen minutes At one point , Savage was about to use the ring bell as a weapon but was stopped by Steele who knocked him off of the top rope . When Savage attempted to give Steamboat a scoop slam , Steamboat reversed it into a small package to get the win and become the new WWF Intercontinental Champion , marking the first time in WrestleMania history that the Intercontinental Championship changed hands . This match is considered by many to be one of the greatest matches in WWE history . 
 The tenth match of the night was between The Honky Tonk Man ( with Jimmy Hart ) and Jake Roberts , who along with his pet Python " Damien " , had Detroit native Alice Cooper in his corner . When Jake went for the DDT , Honky Tonk Man 's manager Jimmy Hart pulled Roberts ' legs , and the Honky Tonk Man rolled up Roberts from behind , held on to the ropes , and pinned him for the win . After the match Roberts narrowly missed hitting Honky with his own guitar , smashing it against a ring post and causing Honky to run off down the isle , leaving Hart alone in the ring . Alice Cooper got in the ring and with Roberts ' holding Hart in a Full Nelson , attacked him with Roberts ' python Damien . 
 Howard Finkel then introduced Gene Okerlund to the crowd . Okerlund then announced the record indoor attendance of 93 @,@ 173 . 
 The Iron Sheik and Nikolai Volkoff ( with Slick ) were in action next , against The Killer Bees . Slick asked all of the fans to rise to respect Nikolai Volkoff 's singing of the Soviet National Anthem , and when Volkoff began singing , Jim Duggan came to the ring with his two @-@ by @-@ four , which had an American flag attached to it , got on the microphone and said that Volkoff was not going to sing because America is the land of the free and the home of the brave . While the match ensued , Duggan stayed at ringside . When The Iron Sheik locked a camel clutch on Jim <unk> , Duggan , who was chasing Volkoff around the ring and finally into it , stopped and hit an unsuspecting Sheik across the back with his two by four in front of the referee , resulting in The Iron Sheik and Nikolai Volkoff winning the bout by disqualification . 
 In what was billed as the " biggest main event in sports entertainment , " the match pitted WWF Champion Hulk Hogan defending the title against André the Giant ( with Bobby Heenan ) . Howard Finkel introduced the guest ring announcer , Bob Uecker , who in turn introduced the guest time keeper , Entertainment Tonight host Mary Hart . The fans booed André heavily and pelted him and his manager Bobby Heenan with trash as they rode the cart to the ring . In contrast , Hogan , who walked to the ring , came out to a huge ovation . Approximately two minutes into the match , Hogan attempted to bodyslam André , but he was unable to lift The Giant and nearly lost the match when Andre fell on him and almost pinned him . After the match had battled back and forth , André gave Hogan an Irish whip to the far side of the ring and attempted a big boot on Hogan , but Hogan ducked it and came off the ropes to give André a clothesline to take him off his feet for the first time in the match . Hogan then " <unk> up " and scoop slammed the 520 @-@ pound Giant before hitting the ropes and executing his patented leg drop pin to get the win and retain the championship . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Roddy Piper went on to film Hell Comes to Frogtown and They Live and made sporadic appearances on television before finally returning to host a Piper 's Pit segment at WrestleMania V. Piper continued to be active in professional wrestling at various points for more than two decades . The first televised match between André and Hulk Hogan after WrestleMania III was on The Main Event on NBC on February 5 , 1988 , drawing a record 33 million viewers , making it the most watched match in North American professional wrestling history . The angle surrounding this match was that after winning the match , André ended Hogan 's four @-@ year reign as WWF champion with the help of a worked screwjob finish involving twin referees Earl and Dave Hebner . Their feud culminated in a rematch at WrestleMania IV as part of a tournament to crown a new champion ( both ended up being disqualified during the match for using a steel chair in front of referee Joey Marella ) . The Hogan / Andre match at WrestleMania IV was the first ever WrestleMania rematch . 
 Randy Savage continued to challenge Ricky Steamboat for the Intercontinental title in rematches at house shows across the country . Steamboat eventually lost the title to The Honky Tonk Man , and not long after , Savage became a babyface and feuded with Honky Tonk over the title . 
 Twenty years later , WrestleMania 23 celebrated WrestleMania III by returning to the Detroit metropolitan area , showing footage from WrestleMania III , having Aretha Franklin ( " Who 's Zoomin ' Who ? " by Franklin was the theme song to WrestleMania III ) sing " America the Beautiful , " and having Kane scoop slam The Great Khali . WrestleMania 23 had the highest buyrate of any WrestleMania in history , before getting beaten by WrestleMania XXVIII . 
 Also in 2007 , WrestleMania III was re @-@ released on DVD . The DVD included pre @-@ WrestleMania interviews and matches , including the battle royal from Saturday Night 's Main Event that Hercules won , and optional pop @-@ up trivia facts about the event . 
 WrestleMania III was re @-@ released on DVD on March 12 , 2013 
 = = Reception = = 
 The event has received positive reviews . In the years after WrestleMania III , the Savage vs. Steamboat match has been ranked by critics and other wrestlers as one of the greatest matches in professional wrestling . Pro Wrestling Illustrated and Wrestling Observer Newsletter named it 1987 's Match of the Year . IGN ranked it at number 6 in their Top 20 Matches in WrestleMania History . Steamboat described the match as " the moment in time that defined me as a wrestler . " Thomas <unk> of Complex Sports ranked it at number two in his list of the 50 Greatest Matches in WrestleMania History , citing that " Both guys worked lightning fast and everything from Steamboat 's aggressiveness to the involvement of George " The Animal " Steele played off their part . " Current WWE superstar David Otunga picked it as WWE.com 's Five @-@ Star Match of the Week in December 19 , 2012 . 
 Incidentally , the Hogan vs. Andre match received a negative four star rating from Dave Meltzer and the Wrestling Observer Newsletter named it the " Worst Worked Match of the Year . " 
 While the WWE and Silverdome management have always maintained that the 93 @,@ 173 figure is correct , Vince Russo continues debate among wrestling fans as to what the true attendance was on the day . Also , Russo claimed that the 1992 SummerSlam at Wembley did 79 @,@ 127 . The record would be decisively broken by WrestleMania 32 in 2016 . Bleacher Report commentator Jason Savage responded to allegations of the attendance dispute by noting that a pictorial analysis showed that there no covered bleachers or empty sections during the event and that the Silverdome , which had a seat capacity of 80 @,@ 311 for football games , was able to add approximately 13 @,@ 000 additional seats . 
 Officially Wrestlemania III ranks as the second highest attended event in WWE history , ahead of the 80 @,@ 676 who attended WrestleMania 29 at the MetLife Stadium in New Jersey in 2013 , the 80 @,@ 355 who attended SummerSlam 1992 at Wembley Stadium in London , England and the 80 @,@ 103 who attended WrestleMania 23 at Ford Field in Detroit , Michigan . But behind Wrestlemania 32 at the AT & T Stadium in Arlington , Texas in 2016 with an alleged over 101 @,@ 000 in attendance although Meltzer claims the actual number was between 93 @-@ 94 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Morchella rufobrunnea = 
 Morchella rufobrunnea , commonly known as the blushing morel , is a species of ascomycete fungus in the family Morchellaceae . A choice edible species , the fungus was originally described as new to science in 1998 by mycologists Gastón Guzmán and Fidel Tapia from collections made in Veracruz , Mexico . Its distribution was later revealed to be far more widespread after several DNA studies suggested that it is common in the West Coast of the United States , Israel , Australia , and Cyprus . 
 M. rufobrunnea grows in disturbed soil or in woodchips used in landscaping , suggesting a saprophytic mode of nutrition . Reports from the Mediterranean under olive trees ( Olea europaea ) , however , suggest the fungus may also be able to form facultative tree associations . Young fruit bodies have conical , grayish caps covered with pale ridges and dark pits ; mature specimens are yellowish to ochraceous @-@ buff . The surface of the fruit body often bruises brownish orange to pinkish where it has been touched , a characteristic for which the fungus is named . Mature fruit bodies grow to a height of 9 @.@ 0 – 15 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 1 in ) . M. rufobrunnea differs from other Morchella species by its urban or suburban habitat preferences , in the color and form of the fruit body , the lack of a sinus at the attachment of the cap with the stipe , the length of the pits on the surface , and the bruising reaction . A process to cultivate morels now known to be M. rufobrunnea was described and patented in the 1980s . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first scientifically described specimens of Morchella rufobrunnea were collected in June 1996 from the Ecological Institute of Xalapa and other regions in the southern Mexican municipality of Xalapa , which are characterized by a subtropical climate . The type locality is a mesophytic forest containing oak , sweetgum , <unk> and alder at an altitude of 1 @,@ 350 m ( 4 @,@ 430 ft ) . In a 2008 study , Michael Kuo determined that the " winter fruiting yellow morel " — erroneously referred to as Morchella deliciosa — found in landscaping sites in the western United States was the same species as M. rufobrunnea . According to Kuo , David Arora depicts this species in his popular 1986 work Mushrooms Demystified , describing it as a " coastal Californian form of Morchella deliciosa growing in gardens and other suburban habitats " . Kuo suggests that M. rufobrunnea is the correct name for the M. deliciosa used by western American authors . Other North American morels formerly classified as deliciosa have since been recategorized into two distinct species , Morchella <unk> and M. sceptriformis ( = M. virginiana ) . 
 Molecular analysis of nucleic acid sequences from the internal transcribed spacer and elongation factor EF @-@ 1α regions suggests that the genus Morchella can be divided into three lineages . M. rufobrunnea belongs to a lineage that is basal to the esculenta clade ( " yellow morels " ) , and the elata clade ( " black morels " ) . This phylogenetic placement implies that it has existed in its current form since the Cretaceous era ( roughly 145 to 66 million years ago ) , and all known morel species evolved from a similar ancestor . M. rufobrunnea is genetically closer to the yellow morels than the black morels . M. <unk> , described from Turkey in 2012 , is a closely related sister species . 
 The specific epithet rufobrunnea derives from the Latin roots <unk> ( <unk> , reddish ) and <unk> ( brown ) . Vernacular names used for the fungus include " western white morel " , " blushing morel " , and — accounting for the existence of subtropical species in the " blushing clade " — " red @-@ brown blushing morel " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fruit bodies of M. rufobrunnea can reach 6 @.@ 0 – 21 @.@ 0 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 8 @.@ 3 in ) tall , although most are typically found in a narrower range , 9 @.@ 0 – 15 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 1 in ) . The conical to roughly cylindrical hymenophore ( cap ) is typically 6 @.@ 0 – 8 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 3 in ) high by 3 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 8 in ) wide . Its surface is covered with longitudinal anastomosed ridges and crosswise veins that form broad , angular , elongated pits . Young fruit bodies are typically dark grey with sharply contrasting beige or buff ridges , while mature specimens fade to ochraceous @-@ buff . The cylindrical stipe is often strongly wrinkled , enlarged at the base and measures 30 – 70 cm ( 12 – 28 in ) by 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick . It is typically covered with a dark brown to greyish <unk> , often fading at maturity , a useful character to discriminate it from similar species , such as M. tridentina or M. sceptriformis . The stipe and hymenophore often exhibit ochraceous , orange or reddish stains , although this feature is neither constant nor exclusive to M. rufobrunnea and can be seen in a number of Morchella species , such as Morchella tridentina ( = Morchella frustrata ) , M. esculenta , M. <unk> , the recently described M. <unk> ( <unk> et al . 2014 ) , and most likely M. <unk> . 
 In deposit , the spores are pale orange to yellowish orange . Ascospores are egg @-@ shaped , measuring 20 – 24 by 14 – 16 µm when mature , but smaller ( 14 @.@ 5 – 19 by 9 – 10 µm ) in immature fruit bodies . They are thin @-@ walled , hyaline ( translucent ) , and inamyloid . The cylindrical asci ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 300 – 360 by 16 – 20 µm with walls up to 1 @.@ 5 µm thick . Paraphyses measure 90 – 184 by 10 – 18 @.@ 5 µm ( 6 – 9 µm thick if immature ) ; they are hyaline , have a septum at the base , and comprise either one or two cells . The flesh is made of thin @-@ walled , hyaline hyphae measuring 3 – 9 µm wide . 
 Morchella <unk> is an edible fungus ; it has been described variously as " one of the tastiest members of the morel family " , and alternately as " bland in comparison to other morel species " . Individual specimens over 1 pound ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) have been reported . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Morchella tridentina ( = Morchella frustrata ) is also rufescent and very similar to M. rufobrunnea . It is found in mountainous forests and maquis and forms a marked sinus at the attachment of the cap with the stem , which is pure white . At maturity , it develops more or less parallel , <unk> interconnecting ridges . Microscopically , it often has moniliform paraphyses with septa extending in the upper half and has more regularly cylindrical or clavate ' hairs ' on the stem , up to 100 μm long . M. <unk> , found in Central America , has a color ranging from yellow to yellowish @-@ orange , but never grey , and it has a more distinct reddish to wine red bruising reaction . Microscopically , it has smaller paraphyses , measuring 56 – 103 by 6 @.@ 5 – 13 µm . The New Guinean species M. <unk> has smaller fruit bodies that are pale ochre to yellow , without any grey . Its pits are less elongated than those of M. rufobrunnea , and it has wider paraphyses , up to 30 µm . 
 Morchella americana ( = M. <unk> ) , is widely distributed in North America , north of Mexico and has similar colours to mature fruit bodies of M. rufobrunnea , but lacks the bruising reaction . M. <unk> , found in hardwood forests of eastern North America , has a smaller fruit body than M. rufobrunnea , up to 9 @.@ 4 cm ( 3 @.@ 7 in ) tall and up to 2 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) wide at its widest point . Morchella sceptriformis ( = Morchella virginiana ) is found in riparian and upland ecosystems from Virginia to northern Mississippi , usually in association with the American tulip tree ( Liriodendron tulipifera ) . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 A predominantly saprophytic species , Morchella rufobrunnea fruit bodies grow singly or in clusters in disturbed soil or woodchips used in landscaping . Large numbers can appear the year after wood mulch has been spread on the ground . Typical disturbed habitats include fire pits , near compost piles , logging roads , and dirt basements . Fruiting usually occurs in the spring , although fruit bodies can be found in these habitats most of the year . Other preferred habitats include steep slopes and plateaus , and old @-@ growth conifer forests . In Cyprus , the fungus is frequently reported from coastal , urban and suburban areas under olive trees ( Olea europaea ) . 
 Morchella rufobrunnea ranges from Mexico through California and Oregon in the United States . It has also been introduced to central Michigan from California . It is one of seven Morchella species that have been recorded in Mexico . In 2009 , Israeli researchers used molecular genetics to confirm the identity of the species in northern Israel , where it was found growing in gravelly disturbed soil near a newly paved path at the edge of a grove . This was the first documented appearance of the fungus outside the American continent . Unlike North American populations that typically fruit for only a few weeks in spring , the Israeli populations have a long @-@ season ecotype , fruiting from early November to late May ( winter and spring ) . This period corresponds to the rainy season in Israel ( October to May ) , with low to moderate temperatures ranging from 15 – 28 ° C ( 59 – 82 ° F ) during the day and 5 – 15 ° C ( 41 – 59 ° F ) at night . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Morchella rufobrunnea is the morel that is cultivated commercially per US patents <unk> and <unk> . This process was developed in 1982 by Ronald Ower with what he thought was Morchella esculenta ; M. rufobrunnea had not yet been described . The cultivation protocol consists of preparing a spawn culture that is mixed with nutrient @-@ poor soil . This mixture is laid on nutrient @-@ rich soil and kept sufficiently moist until fruiting . In the nutrient @-@ poor substrate , the fungus forms sclerotia — hardened masses of mycelia that serve as food reserves . Under appropriate environmental conditions , these sclerotia grow into morels . 
 The fruit bodies of Morchella rufobrunnea have been cultivated under controlled conditions in laboratory @-@ scale experiments . <unk> , which are tiny nodules from which fruit bodies develop , appeared two to four weeks after the first watering of pre @-@ grown sclerotia incubated at a temperature of 16 to 22 ° C ( 61 to 72 ° F ) and 90 % humidity . Mature fruit bodies grew to 7 to 15 cm ( 3 to 6 in ) long . 
 The early stages of fruit body development can be divided into four discrete stages . In the first , disk @-@ shaped knots measuring 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 5 mm appear on the surface of the substrate . As the knot expands in size , a primordial stipe emerges from its center . The stipe lengthens , orients upward , and two types of hyphal elements develop : long , straight and smooth basal hairy hyphae and short stipe hyphae , some of which are inflated and project out of a cohesive layer of tightly packed hyphal elements . In the final stage , which occurs when the stipe is 2 – 3 mm long , immature caps appear that have ridges and pits with distinct paraphyses . Extracellular mucilage that covers the ridge layer imparts shape and rigidity to the tissue and probably protects it against dehydration . 
 = 1948 Ashes series = 
 The 1948 Ashes series was that year 's edition of the long @-@ standing cricket rivalry between England and Australia . Starting on 10 June 1948 , England and Australia played five Tests . Australia had not lost a Test since the Second World War and were strong favourites . Their captain Don Bradman had publicly expressed his ambition of going through the tour without defeat , and Australia won 10 of their 12 lead @-@ up matches , eight by an innings . The England team , however , had several notable players themselves , including Len Hutton , Denis Compton and Alec Bedser . Nevertheless , the final result was a 4 – 0 series win for Australia , with the Third Test being drawn . They thus retained The Ashes . The Australians remained undefeated for their entire tour of England , earning them the sobriquet of The Invincibles . 
 The First Test set the trend for the series as England 's batsmen struggled against the Australian pace attack and , despite attempting to stifle the Australian scoring with leg theory , fell to an eventual defeat . Failure to contain the Australian batsmen , particularly Bradman himself , plagued the English bowlers , while their batsmen were prone to struggling and collapsing on key occasions , with rain petering the Third Test into a draw . The series saw a number of notable cricketing feats , including a 301 @-@ run partnership between Bradman and Arthur Morris , aided by many dropped catches and missed stumpings , during the Fourth Test , and Australia 's heaviest win of the series in the Fifth Test , where England were bowled out for 52 in half a day . Australia then made 389 , with Bradman making a famous duck in his final innings . England were then bowled out for 188 to lose by an innings and 149 runs in less than three days ' playing time . 
 = = Test representatives = = 
 = = Match details = = 
 = = = First Test , 10 – 15 June = = = 
 Since the Second World War , Australia had played 11 Tests and had been unbeaten . In early 1946 , they defeated New Zealand in a one @-@ off Test by an innings . The following season , in 1946 – 47 , they won the five @-@ Test series against England 3 – 0 , and followed this with a 4 – 0 series win over India in the following season . Australia were regarded as an extremely strong team in the lead @-@ up to the tour of England , and Bradman publicly expressed his desire to achieve the unprecedented feat of going through the five @-@ month tour without defeat . Prior to the First Test , Australia had played 12 first @-@ class matches , winning ten and drawing two . Eight of the victories were by an innings , and another was by eight wickets . One of the drawn matches , against Lancashire was rain @-@ affected with the first day washed out entirely . 
 It was thought that Bradman would play Ring , but he changed his mind on the first morning of the First Test when rain was forecast . Johnston was played in the hope of exploiting a wet wicket . Yardley won the toss and elected to bat . England lost leg spinner Wright before the match due to lumbago . The first innings of the First Test set the pattern of the series as the England top @-@ order struggled against Australia 's pace attack . Only twenty minutes of play was possible before the lunch break on the first day due to inclement weather , but it was enough for Miller to bowl Hutton with a faster ball . During the interval , heavy rain fell , making the ball skid through upon resumption . Washbrook was out after the luncheon interval , caught on the run by Brown at fine leg after attempting to hook Lindwall . At 15 / 2 , Compton came to the crease , and together with Edrich , they took the score to 46 before left arm paceman Johnston bowled the latter . Two balls later , Johnston removed Hardstaff without scoring , caught by Miller in slips , an effort described by Wisden as " dazzling " . Two runs later , Compton was bowled attempting a leg sweep from the bowling of Miller and half the English team were out with only 48 runs on the board . Lindwall was forced to leave the field mid @-@ innings due to a groin injury and did not bowl again in the match . Johnston bowled Barnett for eight and when Evans and Yardley were both dismissed with the score on 74 , England was facing the prospect of setting a new record for the lowest Test innings score at Trent Bridge , the current record being 112 . Laker and Bedser , both from Surrey , scored more than half of England 's total , adding 89 runs in only 73 minutes . Laker 's innings was highlighted by hooking , while Bedser defended stoutly and drove in front of the wicket . Bedser was removed by Johnston and Miller had Laker caught behind two runs later , ending England 's innings at 165 . Laker top @-@ scored with 63 in 101 minutes , with six boundaries . Johnston ended with 5 / 36 , a display characterised with accuracy and variations in pace and swing . Miller took 3 / 38 and a catch . 
 Australia had less than 15 minutes of batting before the scheduled close of play . Barnes made an unsuccessful appeal against the light after the first ball of the innings , which was a wide by Edrich . Morris and Barnes successfully negotiated the new ball by Edrich and Bedser to reach stumps with 17 without loss . Ideal batting conditions and clear weather greeted the players on the second day . Barnes and Morris took the score to 73 before Morris was bowled by Laker 's off spin . Bradman came in and the score progressed to 121 when Barnes cut Laker onto the thigh of wicket @-@ keeper Evans . The ball bounced away and the gloveman turned around and took a one @-@ handed diving catch to dismiss Barnes for 62 . Miller came in and was dismissed for a duck without further addition to Australia 's total . He failed to pick Laker 's arm ball , which went straight on , clipped the outside edge and was taken at slip by Edrich . 
 Laker to this point had taken 3 / 22 from 12 @.@ 4 overs . All the while , Australia had been scoring slowly , as they would throughout the day . Yardley set a defensive field , employing leg theory to slow the scoring . Brown came in at No. 5 , but he had played most of his career as an opening batsman . Yardley took Laker out of the attack and took the second new ball . Bradman struck his first boundary in over 80 minutes but the run rate remained low . Australia passed England 's total before Yardley brought himself on to bowl , trapping Brown leg before wicket in his first over . Hassett came in at 185 / 4 and Australia batted to stumps on the second day without further loss , ending at 293 / 4 , a lead of 128 . Bradman reached his 28th Test century in over 210 minutes , with the last 29 runs taking 70 minutes . It was one of his slower innings as Yardley focused on stopping runs rather than taking wickets . 
 On the third morning , Bradman resumed on 130 , before progressing to 132 and becoming the first player to pass 1 @,@ 000 runs for the English season . His innings was soon terminated at 138 when he leg glanced an inswinger from Bedser to Hutton at short fine leg . Bradman had batted for 290 minutes and Johnson replaced him with Australia at 305 / 5 . Johnson made 21 before being bowled by Laker , and Tallon took 39 minutes to compile 10 before hitting a return catch to the left arm orthodox spin of Young . The scoring was slow during this passage of play — Young delivered 11 consecutive maiden overs and his 26 @-@ over spell conceded only 14 runs . Lindwall came out to bat at 365 / 7 without a runner and he added 107 runs with Hassett for the eighth wicket . Hassett reached his century and proceeded to 137 in almost six hours of batting , striking 20 fours and a six . The partnership was terminated when Bedser struck Hassett 's off stump . Lindwall was caught by Evans down the leg side four runs later , but Australia 's last @-@ wicket pair of Johnston and Toshack wagged a further 33 runs in only 18 minutes before Bedser trapped Toshack lbw to end the innings on 509 , leaving the tourists with a 344 @-@ run lead . Australia had batted for 216 @.@ 2 overs , the longest innings in terms of overs and the highest total in the series . Yardley placed the majority of the bowling load on his spinners , with Young ( 1 / 79 ) and Laker ( 4 / 138 ) bowling 60 and 55 overs respectively . Bedser bowled 44 @.@ 2 overs , taking 3 / 113 . 
 At the start of England 's second innings , Miller removed Washbrook for one from a top @-@ edged hook shot . Edrich was then caught behind attempting a cut from the off spin of Johnson , leaving England 39 / 2 . This brought together England 's leading batsmen , Hutton and Compton , who took the score to 121 without further loss by stumps on the third day . Miller battled with Hutton and Compton through the afternoon , delivering five bouncers in the last over of the day . One of these struck Hutton high on his left arm . The batsmen survived , but Miller received a hostile reaction from the crowd . Nevertheless , the English had the better of the late afternoon period , scoring 82 runs together in 70 minutes , including one 14 @-@ run over bowled by Miller where Hutton struck consecutive boundaries . The third day was followed by a rest day on Sunday and play resumed on the fourth morning , a Monday . The Nottinghamshire County Cricket Club secretary , H. A. Brown , broadcast an appeal to the gallery to refrain from their heckling of Miller on the third day . 
 Hutton resumed on 63 and he and Compton progressed before the light deteriorated . An unsuccessful appeal against the light was quickly followed by a thunderstorm , which stopped proceedings . Shortly after the resumption , Miller bowled Hutton with an off cutter in the dark conditions , ending a 111 @-@ run partnership at 150 / 3 . The innings was then interrupted by poor light and upon the resumption , poor visibility intervened for a second time with Compton on 97 . After 55 minutes of delay , the umpires called for the resumption . Wisden opined that " rarely can a Test Match have been played under such appalling conditions as on this day " . Hardstaff supported Compton in a partnership of 93 before being removed by Toshack , and Barnett was removed by Johnston for six with the score having progressed a further 17 runs to 264 / 5 . Compton brought up his third consecutive century at Trent Bridge , aided by a 57 @-@ run partnership with his captain before Johnston held a return catch to dismiss Yardley for 22 . England reached stumps at 345 / 6 , just one run ahead of Australia , with Compton on 154 and Evans on 10 . 
 Compton and Evans continued to resist the Australians on the final morning , which was briefly interrupted twice by rain . Miller bowled a fast bouncer at Compton , who moved into position to hook before changing his mind and attempting to evade the ball . He lost balance and fell onto his wicket . He was out hit wicket for 184 . He had batted for 413 minutes and hit 19 fours . Wisden opined that " No praise could be too high for the manner in which Compton carried the side 's responsibilities and defied a first @-@ class attack in such trying circumstances " . Compton 's fall at 405 / 7 exposed the bowlers and Australia quickly finished off the innings within half an hour . Miller bowled Laker , Evans reached 50 and was caught behind from Johnston , who then castled Young . England finished at 441 after 183 overs , leaving Australia a target of 98 . Lindwall 's absence meant that the remaining four frontline bowlers had to bowl more than 32 overs each — Johnston bowled 59 and ended with 4 / 147 while Miller took 4 / 125 from 44 overs . Australia progressed steadily to 38 before Bedser bowled Morris for nine and then dismissed Bradman for a duck , again caught by Hutton at short fine leg . This left Australia 48 / 2 . However , Hassett joined Barnes and they reached the target without further loss . Barnes ended on 64 with 11 boundaries , being prolific on the square cut . Barnes tied the scores with a boundary , but ran off the field with a souvenir stump believing that the match was over . He returned to the field when he noticed the crowd reaction and Hassett hit the winning run . 
 = = = Second Test , 24 – 29 June = = = 
 Australian retained the same XI from the First Test at Trent Bridge . On the other hand , England made three changes ; the leg spinner Wright had regained fitness and replaced the left arm orthodox of Young , all rounder Coxon made his Test debut in place of Barnett and Dollery replaced Hardstaff as the No. 5 @.@ batsman . Hardstaff had scored a duck and 43 in the First Test , while Barnett managed only eight and six . Following his injury in the previous Test , Lindwall was subjected to a thorough fitness test on the first morning . Bradman was not convinced of Lindwall 's fitness , but the bowler 's protestations was sufficient to convince his captain to gamble on his inclusion . Australia won the toss and elected to bat , allowing Lindwall further time to recover before bowling . Miller played , but was unfit to bowl . 
 The debutant Coxon opened the bowling with Bedser and removed Barnes for a duck in his second over , caught by Hutton at short fine leg from a short delivery , leaving Australia 3 / 1 . Morris and Bradman rebuilt the innings , taking the score to 87 before Bradman was caught for the third consecutive time by Hutton in the leg trap off Bedser . Hutton had dropped Bradman in the same position when the Australian captain was on 13 . In the meantime , Morris , after a slow start , made 105 runs out of a total of 166 scored while he was at the wicket , including 14 fours and one six . His innings was noted for powerful , well @-@ placed cover drives . He was out after hitting Coxon to Hutton in the gully , leaving Australia at 166 / 3 . Miller came in and Bedser bowled three consecutive outswingers to him . A fourth ball swung the other way , with Miller not offering a shot . He was given out leg before wicket for four . Brown came in at 173 / 4 and helped Hassett to rebuild the innings after the two quick wickets of Morris and Miller . Both scored slowly , taking more than three and half minutes on average for each run . Hassett was dropped three times before Yardley bowled him and then trapped Brown lbw in the space of nine runs to leave Australia 225 / 6 . Edrich had Johnson caught behind for four and England were well placed when Australia ended the day on 258 / 7 . 
 Australia 's lower order batted the tourists into control on the second morning . Despite the loss of Lindwall for 15 at 275 / 8 , Tallon kept on batting , supported by Johnston and Toshack , who scored their highest Test scores . Australia 's wicket @-@ keeper put on 45 with Johnston — who scored 29 — before becoming Bedser 's second victim for the morning . Toshack then joined Johnston and the last pair put on 30 more runs before Johnston was stumped from Wright 's leg spin . Yardley was later criticised for not bringing Wright into the attack at an earlier stage , as the Australian tail were dealing well with the English pacemen . Bedser was the most successful of the bowlers , ending with 4 / 100 from 43 overs , while debutant Coxon took 2 / 90 from 35 overs . 
 Lindwall took the new ball and felt pain in his groin again after delivering his first ball to Hutton . Despite this , Lindwall persevered through the pain . He had Washbrook caught behind for eight in his fourth over . Hutton then played outside a Johnson off break and was bowled for 20 to leave England at 32 / 2 . Lindwall then clean bowled Edrich before doing the same to Dollery for a duck two balls later . England were 46 / 4 and Australia were firmly in control . Compton was joined by his skipper Yardley and the pair rebuilt the innings , scoring 87 runs together in 100 minutes . After the tea break , Lindwall and Johnston returned with the new ball . Compton edged Johnston into the slips , where Miller took a low catch , dismissing him for 53 . One run later , Lindwall clipped Yardley 's off stump with the first ball of the over to leave England at 134 / 6 with their skipper dismissed for 44 . Johnson then removed Evans for nine , before Coxon and Laker put on a 41 @-@ run stand for the eight wicket . After 85 minutes of resistance , Coxon hit a catch back to Johnson and Laker was caught behind from the same bowler , having already been dropped twice . England 's last pair added ten runs to close at stumps on 9 / 207 . 
 On the third morning , Bedser inside @-@ edged a Lindwall bouncer onto his stumps , ending England 's innings at 215 , giving Australia a 135 first innings lead . Lindwall ended with 5 / 70 . In later years , Bradman told Lindwall that he pretended not to notice Lindwall 's pain . Lindwall was worried that Bradman had noticed his injury , but Bradman later claimed that he feigned ignorance to allow Lindwall to relax . The weather was fine as Australia started their second innings . Barnes survived a missed stumping opportunity when he was 18 and he took advantage to combine with Morris in an opening stand of 122 . Morris was then bowled for 62 , knocking a ball from Wright onto his stumps . Bradman joined Barnes at the crease and they amassed 174 runs for the second wicket . Barnes started slowly , but he accelerated after reaching his half @-@ century . Once he reached his century , Barnes became particularly aggressive . He dispatched one Laker over for 21 runs , included two successive blows over the boundary for six . He was finally removed for 141 , caught on the boundary from Yardley . He had struck 14 boundaries and two sixes in his innings . The speed of his batting had allowed Australia to be 296 / 2 after 277 minutes when he departed . Hassett was bowled first ball , so Miller came to the crease at 296 / 3 to face Yardley 's hat @-@ trick ball . Miller survived a loud leg before wicket appeal on the hat @-@ trick ball . Bradman was on 89 and heading towards a century in his last Test innings at Lord 's when he fell to Bedser again , this time because of a one @-@ handed diving effort from Edrich at slip . Brown joined Miller at 329 / 4 and Australia reached stumps at 343 , without further loss , with Miller having struck one six into the grandstand . 
 After the rest day , Australia resumed with a lead of 478 runs with six wickets in hand . The morning was punctuated by three rain stoppages . In 88 minutes of play , Australia added a further 117 runs . Brown was caught behind from Coxon for 32 after an 87 @-@ run partnership with Miller , bringing Lindwall to the crease . Miller 's innings was noted for its driving and when he was out for 74 , followed by Lindwall for 25 , Bradman declared with Australia at 460 / 7 , 595 runs ahead . It would take a world record chase from England to win the match . Yardley and Laker had been the only multiple wicket @-@ takers , with two each . 
 Further showers breathed extra life into the pitch , and Lindwall and Johnston extracted steep bounce with the new ball , troubling the English batsmen . Miller dropped Hutton from Lindwall 's bowling before he had scored and played and missed multiple times . Hutton and Washbrook took the score to 42 , England 's highest opening partnership of the series thus far , before Hutton edged Lindwall to Johnson and was out for 13 . Edrich and Washbrook were then subjected to repeated short balls , before Toshack removed both in quick succession to leave England at 65 / 3 . However , Compton and Dollery added 41 in the last 30 minutes to have England close at 106 / 3 . 
 The final day started poorly for England , with Compton edging Johnston to a diving Miller at second slip from the second ball of the day . England had lost a wicket without adding to their overnight total . Yardley and Dollery took the score to 133 before Toshack bowled the former . He then trapped Coxon lbw two balls later in the same over . Eight runs later , Dollery shaped to duck a Lindwall bouncer , but it skidded through low and bowled him . Lindwall bowled Laker for a duck later in the same over to leave England at 141 / 8 . Evans continued to resist stubbornly , remaining 24 not out as England were bowled out for 186 to cede a 409 @-@ run victory . Toshack ended the innings with 5 / 40 , while Lindwall and Johnston took three and two respectively . The gross attendance was 132 @,@ 000 and receipts were £ 43 @,@ 000 — a record for a Test in England . 
 = = = Third Test , 8 – 13 July = = = 
 When the teams reconvened at Old Trafford for the Third Test , Hutton had been dropped . The reason was said to be Hutton 's struggles with Lindwall 's short @-@ pitched bowling . The omission generated considerable controversy . The Australians were pleased , feeling that Hutton was England 's best batsman . Hutton 's opening position was taken by debutant Emmett . England made three further changes . Young and Pollard replaced Wright and Laker in the bowling department , thereby reverting from two spinners to one . Coxon , who made his debut in the previous match and opened the bowling , taking match figures of 3 / 172 and scoring 19 and a duck , was replaced by debutant batsman Crapp . Australia dropped Brown , who had scored 73 runs at 24 @.@ 33 in three innings , with the all rounder Loxton . Yardley won the toss and elected to bat . 
 The change in England 's opening pair did not result in an improvement on the scoreboard . A run out was narrowly avoided from the first ball , and Washbrook and Emmett appeared to be uncomfortable on a surface that offered early assistance to the bowlers . With 22 runs on the board , Johnston bowled Washbrook with a yorker , and six runs later , Emmett fended a rising ball from Lindwall to Barnes at short leg , leaving England 28 / 2 . Edrich eschewed attacking strokeplay as he and Compton attempted to establish themselves . Lindwall bowled a series of short balls . One hit Compton on the arm and the batsman attempted to hook another bouncer , but edged it into his face . This forced Compton to leave the field with a bloodied eyebrow with the score at 33 / 2 . Edrich and Crapp then engaged in grim defensive batting , resulting in one 25 @-@ minute period where only one run was added . They reached lunch at 57 / 2 . Upon the resumption , Crapp began to accelerate , hitting a six and three boundaries from Johnson . Australia took the new ball and Lindwall trapped Crapp lbw for 37 . Dollery took a single to get off the mark but then missed a yorker from Johnston and was bowled . England had lost two wickets for one run to be 97 / 4 . After 170 minutes of slow batting , Edrich gloved a rising Lindwall delivery and was caught behind . At 119 / 5 , Compton returned to the field , his wound having been stitched to stop the bleeding . Yardley fell to Toshack for 22 with the score at 141 / 6 , bringing Evans to the crease . Compton combined with the gloveman to add 75 runs for the seventh wicket in 70 minutes , before Lindwall removed Evans to leave England 216 / 7 . 
 England resumed on the second day at 231 / 7 and Australia was unable to break through with the new ball . Bedser stubbornly defied the Australians for 145 minutes , adding 37 and featuring in a 121 @-@ run partnership with Compton before he was run out . Soon after , Pollard pulled a ball from Johnson into the ribs of Barnes , who was standing at short leg . Barnes had to be carried from the ground by four policemen and taken to hospital for an examination . Toshack then bowled Pollard and Young was caught from Johnston 's bowling as England were bowled out for 363 . Compton was unbeaten on 145 in 324 minutes of batting , having struck 16 fours . Lindwall took 4 / 99 and Johnston 3 / 67 . Miller did not bowl and the remaining four frontline bowlers sent down at least 38 overs each . 
 Having dropped Brown , Barnes 's injury left Australia with only Morris as a specialist opener . Johnson was deployed as Australia 's makeshift second opener . He was unable to make an impact , as Bedser removed him for one , and Pollard then trapped Bradman for seven to leave Australia at 13 / 2 . Morris and Hassett rebuilt the innings , adding 69 for the third wicket in 101 minutes before Hassett was beaten in flight by Young and was caught by Washbrook . Miller joined Morris and they took the score to 126 / 3 at stumps . 
 Australia had added only nine runs on the third morning when Pollard trapped Miller for 31 with the new ball . Four runs later , Morris had reached 51 when Bedser removed him , leaving Australia 139 / 5 . Barnes came out to bat at 135 / 4 , despite having collapsed while practising in the nets due to the aftereffects of the blow to his chest . He made a painful single in 25 minutes of batting before it became too much and he had to be taken from the ground and sent to the hospital to be put under observation . Tallon and Loxton added a further 43 before Tallon was caught behind from Edrich . Lindwall came into bat at 172 / 6 with Australia facing the prospect of the follow on . He then received five consecutive bouncers from Edrich , one of which hit him in the hand , evoking cheers from the home crowd . Loxton and Lindwall added a further 36 before the former was bowled by Pollard , leaving Australia 208 / 7 , five runs behind the follow @-@ on mark . Johnston helped Lindwall advance Australia beyond the follow on before Bedser removed both and Australia were bowled out for 221 , giving England a lead of 142 runs . Bedser and Pollard were the most successful bowlers , taking 4 / 81 and 3 / 53 respectively . 
 Lindwall removed Emmett for a duck at the start of the second innings , bringing his tormentor Edrich to the crease . Bradman advised Lindwall not to bowl any bouncers at Edrich , fearing that it would be interpreted as retaliation and lead to a negative media and crowd reaction . However , Miller did retaliate with a series of bouncers , earning the ire of the crowd . He struck Edrich on the body before Bradman intervened and order him to stop . Edrich and Washbrook settled and put together a 124 @-@ run partnership in only 138 minutes . This was aided by the Australian fielders , who twice dropped Washbrook at long leg and once in the slips cordon . Edrich struck eight boundaries and brought up his fifty with a six , but was immediately run out by Morris , who threw down the stumps from cover . Toshack removed Compton for a duck , leaving England at 125 / 3 . Crapp joined Washbrook and helped see off the new ball , as England reached 174 at the close without further loss , with Washbrook unbeaten on 85 . 
 The rest day was followed by the fourth day , which was abandoned due to persistent rain . Yardley declared at the start of the fifth day , leaving Australia a victory target of 317 , but the rain kept falling and the entire first session was lost . Young removed Johnson for six to leave Australia 10 / 1 , but the tourists thereafter batted safely in a defensive manner to ensure a draw . They ended at 92 / 1 in 61 overs , a run rate of 1 @.@ 50 , which was the slowest innings run rate to date in the series . Morris finished unbeaten on 54 , his fourth consecutive half @-@ century of the Test series . The attendance of 133 @,@ 740 exceeded the previous Test . 
 = = = Fourth Test , 22 – 27 July = = = 
 Australia made two changes for the Test . Harvey replaced the injured Barnes , while Saggers replaced Tallon behind the stumps . Tallon 's little left finger had swelled up after the Third Test and he exacerbated the injury during a tour match against Middlesex . England made three changes . Emmett was dropped after making 10 and a duck on debut and Hutton was recalled to take his opening position . Laker , the off spinner , replaced his left arm finger spinning colleague Young . Dollery , who had made only 38 in three innings , was replaced by all @-@ rounder Cranston . 
 England won the toss and elected to bat on an ideal batting pitch . Hutton and Washbrook put on an opening partnership of 168 , the best by England in the series . Washbrook refrained from the hook shot , which had caused him to lose his wicket on earlier occasions in the series . The partnership was ended when Hutton was bowled by Lindwall . Washbrook reached his century with the score on 189 . Joined by Edrich , the pair batted until late in the first day , when Washbrook was dismissed by Johnston for 143 in the last over of the day . His innings had included 22 boundaries and ended a second wicket partnership that yielded exactly 100 runs . Bedser was sent in as the nightwatchman and survived the last four balls as England closed without further addition to score at 268 / 2 , with Edrich on 41 . 
 The next day , Bedser batted on in steady support of Edrich . The pair saw England to lunch without further loss , and 155 runs were added for the third wicket before Bedser was out in the second session after almost three hours of batting . Bedser had struck eight fours and two sixes in a Test career best 79 before returning a catch to the off spin of Johnson . Edrich fell to Johnson after three further runs were added with the score at 426 / 4 . He had batted for 314 minutes in compiling 111 , with 13 fours and a six . With two new batsmen at the crease , Australia quickly made further inroads . Toshack bowled Crapp for five and after Compton and Yardley added 26 for the sixth wicket , the former edged Lindwall and Saggers had his first Test catch to leave England at 473 / 6 . Playing in his first Test of the summer , Loxton then successively removed Cranston , Evans and Laker as England fell from 486 / 6 to 496 / 9 . Miller then bowled the English skipper Yardley to end England 's innings at 496 . The home side had batted for 192 @.@ 1 overs and lost their last eight wickets for the addition of 73 runs . Loxton took 3 / 55 while Lindwall and Johnson both took two . Australia lost the services of Toshack after he broke down with a knee injury . With Barnes injured , Hassett was moved from the middle order to open the innings with Morris . Bedser removed Morris for six with the new ball , to leave Australia at 13 / 1 , before Bradman and Hassett saw the tourists to stumps at 63 / 1 . Bradman did the majority of the scoring in the late afternoon , finishing unbeaten on 31 in a partnership of 40 . 
 On the third morning , England made the ideal start when Pollard removed both of the established batsmen in his opening over . He removed Hassett for 13 and two balls later bowled Bradman for 33 . This left Australia struggling at 68 / 3 . Harvey , playing his first Ashes Test , joined Miller at the crease . Australia were more than 400 behind and Harvey told his senior partner " Let 's get stuck into ' em " . If England were to remove the pair , they would expose Australia 's lower order and give themselves an opportunity to win by taking substantial lead . The pair launched a counterattack , with Miller taking the lead . He hoisted Laker 's first ball over square leg for six . Miller shielded Harvey from Laker , as he was struggling against the off breaks that were turning away from him . Miller struck consecutive sixes over long off and the sightscreen respectively . This allowed Australia to seize the initiative , with Harvey joining in and hitting consecutive boundaries against Laker . Miller then lifted another six over long off , hitting a spectator in the head , and another over long on from Yardley 's bowling . He was dismissed by Yardley for 58 attempting another six , when an edge bounced off Evans ' head and was caught by a diving Edrich at short fine leg . 
 The partnership had yielded 121 runs in 90 minutes , likened by Wisden to a " hurricane " . Harvey then shared another century stand with Loxton which yielded 105 in only 95 minutes . Harvey ended with a century on his Ashes debut , scoring 112 from 183 balls in an innings noted for powerful driving on both sides of the wicket . The innings and the high rate of scoring helped to swing the match back from England 's firm control . Loxton was particularly severe on Laker , lifting him into the crowd for five sixes in addition to nine fours . Harvey fell at 294 / 5 and Johnson scored 10 before falling with the score at 329 / 6 , both dismissed by Laker . 
 Australia was still some way behind when Lindwall replaced Johnson . Fifteen runs later , Yardley bowled Loxton for 93 , while Saggers only managed five in his first Test innings before being stumped after being lured out of his crease by Laker . This left Australia at 355 / 8 with only Johnston and Toshack remaining . Lindwall hit out , scoring 77 , an innings marked by powerful driving and pulling , dominating in stands of 48 and 55 with Johnston and Toshack respectively . Of the 103 added for the last two wickets , Johnston and Toshack managed only 25 between them . Lindwall was the last man out at 458 , leaving Australia 38 runs in arrears on the first innings . Australia added only one run to its overnight score of 457 / 9 , with Bedser taking the final wicket to end with 3 / 92 . Laker took 3 / 113 , while Pollard and Yardley ended with two wickets each . 
 England set about extending their first innings lead for the remainder of the fourth day . For the second time in the match , Washbrook and Hutton put on a century opening partnership . Johnston removed Washbrook for 65 before Johnson removed Hutton for 57 without further addition to the total , leaving England at 129 / 2 . Edrich and Compton continued where the openers had left off , adding 103 for the third wicket before Lindwall trapped Edrich for 54 . Crapp came in and added 18 before Lindwall bowled him at 260 / 4 and precipitated a mini @-@ collapse . Yardley made seven before Johnston removed him . Johnston then removed Cranston caught behind for a duck with only a further run added to leave England at 278 / 6 . When Johnston removed Compton for 66 , caught by Miller , England were 7 / 293 with no recognised batsmen remaining . They had lost 4 / 33 . Wicket @-@ keeper Evans was joined by Bedser , and the pair added 37 before Miller removed the latter . Laker then helped Evans to add a further 32 as England reached 362 / 8 at the close of the fourth day . 
 England batted on for five minutes on the final morning , adding three runs in two overs before Yardley declared at 365 / 8 , with Evans on 47 not out . Johnston had the pick of the bowling figures , with 4 / 95 . Batting into the final day allowed Yardley to ask the groundsman to use a heavy roller , which would help to break up the wicket and make the surface more likely to spin . 
 This left Australia a target of 404 runs for victory . At the time , this would have been the highest ever fourth innings score to result in a Test victory for the batting side . Australia had only 345 minutes to reach the target , and the local press wrote them off , predicting that they would be dismissed by lunchtime on a deteriorating wicket expected to favor the spin bowlers . Morris and Hassett started slowly , with only six runs in the first six overs on a pitch that offered spin and bounce . When Laker was introduced to exploit the spin , 13 runs were taken from his first over , but only 44 runs came in the first hour , leaving 360 runs needed in 285 minutes . Just 13 runs were added in the next 28 minutes before Hassett was dismissed by Compton 's left arm unorthodox spin for 17 with the score at 57 . Bradman joined Morris with 347 runs needed in 257 minutes . Bradman signalled his intentions on his first ball by driving Laker against the spin for a boundary . Morris promptly joined Bradman in the counter @-@ attack , hitting three consecutive fours off Len Hutton 's bowling as Australia reached lunch at 121 / 1 . In the half hour preceding the interval , Australia had added 64 runs . Australia had given chances , but England failed to seize them . Evans failed to stump Morris when he was on 32 , and Crapp dropped Bradman from Compton . 
 Upon resumption , Morris severely attacked Compton , who had been bowling in an attempt to exploit the spin , aided by a series of full tosses and long hops that were easily dispatched for runs . This prompted Yardley to take the new ball and replace Compton with pacemen . Australia reached 202 , halfway to the required total , with 165 minutes left . When Bradman suffered a fibrositis attack , Morris had to shield him from the strike until it subsided . Morris passed his century , and was then given another life on 126 when Laker dropped him while fielding at square leg . Bradman was given another life at 108 when Evans missed a stumping opportunity . Australia reached tea at 288 / 1 with Morris on 150 . The pair had added 167 during the session . Morris was eventually dismissed by Yardley for 182 , having partnered Bradman in a stand of 301 in 217 minutes . He struck 33 fours in 290 minutes of batting . This brought Miller to the crease with 46 runs still required . He struck two boundaries and helped take the score to 396 before falling to Cranston with eight runs still needed . Harvey came in and got off the mark with a boundary that brought up the winning runs . Australia had won by seven wickets , setting a new world record for the highest successful Test run @-@ chase , with Bradman unbeaten on 173 in only 255 minutes with 29 fours . The attendance of 158 @,@ 000 was the highest for any cricket match on English soil and the takings were 34 @,@ 000 pounds . The attendance remains a record for a Test in England . 
 = = = Fifth Test , England v Australia = = = 
 With the series already lost , England made four changes to their team . Dewes replaced Washbrook , who was suffering from a thumb injury , at the top of the order . Watkins replaced Cranston as the middle order batsman and bowler . Both Dewes and Watkins were making their Test debut . England played two spinners ; Young replaced fellow finger spinner Laker , while the leg spin of Hollies replaced Pollard . The selectors were widely condemned for their changes . Australia made three changes . Having taken only seven wickets in the first four Tests at an average of 61 @.@ 00 , off spinner Johnson was replaced by the leg spin of Ring . Australia 's second change was forced on them ; the injured Toshack was replaced by the recovered Barnes , meaning that Australia were playing with one extra batsman and one less frontline bowler . The final change was the return of wicket @-@ keeper Tallon from injury . 
 The match saw Lindwall at his best . English skipper Yardley won the toss and elected to bat on a rain @-@ affected pitch . Precipitation in the week leading up to the match meant that the Test could not start until midday had passed . The damp conditions meant that sawdust had to be added in large amounts to allow the players to keep their grip . The humid conditions , along with the rain , assisted the bowlers , with Lindwall in particular managing to make the ball bounce at variable heights . 
 Miller bowled Dewes for one with his second ball to leave England at 2 / 1 , before Johnston removed Edrich for three to leave England at 10 / 2 . Lindwall dismissed Compton after Morris had taken a diving catch , and Miller then removed Crapp without scoring after a 23 @-@ ball innings , leaving England at 23 / 4 . 
 After the lunch break , England had struggled to 35 / 4 , before Lindwall bowled Yardley with a swinging yorker . The debutant Watkins then batted for 16 balls without scoring before Johnston trapped him for a duck to leave England at 42 / 6 . For his troubles , Watkins also collected a bruise on the shoulder that inhibited his bowling later in the match . Lindwall then removed Evans , Bedser and Young , all yorked in the space of two runs . The innings ended at 52 when Hutton leg glanced and was caught by wicket @-@ keeper Tallon , who grasped the ball one @-@ handed at full stretch to his left . Lindwall described the catch as one of the best he had ever seen . In his post @-@ lunch spell , Lindwall bowled 8 @.@ 1 overs , taking five wickets for eight runs , finishing with 6 / 20 in 16 @.@ 1 overs . Bradman described the spell as " the most devastating and one of the fastest I ever saw in Test cricket " . Hutton was the only batsman to resist , scoring 30 in 124 minutes and surviving 147 deliveries . The next most resilient display was from Yardley , who scored seven runs in 31 minutes of resistance , facing 33 balls . Miller and Johnston took 2 / 5 and 2 / 20 respectively , and Australia 's pace trio removed all the batsmen without Bradman having to call on Ring for a bowl . 
 In contrast , Australia batted with apparent ease , and Morris and Barnes passed England 's first innings total by themselves . The score had reached 117 before Barnes was caught behind from Hollies for 61 . The opening stand had been compiled in only 126 minutes . This brought Bradman to the crease shortly before 6 pm late on the first day . As Bradman had announced that the tour was his last at international level , the innings would be his last at Test level if Australia batted only once . The crowd gave him a standing ovation as he walked out to bat . Yardley led the Englishmen in giving his Australian counterpart three cheers . With 6996 Test career runs , he only needed four runs to average 100 in Test cricket , but Hollies bowled him second ball for a duck with a googly that went between bat and pad . Hassett came in at 117 / 2 and together with Morris saw Australia to the close at 153 / 2 . Morris was unbeaten on 77 , having hit two hook shots from Hollies for four . 
 On the second morning , Hassett and Morris took the score to 226 before their 109 @-@ run stand was broken when Young trapped Hassett for 37 after 134 minutes of batting . The following batsmen were unable to establish themselves at the crease . Miller made five and Harvey 17 , both falling to Hollies as Australia progressed to 265 / 5 . Loxton accompanied Morris for 39 further runs before Edrich removed him for 15 . Young removed Lindwall for nine before Morris was finally removed for 196 , ending an innings noted for his hooking and off @-@ driving . It took a run out to remove Morris ; he had attempted a quick run after the ball was hit to third man but was not agile enough for the substitute fielder 's arm . Tallon , who scored 31 , put on another 30 runs with Ring , before both were out on 389 , ending Australia 's innings . Morris had scored more than half the runs as the rest of the team struggled against the leg spin of Hollies , who took 5 / 131 . England had relied heavily on spin ; Young took 2 / 118 and of the 158 @.@ 2 overs bowled , 107 were delivered by the two spinners . 
 England started their second innings 337 runs in arrears . Lindwall made the early breakthrough , bowling Crapp for 10 to leave England 20 / 1 . Edrich joined Hutton and the pair consolidated the innings to close at the end of the second day on 54 / 1 due to bad light . 
 Early on the third day , Lindwall bowled Edrich for 28 with the score at 64 , before Compton and Hutton consolidated the innings with a partnership of 61 in 110 minutes . On 39 , Compton aimed a hard cut shot from Johnston 's bowling , which flew into Lindwall 's left hand at second slip . Hutton managed to continue resisting the Australians before Miller struck Crapp in the head with a bouncer . Hutton then edged Miller to Tallon and was out for 64 , having top @-@ scored in both innings . He had batted for over four hours and left England at 153 / 4 . Thereafter , England collapsed . Crapp was bowled by Miller for nine , and two runs later , Ring dismissed debutant Watkins for two to take his only wicket . Lindwall returned and bowled Evans for eight . Evans appeared to not detect Lindwall 's yorker in the fading light , and the umpires called off play due to bad light . The ground was then hit by rain , resulting in a premature end to the day 's play . England had lost four wickets for 25 runs to end at 178 / 7 . 
 England resumed on the fourth morning with only three wickets in hand and still 159 runs in arrears . Johnston quickly removed the last three wickets to seal an Australian victory by an innings and 149 runs . Only ten runs were added , with Hollies being removed for a golden duck , skying a ball to Morris , immediately after Yardley was the ninth man to fall . Johnston ended with 4 / 40 from 27 @.@ 3 overs while Lindwall took 3 / 50 from 25 overs . This result sealed the series 4 – 0 in favour of Australia . The match was followed by a series of congratulatory speeches . 
 = = Records and statistical analysis = = 
 As Australia won the series convincingly 4 – 0 , it is not surprising that their players dominated the statistical rankings . Australian batsmen scored eight centuries to four by their English counterparts and scored their runs at a much higher average . Six of the nine highest averaging batsmen were Australian . On the bowling front , Australia 's pace attack had far more success and they were a large part of the success . Lindwall and Johnston both took 27 wickets , supported by Miller and Toshack , who took 13 and 11 respectively . For England , only Bedser with 18 was able to take 10 or more wickets , and at a substantially higher cost than the Australian pacemen . The bowling was dominated by pace bowling , with Laker being the only spinner on the list , with by far the worst average . This was in large part because England agreed to make a new ball available every 55 overs , more frequently than under normal conditions . As a new ball is more conducive to fast bowling , this favoured fast bowlers and therefore the team with the best pace attack , in this case Australia . 
 = = = Most runs = = = 
 = = = Best batting averages = = = 
 Minimum 100 runs and three innings 
 = = = = Most wickets = = = = 
 = = = = Best bowling averages = = = = 
 Minimum nine wickets 
 = M @-@ 110 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 110 was the designation of a former state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . The highway was a 1 @.@ 715 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 2 @.@ 760 km ) spur that provided access from US Highway 31 ( US 31 ) to Orchard Beach State Park . The highway was designated in 1927 and lasted until 2003 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The southern terminus of M @-@ 110 was at a junction with US 31 near Parkdale on the northern boundary of the city of Manistee . From there , the trunkline traveled north along Lake Shore Road near Lake Michigan . Along the way , the highway passed through the unincorporated community of Parkdale . The landscape contains fields as the roadway approaches the forest at Orchard Beach State Park . M @-@ 110 continues past the park and terminated at an intersection with Kott Road . 
 = = History = = 
 A highway was first designated along Lakeshore Road in 1927 bearing the M @-@ 110 designation . In 2003 , the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) transferred M @-@ 110 to the Manistee County Road Commission . In the last traffic surveys before the transfer , MDOT determined that an average of 2 @,@ 335 vehicles used M @-@ 110 on a daily basis in 2002 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway was in Manistee Township , Manistee County . 
 = Belldandy = 
 Belldandy ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a character in the popular anime and manga series Oh My Goddess ! . She was created by Kōsuke Fujishima as one of three Goddesses who come to Earth to reside with Keiichi Morisato , and she serves as his love interest . She is depicted as a beautiful and powerful young woman , with strong nurturing tendencies , a trusting and innocent character , and an extremely kind heart . Belldandy is accidentally summoned from heaven by Keiichi in order to grant him a wish and stays when Keiichi wishes for " a goddess like you to be by my side forever " . The stories follow Belldandy as she builds a relationship with Keiichi , using her powers ( which include teleportation , telekinesis , telepathy , and levitation ) to help both Keiichi and his friends while keeping her true identity a secret . 
 Her first appearance was in Afternoon in August 1988 . Belldandy has also featured in a novel , two TV series , a movie , and three OVA series . The character has gained considerable respect throughout the various formats , as evidenced by her appearance as one of the most popular characters in the Newtype and Animage polls . The concept of Belldandy draws loosely from Norse mythology , with " Belldandy " being a transliteration of the Old Norse Verðandi , one of a trio of Norns . She is joined by characters representing the other two of the trio of Norns — her sisters Urd and Skuld . 
 Belldandy is regarded by commentators as an example of the magical girlfriend character , and comparisons have been drawn with the characters of Samantha from Bewitched and Jeannie from I Dream of Jeannie . The character 's very conservative nature , however , which almost completely subordinates her to her fictional boyfriend , Keiichi , has led to some concerns from critics and has polarized the audience . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 Belldandy was created by Kōsuke Fujishima and features as one of the two principal protagonists in the manga Ah ! My Goddess ! ( <unk> ) ( along with the character of Keiichi Morisato ) . Her first appearance was in the comic Afternoon on August 25 , 1988 , but she has also been depicted in a novel ( Ah ! My Goddess : First End ) , three anime series — Oh My Goddess ! ( OVA ) , Ah ! My Goddess and The Adventures of Mini @-@ Goddess — and in Ah ! My Goddess : The Movie . 
 Belldandy 's original concept was loosely based on a depiction of Miyuki Kobayakawa , one of the main characters of You 're Under Arrest , which was also created by Kosuke Fujishima . Miyuki was featured as a goddess in an advertisement for a You 're Under Arrest T @-@ shirt giveaway and appeared as a goddess character in a " four panel gag strip " in the You 're Under Arrest manga , leading to claims that Oh My Goddess is a spin @-@ off series . The character Ken Nakajima from You 're Under Arrest appears in the first episode of the original OVA . He is driving the car that Keiichi almost hits with his motorcycle . 
 = = = Norse origins = = = 
 Fujishima was particularly interested in the concept of a goddess " as a job " , and turned to Norse mythology as he felt that it was relatively unknown in Japan . Thus Belldandy is based on Verðandi ( or <unk> ) , the Norse Goddess of the present , ( whose name is literally translated as " to become " or " becoming " ) , and she is one of the three Norns or " fates " from Norse mythology . Verdandi , when translated into Japanese , becomes <unk> ( <unk> ) . As the Japanese phonetic system does not distinguish between " b " and " v " or " r " and " l " ( although <unk> can describe " v " . ) , " Belldandy " can emerge as a product of consonant substitutions . Indeed , it was in the first chapter of the manga that her name was transliterated as Belldandy rather than Verdandi , and this romanization has stuck since . When the English translations were being prepared , Toren Smith considered returning the name to " <unk> " , ( which Smith had determined to be the correct translation of the Old Norse ) , but chose to stick with Belldandy on the grounds that Fujishima was already " playing fast and loose with the mythos " and thus felt that no further harm was likely to come from employing Fujishima 's transliteration . ( Nevertheless , in the Swedish translation of the manga , released in 2007 , her name was returned to Verdandi ) . 
 = = Character outline = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Belldandy is depicted as being a Goddess working with the fictional " Goddess Relief Agency " . Although the series never specifically mentions her age , there are hints that she is between 18 and 28 when the series begins : in the original manga her birthdate is shown as <unk> / 09 / 25 — the English translation offers no year , but simply says " September " — while in the anime the more specific 1985 / 01 / 01 is employed . This should not be seen as conclusive as Eileen Stevens , who provides the voice of Belldandy in the English @-@ language version of the TV series , states that while Belldandy is " young in appearance , late teens to early 20s , she 's ageless , perhaps thousands of years old . " 
 Fujishima provided the character with two sisters — Skuld and Urd — each with notably different personalities from her own . These two sisters represent the other two Norns from Norse mythology , with Urd ( the eldest of the three ) representing the past while Skuld ( the youngest ) represents the future . In recent volumes , Fujishima revealed the identity of Skuld and Belldandy 's mother , a goddess named <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , who seems to have a rivalry with Hild , Urd 's mother . 
 When the series begins , Belldandy is working on the " Goddess Technical Helpline , also known as " Goddess Relief Office / Agency " " and is responsible for granting wishes to those who call . As such , her role is similar to the character <unk> 's work at the Earth Assistance Agency . In spite of working for Heaven , Belldandy , unlike her two sisters , does not appear to play a significant role in maintaining Yggdrasil . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 The " magical girl " character , of which Belldandy is an example , typically combines powerful abilities with very feminine characteristics . For Western audiences , a comparison can be drawn with the characters of Samantha Stephens from Bewitched and Jeannie from I Dream of Jeannie . As such , Belldandy is depicted as being very sweet and exceptionally kind @-@ hearted , with very " old @-@ fashioned " sensibilities . Combined with domestic skills portrayed through the series and her loyalty to Keiichi , this makes her a classic example of the concept of Yamato Nadeshiko . 
 Belldandy is exceptionally kind @-@ hearted , even for a goddess . She can easily sense other people 's emotions and tries her best to be empathetic to all those around her , displaying a combination of " serene beauty and acceptance " . She rarely holds a grudge and is always willing to forgive anyone who does injury to her ... unless Keiichi is involved of course . Even though Belldandy tries her best to be as kind as possible , it is revealed that at times she can become very insecure and sad , especially when she is confronted with an implication that involves Keiichi in one way or another . This aspect of her character provides one of the biggest plot points in the Ah ! My Goddess movie : Belldandy 's possessiveness of Keiichi could make her an easy target for manipulation or even brainwashing , if the right buttons were pressed ; her jealousy of Morgan Le Fay was what allowed <unk> , her teacher , to lure Belldandy into his plans . 
 As noted by <unk> and Cornog , Belldandy , as a depiction of what they term " <unk> " , is comfortable " being loved and admired " and very much aware of her own beauty — yet this does not equate to vanity . 
 = = = Abilities = = = 
 Belldandy is unflinchingly kind , patient , and warm , not only to Keiichi but to everyone , without exception . This , however , does not mean that she is to be taken lightly ; Belldandy is licensed as a " goddess first @-@ class , unlimited " , and as such is depicted as being highly skilled . Her power is so great that she is required to wear a special earring on her left ear which constantly seals the full brunt of her magical strength . The only time at which she has ever revealed her true strength is during the " Lord of Terror " arc . At the end of this arc , Belldandy completely reconstructed their home from rubble , mentioning that doing so only took one ten @-@ millionth of her power . 
 Belldandy 's capacities and talents are diverse , whether magical or worldly . Not only can she change the appearance of her clothing and levitate ( and , by extension , fly ) , but she can also teleport through mirrors , speak to and understand animals , " see " people 's emotions as auras , heal minor wounds by speeding metabolism , and " speak " to machines . Furthermore , she is a superb cook , and her singing skills are held to be the best in the heavens . She is also incapable of becoming inebriated on alcoholic drinks , but instead becomes so with soda . ( One can is enough to send her in a drunken rampage — although given her personality , " rampage " takes an entirely different , but no less destructive , meaning ) . During the manga 's publication , more of Belldandy 's capabilities are discovered , but she probably has many more : Urd notes that Belldandy loves accumulating capabilities but usually doesn 't mention them herself . Among those seen in the manga , she has a Valkyrie diploma - as demonstrated when she neutralizes <unk> the Invincible in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat - and she 's a champion flying broom <unk> the only thing she can 't do is hurt others - provided Keichi isn 't in harm 's way , otherwise she will " deal " with anything and anyone standing in her way ( see <unk> above for the most out of character example ) whatever the cost on herself . 
 = = = Holy Bell = = = 
 Each of the fully @-@ fledged goddesses in the series is teamed with an " angel " . Belldandy 's angel is called Holy Bell ( <unk> Bell in some versions of the English manga ) ; her elemental attribute is wind . Like the other angels in the series , Holy Bell augments Belldandy 's magical powers when called upon , and like all angels , she also reflects her master 's current state . For example , when Belldandy falls unconscious after being infected with a virus , Holy Bell emerges comatose and covered with crystals that represent the virus . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 Belldandy is introduced to the series when Keiichi Morisato , portrayed as a typical college student with a notable lack of experience with women , accidentally dials the " Goddess Relief Agency " when attempting to order take @-@ away noodles ( the reason is simply explained as fate in the manga and anime adaptations ) . Belldandy appears before Keiichi and offers to grant him a wish . Convinced that the whole incident is a prank played on him by his seniors ( <unk> ) , Keiichi half @-@ jokingly wishes her to stay with him forever . ( " I want a goddess like you to be by my side forever " ) . The wish , of course , is granted — thus providing one of the key premises of the series . 
 With Belldandy and Keiichi now portrayed as a couple , Fujishima introduces other factors : specifically the complications caused by family and friends . Forced to leave his dorm , as women are not permitted to stay on the premises , Keiichi and Belldandy end up living at the Tariki Hongan Temple in the city of <unk> , Chiba Prefecture near Tokyo . Within both the manga and the anime , the temple was turned over to them by its former guardian , <unk> , a Buddhist monk who was overwhelmed by the purity of Belldandy 's spirit and her unparalleled skills in polishing the temple altar , in cooking , and in <unk> meditation . <unk> departs the series by leaving for a pilgrimage to find spiritual perfection , ( although he does briefly return later in the series ) , turning over the temple to Belldandy and Keiichi 's care without realizing Belldandy 's true nature as a Goddess . Later , Fujishima has Belldandy 's two sisters ( Urd and Skuld ) join Belldandy and Keiichi in the temple . The story then follows the numerous misadventures of the not @-@ so normal household , their growth over the course of the series and the budding romance between an ordinary young man and an angelic goddess . 
 = = = Relationship with Keiichi = = = 
 Although Belldandy was sent to grant Keiichi a wish and nothing more , Belldandy expresses many times that she has enjoyed her time with Keiichi and that her purpose is to make him happy . The contract really is an excuse for her to stay since her rival <unk> , a first class demon , has stated that " she can cancel a contract with a human anytime " . Belldandy had then stated that she did not want to , because Keiichi was a special person in her heart . This was reinforced at the conclusion of chapter 39 : with the " System " down , Belldandy 's contract with Keiichi is effectively suspended , yet she chooses to stay because , as Fujishima has her explain in the manga , " ... I 'm here now because I love you ” . 
 There have been a couple of noticeable twitches in this however , when Belldandy shows doubt as to her future with Keiichi . When he takes up his job at Whirlwind towards the end of his time at <unk> Tech , Belldandy reflects on how he ’ s beginning to follow his dream , before wondering just how far she can follow it with him . Then at the start of the current storyline in Volume 38 , in which the demon <unk> <unk> Hild , Keiichi asks Belldandy if she will walk with him as his companion in life ; she hesitates , saying “ I ... Of course I will ” , without meeting his eyes . 
 In chapter 285 , " Kiss of Truth " , Hild reveals that Keiichi 's sexual desires for Belldandy have previously been sealed away in order to prevent humans and gods from mating , as would be the natural consequences of Keiichi 's wish for a goddess to be with him always . This explains why Keiichi has never been very forward in their relationship . Although Belldandy has never lied about this situation , she has also never told him . When the old contract was dissolved and a new one is formed , Belldandy and Keiichi are immediately confronted with an Interracial Romance Inquisitor ( <unk> , mother of Belldandy and Skuld ) who immediately sets a trial to determine if they are really meant to be together , and should Keiichi fail , they shall be separated forever . Once passing the test , Belldandy and Keiichi are allowed by the heavens to live together as a proper couple , with their wedding ceremony being held in the final chapter . 
 = = Depictions = = 
 The character is depicted as being extremely beautiful , but not voluptuous in the same sense as her sister , Urd , nor does she possess the youthfulness of her younger sister , Skuld . As described by <unk> and Cornog : 
 She is often depicted in " angelic " poses , with " impossibly long " hair , sparkling eyes , and a perfectly proportioned body . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 When Fujishima first started drawing Oh My Goddess ! his style resembled that of his earlier series , You 're Under Arrest , and as such lacked the polish that became evident in his later work . However , as his style evolved it became more refined , as seen in works such as those collected in Childhood 's End . As part of this process the depictions of Belldandy within the manga have undergone change , with the later drawings displaying greater refinement than those in the earlier chapters . Nevertheless , it did not take long for Fujishima 's style to emerge : while still considered to be one of his earlier works , in the " Terrible Master Urd " story arc many of his trademarks are already apparent , including the " long flowing , well @-@ drawn hair " . In Chapter 293 of the manga , Belldandy 's original design was depicted in a flashback prior to coming to Earth using Fujishima 's current drawing style . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Kosuke Fujishima was involved in the design for the OVA , ( even working on some of the storyboards ) , and the design of Belldandy is consistent with that of the manga of the period . While Fujishima wasn 't as involved in Ah ! My Goddess : The Movie , so that the character designs were produced Hidenori Matsuhara , the finished result has since been described as " staying true to Kosuke Fujishima 's original designs " . The TV series saw slightly greater change , with the producers opting to update and redesign the characters in line with modern anime , especially when contrasted to the earlier manga . Nevertheless , while Belldandy has a more rounded face in the TV series than in the manga , the approach is still in keeping with Fujishima 's style . Adventures of Mini Goddess is quite different , being drawn in the super deformed style , and thus Belldandy 's appearance differs considerably from the manner in which she is depicted elsewhere . 
 In the OVA , TV series , movie and in The Adventures of Mini Goddess , the original voice of Belldandy was provided by voice actress Kikuko Inoue ; such was the success of Inoue that Fujishima was said to have been influenced by her when developing the manga character after the release of the first OVA . Akemi Okamura took on the role for the first 13 episodes of Adventures of a Mini Goddess due to Inoue 's pregnancy . 
 Three different voice actors have provided Belldandy 's voice in the English versions of the various anime series . For the English OVA , Belldandy 's voice was provided by Juliet <unk> , with her child voice being played by Juliet <unk> with the aid of helium . Bridget Hoffman , ( performing as Ruby Marlowe ) , provided the voice of Belldandy in both the movie and The Adventures of Mini Goddess , while Eileen Stevens voiced Belldandy for both seasons of the TV series . 
 = = Reception and critique = = 
 The character of Belldandy was generally well received and has a large number of fans , as evidenced when she was voted the second most popular female character in a 2001 poll in Newtype . In addition , Belldandy topped the Animage character polls for many months and was placed third on the all time Best Character list at the 17th Anime Grand Prix held in 1993 . Nevertheless , as reviewer Zac Bertschy described the situation : " People tend to go either way on the Belldandy character ; either she 's an obnoxious , archaic fantasy girl for men who prefer their women to act like indentured servants , or she 's the archetype of perfection , a flawless example of graceful femininity " . 
 The critique that Belldandy represents a negative stereotype of women , placing them in a subservient role to men , appears a number of times in the literature . Annalee Newitz states that the manner in which Belldandy is portrayed in the series would , in all likelihood , be impossible in the United States — especially , as she goes on to say , since " the advent of feminism and the women 's rights movement " . While Newitz sees this as reflective of Japanese culture , arguing that characters such as Belldandy are possible because feminist issues do not have the same recognition within Japan as they do in many Western countries , Susan J. Napier takes a very different line . She argues that characters such as Belldandy may be a reaction to the increasing assertiveness of women in Japan , thus presenting Belldandy as an attempt to reinforce traditional cultural values , rather than a reflection of them . To demonstrate this , Napier points to Belldandy 's role in " Moonlight and Cherry Blossoms " , the first of the OVA episodes . The episode begins with disorder , as Keiichi is evicted from his dorm after Belldandy 's chaotic appearance into his life , but ends with a return to " traditional values " , signified through the restoration of the old temple . Similarly , Napier notes that Belldandy 's cooking is often commended by the other characters , and as such is another way in which the character of Belldandy can be seen to reinforce more traditional female roles . Carlos Ross of THEM Anime Reviews considers Belldandy 's characterization in the film much better than in the OVA series , where he describes her as a " doormat " . 
 Either way , commentators still notice strengths in Belldandy 's character . While acknowledging the conservative portrayal , Napier describes Belldandy as " almost a perfect dream of feminine <unk> " and identifying that she has a " soothing and escapist function " , while reviewer Megan Lavey states that Belldandy is no pushover , and that she can hold her own , noting that she is making " the best of difficult circumstances . " 
 Another line of criticism of Belldandy relates to the sexual nature of the character , with Belldandy being described by one commentator as a " soft porn goddess " . Nevertheless , other commentators have observed that Belldandy might be sexual , but writers such as Gilles Poitras note that the series — far from being soft porn — is in fact a very tender and romantic comedy : the characters do no more than simply kiss ( and that infrequently ) over the course of the series . Newitz suggests that part of the appeal of Oh My Goddess ! is the romantic nature of the story : " In anime , romantic love is possible because overt sexuality is not " . According to Newitz the relationships in romantic anime , such as Oh My Goddess ! , are not about consummation but about " sexual innuendo and deferral " . 
 = Dugway sheep incident = 
 The Dugway sheep incident , also known as the Skull Valley sheep kill , was a 1968 sheep kill that has been connected to United States Army chemical and biological warfare programs at Dugway Proving Ground in Utah . Six thousand sheep were killed on ranches near the base , and the popular explanation blamed Army testing of chemical weapons for the incident , though alternative explanations have been offered . A report , commissioned by Air Force Press Officer Jesse Stay and first made public in 1998 , was called the " first documented admission " from the Army that a nerve agent killed the sheep at Skull Valley . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since its founding in 1941 , much of the activity at Dugway Proving Ground has been a closely guarded secret . Activities at Dugway included aerial nerve agent testing . According to reports from New Scientist , Dugway was still producing small quantities of anthrax as late as 1998 , 30 years after the United States renounced biological weapons . There were at least 1 @,@ 100 other chemical tests at Dugway during the time period of the Dugway sheep incident . In total , almost 500 @,@ 000 lb ( 230 @,@ 000 kg ) of nerve agent were dispersed during open @-@ air tests . There were also tests at Dugway with other weapons of mass destruction , including 332 open @-@ air tests of biological weapons , 74 dirty bomb tests , and eight furnace <unk> of nuclear material under open air conditions to simulate the dispersal of fallout in the case of meltdown of aeronautic nuclear reactors . 
 = = Incident = = 
 In the days preceding the Dugway sheep incident the United States Army at Dugway Proving Ground conducted at least three separate operations involving nerve agents . All three operations occurred on March 13 , 1968 . One involved the test firing of a chemical artillery shell , another the burning of 160 U.S. gallons ( 600 L ) of nerve agent in an open air pit and in the third a jet aircraft sprayed nerve agent in a target area about 27 mi ( 43 km ) west of Skull Valley . It is the third event that is usually connected to the Skull Valley sheep kill . 
 The incident log at Dugway Proving Ground indicated that the sheep incident began with a phone call on March 17 , 1968 , at 12 : 30 a.m. The director of the University of Utah 's ecological and epidemiological contract with Dugway , a Dr. Bode , phoned Keith Smart , the chief of the ecology and epidemiology branch at Dugway to report that 3 @,@ 000 sheep were dead in the Skull Valley area . The initial report of the incident came to Bode from the manager of a Skull Valley livestock company . The sheep were grazing in an area about 27 mi ( 43 km ) from the proving ground ; total sheep deaths of 6 @,@ 000 – 6 @,@ 400 were reported over the next several days as a result of the incident . The Dugway Safety Office 's attempt to count the dead sheep compiled a total of 3 @,@ 843 . 
 = = Possible causes = = 
 Previously obtained documents said one such demonstration also occurred the day before the sheep deaths . On 13 March 1968 , an F @-@ 4 Phantom strike aircraft flew a test mission over the Dugway Proving Ground with chemical dispensers containing VX . One of the dispensers was not completely emptied during the test , and as the F @-@ 4 gained altitude after its bombing run , VX trickled out in a trail behind the aircraft , drifted into Skull Valley , north of the proving ground , and settled over a huge flock of sheep . 
 One explanation in the aftermath of the incident was that a chemical or biological agent had escaped from the Dugway Proving Ground . Circumstantial evidence seemed to support this assertion ; the United States Army admitted to conducting open @-@ air tests with the nerve agent VX in the days preceding the sheep kill . The Army intimated that a spray nozzle had malfunctioned during the test causing an aircraft to continue spraying VX as it climbed to higher altitudes . It was reported that a small amount of VX was found in the tissue of the dead sheep . 
 Other information contradicted the initial assumptions . One contradiction to nerve agent exposure as a cause came in the symptoms of some of the sheep following the incident . Several sheep , still alive , sat unmoving on the ground . The sheep refused to eat , but exhibited normal breathing patterns and showed signs of internal hemorrhaging . Regular breathing and internal hemorrhaging are inconsistent with nerve agent exposure , and " no other animals of any type , including cows , horses , dogs , rabbits , or birds , appeared to have suffered any ill effects , a circumstance that was hard to explain if VX had in fact caused the sheep deaths . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The incident affected the Army , and U.S. military policy within a year . The international infamy of the incident contributed to President Richard Nixon 's decision to ban all open @-@ air chemical weapon testing in 1969 . The sheep incident was one of the events which helped contribute to a rise in public sentiment against the U.S. Army Chemical Corps during and after the Vietnam War . Ultimately , the Chemical Corps was almost disbanded as a result . 
 Following the incident , the Army and other state and federal agencies compiled reports , some of which were later characterized as " studies " . A report which remained classified until 1978 and unreleased to the public until nearly 30 years after the incident was called the " first documented admission " by the Army that VX killed the sheep . In 1998 , Jim Woolf , reporting for The Salt Lake Tribune , made the content of the report public for the first time . The report described the evidence that nerve agent was the cause of the sheep kill as " incontrovertible " . The 1970 report , compiled by researchers at the U.S. Army 's Edgewood Arsenal in Maryland , stated that VX was found in both snow and grass samples recovered from the area three weeks after the sheep incident . 
 The report concluded that the " quantity of VX originally present was sufficient to account for the death of the sheep . " Even after the report surfaced , the Army maintained that it did not accept responsibility for the incident and did not admit negligence . As late as 1997 , one year before the report went public , U.S. Department of Defense officials stated that " the reason it ( the report ) was never published is because it wasn 't particularly revealing . " Deseret News reported in June 1994 that Ray Peck , who owned the sheep that were killed , was outside working during the May 13 , 1968 , incident ; members of his family developed nervous @-@ system illnesses that were similar to those reported by people exposed to low levels of VX in lab experiments . Also , the probe showed that medical tests the Army had used to claim humans were not affected are now considered inconclusive , and the Pecks had shown other signs of low @-@ level VX exposure . 
 = Anthony Field = 
 Anthony Donald Joseph Field , AM ( born 8 May 1963 ) is an Australian musician and actor . He is best known as a member of the children 's group The Wiggles and the 1980s and 1990s pop band The Cockroaches . While still a teenager , he helped found The Cockroaches with his brothers , Paul and John . The Cockroaches recorded two albums and enjoyed moderate success , interrupted by Field 's service in Australia 's regular army , until they disbanded in the late 1980s . 
 Field attended Macquarie University to receive training in early childhood education , and founded The Wiggles with fellow students Murray Cook , Greg Page and former bandmate Jeff Fatt in 1991 . He worked as a preschool teacher for two years before the success of The Wiggles led him to focus on children 's music full @-@ time . Despite Field 's strong dislike of touring , The Wiggles became one of the most successful and active groups in Australia . Field , who wore blue while performing with the group , was responsible for the production aspects of their stage and television shows , CDs , and DVDs . His issues with chronic pain and depression , which almost forced him out of the group at the height of their success , are well @-@ documented . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Field was born in <unk> , New South Wales . He is the youngest of seven children , and grew up in north western Sydney . He came from a long line of musicians , especially the women in his family . His great @-@ great aunt was " Queenie Paul " , known for performing at the Tivoli Theatre in Sydney , and his grandmother Kathleen accompanied silent movies in the mining town of Cobar . Field 's mother , Marie , made sure that all of her seven children learned how to play at least one musical instrument . He attended the all @-@ boys boarding school St. Joseph 's College , which his great @-@ grandfather Paddy Condon , an Italian immigrant and master stonemason , helped build . In 1979 , while they were students at St. Joseph 's , he and his brothers Paul and John formed the pop group The Cockroaches . 
 He was inspired by his sister Colleen to study Early Childhood Education , and became convinced that teaching preschool children " was my calling " . He was also attracted to the field 's freedom , artistic nature , and lack of discipline , which was different from his experience in boarding school . Field put off university when The Cockroaches became successful , but he was dissatisfied with touring and plagued by " perhaps irrational , but very real , feelings of inadequacy and depression " . By his mid @-@ twenties , he decided that he did not want to tour any longer , so he took two breaks . His first break was as an infantry soldier , medic , and rifleman in the 5th / 7th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment , Australia 's regular army from 1982 to 1985 . He played the bagpipes in parades and on training missions , but ended his military service in July 1985 and suffered from a bad back as a result of his training . He also went backpacking in the U.K. , listening to roots music , to children 's music by artists like Raffi , and to recordings of children 's books . 
 When The Cockroaches disbanded in the early 1990s , Field enrolled at Macquarie University . While at university , he decided to record an album of children 's music , enlisting the assistance of fellow student and guitarist Murray Cook , former Cockroaches roadie and vocalist Greg Page , former bandmate and keyboardist Jeff Fatt , and Macquarie instructor and composer Phillip Wilcher , who later left the group . 
 = = The Wiggles = = 
 The Wiggles recorded their first CD in 1991 ; it sold 100 @,@ 000 copies . Field worked as a preschool teacher for two years before the success of The Wiggles and their extensive touring schedule , which he strongly disliked , forced him to quit . After the production of their second album , The Wiggles adopted colour @-@ coded <unk> to wear on stage . According to Field , he wore blue because Cook and Fatt already owned shirts in their colours of red and purple respectively , so he and Page " met in a Sydney department store and literally raced to see who got the blue shirt " . Page ended up wearing a yellow <unk> and Field originally wore a green polo shirt , but changed to blue to avoid clashing with Dorothy the Dinosaur . 
 Each Wiggle developed a " schtick " based on their actual behaviours , which evolved into caricatures , and served the same purpose as the uniforms in differentiating their characters and making them memorable to young children ; Field 's was eating . Field created and played the original Captain Feathersword ; the role was taken over by Paul Paddick in 1993 . Field also played Wags the Dog . 
 By the mid @-@ 1990s , despite the success of The Wiggles , Field reported being suicidal and " frequently gripped by anxiety , sadness , and negativity " . By mid @-@ 2004 , shortly after his marriage and the birth of his first child , Field 's serious medical issues , worsened by their heavy tour schedule , caused him to consider quitting or re @-@ inventing The Wiggles , despite their great success in the U.K. and North America . After meeting chiropractor James <unk> in Chicago in 2004 , Field improved his health to the point that he was able to continue . He began to hire teams of chiropractors for himself , his fellow bandmembers , and castmembers in every city they performed , which he credited with making it possible for them to fulfill their touring requirements . In early 2013 , Field became the only original member of the group to remain after Fatt , Cook , and Page retired . He remained in the group because he wanted to continue to educate children and as Wiggles manager Paul Field stated , " to placate American , British and Canadian business partners " . 
 Field 's musical influences include Lightning Hopkins , Elvis Presley , and the Rolling Stones . He plays several instruments , including the tin whistle , bagpipes , guitar , drums , trumpet , violin , percussion instruments and didgeridoo , and has been known to sing in a deep rich bass voice . Field , with input from the other members , produced most of the Wiggles ' music , DVDs , and live shows . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1999 , Field was named " Bachelor of the Year " in Cleo Magazine . In 2003 , he married Michaela <unk> , a former dancer whose family owned Griffiths Coffee in Melbourne . They have three children , who have joined the Field family business by appearing in several of The Wiggles ' TV shows and videos . Beginning in 2007 , Field , who is a registered breeder of Miniature Fox Terriers , did some voiceover work for the TV show " RSPCA Animal Rescue , " for Channel 7 in Australia . 
 Field , in describing his enthusiasm for competitive sports , has stated , " My love of cricket is abiding " , a sport that " instills the same loyalty and passions in me as I know baseball does for many in North America " . He is a fan of the Australian rugby league club the Wests Tigers . He is also a fan of singer Julio Iglesias . As Field 's fitness improved , to the point that his training regimen became comparable to that of an elite athlete , he gained an interest in gymnastics and acrobatics . 
 Field went public about his experience with clinical depression in mid @-@ 2007 to draw more attention to the condition . He has stated that " being on the road is a dangerous job for someone with depression , " but has dealt with it through diet , exercise , talking about it , and having a good support system ( including his father before his death in 1998 , his wife , and his friend Murray Cook ) . He chronicled his health struggles and how he overcame them in his 2012 book How I Got My Wiggle Back . 
 Field is a devout Catholic , something that he reported helped him deal with his chronic health issues and depression , especially the spiritual practices of prayer and devotion to the Virgin Mary as expressed by Our Lady of Guadalupe . He has two large tattoos on his arms : one is the Virgin Mary with the words " My life is in your hands " in Spanish ; the other is a heart with the words , " My love , my heart " in Spanish . The names of his wife and his three children are also tattooed on his arms . He admits that he got his tattoo of the Virgin , which he hid from fans for a long time , during a visit to Mexico while on tour in North America , in the middle of a bout with chronic pain and dental problems , as he put it , " in a moment of madness " . 
 Field was made a Member of the Order of Australia on 26 January 2010 " for service to the arts , particularly children 's entertainment , and to the community as a benefactor and supporter of a range of charities " . 
 = Globalization and women in China = 
 The study of the impact of globalization on women in China examines the role and status of Chinese women relative to the political and cultural changes that have taken place in the 20th century as a consequence of globalization . Globalization refers to the interaction and integration of people , products , cultures and governments between various nations around the globe ; this is fostered by trade , investment , and information technology . Globalization affected women 's rights and the gender hierarchy in China , in aspects of domestic life such as marriage and primogeniture , as well as in the workplace . These changes altered the quality of life and the availability of opportunities to women at different junctures throughout the modern globalization process . 
 The dynamics of gender inequity are correlated with the ideological principles held by the ruling political regime . The imperial era was dominated by the social paradigm of Confucianism , which was a pervasive philosophy throughout the Orient . Confucian ideals emphasized morality , character , social relationship , and the status quo . Confucius preached jen ( humanity ) and the equality and <unk> of all people ; Neo @-@ Confucianists and Imperial leaders used his beliefs in social hierarchy , particularly in the family setting , for the physical and social oppression of women . As the Chinese government began to re @-@ assimilate themselves into the global community in the late 19th to early 20th century , it shifted away from conventional Confucian ideals and women ’ s role in society changed as well . After Mao Zedong established the People ’ s Republic of China in 1949 , a change in traditional gender roles came about . Mao ’ s death marked the beginning of the current communist administration and an influx of international communications in the areas of commerce , politics and social ideals . Since the 1980s , under the new communist party , the women ’ s rights movement has gained momentum and has become a national issue and a sign of modernization . 
 In rural areas , women traditionally work alongside their family to produce crops like tea and rice . In urban areas , women work in factories , living away from home . Most of these factory workers are young girls that send their income to their families . To help maintain the rights of women in factories , labor unions and organizations were built . In their homes , women take care of their children and cook . 
 = = Western bias = = 
 Western scholarship has historically used ideas of subordinance and victimization to characterize traditional Chinese womanhood . These beliefs were largely constructed on the basis of ideological and political agendas , and were widely accepted despite their <unk> . Early European writings pertaining to Chinese women were produced by missionaries and ethnologists at the conclusion of the 19th century . The goal of the missionaries was to “ civilize China , ” and highlighting weakness and victimization provided for the continuance of their work . This belief prompted scholars to use female subordination as a means to validate Western ideas about Chinese culture and Confucian principles . 
 In the 1970s , as the feminist movements were forming , they began to affect the literature surrounding women in China . Studies on Chinese women from this period were concerned with women ’ s liberation , and were sympathetic to the feminist movement . This sentiment largely influenced the topics and methodology of the research . With this shift in perspective , the focus of discourse remained on subordination , patriarchal oppression , and victimization . These studies examined such issues as foot binding and the chastity of widows . Literature formulated by feminist writers did nothing to dispel the myth of the weak , subservient woman . These works provided a new bias that had not before been articulated . Feminists believed that Chinese women were a part of a “ universally subordinated womanhood " . This line of thinking illustrates the cultural superiority inherently felt by Western women . Writings on Chinese woman rarely account for differences in time , ethnicity , class , region or age , preferring to describe the status of women as a static , unitary fixture of Chinese culture , despite the political and geographic boundaries that defined different regions and the economic and social changes that occurred throughout history . 
 = = History of female oppression = = 
 = = = Traditional roles and Confucianism = = = 
 From the Han Dynasty ( 206 BC @-@ 220 CE ) until the modern period ( 1840 – 1919 ) , scholars and rulers developed a male @-@ dominated patriarchal society in China . Confucianism was at the root of the development of the patriarchal society in China , and emphasized the distinctions between the sexes and the roles they have within the family . These ideologies continued through the Tang dynasty ( 618 @-@ 907 ) , and girls were taught from a very young age to be submissive to their fathers , then to their husbands , and later to their sons . During the Song Dynasty ( 960 @-@ 1297 ) , Confucian scholars further developed the patriarchal tradition with more restrictions for females , including foot binding for girls at a very young age . 
 = = = Married life = = = 
 The traditional Chinese marriage system is organized by the parents of the groom and bride in order to obtain alliances between the two families to ensure the continuance of the family line . There were three types of marriages that emerged in the late Chou Dynasty ( 951 @-@ 960 ) . In these three marriages , the Chinese woman 's main function was to produce children . The first marriage was called a capture marriage , in which the groom would go to his prospective bride 's house at dusk to " kidnap " her . The second type of marriage was called a purchase marriage , in which women were paid for by their husbands . Once women were purchased , they became their husband 's possession and could be traded or sold . The third type of marriage was the arranged marriage , which was accomplished by a matchmaker who acted as a go @-@ between for both families . If there was not a matchmaker , the marriage could be deemed unacceptable and the husband had the right to dissolve the marriage . The married woman 's role at home depended upon the social rank of her spouse , but the prime mission of married women , regardless of their social status , was to bear a son in order to carry on the family name . In addition , a married woman was to be obedient to her in @-@ laws as if they were her own parents . 
 The marriage law of 1950 was issued after the founding of the People 's Republic of China in 1949 . It declared the abolition of the feudal marriage system characterized by arranged and forced marriage , male superiority , and the disregard for the interests of children . This law also asserted the rights of adults to divorce , which embraced the free @-@ choice marriage , and helped transfer power from the older to the younger generations . 
 = = = May Fourth Movement = = = 
 The " New Culture " movement began in China around 1916 following the unsuccessful activities of the 1911 Revolution to establish a republican government , and continued through the 1920s . The May Fourth Movement , which took place on May 4 , 1919 , was a demonstration led by students at the National Peking University against the government , in which they protested the abolition of Confucianism and changes in the traditional value system . Many believed that the solution to China 's problems would be to adopt Western notions of equality and democracy . Since the movement stressed group efforts and propaganda , women were involved in numerous collective tasks such as publication , drama production , and fund raising , which helped them gain more social contact with men and win respect . 
 = = Domestic life of a Chinese woman = = 
 = = = Foot binding = = = 
 Foot binding is the process in which the arch of a woman 's feet is broken and the toes are wrapped up against the foot to create a smaller looking foot with an acute arch . These " fists of flesh " were seen as attractive and arousing for men and the practice was passed down as a prerequisite to marriage from mother to daughter across generations . Special shoes were made to accentuate the small size of the women 's feet . This process was painful and often confined women to their rooms . Few lower class women were able to have their feet bound because they needed to be able to walk normally to accomplish house work . Bound feet came to be an indication of high class and wealth for women . Chinese male reformers during the imperialism period recognized the liberation of the Chinese women as something necessary for their own sake . The humiliation that China had gone through on an international level was turned on the Chinese “ women ” . Naturally , the foot binding was recognized as “ national shame , ” and people found it as a serious problem to be disappeared , thus raging anti @-@ footbinding campaigns in the 1890s to the 1900s . Moreover , the new government that came in after the 1911 revolution banned foot binding practice . Thus , it started to disappear in the coastal areas in 1900 to 1920 . However , the practice was still popular within the interior areas of China till the 1930s and even in the 1950s . The practice has been outlawed multiple times since its inception in the 13th century . It was finally banned as the Communists came to power around 1949 . 
 = = = Trafficking of women = = = 
 Women are sold through gangs of women traffickers who kidnap and transport young women and girls across large distances from their homes . Their papers and documentation are taken from them . These women are purchased by men who bar them from leaving the home for fear of the women escaping . Some of these women feel a sense of duty to the family once they have committed to them and had children . They also have no means of escape . This practice has been banned by the government since Mao Zedong and the Communists came to power . Men who buy wives are subject to time in jail , and those convicted for trafficking women face execution . 
 = = = Confucianism and Communism = = = 
 Under Confucianism the typical family was patriarchal because men have the capability to pass on the family name and carry on the lineage of the ancestors ; women were expected to be subservient . As the Communist regime changed the structure of Chinese society through economic reform , the structure of the Chinese family was altered . " The Four Olds " ( <unk> ) - old ideas , old habits , old customs , old cultures - were discouraged and were replaced by Communist ideology particularly during the Cultural Revolution . The economy was shifted to total government control with few chances to own private property and communal property . Collectivization destroyed " clan @-@ based " systems and had a great effect on motivation of workers and family loyalties . 
 The traditional social structure was further degraded by the Cultural Revolution . The Red Guards turned members of a family against one another as they sought out " class enemies " to be sent for " re @-@ education , " ultimately resulting in a loss of family ties . Women were elevated to equal status as men through a series of laws which prohibited practices such as arranged marriages , <unk> , dowries , and child betrothals . Under these marriage laws , women enjoyed joint property in marriage and could file for a divorce . 
 As a result of Communist rule in China , the social status of women improved greatly . Women were empowered to work outside the home . Communist rule also brought about the end of practices such as foot binding , child marriages , prostitution , and arranged marriages . China has seen a decrease in domestic violence due to government @-@ supported grassroots programs to counter these practices . Women in rural areas remain largely uneducated . 
 = = = Population control = = = 
 During the reform period , the Communist regime in China regulated birth control . The party legalized abortion in 1953 and then created public birth control study groups in 1954 . There was a push for a limit on childbirth in 1956 , which had no immediate effect on the population . In 1979 , the One Child Policy was implemented and is still in effect today . 
 Another instance of population control is the prevalence of female infanticide . Due to the One Child Policy , most families want a boy rather than a girl . Since the 1980s , roughly 200 @,@ 000 female infants would be killed per year because of the preference for male children and the advancement in technologies such as ultrasound , which help to find out the sex of the fetus . In addition to female infanticide , girls are being unregistered or are abandoned by their families , which stops them from receiving education and legal benefits the government offered . These methods of controlling population have resulted in a huge gender gap in China . 
 = = Chinese women in the workplace = = 
 = = = History of working women = = = 
 In the imperial era , women were prohibited from having official positions . It was unimaginable for women to hold these positions because during this time women underwent foot bindings , which prevented them from doing any sorts of physical labor . They held jobs that required minimal physical activity like domestic chores and producing textiles to sell or use . 
 During Mao 's rule ( 1949 – 1976 ) , Chinese women were needed for their manual labor for farming and for urban industrialization . To compensate for their hard work , they were provided access to education and politics . The Chinese government supported women 's education . The percentage of girls attending school was 96 @.@ 2 % compared to below 20 % before the People 's Republic ( 1949 ) . The Chinese government has tried to decrease the amount of women illiterates while promoting adult and vocational schools . The amount of illiterates has gone down from 90 % in 1949 and 32 % from 1993 . In the first 30 years of Communist rule women 's discrimination was decreasing , but they did not have jobs that had real decision @-@ making power . 
 Now in the present day , there are more employed Chinese women . They receive the same amount of money for the same amount of work that they do . The Chinese government has made great efforts to achieve a high level of economic status for women . Since 1949 , with the founding of the People ' Republic , the rate for employed women has risen . Chinese women account for 44 % of the work force and 34 @.@ 5 % account for the women 's work force in the world . 
 = = = Rural areas = = = 
 The key role women have in farming is to maintain ownership of the main sources of production in rural areas . In traditional <unk> women were not allowed to own land . Land was inherited through the sons , and if there was no son in the family , it was taken by a close male relative . In less populated areas , women do more agricultural work than men because of shifting cultivation . In more populated areas , men do more work than women because extensive plough cultivation is used . During the busy periods of planting , transporting , and harvesting , women are brought onto the field to work rather than working in the house . Female involvement is high in the double @-@ cropping rice area . Women also play a role in tea cultivation . Other types of work women perform in the countryside include pig and poultry rearing , spinning , weaving , basket @-@ making , and other handicrafts . This type of work supplements agricultural income . 
 = = = Urban areas = = = 
 China 's economic policies laid the basis of the industrialization drive in export @-@ oriented development , and its reliance on low @-@ wage manufacturing to produce consumer goods for the world market . Young migrant women left their homes in rural settings to work in urban industrial areas . Work included export @-@ oriented industrialization , manufacturing in electronics and toy assembly , sewing in garment production , and mixed assembly and sewing in the footwear industry . Hong Kong and Shenzhen were cities established as centers of export @-@ oriented industrialization , and migrant women workers have made up 70 % of Shenzhen 's three million people . 
 Private sector employers are reluctant to hire women because Chinese law requires that the employer cover maternity leave and childbirth costs . 
 = = = = Reasons for migrant labor = = = = 
 A recent phenomenon , the migration of rural Chinese workers began in 1984 when the Regulations of Permanent Residence Registration became less punitive and allowed people to move to find employment . People left rural areas to escape poverty , and females left due to the lack of local opportunities for women . In the cities , women could find new , low @-@ paid factory @-@ based jobs that did not require highly skilled workers . According to national statistics , the ratio of male to female migrant workers averages 2 : 1 , and an estimated 30 @-@ 40 million of the migrant women work in the cities , namely Hong Kong and Shenzhen . 
 In 2003 , 70 % of the 5 @.@ 5 million migrant workers were females in the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone . In the <unk> district of Shenzhen , females comprised 80 % of the workforce with the average age of 23 . Young female workers are preferred over older females or males for several reasons . First , as married women are less mobile , female migrant workers are younger and more likely to be single than their male counterparts . Young rural women are preferred for these jobs primarily because they are less likely to get pregnant , and are able and willing to withstand longer working hours , have “ nimble fingers , and will be less experienced in asking for their statutory rights . In many cases , migrant women sign contracts stating that they will not get pregnant within their period of employment . ” 
 In the interest of the family , rural females are sent to find urban employment over male counterparts , mainly to supplement familial income at home and to support the males , who are more likely to attend college . The male standard of education in China is higher ; particularly when a family is under financial stress , females are more likely to drop out of school to generate income for the family . Because females have lesser impact on the family ’ s long @-@ term financial stability , their rights for opportunities development are consequently unequal . 
 This new system allowed rural residents to migrate , it did not allow them to change their residence or accept any benefits in the cities . This resulted in a growing population of migrant laborers without the minimal benefits of residency including medical care , housing , or education . Many migrants , particularly less educated , younger women are unaware of their rights . Today , up to 90 % of migrants work without contracts , in violation of the Chinese labour law . 
 = = = = Degradation = = = = 
 Women factory workers are known as " <unk> " ( working girls ) . They are traditionally young women migrants who experience a segmented labor market in informal and low @-@ wage employment sectors . Workers in export @-@ oriented factories receive minimum wage and minimum overtime pay , they pay for meals and lodging at the factory , and they pay fines for breaking factory rules . The average daily wage , for a 12 @-@ hour day in a toy factory , in the mid @-@ 1990s was $ 1 @.@ 10 USD for migrant women workers in Shenzhen . 
 These conditions create " maximum surplus appropriation " ; workers ' daily lives revolve around factory production and are dependent on the regional economy . The state disallows local unionization and has the All @-@ China Federation of Trade Unions ( ACFTU ) as the legitimate forum of worker representation . Without the right to form unions and with the state sanctioned ACFTU , migrant women workers find it hard to effectively gain suitable rights and treatment from the factory management . The 2003 statistics from the People 's University show 90 % of migrants work without contracts , directly violating the Chinese Labour Law . According to the ACFTU , migrant workers are owed over 100 billion Yuan in back wages . 
 Organizations are now attempting to assist and empower female migrant workers through training and education on their labor @-@ related rights . Legal clinics have begun to assist female migrants in filing claims against employers and local labor bureaus . One case of female worker exploitation in the Hua Yi garment factory in Beijing resulted in mistreatment by management as well as withholding pay for at least 24 women . After filing complaints , in collaboration with the Center for Women 's Law Studies and Legal Services of Beijing University , the women received 170 @,@ 000 Yuan in back wages and compensation . 
 Relations between workers and employers represent both the immediate need of manufacturing plants for large quantities of low wage laborers , and the insecurities young workers face in relocating long distances to life in factory dormitories . Hiring single young women serve needs of management . The employment of young females allow management to exhibit maximum control and authority over the labor force . Compared to older women and male workers , young single women are susceptible to the authority and demands of management . The common manipulation of " factory as family " by owners and managers suggests how workers hold a subliminal status within the factory environment . Uneven power relations inside the factory result in demands from management for personal services from women workers , from hair washing to sex . 
 = William O 'Connell Bradley = 
 William O 'Connell Bradley ( March 18 , 1847 – May 23 , 1914 ) was a politician from the US state of Kentucky . 
 He served as the 32nd Governor of Kentucky and was later elected by the state legislature as a U.S. senator from that state . The first Republican to serve as governor of Kentucky , Bradley became known as the father of the Republican Party in Kentucky . 
 As a Republican in a heavily Democratic state , Bradley found little success early in his political career . He was defeated for a seat in the United States House of Representatives and in the United States Senate twice each . After rising to national prominence with his speech seconding the presidential nomination of Ulysses S. Grant at the 1880 Republican National Convention , he was nominated for governor in 1887 . Although he lost the contest to Simon Bolivar Buckner , he reduced the usual Democratic majority substantially . He was again nominated for governor in 1895 . Capitalizing on divisions in the Democratic Party over the issue of free silver , he defeated Parker Watkins Hardin in the general election . His term was marked by political struggles and violence . He was an advocate for blacks and did much to advance their status in the state , but was unable to enact much of his reform agenda because of a hostile Democratic majority in the state legislature . 
 Republican William S. Taylor was elected to succeed Bradley in the contentious 1899 gubernatorial election . When Democratic nominee William Goebel and his running mate J. C. W. Beckham challenged the election results , Bradley formed part of the legal team for the Republicans . The case was appealed to the Supreme Court , which found in favor of the Democrats . Despite being a member of the state 's minority party , Bradley was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1907 . Again , divisions within the Democratic Party played a role in his election . Bradley 's opposition to Prohibition made him more palatable to some Democrats than their own candidate , outgoing Governor Beckham . Beckham refused to withdraw in favor of a compromise candidate , and after two months of balloting , four Democratic legislators crossed party lines and elected Bradley . Bradley had a largely undistinguished career in the Senate . On the day he announced he would not seek re @-@ election to his Senate seat , he was involved in a streetcar accident . He died from his injuries on May 23 , 1914 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William O 'Connell Bradley was born near Lancaster in Garrard County , Kentucky , on March 18 , 1847 . He was the youngest child of Robert McAfee and Nancy Ellen ( Totten ) Bradley . The couple also had six daughters , five of whom survived infancy , and one other son , who died as an infant . Bradley 's sister , Catherine Virginia ( Bradley ) Morrow , married Judge Thomas Z. Morrow , who made an unsuccessful run for the governorship of Kentucky in 1883 ; their son , Edwin P. Morrow , was elected the 40th governor of Kentucky in 1917 . 
 While Bradley was still a child , the family moved to Somerset , Kentucky , where Bradley was educated by private tutors and at a private school . After the outbreak of the Civil War , he twice dropped out of school and ran away to join the Union Army , first serving as a recruiting officer in Somerset , then enlisting as a private soldier in Louisville . Both times , his father removed him from the service because of his young age . Despite having only this few months of service to his credit , he was referred to as " Colonel Bradley " by many for the rest of his life . 
 In 1861 , Bradley became a page in the Kentucky House of Representatives . He studied law under his father , one of Kentucky 's leading criminal defense lawyers . Although Kentucky law required that anyone taking the bar examination be at least twenty @-@ one years old , Bradley was allowed by a special provision of the state legislature to take it at age eighteen . This arrangement was contingent on Bradley 's being judged competent by two circuit judges . Despite having no college education , Bradley passed the exam and was licensed in 1865 , joining his father 's firm in Lancaster . He later received an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Kentucky University ( now Transylvania University ) . 
 On July 13 , 1867 , Bradley married Margaret Robertson Duncan , and subsequently converted from Baptism to Presbyterianism , his wife 's faith . The couple had two children , George Robertson Bradley and Christine ( Bradley ) South . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Bradley 's political career began in 1870 , when he was elected prosecuting attorney of Garrard County . A Republican in the heavily Democratic Eighth District , Bradley was defeated by Milton J. Durham for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives in 1872 . In 1875 , his party honored him with a nomination to serve in the U.S. Senate , even though he was too young to legally qualify for the office . Nevertheless , he received the vote of every Republican in the state legislature . The following year , he again lost to Durham for a seat in the House of Representatives , but received 3 @,@ 000 more votes than any Republican candidate had ever received in that district . He refused his party 's nomination for the Senate in 1878 and 1882 , and declined a nomination for state attorney general in 1879 because of ill health . 
 Bradley was unanimously chosen as a delegate @-@ at @-@ large to six consecutive Republican National Conventions . At the 1880 Republican National Convention in Chicago , he was unanimously chosen to second Roscoe Conkling 's nomination of Ulysses S. Grant for a third term as president . His rousing oratory gained him the attention of prominent leaders of his party . At the 1884 convention , he was instrumental in defeating a motion to curtail Southern states ' representation . President Chester A. Arthur chose Bradley to help recover financial damages from postal officials involved in the Star Route Frauds in 1885 , but Bradley resigned this responsibility over differences with U.S. Attorney General Benjamin H. Brewster regarding the prosecution of these cases . 
 = = Gubernatorial election of 1887 = = 
 At their nominating convention in Louisville on May 11 , 1887 , Kentucky Republicans nominated Bradley for Governor of Kentucky to oppose Democrat Simon B. Buckner , a former Confederate general . In his acceptance speech , Bradley implored Kentuckians to realize that the Civil War was over and to discontinue their practice of electing ex @-@ Confederate Democrats to public office . His platform included proposals for education , implementing of a high protective tariff , and developing the state 's resources . He pointed out that , though Kentucky contained more coal than Pennsylvania , the state bought half of its coal from that state . A similar situation existed with regard to lumber . He was also critical of excessive spending during the preceding Democratic administrations . Among his cited examples of extravagance were the creation of a state bureau of agriculture and the construction of a new state penitentiary . Democratic mismanagement of the state 's affairs had resulted in able , young Kentuckians leaving the state to seek their fortunes because of a lack of opportunity at home , Bradley lamented . 
 During the campaign , Buckner relied on party strength and personal popularity to give him an advantage over Bradley , a decidedly superior orator . In the only debate between the two , held at Grayson , Bradley attacked Democrats for creating " useless offices " such as railroad commissioners . He defended the Republican proposal of a high protective tariff and advocated federal aid for education . When Buckner took the platform , he began by asking if Bradley had charged in an earlier speech that one of Buckner 's speeches had been written by former governor J. Proctor Knott . Bradley acknowledged that he had heard that Knott had written the speech and that he ( Bradley ) had repeated this claim in one of his speeches . Buckner rebuked Bradley for circulating this " infamously false " charge , and withdrew his agreement to participate in any further joint debates . He then delivered a discourse attacking the protective tariff and federal aid for education . 
 True to his word , Buckner never again met Bradley in a joint debate . Rumors began to circulate that Buckner was afraid to meet Bradley in debate again , and Bradley did little to dispel these rumors . The Democrats were not completely united throughout the campaign , with prominent members of the party , including Milton J. Durham and State Senator Albert Seaton Berry , criticizing the Democratic record in the state . The Democratic Henderson Gleaner was also critical , opining " We should be ashamed of ourselves . " Throughout the state , Bradley hammered the issue of the blind trust afforded the perennial Democratic officeholders , specifically calling for an examination of the treasury . Though Bradley lost the election by more than 16 @,@ 000 votes , he made the best showing of any Republican gubernatorial candidate to that time and garnered strong support from the state 's black voters . His concerns about the state treasury proved valid : When Buckner ordered an audit of the treasurer 's books in 1888 , Treasurer James " Honest Dick " Tate fled with $ 250 @,@ 000 from the state treasury . He was never found . 
 In 1888 , Bradley 's name was again put before the General Assembly as a candidate for the U.S. Senate , but he was defeated by James B. Beck by a vote of 94 – 31 . Later that year , he received 103 of 832 votes for the Vice @-@ Presidential nomination at the 1888 Republican National Convention , losing the nomination to Levi P. Morton . Upon the unsolicited recommendation of Senator Beck , President Benjamin Harrison nominated Bradley as Minister to Korea in 1889 , but Bradley declined the nomination , opting to remain in Kentucky and pursue future political opportunities there . He was elected to the Republican National Committee three times between 1890 and 1896 . In 1896 , he was the Kentucky delegation 's choice for Presidential nominee . 
 = = Gubernatorial election of 1895 = = 
 Bradley declared his candidacy early for the Republican gubernatorial nomination in 1895 , and no real challenger emerged prior to the Republicans ' nominating convention . Consequently , Bradley was nominated in a relatively harmonious convention . The major issue of the campaign was whether the country should maintain a monetary system based on the gold standard or allow the coinage of silver at a ratio of 16 to 1 , commonly called the free silver position . At their convention , the Republicans adopted a platform that was unequivocally in favor of the gold standard . 
 Democrats were divided on the monetary issue . Their eventual nominee , Parker Watkins Hardin , was known to be a free silver supporter , but he pledged to abide by whatever platform the convention adopted . That platform was ambiguous with regard to the gold and silver question ; it praised President Grover Cleveland and his treasury secretary , native Kentuckian John G. Carlisle , both gold supporters , and endorsed the national Democratic platform of 1892 . Most believed this meant the platform favored gold , although silverites like Ollie M. James contended that the 1892 platform favored silver . Consequently , most Democrats left the convention not knowing where their nominee would stand on the money question . 
 The campaign opened in Louisville on August 19 , 1895 . In his first address , Hardin came out squarely for free silver , ensuring the division of his party for the rest of the campaign . Bradley reprised much of his argument from the 1887 campaign against Buckner . He charged mismanagement of state government by Democrats , citing Tate 's <unk> as evidence . He also stressed Hardin 's association with Tate ; Hardin had been the state 's attorney general when Tate absconded , and the two were known to be friends . He denounced free silver and again called for a high protective tariff . He blamed Democratic President Cleveland for the national depression . 
 In the third debate , held in Hopkinsville , Hardin countered Bradley 's offensive against him on the money issue by charging that the election of a Republican would lead to " Negro domination " of the state . This put Bradley in a dilemma . If he refused to acknowledge blacks ' influence on the party , he would lose their votes ; if he acknowledged it , he would lose many white voters . Bradley attempted to ignore the racial question in Hopkinsville and during the next two debates , instead intensifying his criticism of Hardin on the money question and his association with Tate . In the sixth joint debate , held August 30 at Eminence , some members of the audience began to heckle Bradley , who was hoarse from previous debates . After attempting to restart his opening statement four times , Bradley left the platform , and the next day announced he would not participate in any further joint debates as a result of the incident . Many believed Bradley was looking for a reason to end the debates in order to dodge the racial question , and the incident at Eminence gave him the opportunity . Some black Republicans resented Bradley 's attempt to dodge the racial question and encouraged fellow blacks not to support Bradley but vote for Populist Thomas S. Pettit instead . 
 In the general election , Bradley carried the vote of many Gold Democrats . He also drew a number of votes from those who sympathized with the views of the American Protective Association , an anti @-@ immigrant , anti @-@ Catholic organization . Some estimates placed the organization 's membership at 14 @,@ 000 in Louisville alone ; it also had strength in the urban centers of Paducah , Lexington , Ashland , Covington , and Frankfort . Democrats were also hurt by economic factors , including the national economic problems and a severe drought in the state . Bradley was elected the first Republican governor of Kentucky , defeating Hardin by a vote of 172 @,@ 436 to 163 @,@ 524 . Pettit , the Populist candidate , drew 16 @,@ 911 votes , most of them from Democrats in western Kentucky . Turnout in the election was 85 % . More votes than potential voters were registered in 18 counties , nine of which went for Bradley and nine for Hardin . 
 = = Governor of Kentucky = = 
 Bradley was inaugurated December 10 , 1895 . During his term , Republicans controlled the Kentucky House of Representatives , while Democrats controlled the Kentucky Senate . This led to infighting between the two houses of the General Assembly and between the General Assembly and the governor . On joint votes , such as the election of U.S. Senators , the parties were even with sixty @-@ eight members each ; two Populists were also members of the Assembly , one who supported the Democrats and another who supported the Republicans . 
 = = = Legislative session of 1896 = = = 
 In the first legislative session of Bradley 's term , 75 bills were filed , including a ban on the manufacture and sale of cigarettes , a measure to make carrying a concealed weapon a felony , and a bill banning gambling at racetracks and church fairs . Competing measures affecting pool halls were introduced – one would have lifted most of the restrictions on their operation while another would have banned them altogether . Bradley added an anti @-@ lynching law to the legislative agenda . However , none of these bills were acted on ; the vast majority of the Assembly 's attention during the session was focused on the election of a U.S. Senator . 
 Many Democrats were anxious to return Senator J. C. S. Blackburn to his seat in Congress , but some were instead supporting ex @-@ Governor John Y. Brown . Democratic state senator Albert Berry was also making overtures about being considered for the seat . Republican legislators nominated W. Godfrey Hunter for the seat , and ultimately , Blackburn and Hunter emerged as the leading candidates . The Gold Democrats refused to back Blackburn , a free silver supporter , instead opting for ex @-@ Governor James B. McCreary . On ballot after ballot , no candidate received a majority , though Blackburn received 65 votes once , leaving him just two votes shy of election . Treasury Secretary John G. Carlisle was put forward as a compromise candidate , but never received more than 61 votes . Other proposed compromise candidates included Louisville Courier @-@ Journal editor Henry Watterson , congressman Walter Evans , ex @-@ Governor Buckner , Judge William H. Holt , and Augustus E. Willson . 
 Free silver Democrats challenged Hunter 's naturalization . It was finally concluded that Hunter , an Englishman , was naturalized under provisions of a federal law that allowed him to omit the standard preliminaries because of his service as a surgeon in the U.S. Army . Over the course of the contest , Hunter was also indicted for bribery , but was acquitted in short order for lack of evidence . Voting proceeded over several days , and demonstrators in the chamber galleries became disruptive in their support of various candidates . A Kentucky Post account from March 7 , 1896 , recorded that good @-@ humored legislators began pelting each other with paper wads during the day 's deliberations . This attempt at levity escalated until wrapped transcripts of the governor 's message to the legislature were flying through the air . By March 11 , tensions had reached the point that armed Democratic supporters were standing outside the state house in an attempt to intimidate Republican lawmakers and discourage them from entering . Attempts were made to unseat several legislators in the General Assembly , leading to threats of violence . Observers were banned from the gallery , and everyone entering the state house was searched for weapons . 
 Bradley called the militia to Frankfort to maintain order , and considered adjourning the session to an opera house in Louisville where more security could be provided . Some leading Democrats in Louisville lauded Bradley for preserving order , but Democratic lawmakers in the Senate sought the passage of resolutions to convict Bradley of interference with the election , fine him $ 500 , and sentence him to six months in jail . These same legislators also threatened to imprison Lieutenant Governor William Jackson Worthington , allowing Democratic President pro tem of the Senate William Goebel to become acting governor . A committee was appointed to investigate Bradley , but the resolutions to convict and imprison him were not passed . On March 16 , Governor Bradley declared martial law in the capital . The session adjourned later that day without having elected a senator . Among the session 's few accomplishments were bills creating two reform houses in the state and providing for free turnpikes and gravel roads . A bill forbidding the employment of children of school age who had not attended at least twelve weeks of school during the year passed over Bradley 's veto . In an effort to embarrass the governor , the Senate refused to pass a revenue bill , leaving the governor with no money to run the state . Following the session , a Northern Kentucky newspaper opined " It is hard to conceive how a legislature would go about accomplishing less than this present one has . " 
 Bradley called a special session in March 1897 to resume the balloting for senator . He appointed Andrew T. Wood to fill the vacancy in case the legislators did not elect a senator in time for the congressional session to begin . The Republicans continued supporting Hunter , Free Silver Democrats still backed Blackburn , and Gold Democrats nominated businessman Henry L. Martin of Woodford County . When continued deadlock between Hunter and Blackburn ensued , Hunter withdrew his name from consideration . Republicans nominated St. John Boyle , but the gridlock continued unabated . After several ballots , Boyle also withdrew , and Republicans put forth lawyer and State senator William Joseph Deboe in his place . Deboe was elected on the 112th ballot , becoming the first Republican senator from the Commonwealth . 
 = = = Advocacy for blacks = = = 
 Bradley did much to advance the cause of blacks in Kentucky . He denounced racially motivated lynchings and demanded that county officials prosecute racial violence . He called a special legislative session in March 1897 to consider an anti @-@ lynching bill that imposed penalties including a fine of up to $ 500 and removal from office for any peace officer who did not prevent a lynching or mob violence . It further empowered peace officers to recruit able @-@ bodied men to help protect prisoners and fined them for failing to do so , if necessary . Despite the politically divided legislature , the bill quickly passed both houses of the General Assembly and Bradley signed it on May 11 , 1897 . In January 1898 , Bradley accepted an invitation to speak before the Anti @-@ Mob and Lynch Law Association in Springfield , Ohio . During Bradley 's four @-@ year term , twenty @-@ five lynchings were committed in the state , down from fifty @-@ six during the term of his predecessor . 
 One high @-@ profile case that illustrated Bradley 's opposition to racial violence was that of ex @-@ slave George Dinning . After being emancipated , Dinning saved enough money to purchase a farm in Simpson County . On January 27 , 1897 , a mob of 25 armed white men came to Dinning 's farm , accused him of stealing hogs and chickens , and demanded he leave the county within 10 days . Dinning denied being a thief and insisted several people in the county would vouch for his good character . The mob , enraged by Dinning 's resistance , began firing on his house and wounded him twice . Dinning retrieved a gun from his house and fired into the mob , killing one man . The mob fled , and the next day , Dinning turned himself in to local officials . While he was in their custody , the mob returned to his farm , drove his family from their house , looted it , and razed it to the ground . 
 The Simpson County sheriff moved Dinning to Bowling Green and eventually to Louisville to prevent him from being lynched . Governor Bradley dispatched a squad of the state militia to protect him while his trial proceeded . Despite the fact that the case involved a black man killing a white man , most observers believed Dinning would be acquitted on grounds of self @-@ defense . The jury , however , convicted Dinning of manslaughter and sentenced him to seven years of hard labor . Immediately , Bradley 's office was flooded with requests for him to intervene on Dinning 's behalf . The requests came from blacks and whites , some of them ex @-@ Confederates . Dinning 's attorney , Augustus E. Willson , formally requested a pardon , and Bradley issued it 10 days after the conviction . Bradley opined that Dinning had acted reasonably under the circumstances and that it was a shame that no members of the mob were charged . After being freed , Dinning relocated to Indiana and hired ex @-@ Confederate Bennett H. Young to file a federal lawsuit against some members of the mob that had identified themselves during his trial . The trial was held in Louisville , and Dinning was awarded $ 50 @,@ 000 in damages . 
 In his address to the state legislature in January 1898 , Bradley advocated the repeal of the state 's Separate Coach Law , which provided separate streetcars for whites and blacks . He appointed substantial numbers of blacks to patronage positions in government beyond the janitorial jobs they usually received . He named Edward E. Underwood as the first black person on the board of trustees for Kentucky State College ( later the University of Kentucky ) . Because of his devotion to black advancement , Bradley was the only white person included in William Decker Johnson 's 1897 compilation Biographical Sketches of Prominent Negro Men and Women of Kentucky . 
 = = = Other matters of Bradley 's term = = = 
 The election of Republican president William McKinley in 1896 deepened the Democrats ' resolve to oppose the Republican governor and his allies . Moreover , when the legislature convened in 1898 , the Democratic majority in both houses was overwhelming . Bradley 's message to the General Assembly in 1898 called for numerous reforms including spending cuts to reduce government waste , putting the state 's charitable institutions under control of a non @-@ partisan board , and reforms to public education and legal system . 
 The legislature largely ignored the governor 's message in favor of partisan concerns . A pure food and drug law was enacted without his signature . His veto of controversial legislation regulating railroad rates , however , was sustained . Both houses passed a resolution calling for the resignation of Senator William Lindsay , a Gold Democrat who did not support William Jennings Bryan 's presidential bid , on grounds that he no longer represented the interests of his party . Lindsay responded that he represented the people of Kentucky and refused to resign his seat . 
 Another of Bradley 's concerns in his message to the legislature was the condition of the Governor 's Mansion . In his address , he declared " As to the Executive Mansion , for years its floors have been propped up to prevent them from falling , and it required more than seven hundred feet of weather strips to make it comfortable in the winter . The present site is disagreeable , the view from one side overlooks the walls of the penitentiary , and from the other the smokestack of a large flouring mill nearby . " Instead of addressing Bradley 's concerns , the General Assembly passed a " ripper bill " taking control of the mansion from the governor and putting it under the supervision of the Court of Appeals . On February 10 , 1899 , the mansion caught fire as a result of a faulty flue in the governor 's bedroom . The day was so cold that the fireman had difficulty keeping the water in their hoses unfrozen , and the mansion suffered extensive damage . Though the mansion was insured and a reporter for the Courier @-@ Journal opined that the sensible thing to do would be to demolish the old structure and construct a new one or purchase another house in Frankfort to serve as the governor 's mansion , the legislature was disinclined to make more than minimal accommodations for a Republican governor . Consequently , the mansion was once again repaired . The Bradleys stayed with a neighbor in Frankfort immediately after the fire . Thereafter , Governor Bradley stayed in Frankfort 's Capitol Hotel , while Mrs. Bradley and daughter Christine returned to the family 's home in Lancaster . The family re @-@ occupied the residence prior to the end of Bradley 's term . 
 Bradley struggled to end violent feuds that continued in the eastern part of the state . During his term , the so @-@ called " Tollgate Wars " were ongoing . In many rural areas that could not afford to build good roads , private companies had built the roads and attempted to recover the costs and turn a profit by charging tolls . Poor residents of the areas , however , maintained that the tolls were excessive , especially in light of the national depression . They began to call for " free roads " , but their calls went unheeded by the state and national governments . Many then resorted to violence , burning toll houses and threatening and attacking toll collectors . Bradley called for harsh action against this lawlessness , but the Democratic General Assembly , sympathetic to the plight of the poor residents of the state , refused to act . By the end of Bradley 's term , most of the violence had ended , as companies sold their stock to local groups or simply abandoned their roads due to the violence . 
 Kentucky 's four infantry regiments and two cavalry units that served in the Spanish – American War were beset by poor sanitation and disease in the army camps where they were stationed . The units saw little action in the war , but 84 men died as a result of the poor conditions . When the time came for the troops to return home , Bradley found that the state had no money to pay for the hospital trains needed for their trip . Bradley personally borrowed money from a bank to secure their passage , and trusted that the General Assembly would reimburse him . 
 = = = Goebel Election Law ; gubernatorial election of 1899 = = = 
 On February 1 , 1898 , Senate President Pro Tem William Goebel sponsored a measure later referred to as the Goebel Election Law . The bill created a Board of Election Commissioners , appointed by the General Assembly , who were responsible for choosing election commissioners in all of Kentucky 's counties . The Board was empowered to examine election returns and rule on the results . The power to decide the outcome of disputed elections remained with the General Assembly , pursuant to Section 153 of the state constitution . Because the General Assembly was heavily Democratic and Goebel was considered a likely Democratic aspirant for the governorship in the 1899 election , the bill was attacked as blatantly partisan and self @-@ serving , even by some Democrats . Nevertheless , Goebel was able to hold enough members of his party together to override Bradley 's veto , making the bill law . 
 A proposal was made to call a special session to repeal the law , and Bradley was in favor of the action , but a poll of the legislators showed that too many of them were noncommittal to justify the call . Republicans organized a test case against the law , but the Kentucky Court of Appeals found it constitutional . As leader of the party , Goebel essentially hand @-@ picked the members of the Election Commission . He chose three staunch Democrats – W. S. Pryor , former chief justice of the Kentucky Court of Appeals ; W. T. Ellis , former U. S. Representative from Daviess County ; and C. B. Poyntz , former head of the state railroad commission . 
 As Bradley 's term drew to a close , potential Republican candidates to succeed him were initially few . Some saw Kentucky 's 18 @,@ 000 @-@ vote plurality for William Jennings Bryan in the 1896 presidential election as a sure sign that the state would vote Democratic in 1899 . Others were not interested in being on the defensive against the inevitable Democratic attacks on Bradley 's administration . Still others were intimidated by the prospect of being defeated by the machinery of the Goebel Election Law . Sitting attorney general William S. Taylor was the first to announce his candidacy and soon secured the support of Senator Deboe . Later candidates included Hopkins County judge Clifton J. Pratt and sitting state auditor Sam H. Stone . The former was Bradley 's choice , but Taylor was a skilled political organizer and was able to create a strong political machine amongst the county delegations . He seemed the favorite to win the nomination . 
 The Republican nominating convention convened on July 12 in Lexington . Angry that his party had not more seriously considered his candidate , Bradley did not attend . Black leaders in the party threatened to follow Bradley and organize their own nominating convention , as they believed Taylor represented the " lily @-@ white " branch of the party . Taylor attempted to hold the party together by making one of the black leaders permanent secretary of the convention and promising to appoint other black leaders to his cabinet if elected . He also tried to bring Bradley back to the convention by promising to nominate Bradley 's nephew , Edwin P. Morrow , for secretary of state . Bradley refused the offer . In the face of Taylor 's superior organization , all the other candidates withdrew in a show of party unity , allowing Taylor to be nominated unanimously . 
 Bradley had initially been cool toward Taylor , but he agreed to tour the state with Republican leader Augustus E. Willson after Goebel , the eventual Democratic nominee , made a similar tour with William Jennings Bryan , who was wildly popular in the state . Although he insisted he only wanted to defend his administration from Democratic attacks , Henry Watterson suggested that Bradley was seeking to enlist Taylor 's support for his anticipated senatorial bid . Bradley began his tour of the state in Louisville , charging that Democrats had to import an orator for their candidate because all of the state 's best men had deserted him . He also encouraged blacks not to desert the Republican Party . He contrasted his appointments of blacks to his cabinet with the Democrats ' support of the Separate Coach Bill . Throughout his speech , Bradley defended his administration and never once mentioned Taylor . Finally , he closed with the line " And go to the polls and elect Taylor ! " As Bradley exited the stage , Willson whispered to him , " Bradley , that 's the slickest thing you ever did in your life . " As they continued to tour the state , Bradley and Willson often drew crowds larger than those assembled for Taylor . 
 As the campaign drew to a close , both Republicans and Democrats warned of the possibility that electoral fraud and violence would be perpetrated by the other side . Louisville mayor Charles P. Weaver , a Goebel Democrat , added 500 men to the city 's police force just before the election , leading to charges that voter intimidation would occur in that city . Bradley countered by ordering the state militia to be ready to quell any disturbances across the state . On election day , the headline of the Courier @-@ Journal proclaimed " Bayonet Rule " . 
 For all the claims about the potential for violence , election day , November 7 , remained mostly calm across the state . Fewer than a dozen people were arrested statewide . Voting returns were slow , and on election night , the race was still too close to call . When the official tally was announced , Taylor had won by a vote of 193 @,@ 714 to 191 @,@ 331 . Former governor John Y. Brown , nominated by a dissident group of Democrats , had garnered 12 @,@ 040 votes , and Populist candidate John G. Blair had captured 2 @,@ 936 . Though the Board of Elections was thought to be controlled by Goebel , it rendered a surprise 2 – 1 decision to certify the election results . The Board 's majority opinion claimed that they did not have any judicial power and were thus unable to hear proof or swear witnesses , leaving them without grounds to invalidate any votes . Taylor was inaugurated on December 12 , 1899 . 
 Following his term as governor , Bradley moved to Louisville and resumed his legal practice . Shortly after Bradley left office , Goebel and his running mate , J. C. W. Beckham , challenged the results of the 1899 election in the General Assembly , per the state constitution . All the candidates for the state 's minor offices contested as well . Bradley and his colleague Augustus Willson formed part of the legal team that represented the Republicans before the General Assembly and in court , where they challenged the legality of the Goebel Election Law and , later , the actions of the General Assembly 's contest committee . 
 Republicans around the state expected the General Assembly 's contest committee to recommend disqualification of enough ballots to make Goebel governor . Armed men from eastern Kentucky filled the capital , awaiting the contest committee 's findings . On the morning of January 30 , as Goebel and two friends walked toward the capitol building , a shot rang out , and Goebel fell wounded . He was taken to a nearby hotel to be treated for his wounds . As expected , the contest committee recommended invalidating enough votes to make Goebel governor , and the General Assembly voted to certify the recommendation . Goebel was sworn in as governor , but he died on February 3 . Beckham then took the oath of office and continued the legal challenge against Taylor and his lieutenant governor , John Marshall . 
 In federal court , Bradley argued on behalf of the Republican minor officers that the Goebel Election Law deprived citizens of their right to vote . The right to vote , he claimed , was inherent in the Fourteenth Amendment 's guarantee of " liberty " , and could not be taken from any citizen without due process . Federal judge William Howard Taft ruled that the Republicans would have to seek remedy in the state courts . After a protracted legal battle , all of the minor officers were unseated except Attorney General Clifton J. Pratt . 
 The cases of Taylor and Marshall were appealed to the Kentucky Court of Appeals , then to the Supreme Court of the United States . In the case of Taylor v. Beckham , Bradley countered Democrats ' claims that the federal courts should not have jurisdiction by citing Thayer v. Boyd , a similar case in which the court had assumed jurisdiction . He further quoted authorities who opined that an elected office was property , using this to contend that Taylor 's rights under the Fourteenth Amendment had been violated , thus giving the court jurisdiction . Also , Bradley asserted , the election of some members of the General Assembly 's contest committee would hinge on the decision of that very committee . At least one member of the committee was known to have wagered on the election 's outcome . These facts should have nullified the decision of the committee and the Assembly on the grounds that it had left some members as judges of their own cases , Bradley argued . Finally , Bradley cited irregularities in the proceedings of the contest committee , including giving insufficient time for the review of testimony provided in written form by Taylor and Marshall 's legal representation . The court refused to intervene in the case , however , because it found that there were no federal questions involved . The lone justice dissenting from that opinion was Kentuckian John Marshall Harlan . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 On a joint ballot of the General Assembly in 1900 , Bradley was defeated for a seat in the U.S. Senate by a vote of 75 – 54 . After the unseating of Taylor , the state Republican party split into factions , with Godfrey Hunter at the head of one and Bradley at the head of the other . The two factions formed a tentative alliance to nominate Danville law professor John W. Yerkes in the special election called after Goebel 's assassination , but Yerkes lost to Democratic nominee J. C. W. Beckham . At the 1904 Republican National Convention , Bradley was chosen to second the nomination of Theodore Roosevelt for president . 
 Factionalism again marked the Republican nominating convention in 1904 . Bradley and his faction backed Augustus E. Willson for governor , while Hunter and Yerkes favored Louisville businessman Morris B. Belknap , the son @-@ in @-@ law of former governor Simon Buckner . When convention officials ruled against a county delegation committed to Willson , he withdrew from the contest . Bradley was angered as Belknap was nominated on the first ballot and subsequently lost to J. C. W. Beckham , who was allowed to seek a second term because a court ruled he had not been elected to a full term in 1900 . 
 = = = Career in the Senate = = = 
 In 1907 , Republicans nominated Willson for governor , and he was elected . This victory again emboldened Republicans in the General Assembly , who nominated Bradley for a seat in the U.S. Senate in 1908 . The Democrats countered by nominating outgoing Governor Beckham . Though the Democrats had a majority in the General Assembly , seven Democratic legislators refused to vote for Beckham because he favored Prohibition . Instead , they voted for other candidates , leaving no one with a majority . As balloting continued over the course of two months with no winner , some Democrats urged Beckham to withdraw in favor of a more palatable candidate . He refused , and after twenty @-@ nine ballots , four Democrats who favored Bradley 's " wet " position defied allegiance to their party , electing him by a 64 – 60 margin . None of the four were re @-@ elected to their seats in the legislature , though one eventually became Bradley 's private secretary . 
 During the Sixty @-@ first and Sixty @-@ second Congresses , Bradley was chairman of the U.S. Senate Committee on Expenditures in the Department of Justice . He was also chairman of the Committee to Investigate Trespassers upon Indian Land during the Sixty @-@ first Congress , and the chairman of the Committee on Revolutionary Claims during the Sixty @-@ third Congress . Historian James C. Klotter opined that during Bradley 's career in the Senate , he was " better known for his oratory than for his legislative accomplishments " . He disappointed blacks by supporting the Taft administration 's policy of not appointing blacks to patronage positions in the states where they resided . 
 In the 1908 presidential election , Bradley supported Charles W. Fairbanks for the Republican nomination , while Willson favored William Howard Taft . <unk> marred the state nominating convention , and despite being a newly minted senator , Bradley was not chosen as a delegate to the Republican National Convention . This infuriated Bradley and ended his alliance with Willson . In the 1911 Republican nominating convention , Bradley did not support Edward C. O 'Rear , the party 's eventual gubernatorial nominee . He did little to support O 'Rear in the general election , and former governor James B. McCreary was elected . 
 On May 14 , 1914 , Bradley announced his intent to retire from politics upon the completion of his term , owing to the decline of his general health . Hurrying to board a streetcar following his announcement , Bradley suffered a serious fall , sustaining two broken fingers , head trauma , and internal injuries . After briefly attempting to return to his duties , he became <unk> , and died on May 23 , 1914 . His official cause of death was listed as uraemia . Upon Bradley 's death , both houses of Congress passed resolutions expressing their sympathy , and promptly adjourned out of respect . His body was returned to Frankfort for burial , but in accordance with the wishes of Bradley and his family , did not lie in state . He was buried in the state cemetery in Frankfort . 
 = Irresistible ( Jessica Simpson song ) = 
 " Irresistible " is a song by American recording artist Jessica Simpson that Sony Music released on April 12 , 2001 , as the lead single from her second studio album of the same name . Its title and concept were proposed by singer @-@ songwriter Pamela Sheyne , while Arnthor Birgisson , an acquaintance of Sony chief executive officer Tommy Mottola , and his partner Anders Bagge developed the melody and co @-@ wrote the verses with Sheyne . The lyrics are more sexually suggestive than Simpson 's previous songs . 
 The song , composed in the key of C major , is a mid @-@ tempo R & B number with dance @-@ pop , teen pop and funk influences . Instruments featured in the song include strings , synthesizers , percussion , and acoustic piano . The lyrics center on the tension between a young woman 's sexual desires and her inhibitions . A So So Def remix of the piece features Lil ' Bow Wow and Jermaine Dupri , and incorporates samples of Kool & the Gang 's " Jungle Boogie " ( 1973 ) . 
 The accompanying music video , directed by Simon Brand , has a James Bond theme and features scenes of Simpson dressed as a spy . A music video for the So So Def remix was also filmed , featuring appearances by Dupri and Lil ' Bow Wow inter @-@ cut with scenes of Simpson . She performed the song as part of the set list of her DreamChaser Tour ( 2001 ) and Reality Tour ( 2004 ) . The single was also promoted with live performances on various televised appearances and the MTV Total Request Live Tour ( 2001 ) . " Irresistible " was featured on the Disney Channel Original Series Lizzie McGuire ( 2001 ) . 
 Critics gave " Irresistible " mostly negative reviews noting the similarity to Pink 's " There You Go " ( 2000 ) . Although a few praised the song for its theme and production , most criticized Simpson 's singing style , the sexual nature of the song 's lyrics , and the over @-@ use of digital sound enhancers . The song reached number eleven on the UK Singles Chart and number fifteen on the United States Billboard Hot 100 , while peaking within the top twenty in nine other countries . Despite not charting within the top twenty in Australia , it was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of more than 35 @,@ 000 copies within the country . The song ranked on the Billboard Hot 100 and Australian year @-@ end charts at numbers sixty @-@ three and fifty , respectively . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 " Irresistible " ( also registered as " <unk> " with the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ) was written specifically for Simpson by Swedish composers Anders Bagge and Arnthor Birgisson , in collaboration with English singer @-@ songwriter Pamela Sheyne , who also contributed vocals for the demo . Initial recording of the song was done at the Murlyn Studios , Stockholm , for which Sheyne provided the background vocals with the final recording being done at Sony Music Studios , New York City . In an interview , Birgisson commented on the collaboration with Sheyne saying that : 
 " Pam came up with the title ' Irresistible ' , and as she started talking about the whole concept we immediately became inspired and began working on the music . You know , when we hear a concept or a title that we like — no matter if it 's ours or somebody else 's — both Anders and I get a feel for the song 's vibe ; a feel for whether a keyboard or guitar should be used to give it a certain character , be it upbeat or melancholic . So , when Pam mentioned the title , we immediately came up with the tempo and the whole feeling of the song , and then she came up with the lyrics . There was a really good flow to that song . We played around with the melody , put down the demo , and it was done . " 
 Vocals were recorded and engineered by Robert Williams using a Sony C @-@ <unk> Studio Tube condenser microphone while post @-@ recording editing , via the Pro Tools software , was done by Peter Wade Keusch . Mats <unk> played the guitar on the track , while Bagge mixed the song . Ted Jensen mastered it at Sterling Sound , New York City . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Irresistible " is a moderately paced R & B song composed in the verse – chorus – bridge form with a play time of three minutes and thirteen seconds . The song draws influence mostly from the dance @-@ pop genre while infusing elements of funk music , and Latin rhythms . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , the song is written in common time , in a key of C major . The tempo is ninety @-@ four beats per minute , with a chord progression of Am – Dm7 – F – E7 . Simpson 's vocals in the song span over two octaves from the low note of F3 to the high note of E5 . Cashbox Canada commented that Simpson adopts " breathy vocals " for the song , and it has a " gently danceable backing while Chuck Taylor of Billboard noted that Simpson 's vocals in the song were " funk @-@ fortified " . The Dallas Morning News ' Teresa Gubbins observed that the track possesses a rat @-@ a @-@ tat @-@ tat beat , similar to " There You Go " ( 2000 ) by singer Pink . The song features a string section by Stockholm Session Strings as well as spoken passages by Simpson and a midsection breakdown . 
 " Irresistible " is a groove @-@ laden song , following a musical setting that is beat @-@ oriented . In an interview with Associated Press , Simpson said that " Irresistible " is " very sexy , more grown @-@ up . I think you 're going to see a new side of Jessica Simpson . " Lyrically , according to Birgisson , the song carries some feminine viewpoints that Sheyne had managed to incorporate through her contribution . Ben Graham , the author of Maximum Jessica Simpson , noted that the lyrics suggest that Simpson finds it hard to keep her famous virginity image intact . This can be inferred from the lines " I know that I 'm supposed to make him wait / Let him think I like the chase / But I can 't stop fanning the fire / I know I meant to say no . " Bob Waliszewski of Plugged In pointed out that the verses " I can 't stop fanning the fire [ ... ] Now inescapable " refer to an " imminent sexual compromise " . " She knows she shouldn 't give in , but seems past the point of no return , " he explained . However , Taylor stated that lyrically , the song demands for " total fulfillment " . The version featured on Lizzie McGuire soundtrack replaces the lyric " When he makes me weak with desire " with " When he makes me want to move closer " and " But I can 't stop fanning the fire / I know I meant to say no " with " But it 's time to stop this emotion / Right now I 'm gonna say no . " 
 = = Remixes and release = = 
 " Irresistible " was commissioned for remixes from So So Def Recordings , Hex Hector , and <unk> . The So So Def remix of the song , produced by Jermaine Dupri , features American rapper Lil ' Bow Wow and Dupri himself . It samples the Kool & the Gang 's song , " Jungle Boogie " ( 1973 ) . Another remix of the song was produced by American producer Hex Hector . According to Slant Magazine , the Hex Hector remix of the song uses full @-@ throated vocals by Simpson , and includes disco @-@ influenced string arrangement , which is comparable to the musical style of Giorgio Moroder , and utilizes beats from a Roland TR @-@ 808 . Ron Thal , the current lead guitarist of the hard rock band Guns N ' Roses , plays guitar on the remix tracks . Both of the remixes are included on Simpson 's remix extended play ( EP ) This Is the Remix ( 2002 ) . Brendan Frederick of Complex wrote that while the remix could not do anything to complement the original track 's chart performance , it helped achieve a " gimmicky redemption " . He also noted that although the samples were used in the song " Satisfy You " by Puff Daddy about one and a half year ago , the remix of " Irresistible " sounded " kinda [ sic ] sweet " . 
 Sony Music Entertainment released " Irresistible " in the United Kingdom and Ireland on April 12 , 2001 . In the United States , " Irresistible " was first commissioned as a radio @-@ only single , on April 17 , 2001 . Later , a promotional CD single was issued , containing the album version of the song . A vinyl was also released , on June 26 , 2001 , which includes the remixes of the song . In France , the single was released on April 27 , 2001 , as a maxi @-@ single and vinyl . The pressing contains the album version as the A @-@ side , and the So So Def remix as the B @-@ side . Sony Music released a CD single of " Irresistible " in Germany , on June 25 , 2001 . Sony Music Holland released the song as a single in the Netherlands on June 23 , 2001 . In Australia , " Irresistible " was released on July 2 , 2001 , as a CD single . The same day , it was released in Sweden through Sony Music . The song is also included on the Italian compilation album <unk> ( 2001 ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Irresistible " was received with mostly negative reviews by music critics . Although a few critics called the song a " peppy " number , others commented that they did not like the song , and criticized the sexuality of its lyrics and the over @-@ usage of digital sound manipulators . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic stated that the song and " A Little Bit " , the second single released from the parent album , were a " double @-@ punch " and picked the former song as a standout from the album . Cashbox Canada , ranking the song at number ten on " Top 10 Love Songs : The Crush " , praised it as " an ode to love at step one " . Similarly , Chuck Taylor of Billboard reviewed " Irresistible " favorably , calling it " a sexy , uptempo romp about new found love that proves Simpson 's pop intuition . " In another review , Taylor complimented the contemporary appeal of the track and felt that it would be a staple at radios . He also noticed that the breakdown and spoken passages of the song gave it a " street edge " , something not previously heard from Simpson . Teresa Gubbins of The Dallas Morning News had mixed feelings towards the song in her review , writing that its sound might help Simpson get attention on urban radios , but did nothing to demonstrate her voice . Larry Printz of The Morning Call also expressed a similar view of the song , stating that the song " is loaded with platitudes , but [ it 's ] easy on the ears . " 
 However , Siobhan Grogan of NME magazine stated " to the delight of lonely men everywhere , she tells us she 's ' weak with desire ' and knows ' I 'm meant to say no ' — and the mind boggles at how she 'd have turned out if she 'd spent her teens <unk> cider on a street corner . " Chuck Campbell of Daily News viewed the song as " gurgling " and noted that Simpson was singing it breathlessly . An editor of The Advocate remarked that the track sounded more manufactured than composed . Craig Seymour of The Buffalo News wrote that he felt " Irresistible " was a " limp seduction tune " . Similarly , David Browne of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the single could have been easily reprocessed for a " new virginity ad campaign . " The Northern Echo 's Hayley <unk> dismissed the song , elaborating that it sounded similar to the works of Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera . She added , " If only this 21- year @-@ old songbird had done something original she may indeed have been irresistible . " An editor of The Malay Mail echoed <unk> 's comment , writing that the track sounded like a typical Aguilera pop @-@ Latino piece . In 2003 , " Irresistible " won a Broadcast Music Incorporated ( BMI ) " Pop Music Award " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 " Irresistible " experienced moderate commercial success worldwide , reaching the top forty of the charts in eleven countries . In the United States , the song initially debuted at number five on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , on the issue dated May 5 , 2001 . Three weeks later , it debuted at number sixty @-@ nine on the Billboard Hot 100 . In mid @-@ July the single reached its peak position of number fifteen on the Hot 100 and stayed on the chart for twenty weeks . Its peak position in the chart was thanks to the airplay , largely due to its release as an radio @-@ only single rather than the traditional CD single . " Irresistible " became Simpson 's second top @-@ twenty single in the US , following " I Wanna Love You Forever " ( 1999 ) . The song also reached number three on Billboard Pop Songs chart , her highest peak at the time , and her second single to reach the top five . Although it did not chart on the Hot Dance Club Play chart , " Irresistible " reached number one on the Billboard Hot Dance Music / Maxi @-@ Singles Sales , on the issue dated July 14 , 2001 . On the 2001 Billboard year @-@ end charts , the song was ranked at number sixty @-@ three on the Hot 100 Singles . In Canada , " Irresistible " debuted at number sixteen on the Canadian Singles Chart , on the issue of August 4 , 2001 and stayed on the Top 100 for fifteen weeks . The song also reached number fifteen on the Canadian Nielsen BDS Airplay chart . As the date , " Irresistible " has sold 37 @,@ 000 physical copies and 345 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads according to Nielsen Soundscan . It is her fifth best @-@ selling digital single in the United States . 
 = = = Europe and Oceania = = = 
 Abroad , in the United Kingdom , " Irresistible " debuted at number eleven on the UK Singles Chart for the week of July 14 , 2001 , and stayed on the chart for six weeks . It became her third top @-@ twenty single there . In Ireland , the song made its first appearance on the chart at number eighteen during the week of July 5 , 2001 , a position which became its peak in that country . During the week of July 15 , 2001 , the single debuted at number twenty @-@ one on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart and stayed on the chart for eleven weeks . It was later certified gold by Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 35 @,@ 000 units within the country . It reached number fifty on the ARIA year @-@ end singles chart . In New Zealand , the single debuted at number forty @-@ five , however dropping to number fifty the following week . It eventually peaked at number forty @-@ one . 
 In Norway , " Irresistible " debuted at number eighteen on the VG @-@ lista charts . It descended to number twenty @-@ one the next week , before reaching its peak position of number sixteen during the fourth week on the chart . The song reached number two on the Ultratip chart of Belgium 's Wallonia region , and number forty @-@ six on the Belgium Flanders Ultratop 50 chart . It also reached number fifty in Austria , thirty @-@ three in Germany and seventeen in Sweden . In Switzerland , the single debuted at number twenty @-@ three , on the issue dated July 1 , 2001 . The next week peaked at number twenty and stayed on the chart for fourteen weeks . In the Netherlands , " Irresistible " reached a peak of number fifty @-@ four on the Mega Single Top 100 chart . In Romania , the song reached number seventeen on the Romanian Singles Chart , and stayed on the chart for twenty @-@ six weeks . It made number fifty @-@ three on the country 's year @-@ end charts . Due to its appearance on several European charts , the song peaked at number nineteen on the European Hot 100 Singles chart , as compiled by Billboard . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Fraser Middleton of The Evening Times wrote that Simpson captured a " girl next door " image with her previous album and the music videos for its accompanying singles . Although the album was successful , Columbia Records felt it was far from the successes of her contemporaries , Aguilera and Spears and that Simpson needed to make some changes to her image . As a part of the change , she lost weight , dressed in a more sexy style and learned dance . Simpson said the video is a kind of " comic strip girl come to life " further explaining that the video was something she had never done before . 
 The music video was directed by Colombian film director Simon Brand , in Los Angeles between April 6 and April 8 , 2001 , and was choreographed by Dan <unk> . Shot in a set with futuristic backdrops , Simpson assumes the role of a spy on a mission in the video . It begins with Simpson exiting a helicopter then entering a building to compromise evidence in a laboratory there . Simpson takes the elevator which opens onto a pathway . While she is walking , a gadget appears on the floor followed by a small explosion . In the next scene , Simpson walks through a water tunnel , out of which she is pulled by a robotic hand . As the video progresses , Simpson is shown dancing in a room full of mirrors . Scenes of ninjas climbing up a rope hanging from top of the building are inter @-@ cut with scenes of Simpson dancing until the laboratory explodes . Simpson is next shown dancing on the rooftop alongside the ninjas before a helicopter arrives and Simpson boards it . 
 The video premiered on MTV 's Total Request Live on May 9 , 2001 . Upon the premiere , critics gave the music video mixed reviews . People magazine called the video " <unk> " , referring to Simpson 's progressive sexual image from her previous videos , while an editor for The Irish Independent wrote that Simpson looked " incredibly sexy " in the video . Billboard 's Chuck Taylor also reviewed the video positively , writing the video will " add to the allure " of Simpson becoming a " sex @-@ symbol " . Similarly , Melissa Ruggeri of The Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch also gave a positive review , writing that the term " Irresistible " fitted the video . However , Siobhan Grogan of NME magazine wrote that Simpson has no apprehension " about ' forgetting ' most of her clothes for the video " . Craig Seymour of The Buffalo News criticized Simpson 's ungraceful performance on the video , which was echoed by Jon Bream and Chris Riemenschneider of The Star Tribune who felt Simpson was trying too hard to be a sexpot in the video . The video reached number two on MTV 's Total Request Live ( TRL ) countdown , and number seventeen on MuchMusic Canada 's Top 30 Countdown . In the So So Def remix music video , which featured additional direction from Cameron Casey and followed the same plot as the unmixed version , scenes of Lil ' Bow Wow and Dupri rapping are intercut with scenes of Simpson performing the song . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Irresistible " was included on the setlist of her DreamChaser Tour ( 2001 ) and Reality Tour ( 2004 ) . In the book People in the News : Jessica Simpson and Nick Lachey , Terri Dougherty wrote that Simpson wanted the DreamChaser Tour to feature her as a singer and dancer , following the model laid down by performers like Britney Spears . Therefore , Simpson made the choreography more risqué by adding backup dancers and performing dance moves in revealing outfits . The song was also performed on MTV 's Total Request Live Tour in which she was supported by six backup dancers . Her performance was commended by The Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch , who wrote that her voice " soared , " but criticised by The Buffalo News ' Andrea <unk> and St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch 's Kevin C. Johnson , both of whom opined that Simpson was lip @-@ syncing the whole song . 
 Simpson performed the song on The Rosie O 'Donnell Show on May 11 , 2001 . On June 1 , she performed at the summer concert Zootopia , organized by Radio Z100 . Six days later , she performed on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . On June 11 , she appeared on an episode of MuchMusic in Canada , and sang " Irresistible " . On June 16 , she performed it at Wango Tango , an annual all @-@ day concert organized by KIIS @-@ FM , in California . On July 4 , 2001 , it was performed at the Macy 's 4th of July Fireworks Spectacular , for the celebration of Independence Day . In December 2001 , Simpson joined the cast of KBKS @-@ FM 's Jingle Bell Bash in Seattle . 
 In late 2001 , Simpson sang the song as part of MTV 's Spring Break program , held in Cancún , Mexico . She later performed the song at The Monkey Club in Paris , France . " Irresistible " was sung during the 2001 Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve , along with " A Little Bit " . In 2002 , Simpson sang " Irresistible " at Rockin ' for the USA , a music special honoring the United States Armed Forces . In 2004 , Simpson went out on her second headlining tour , the Reality Tour , to promote her third studio album In This Skin ( 2003 ) . The tour , unlike the DreamChaser Tour , had no dance production . On the Houston stop of the North American leg of the tour , Simpson performed " Irresistible " at the end of the show , before singing " With You " , a song from In This Skin , as the encore . However , on the Ohio stop , she performed the song after " Underneath " , another song from In This Skin . Her performance was approved by Dustin J. Seibert of The Cincinnati Enquirer , who wrote that " Simpson 's reliance on her high @-@ octane voice and bubbly personality set her apart from some of her pop counterparts . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Cedillo v. Secretary of Health and Human Services = 
 Michelle Cedillo v. Secretary of Health and Human Services , also known as the omnibus autism proceeding ( OAP ) , was a court case involving the family of Michelle Cedillo , a girl with autism whose parents sued the United States government because they believed that her autism was caused by her receipt of both the measles @-@ mumps @-@ and @-@ rubella vaccine ( also known as the MMR vaccine ) and thimerosal @-@ containing vaccines . The omnibus proceeding required the petitioners to present three test cases for each proposed mechanism by which vaccines had , according to them , caused their children 's autism ; Michelle was the first such case for the MMR @-@ and @-@ thimerosal hypothesis . 
 The family sought compensation from the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program ( NVICP ) , but in order to qualify they were required to prove that it was more likely than not that their children 's autism was caused by their vaccines . The scientific community had concluded that vaccines did not cause autism years before the first cases were heard , and concern was therefore expressed that the relatively lax evidentiary standards of the NVICP could lead to compensation being awarded in spite of the compelling scientific evidence to the contrary . This , some vaccine supporters argued , might have serious adverse public health effects by discouraging vaccine manufacturers from producing more childhood vaccines . Though the NVICP had existed since 1988 , it was not designed to handle the thousands of cases it received from 1999 to 2007 , which led to the establishment of the Omnibus Autism Proceeding in 2002 . 
 The trial opened on June 11 , 2007 in Washington , DC . The Cedillos ' six expert witnesses argued that thimerosal @-@ containing vaccines degraded Michelle 's immune system , which in turn made it possible for the weakened measles virus in the MMR vaccine to cause a persistent infection leading to autism . In support of this hypothesis , the Cedillos ' witnesses relied on the reported detection of measles virus in Michelle 's gastrointestinal tract by John O 'Leary 's Unigenetics laboratory in Dublin . However , the government 's expert witnesses conclusively demonstrated that O 'Leary 's positive results were caused by contamination in the Unigenetics lab rather than an actual infection . 
 On February 12 , 2009 , the special masters ruled that the Cedillos were not entitled to compensation as they had failed to demonstrate that thimerosal @-@ containing vaccines in combination with the MMR vaccine could cause autism . The special masters concluded , among other things , that the government 's experts were considerably more qualified than those testifying on behalf of the families , with special master George Hastings stating that " the Cedillos have been misled by physicians who are guilty , in my view , of gross medical misjudgment . " 
 = = Background = = 
 The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program was established in 1988 in the United States by the passing of the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act , and is funded by a 75 @-@ cent tax on each vaccine dose . The program 's aims were to maintain a steady supply of vaccines while , at the same time , allowing victims of vaccine injury to be compensated more efficiently than was previously possible . The program operates according to a no @-@ fault principle . The family of Michelle Cedillo sought compensation from this program . Cedillo , a then 12 @-@ year @-@ old female wheelchair user from Yuma , Arizona , was involved in the first of three test cases chosen by the government to represent the approximately 4 @,@ 900 other vaccine @-@ autism cases that had been brought before the court . Michelle Cedillo was born on August 30 , 1994 , and received thimerosal @-@ containing vaccines during the first fifteen months of her life . On December 20 , 1995 , she received an MMR vaccine . Theresa and Michael Cedillo filed a vaccine injury claim on behalf of their daughter on December 9 , 1998 for encephalopathy , but on January 14 , 2002 , changed their petition to a causation @-@ in @-@ fact claim , meaning they were arguing that Michelle developed autism as a result of the combined effects of thimerosal and the MMR vaccine . They did this as a result of a meeting that had taken place the previous year , between Theresa Cedillo and Andrew Wakefield , at a Defeat Autism Now ! conference . 
 In 2001 , many other families also filed suit in the NVICP , also because they believed their children 's autism had been caused by vaccines and they were therefore entitled to compensation . The following year , the Office of Special Masters of the United States Court of Federal Claims held a series of meetings to decide how to deal with these claims , and that July , issued an order establishing the Omnibus Autism Proceeding . According to the Cedillos , Michelle was developmentally normal until she received her MMR vaccine at the age of 15 months , at which point she developed a 105 @-@ degree fever , began vomiting and developed diarrhea . Michelle was diagnosed with autism 18 months after receiving her MMR vaccine . According to the Washington Post , the legal standard to which the cases were subjected in this trial meant that " the outcome will hinge not on scientific standards of evidence but on a legal standard of plausibility — what one lawyer for the families called ' 50 percent and a feather ' . " It was in 2002 that , given the large number of litigants seeking compensation from the NVICP , the Omnibus Autism Proceeding was established . Its aim was to resolve pending vaccine @-@ autism claims " aggressively but fairly . " 
 = = Overview = = 
 Prior to the Cedillo case beginning , the scientific community had conducted considerable research into the hypothesized link between either the MMR vaccine and autism or thimerosal @-@ containing vaccines and autism . This research had consistently come to the conclusion that no such link existed . However , some vaccine supporters , such as Paul Offit , argued that the standards for proving a vaccine had " caused " an adverse effect in the NVICP were far too low , and that the court might therefore find in favor of the Cedillos anyway . They also argued that if this happened , the vaccine manufacturers might be discouraged from manufacturing childhood vaccines , which might lead to more frequent vaccine shortages . 
 In the Cedillo case , her family claimed that Michelle was normal until receiving her vaccines , as evidenced by a number of videos of her between the age of 6 and 8 months . They also argued that thimerosal @-@ containing vaccines degraded her immune system , which made it possible for the measles virus to infect her and cause autism and the other health problems from which she suffers , which include inflammatory bowel disease , glaucoma and epilepsy . The evidence presented for this consisted primarily of the detection of measles virus in Michelle Cedillo 's GI tract . According to the testimony of Marcel Kinsbourne , a pediatric neurologist and professor of psychology at the New School , the vaccine strain of measles virus caused autism by " ... infect [ ing ] the gut and enter [ ing ] the brain , causing dysfunction of astrocytes and other brain cells , which in turn provokes high levels of the neurotransmitter glutamate , causing a state of overstimulation which manifests itself in the symptoms of autism . " 
 = = = Plaintiff 's case = = = 
 The witnesses testifying on behalf of the state whose testimony attracted the most attention were Éric Fombonne , a psychiatrist at McGill University , Jeffrey Brent , a medical toxicologist at the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center , and Stephen Bustin of Queen Mary University of London . Other experts who testified on behalf of the state included Edwin Cook , a psychiatrist , Diane Griffin , a virologist at Johns Hopkins University , Stephen Hanauer , a gastroenterologist , Christine McCusker , a pediatric immunologist , Brian Ward , a virologist who , along with Fombonne , published some research which failed to replicate the Unigenetics lab 's results , and Max <unk> , a pediatric neurologist . 
 Those who testified on behalf of the plaintiffs were H. Vasken Aposhian , a toxicologist at the University of Arizona , Arthur Krigsman , a gastroenterologist at Thoughtful House , Karin Hepner , a molecular biologist at Wake Forest University , Vera Byers , a retired immunologist , Ronald C. Kennedy , a virus immunologist at Texas Tech University and Marcel Kinsbourne , a retired pediatric neurologist . 
 On June 11 , 2007 , the plaintiffs presented their first argument , in which they contended that Michelle Cedillo , as well as other children with autism , suffered from a " mercury efflux disorder " which was described by Aposhian , their first expert witness , as " a problem with getting a metal , in this case mercury , out of a cell . " As evidence that such disorders have been documented before , he pointed to Wilson 's disease . Aposhian based this claim , in part , on three peer @-@ reviewed papers . The first such study was co @-@ authored by Boyd Haley , and concluded that hair of children with autism contained less mercury than that of children without autism . Aposhian stated that " we know that the hair is an excretory organ and that the hair is reflective of the mercury or the metal in the blood , and the blood is a reflection of the mercury in the tissues , and so the fact that the children with autism had less mercury in their hair was a hint or indication that perhaps there was mercury efflux disorder . " The second of these studies was conducted by James B. Adams , and found that baby teeth of children with autism had more than twice as much mercury as those of children without autism . Aposhian cited this study as evidence that " autistic children have a greater body burden of mercury . " Another study which Aposhian used to back up this statement was one conducted by Jeff Bradstreet and Mark Geier , which gave <unk> acid , a chelating agent , to children and concluded that children with autism excreted much more mercury thereafter than children without autism . Aposhian also cited a number of in vitro studies as evidence that thimerosal could cause immune system dysregulation . 
 The following day , the plaintiffs presented their second argument , namely that the measles vaccine had caused intestinal damage . Their witness that day was gastroenterologist Arthur Krigsman , who testified that his opinion in the case depended on whether measles virus had really been detected in the intestinal tissue of Michelle Cedillo and other children with autism by the Unigenetics lab , using a study conducted by him , Dr. Hepner , Steve Walker , and Jeff Segal as evidence that the Unigenetics lab 's results were reliable . This study , however , was still in its preliminary stages at the time of the trial , and had only been presented as a poster at the International Meeting for Autism Research the year before , and Walker himself warned that " We haven 't done anything to demonstrate that the measles virus is causing autism or even causing bowel disease . " 
 On the trial 's third day , the plaintiffs presented their next argument , which was that the Uhlmann paper , which had reported the presence of vaccine @-@ strain measles virus in the GI tract of <unk> autism , used reliable PCR techniques to detect said virus . Their witness for that day was molecular biologist Karin Hepner , who testified that " ... the positive and negative controls used by the Uhlmann authors [ led by Dr. John J. O 'Leary , who runs the Unigenetics lab in Dublin ] were appropriate , that the operating procedure employed in the testing was appropriate to minimize the possibility of " contamination , " and that the " assays " utilized were appropriately selected and implemented . " She also contended that the two studies that had failed to replicate the Uhlmann paper 's results were flawed for two reasons : because they looked at cells of children with autism rather than in their GI tract , and because they did not test children with autism with gastrointestinal dysfunction . 
 <unk> Vera Byers testified that Michelle Cedillo had a <unk> immune system , which allowed the measles virus to persist in her system , and that her malfunctioning immune system was in part a result of the virus itself . She also stated that this dysregulation was caused by " a combination of genetics and the measles virus vaccination and the thimerosal @-@ containing vaccines that she had received . " 
 Viral immunologist Ronald C. Kennedy testified that Michelle Cedillo had a " selective immune dysfunction " . He also , like Dr. Hepner , testified that the Unigenetics lab was reliable and followed appropriate measures to prevent contamination , stating " that the laboratory of Dr. John O 'Leary , Dr. Orla <unk> , and their colleagues has a good reputation . " Kennedy also testified that he attended a meeting during which Dr. Cotter orally reported that his testing reached results similar to those reported by Uhlmann . However , he also acknowledged that this lab never published sequencing data , which is in line with the fact that the Uhlmann paper does not mention the sequencing process . 
 Retired pediatric neurologist Marcel Kinsbourne testified that Michelle was developing normally until December 20 , 1995 , when she was vaccinated with the MMR vaccine , and that the fever and rash she experienced shortly thereafter was caused by this vaccine . He also testified that Michelle had regressive autism , and that " since Michelle has experienced both chronic gastrointestinal problems and the chronic neurologic disorder known as autism , the most reasonable conclusion is that a single causative <unk> , the vaccine @-@ strain measles <unk> the cause of both chronic conditions . " 
 = = = Opposing arguments = = = 
 One of the key lines of evidence presented by the Cedillo family was that Michelle was developmentally normal before she received the MMR vaccine . This , they claimed , was evident from videos taken of her when she was 6 to 8 months old . However , Eric Fombonne testified that Michelle " ... displayed early signs of autism clearly visibly on family video taken prior to her receiving the MMR vaccine . " 
 Jeffrey Brent , the past president of the American Academy of Clinical Toxicology , was invited to testify about the potential role of thimerosal @-@ containing vaccines in triggering Michelle 's autism . He stated that " there was not a single study indicating that any form of mercury could cause serious neurological symptoms in the dosages that were used in vaccines " and criticized Aposhian 's use of in vitro studies and his equating them to what happens in the actual animal , arguing that " the exposure to a cell in a petri dish was far more likely to cause damage than an equivalent dosage in a living system . " With regard to specific in vitro studies , Brent argued that the Goth study was flawed because it tested thimerosal on mouse cells , not human cells ; because these cells were exposed not to ethylmercury , as the human body would be after receiving a thimerosal @-@ containing vaccine since thimerosal is quickly metabolized to ethylmercury , but to thimerosal itself , and because the cells were exposed to far higher concentrations of thimerosal than could ever occur as a result of the administration of thimerosal @-@ containing vaccines . Brent highlighted similar problems with the Agrawal study , noting that the cells in that study , like those in the Goth study , were exposed to thimerosal , not ethylmercury , and to much higher doses than found in vaccines . He also examined the Bradstreet and Geier study and the Holmes study , noting that " much better studies from other investigators could not replicate the results of either the Holmes study or the Bradstreet / Geier study , " citing two other peer @-@ reviewed papers which had concluded that hair mercury levels were not significantly different between study participants with autism and controls , as well as a study which had concluded that children with autism had no <unk> heavy @-@ metal body burden whatsoever . Brent also pointed out that , like another of Bradstreet 's studies , the Bradstreet @-@ Geier study had been published in a non @-@ indexed journal , the Journal of American Physicians and Surgeons , which he described as " very much of a fringe journal with lots of alternative agendas , and it 's not even indexed by the National Library of Medicine . " Brent concluded by testifying that thimerosal could not have degraded Michelle 's immune system to the extent that when she was vaccinated with MMR nine months later , it caused brain damage , saying " That couldn 't possibly be the case . " In the second set of the proceedings , which pertained to thimerosal alone ( as opposed to thimerosal working in conjunction with MMR ) , Brent testified , with regard to Jordan King and one other child with autism who also served as a test case in this trial , that there was " absolutely no reason to chelate them for any mercury @-@ related reason . " 
 Many of the plaintiff 's experts also relied on the reported detection of measles virus RNA in Michelle 's intestinal tissue . This claim was based on results from O 'Leary 's Unigenetics lab , and was examined by Stephen Bustin , a world @-@ renowned expert on polymerase chain reaction who has authored a number of scientific papers on the subject , as well as a book entitled A @-@ Z of Quantitative PCR . He pointed out that this is based on results from the O 'Leary lab , and concluded , based on a 2002 paper by Uhlmann that described their PCR methodology , that this lab contained a lot of contaminating DNA , and that the assays were actually detecting this DNA rather than the RNA which makes up the measles virus . Bustin pointed out that , among other things , O 'Leary 's Unigenetics lab which published this study neglected to use controls , and also did not discuss contamination . For this reason , Bustin concluded that " the positive results from the Unigenetics laboratory are spurious and likely to be the result of contamination or false positives , " citing two other peer @-@ reviewed papers as evidence for this claim . In addition , Bustin and <unk> Rima both testified that Cotter was unable to replicate the Unigenetics lab 's results , in contrast to Kennedy 's claim that they were able to replicate these results . 
 Byers ' testimony was countered by that of Christine McCusker , who testified that " Dr. Byers had compared the results from several of the tests on Michelle to a set of " normal " values for such tests . The normal values utilized by Dr. Byers , however , were for adults , not children " and that " when she herself instead compared Michelle 's results to an age @-@ adjusted set of normal values , Michelle 's results fell within the normal ranges , " with McCusker noting in her expert report that the only marker of Th2 cell activity that was assessed in Michelle 's case , namely serum Immunoglobulin E level , was entirely normal . Additionally , Ward 's expert report stated that Byers ' expert report contained " many statements that appear to be entirely unsubstantiated . " 
 Kinsbourne 's testimony was countered by that of Ward , who noted that if Kinsbourne were correct and persisting measles virus were causing autism , then it ought to be detectable in the blood , since Kinsbourne himself had stated that MV would travel throughout the body via the bloodstream ; he also criticized Kinsbourne 's expert report for citing Bradstreet et al . ' s case series which had been published in the Journal of American Physicians and Surgeons . With regard to this study , Ward said that " the cerebrospinal antibody data from the three ASD children included in this manuscript actually argue powerfully AGAINST a persistent measles infection in the brains of these children . " Ward also noted that Krigsman had cited research conducted by <unk> K. Singh of Utah State University which had concluded that more than 80 % of children with autism had elevated measles antibodies . However , Ward stated in his expert report that " Unless virtually all cases of autism are caused by measles virus ( a position expressly excluded by the MRC , IOM and Cochrane reports ) , then Singh 's work must be in error or there must be an alternate explanation for this finding . We have recently tested anti @-@ measles antibodies in children with ASD and found no differences with control children . " Another point of contention was a paper by Paul Ashwood , which had been cited by Kinsbourne in his expert report ; however , as Ward noted , Kinsbourne had neglected to mention that Ashwood 's paper concluded that " the overwhelming majority of epidemiological , population studies indicate there is no established correlation between vaccinations and autism . " Additionally , Ward noted that this paper made no mention of the potential link between MMR and autism . 
 = = = Decision = = = 
 On February 12 , 2009 , the three special masters each ruled against the petitioners ' causation claims . In his decision , George Hastings noted that , unlike Aposhian , Jeffrey Brent , who testified that there was no evidence that children with autism were uniquely susceptible to mercury exposure , was a medical doctor . Hastings also described Dr. Brent 's testimony as " persuasive . " In addition , with regard to the theory that some children are genetically <unk> to mercury toxicity , Hastings concluded that the " petitioners have failed to demonstrate that this theory has any validity . " According to Hastings ' decision , Byers ' testimony " was far outweighed by the testimony of Dr. Brent and respondent 's other witnesses ... " ; he also concluded that " her insistence that it was acceptable to use adult norms to measure the immune function of infants and young children was , frankly , incredible . " Hastings also wrote that Kennedy made the same mistake that Byers made — namely , comparing the measurements of Michelle 's immune system to the parameters for adults , and that while Kennedy testified that Cotter 's results were evidence of the Unigenetics lab 's testing , that " no conclusions can reasonably be drawn " regarding these results , noting that they had not yet been published . After examining Kinsbourne 's testimony , Hastings concluded that it contained " ... contradictions and inconsistencies ... concerning the appropriate time period between MMR vaccination and onset of autism symptoms , " and also noted that Kinsbourne had not included measles virus as a cause of autism in a chart he wrote for a textbook , but had done so in the proceedings . 
 Hastings , in his decision , noted that " all of the petitioners ' causation theories depend upon the validity of certain testing that purported to find evidence of persisting measles virus in the biological materials of Michelle and a number of other children with autism . " However , Hastings concluded that this testing was " not reliable . " In his decision , he noted that the authors of the D 'Souza paper first performed PCR on <unk> from children with autism , which resulted in a large proportion of apparently positive results . However , " the D 'Souza group ... subjected those apparently positive samples to additional testing techniques in order to determine whether the PCR testing using the Uhlmann primers was truly identifying measles virus and only measles virus . ... The application of those two techniques revealed that all but nine of the samples that had initially tested positive by the PCR test using the Uhlmann primers were , in fact , not measles virus . " With regard to the 9 remaining samples , the D 'Souza paper performed sequencing on 7 of those samples . This step " demonstrated that the material , which in the PCR testing had appeared to be measles virus material , was in fact not measles virus material , but human genetic material . " 
 With regard to the Michelle Cedillo case in general , Hastings concluded that " The evidence was overwhelmingly contrary to the petitioners ' contentions . " He also said that the Cedillo family had been " misled by physicians who are guilty , in my view , of gross medical misjudgment . " The Cedillos appealed this case in March 2009 , but the court upheld its dismissal thereof in August 2010 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In response to the second rulings in 2010 , <unk> stated , " The denial of reasonable compensation to families was based on inadequate vaccine safety science and poorly designed and highly controversial epidemiology . " Similarly , Rebecca <unk> of the Coalition for Vaccine Safety said in a statement , " The deck is stacked against families in vaccine court . Government attorneys defend a government program , using government @-@ funded science , before government judges , " and Generation Rescue 's J.B. Handley argued that " the courts won 't concede something that will bring down the vaccination program . " 
 On the other hand , vaccine scientists praised the ruling , with Paul Offit stating " the autism theory had ' already had its day in science court and failed to hold up . ' " Additionally , Autism Speaks said that " the proven benefits of <unk> a child to protect them against serious diseases far outweigh the hypothesized risk that vaccinations might cause autism . Thus , we strongly encourage parents to vaccinate their children to protect them from serious childhood diseases . " The Department of Health and Human Services released a statement saying that " Hopefully , the determination by the special masters will help reassure parents that vaccines do not cause autism . " Similarly , the chairman of the American Medical Association stated that the " recent rulings by the Special Masters of the U.S. Court of Federal Claims provide even more overwhelming evidence that there is no association between vaccines and autism or related disorders . " 
 After the ruling , Keelan and Wilson wrote that , in contrast to those who argued that the proceedings gave unnecessary publicity to the scientifically unsupported vaccine @-@ autism hypothesis , " the NVICP was successful in its management of these proceedings and met the intent of the original legislation to protect the integrity of the vaccine supply , maintain public confidence in immunization , and provide those injured with a fair hearing . " 
 = Podoserpula = 
 Podoserpula is a genus of fungi in the family <unk> . The genus contains two species : the type , P. pusio , commonly known as the pagoda fungus , and the " Barbie pagoda " , P. miranda , officially published in 2013 . Podoserpula species produce fruit bodies consisting of up to a dozen caps arranged in overlapping shelves , attached to a central axis . Its unique shape is not known to exist in any other fungi . Four varieties of P. pusio are known , which differ in their sizes , spore morphology , and distribution . The genus is known to occur in Australia and New Zealand , Venezuela , Madagascar , and New Caledonia . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Craterellus pusio was first described by Miles Joseph Berkeley in an 1859 publication by James Hooker . Otto Kuntze transferred it to the genus Merulius in 1891 . Until the 1960s , however , it was known as Craterellus multiplex , a species described by Mordecai Cubitt Cooke and George Edward Massee in 1889 , and moved to Cantharellus by Curtis Gates Lloyd in 1920 . In 1958 , British mycologist R.W.G. Dennis collected the species in Venezuela during an expedition financed by the Percy Sladen Memorial Trust . Derek Reid , attempting to identify the species , rediscovered Berkeley 's name , which had priority , and described the new genus Podoserpula for it in 1963 while simultaneously describing four varieties of it . 
 Reid considered the genus allied to Leucogyrophana , then thought to belong to the family Coniophoraceae . Marinus Anton Donk , in a monograph published the next year , agreed and placed it close to <unk> and <unk> ; these genera are now known to represent early @-@ diverging lineages in the Boletales order . However , the white spore print and small , smooth , and hyaline spores are not characteristic of species in the Coniophoraceae . In a large @-@ scale phylogenetic analysis published in 2006 , Podoserpula nested far from them in the Plicaturopsis clade , an evolutionarily related group of early @-@ diverging members of the Agaricales order . Other taxa in this clade include Plicaturopsis and <unk> <unk> . The entire clade was later separated into three smaller orders , Podoserpula becoming a member of the <unk> along with mostly corticioid genera such as <unk> and <unk> . 
 A new species , Podoserpula miranda , was proposed in 2009 by a group of New Caledonian mycologists for a species of that South Pacific archipelago . The name was provisional ( not validly published ) , however , as the description was in French ( the code of nomenclature mandates Latin ) and lacked a required designation of a type specimen . It was validly published in 2013 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of Podoserpula species have an unusual form unknown in other fungi . The fruit bodies , which grow to a height of 1 – 18 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) , consist of up to a dozen cup @-@ shaped ( spathulate ) to kidney @-@ shaped ( reniform ) caps arranged in multiple tiers and attached to a central stem . Caps are joined to the main axis by short , flattened , stem @-@ like attachments . The variety tristis , in contrast , has caps that are more circular and appear to be pierced either centrally or off to the side . The surface of the caps is smooth and often brightly colored . The hymenium ( spore @-@ bearing surface ) on the underside of the caps is pink and has a folded and corrugated surface . Close to the area of attachment between the cap and the stem @-@ like connection to the main axis are swellings resembling warts or blisters . Individual caps resemble somewhat those of the European species Plicaturopsis <unk> . 
 Podoserpula has a monomitic hyphal structure , meaning that it only contains generative hyphae , which are relatively undifferentiated and can develop reproductive structures . These hyphae are thin @-@ walled , hyaline ( translucent ) , branched , and up to 10 μm thick . They have distinct , often swollen , clamp connections at the septa . The spores are small , typically 2 @.@ 75 – 6 by 2 – 3 @.@ 5 μm , smooth , hyaline , and vary in shape from roughly elliptical to somewhat spherical . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) can be either two- or four @-@ spored , and are club shaped , with a clamp connection at the base . Podoserpula has neither cystidia nor gloeocystidia . 
 Podoserpula pusio var. pusio is the nominate variety . Its fruit bodies are rarely greater than 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) tall . Variety <unk> @-@ americana is the largest of the varieties , reaching heights up to 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) . Other than its size and geographical distribution , it is roughly similar to var. pusio . Variety <unk> has elongated elliptical spores typically measuring 4 – 5 by 2 @.@ 75 – 3 @.@ 5 μm . Variety tristis has caps whose upper surfaces are colored pale fawn , and the main axis of the fruit bodies pierces through the cap . 
 Podoserpula miranda grows to a height of 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . It differs from P. pusio var. pusio in having thinner flesh , up to six funnel @-@ shaped caps whose size diminishes approaching the top , and a bright pink coloration in the folds of the hymenium . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Podoserpula pusio grow on the ground , on well @-@ rotted stumps , or among decaying tussock grass . They are presumed to be saprobic , and obtain nutrients by breaking down larger organic molecules found in the soil or in decaying wood . P. miranda in contrast , is thought to be ectomycorrhizal , as it appears to associate with <unk> <unk> , the predominant canopy tree in the forests where it is found . 
 The nominate variety is found in Australasia , but in 1997 it was reported in a protected area near Antananarivo in Madagascar , and in 2009 on the Falkland Islands . Variety <unk> occurs in Australia , var. tristis in New Zealand , and var. <unk> @-@ americana is known from Venezuela . 
 = Paul Bako = 
 Gabor Paul Bako II ( / <unk> / ; born June 20 , 1972 ) is a retired catcher in Major League Baseball . Bako is an example of a baseball " journeyman " , having played for 11 different major league teams during his 12 @-@ year career . He is officially listed at 6 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) and 210 pounds ( 95 kg ) . 
 Bako attended high school and college in his home state of Louisiana , winning two conference championships at the University of Southwest Louisiana . After reaching the majors with the American League 's Detroit Tigers in 1998 , Bako spent seven seasons in the National League , playing with six different teams . He returned to the American League with the Baltimore Orioles and the Kansas City Royals , then played for the Cincinnati Reds and the Philadelphia Phillies for one season each . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 = = = High school and college = = = 
 In 1990 , Bako was drafted out of Lafayette High School — who later retired his number 6 — with the ninth pick of the sixth round by the Cleveland Indians . He chose not to sign , and attended the University of Southwest Louisiana . In his college career , Bako caught for the Ragin ' Cajuns during two consecutive conference championship seasons : 1991 in the American South Conference , when they finished with a 49 – 20 record , 14th @-@ best among Division I squads ; and 1992 in the Sun Belt Conference , when Southwestern Louisiana 's pitching staff amassed a 3 @.@ 50 earned run average , 29th @-@ best in Division I. In 1993 , he was named to the second team of the all @-@ Sun Belt Conference baseball team , and was selected by the Cincinnati Reds in the fifth round of the 1993 June draft . 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 Bako began his professional career with the Pioneer Baseball League 's Billings Mustangs , a rookie @-@ league farm team of the Reds located in Montana . During the 1993 season , Bako amassed a .314 batting average , second @-@ highest on the team that season behind Chris Sexton . Bako walked 22 times , stole 5 bases , and batted in 30 runs , while excelling defensively compared to the other catcher on the team . His fielding percentage was .988 , and he posted only four errors that season . He was also named a Pioneer League All @-@ Star . 
 Bako moved on to the high @-@ A Winston @-@ Salem Spirits in the Carolina League for the 1994 and 1995 seasons . He struggled during the 1994 season , batting only .204 with three home runs and 26 runs batted in ( RBIs ) . 1995 was more successful , with an 81 @-@ point boost in batting average ( .285 ) , seven home runs and 11 doubles . After the season , Baseball America rated him the top @-@ ranked catching prospect in the Reds farm system . 
 Bako 's 1995 performance earned him a promotion to the Southern League 's Chattanooga Lookouts , the Reds AA @-@ level affiliate , for 1996 , where he was named a Southern League All @-@ Star . He was second on the team in strikeouts ( 93 ) and fifth among regulars with a .294 batting average . He hit a career @-@ high eight home runs during that season , adding 27 doubles and 48 RBIs in 360 at bats . In 1997 , playing for the Indianapolis Indians , Bako was a teammate of brothers Aaron and Bret Boone . That year , he batted .243 and matched his previous year 's career @-@ high home run total . He had 78 hits in 321 at @-@ bats . Bako 's game management earned him a reputation , even in the minor leagues . Brett Tomko , who played with Bako in the minors in 1996 as a member of the Lookouts and in 1997 with Indianapolis , recalled one of their mound conversations : 
 Bako : Are you really trying out here ? Tomko : What do you mean ? Bako : Because your stuff is horrible today and if you don 't try a little harder , you 're not going to make it out of this inning . 
 On November 11 , 1997 , Bako was traded by the Reds to the Detroit Tigers in an offseason deal that included Donne Wall . After playing 13 games with the Tigers AAA @-@ level affiliate — the Toledo Mud Hens — in 1998 , Bako was called up to the Major League club . 
 = = = Major leagues = = = 
 = = = = 1998 – 2000 = = = = 
 Bako made his major league debut with the Tigers on April 30 , 1998 , going 0 @-@ for @-@ 4 with three strikeouts . His first Major League hit , a bases loaded double , came the next day off Bill Swift , when he went 2 @-@ for @-@ 5 against the Seattle Mariners in a 17 – 3 Tigers win . He hit his first major league home run on May 15 against the Oakland Athletics ; it came off Mike Mohler in the bottom of the sixth inning with two runners ( Damion Easley , Joe Randa ) on base . He also went 4 @-@ for @-@ 4 against the New York Yankees on July 21 . Bako 's rookie season was arguably his most successful : he posted a .272 batting average , hit three home runs , batted in 30 runs , and collected 106 total bases . After the season , the Tigers traded Bako to the Houston Astros in a seven @-@ player deal that included Brad Ausmus . 
 Bako appeared in 73 games for the 1999 Astros ; he got at least one hit in his first six games with Houston after beginning the season in the minor leagues , highlighted by a 3 @-@ for @-@ 4 performance on April 30 , the anniversary of his debut . He added another 4 @-@ for @-@ 4 game to his résumé on July 29 against the Colorado Rockies . Bako hit .256 with two home runs , 17 RBIs , and 16 runs scored in the 1999 season ; he was part of Houston 's roster for the 1999 National League Division Series , but did not play . After one game for the Astros in 2000 , Houston traded Bako to the Florida Marlins . He played his first game for Florida on April 13 , going 0 @-@ for @-@ 4 with a strikeout . Bako played for the Marlins until July 20 , batting .242 with 14 RBIs . He was waived on July 21 and claimed by the Atlanta Braves , who acquired Bako from their division rivals . He batted .190 with the Braves and played in his first career game at first base in the last two months of the 2000 season . 
 = = = = 2001 – 2004 = = = = 
 Bako remained with the Braves for the 2001 season , where he was the backup to Javy López . He batted .212 , amassing the third @-@ highest ( 20 ) walk total among Atlanta 's bench players and batting in 15 runs . His top performances of the season were a 3 @-@ for @-@ 4 game against the Montréal Expos in August and a 2 @-@ for @-@ 3 night — with 2 walks — in October against Florida . Bako appeared in three games during the 2001 National League Division Series ( NLDS ) , his first playoff appearances , and three more during the National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) . In Game 3 of the NLDS , Bako went 2 @-@ for @-@ 2 with a two @-@ run home run in the second inning ; he also batted in a third run on a squeeze bunt in the fourth . 
 In a trade of catchers , the Braves acquired Henry Blanco from the Milwaukee Brewers in exchange for Bako and José Cabrera . Bako played in 87 games for the Brewers in 2002 , his most extensive playing time since his rookie season ; behind him , the team used four additional catchers . Bako batted .235 with four home runs for the season . His top performance of the year was against the Minnesota Twins in interleague play ; Bako went 3 @-@ for @-@ 5 with a two @-@ run home run in the top of the fourth inning and a bases @-@ loaded single to drive in a third run . 
 After the 2002 season , Milwaukee traded Bako to the Chicago Cubs , where he spent two complete seasons ; 2003 and 2004 were the only consecutive seasons that Bako spent with the same organization . Over his two years , he backed up Damian Miller and Michael Barrett , and was reunited with former Braves teammate Greg Maddux in 2004 . In his first Chicago season , Bako batted .229 with 22 walks and 13 doubles ; a 4 @-@ for @-@ 5 performance in his second game of the year was his best of the season . In that game , he batted three times against the Reds with the bases loaded , notching a triple , two singles and six RBIs . Bako batted only .203 for the Cubs in 2004 . He hit one home run and eight doubles , displaying his defense with a .989 fielding percentage . His top performance that year was in the second game of a doubleheader against Florida , when he went 3 @-@ for @-@ 3 and batted in two runs . 
 = = = = 2005 – 2009 = = = = 
 As a free agent , Bako signed with the Los Angeles Dodgers for the 2005 season . He batted .250 for the Dodgers in 13 games with two doubles and four RBIs . He backed up both Jason Phillips and Dioner Navarro in 2005 , but underwent season @-@ ending surgery on his anterior cruciate ligament in June of that season . The Dodgers granted Bako free agency after the season , and he signed with the Kansas City Royals in December 2005 . After beginning the 2006 season in the minor leagues , Bako returned to the majors with the Royals , where he batted .209 backing up John Buck . He played in 60 games with the Baltimore Orioles in 2007 , amassing five extra @-@ base hits and batting .205 . He tied for the highest total of walks off the Orioles bench and batted in eight runs for the season . 
 On February 1 , 2008 , Bako signed a minor league contract with an invitation to spring training with the Cincinnati Reds . At the end of spring training , he was added to the 40 @-@ man roster . Though he batted only .217 , Bako appeared in a career @-@ high 99 games in 2008 , hitting six home runs and notching 35 RBIs . On January 30 , 2009 , the Chicago Cubs signed Bako to a one @-@ year contract . However , he was unconditionally released near the end of spring training . On May 18 , Bako signed a minor league deal with the Philadelphia Phillies , and was called up from the Reading Phillies to the Major League roster on June 9 . He became the Phillies only backup catcher when the Phillies waived " folk hero " Chris Coste on July 10 ; Coste had broken into the big leagues for the first time with Philadelphia at age 33 . The next day , Bako came to the plate in the bottom of the ninth inning against Pittsburgh Pirates closer Matt Capps with the score tied , 7 – 7 ; the Phillies had been behind by four runs before home runs by Matt Stairs and Ryan Howard tied the game . With the bases loaded , Bako hit a single through the left side of the infield , driving in the winning run ( Raúl Ibáñez ) and sealing the Phillies fourth consecutive victory in a season @-@ high ten @-@ game winning streak . After the acquisition of starting pitcher Cliff Lee , Bako caught all of his first five starts with the Phillies , when Lee posted a 5 – 0 record and an 0 @.@ 68 earned run average . Bako said , " With as many strikes as he throws and as many weapons as he has , it 's a lot of fun to catch him . " Manager Charlie Manuel , however , denied that Bako was scheduled to be Lee 's personal catcher , as he had done for Maddux in 2001 . " [ Bako ] ' s [ sic ] not his personal catcher ... Of course you guys will write whatever you want to write . If you want him to be his personal catcher , go right ahead . But I 'll handle it anyway , so it doesn 't matter . " 
 As the 2009 season wore on , regular catcher Carlos Ruiz spent some time recuperating from an injury , allowing Bako expanded playing time near the end of the season . From September 18 to 29 , Bako played in all but one of the team 's games ; his best stretch was from September 24 through September 27 , when he went 6 @-@ for @-@ 13 with two <unk> over three games . He finished the year with a .224 batting average . After winning the National League East for the third consecutive year , the Phillies faced the Colorado Rockies in the National League Division Series , the Los Angeles Dodgers in the National League Championship Series , and the New York Yankees in the World Series ; Bako did not appear in any games during the postseason . After the 2009 season , Bako filed for free agency ; considered retirement , according to teammate Scott Eyre ; and did not play during the 2010 season . 
 = = After baseball = = 
 As of 2011 , Bako is currently an equipment representative for the <unk> Bat Company , based in Baton Rouge , Louisiana . He and former Orioles first baseman David <unk> are part @-@ owners of the company . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Bako lives in his hometown of Lafayette , Louisiana , during the offseason . He has a wife , Laurie , and two children : a son named Will and a daughter , Abbey . 
 = Miley : The Movement = 
 Miley : The Movement is a 2013 documentary television film about American entertainer Miley Cyrus , following her return to the music industry in the lead @-@ up to her fourth studio album Bangerz ( 2013 ) . It premiered on October 2 , 2013 , on MTV , shortly before the release of her record , for which the documentary served as a promotional tool . The documentary depicts Cyrus finalizing details regarding its launch , making public appearances for additional promotion , and rehearsing for her controversial performance at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 Miley : The Movement received generally mixed reviews from mainstream critics , who appreciated Cyrus ' seemingly genuine commentary , but were disappointed by its failure to fully discuss her recent controversies and public criticisms . According to Nielsen ratings , it was watched by approximately 1 @.@ 6 million viewers in the United States . An extended version of the documentary was broadcast by MTV on October 6 , 2013 . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 It was first announced that Cyrus would appear in a documentary broadcast by MTV in July 2013 ; an official statement published by the network elaborated that it would " [ follow ] Cyrus as she works on the album and delves deep into the transformation she has experienced over the past few years . " Its title was announced on September 10 , with a broadcast date confirmed for October 2 . It premiered shortly before the release of Cyrus ' fourth studio album Bangerz , for which the documentary served as a promotional tool . An official trailer was released by MTV on September 18 . Miley : The Movement was screened to mainstream critics the week prior to its official release , although it was further reworked before being broadcast on the network . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Miley : The Movement commences with Cyrus stating " I don 't apologize for anything . " Shortly after , she comments that " For me , the movement needs to be something bigger than just a record . For me , a movement is something that represents , like , taking over the world . " Cyrus notably avoids specifically naming her former television series Hannah Montana , instead calling it " my show " when flashback pictures of her earlier career was shown , presumably to distance herself from the franchise . However , she commented that after its conclusion " I made one movie , and I never wanted to do it again . I want to make music for the rest of my life . " Having been filmed after Bangerz was recorded , the documentary instead depicts Cyrus finalizing details including its album artwork and track listing . A brief discussion in a recording studio with Britney Spears , who is featured on the track " SMS ( Bangerz ) " is additionally included . 
 Cyrus ' former fiancé Liam Hemsworth , whom she had been in a highly publicized relationship with before ending her engagement in September 2013 , and father Billy Ray Cyrus are not mentioned during the program in an intentional effort to " focus on music and professional footage . " Cyrus ' mother Tish frequently appears during Miley : The Movement , and on one occasion describes her initial hesitation after Cyrus befriended hip hop producers and recording artists Juicy J , Pharrell Williams , and Mike Will Made It . Cyrus is seen making promotional appearances for further promotion of Bangerz in the three months before its release . The preparation for her controversial performance of " We Can 't Stop " at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards serves as a recurring theme ; she expresses concern that the track itself charted lower than Cyrus expected on the iTunes Store immediately after its release , experiences a brief illness during rehearsals , and becomes upset after her planned entrance to the event did not come to fruition . The final performance itself is not shown , although Cyrus briefly addresses criticism and describes it as " a strategic hot mess . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Miley : The Movement received generally mixed reviews from mainstream critics . Writing for E ! , Bruna Nessif provided a favorable review ; she opined that the documentary was " pretty entertaining " and reminded the general public that Cyrus " takes her job very seriously and still gets nervous . " Andrew <unk> from Entertainment Weekly felt that Cyrus ' footage with her mother and Spears were among " her most candid moments " , although noted the absences of her father and Hemsworth . Newsday 's Glenn Gamboa gave a positive review , appreciating that Cyrus " surprises with her words , not her <unk> . " Elysa Gardner of USA Today opined that Cyrus appeared " good @-@ humored and grateful to her fans " throughout the documentary , but questioned if her evolving image and public persona would become " yet another cautionary tale . " 
 In a mixed review , Kia Makarechi from The Huffington Post was critical of the decision to avoid mentioning Hemsworth and toning @-@ down of the criticism Cyrus received after the MTV Video Music Awards . She implied that MTV treated Cyrus like " an honest @-@ to @-@ god civil rights advocate " , although felt that Spears ' appearance was among the only " redeeming moments " of the documentary . Kate Dries from Jezebel suggested that frequent flashback footage of Cyrus ' idols Madonna and Spears implied that MTV was " clearly proud " that all three women generated controversies at the MTV Video Music Awards in years past . Writing for Refinery29 , Leila Brillson felt that " very little was clarified " by Miley : The Movement , and suggested that the documentary suffered from its lack of focus . 
 In its original broadcast in the United States on October 2 , 2013 , Miley : The Movement was watched by approximately 1 @.@ 6 million viewers , and earned a 0 @.@ 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . An expanded version of the program with an additional thirty minutes of content was broadcast by MTV on October 6 , 2013 ; it contained behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage that was excluded from the original version , and expanded upon existing segments . 
 = Preggers = 
 " Preggers " is the fourth episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on September 23 , 2009 , and was written and directed by executive producer Brad Falchuk . " Preggers " sees glee club member Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) join the football team and admit his homosexuality to his father , Burt ( Mike O 'Malley ) . Cheerleader Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) discovers she is pregnant and tells her boyfriend Finn ( Cory Monteith ) the baby is his , when in fact the father is his best friend Puck ( Mark Salling ) . Faculty members Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) and Sandy Ryerson ( Stephen Tobolowsky ) team up in an effort to bring down the glee club , luring away a disillusioned Rachel ( Lea Michele ) , who quits when club director Will ( Matthew Morrison ) refuses to award her a solo song . This episode features the first appearance of O 'Malley as Burt Hummel . 
 " Preggers " features covers of two songs , and several dance performances of Beyoncé Knowles ' " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . A studio recording of Michele 's cover of " Taking Chances " was released as a single , available for digital download and features on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 1 . The scene in which Kurt comes out to his father was based on the personal experience of series creator Ryan Murphy . Murphy 's intention was to move away from previous shows he has worked on in which gay characters have not been given happy endings , by allowing Kurt to succeed and be accepted . 
 The episode was watched by 6 @.@ 64 million United States viewers and received mixed reviews from critics . Shawna Malcom of the Los Angeles Times praised the show 's fast pacing ; however , the New York Times 's Mike Hale felt that key characters were not given enough screen time . The football team 's performance of " Single Ladies " and Kurt 's coming out to his father were generally well received ; however , Rachel 's actions garnered little sympathy , and several reviewers commented negatively on Quinn 's pregnancy , with Eric Goldman of IGN deeming it " a very soap opera plotline " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Glee club member Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) is caught dancing to Beyoncé Knowles 's " Single Ladies " by his father Burt ( Mike O 'Malley ) , and claims that it is a football exercise , and that he is now part of the team . Fellow glee club member and football quarterback Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) helps Kurt to practice , and finds him to be a skilled kicker . Finn convinces coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) to let Kurt try out for the team . Ken is delighted to find such an asset for the team and adds Kurt as the kicker . 
 Finn 's girlfriend Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) tells him she is pregnant , claiming her pregnancy as a result of Finn 's premature ejaculation when they made out in Quinn 's hot tub . Finn worries that his future prospects will be diminished by fatherhood . He asks glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) to coach the football team at dancing , believing it will help them to improve , increasing his chances of securing a football scholarship . Finn confides Quinn 's news to his best friend Puck ( Mark Salling ) , who later confronts Quinn , claiming to be the baby 's father , since she said she was a virgin when they had sex . Quinn rejects Puck , calling him a " Lima loser " who could never support her and the baby like Finn . Will 's wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) reveals to her sister Kendra ( Jennifer Aspen ) that she experienced a hysterical pregnancy and is not really carrying Will 's baby . Kendra suggests that they acquire a baby , and when Terri learns of Quinn 's pregnancy from Will , she confronts her , asking questions about her prenatal care . 
 Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) approaches former glee club director Sandy Ryerson ( Stephen Tobolowsky ) and enlists him in her plan to sabotage the club . She blackmails Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) into appointing Sandy as the school 's new Arts director , and together they hold auditions for a school production of Cabaret , hoping to entice away the glee club 's star , Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) . Rachel feels slighted when Will awards Tina Cohen @-@ Chang ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) a solo that she wanted , so she auditions for the musical and is given the lead role . When Will refuses to reassign the solo to Rachel , she quits the club . 
 The football team puts their dance training into practice by performing the " Single Ladies " routine in the middle of a game , confusing and distracting the opposition , and with Kurt 's help is able to win . Buoyed by his success , Kurt comes out to his father Burt and tells him that he 's homosexual ; Burt tells him he knew all along and loves Kurt just the same . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Preggers " was written and directed by Glee 's executive producer and co @-@ creator Brad Falchuk . Kurt Fuller guest stars as local news station owner Mr. McClung . The episode features covers of " Taking Chances " by Celine Dion and " Tonight " from West Side Story . Beyoncé Knowles ' " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " is also featured in several dance performances . Kurt 's backup dancers for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " are series regular Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) and recurring character Brittany ( Heather Morris ) . Dancer Morris was one of Beyonce 's backup dancers for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " appearing on The Today Show , Ellen , and others . A studio recording of " Taking Chances " was released as a single , available for digital download , and appeared on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 1 . The track charted at number 79 in Australia , 73 in Canada and 71 in the United States . 
 The scene in which Kurt comes out to his father was taken verbatim from series creator Ryan Murphy 's own life . Murphy felt that the scene was " a great thing to put on television " , as , while audiences have seen gay characters isolated and attacked , they have rarely seen them ultimately winning and triumphing . He commented that : " The show is about making you feel good in the end . It 's about happy endings and optimism and the power of your personal journey and making you feel that the weird thing about me is the great thing about me . I ’ ve done other shows with gay characters , and I will say that in many of those cases , the gay characters didn 't have a happy ending . And I thought you know what ? Enough . " Colfer has commented that his biggest challenge was in ensuring the scene felt " honest " and not comical or " used as a punchline " . He explained : " I think it 's probably the first time a character 's sexuality has been respected and almost dignified in a way , and I think that 's really important , and there needs to be more of that on TV . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Preggers " was watched by 6 @.@ 64 million United States viewers and attained a 3 @.@ 1 / 8 rating / share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . It was the twenty @-@ second most watched show in Canada for the week of broadcast , with 1 @.@ 39 million viewers . In the UK , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 804 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 397 million on E4 , and 407 @,@ 000 on timeshift ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on E4 and E4 + 1 for the week , and the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week , as well as the most watched episode of the series at the time . The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Shawna Malcom for the Los Angeles Times reviewed the episode positively , praising the football team 's performance of the " Single Ladies " dance and Kurt coming out to his father . Malcom also commented positively on the show 's fast pacing ; however , Mike Hale of the New York Post was less favorable , deeming the episode " overstuffed with story lines " . He felt that key characters did not receive enough screentime , and that : " There was so much exposition going on that there didn ’ t seem to be much room for laughs . " 
 Tim Stack for Entertainment Weekly wrote that , although the dancing in the episode was fun , " Preggers " was lacking in " big singing moments " apart from Rachel 's performance of " Taking Chances " . He deemed Quinn 's pregnancy " a good dramatic twist " , but hoped that it would not be a long @-@ lasting storyline . Eric Goldman of IGN rated the episode 8 @.@ 8 out of 10 . He called the " Single Ladies " performance " a memorable TV moment " , and wrote that Quinn 's pregnancy was a " very soap opera plotline " however commented : " luckily Glee is the kind of show to handle it with humor . " 
 James Poniewozik for Time deemed Kurt 's coming out " beautifully handled " , commenting : " the fact that Dad ( Mike O 'Malley , who has turned out to be a pretty good character actor ) ends up not being the boor we think he 's going to be is one of the first signs that Glee is growing up as a series , that having established a world of primary @-@ color stereotypes , it 's now willing to subvert those expectations . " Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal criticized Rachel 's actions in the episode , and felt that : " Rachel has become insufferable . The disagreements with Mr. Schue about her own development as a bona fide triple @-@ threat have branded her as an overbearing prima donna to the rest of Glee . " 
 The comedic pairing of Sue and Sandy attracted some praise , with Stack deeming them " the best villains ever " . Goldman said that : " Tobolowsky is terrific in this role , as Sandy manages to make everything he says [ ... ] sound amazingly disturbing . " Hale criticized Lynch as Sue , however , writing that she gave a " one @-@ note performance " , suggesting that she had been miscast in the role . 
 = House of Hasan @-@ Jalalyan = 
 The House of Hasan @-@ Jalalyan ( Armenian : <unk> @-@ <unk> ) was an Armenian dynasty that ruled the region of Khachen ( Greater Artsakh ) from 1214 onwards in what are now the regions of lower Karabakh , Nagorno @-@ Karabakh and small part of Syunik . It was named after Hasan @-@ Jalal Dawla ( <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> ) , an Armenian feudal prince from Khachen . The Hasan @-@ Jalalyan family was able to maintain its autonomy throughout several centuries of foreign domination of the region by Seljuk Turks , Persians and Mongols as they , as well as the other Armenian princes and meliks of Khachen , saw themselves of holding the last bastion of Armenian independence in the region . 
 Through their many patronages of churches and other monuments , the Hasan @-@ Jalalyans helped cultivate Armenian culture throughout the region . By the late 16th century , the Hasan @-@ Jalalyan family had branched out to establish <unk> in Gulistan and Jraberd , making them , along with Khachen , <unk> and Dizak , a part of what was then known as the " <unk> of Khamsa . " 
 = = Origins = = 
 Hasan @-@ Jalal traced his descent to the Armenian <unk> dynasty , a family that predated the establishment of the Parthian Arsacids in the region . Hasan @-@ Jalal 's ancestry was " almost exclusively " Armenian according to historian Robert H. Hewsen , a professor at Rowan University and an expert on the history of the Caucasus : 
 In the male line , ( 1 ) the princes ( who later became kings ) of <unk> . Through various princesses , who married his ancestors , Hasan @-@ Jalal was descended from ( 2 ) the kings of Armenia or the Bagratuni Dynasty , centered at Ani ; ( 3 ) the Armenian kings of Vaspurakan of the Artsruni dynasty , centered in the region of Van ; 4 ) the princes of <unk> ; ( 5 ) the Sassanid dynasty of Persia , and ( 6 ) the Arsacids , the second royal house of Albania , itself a branch of ( 7 ) the kings of ancient Parthia . 
 Much of Hasan @-@ Jalal Dawla 's family roots were entrenched in an intricate array of royal marriages with new and old Armenian <unk> families . Hasan @-@ Jalal 's grandfather was Hasan I ( also known as Hasan the Great ) , a prince who ruled over the northern half of Artsakh . In 1182 , he stepped down as ruler of the region and entered monastery life at <unk> , and divided his land into two : the southern half ( comprising much of Khachen ) went to his oldest son Vakhtank II ( also known as <unk> ) and the northern half went to the youngest , Gregory " the Black . " Vakhtank II married <unk> Zakarian , who was herself the daughter of Sargis Zakarian , the progenitor of the Zakarid line of princes . When he married the daughter of the <unk> king of Dizak @-@ Balk , <unk> , Hasan @-@ Jalal also inherited his father @-@ in @-@ law 's lands . 
 In the late 1960s and into the 1970s , Hasan @-@ Jalal ’ s origins became a part of a larger debate revolving around the history of Artsakh between Armenian and Azerbaijani scholars . In addition to the position held almost solely by Azerbaijani historians that much of Artsakh at the time was under heavy Caucasian Albanian influence , they also contend that the population and monuments were not Armenian but Caucasian Albanian in origin ( this argument has also been employed against Armenian monuments in the region of Nakhichevan ) . Among the foremost revisionists who expounded these views were Ziya <unk> and Farida <unk> . <unk> herself asserted that Hasan @-@ Jalal , based upon her interpretation of an inscription carved into the Gandzasar Monastery by the prince , was Caucasian Albanian . Armenian historians as well as experts of the region such as Hewsen , reject her conclusions , along with the notion held in Azerbaijan , that the Armenians " stole " Caucasian Albania ’ s culture . 
 = = Reign under Hasan @-@ Jalal Dawla = = 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 With the surrender of Ani to the Byzantine Empire in 1045 and the Byzantine annexation of Kars in 1064 , the final independent Armenian state in historic Armenia , Bagratuni kingdom , came to an end . However , despite foreign domination of the region , which became more pronounced after the Seljuk Turks defeated the Byzantines at the battle of Manzikert in 1071 , Armenians in eastern Armenia were able to maintain autonomy in the two mountainous kingdoms of Syunik and Lori and in the principality of Khachen . From the early to mid @-@ 12th century , the combined Georgian and Armenian armies were successful in pushing the Turks out of Eastern Armenia , thereby establishing a period of relative peace and prosperity until the appearance of the Mongols in 1236 . 
 Khachen used to be a part of Syunik until numerous Turkic invasions severed it from the rest of the kingdom . The reign of the Hasan @-@ Jalalyan family was concentrated around the Terter and the <unk> rivers . Hasan @-@ Jalal 's birth date is unknown ; however his reign , beginning in 1214 and ending at the time of his death sometime between 1261 @-@ 1262 in Qazvin , encompassed both Artsakh and the surrounding Armenian regions . When his father Vakhtank died in 1214 , Hasan @-@ Jalal inherited his lands and took up residence in a castle at <unk> in Jraberd . He was addressed with the titles <unk> ( king ; Armenian : <unk> ) or <unk> ( autocrat or absolute ruler ; <unk> ) but took the official title of " King of Artsakh and Balk " when he married the daughter of the final king of Dizak @-@ Balk . The medieval Armenian historian Kirakos Gandzaketsi extolled Hasan @-@ Jalal in his work History of Armenia , lacing him with praise for his piety and devotion to Christianity : 
 He was ... a pious and God @-@ loving man , mild and meek , merciful , and a lover of the poor , striving in prayers and entreaties like one who lived in the desert . He performed matins and vespers unhindered , no matter where he might be , like a monk ; and in memory of the Resurrection of our Savior , he spent Sunday without sleeping , in a standing vigil . He was very fond of the priests , a lover of knowledge , and a reader of the divine Gospels . 
 A further testament to this devotion included Hasan @-@ Jalal 's commissioning of the Gandzasar Monastery . Construction of the monastery began in 1216 and lasted until 1238 . On July 22 , 1240 , amid great celebration during Vardavar celebrations and in the presence of nearly 700 priests including Nerses , the Catholicos of Albania , the church was consecrated . The monastery went on to become the residence and sepulcher of the family as well as the house of the <unk> ; beginning in the 15th century , the family also monopolized control over the seat of Catholicos itself , which would from thereon in pass down from uncle to nephew . Hasan @-@ Jalal 's son John VII is considered to be the first to have established this practice when he became the Catholicos whereas his nephew , also named John , became the second . 
 Despite his faithfulness to Christianity , Muslim influence in the region had pervaded and influenced the culture and customs of the Christians living in Georgia and Armenia , especially after the Seljuk Turks invaded the Caucasus . Byzantine art scholar Anthony Eastmond , for example , notes that " many of the outward manifestations of [ Hasan @-@ Jalal 's ] rule were presented through Islamic customs and titles , most notably in his depiction on his principal foundation of Gandzasar . " The image of Hasan @-@ Jalal on the drum of Gandzasar 's dome has him sitting cross @-@ legged , which Eastmond remarks was a " predominant device for depicting power at the Seljuq court . " Muslim influence was also seen in Hasan @-@ Jalal 's name : as a fashion of the time , many Armenians adopted Arabic patronymics ( kunya ) that lost any " connexion with original Armenian names . " Hasan @-@ Jalal 's Armenian name was <unk> but the Arabic words in his name , in fact , described his person ; thus , Hasan meant handsome ; Jalal , grand ; Dawla , wealth and governance . 
 = = = Hasan @-@ Jalal 's Armenian Synaxarion = = = 
 Gandzasar became home to Armenia 's first completed Haysmavurk ( Synaxarion ) , a calendar collection of short lives of saints and accounts of important religious events . The idea to have a new , better organized Haysmavurk came from Hasan @-@ Jalal himself , who then placed his request with Father Israel ( Ter @-@ Israel ) , a disciple of an important Armenian medieval philosopher and Artsakh native known as <unk> <unk> . The Haysmavurk was further developed by Kirakos Gandzaketsi . Ever since , the Haysmavurk ordered by Hasan @-@ Jalal became known as " Synaxarion of Ter @-@ Israel ; " it was mass printed in Constantinople in 1834 . 
 = = = Mongol invasion = = = 
 In 1236 , the Ilkhanate Mongol armies invaded the Caucasus . Prior to them entering Khachen , Hasan Jalal and his people were able to take refuge at <unk> ( located directly south of Gandzasar ; also known by its Persian name of <unk> ) . Given its formidable location atop a mountain , the Mongols chose not to besiege the fortress and sued for negotiations with Hasan @-@ Jalal : they exchanged his loyalty and military service to the Mongol Empire in return for some of the immediate lands adjacent to Khachen that they had conquered . Later , in 1240 @-@ 1242 Hasan Jalal even had struck coins of common Mongol types in Khachen on the mints of " <unk> " ( in <unk> ) and " <unk> " ( in <unk> <unk> ) . 
 Feeling the need to preserve his power , Hasan @-@ Jalal traveled twice to Karakorum , the capital of the Mongol empire , where he was able to obtain special autonomy rights and privileges for himself and the people under his domain from the ruling khan . Despite this arrangement , the Mongols viewed many of the people of the region with contempt and taxed them excessively . Arghun Khan , the regional Mongol <unk> at the time , placed so many restrictions against Armenians that it prompted Hasan @-@ Jalal in 1256 to journey to the capital once more to protest against the encroachments upon Catholicos Nerses . In response , Batu Khan drafted a document " guaranteeing freedom for Lord Nerses , <unk> of Albania , for all his properties and goods , that he be free and untaxed and allowed to travel freely everywhere in the dioceses under his authority , and that no one disobey what he said . " 
 Hasan @-@ Jalal also attempted to strengthen his alliances with the Mongols by having his daughter <unk> marry Bora <unk> , the son of a Mongol leader . Relations between Armenians and Mongols continued to deteriorate however , and the document issued by the khan failed to uphold its promises . 
