 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – writer , vocals 
 Patrick Leonard – co @-@ writer , drums , keyboard , production 
 Richard Page – co @-@ writer 
 Dean Parks – acoustic guitar 
 Suzie Katayama – cello 
 Credits adapted from " I 'll Remember " 7 " vinyl single liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Labyrinth ( film ) = 
 Labyrinth is a 1986 British @-@ American adventure musical fantasy film directed by Jim Henson , executive produced by George Lucas , and based upon conceptual designs by Brian Froud . The film revolves around 16 @-@ year @-@ old Sarah 's ( Jennifer Connelly ) quest to reach the center of an enormous otherworldly maze to rescue her infant brother Toby , who has been kidnapped by Jareth , the Goblin King ( David Bowie ) . With the exception of Bowie and Connelly , most of the significant characters in the film are played by puppets produced by Jim Henson 's Creature Shop . 
 The film started as a collaboration between Henson and Froud , with ideas for the film first being discussed between them following a screening of their previous collaboration , The Dark Crystal . Terry Jones of Monty Python wrote the first draft of the film 's script early in 1984 , drawing on Froud 's sketches for inspiration . Various other script @-@ writers , including Laura Phillips ( who had previously written several episodes of Fraggle Rock ) , Lucas , Dennis Lee , and Elaine May , subsequently re @-@ wrote and made additions to the screenplay , although Jones received the film 's sole screen @-@ writing credit . Labyrinth was shot on location in Upper Nyack , Piermont and Haverstraw in New York , and at Elstree Studios and West Wycombe Park in the United Kingdom . 
 The New York Times reported that Labyrinth had a budget of $ 25 million . The film was a box office disappointment and only grossed $ 12 @.@ 7 million during its U.S. theatrical run . The commercial failure of the film demoralized Henson to the extent that his son Brian remembered the time of the film 's release as one of the most difficult periods of his father 's career . It would be the last feature film directed by Henson before his death in 1990 . 
 Although it was met with a mixed critical response upon its original release , Labyrinth has since gained a large cult following . A four @-@ volume manga sequel to the film , Return to Labyrinth , was published by Tokyopop between 2006 @-@ 10 . In 2012 , Archaia Studios Press announced they were developing a graphic novel prequel to the film . In January 2016 , it was announced that a reboot was in development , which was later denied by screenwriter Nicole Perlman . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Sarah Williams rehearses a play in the park with her dog Merlin and becomes distracted by a line she is unable to remember while being watched by a barn owl . Realizing she is late to babysit her baby brother Toby , she rushes home and is confronted by her stepmother Irene before she and her father Robert leave for dinner . Sarah realizes that Toby is in possession of her treasured teddy bear Lancelot . Frustrated by this and his constant crying , Sarah rashly wishes Toby be taken away by the Goblin King Jareth , a character in the play she is rehearsing . She is shocked when Toby disappears and the Goblin King confronts her and transports her to his kingdom . He refuses to return the baby , but gives Sarah thirteen hours to solve his Labyrinth and find him before Toby is turned into a goblin . Sarah meets the dwarvish Hoggle , who aids her in entering the Labyrinth , but a talking worm inadvertently sends her in the wrong direction . 
 Sarah ends up in an oubliette where she reunites with Hoggle . After they confront Jareth and escape one of his traps , the two encounter a large beast named Ludo . Hoggle flees while Sarah befriends Ludo . After another riddle , she loses him in a forest . Hoggle encounters Jareth , who gives him a peach and instructs him to give it to Sarah , calling his loyalty into question as he was supposed to lead her out of the maze . Sarah is assaulted by a group of creatures with detachable body parts who try to remove her head , but Hoggle comes to her aid . She kisses him , and Jareth magically sends them to the Bog of Eternal <unk> as punishment , where they reunite with Ludo . Sarah , Hoggle , and Ludo meet the guard of a bridge out of the swamp named Sir Didymus , an anthropomorphic fox and his Old English Sheepdog steed named Ambrosius ( who bears a resemblance to Merlin ) . After Ludo saves Sarah from falling into the swamp , Didymus joins the group . After the group gets hungry , Hoggle gives Sarah the peach and runs away as it begins to erase her memories . She has a dream where Jareth comes to her at a masquerade ball , proclaiming his love for her , but she resists and escapes , falling into a junkyard . After an old hag named Junk Lady fails to brainwash her and her memory is jogged , she is rescued by the others , and they are right outside Goblin City near Jareth 's castle . Confronted by the gate guard , Hoggle comes to the rescue . Despite his feeling unworthy of forgiveness , Sarah and the others welcome him back , and they enter the city together . 
 Jareth is alerted to their presence and sends his goblin army to stop them , but Ludo 's powers to summon rocks helps to turn the tide of the comical battle , and they enter the castle . Sarah insists she must face Jareth alone and promises to call the others if needed . In a room modeled after an Escher staircase , she confronts Jareth while trying to retrieve Toby . She tries to recite the line from her play , that has told her adventure to that point , but cannot remember the last line . As Jareth begs her to obey him and he will love her , she remembers the line , " You have no power over me ! " Defeated at the last second , Jareth returns Sarah and Toby to the real world safely . 
 Realizing how important Toby is to her , she gives him Lancelot and returns to her room . While there , she sees her friends in the mirror and realizes even though she is growing up , she still needs them in her life every now and again . In an instant , all of the major characters from the Labyrinth appear in her room for a raucous celebration , while Jareth in his owl form watches from outside and then flies away into the night . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jennifer Connelly as Sarah Williams , a 16 @-@ year @-@ old girl who journeys through the Labyrinth to find her baby brother . 
 David Bowie as Jareth the Goblin King , the ruler of the Goblins . He brings Toby to his Labyrinth on Sarah 's wish , falls in love with her , and offers to make her his consort . 
 Toby Froud as Toby Williams . Sarah 's baby brother . 
 Christopher Malcolm as Robert , Sarah and Toby 's father . 
 Shelley Thompson as Karen , Toby 's mother and Sarah 's stepmother . 
 Natalie Finland as the Labyrinth Fairies , a bunch of deceitful barefoot fairies that reside in the Labyrinth . 
 = = = Voices = = = 
 Brian Henson as the voice of Hoggle , a dwarf in Jareth 's employ who befriends Sarah . 
 Artist Ron Mueck as the voice of Ludo , a kind @-@ hearted beast . 
 David Shaughnessy as the voice of Sir Didymus , a brave fox knight . 
 David Shaughnessy also voices The Wiseman 's Bird Hat , a bird @-@ headed hat worn by the Wiseman . 
 Percy Edwards as the voice of Ambrosius , an Old English Sheepdog . 
 Timothy Bateson as the voice of The Worm 
 Michael Hordern as the voice of The Wiseman , an aged human @-@ like individual . 
 Denise Bryer as the voice of The Junk Lady , a hag inhabitant of Junk City 
 David Healy as the voice of the Right Door Knocker , a component of the door that is between the <unk> and the forest . 
 Robert Beatty as the voice of the Left Door Knocker , a component of the door that is between the <unk> and the forest . 
 Kevin Clash as the voice of Firey # 1 , the apparent leader of the <unk> . 
 Charles <unk> as the voice of Firey # 2 , the first of the <unk> to have their head removed . 
 Danny John @-@ Jules as the voice of Firey # 3 , the only Firey with a moustache . 
 Danny John @-@ Jules also voices Firey # 4 
 Richard Bodkin as the voice of Firey # 5 , the first Firey to make his head jump up and down . 
 Four Guards voiced by Anthony Jackson , Douglas Blackwell , David Shaughnessy , and Timothy Bateson 
 Goblins voiced by Michael <unk> , Sean Barrett , Timothy Bateson , Douglas Blackwell , John <unk> , Brian Henson , Anthony Jackson , Peter <unk> , Ron Mueck , Kerry Shale , and David Shaughnessy . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Shari Weiser as Hoggle ( in @-@ suit performer ) 
 Brian Henson as Hoggle ( face performance ) 
 Ron Mueck and Rob Mills as Ludo 
 Dave Goelz and David Barclay as Sir Didymus 
 Steve Whitmire and Kevin Clash as Ambrosius 
 Karen Prell as The Worm 
 Frank Oz as The Wiseman 
 Dave Goelz as The Wiseman 's Bird Hat 
 Karen Prell as The Junk Lady 
 Steve Whitmire , Kevin Clash , Anthony Asbury , and Dave Goelz as The Four Guards 
 Kevin Clash , David Barclay , and Toby Philpott as Firey # 1 
 Karen Prell , Ron Mueck , and Ian Thom as Firey # 2 
 Dave Goelz , Rob Mills , and Sherry <unk> as Firey # 3 
 Steve Whitmire , Cheryl Henson , and Kevin Bradshaw as Firey 4 
 Anthony Asbury , Alistair Fullarton , and Rollie <unk> as Firey 5 
 Anthony Asbury as Right Door Knocker 
 Dave Goelz as Left Door Knocker 
 <unk> Michael <unk> performed Jareth 's elaborate crystal @-@ ball contact juggling manipulations . 
 Goblin Corps performed by Marc <unk> , Kenny Baker , Michael Henbury Ballan , Danny <unk> , Peter Burroughs , Toby Clark , Tessa Crockett , Warwick Davis , Malcolm Dixon , Anthony <unk> , Paul Grant , Andrew Herd , Richard Jones , John Key , Mark Lisle , Peter Mandell , Jack Purvis , Katie Purvis , Nicholas Read , Linda Spriggs , Penny Stead , and Albert Wilkinson . 
 Goblins performed by Don Austen , Michael Bayliss , Martin Bridle , Fiona <unk> Brown , Simon Buckley , David <unk> , Sue Dacre , Geoff Felix , Trevor Freeborn , Christine Glanville , David Greenaway , Brian Henson , Jim Henson , Brian James , Jan King , Ronnie Le Drew , Terry Lee , Christopher Leith , Kathryn Mullen , Angie Passmore , Michael Petersen , Nigel <unk> , Judy Preece , Michael Quinn , <unk> <unk> , David Rudman , David <unk> , Robin Stevens , Ian <unk> , Mary Turner , Robert <unk> , Mak Wilson , and Francis Wright . 
 = = Influences = = 
 Richard Corliss noted that the film appeared to have been influenced by The Wizard of Oz and the works of Maurice Sendak , writing that " Labyrinth lures a modern Dorothy Gale out of the drab Kansas of real life into a land where the wild things are . " Nina Darnton wrote that the plot of Labyrinth " is very similar to Outside Over There by Mr. Sendak , in which 9 @-@ year @-@ old Ida 's baby sister is stolen by the goblins . " Copies of Outside Over There and Where the Wild Things Are are shown briefly in Sarah 's room at the start of the film , along with copies of Alice in Wonderland , The Wizard of Oz , a book by Hans Christian Andersen , Grimms ' Fairy Tales and Walt Disney 's Snow White . The film also features an end credit stating that " Jim Henson acknowledges his debt to the works of Maurice Sendak " . 
 The film 's concept designer Brian Froud has stated that the character of Jareth was influenced by a diverse range of literary sources . In his afterword to The Goblins of Labyrinth , Froud wrote that Jareth references " the romantic figures of Heathcliff in Wuthering Heights and a brooding Rochester from Jane Eyre " and the Scarlet Pimpernel . Bowie 's costumes were intentionally eclectic , drawing on the image of Marlon Brando 's leather jacket from The Wild One as well as that of a knight " with the worms of death eating through his armour " from the fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm . 
 The dialogue starting with phrase , " you remind me of the babe " that occurs between Jareth and the goblins , in the Magic Dance sequence in the film , is a direct reference to an exchange between Cary Grant and Shirley Temple in the 1947 film The Bachelor and the Bobby @-@ <unk> . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origins and script = = = 
 According to the film 's conceptual designer Brian Froud , Labyrinth was first discussed between himself and director Jim Henson . Both agreed to work on another project together , and Froud suggested that the film should feature goblins . On the same journey , Froud " pictured a baby surrounded by goblins " and this strong visual image – along with Froud 's insight that goblins traditionally steal babies – provided the basis for the film 's plot . 
 Discussing the film 's origins , Henson explained that he and Froud " wanted to do a lighter weight picture , with more of a sense of comedy since Dark Crystal got kind of heavy – heavier than we had intended . Now I wanted to do a film with the characters having more personality , and interacting more . " 
 Labyrinth was being seriously discussed as early as March 1983 , when Henson held a meeting with Froud and children 's author Dennis Lee . Lee was tasked with writing a novella on which a script could be based , submitting it at the end of 1983 . Henson approached Terry Jones to write the film 's script as " his daughter Lisa had just read Erik the Viking and suggested that he try me as screen @-@ writer . " Jones was given Dennis Lee 's novella to use as a basis for his script , but later told Empire that Lee had produced an unfinished " poetic novella " that he " didn 't really get on with . " In light of this , Jones " discarded it and sat down with Brian [ Froud ] ' s drawings and sifted through them and found the ones that I really liked , and started creating the story from them . " 
 While Jones is credited with writing the screenplay , the shooting script was actually a collaborative effort that featured contributions from Henson , George Lucas , Laura Phillips , and Elaine May . Jones himself has said that the finished film differs greatly from his original vision . According to Jones , " I didn 't feel that it was very much mine . I always felt it fell between two stories , Jim wanted it to be one thing and I wanted it to be about something else . " Jones has said his version of the script was " about the world , and about people who are more interested in manipulating the world than actually baring themselves at all . " In Jones ' original script , Jareth merely seems " all powerful to begin with " and is actually using the Labyrinth to " keep people from getting to his heart . " 
 Jones has said that Bowie 's involvement in the project had a significant impact on the direction taken with the film . Jones had originally intended for the audience not to see the center of the Labyrinth prior to Sarah 's reaching it , as he felt that doing so robbed the film of a significant ' hook . ' With the thought of Bowie starring in the film in mind , Henson decided he wanted Jareth to sing and appear throughout the film , something Jones considered to be the " wrong " decision . Despite his misgivings , Jones re @-@ wrote the script to allow for songs to be performed throughout the film . This draft of the script " went away for about a year , " during which time it was re @-@ drafted first by Laura Phillips and subsequently by George Lucas . 
 An early draft of the script attributed to Jones and Phillips is markedly different from the finished film . The early script has Jareth enter Sarah 's house in the guise of Robin <unk> , the author of a play she is due to perform in . Sarah does not wish for her brother to be taken away by the goblins , and Jareth snatches him away against her will . Jareth is overtly villainous in this draft of the script , and during his final confrontation with Sarah he tells her he would " much rather have a Queen " than " a little goblin prince . " The early script ends with Sarah kicking Jareth in disgust , her blows causing him to transform into a powerless , <unk> goblin . In the extensive junkyard scene , Jareth operates the Junk Lady as a puppet , whereas in the film she is autonomous . There is actually a pub or bar in the Labyrinth where the Man with Hat and Hoggle gather , and the river Lethe in Greek myth is mentioned . As well , the ballroom scene features extensive dialogue between Jareth and Sarah , whereas in the film there is none ( although there is in the novelization by <unk> Smith ) , and the goings @-@ on with the dancers in the ballroom are more overtly sexualized . 
 The re @-@ drafted script was sent to Bowie , who found that it lacked humor and considered withdrawing his involvement in the project as a result . To ensure Bowie 's involvement , Henson asked Jones to " do a bit more " to the script in order to make it more humorous . Elaine May met with Henson several months prior to the start of filming in April 1985 , and was asked to polish the script . May 's changes " humanized the characters " and pleased Henson to the extent that they were incorporated into the film 's shooting script . 
 At least twenty @-@ five treatments and scripts were drafted for Labyrinth between 1983 – 85 , and the film 's shooting script was only ready shortly before filming began . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The protagonist of the film was , at different stages of its development , going to be a King whose baby had been put under an enchantment , a princess from a fantasy world and a young girl from Victorian England . In order to make the film more commercial , it was ultimately decided that the film 's lead would be a teenage girl from contemporary America . Henson noted that he wished to " make the idea of taking responsibility for one 's life – which is one of the neat realizations a teenager experiences – a central thought of the film . " 
 Auditions for the lead role of Sarah began in England in April 1984 . Helena Bonham Carter auditioned for the role , but it was ultimately decided it would be better to cast an American actress . Monthly auditions were held in the U.S. until January 1985 , and Jane Krakowski , Yasmine Bleeth , Sarah Jessica Parker , Marisa Tomei , Laura Dern , Ally Sheedy , Maddie Corman , and Mia Sara all auditioned for the role . Of these , Krakowski , Sheedy and Corman were considered to be the top candidates . 14 @-@ year @-@ old actress Jennifer Connelly was ultimately chosen to play Sarah after her audition on January 29 , 1985 , " won Jim [ Henson ] over " and led him to cast her within a week . According to Henson , Connelly was chosen as she " could act that kind of dawn @-@ twilight time between childhood and womanhood . " Connelly moved to England in February 1985 in advance of the film 's rehearsals , which began in March . Discussing her understanding of her role with Elle , Connelly said that the film is about " a young girl growing out of her childhood , who is just now becoming aware of the responsibilities that come with growing up . " 
 The character of Jareth also underwent some significant developments during the early stages of pre @-@ production . According to Henson he was originally meant to be another puppet creature in the same vein as his goblin subjects . Henson eventually decided he wanted a big , charismatic star to play the Goblin King , and decided to pursue a musician for the role . Sting , Prince , Mick Jagger , and Michael Jackson were considered for the part ; however , it was ultimately decided that David Bowie would be the most suitable choice . 
 " I wanted to put two characters of flesh and bone in the middle of all these artificial creatures , " Henson explained , " and David Bowie embodies a certain maturity , with his sexuality , his disturbing aspect , all sorts of things that characterize the adult world . " Henson met David Bowie in the summer of 1983 to seek his involvement , as Bowie was in the U.S. for his Serious Moonlight Tour at the time . Henson continued to pursue Bowie for the role of Jareth , and sent him each revised draft of the film 's script for his comments . During a meeting that took place on June 18 , 1984 , Henson showed Bowie The Dark Crystal and a selection of Brian Froud 's concept drawings to pique his interest in the project . Bowie formally agreed to take part on February 15 , 1985 , several months before filming began . Discussing why he chose to be involved in the film , Bowie explained that " I 'd always wanted to be involved in the music @-@ writing aspect of a movie that would appeal to children of all ages , as well as everyone else , and I must say that Jim gave me a completely free hand with it . The script itself was terribly amusing without being vicious or spiteful or bloody , and it had a lot more heart in it than many other special effects movies . So I was pretty hooked from the beginning . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on April 15 , 1985 , at Elstree Studios . 
 The team that worked on Labyrinth was largely assembled from talent who had been involved in various other projects with the Jim Henson Company . Veteran performers Frank Oz and Dave Goelz operated various puppets in the film , as did Karen Prell , Ron Mueck and Rob Mills who had all worked with Henson on Fraggle Rock . Kevin Clash , a crew member on Sesame Street best known for voicing the character Elmo , worked on the film . Members of Henson 's family also worked on the production , including son Brian and daughter Cheryl . Newcomers working on the production included puppeteer Anthony Asbury , who had previously worked on the satirical puppet show Spitting Image . 
 Labyrinth took five months to film , and was a complicated shoot due to the myriad of puppets and animatronic creatures involved . In the making @-@ of documentary Inside the Labyrinth , Henson stated that although Jim Henson 's Creature Shop had been building the puppets and characters required for around a year and a half prior to shooting , " everything came together in the last couple weeks . " Henson noted that " even if you have the characters together , the puppeteers start working with them , they find problems or they try to figure out what they 're going to do with these characters . " 
 Although each of the film 's key puppets required a small team of puppeteers to operate it , the most complex puppet of the production was Hoggle . Shari Weiser was inside the costume , while Hoggle 's face was radio @-@ controlled by Brian Henson and three other operators . Speaking in the Inside the Labyrinth documentary , Brian Henson explained that Weiser " does all the body movement and her head is inside the head . However , the jaw is not connected to her jaw . Nothing that the face is doing has any connection with what she 's doing with her face . The other four members of the crew are all radio crew , myself included . " Speaking of the challenges involved with performing Hoggle , Brian Henson said that " five performers trying to get one character out of one puppet was a very tough thing . Basically what it takes is a lot of rehearsing and getting to know each other . " 
 At the early stages of filming , stars Connelly and Bowie found it difficult to interact naturally with the puppets they shared most of their scenes with . Bowie told Movieline " I had some initial problems working with Hoggle and the rest because , for one thing , what they say doesn 't come from their mouths , but from the side of the set , or from behind you . " Connelly remarked that " it was a bit strange [ working almost exclusively with puppets in the film ] , but I think both Dave [ Bowie ] and I got over that and just took it as a challenge to work with these puppets . And by the end of the film , it wasn 't a challenge anymore . They were there , and they were their characters . " 
 The film required large and ambitious sets to be constructed , from the Shaft of Hands to the rambling , distorted Goblin City where the film 's climactic battle takes place . The Shaft of Hands sequence was filmed on a rig that was roughly forty feet high , and required nearly a hundred performers to operate the grey , scaly hands integral to the scene . Connelly was strapped into a harness when shooting the scene , and would spend time between takes suspended mid @-@ way up the shaft . 
 The set of the Goblin City was built on Stage 6 at Thorn EMI Elstree Studios in London , and required the largest panoramic back @-@ cloth ever made . According to Production Designer Elliot Scott , the biggest challenge he faced was building the forest Sarah and her party pass through on their way to Jareth 's Castle . The film 's production notes state that " the entire forest required 120 truckloads of tree branches , 1 @,@ 200 turfs of grass , 850 pounds of dried leaves , 133 bags of lichen , and 35 bundles of mossy old man 's beard . " 
 While most filming was conducted at Elstree Studios , a small amount of location shooting was carried out in England and the U.S. The park seen at the start of the film is West Wycombe Park in Buckinghamshire , England . The scenes of Sarah running back home were filmed in various towns in New York , namely Upper Nyack , Piermont and Haverstraw . 
 Shooting wrapped on September 8 , 1985 . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Most of the visual effects on Labyrinth were achieved in @-@ camera , with several notable exceptions . The most prominent of these post @-@ production effects was the computer @-@ generated owl that appears at the opening of the film . The sequence was created by animators Larry Yaeger and Bill Kroyer , and marked the first use of a realistic CGI animal in a film . 
 The scene where Sarah encounters the Fire Gang had to be altered in post @-@ production as it had been filmed against black velvet cloth , and a new forest background was added . Jim Henson was unhappy with the compositing of the finished scene , although he considered the puppetry featured in it worthy of inclusion . 
 Henson received help editing the film from executive producer George Lucas . According to Henson , " When we hit the editing , I did the first cut , and then George was heavily involved on bringing it to the final cut . After that , I took it over again and did the next few months of post @-@ production and audio . " Henson went on to explain that " When you edit a film with somebody else you have to compromise . I always want to go one way , and George goes another way , but we each took turns trading off , giving and taking . George tends to be very action @-@ oriented and he cuts dialogue quite tight ; I tend to cut looser , and go for more lyrical pauses , which can slow the story . So , I loosen up his tightness , and he tightens my looseness . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack album features Trevor Jones ' score , which is split into six tracks for the soundtrack : " Into the Labyrinth " , " Sarah " , " <unk> " , " The Goblin Battle " , " Thirteen O 'Clock " and " Home at Last " . 
 Bowie recorded five songs for the film : " Underground " , " Magic Dance " , " Chilly Down " , " As the World Falls Down " and " Within You " . " Underground " features on the soundtrack twice , first in an edited version that was played over the film 's opening sequence and secondly in full . " Underground " was released in various territories as a single , and in certain markets was also released in an instrumental version and an extended dance mix . " Magic Dance " was released as a 12 " single in the U.S. " As the World Falls Down " was initially slated for release as a follow @-@ up single to " Underground " at Christmas in 1986 , but this plan did not materialize . The only song Bowie did not perform lead vocal on is " Chilly Down " , which was performed by Charles <unk> , Richard Bodkin , Kevin Clash , and Danny John @-@ Jules , the actors who voiced the ' Firey ' creatures in the film . 
 Steve Barron produced promotional music videos for " Underground " and " As the World Falls Down " . The music video for " Underground " features Bowie as a nightclub singer who stumbles upon the world of the Labyrinth , encountering many of the creatures seen in the film . The clip for " As the World Falls Down " integrates clips from the film , using them alongside black @-@ and @-@ white shots of Bowie performing the song in an elegant room . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 The production of Labyrinth was covered in multiple high @-@ profile magazines and newspapers , in anticipation of its release , with articles appearing in The New York Times , Time and Starlog magazine . An article that appeared in The New York Times shortly after filming wrapped in September 1985 focused heavily on the film 's large scale , emphasizing the size of the production and selling Labyrinth as a more " accessible " film than The Dark Crystal due to the casting of live actors in its key roles . An hour @-@ long making @-@ of documentary that covered the filming of Labyrinth and included interviews with the key figures involved in its production was broadcast on television as Inside the Labyrinth . 
 Labyrinth was featured in music trade papers such as Billboard due to David Bowie 's soundtrack for the film . Bowie was not heavily involved in promoting the film , but Jim Henson was nonetheless grateful that he produced a music video to accompany the song " Underground " from the soundtrack , saying , " I think it 's the best thing he could have done for the film . " Ted <unk> produced a one @-@ sheet poster for the film 's North American release . 
 A range of merchandise was produced to accompany the film 's release , including plush toys of Sir Didymus and Ludo , a board game , computer game and multiple jigsaw puzzles . An exhibition of the film 's characters and sets toured across shopping malls in various cities in the U.S , including New York , Dallas and Chicago . Labyrinth was featured in an exhibition titled ' Jim Henson 's Magic World ' that was shown at the Seibu Department Store in Tokyo in August 1986 . 
 = = = Theatrical release = = = 
 Labyrinth opened in America / Germany theaters on June 27 , 1986 . The film received a royal premiere on December 1 , 1986 in London , with the Prince and Princess of Wales in attendance . Jim Henson , Brian Henson , Brian Froud , Jennifer Connelly , and the animatronic creature Ludo were all present to support the film . The royal premiere brought the film a significant level of media coverage in the United Kingdom and an article that appeared in The Sun quoted the Princess of Wales as remarking , " Isn 't he wonderful ! " upon being introduced to Ludo . 
 The film was rolled out in other European countries largely between December 1986 and February 1987 , and premiered in France as <unk> on December 2 and in West Germany as Die Reise ins Labyrinth ( The Journey into the Labyrinth ) on December 13 . The film was released in Denmark as <unk> til <unk> slot ( The Labyrinth to the Troll King 's Castle ) on February 20 , 1987 , and saw its last theatrical release in Hungary under the tile <unk> <unk> ( Fantastic Labyrinth ) when it premiered there on July 7 , 1988 . 
 The movie was released in Brazil on December 25 , 1986 where it was named " <unk> - A Magia do Tempo " ( Labyrinth - The Magic of Time ) . 
 In 2012 , the film was digitally remastered and re @-@ released at The Astor Theatre in Melbourne , Australia . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Labyrinth was first released on home video in 1987 by Embassy Home Entertainment in the US and by Channel 5 Video Distribution in the UK . Sony re @-@ issued the film on video in 1999 in the US under the name of its subsidiary company , Columbia @-@ TriStar . Labyrinth was re @-@ issued on VHS in the UK the same year , with Inside the Labyrinth included as a special feature . 
 This film was released on VHS and DVD by Image Entertainment on April 10 , 2002 . 
 The film made its DVD premiere in 1999 in the US , and has since been re @-@ released on DVD in 2003 and 2007 . All DVD releases of the film feature the Inside the Labyrinth documentary as an extra . The 2003 re @-@ release was described as a collector 's edition , and featured a set of exclusive collectors cards that featured concept art by Brian Froud . The 2007 release was promoted an Anniversary Edition , and featured a commentary by Brian Froud and two newly produced making @-@ of documentaries : " Journey Through the Labyrinth : Kingdom of Characters " and " Journey Through the Labyrinth : The Quest for Goblin City " which featured interviews with producer George Lucas , choreographer Gates McFadden ( listed as Cheryl McFadden ) and Brian Henson . 
 The film was released on Blu @-@ ray in 2009 , in a package that replicated the extras featured on the 2007 Anniversary Edition DVD . The Blu @-@ ray release featured one new special feature , a picture @-@ in @-@ picture track that lasts the length of the film and features interviews with the crew and several minor cast members including Warwick Davis . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Labyrinth opened at number eight in the U.S. box office charts with $ 3 @,@ 549 @,@ 243 from 1 @,@ 141 theaters , which placed it behind The Karate Kid Part II , Back to School , Legal Eagles , Ruthless People , Running Scared , Top Gun , and Ferris Bueller 's Day Off . In its next weekend at the box office , the film dropped to number 13 in the charts , only earning $ 1 @,@ 836 @,@ 177 . By the end of its run in U.S cinemas the film had grossed $ 12 @,@ 729 @,@ 917 , just over half of its $ 25 million budget . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film received mixed to positive reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film averages a 66 % positive rating ; the general consensus states : " While it 's arguably more interesting on a visual level , Labyrinth provides further proof of director Jim Henson 's boundless imagination . " On Metacritic , which uses a " weighted average " of all the critics ' scores , Labyrinth scores 50 out of 100 . 
 While acknowledging that Labyrinth was made with " infinite care and pains , " Roger Ebert gave the film two stars out of four as he felt that the film " never really comes alive . " Ebert said that as the film was set in an " arbitrary world " none of the events in it had any consequences , robbing the film of any dramatic tension . Gene Siskel 's review of Labyrinth for the Chicago Tribune was highly negative , and he referred to it as an " awful " film with a " pathetic story , " " much too complicated plot " and a " visually ugly style . " Siskel objected to the film 's " violent " plot , writing that " the sight of a baby in peril is one of sleaziest gimmicks a film can employ to gain our attention , but Henson does it . " 
 Other critics were more positive . Kathryn Buxton found that it had " excitement and thrills enough for audiences of all ages as well as a fun and sometimes slightly naughty sense of humor . " Bruce Bailey admired the film 's script , stating that " Terry Jones has drawn on his dry wit and bizarre imagination and come up with a script that transforms these essentially familiar elements and plot structures into something that fairly throbs with new life . " Bailey was also impressed by the film 's depth , writing that " adults will have the additional advantage of appreciating the story as a coming @-@ of @-@ age parable . " 
 Several critics noted the film 's subtext , and found it successful to varying degrees . Saw Tek Meng acknowledged that " Sarah 's experiences in the labyrinth are symbolic of her transition from child to woman " but ultimately found the film " too linear " for its latent themes to come through . Nina Darnton compared the film 's tone to the writings of E.T.A. Hoffman , stating that Hoffman 's The Nutcracker " is also about the voyage to womanhood , including the hint of sexual awakening , which Sarah experiences too in the presence of a goblin king . " Darton enjoyed the film and considered it to be more successful than Henson 's previous collaboration with Brian Froud , The Dark Crystal . 
 Connelly 's portrayal of Sarah polarized critics and received strong criticism from some reviewers . Critic Kirk Honeycutt referred to Connelly as " a bland and minimally talented young actress " Writing for The Miami News , Jon Marlowe stated that " Connelly is simply the wrong person for the right job . She has a squeaky voice that begins to grate on you ; when she cries , you can see the onions in her eyes . " Contrary to these negative views , an anonymous review in St. Petersburg Times praised her acting saying that " Connelly makes the entire experience seem real . She acts so naturally around the puppets that you begin to believe in their life @-@ like qualities . " 
 Bowie 's performance was variously lauded and derided . In his largely positive review of the film , Corliss praised him as " charismatic " referring to his character as a " Kabuki sorcerer who offers his ravishing young antagonist the gilded perks of adult servitude . " Bruce Bailey enjoyed Bowie 's performance , writing that " the casting of Bowie can 't be faulted on any count . He has just the right look for a creature who 's the object of both loathing and secret desire . " In a largely critical review , the St. Petersburg Times found that " Bowie forgoes acting , preferring to prance around his lair while staring solemnly into the camera . He 's not exactly wooden . Plastic might be a more accurate description . " 
 The film 's mixed reviews and poor box office takings demoralized Henson to the extent that his son Brian remembered the time of the film 's release as being " the closest I 've seen him to turning in on himself and getting quite depressed . " It was the last feature film directed by Henson before his death in 1990 . 
 Since Henson 's death , Labyrinth has been re @-@ evaluated by several notable critics . A review from 2000 in Empire magazine called the film " a fabulous fantasy " and wrote that " David Bowie cuts a spooky enough figure in that fright wig to fit right in with this extraordinary menagerie of Goth Muppets . And Jennifer Connelly , still in the flush of youth , makes for an appealingly together kind of heroine . " Writing for the Chicago Tribune in 2007 , Michael Wilmington described Labyrinth as " dazzling , " writing that it is " a real masterpiece of puppetry and special effects , an absolutely gorgeous children 's fantasy movie . " In 2010 Total Film ran a feature called ' Why We Love Labyrinth ' which described Labyrinth as a " hyper @-@ real , vibrant daydream , Labyrinth 's main strength lies in its fairytale roots , which give the fantastical story a platform from which to launch into some deliriously outlandish scenarios . " In their February 2012 issue , Empire featured a four @-@ page spread on Labyrinth as part of their Muppet Special . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Despite its poor performance at the American box office , Labyrinth was a success on home video and later on DVD . David Bowie told an interviewer in 1992 that " every Christmas a new flock of children comes up to me and says , ' Oh ! you 're the one who 's in Labyrinth ! ' " In 1997 , Jennifer Connelly said " I still get recognized for Labyrinth by little girls in the weirdest places . I can 't believe they still recognize me from that movie . It 's on TV all the time and I guess I pretty much look the same . " 
 Labyrinth has become a cult film . Brian Henson remembered his father Jim Henson as being aware that Labyrinth and The Dark Crystal both had cult followings by the time of his death in 1990 , saying that " he was able to see all that and know that it was appreciated . " Academic Andrea Wright wrote that Labyrinth has managed to maintain audience popularity long after its initial release to a greater extent than The Dark Crystal . Since 1997 , an annual two @-@ day masquerade ball called the " The Labyrinth of Jareth " where revelers come dressed in costumes inspired by the film has been held in Hollywood . Labyrinth has a significant Internet fan following , and as of September 1 , 2015 , <unk> hosts over 8 @,@ 900 stories in its Labyrinth section . 
 The strong DVD sales of Labyrinth prompted rights @-@ holders the Jim Henson Company and Sony Pictures to look into making a sequel , and Curse of the Goblin King was briefly used as a place @-@ holder title . However , the decision was ultimately taken to avoid making a direct sequel , and instead produce a fantasy film with a similar atmosphere . Fantasy author Neil Gaiman and artist Dave McKean were called in to write and direct a film similar in spirit to Labyrinth , and <unk> was ultimately released in selected theaters in 2005 after premiering at the Sundance Film Festival . On January 22 , 2016 , Sony Pictures announced that a reboot is in development with Lisa Henson as producer and Nicole Perlman attached as the screenwriter . However , on January 25 , Perlman confirmed on Twitter that while she is working on a Labyrinth project with the Jim Henson Company , it is not a remake or reboot . Perlman also discussed the timing of the rumors in conjunction with David Bowie 's death and said , " Henson Co & I started talking in late 2014 , so the timing of these rumors is so upsetting . I would never seek to profit from Bowie 's death . " Although fandom has produced its own fan fiction sequels , some fans of the original film voiced opposition to a remake or sequel . 
 = = In other media = = 
 Since initial release , Labyrinth has been translated to other forms of media . The film was novelized by A. C. H. Smith as Labyrinth : A Novel Based On The Jim Henson Film , which is currently out of print . Along with The Dark Crystal , Archaia Publishing reprinted Labyrinth with illustrations in 2014 . A three @-@ issue comic book adaptation , which was first released in a single volume as Marvel Super Special # 40 , was published by Marvel Comics . Tokyopop , in partnership with The Jim Henson Company , published a manga @-@ style four @-@ volume comic called Return to Labyrinth , written by Jake T. Forbes and illustrated by Chris Lie , with cover art by <unk> <unk> . Return to Labyrinth follows the adventures of Toby as a teenager , when he is tricked into returning to the Labyrinth by Jareth . The first volume was released August 8 , 2006 , with a second following on October 9 , 2007 and a third on May 1 , 2009 . In an afterword to the second volume , editor Tim Beedle announced that the series , originally planned as a trilogy , was being extended to include a fourth volume . The fourth and final volume of Return to Labyrinth was released on August 3 , 2010 . 
 The Cartoon Network series Secret Mountain Fort Awesome paid an episode @-@ long homage to the film , also entitled " Labyrinth " , with Tom Kenny in the role of the Goblin King . 
 Gravity Falls creator Alex Hirsch mentioned doing an episode , based on Labyrinth , but it was scrapped . However , he still added a reference to the Goblin King in an episode of " Mabel 's Guide . " 
 Archaia Entertainment , in collaboration with The Jim Henson Company , is developing a prequel comic book about the story of how Jareth became the Goblin King . Project editor Stephen Christy has stated the graphic novel will be a " tragic story . " While it is still in the early stages of development , there are plans for the novel to integrate music into the plot in some way . Prior to his death in early 2016 , David Bowie was approached by Archaia Comics in order to seek permission to use his likeness , and ascertain if he wished to have any involvement in the project . Brian Froud is serving as a creative consultant on the project . Froud will be producing covers for the series , as well as character designs . Archaia released a Labyrinth short story titled Hoggle and the Worm for Free Comic Book Day on May 5 , 2012 and another titled Sir Didymus ' Grand Day on May 4 , 2013 . 
 In addition to these print media tie @-@ ins , a Muppet Babies episode with a similar plot , " Nice to Have Gnome You " , incorporates clips from the film and features Miss Piggy going on a quest to recover her copy of Alice 's Adventures In Wonderland . The film was also adapted for the Commodore 64 and Apple II home computers in 1986 as " Labyrinth : The Computer Game " . Different versions were also released in Japan the following year for the Family Computer console and MSX computer , under the title Labyrinth : Maō no Meikyū . 
 = Red rail = 
 The red rail ( Aphanapteryx bonasia ) is an extinct species of flightless rail . It was endemic to the Mascarene island of Mauritius , east of Madagascar in the Indian Ocean . It had a close relative on Rodrigues island , the likewise extinct Rodrigues rail ( Erythromachus leguati ) , with which it is sometimes considered congeneric . Its relationship with other rails is unclear . Rails often evolve flightlessness when adapting to isolated islands , free of mammalian predators . 
 The red rail was a little larger than a chicken and had reddish , hairlike plumage , with dark legs and a long , curved beak . The wings were small , and its legs were slender for a bird of its size . It was similar to the Rodrigues rail , but was larger , and had proportionally shorter wings . It has been compared to a kiwi or a limpkin in appearance and behaviour . It is believed to have fed on invertebrates , and snail shells have been found with damage matching an attack by its beak . Human hunters took advantage of an attraction red rails had to red objects by using coloured cloth to lure the birds so that they could be beaten with sticks . 
 Until subfossil remains were discovered in the 1860s , scientists only knew the red rail from 17th century descriptions and illustrations . These were thought to represent several different species , which resulted in a large number of invalid junior synonyms . It has been suggested that all late 17th @-@ century accounts of the dodo actually referred to the red rail , after the former had become extinct . The last mention of a red rail sighting is from 1693 , and it is thought to have gone extinct around 1700 , due to predation by humans and introduced species . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The red rail was long known only from a few contemporary descriptions referring to red " hens " and names otherwise used for grouse or partridges in Europe , as well as the sketches of the travellers Pieter van den Broecke and Sir Thomas Herbert from 1617 and 1634 . These were thought to depict separate species of birds by some authors , but were regarded as one by Hugh Edwin Strickland in 1848 . Hermann Schlegel thought Broecke 's sketch depicted a smaller dodo species from Mauritius , and that the Herbert sketch showed a dodo from Rodrigues , and named them Didus broecki and Didus herberti in 1854 . Jacob Hoefnagel 's 1610 painting , the 1601 sketch from the Gelderland ship 's journal , and Peter Mundy 's 1638 description and sketch later surfaced , but there was still uncertainty about the identity of the birds depicted . 
 In the 1860s , subfossil foot bones and a lower jaw were found along with remains of other Mauritian animals in the Mare aux Songes swamp , and were identified as belonging to a rail by Alphonse Milne @-@ Edwards in 1866 . He also determined they belonged to the birds in the 17th century descriptions and illustrations . In 1869 , Milne @-@ Edwards combined the genus name of Aphanapteryx imperialis , which had been coined the previous year by Georg Ritter von Frauenfeld for the Hoefnagel painting , with the older specific name broecki . Due to nomenclatural priority , the genus name was later combined with the oldest species name bonasia , which was coined by Edmond de Sélys Longchamps in 1848 . Sélys Longchamps had originally named the genus Apterornis , wherein he also included the Réunion solitaire and the Réunion swamphen , but the name was preoccupied by <unk> , a bird described by Richard Owen in 1844 . Aphanapteryx means " invisible @-@ wing " , but the meaning of bonasia is unclear . Some early accounts refer to red rails by the vernacular names for the hazel grouse , Tetrastes bonasia , so the name evidently originates there . The name itself perhaps refers to bonasus , meaning " bull " in Latin , or bonum and assum , meaning " good roast " . It has also been suggested to be a Latin form of the French word <unk> , meaning simple @-@ minded or good @-@ natured . 
 More fossils were later found by Theodore Sauzier , who had been commissioned to explore the " historical souvenirs " of Mauritius in 1889 . Around the end of the 19th century , a complete specimen was found by the barber Louis Etienne Thirioux , who also found important dodo remains . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Apart from being a close relative of the Rodrigues rail , the relationships of the red rail are uncertain . The two are commonly kept as separate genera , Aphanapteryx and Erythromachus , but have also been united as species of Aphanapteryx at times . They were first generically synonymised by Edward Newton and Albert Günther in 1879 , due to skeletal similarities . Based on geographic location and the morphology of the nasal bones , it has been suggested that they were related to the genera Gallirallus , Dryolimnas , Atlantisia , and Rallus . Rails have reached many oceanic archipelagos , which has frequently led to speciation and evolution of flightlessness . The fact that the red rail lost much of its feather structure indicates it was isolated for a long time . These rails may be of Asian origin , like many other Mascarene birds . 
 = = Description = = 
 From the subfossil bones , illustrations and descriptions , it is known that the red rail was a flightless bird , somewhat larger than a chicken . Subfossil specimens range in size , which may indicate sexual dimorphism , as is common among rails . Its exact length is unknown , but the pelvis was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) in length , the femur was 69 – 71 mm ( 2 @.@ 7 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) , the tibia was 98 – 115 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 5 in ) , the tarsometatarsus was 79 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) , and the humerus was 60 – 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 6 in ) . Its plumage was reddish brown all over , and the feathers were fluffy and hairlike ; the tail was not visible in the living bird and the short wings likewise also nearly disappeared in the plumage . It had a long , slightly curved , brown bill , and some illustrations suggest it had a nape crest . It perhaps resembled a lightly built kiwi , and it has also been likened to a limpkin , both in appearance and behaviour . 
 The sternum and humerus were small , indicating that it had lost the power of flight . Its legs were long and slender for such a large bird , but the pelvis was compact and stout . It differed from the Rodrigues rail , its closest relative , in having a proportionately shorter humerus , a narrower and longer skull , and having shorter and higher nostrils . They differed considerably in plumage , based on early descriptions . The red rail was also larger , with somewhat smaller wings , but their leg proportions were similar . The pelvis and sacrum was also similar . 
 = = = Contemporary descriptions = = = 
 The English traveller Peter Mundy visited Mauritius in 1638 and described the red rail as follows : 
 A Mauritius henne , a Fowle as bigge as our English hennes , of a yellowish Wheaten Colour , of which we only got one . It hath a long , Crooked sharpe pointed bill . Feathered all over , butte on their wings they are soe Few and <unk> that they cannot with them raise themselves From the ground . There is a pretty way of taking them with a red cap , but this of ours was taken with a stick . They bee very good Meat , and are also Cloven footed , soe that they can <unk> Fly nor <unk> . 
 The yellowish colouration instead of the red mentioned by other accounts has been used as argument for this referring to a distinct species , <unk> <unk> , but it has also been suggested it was due to the observed bird being a juvenile . Another English traveller , John Marshall , described the bird as follows in 1668 : 
 Here are also great plenty of Dodos or red hens which are larger a little than our English <unk> , have long <unk> and no , or very little <unk> . Their <unk> are like down , and their wings so little that it is not able to support their bodies ; but they have long <unk> and will <unk> very fast , and that a man shall not catch them , they will turn so about in the trees . They are good <unk> when roasted , tasting something like a pig , and their skin like pig skin when roosted , being hard . 
 = = = Contemporary depictions = = = 
 Much information about the bird 's appearance comes from a painting attributed to Jacob Hoefnagel , based on a bird in the menagerie of Emperor Rudolph II around 1610 . It is the only coloured depiction of the species , showing the plumage as reddish brown , but it is unknown whether it was based on a stuffed or living specimen . The bird had most likely been brought alive to Europe , as it is unlikely that taxidermists were on board the visiting ships , and spirits were not yet used to preserve biological specimens . Most tropical specimens were preserved as dried heads and feet . It had probably lived in the emperor 's zoo for a while together with the other animals painted for the same series . The painting was discovered in the emperor 's collection and published in 1868 by Georg von Frauenfeld , along with a painting of a dodo from the same collection and artist . This specimen is thought to have been the only red rail that ever reached Europe . 
 The travel journal of the Dutch East India Company ship Gelderland ( 1601 – 1603 ) , rediscovered in the 1860s , contains good sketches of several now @-@ extinct Mauritian birds attributed to the artist Joris Laerle , including an unlabelled red rail . The bird appears to have been stunned or killed , and the sketch is the earliest record of the species , but was only rediscovered in the 1860s . The image was sketched with pencil and finished in ink , but details such as a deeper beak and the shoulder of the wing are only seen in the underlying sketch . In addition , there are three rather crude black @-@ and @-@ white sketches , but differences in them were enough for some authors to suggest that each image depicted a distinct species , leading to the creation of several scientific names which are now synonymous with Aphanapteryx bonasia . 
 There are also depictions of what appears to be a red rail in three of Roelant Savery 's paintings . In his famous Edwards ' Dodo painting from 1626 , a rail @-@ like bird is seen swallowing a frog behind the dodo , but this identification has been doubted , and it may instead show a bittern . A bird resembling a red rail is also figured in Jacopo Bassano 's painting Arca di Noè ( " Noah 's Ark " ) from c . 1570 . It has been pointed out that it is doubtful that a Mauritian bird could have reached Italy this early , but the attribution may be inaccurate , as Bassano had four artist sons who used the same name . A similar bird is also seen in Jan Brueghel the Elder 's Noah 's Ark painting . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Contemporary accounts are repetitive and do not shed much light on the bird 's life history . The shape of the beak indicates it could have captured reptiles and invertebrates . There were many endemic land snails on Mauritius , including the extinct Tropidophora carinata , and subfossil shells have been found with damage matching attacks from the beak of the red rail . No contemporary accounts were known to mention the red rail 's diet , until the 1660s report of Johannes Pretorius about his stay on Mauritius was published in 2015 , where he mentioned that the bird " scratches in the earth with its sharp claws like a fowl to find food such as worms under the fallen leaves . " 
 An anonymous Dutchman gave some description of behavioural traits in 1631 : 
 The soldiers [ red rails ] were very small in stature and slow of foot , so they could be caught easily by hand , their armour or gun was their mouth , which was sharp and pointed , and which they used instead of a dagger , were very naked and [ unrecognisable word ] , not hewing about like soldiers , run about in great disorder , now here , now there , not being true to each other at all . 
 While it was swift and could escape when chased , it was easily lured by waving a red cloth , which they approached to attack ; a similar behaviour was noted in its relative , the Rodrigues rail . The birds could then be picked up , and their cries when held would draw more individuals to the scene , as the birds , which had evolved in the absence of mammalian predators , were curious and not afraid of humans . 
 The English traveller Sir Thomas Herbert described its behaviour towards red cloth in 1634 : 
 The hens in eating taste like parched pigs , if you see a <unk> of twelve or twenties , shew them a red cloth , and with their utmost silly fury they will altogether <unk> upon it , and if you strike downe one , the rest are as good as caught , not budging an <unk> till they be all destroyed . 
 Many other endemic species of Mauritius became extinct after the arrival of man heavily damaged the ecosystem , making it hard to reconstruct . Before humans arrived , Mauritius was entirely covered in forests , but very little remains today due to deforestation . The surviving endemic fauna is still seriously threatened . The red rail lived alongside other recently extinct Mauritian birds such as the dodo , the broad @-@ billed parrot , the Mascarene grey parakeet , the Mauritius blue pigeon , the Mauritius owl , the Mascarene coot , the Mauritian shelduck , the Mauritian duck , and the Mauritius night heron . Extinct Mauritian reptiles include the saddle @-@ backed Mauritius giant tortoise , the domed Mauritius giant tortoise , the Mauritian giant skink , and the Round Island burrowing boa . The small Mauritian flying fox and the snail Tropidophora carinata lived on Mauritius and Réunion , but became extinct in both islands . Some plants , such as Casearia tinifolia and the palm orchid , have also become extinct . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Though Mauritius had previously been visited by Arab vessels in the Middle Ages and Portuguese ships between 1507 and 1513 , they did not settle on the island . The Dutch Empire acquired the island in 1598 , renaming it after Maurice of Nassau , and it was used from then on for the provisioning of trade vessels of the Dutch East India Company . To the sailors who visited Mauritius from 1598 and onwards , the fauna was mainly interesting from a culinary standpoint . The dodo was sometimes considered rather unpalatable , but the red rail was a very popular gamebird for the Dutch and French settlers . The reports dwell upon the varying ease with which the bird could be caught according to the hunting method and the fact that when roasted it was considered similar to pork . 
 Johann Christian Hoffmann , who was on Mauritius in the early 1670s , described a red rail hunt as follows : 
 ... [ there is also ] a particular sort of bird known as <unk> which is the size of an ordinary hen . [ To catch them ] you take a small stick in the right hand and wrap the left hand in a red rag , showing this to the birds , which are generally in big flocks ; these stupid animals precipitate themselves almost without hesitation on the rag . I cannot truly say whether it is through hate or love of this colour . Once they are close enough , you can hit them with the stick , and then have only to pick them up . Once you have taken one and are holding it in your hand , all the others come running up as it [ sic ] to its aid and can be offered the same fate . 
 Hoffman 's account refers to the red rail by the German version of the Dutch name originally applied to the dodo , " <unk> @-@ <unk> " , and John Marshall used " red hen " interchangeably with " dodo " in 1668 . The ecologist Anthony Cheke has suggested that the name " dodo " was transferred to the red rail after the former had gone extinct , so that all post 1662 references to " dodos " refer to the rail instead . A 1681 account of a " dodo " , previously thought to have been the last , mentioned that the meat was " hard " , similar to the description of red hen meat . Errol Fuller has also cast the 1662 " dodo " sighting in doubt , as the reaction to distress cries of the birds mentioned matches what was described for the red rail . Milne @-@ Edwards suggested that early travellers may have confused young dodos with red rails . 
 230 years before Charles Darwin 's theory of evolution , the appearance of the red rail and the dodo led Peter Mundy to speculate : 
 Of these 2 sorts off fowl afforementionede , For oughtt wee yett know , Not any to bee Found out of this Iland , which lyeth aboutt 100 leagues From St. Lawrence . A question may bee demaunded how they should bee here and Not elcewhere , beeing soe Farer From other land and can Neither fly or swymme ; whither by Mixture off kindes producing straunge and Monstrous formes , or the Nature of the Climate , ayer and earth in alltring the First shapes in long tyme , or how . 
 = = = Extinction = = = 
 In addition to hunting pressure by humans , the fact that the red rail nested on the ground made it vulnerable to pigs and other introduced animals , which ate their eggs and young , probably contributing to its extinction . Feral cats , which are effective predators of ground @-@ inhabiting birds , increased in numbers around the 1680s . When François Leguat , who had become familiar with the Rodrigues rail in the preceding years , arrived on Mauritius in 1693 , he remarked that the red rail had already become rare . He was the last source to mention the bird , so it is assumed that it became extinct around 1700 . 
 = Samantha Smith = 
 Samantha Reed Smith ( June 29 , 1972 – August 25 , 1985 ) was an American schoolgirl , peace activist and child actress from Manchester , Maine , who became famous in the Cold War era United States and Soviet Union . In 1982 , Smith wrote a letter to the newly appointed CPSU General Secretary Yuri Andropov , and received a personal reply which included a personal invitation to visit the Soviet Union , which she accepted . 
 Smith attracted extensive media attention in both countries as a " Goodwill Ambassador " , and became known as " America 's Youngest Ambassador " participating in peacemaking activities in Japan . She wrote a book about her visit to the Soviet Union and co @-@ starred in the television series Lime Street , before her death at the age of 13 in the Bar Harbor Airlines Flight 1808 plane crash . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 When Yuri Andropov succeeded Leonid Brezhnev as leader of the Soviet Union in November 1982 , the mainstream Western newspapers and magazines ran numerous front @-@ page photographs and articles about him . Most coverage was negative and tended to give a perception of a new threat to the stability of the Western world . Andropov had been the Soviet Ambassador to Hungary during the 1956 Hungarian Revolution and the Chairman of the KGB from 1967 to 1982 ; during his tenure , he was known in the West for crushing the Prague Spring and the brutal suppression of dissidents , such as Andrei Sakharov and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn . He began his tenure as Soviet leader by strengthening the powers of the KGB , and by suppressing dissidents . Andropov declared , " the struggle for human rights was a part of a wide @-@ ranging imperialist plot to undermine the foundation of the Soviet state . " Much international tension surrounded both Soviet and American efforts to develop weapons capable of being launched from satellites in orbit . Both governments had extensive research and development programs to develop such technology . However , both nations were coming under increasing pressure to disband the project . In America , president Ronald Reagan came under pressure from a lobby of U.S. scientists and arms experts , while in Russia the government issued a statement that read , " To prevent the militarization of space is one of the most urgent tasks facing mankind " . 
 During this period , large anti @-@ nuclear protests were taking place across Europe and North America , while the November 20 , 1983 , screening of ABC 's post @-@ nuclear war dramatization The Day After became one of the most anticipated media events of the decade . 
 The two superpowers had by this point abandoned their strategy of détente and in response to the Soviet deployment of SS @-@ 20s , Reagan moved to deploy cruise and Pershing II missiles to Europe . The Soviet Union 's involvement in a war in Afghanistan was in its third year , a matter which was also contributing to international tension . In this atmosphere , on November 22 , 1982 , Time magazine published an issue with Andropov on the cover . When Smith viewed the edition , she asked her mother , " If people are so afraid of him , why doesn 't someone write a letter asking whether he wants to have a war or not ? " . Her mother replied , " Why don 't you ? " 
 = = Life = = 
 Smith was born on June 29 , 1972 , in the small town of Houlton , Maine , on the Canada – United States border , to Jane Reed and Arthur Smith . At the age of five , she wrote a letter to Queen Elizabeth II in order to express her admiration to the monarch . When Smith had finished second grade in the spring of 1980 , the family settled in Manchester , Maine , where she attended Manchester Elementary School . Her father served as an instructor at Ricker College in Houlton before teaching literature and writing at the University of Maine at Augusta while her mother worked as a social worker with the Maine Department of Human Services . 
 In November 1982 , when Smith was 10 years old , she wrote to Soviet leader Yuri Andropov , seeking to understand why the relations between the Soviet Union and the United States were so tense : 
 Dear Mr. Andropov , 
 My name is Samantha Smith . I am ten years old . Congratulations on your new job . I have been worrying about Russia and the United States getting into a nuclear war . Are you going to vote to have a war or not ? If you aren 't please tell me how you are going to help to not have a war . This question you do not have to answer , but I would like to know why you want to conquer the world or at least our country . God made the world for us to live together in peace and not to fight . 
 Sincerely , 
 Samantha Smith 
 Her letter was published in the Soviet newspaper Pravda . Samantha was happy to discover that her letter had been published ; however , she had not received a reply . She then sent a letter to the Soviet Union 's Ambassador to the United States asking if Mr. Andropov intended to respond . On April 26 , 1983 , she received a response from Andropov : 
 Dear Samantha , 
 I received your letter , which is like many others that have reached me recently from your country and from other countries around the world . 
 It seems to me – I can tell by your letter – that you are a courageous and honest girl , resembling Becky , the friend of Tom Sawyer in the famous book of your compatriot Mark Twain . This book is well known and loved in our country by all boys and girls . 
 You write that you are anxious about whether there will be a nuclear war between our two countries . And you ask are we doing anything so that war will not break out . 
 Your question is the most important of those that every thinking man can pose . I will reply to you seriously and honestly . 
 Yes , Samantha , we in the Soviet Union are trying to do everything so that there will not be war on Earth . This is what every Soviet man wants . This is what the great founder of our state , Vladimir Lenin , taught us . 
 Soviet people well know what a terrible thing war is . Forty @-@ two years ago , Nazi Germany , which strove for supremacy over the whole world , attacked our country , burned and destroyed many thousands of our towns and villages , killed millions of Soviet men , women and children . 
 In that war , which ended with our victory , we were in alliance with the United States : together we fought for the liberation of many people from the Nazi invaders . I hope that you know about this from your history lessons in school . And today we want very much to live in peace , to trade and cooperate with all our neighbors on this earth — with those far away and those near by . And certainly with such a great country as the United States of America . 
 In America and in our country there are nuclear weapons — terrible weapons that can kill millions of people in an instant . But we do not want them to be ever used . That 's precisely why the Soviet Union solemnly declared throughout the entire world that never — never — will it use nuclear weapons first against any country . In general we propose to discontinue further production of them and to proceed to the abolition of all the stockpiles on Earth . 
 It seems to me that this is a sufficient answer to your second question : ' Why do you want to wage war against the whole world or at least the United States ? ' We want nothing of the kind . No one in our country – neither workers , peasants , writers nor doctors , neither grown @-@ ups nor children , nor members of the government – want either a big or ' little ' war . 
 We want peace — there is something that we are occupied with : growing wheat , building and inventing , writing books and flying into space . We want peace for ourselves and for all peoples of the planet . For our children and for you , Samantha . 
 I invite you , if your parents will let you , to come to our country , the best time being this summer . You will find out about our country , meet with your contemporaries , visit an international children 's camp – Artek – on the sea . And see for yourself : in the Soviet Union , everyone is for peace and friendship among peoples . 
 Thank you for your letter . I wish you all the best in your young life . 
 Y. Andropov 
 A media circus ensued , with Smith being interviewed by Ted Koppel and Johnny Carson , among others , and with nightly reports by the major American networks . On July 7 , 1983 , she flew to Moscow with her parents , and spent two weeks as Andropov 's guest . During the trip she visited Moscow and Leningrad and spent time in Artek , the main Soviet pioneer camp , in the town of <unk> on the Crimean Peninsula . Smith wrote in her book that in Leningrad she and her parents were amazed by the friendliness of the people and by the presents many people made for them . Speaking at a Moscow press conference , she declared that the Russians were " just like us " . In Artek , Smith chose to stay with the Soviet children rather than accept the privileged accommodations offered to her . For ease of communication , teachers and children who spoke fluent English were chosen to stay in the building where she was lodged . Smith shared a dormitory with nine other girls , and spent her time there swimming , talking and learning Russian songs and dances . While there , she made many friends , including Natasha <unk> from Leningrad , a fluent English speaker . 
 Andropov , however , was unable to meet with her during her visit , although they did speak by telephone . It was later discovered that Andropov had become seriously ill and had withdrawn from the public eye during this time . Smith also received a phone call from Russian cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova , the first woman to orbit the Earth . However , not realizing with whom she was speaking , Samantha mistakenly hung up after only a brief conversation . Media followed her every step — photographs and articles about her were published by the main Soviet newspapers and magazines throughout her trip and after it . Smith became widely known to Soviet citizens and was well regarded by many of them . In the United States , the event drew suspicion and some regarded it as an " American @-@ style public relations stunt " . 
 Smith 's return to the U.S. on July 22 , 1983 , was celebrated by the people of Maine with roses , a red carpet , and a limousine and her popularity continued to grow in her native country . Some critics at the time remained skeptical , believing Smith was unwittingly serving as an instrument of Soviet propaganda . In December 1983 , continuing in her role as " America 's Youngest Ambassador " , she was invited to Japan , where she met with the Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone and attended the Children 's International Symposium in Kobe . In her speech at the symposium , she suggested that Soviet and American leaders exchange granddaughters for two weeks every year , arguing that a president " wouldn 't want to send a bomb to a country his granddaughter would be visiting " . Her trip inspired other exchanges of child goodwill ambassadors , including a visit by the eleven @-@ year @-@ old Soviet child Katya <unk> to the United States . Later , Smith wrote a book called Journey to the Soviet Union whose cover shows her at Artek , her favorite part of the Soviet trip . 
 Smith pursued her role as a media celebrity when in 1984 , she hosted a children 's special for the Disney Channel entitled Samantha Smith Goes To Washington ... Campaign ' 84 . The show covered politics , where Smith interviewed several candidates for the 1984 presidential election , including George McGovern and Jesse Jackson . That same year she guest starred in Charles in Charge as Kim , alongside another celebrity guest star , Julianne McNamara . Her fame resulted in Smith becoming the subject of stalker Robert John Bardo , the man who would later go on to stalk and ultimately murder My Sister Sam actress Rebecca Schaeffer . Bardo traveled to Maine in an attempt to meet Smith , but was stopped by police and returned home . 
 In 1985 she co @-@ starred with Robert Wagner in a television series called Lime Street . 
 = = Death = = 
 On August 25 , 1985 , Smith and her father were returning home aboard Bar Harbor Airlines Flight 1808 after filming a segment for Lime Street . While attempting to land at Lewiston @-@ Auburn Regional Airport in Auburn , Maine , the Beechcraft 99 commuter plane struck some trees 4 @,@ 007 feet ( 1 @,@ 221 m ) short of the runway and crashed , killing all six passengers and two crew on board . Much speculation regarding the cause of the accident circulated afterwards . Accusations of foul play circulated widely in the Soviet Union . An investigation was undertaken in the United States and the official report — which did not show evidence of foul play — was made public . As stated in the report , the accident occurred at about 22 : 05 EDT , the ground impact point located one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south @-@ west of the airport , at 44 ° 02 ′ 22 ″ N 70 ° 17 ′ 30 ″ W. The report goes on to say , " The relatively steep flight path angle and the attitude ( the orientation of the aircraft relative to the horizon , direction of motion etc . ) and speed of the airplane at ground impact precluded the occupants from surviving the accident . " The main point of the report was that it was a rainy night , the pilots were inexperienced , and an accidental , but not uncommon and not usually critical , ground radar failure occurred . 
 Samantha Smith was mourned by about 1 @,@ 000 people at her funeral in Augusta , Maine , and was eulogized in Moscow as a champion of peace . Attendees included Robert Wagner and Vladimir Kulagin of the Soviet Embassy in Washington , who read a personal message of condolence from Mikhail Gorbachev . 
 " Everyone in the Soviet Union who has known Samantha Smith will forever remember the image of the American girl who , like millions of Soviet young men and women , dreamt about peace , and about friendship between the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union " . 
 President Ronald Reagan sent his condolences to Smith 's mother , in writing , 
 " Perhaps you can take some measure of comfort in the knowledge that millions of Americans , indeed millions of people , share the burdens of your grief . They also will cherish and remember Samantha , her smile , her idealism and unaffected sweetness of spirit . " 
 The remains of Smith and her father were cremated , and buried side by side in Estabrook Cemetery , Aroostook County , near Houlton where Smith was born . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Smith 's contributions have been honored with a number of tributes by Russians and by the people of her home state of Maine . A monument to her was built in Moscow ; " Samantha Smith Alley " in the Artek Young Pioneer camp was named after her in 1986 . The monument built to Smith was stolen by metal thieves in 2003 following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 . In 2003 , Voronezh retiree Valentin <unk> built a monument to her without any support from the government . The Soviet Union issued a commemorative stamp with her likeness . In 1986 , when Soviet astronomer Lyudmila Chernykh discovered asteroid <unk> , she named it <unk> Samantha . The Danish composer Per <unk> wrote his 1985 viola concerto " Remembering Child " in memory of Smith . A diamond found in Siberia , a mountain in the former Soviet Union , a cultivar of tulips and of dahlias , and an ocean vessel have been named in Smith 's honor . In Maine , the first Monday in June of each year is officially designated as Samantha Smith Day by state law . There is a bronze statue of Smith near the Maine State Museum in Augusta , which portrays Smith releasing a dove with a bear cub resting at her feet . The bear cub represents both Maine and Russia . Elementary schools in Sammamish , Washington , and in Jamaica , Queens , New York City , have been named after Samantha . In October 1985 , Smith 's mother founded The Samantha Smith Foundation , which fostered student exchanges between the United States and the Soviet Union ( and , after December 1991 , the ex @-@ Soviet successor states ) until it became dormant in the mid @-@ 1990s . The Foundation was formally dissolved in 2014 after two decades of dormancy . 
 A 1987 episode of the U.S. sitcom The Golden Girls entitled " Letter to Gorbachev " draws inspiration from Smith 's story . In addition , the 1987 film Superman IV : The Quest for Peace included a scene where a boy writes Superman a letter to control the nuclear arms race ; according to Christopher Reeve , this scene was also inspired by Smith 's story . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , after Smith 's death , a script was written for a television movie titled The Samantha Smith Story with Robert Wagner as producer . Columbia Pictures Television and R.J. Wagner Productions were reported to have agreed to produce the film for NBC , with Soviet company <unk> Film interested in co @-@ producing it . Ultimately , Columbia Pictures Television decided not to film it due to lack of interest from any network . 
 In 2008 , Smith posthumously received the Peace Abbey Courage of Conscience Award for " helping to bring about better understanding between the peoples of the [ USA and the USSR ] , and as a result , reduce the tension between the superpowers that were poised to engage in nuclear war " . The Peace Abbey has also proposed The Peace Literature Project in Honor of Samantha Smith " to educate students about peace and promote peace literature for school @-@ age children in 50 selected pilot schools across the United States " 
 Elliott Holt 's 2013 novel You Are One of Them , uses the story of Samantha Smith as inspiration for a fictional character , Jennifer Jones . The book , characterized as literary fiction , was well received by critics for both literary style and page @-@ turning intrigue . 
 On the 30th anniversary of the plane crash in 2015 , the Maine State Museum opened a new exhibit of materials related to Samantha , including photographs of her time at the Artek camp , traditional Russian clothing she was given , and an issue of Soviet Life magazine with her on the cover . 
 = Michael Larson = 
 Paul Michael Larson ( May 10 , 1949 – February 16 , 1999 ) was a contestant on the American television game show Press Your Luck in 1984 . Larson is notable for winning $ 110 @,@ 237 ( equivalent to $ 251 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) in cash and prizes , at the time the largest one @-@ day total ever won on a game show . He was able to win by memorizing the patterns used on the Press Your Luck game board . 
 Originally from southwestern Ohio , Larson used his cash winnings for taxes and real estate investments . However , he also had problems with the law and was involved in illegal schemes . As a result , Larson lost all of his winnings within two years of the show 's taping and moved to Florida , where he later died of throat cancer at the age of 49 . Since his death in 1999 , Larson 's game has re @-@ aired on TV at various times and inspired the 2003 Game Show Network documentary Big Bucks : The Press Your Luck Scandal . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Larson began recording episodes of Press Your Luck shortly after its premiere on CBS in September 1983 . Through a careful study of the light indicator used for its eighteen @-@ square " Big Board " , Larson discovered that it always moved in one of five looping patterns . By memorizing these patterns , or at least parts of them , he would be able to predict which squares the indicator would move to next . 
 He also discovered that the fourth and eighth squares ( when numbered beginning at # 1 in the top left hand corner and then moving clockwise along the board ) always contained cash , never had a Whammy in them , and , most importantly , both of those squares also rewarded contestants with an extra spin of the board when hit . Square # 4 contained $ 3 @,@ 000 , $ 4 @,@ 000 , and $ 5 @,@ 000 , while square # 8 contained $ 500 , $ 750 , and $ 1 @,@ 000 , all of those amounts came with an additional spin . The extra spins meant that Larson , at least in the second round , could play on for as long as he dared and never have to stop at a Whammy if he managed to follow the patterns he discovered . 
 Carrying this knowledge and using nearly all of his saved money to make the trip to Los Angeles , Larson traveled to CBS Television City to audition for Press Your Luck . The program 's executive producer Bill Carruthers and contestant supervisor Bobby Edwards discussed whether to have him on the show after his tryout interview ; Edwards was suspicious of Larson and his reasons for trying out , but Carruthers was not . The final decision was to let him on , so he was booked for the show and later chosen for the fourth taping of that day , May 19 , 1984 , intended as a Friday episode . For the rest of his life , Carruthers would say that he regretted not listening to Edwards . 
 While waiting in the green room , Larson met Ed Long , a Baptist minister booked for the third taping , and they struck up a conversation . Long recalled that at one point , Larson , who had watched Press Your Luck a lot , asked him how many times he had seen the show . When Long replied that he had only seen it once , Larson responded by looking at him as though he " were from another planet . " Soon , Long was called up to go on the show and as he left , Larson said to him , " I really hope we don 't have to play each other . " As it turned out , Larson would in fact have to face Long ( who won $ 11 @,@ 516 in his first game and returned for a second game ) and a dental assistant named Janie Litras . 
 = = The game = = 
 = = = First round = = = 
 As always , the game began with the first of two question rounds in which contestants answered questions to earn spins for the Big Board ; a correct buzz @-@ in answer earned three spins , while a correct multiple @-@ choice answer earned one spin . Larson 's memorization of the patterns could not help him here , and he struggled early . On the second question , host Peter Tomarken asked , " You 've probably got President Franklin D. Roosevelt in your pocket or purse right now , because his likeness is on the head side " . Larson buzzed in at this point and answered , " $ 50 bill " , after which Tomarken finished the question " of what American coin ? " with the answer being " a dime " ; the other choice was " a nickel " . He did not buzz in again , answering the last two questions multiple choice and finishing with three spins , behind Long 's four and Litras 's ten . With the fewest spins , Larson went first . On his first spin , he hit a Whammy ; however , on his next two , he hit square # 4 for $ 1 @,@ 250 and finished the round with $ 2 @,@ 500 . Long and Litras finished the round without a Whammy and won $ 4 @,@ 080 and $ 4 @,@ 608 , respectively , putting Larson in last place . 
 = = = Second round = = = 
 After the first two questions in the second round , Long had not earned any spins while Larson and Litras had each received one . Larson successfully buzzed in on the final two questions to earn six more spins , for a total of seven , while Long finished with two and Litras with three . Because Larson was in last place in the first Big Board round , he got to use his spins first in the second round . He went to his pattern play , aiming for squares # 4 and # 8 . 
 Larson quickly bumped his total to over $ 10 @,@ 000 . Early on , his pattern play was irregular , as he stopped four times on squares that did not follow his pattern : a trip to Kauai worth $ 1 @,@ 636 in square # 7 , $ 700 and one spin in square # 17 ; " Pick a Corner " in square # 6 ( where he was given the choice of $ 2 @,@ 250 in square # 1 , $ 2 @,@ 000 in square # 10 , or $ 1 @,@ 500 and one spin in square # 15 — he chose $ 2 @,@ 250 ) ; and a sailboat worth $ 1 @,@ 015 in square # 7 . 
 After the sailboat , Larson 's pattern play became more accurate , as he hit his target squares each time he spun . Tomarken was increasingly astounded that Larson was still spinning despite not having seen a Whammy for so long . At the point where he exceeded $ 36 @,@ 000 , the episode was post @-@ edited for Tomarken to announce that they had run out of time and that the game would resume the following Monday . As part two of the episode began , Tomarken explained to viewers who missed the Friday show what was going on , and the game resumed . 
 Larson continued to press on , exceeding $ 60 @,@ 000 without losing any of his four remaining spins . Tomarken virtually begged Larson to stop more than once , fearing he would hit a Whammy . Finally , Larson surpassed the six @-@ figure mark at $ 102 @,@ 851 . He then passed his remaining four spins to Litras ( who had the second highest total at $ 4 @,@ 608 ) raised his arms in triumph , and received a standing ovation from the audience . Long , who took the next spin , immediately hit a Whammy and lost the $ 4 @,@ 080 he racked up in the first round , leading Tomarken to wonder aloud if Larson " knew that the Whammy was coming . " He then hit $ 5 @,@ 000 + ONE SPIN twice before pressing on and hitting another Whammy , costing him $ 10 @,@ 000 and effectively ending his participation in the game . 
 Litras hit a Whammy on her first spin as well , which was one of the spins passed to her by Larson , and lost the $ 4 @,@ 608 she won in the first round . The remaining three passed spins were moved to the earned column after hitting the Whammy , giving her six spins . In five successful spins , she accumulated $ 9 @,@ 385 . Litras then decided that she would pass her remaining spins , which totalled three . Since the rules dictated that any passed spins go to the leader , this gave Larson another turn at the board that he had not been expecting . 
 Since Larson did not earn the spins , he was forced to take them one at a time . He picked right back up where he had left off for the first two spins , hitting targets and earning spins with which he could do whatever he wanted , but deviated from his pattern by stopping the board early . Larson won a trip to The Bahamas worth $ 2 @,@ 636 but landed on a square with a Whammy that had just turned . 
 With his score now at $ 110 @,@ 237 and now in possession of a pair of earned spins , Larson returned the favor and passed both spins back to Litras . Though Litras took both spins safely , she earned no additional spins with them . Her final spin ended with her landing on a Mexican cruise in square # 15 , and lost the game by a huge margin . Larson won the game with $ 110 @,@ 237 ; of this , $ 104 @,@ 950 was in cash . 
 At the end of the episode , Tomarken asked Larson why he decided not to pass his remaining spins before he did , considering the lead he rapidly gained over Litras and Long . Side @-@ stepping revealing how he had won the game , Larson responded with , " Two things : one , it felt right , and second , I still had seven spins and if I passed them , somebody could 've done what I did . " 
 = = Accusations of cheating = = 
 While Larson was running up the score , the show 's producers contacted Michael Brockman , then head of CBS ' daytime programming department . In a 1994 TV Guide interview commemorating the Larson Sweep , conducted at the time the movie Quiz Show was released , he recalled " Something was very wrong . Here was this guy from nowhere , and he was hitting the bonus box every time . It was bedlam , I can tell you . And we couldn 't stop this guy . He kept going around the board and hitting that box . " 
 The program 's producers and Brockman met to review the videotape . They noticed that Larson would immediately celebrate after many of his spins instead of waiting the fraction of a second it would take for a contestant to see and respond to the space he or she had stopped on , effectively showing he knew he was going to get something good . It was also noticed that Larson had an unusual reaction to his early prize of a Kauai trip , which was out of his pattern – he initially looked puzzled and upset , but then recovered and celebrated after a pause . 
 At first , CBS refused to pay Larson , considering him a cheater . However , Brockman and the producers could not find a clause in the game 's rules with which to disqualify him ( largely because the board had been constructed with these patterns from the beginning of the series ) , and the network complied . Because he had surpassed the CBS winnings cap ( at the time ) of $ 25 @,@ 000 , Larson was not allowed to return for the next show . 
 The five light patterns on the Big Board were immediately erased and replaced with five new ones for about a month . Then , to make sure no one was memorizing those , they were again replaced with five new patterns for another month . Finally in August , new software was installed which gave the Big Board a total of 32 patterns , effectively ensuring that no one would ever duplicate Larson 's trick . 
 = = Episode broadcasts = = 
 Due to its exceptional running time , Larson 's appearance was split into two episodes , which aired on June 8 and 11 , 1984 . CBS then suppressed them for 19 years , as both the network and Carruthers at that time considered the incident to be one of their biggest embarrassments . When USA Network ( and later , GSN ) bought the rights to rerun Press Your Luck , CBS and Carruthers insisted that the Larson episodes must not be aired . 
 On March 16 , 2003 , GSN was allowed to air the episodes , including a few previously edited @-@ out portions , as part of a two @-@ hour documentary called Big Bucks : The Press Your Luck Scandal , hosted and narrated by Tomarken . The documentary was produced by and aired on GSN ( in association with Lionsgate and FremantleMedia , the latter of which now owns the rights to Press Your Luck ) , and broke all previous viewership records for the network . The original telecast was dedicated to the memory of Bill Carruthers , producer / creator of Press Your Luck , who had died before the airing . 
 As part of the commemoration , Larson 's opponents from 1984 were invited back to be contestants on Whammy ! The All @-@ New Press Your Luck playing against Larson 's brother , James , with Tomarken returning to host the Question Round . Despite the fact that the board was now more random ( host Todd Newton calling it " Larson @-@ proof " ) , and there was no way the same trick could have been performed , Long and Litras ( who had remarried and took the surname Litras @-@ <unk> ) still lost . When Larson hit the Big Bank space on his first spin of the first round , Long proceeded to joke with host Todd Newton that he had " seen this before " . At one point , Litras @-@ <unk> advanced to first place before hitting a Double Whammy shortly afterward , effectively giving Larson the win . Larson won a digital grand piano worth $ 6 @,@ 695 , while Newton closed the game by announcing , " The legacy continues " . 
 The two Larson episodes finally aired in their entirety on GSN in late 2003 and were shown in regular rotation and on special occasions until the network ceased showing Press Your Luck in March 2009 . However , the Big Bucks documentary included additional footage , directly from the original master tapes , that had been edited out of the episodes for their initial broadcast . Larson 's performance on Press Your Luck was also featured in a July 2010 broadcast of This American Life . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 After Press Your Luck , Larson became an assistant manager at local Walmart stores in Dayton , Lebanon , Xenia and <unk> , Ohio . He also ran a promotions and marketing company , Group Dynamics <unk> , out of his Lebanon home . 
 In November 1984 , Larson learned about a local radio show promotion promising a $ 30 @,@ 000 prize for matching a $ 1 bill 's serial number with a random number read out on the air . Over several days , he withdrew his remaining winnings in $ 1 bills , examined each dollar , and ( upon discovering that he did not have the winning number ) re @-@ deposited roughly half of the money . Larson left around $ 50 @,@ 000 in his house , which was stolen in a burglary while he was attending a Christmas party . The case still remains open today . 
 Larson gave an interview with TV Guide in 1994 , in which he revealed to have called the producers of Press Your Luck after losing most of his remaining money , challenging them to hold a tournament of champions to see if he could break the bank again . The producers declined . 
 In 1994 , the film Quiz Show was released and , as part of the renewed discussion on game show scandals , Larson appeared on ABC 's Good Morning America . By this time , he had been diagnosed with throat cancer , and his voice was noticeably weakened . 
 Shortly thereafter , Larson got involved with an illegal scheme to sell part of a foreign lottery . As a result , he went on the run , leaving Ohio . His family was contacted by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission , the Internal Revenue Service , and the Federal Bureau of Investigation , but no one knew his whereabouts until his death from throat cancer on February 16 , 1999 , in Apopka , Florida . 
 In 2000 , a biopic was planned , with Bill Murray set to portray Larson ; however , those plans fell through . 
 = 1960 Winter Olympics = 
 The 1960 Winter Olympics was a winter multi @-@ sport event held between February 18 – 28 , 1960 in Squaw Valley , California , United States . Squaw Valley was chosen to host the Games at the 1956 meeting of the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) . It was an undeveloped resort in 1955 , so from 1956 to 1960 the infrastructure and all of the venues were built at a cost of US $ 80 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . It was designed to be intimate , allowing spectators and competitors to walk to nearly all the venues . Squaw Valley hosted athletes from thirty nations who competed in four sports and twenty @-@ seven events . Women 's speed skating and biathlon made their Olympic debuts . The organizers decided the bobsled events did not warrant the cost to build a venue , so for the first and only time bobsled was not on the Winter Olympic program . The Soviet Union dominated the medal count winning twenty @-@ one medals , seven of which were gold . Soviet speed skaters Yevgeny Grishin and Lidiya Skoblikova won two gold medals each . Swedish cross @-@ country skier Sixten Jernberg added a gold and silver to the four medals he won at the 1956 Winter Games . 
 Cold War politics forced the IOC to debate the participation of China , Taiwan , North Korea and East Germany . In 1957 the United States government threatened to deny visas to athletes from Communist countries . The IOC responded with a threat to revoke Squaw Valley 's right to host the 1960 Games . The United States conceded and allowed entry to athletes from Communist countries . 
 = = Host city selection = = 
 Squaw Valley was a struggling ski resort with minimal facilities , which made its selection to host the 1960 Winter Olympics a surprise . Wayne Poulsen and Alexander Cushing , who were inspired to an Olympic bid by a newspaper article mentioning that Reno , Nevada and Anchorage , Alaska had expressed interest in the Games . Poulsen , president of the Squaw Valley Development Company , petitioned California Governor Goodwin Knight to support a bid to host the Olympic Games . Knight 's administration agreed and recommended that the California Legislature appropriate $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to the effort . Based on the financial support received from the State of California , the United States Olympic Committee ( USOC ) approved the bid on January 7 , 1955 . Cushing and the USOC received a resolution passed by the United States Congress and signed by President Dwight Eisenhower , calling on the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) to consider Squaw Valley 's bid for the 1960 Games . Preliminary reports were drafted and submitted to the IOC , which was considering bids from Innsbruck , Austria , St. Moritz , Switzerland and Chamonix , France . Squaw Valley was provisionally awarded the right to host the Games , but IOC president Avery Brundage warned the Organizing Committee that unless more funds were secured by April 1956 , the bid would be awarded to Innsbruck . Another $ 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 were committed by the State Legislature , which met Brundage 's requirements . On April 4 , 1956 the right to host the 1960 Winter Olympics was officially awarded to Squaw Valley . Competitors and officials from European nations were angered by the selection ; they felt that the alpine ski courses were not up to specifications and that the altitude would prove too stressful on the athletes . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Squaw Valley in 1956 consisted of one chair lift , two rope tows , and a fifty @-@ room lodge . Cushing presented the site as a blank canvas of unspoiled environment , where a world @-@ class ski resort could be constructed . The obscurity of the location was underscored at the closing ceremonies of the 1956 Winter Olympics . Traditionally the mayor of the current host city passes a flag to the mayor of the next host city signalling the transfer of the Games . Since Squaw Valley was an unincorporated village it had no city government . John Garland , an IOC member from California , was asked to stand in and received the flag from the mayor of Cortina d 'Ampezzo . 
 After winning the right to host the Games , the California Olympic Commission was formed . They were given four years to build venues , an Olympic Village , and expand infrastructure . With the expansion of roads , bridges , water and electrical capacity the resort of Squaw Valley became the city of Squaw Valley . Hotels , restaurants , administration buildings , a Sheriff 's office and a sewage pumping and treatment plant were all constructed to support the influx of visitors for the Games . Organizers wanted the Olympics to be intimate with the venues close to one another . The Blyth Memorial Ice Arena was built along with three outdoor skating rinks , a 400 @-@ meter speed skating oval and four dormitories to house athletes . One venue deemed impractical to build was the bobsled run . Organizers felt the lack of possible entrants and the high cost of building the run were sufficient deterrents to leave the bobsled events off the 1960 Olympic program . 
 Several design innovations and new technologies were used for the 1960 Games . The speed skating , figure skating and ice hockey events were held on artificial ice for the first time in Olympic history . A refrigeration plant capable of heating 4 @,@ 800 homes had to be built to generate and maintain the ice . The heat generated from the refrigeration plant was used to warm spectators , provide hot water , and melt the snow off of roofs . New timing equipment provided by Longines was installed that used a quartz clock to measure to the hundredths of a second . IBM provided a computer that was capable of tabulating results and printing them in English and French . Blyth Arena , site of the opening and closing ceremonies as well as the figure skating and ice hockey competitions , was built with a 22 in ( 56 cm ) gap in the roof , which would slide closed as the cables supporting the roof contracted during cold weather . 
 Funding for Cushing 's initial bid to the IOC came from the California Legislature and investors in the " Squaw Valley Development Company " , who were owners of the existing resort . To fund the construction , organizers turned to the federal government , which provided about a quarter of the $ 80 million required to host the Games . The monies were used to build sports arenas and provide military support during the Games . Further funding was secured from private sponsorships and from the State of California . Governor Knight and his successor Edmund " Pat " Brown remained behind the project , seeing it as a means to showcase the state of California to the world . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Television was not new to the Olympic Winter Games ; broadcasts of events to European audiences had begun in 1956 . What was unprecedented was the sale of exclusive United States television rights to broadcast the Games . The Organizing Committee decided to sell the television broadcast rights to CBS for $ 50 @,@ 000 . Unknown at the time was how lucrative the sale of broadcast rights would become . For example , CBS purchased the rights to broadcast the 1960 Summer Olympics for $ 550 @,@ 000 . During the Games , CBS broadcast 15 and a quarter hours of television focusing on ice hockey , speed skating , figure skating , alpine skiing and ski jumping . The impact of television was felt during the Games ; in the men 's slalom event , officials who were unsure if a skier had missed a gate asked CBS if they could review tape of the event . This request gave CBS the idea for what is now known as instant replay . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Athletic competition between the Soviet Union and United States had grown intense during the 1950s . Their opposing ideologies and interests in nations such as East and West Germany , China and North and South Korea created a delicate situation as the 1960 Winter Games approached . Of particular interest was the question of whether China would be allowed to participate . Chinese athletes last competed at the 1952 Summer Games but had since withdrawn from the IOC due to a dispute over Taiwan 's participation as a separate country . The United States supported Taiwan while the Soviet Union stood behind China . Given the fact that the 1960 Games were to be held in America , there was concern among IOC members that the United States would not allow China or any other Communist country to participate . In 1957 IOC president Avery Brundage , himself an American , announced that if the United States refused entry to any country recognized by the IOC , then they would revoke Squaw Valley 's invitation to host the Games and he would resign the presidency . Bowing to international pressure , the United States allowed athletes from Communist countries to participate . China continued to demand that Taiwan be expelled from the IOC , demands that were refused until China broke off relations ending any hope that they would participate in 1960 . 
 Problems similar to the issue with China broke out over North Korea and East Germany . Prior to the Korean War the IOC had recognized the Olympic committee of Korea , which was headquartered in Seoul . North Korea was not recognized as a separate country by the IOC who maintained the existence of one Olympic committee . A unified team compromise was proposed but rejected , which meant only athletes from South Korea participated due to their prior recognition . Pressure for full recognition of East Germany continued despite the fact that both East and West Germany had participated as a unified team in 1956 . One of the conditions for a unified German team was that the athletes be represented by a neutral flag . Initially West German officials refused to agree to this stipulation citing the fact that the West German flag had been used at both the 1956 Winter and Summer Games . Eventually the neutral flag was adopted and a unified German team participated . 
 = = Events = = 
 The Games were held from February 18 to 28 . Medals were awarded in 27 events contested in 4 sports ( 8 disciplines ) . The sport of biathlon was added to the program as were speed skating events for women . After a poll was taken indicating that only nine countries would send a bobsled team , the organizers determined that bobsled would be removed from the Olympic program . Despite petitions from the International Bobsleigh and Tobogganing Federation to reconsider , the organizers felt they could not justify the costs of constructing a bobsled run for nine competing nations . It would be the only time in Winter Olympic history that the bobsled events were not held . 
 Biathlon ( 1 ) ( ) 
 Ice hockey ( 1 ) ( ) 
 Skating 
 Figure skating ( 3 ) ( ) 
 Speed skating ( 8 ) ( ) 
 Skiing 
 Alpine skiing ( 6 ) ( ) 
 Nordic skiing ( ) 
 Cross @-@ country skiing ( 6 ) ( ) 
 Nordic combined ( 1 ) ( ) 
 Ski jumping ( 1 ) ( ) 
 = = = Opening ceremonies = = = 
 The chairman of the Pageantry Committee was Walt Disney , who was responsible for producing both the opening and closing ceremonies . He organized an opening that included 5 @,@ 000 entertainers , the release of 2 @,@ 000 pigeons , and a military gun salute of eight shots , one for each of the previous Winter Olympic Games . The opening ceremonies were held on February 18 , 1960 at Blyth Arena in the midst of a blizzard . The heavy snow fall caused traffic problems that delayed the ceremony by an hour . The festivities began with a sustained drum roll as the flags of each participating nation were raised on specially designed flag poles . Vice President Richard Nixon represented the United States government and declared the Games open . The Olympic cauldron was lit by Kenneth Henry , Olympic champion of the 500 meter speed skating race at the 1952 Winter Olympics in Oslo . The Olympic oath was taken by Carol Heiss on behalf of all the athletes . As the national delegations left the stadium fireworks concluded the ceremonies . 
 = = = Ice hockey = = = 
 The ice hockey tournament took place at Blyth Arena and the Squaw Valley Olympic Skating Rink . Controversy over the amateur status of some of the players overshadowed the event . Canadian Olympic officials objected to the use of " professional amateurs " by Eastern Bloc countries , and especially the Soviet Union . They alleged that the Soviets were giving their elite hockey players phantom jobs in the military that allowed them to play hockey full @-@ time , which gave Soviet teams an advantage that they used to dominate Olympic hockey tournaments for nearly 30 years . This issue started coming to light during the 1960 Games and would culminate in a Canadian boycott of the Olympic hockey tournament at the 1972 Winter Olympics . The team from the United States won an improbable gold medal , defeating the favored Canadian and Soviet teams , who took silver and bronze respectively . This was the first Olympic gold medal in ice hockey for the United States and it would mark the last time a Soviet team did not win the Olympic tournament until the United States victory at the 1980 Winter Olympics . 
 = = = Cross @-@ country skiing = = = 
 There were six cross @-@ country skiing races at the 1960 Olympics , four for men and two for women , all held at the McKinney Creek Cross @-@ Country Complex . Soviet women swept the 10 kilometer race , which was the first medal sweep for the Soviets at the Winter Olympics . They were however upset by Sweden in the 3 × 5 kilometer relay . Nordic countries dominated the men 's competition . Swedish lumberjack Sixten Jernberg added a gold and silver to the four medals he won in 1956 . He would add two golds and a bronze in 1964 to finish his Olympic career with nine medals , which made him the most decorated Winter Olympian . Finnish skier Veikko Hakulinen added a gold , silver and bronze to the two golds and two silvers he had won in 1952 and 1956 . 
 = = = Biathlon = = = 
 Biathlon made its Olympic debut in 1960 . The precursor to biathlon , military patrol , was on the Olympic program for the first Olympic Games in 1924 . It was a demonstration sport at the 1928 , 1936 , and 1948 Winter Olympics , though the competition was only open to members of the armed forces . Military patrol fell out of favor in 1948 due to anti @-@ military sentiments in the post World War II era . Biathlon took its place and was instated as a full Olympic sport in 1960 . It encompassed a 20 kilometer cross @-@ country race with four shooting stations at ranges from 100 to 250 m ( 330 to 820 ft ) . Klas <unk> from Sweden became the first Olympic champion , Antti <unk> from Finland and Soviet Aleksandr <unk> placed second and third respectively . 
 = = = Nordic combined = = = 
 The Nordic combined competition was held on February 21 at the Squaw Valley normal hill and the McKinney Creek Cross @-@ Country Complex . The athletes had three jumps on February 21 followed by a 15 kilometer cross @-@ country race . German skier Georg Thoma became the first non @-@ Nordic athlete to win the event . He would win bronze medal in the Nordic combined in 1964 . Tormod Knutsen of Norway and Nikolay Gusakov of the Soviet Union placed second and third , respectively . Gusakov 's wife , Maria <unk> , competed in the cross @-@ country events , winning a gold and silver . 
 = = = Ski jumping = = = 
 There was one ski jumping event at the 1960 Games , the men 's normal hill , which was held on February 28 . In 1964 the competition would be expanded to include a men 's large hill event . Helmut <unk> became the first German to win the event . In 1994 he would be joined by Jens Weißflog as the only German ski jumping Olympic champions . <unk> Halonen from Finland and Austrian Otto <unk> earned the silver and bronze medals . 
 = = = Figure skating = = = 
 Held at Blyth Memorial Arena , the figure skating competition took place between February 19 and 26 . Though this was not the first time figure skating had been held indoors , it would never be contested outdoors again . There were three events : men 's and women 's singles and the pairs competition . In the men 's event , David Jenkins , brother of 1956 Winter Olympic figure skating champion Hayes Jenkins , won the gold medal . It was his second Olympic medal , having won the bronze in 1956 . Czechoslovakian Karol <unk> took the silver medal , and Canadian Donald Jackson won the bronze . Carol Heiss , winner of the silver medal in 1956 , became the Olympic champion in 1960 . A year later she married Hayes Jenkins and starred in Snow White and the Three Stooges . Dutch skater <unk> Dijkstra took the silver medal ; she would finish her amateur career with an Olympic gold medal in 1964 . Barbara Ann Roles gave the United States its third figure skating medal of the competition when she took the bronze . The Soviet Union made its Olympic figure skating debut by sending two couples to compete in the pairs competition ; the result belied the fact that Soviet skaters would soon come to dominate this event . The competition was won by the Canadian pair of Barbara Wagner and Bob Paul who had won the last three world championships . The German pair Marika <unk> and Hans @-@ Jürgen <unk> followed their recent European championship victory with the Olympic silver medal , and the American husband @-@ and @-@ wife team of Ron and Nancy Ludington took the bronze . 
 = = = Speed skating = = = 
 Women were allowed to compete in the Olympic speed skating competition for the first time in 1960 . The Soviet Union had requested the inclusion of women 's speed skating events in the program for the 1956 Games , but the request was rejected by the IOC . The issue was revisited for the 1960 Games , and since women had been competing internationally since 1936 and there was a World Championship for women 's speed skating , the IOC agreed to four events ; 500 , 1 @,@ 000 , 1 @,@ 500 , and 3 @,@ 000 meters . Most of the events were held on the Squaw Valley Olympic Skating Rink , which was an outdoor skating oval , and featured artificial ice , a first for the Olympic speed skating competition . Given the altitude and the artificial ice , the rink was the fastest in the world , as evidenced by Norwegian Knut Johannesen ’ s world record in the 10 @,@ 000 meter event . At 15 : 46 @.@ 6 he was the first skater ever to break the 16 @-@ minute barrier , and eclipsed the previous world record by 46 seconds . Despite Johannesen 's victory , the Soviets dominated the speed skating events , winning all but two of the races . Yevgeny Grishin won both the 500 and 1 @,@ 500 meter races , though he shared the 1 @,@ 500 meter gold medal with Norwegian Roald Aas . Lidiya Skoblikova from the Soviet Union was the other double gold medalist , when she won the 1 @,@ 500 and 3 @,@ 000 meter events . Polish skaters Helena <unk> and <unk> <unk> placed second and third in the 1 @,@ 500 meter event , which were Poland 's only medals of the Games . They were just the second and third Poles ever to win Winter Olympic medals . 
 = = = Alpine skiing = = = 
 Despite the lack of facilities at Squaw Valley , the resort did have steep mountain slopes in close proximity , resulting in some of the most difficult alpine skiing courses in Olympic history . Both men and women competed in the downhill , giant slalom and slalom with all 6 events held between February 20 and 26 . The men 's downhill was won by Frenchman Jean <unk> who changed the sport by becoming the first Olympic champion to use metal skis . Swiss skier Roger Staub won the giant slalom and Ernst <unk> from Austria was the slalom champion . German Heidi <unk> won the women 's downhill , Yvonne <unk> of Switzerland won the giant slalom and Anne <unk> from Canada won the slalom . Penny <unk> of the United States was the only multiple medal winner with two silvers in the downhill and giant slalom . 
 = = = Closing ceremonies = = = 
 The Games were brought to a close on February 28 in Blyth Memorial Arena in front of 20 @,@ 000 people . Flags of the participating nations were followed by the athletes who marched as a group with no national distinctions . The flag bearers made a semi @-@ circle around the rostrum and the national anthems of Greece ( even though the nation didn 't compete ) , United States , and Austria were played as their respective flags were raised . IOC president Avery Brundage declared the Games closed , at which point the Olympic flame was extinguished . The Games concluded with the release of several thousand balloons . 
 = = Calendar = = 
 All dates are in Pacific Standard Time ( UTC @-@ 8 ) 
 The opening ceremony was held on February 18 , along with the first games of the hockey tournament . From February 19 to 28 , at least one event final was held each day . 
 † The numeral indicates the number of event finals for each sport held that day . 
 = = Venues = = 
 The lack of facilities prior to the Olympics gave organizers freedom to tailor the layout of the venues to fit the needs of the athletes . Their vision was for an intimate Games in which athletes and spectators could walk between venues . This was accomplished with the exception of the cross @-@ country events , which were held at McKinney Creek , a 12 mi ( 19 km ) drive from Squaw Valley . In prior Winter Olympics the athletes were housed in hotels or billeted with local families . Since no such facilities existed in Squaw Valley , the organizers decided to build the first Olympic Village at the Winter Games . Competitors slept in one of four dormitories and ate together in a dining room . The complex was located centrally , with access to all the sporting facilities . 
 The peaks surrounding Squaw Valley were used for the alpine skiing events . The ladies ' downhill and men 's slalom and giant slalom were on KT @-@ 22 mountain , while the ladies ' slalom and giant slalom were contested on Little Papoose Peak . Squaw Peak was the site of the men 's downhill competition . Prior to the Games , concerns persisted that the courses would not meet international standards . To address these concerns , a test event was held in 1959 and the attending delegates from the International Ski Federation ( FIS ) left assured that the events would comply with FIS rules and specifications . <unk> were constructed for officials , coaches and spectators , along with broadcast booths for radio and television . Papoose Peak Jumps was located on Little Papoose Peak directly opposite Blyth Memorial Arena . Designed by Heini Klopfer , the hill was innovative in that it had 40- , 60- , and 80 – meter jumps . Tall trees on both sides protected athletes from the wind , and it was situated so that the sun would be at the jumper 's back during the competition . 
 McKinney Creek Stadium was built to host all of the cross @-@ country races , which included the biathlon and a portion of the Nordic combined competition . It consisted of a timing building , two Quonset huts for competitors and course workers , a scoreboard , and bleachers to accommodate 1 @,@ 200 people . Shooting ranges were interspersed throughout the biathlon course , and were supervised by non @-@ commissioned officers of the United States military . 
 Blyth Memorial Arena was the centerpiece of the Games . It hosted the opening and closing ceremonies jointly with Squaw Valley Olympic Skating Rink , and also hosted the figure skating competition , a few of the speed skating events , as well as most of the games in the hockey tournament . All three of the sports were held indoors on artificial ice for the first time in Olympic history . At full capacity , the arena accommodated 11 @,@ 000 people , 8 @,@ 500 of whom were seated . One end of the stadium could be opened and closed , depending on the event . During the ceremonies it was open to allow for the entrance of the athletes ; during the competitions it was closed to accommodate more spectators . A special machine was created to resurface the ice for all three competitions . It could lay a new ice surface on the 400 @-@ meter speed skating track in 45 minutes . In addition to resurfacing the ice , the machine created the snow dividers that delineated the racing lanes . The roof was designed on a suspension principle , using cables rather than vertical supports ; this removed any visual impediments for the audience , but it weakened the strength of the roof . Given the amount of annual snowfall designers planned on using heat generated by the refrigeration plant to melt the snow . There were flaws in the design and miscalculations in the load the roof could bear , and during a particularly heavy snowfall in 1983 , a portion of the roof collapsed and the building was subsequently demolished . 
 = = Participating nations = = 
 Athletes from 30 nations competed at the 1960 Games . South Africa competed at the Winter Games for the first time ; it would be the last for many years , as apartheid policies prevented South African participation until 1994 . Athletes from West Germany ( FRG ) and East Germany ( GDR ) competed together as the United Team of Germany from 1956 to 1964 . The number at the end of each country denotes the number of athletes each country sent . 
 = = Medal count = = 
 Below is a list of nations that won medals at the Games : 
 The host nation is highlighted in blue . 
 ‡ Since there was a tie in the men 's 1 @,@ 500 meter speed skating race ( like in 1956 ) , two gold medals and no silver medals were awarded . 
 = Italian ironclad Principe Amedeo = 
 Principe Amedeo was an ironclad warship built by the Italian Regia Marina in the 1860s and 1870s . She was the lead ship of the Principe Amedeo class , alongside her sister ship Palestro . Principe Amedeo was laid down in 1865 , launched in 1872 , and completed in late 1874 . She was armed with a battery of six 10 in ( 254 mm ) guns and one 11 in ( 279 mm ) gun . The last sail @-@ rigged ironclad of the Italian fleet , she had a single steam engine that was capable of propelling the ship at a speed of slightly over 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 Principe Amedeo 's lengthy construction time rendered her obsolescent by the time she entered service . As a result , she primarily served as a station ship in Italy 's overseas empire . In November 1881 , she collided with the ironclad Roma in a storm in Naples . Principe Amadeo was withdrawn from service in 1888 and converted into a headquarters ship for the vessels defending Taranto . She was stricken from the naval register in 1895 and thereafter used as a depot ship until she was broken up for scrap in 1910 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Principe Amedeo was 79 @.@ 73 meters ( 261 @.@ 6 ft ) long between perpendiculars ; she had a beam of 17 @.@ 4 m ( 57 ft ) and an average draft of 7 @.@ 9 m ( 26 ft ) . She displaced 5 @,@ 761 metric tons ( 5 @,@ 670 long tons ; 6 @,@ 350 short tons ) normally and up to 6 @,@ 020 t ( 5 @,@ 920 long tons ; 6 @,@ 640 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by six coal @-@ fired , cylindrical fire @-@ tube boilers . Her engine produced a top speed of 12 @.@ 2 knots ( 22 @.@ 6 km / h ; 14 @.@ 0 mph ) at 6 @,@ 117 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 561 kW ) . She could steam for 1 @,@ 780 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 050 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The ship was barque @-@ rigged to supplement the steam engine ; Principe Amedeo and her sister were the last rigged ironclads to be built by Italy . She had a crew of 548 officers and men . 
 Principe Amedeo was armed with a main battery of six 10 in ( 254 mm ) guns , mounted in a single armored casemates placed amidships , with three guns on each broadside . A 11 in ( 279 mm ) gun was mounted forward as a bow chaser . Principe Amedeo was protected by iron belt armor that was 8 @.@ 7 in ( 221 mm ) thick and extended for the entire length of the hull . The casemates were protected with 5 @.@ 5 in ( 140 mm ) of iron plating , and the small conning tower had 2 @.@ 4 in ( 61 mm ) thick iron plates . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Principe Amedeo was laid down at the Arsenale di La Spezia in August 1865 , and her completed hull was launched on 15 January 1872 . Fitting @-@ out work proceeded very slowly , and the ship was finally completed on 15 December 1874 . Obsolescent by the time she was completed , Principe Amedeo primarily served in the Italian colonial empire , which Italy had begun acquiring in the 1880s . She occasionally took part in training maneuvers with the main Italian fleet throughout her career . 
 Principe Amedeo took part in the launching ceremony for the ironclad Italia on 29 September 1880 ; also present were the Italian ironclad Regina Maria Pia and King Umberto I aboard his yacht , and the British ironclads HMS Monarch and Thunderer with Vice Admiral George Tryon , both members of the Mediterranean Fleet . At the time , Principe Amedeo flew the flag of Vice Admiral Martini . In early November 1881 , Principe Amedeo was moored in Naples when a severe storm tore the ironclad Roma free from her anchors and knocked her into Principe Amedeo . Neither ship was damaged in the collision . 
 For the annual fleet maneuvers held in 1885 , Principe Amedeo served as the flagship of the " Eastern Squadron " , with Rear Admiral Civita commanding . She was joined by the ironclad Castelfidardo , the corvette Amerigo Vespucci , a sloop , and four torpedo boats . The " Eastern Squadron " defended against an attacking " Western Squadron " , simulating a Franco @-@ Italian conflict , with operations conducted off Sardinia . During the exercises , Principe Amedeo was forced to " surrender " by the ironclad Caio Duilio . 
 From 1888 to 1889 , Principe Amedeo was employed as the headquarters ship for the forces defending Taranto . By this time , she had been equipped with six 2 @.@ 9 in ( 74 mm ) guns for close @-@ range defense , six machine guns , and two torpedo tubes . The ship was stricken from the naval register on 28 March 1895 and thereafter used as an ammunition depot ship in Taranto . She was eventually broken up for scrap in 1910 . 
 = Pyramids ( song ) = 
 " Pyramids " is a song by American recording artist Frank Ocean , released as the second single from his debut studio album Channel Orange ( 2012 ) . The song was written by Ocean and produced by Malay and Om <unk> Keith . The track features an uncredited guitar solo from recording artist John Mayer . On June 7 , 2012 , Ocean posted a small teaser video featuring a snippet of the song onto his tumblr account , and released the full , nearly 10 @-@ minute song later that day onto his official SoundCloud account . The song explores a narrative of a pimp falling in love with one of his clients . The track lyrically contains several extended metaphors referencing Cleopatra , pyramids , and strip clubs . The song received highly positive reviews and was called epic in nature by several publications , who praised the ambition and scope of the track 's length , along with the lyrical merit . 
 The song was featured in a teaser for Ocean 's then @-@ upcoming album and was released with a cover that featured The Simpsons style characters . The music video was directed by Nabil Elderkin and featured an orange car with an atmospheric background . The song has since debuted on the UK R & B Chart at number 31 . The track has been featured during television promos for Channel Orange . Ocean performed " Pyramids " during his Channel Orange tour through North America . 
 = = Background = = 
 On June 8 , 2012 , Ocean posted onto his tumblr a cryptic , nearly two @-@ minute video , promoting an unknown project which was titled Channel Orange . The clip mostly featured an expensive @-@ looking car , and it also contained new music . Later that day Ocean posted the full song used in the video , titled " Pyramids " onto his Soundcloud account . Popdust noted that " trailers won ’ t tell you everything . For example , the brief snippet of Frank Ocean ’ s new track “ Pyramids ” heard in an ambiguous trailer a few days ago left out one key detail of the track : the damn thing is 10 minutes long . " The cover artwork for the single features sexual Simpsons characters . 
 The song was Ocean 's first new single in over a year , which was described as him coming " back into the spotlight in a huge way . " The track was labeled indicating that it was to be the ninth track on the album . It was later announced that the Channel Orange project was actually his debut album and that he would launch a corresponding tour . The release of the album 's tracklist confirmed both the track placement of the track and the appearance of it on the album . " Pyramids " serves as the second single from the project following " Thinkin Bout You " . The following day Ocean posted that , " playing ‘ Pyramids ’ on the road is gonna be my favourite part " on his Twitter account , speaking about his promotional tour . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Pyramids " is a nine @-@ minute @-@ and @-@ 54 @-@ second R & B song . It has been described as a " nearly 10 @-@ minute epic that touches on everything from club music to good old @-@ fashioned slow jam R & B " and is " an ambitious song with multiple movements . " The song features groaning club beats , psychedelic guitar noodling , crunchy synth leads , a funked @-@ up beat , and " Ocean 's distinctive croon and lots of vague new @-@ R & B angst " . The opening segment sports the " beautiful , warped R & B that Ocean has become known for " , but from there the song transitions into a smattering of electro @-@ house synths , Michael Jackson @-@ influenced pop melodies , spaced out electronic segues , UK bass breaks , saxophone , and guitar solo courtesy of John Mayer . " The track is an " R & B odyssey " slinking from ancient Egypt , where wild cheetahs are on the loose and Cleopatra meets a " <unk> doom " , to the present day where " Frank is living that sleazy motel room life . " It serves as " another case where the production far outstrips the vocal work " , with " clanging and chiming and choirs for the intro , " a dance break toward the middle that sounds like it was " recorded in 2018 " , and a slow jam for the second half that closes the song . 
 The chorus boasts about a woman “ working at the pyramid tonight ” . The track lyrically features intricate imagery that depicts a fantasy @-@ like scenario , and the length gives the song the ability to change pace with " patience , with suave , like a furthering of the foreplay " . The first half details an account of ancient history , " even your junior high school social studies teacher would blush over " , with the second half containing a narrative where Ocean serves as Cleopatra ’ s pimp but through years of working together , he eventually falls in love with her . Through the " unwritten bylaws of their profession " , however , his love is no match for the " rules of the game which were established long before he or she rose to power . " The narrative of " Pyramids " draws inspiration from real events in Ocean 's life . When the singer lived in Los Angeles , he lived alongside actual pimps , and in an interview the singer mused that " it was fantasy built off that dynamic … but you can only write what you know to a point . " The storytelling scope of the song has been compared favorably to Bob Dylan 's " The Hurricane " , and has been described as an anthem " for the Drake generation . " 
 It was reported that Ocean was really stretching the limits of the term “ song ” on " Pyramids " , and that there are " more ideas on this track than on most albums " . The single runs the gamut of Ocean ’ s various influences , pulling from European electronic dance music and Prince 's early 80s discography , notably Purple Rain . The moody tune finds Ocean moaning over ethereal swirls and pulses while cooing about " working at the pyramid " and finding " my Black queen Cleopatra . " It encompasses a multitude of " suites and a kaleidoscope of moods and tones " from " vainglorious to melancholic " and has been called the " Paranoid Android " of R & B. Although Ocean is oftentimes labeled as an R & B artist , he has " entirely steered clear of confining himself to one genre " with the song . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Pyramids " received universal acclaim from music critics . Complex Magazine named the track " song of the week " upon release . Complex later named the song the fourth best song of 2012 . Siân Rowe of NME compared the track to Prince ’ s " Purple Rain " and reported that that the song " is the kind of track you ’ ll lose hours and hours of your life to . This week alone , NME has spent at least two days having our minds freaked on by its space funk swirl . " Pitchfork Media 's Evan <unk> labeled it a " Best New Track " and wrote that " the song 's a 10 @-@ minute R & B event , traveling from club banger ancient Egypt ( ' send the cheetahs to the tomb ' ) to the slow jam strip club ( ' she 's workin ' at the Pyramid tonight ' ) . It 's a journey well @-@ suited to Ocean 's smooth croon . " The publication 's Ryan Dombal commented that it " essentially reincarnates one of the most storied female rulers in history as a six @-@ inch @-@ heeled woman of the night . But still , the song doesn 't read as an indictment of the last 2 @,@ 000 years as much as yet another attempt to cleverly level the playing field . " The Telegraph 's Neil McCormick stated that the track was the " real miracle of the album " , noting that while Ocean " can embark on something as flamboyant as Pyramids - a 10 @-@ minute , tempo @-@ shifting , minor @-@ chord narrative of Egyptian queens and Las Vegas strippers , marrying Tangerine Dream sequencers and a jazzy John Mayer guitar solo to a rapturous slow jam – and make it all seem to make sense . " 
 Melissa Locker of Time called it a " tour de force " and " a ten @-@ minute history of R & B , arcing from club thumping beats to a sultry drawn out jam with Ocean ’ s voice veering from a velvety croon to an endearingly creaky falsetto . " Spin 's Marc Hogan declared " this much is clear : Ocean continues to deliver songs that combine the narrative punch of a great singer @-@ songwriter with the stylish flair of contemporary hip @-@ hop . " John Hall of The Independent described the song as more new material from the " hardest @-@ working man in hip hop " and that the " 10 @-@ minute single works its way through every genre of contemporary pop , from club banger to slow jam . " Nathan S. of the DJBooth described the song as a sprawling affair , noting that it contains " hazy and ambient cut that manages to weave in soaring guitars and ‘ 90s funk synths . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian mused that the track seemed ambitious to the point of sounding slightly daft , and that the track was " certainly unlike anything else in current R & B. " PopMatters 's Brice Ezell stated that all it takes is one listen to ' Pyramids ' , the shape @-@ shifting opus of channel ORANGE to cement Ocean ’ s status as one of contemporary R & B ’ s vital songwriters . 
 John Calvert of The Quietus called " Pyramids " a little " structurally ramshackle though never erratic , it 's the type of massive album centrepiece that was inconceivable before The @-@ Dream 's stadium @-@ R & B reinvented the genre as a mythological epic . " Paley Martin of Most Blunted stated that the track " is so much more than a song ; it is an audible baptism , a narrative delicacy , a self @-@ indulgent experience ! And you best believe once you press play , this ride will take you to the destination of your choice . " Jason Lipshutz of Billboard felt that the real triumph was Ocean 's song structure : " verses and hooks collapse onto each other , rhymes pop up out of nowhere , and the singer acts like minutely balancing a 10 @-@ minute concept piece is no big deal . " Chris Richards of The Washington Post Company described the track as a " righteous funk opus that spans nearly 10 minutes " , commented that it " is loaded with metaphorical riddles , drawing parallels between Cleopatra and a 21st @-@ century prostitute . Puzzle over it . Dance to it . All of the above . " 
 Ocean 's Odd Future cohort Tyler , The Creator called it his favorite Ocean song on his Twitter account . The song has over one million plays on Ocean 's official SoundCloud account , where the song was originally released . 
 The song is ranked as the most acclaimed song of 2012 , the 4th most acclaimed song of 2010s and the 172nd most acclaimed song of all time , according to Acclaimed Music . The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop annual critics ' poll ranked " Pyramids " at number 10 to find the best music of 2012 ; Ocean 's previous single , " Thinkin Bout You " charted at number four on the same poll . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 When " Pyramids " was first released , it debuted within a promotional video less than two minutes long . The clip consists of an extended shot of a car , which flickers slightly with " otherworldly effects " while a " slinky soul tune plays in the background . " The video was directed by Nabil Elderkin , who also helmed the music videos for past Ocean singles such as " Swim Good " and " Novacane " . A portion of the song was used during television commercials advertising Channel Orange , which began airing following the 2012 BET Awards . Siân Rowe of NME mused that the song will definitely get an outing on his upcoming US tour ; " Imagine lots of dry ice , a velvet @-@ covered rotating stage and the entire front row sighing , ' I love you , Frank ' , what a beautiful sight . " Ocean performed the track during his 14 show Channel Orange tour through North America . 
 An extended , eight @-@ minute video for " Pyramids " , also directed by Elderkin , was later released on September 8 , 2012 . The video follows a loose narrative , with stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness scenes , and utilizes several songs from Ocean 's album channel ORANGE . It begins with Ocean drinking four shots of absinthe at a bar , before opening fire upon the bar itself ; a segment of " Pink Matter " plays during this portion . A title card appears as Ocean boards his motorcycle ( the song " Start " appears . ) As he rides off into the desert , a snippet of the first half of " Pyramids " plays before transition directly into the second half . Shots of Ocean singing on his motorbike are interspersed with slow @-@ motion scenes of Ocean walking through a strip club in a hallucinogenic haze , occasionally bursting into laughter ; the club employs vampy women . Ocean is then seen in front of a large neon triangle with the <unk> Tree of Life in neon upon it , from which John Mayer emerges and performs an entirely new guitar solo exclusive to the video . James Montgomery of MTV News characterizes the scene as an inadvertent " vision quest " . Ocean falls down backwards , instantly re @-@ appearing in the desert as a plane flies overhead . The song " End " appears as Ocean walks back to his motorcycle , picks up his helmet and walks down the highway towards a pyramid in the distance . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Remixes and cover versions = = 
 On September 4 , 2012 , producer Chi Duly released " Pyramids ( Chi Duly Remix ) " , an uptempo nu @-@ disco version . 
 = Renault Samsung Motors = 
 Renault Samsung Motors ( Korean : <unk> , IPA : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) , also known by the acronym RSM , is a South Korean car manufacturer headquartered in Busan where its single assembly site is also located , with additional facilities at Seoul ( administration ) and <unk> ( research and development ) . It was first established as Samsung Motors in 1994 by the <unk> Samsung , with technical assistance from Nissan . The company started selling cars in 1998 , just before South Korea was hit by the Asian financial crisis . In September 2000 , it became a subsidiary of Renault and adopted its present name , although Samsung maintained a minority ownership . RSM markets a range of cars , including electric models and crossovers . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings : Samsung Group era ( 1994 – 2000 ) = = = 
 In the early 1990s , Samsung 's Chairman Kun Hee Lee recognised the automotive industry as the culmination of several others . For the Samsung Group , this would allow to leverage resources and technologies from the entire group including Samsung Electrics and Samsung Electronics . He initially tried to take control of Kia , but competition from other bidders and legal restrictions made him to drop the idea . Kia was eventually purchased by Hyundai . 
 Lee decided to create a new carmaker , Samsung Motors ( also known as SMI ) and a truck manufacturer , Samsung Commercial Vehicles Co . , Ltd . ( Hangul : <unk> <unk> ; RR : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , the latter through Samsung Heavy Industries with Nissan Diesel 's support . SMI was established in 1994 ( incorporated in 1995 ) and Daegu @-@ based Samsung Commercial Vehicles in 1996 . Shortly after SMI started its operations , the Asian financial crisis hit . Samsung divested itself of SMI as well as other non @-@ core subsidiaries . SMI was put up for sale , with Daewoo Motors being one of the first interested companies , but , as the crisis deepened , Daewoo Motors itself was bought by GM . Hyundai Motors was also considered as a possible buyer , but corporate politics and strife between the Samsung Group and the Hyundai Group made this impossible . Negotiations with Renault started in December 1998 , and in September 2000 the French automaker bought a 70 % stake for $ 560 million . Samsung Commercial Vehicles was kept by Samsung , but finally it filed for bankruptcy at the end of 2000 . 
 Coupled with his interest on cars , Lee 's project of building SMI as a global automotive company started out with technical assistance from Nissan , a company which at the time of SMI 's early stages was in dire financial straits . SMI 's affiliation with Nissan could have been one of the reasons for Renault buying a major share of the company , as Renault had become a major shareholder of Nissan by then . One of the very early planners for SMI has stated that technical affiliations for SMI were initially considered with Volkswagen , BMW or Honda . From 1998 , Renault Samsung Motors sold cars in Chile with the introduction of the <unk> ( the current SM5 ) . 
 = = = Later developments : Renault era ( 2000 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = Product and market expansion ( 2000 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 After the 2000 acquisition , Renault renamed Samsung Motors as Renault Samsung Motors ( RSM ) . That year , the company 's sales began to improve . Journalists attribute this to the success of the first car manufactured at Busan in taxi fleets ( the SM5 ) , which led to increased confidence of the model within the rest of their customer base . During the following years , the company introduced a new vehicle range , including the SM3 in 2002 , the SM7 in 2004 and the crossover QM5 in 2007 . Over time , RSM changed its products from a Nissan @-@ based architecture to a Renault @-@ based one . As part of the Renault group , Renault Samsung basically became an export @-@ oriented manufacturer . Despite not being exported under their own brand , Renault Samsung @-@ manufactured vehicles have over the time been rebadged as Renault or Nissan , and sold in markets such as Europe ( QM5 and SM5 ) , Russia , Ukraine , Mexico , Egypt , Central and South America , the Middle East ( SM3 and SM5 ) , China ( SM7 ) , Australia ( QM5 ) , or the United States and Canada ( the Rogue ) . 
 In 2005 , Renault increased its stake by acquiring an additional 10 % share from the company 's creditors . On 26 June 2009 , Renault and Samsung agreed to renew the right of the former to use the " Samsung " trade mark on its products until 2020 . 
 = = = = Decline in sales , electric vehicles and recovery attempts ( 2010 – present ) = = = = 
 The pressure from both Hyundai and Kia , dominant automakers in the South Korean market , increased during the 2010s , pushing RSM sales down by 27 % in 2011 . In the first half of 2012 , they fell 41 % . In August 2012 , a personnel reduction of about 80 % of employees was presented by management . Finally , Renault reduced its Busan personnel by 15 % ( about 800 employees ) . With the aim of reviving the company , it invested ( together with Nissan ) US $ 160 million to make Nissan Rogues for export in order to improve the production output and also presented revised versions of the SM3 and SM5 . During 2013 , the company started to market a new compact crossover , the <unk> , based on the <unk> . By late 2015 , its cumulative sales since 2000 in the South Korean market reached 1 @.@ 5 million units . In 2016 , Renault Samsung introduced the <unk> , a new mid @-@ size model which is a Talisman with some minor changes for the South Korean market . 
 In 2012 , RSM introduced an electric version of its SM3 car known as the SM3 Z.E. , imported from Turkey . In October 2013 the car started to be assembled at the Busan plant and in the same year it became the leading electric vehicle by sales in South Korea with a 58 % market share . In 2016 , RSM also announced its intention to market the Twizy . In May 2016 , the company announced a project to develop and produce a 1 @-@ tonne electric light commercial vehicle with a 250 @-@ kilometre range on a single charge in partnership with local companies . 
 As of 2013 , Chile was the only country outside South Korea that RSM has sold its cars under the Renault Samsung Motors marque and not as rebadged Renaults . In 2015 , Renault Samsung badging was replaced entirely by Renault in Chile , with the vehicles themselves now being known under their global Renault names ( e.g. the Renault Samsung SM5 is now the Renault Latitude ) . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 = = = Manufacturing = = = 
 The car manufacturing plant is located at Busan in the <unk> Regional Industrial Site and began production in 1998 . It covers 1 @,@ 650 @,@ 000 m2 and has the capacity to manufacture 300 @,@ 000 cars per year . It can produce various models simultaneously in a single production line . The plant is divided into seven production shops ( stamping , body , painting , bumper , assembly , al @-@ casting and engine ) . 
 = = = Research and development = = = 
 The Renault Samsung Technical Centre ( Hangul : <unk> <unk> ; RR : Reuno <unk> Jungang <unk> ) located at <unk> near Seoul , is one of the largest research and development facilities of Renault after <unk> 's <unk> . It was established in 1997 as the Samsung Motors Technical Centre , being expanded in 2000 and adopting its current name . At first it was only involved in car engineering , but at the end of 2002 the RSM Design Centre ( Hangul : <unk> <unk> ; RR : Reuno <unk> <unk> <unk> ) was created within the facility to locally design various cars manufactured by the company . In early 2013 the design branch was renamed Renault Design Asia ( Hangul : <unk> <unk> <unk> ; RR : Reuno <unk> Asia ) and was put in charge of supervising the Renault 's Asian design operations . 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 The RSM 's head offices are located at <unk> @-@ dong , Seoul , with additional administrative offices in Busan . 
 = = Branding = = 
 = = = Logos = = = 
 Renault Samsung Motors has two logos : the corporate logo and the marque logo . The first is for corporate communications and is an adaptation of the Samsung Group 's logo . The second is the " storm 's eye " logo which is used as marque 's badge and in advertising . 
 = = = Slogan = = = 
 The advertising slogan of Renault Samsung Motors is Discover the Difference ( Hangul : <unk> <unk> <unk> ; RR : <unk> Deo <unk> ) and was introduced in 2009 . According to the company , it refers to the distinct quality of its products . 
 = = = Vehicle nomenclature = = = 
 The company includes in its vehicles ' designations numbers related to their sizes . Those numbers are 3 , meaning compact or small vehicle , 5 and 6 , mid @-@ size vehicle , and 7 , large vehicle . The designations also include the letters S and M , which stands for Samsung Motors and Samsung Motor Sedan . However , the sport utility vehicles replace the SM combination by QM ( Quest Motoring ) . 
 = = Solar energy project = = 
 In March 2013 , Renault Samsung Motors completed the installation of solar panels in the parking lots , rooftops and surrounding land of its Busan facility to create a 20 @-@ MW solar plant , one of the largest in the world . The project was carried out through a joint venture , Busan <unk> Solar Power SPC ( Hangul : <unk> <unk> ; RR : Busan <unk> Taeyang @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ in ) , formed by RSM , Korea East @-@ West Power and KC Cottrell , which also manages the plant . It provides energy to the RSM operations and nearby houses . 
 = = Shareholders = = 
 Renault Samsung Motors is majority owned by Renault with an 80 @.@ 1 % share . Samsung Card has a 19 @.@ 9 % share of the company . 
 = = Model lineup = = 
 As of March 2016 the model lineup consists of the following vehicles : 
 SM3 ( compact four @-@ door car based on the Renault Fluence ) 
 SM5 ( mid @-@ size four @-@ door car also marketed as the Renault Latitude and Renault <unk> , based on the Renault Laguna III ) 
 <unk> ( large four @-@ door car based on the Renault Talisman ) 
 SM7 ( large four @-@ door car sold as Renault Talisman in China ) 
 <unk> ( a mini @-@ crossover based on the Renault <unk> , it is the first car of RSM that is not assembled in South Korea ) 
 QM5 ( the first crossover from Renault Samsung based on the Nissan X @-@ Trail , also marketed as the Renault <unk> ) 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Cyclone Alby = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Alby was regarded as the most devastating tropical cyclone to impact southwestern Western Australia on record . Forming out of an area of low pressure on 27 March 1978 , Alby steadily developed as it tracked southwestward , parallel to Western Australia . Between 1 and 2 April , the storm quickly intensified and attained its peak intensity as a Category 5 cyclone on the Australian cyclone intensity scale . After turning to the southeast , the storm underwent an extratropical transition as it neared Cape Leeuwin . The storm brushed the cape on 4 April , bringing hurricane @-@ force winds , before rapidly losing its identity the following day . 
 In Western Australia , the combination of Alby 's fast movement and hurricane @-@ force winds caused widespread damage . Along the coast , large swells flooded low @-@ lying areas and numerous homes lost their roofs from high winds . Further inland , bushfires were worsened by the storm as it brought little rain , generally less than 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) along the coast . These fires burned roughly 114 @,@ 000 hectares ( 281 @,@ 700 acres ) and destroyed two towns . Five fatalities are directly attributed to Alby while two more resulted from the fires . The resulting damage was extensive , with monetary losses reaching A $ 50 million ( $ 45 million USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Alby was first identified on 27 March 1978 as a disorganized area of low pressure situated roughly 800 km ( 500 mi ) north @-@ northwest of Karratha . At this time , the system was characterised as a large cluster of convection converging around the low . Notable development took place over the following three days as the system drifted towards the southwest . Convection began wrapping around the storm , forming banding features . Early on March 29 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , classified the system as a tropical storm . Shortly thereafter , the Bureau of Meteorology in Perth classified it as a tropical cyclone , assigning it with the name Alby . Gale force winds were later confirmed on 30 March by the Martha Bakke , located 385 km ( 239 mi ) west @-@ northwest of the storm 's centre . By then , a large ragged eye developed and Alby steadily intensified through 2 April . At the end of this strengthening , Cyclone Alby attained its peak intensity as a Category 5 on the Australian cyclone intensity scale ; a barometric pressure of 930 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 46 inHg ) was measured at the time and peak winds were estimated to be 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) based on the Dvorak technique . Additionally , the JTWC assessed the storm to have attained winds of 215 km / h ( 135 mph ) , a low @-@ range Category 4 on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 Shortly after reaching this intensity , Alby slowed as it began turning towards the southeast . By 3 April , the storm rapidly accelerated and attained a forward speed of 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) . This rapid acceleration was due to the cyclone 's interaction with a cold front to its south . Gradually weakening , Alby also underwent an extratropical transition as the storm 's structure became asymmetrical . Around 1300 UTC , the storm passed within 100 km ( 65 mi ) of Cape Leeuwin as an extratropical storm . Due to the rapid movement of Alby , the system maintained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) as it reached this point , making it one of the most intense storms to strike the region . By 5 April , the cyclone rapidly lost its identity as it became caught up in a northwesterly flow before merging with the cold front over the Great Australian Bight . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Retaining winds in excess of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , Cyclone Alby brought damaging winds to much of the region in and around Cape Leeuwin . The highest winds reached 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) in Albany . In Perth , a peak gust of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) was measured , the third @-@ highest in the city 's history . The intense winds , considered unprecedented for many in the region , were attributed to the fast movement of the storm and its location in relation to land . Moving at speeds up to 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) , winds along the northeastern edge of the storm were increased by that amount due to Alby 's clockwise rotation . It also allowed for winds to cover a large area northeast of the centre , impacting many areas far from the storm . In general , rainfall was limited and generally less than 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) ; this was due to the fast movement , as well as the asymmetrical structure with most of the thunderstorms south of the center . 
 These winds resulted in widespread agricultural , environmental and structural damage . Hundreds of structures sustained severe damage , mostly consisting of roofs blowing off . The most severe losses took place in Albany where most homes had partial or complete roof failure . Air @-@ borne debris also damaged buildings during the storm . Nearly 80 % of the apple crop was lost in the <unk> @-@ Manjimup area . A total of 154 @,@ 400 m3 ( 5 @.@ 4 million ft3 ) of timber was lost as well as a potential 200 @,@ 000 m3 ( 7 million ft3 ) of future growth on established trees . Widespread dust storms also ruined crops and removed topsoil from many areas . Near the coast , the combined effects of strong , onshore winds and little rain led to significant inland sea spray . Numerous power lines and stations failed during the storm due to winds as well as dust and salt accretion . Large portions of the South @-@ West Land Division were without electricity due to Cyclone Alby ; Perth nearly sustained a complete breakdown of power services . This led to secondary losses attributable to the storm such as production failure . 
 The large expanse of gale @-@ force winds without precipitation exacerbated 92 ongoing brush fires in the region . These fires erupted into full @-@ fledged wildfires , expanding at a rate of 5 to 10 km / h ( 3 @.@ 1 to 6 @.@ 2 mph ) . A total of 114 @,@ 000 hectares ( 281 @,@ 700 acres ) of land was burned throughout Western Australia as a result of the fires . Within this area , more than 10 @,@ 000 sheep and 500 cattle and horses were killed . Over 100 structures , 1 @,@ 300 km ( 810 mi ) of fencing and tens of thousands of hay bales were destroyed . According to newspaper reports , two towns were leveled by the wildfires . At least 50 individual fires were fanned by the storm across the region , prompting more than 1 @,@ 000 firefighters to assist in putting them out . Two fatalities were attributed to these fires . 
 Along the coast , large swells produced by the storm resulted in two fatalities in Albany Harbour as well as significant coastal damage . Tides across the region were expected to increase . Unexpectedly , all forecast values were exceeded by at least 0 @.@ 3 m ( 0 @.@ 98 ft ) . The highest storm tide was in Busselton at 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) , leading to a storm surge of 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) . Here , the surge penetrated roughly 200 m ( 660 ft ) inland , forcing several evacuations . This led to significant coastal flooding that damaged dozens of structures , including Busselton Jetty . In Bunbury , water breached the sea wall , inundating 100 homes and prompting the evacuation of 130 residents . Throughout Western Australia , Cyclone Alby was responsible for seven fatalities and A $ 50 million ( A $ 213 million 2011 ; $ 284 million 2011 USD ) in damage . There was also severe beach erosion associated with the storm , with some areas losing 30 m ( 98 ft ) of land . Due to the extensive damage , the name Alby was retired from the list of Western Australian cyclone names following its usage . 
 In the wake of Cyclone Alby , an appeal for relief in the affected region was made by The Lord Mayor 's Distress Relief Fund . The unprecedented scale of damage prompted meteorologists to vastly improve forecasting in the region to be better prepared for a similar storm in the future . At the time , little to no warning was given to residents in the South @-@ West Land Division ; this was the result of Alby 's abrupt acceleration along a cold front , a complex forecasting situation . It was also regarded as a " wake up call " for the region , reminding residents that they are not immune to the effects of tropical cyclones . Cyclone Alby has been used as a benchmark to compare future storms in the region to , such as Severe Tropical Cyclone Bianca in 2011 . 
 = Bruce Bowen = 
 Bruce Eric Bowen Jr . ( born June 14 , 1971 ) is an American former professional basketball player . Bowen played small forward and graduated from Edison High School and Cal State Fullerton . He went on to play for the National Basketball Association 's Miami Heat , Boston Celtics , Philadelphia 76ers , San Antonio Spurs and the Continental Basketball Association 's Rockford Lightning , and also played abroad in France . 
 One of the most feared perimeter " lockdown " defenders in NBA history , Bowen was elected to the NBA All @-@ Defensive First and Second Teams eight times , and was a member of the Spurs teams that won the NBA championships in 2003 , 2005 and 2007 . Off the court , Bowen became an informal ambassador for child obesity awareness . He currently works as an analyst for ESPN . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Bruce Bowen Jr. was born in Merced , California as son of Bruce Bowen Sr. and <unk> Campbell . Bowen had a problematic childhood growing up in Merced , because , he claims , his mother took drugs and even sold the family TV to feed her habit . Bruce Jr. spent his days playing basketball and eventually became a star in the local West Fresno Edison High School squad . He then played four seasons at Cal State Fullerton , appearing in 101 games , and averaged 11 @.@ 4 points and 5 @.@ 8 rebounds per game . After averaging 16 @.@ 3 points , 6 @.@ 5 rebounds and 2 @.@ 3 assists in 36 @.@ 6 minutes in 27 games as a senior in 1992 – 93 , he was named to the All @-@ Big West Conference First Team . Bowen ranks 12th on the Titans ' all @-@ time list in career points ( 1 @,@ 155 ) and is seventh all @-@ time in rebounds ( 559 ) . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Early struggles ( 1993 – 1997 ) = = = 
 After finishing his four @-@ year college eligibility , Bowen was eligible for the 1993 NBA draft , but went undrafted . Instead , he seemed to be destined to become a journeyman athlete . Between 1993 and 1997 , Bowen played for five different teams , starting his professional career for the French teams of Le Havre in 1993 – 94 and Évreux the following season . In 1995 – 96 he played in the CBA with Rockford Lightning ; he spent the next season back in France with Besançon , before returning to the Lightning in February 1997 . Bowen made his NBA debut when he was signed to a ten @-@ day contract by the Miami Heat the following month . His output consisted of 1 game , 1 minute and 1 block . 
 = = = Getting settled ( 1997 – 2001 ) = = = 
 In the 1997 – 98 NBA season , Bowen reappeared in the NBA , having been signed by the Boston Celtics . With the Celtics , Bowen slowly established himself in the NBA . In his first full year as an NBA player , he appeared in 61 games ( nine of them as starter ) with the Celtics , averaging 5 @.@ 6 points , 2 @.@ 9 rebounds and 1 @.@ 43 steals in 21 @.@ 4 minutes per game , shooting .409 from the field , .339 from three @-@ point land and .623 from the free throw line . The next year was a disappointment for him , as Bowen appeared in only 30 Celtics games , averaging 2 @.@ 3 points and 1 @.@ 7 rebounds in 16 @.@ 5 minutes per game . 
 In the 1999 – 2000 NBA season , Bowen signed with the Philadelphia 76ers , and was later traded to the Chicago Bulls and immediately waived , then picked up off waivers by the Miami Heat . In that season , he wore jersey # 12 instead of # 30 and appeared in 69 games , averaging 2 @.@ 8 points and 1 @.@ 4 rebounds in 12 @.@ 7 minutes per game , and scored in double @-@ figures six times . In the following year , Bowen was retained by the Heat . In that year , he had his breakout season . For the first time in his career , he played in all 82 regular season games , averaged 7 @.@ 6 points , 3 @.@ 0 rebounds , 1 @.@ 6 assists and 1 @.@ 01 steals in 32 @.@ 7 minutes per game and set new single season career @-@ highs in games , points , rebounds , assists , blocks , minutes , field goals made and attempted , three @-@ point goals made and attempted and free throws made and attempted . Bowen logged more minutes ( 2 @,@ 685 vs. 2 @,@ 678 ) , scored more points ( 623 vs. 606 ) and hit more threes ( 103 vs. 54 ) than he had in his first four seasons combined . Especially , Bowen earned himself a reputation as a defensive stopper . For his strong perimeter defense , he was voted into the All @-@ Defensive Second Team . 
 = = = San Antonio Spurs ( 2001 – 2009 ) = = = 
 In the 2001 – 02 NBA season , Bowen was signed by the San Antonio Spurs . He joined a championship @-@ caliber team , led by veteran Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame center David Robinson and young power forward Tim Duncan , complemented by talented role players like Steve Smith , Malik Rose , Antonio Daniels and point guards Terry Porter and Tony Parker . Bowen established himself as a starter , beginning in each of his 59 regular @-@ season games . In that season , Bowen received his first of several fines : he had to pay $ 7 @,@ 500 for kicking Wally <unk> in the face during a March 1 , 2002 game . In the 2002 NBA Playoffs , Bowen started in all 10 Spurs playoffs games , where the team eventually succumbed to the Los Angeles Lakers . For his feats , Bowen earned himself his second All @-@ Defensive Second Team nomination , although some peers and sports analysts accused him of being a " dirty " defender . 
 In the next season , Bowen started in all 82 regular season games for the second time in his career and averaged 7 @.@ 1 points , 2 @.@ 9 rebounds and 1 @.@ 4 assists in 31 @.@ 3 minutes per game . Again , he was voted into the All @-@ Defensive Second Team and was a member of the Spurs team which won the 2003 NBA Finals . At age 31 , the one @-@ time journeyman Bowen had won his first championship ring as a starter . In the following three seasons , Bowen established a reputation as one of the best perimeter defenders in the NBA , earning three straight All @-@ Defensive First Team elections and ending as runner @-@ up in the NBA Defensive Player of the Year Award <unk> twice , losing to post defender Ben Wallace . 
 Having established himself as the premier defensive backcourt player , Bowen 's effective , but hard nosed style of play came under discussion . In particular , rival guards Vince Carter and Steve Francis accused him of encroaching into their landing space during their <unk> . Inside Hoops columnist M.J. Darnell commented : " They 're whining because Bruce Bowen has frustrated , upset , hurt or angered them in some way .... He just plays tough , physical defense , does not play with any intent to injure , but isn 't afraid to get in someone 's grill " . Bowen 's defensive style failed to help this Spurs squad repeat in the 2004 NBA Playoffs , as the team was eventually defeated 4 – 2 by the Los Angeles Lakers in the Western Conference Semi @-@ Finals . 
 Bowen and the Spurs bounced back and won the NBA title in 2005 , defeating the Detroit Pistons . The Spurs could not win back @-@ to @-@ back titles , however , and bowed out 4 – 3 in a seven @-@ game series against the Dallas Mavericks in the 2006 NBA Playoffs . As a testament to his controversial style of play , Bowen picked up a $ 10 @,@ 000 NBA fine for kicking Ray Allen in the back during a March 2006 game . 
 In the 2007 NBA Playoffs , the Spurs played against the Phoenix Suns , and Bowen became the center of controversy . His knee contacted Phoenix Suns guard Steve Nash 's groin , knocking Nash to the floor . Also in that series , forward – center Amar 'e Stoudemire accused Bowen of kicking him during a game , but the NBA reviewed and dismissed the claim . ESPN columnist Bill Simmons commented that Bowen was " a cheap player who 's going to seriously hurt someone someday " , but Simmons also acknowledged that Bowen " ultimately makes his team better . " The Spurs went on to beat the Suns , and Bowen 's defense contributed to the Spurs winning their fourth championship in the 2007 NBA Finals . 
 In the 2007 – 08 NBA season , the now 36 @-@ year @-@ old veteran Bowen played and started in 81 of 82 regular season games , earning his fifth straight nomination in the NBA All @-@ Defensive First Team . Ever controversial , Bowen was fined $ 7 @,@ 000 and suspended for one game for kicking Chris Paul after Paul had fallen to the floor during a March 12 , 2008 game . Bowen finished as the runner @-@ up behind Marcus Camby for the league 's defensive player of the year award . In the 2008 NBA Playoffs , Bowen was unable to stop Los Angeles Lakers guard Kobe Bryant , who averaged 28 @.@ 3 points and helped L.A. beat the Spurs in five games . Bowen started in every Spurs regular season and playoff game from 2001 to 2008 . 
 The 2008 – 09 NBA season was to be Bowen 's last with the Spurs . Although he played in 80 regular season games , he was no longer a starter as was the case in the previous seven San Antonio campaigns . His minutes were also greatly reduced ( from 30 + to 18 @.@ 9 per game ) , although his shooting numbers remained consistent . The Spurs went into the 2009 NBA Playoffs with a 54 – 28 record and as the third seed . With influential shooting guard Manu Ginóbili out injured , the Spurs got off to a bad start to the series and eventually lost 4 – 1 against the Dallas Mavericks , bowing out of the playoffs in the first round for the first time since 2000 . 
 On June 23 , 2009 , Bowen was traded along with Kurt Thomas and Fabricio Oberto to the Milwaukee Bucks for Richard Jefferson . He was released on July 31 , 2009 and retired on September 3 , 2009 . 
 On March 21 , 2012 , the Spurs retired Bowen 's # 12 jersey . Bowen 's jersey is the seventh retired by the Spurs . With Bowen 's blessing , the Spurs <unk> the number 12 for incoming free agent LaMarcus Aldridge in 2015 . 
 = = International career = = 
 In 2006 U.S. coach Mike Krzyzewski invited Bowen to join the United States men 's national basketball team , which participated in the 2006 FIBA World Championships in Japan . At 35 , he was the oldest player to participate ; Krzyzewski said that the team needed a defensive player like Bowen . However , Bowen received little playing time , despite the injuries of fellow <unk> and guards Antawn Jamison , Carmelo Anthony and Dwyane Wade . Although he participated in several training sessions and training camps , Bowen was eventually cut from the team . He expressed disappointment and said he hoped to make the 2008 Olympics squad , but was not named to the team in the end . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 The 6 ft 7 in ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) , 200 lb ( 91 kg ) Bowen played the small forward , and occasionally the shooting guard , position . He had a reputation for being one of the best perimeter defenders in the NBA , earning himself eight consecutive nominations for the NBA All @-@ Defensive First and Second Teams from 2001 to 2008 . From 2005 to 2007 , he was second in voting for the NBA Defensive Player of the Year Award , beaten only by centers Ben Wallace ( 2005 and 2006 ) and Marcus Camby ( 2007 ) who are both post defenders . 
 Bowen was not known for his offensive production . He was seldom sought on offense , having never attempted more than 600 field goals in an entire 82 @-@ game regular season , and his career averages of 6 @.@ 4 points , 2 @.@ 8 rebounds and 1 @.@ 3 assists per game , and .566 foul shooting were considered mediocre , never earning him nominations for NBA All @-@ Star or All @-@ NBA First or Second Teams . His foul shooting , in fact , was poor enough that he was at times been made the target of the Hack @-@ a @-@ Shaq defense . However , opposing teams could not leave Bowen wide open on offense , because he was also an accurate three @-@ point shooter ( .393 career average on 2 @,@ 082 attempts ) , particularly from the corner . In addition , despite his age Bowen played 500 consecutive games between February 28 , 2002 and March 12 , 2008 , leading Sports Illustrated to name him in 2007 the " Iron Man " of the NBA . 
 Responding to fan e @-@ mail in 2005 , Bowen stated that defense is " a little bit of talent and a lot of work ; being able to take on the challenge of going up against the top guys , even when you didn 't win that battle . Being able to come back the next day and try again — I think that 's the most important thing . " He also stressed that the key to being a good basketball player was to " work hard and make sure you have fun with the game more than anything else . " Bowen mentioned that he considered small forward Carmelo Anthony and shooting guard Ray Allen to be among the most difficult players to guard . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bowen is the son of Bruce Bowen Sr. and <unk> Campbell . He told a reporter of having a problematic childhood , plagued by his mother 's drug addiction and his father 's alcohol problems . Today , Bowen is estranged from his parents and several relatives , instead looking up to his childhood friend Quinn Crozier and to Robert and Sandra Thrash , a Los Angeles couple whom he regards as his adoptive parents . Bowen is married to Yardley Barbon , a Miami native of Cuban descent , and the couple have two sons , Ojani ( born September 7 , 2005 ) and <unk> ( born June 9 , 2007 ) . He often speaks out against child obesity and runs his own " Get fit with Bruce and Buddy " program for children 's healthy nutrition and daily sports activities . He is a fan of the Dallas Cowboys and the University of Texas at Austin Longhorns football team . He runs the Bruce Bowen Foundation , an organization set up to provide scholarships and bursaries . In 2006 , he received a college degree in communications from Cal State Fullerton ; he had also taken classes at the University of Texas at San Antonio . He has stated that he wants to become a teacher . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = Octavia Hill = 
 Octavia Hill ( 3 December 1838 – 13 August 1912 ) was an English social reformer , whose main concern was the welfare of the inhabitants of cities , especially London , in the second half of the nineteenth century . Born into a family with a strong commitment to alleviating poverty , she herself grew up in straitened circumstances owing to the financial failure of her father . With no formal schooling , she worked from the age of 14 for the welfare of working people . 
 Hill was a moving force behind the development of social housing , and her early friendship with John Ruskin enabled her to put her theories into practice with the aid of his initial investment . She believed in self @-@ reliance , and made it a key part of her housing system that she and her assistants knew their tenants personally and encouraged them to better themselves . She was opposed to municipal provision of housing , believing it to be bureaucratic and impersonal . 
 Another of Hill 's concerns was the availability of open spaces for poor people . She campaigned against development on existing suburban woodlands , and helped to save London 's Hampstead Heath and Parliament Hill Fields from being built on . She was one of the three founders of the National Trust , set up to preserve places of historic interest or natural beauty for the enjoyment of the British public . She was a founder member of the Charity Organisation Society ( now the charity Family Action ) which organised charitable grants and pioneered a home @-@ visiting service that formed the basis for modern social work . She was a member of the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws in 1905 . 
 Hill 's legacy includes the large holdings of the modern National Trust , several housing projects still run on her lines , a tradition of training for housing managers , and the museum established by the Octavia Hill Society at her birthplace . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Octavia Hill was the daughter of James Hill , corn merchant , follower of <unk> banker , and his third wife , Caroline Southwood Smith . He had been widowed twice , and had six children ( five daughters and a son ) from his previous marriages . He had been impressed by the writings on education of Caroline Southwood Smith , the daughter of Dr Thomas Southwood Smith , a pioneer of sanitary reform . He had engaged Caroline as a governess for his children in 1832 , and they were married in 1835 , three years before Octavia was born in Wisbech , Cambridgeshire , her father 's eighth daughter and ninth child . The family 's comfortably prosperous life was disrupted by James Hill 's financial problems and his mental collapse . In 1840 he was declared bankrupt . Caroline Hill 's father gave the family financial support , and took on some of Hill 's paternal role . Southwood Smith was a health and welfare reformer concerned with a range of social issues including child labour in mines and the housing of the urban poor . Caroline Hill held similar views on social reform , and her interest in progressive education , influenced by Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi , and Southwood Smith 's daily experience in his work at the London Hospital in the East End inspired Octavia Hill 's concern for the poorest in early Victorian London . She received no formal schooling : her mother educated the family at home . 
 The family settled in a small cottage in Finchley , now a north London suburb , but then a village . Octavia Hill was impressed and moved by Henry Mayhew 's London Labour and the London Poor , a book that portrayed the daily lives of slum dwellers . She was also strongly influenced by the theologian , Anglican priest and social reformer F. D. Maurice , who was a family friend . She began her work on behalf of London 's poor by helping to make toys for Ragged school children , and serving as secretary of the women 's classes at the Working Men 's College in Bloomsbury in central London . 
 A co @-@ operative guild providing employment for " distressed gentlewomen " accepted Hill for training in glass @-@ painting when she was 13 . When the work of the guild was expanded to provide work in toy @-@ making for Ragged school children , she was invited , at the age of 14 , to take charge of the workroom . The following year she began working in her spare time from the guild as a copyist for John Ruskin in Dulwich Art Gallery and the National Gallery . She was deeply aware of the dreadful living conditions of the children in her charge at the guild . Her views on encouraging self @-@ reliance led to her association with the Charity Organisation Society ( COS ) , described by Hill 's biographer Gillian Darley as " a contentious body which deplored dependence fostered by kindly but <unk> philanthropy … support to the poor had to be carefully targeted and efficiently supervised . Later in life , however , she began to think the COS line … was over @-@ harsh . " 
 Hill was short , like all her family , and indifferent to fashion . Her friend Henrietta Barnett wrote : " She was small in stature with long body and short legs . She did not dress , she only wore clothes , which were often unnecessarily unbecoming ; she had soft and abundant hair and regular features , but the beauty of her face lay in brown and very luminous eyes , which quite unconsciously she lifted upwards as she spoke on any matter for which she cared . Her mouth was large and mobile , but not improved by laughter . Indeed , Miss Octavia was nicest when she was made passionate by her earnestness . " Barnett also spoke of Hill 's streak of ruthlessness . Gertrude Bell called Hill despotic . Later in Hill 's life , the Bishop of London , Frederick Temple , encountered her at a meeting of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners , and wrote , " She spoke for half an hour … I never had such a beating in all my life . " 
 = = = Housing for the poor = = = 
 Parliament and many concerned reformers had been attempting to improve the housing of the working classes since the early 1830s . When Hill began her work , the model dwelling movement had been in existence for twenty years , royal and select committees had sat to examine the problems of urban well @-@ being , and the first of many tranches of legislation aimed at improving working class housing had been passed . From Hill 's point of view these had all failed the poorest members of the working class , the unskilled labourers . She found that their landlords routinely ignored their obligations towards their tenants , and that the tenants were too ignorant and oppressed to better themselves . She tried to find new homes for her charges , but there was a severe shortage of available property , and Hill decided that her only solution was to become a landlord herself . John Ruskin , who was interested in the co @-@ operative guild , knew Hill from her work as his copyist and was impressed by her . As an aesthete and a humanitarian he was affronted by the brutal ugliness of the slums . In 1865 , having inherited a substantial sum of money from his father , he acquired for £ 750 the leases of three cottages of six rooms each in Paradise Place , Marylebone . 
 Ruskin placed these houses , which were " in a dreadful state of dirt and neglect " , under Hill 's management . He told her that investors might be attracted to such schemes if a five per cent annual return could be secured . In 1866 Ruskin acquired the freehold of five more houses for Hill to manage in Freshwater Place , Marylebone . The Times recorded , " The houses faced a bit of desolate ground occupied by dilapidated <unk> and manure heaps . The needful repairs and cleaning were carried out , the waste land was turned into a playground where Mr. Ruskin had some trees planted . " 
 After being improved the properties were let to those on intermittent and low incomes . A return of five per cent on capital was obtained as promised to Ruskin ; any excess over the five per cent was reinvested within the properties for the benefit of the tenants . Rent arrears were not tolerated , and bad debts were minimal . As Hill said , " Extreme punctuality , and diligence in collecting rents , and a strict determination that they shall be paid regularly , have accomplished this . " In consequence of her prudent management , Hill was able to attract new backers , and by 1874 she had 15 housing schemes with around 3 @,@ 000 tenants . 
 Hill 's system was based on closely managing not only the buildings but the tenants ; she insisted , " you cannot deal with the people and their houses separately . " She maintained close personal contact with all her tenants , and was strongly opposed to impersonal bureaucratic organisations and to governmental intervention in housing . In her view , " municipal socialism and subsidized housing " led to indiscriminate demolition , re @-@ housing schemes , and the destruction of communities . 
 = = = Housing management = = = 
 At the heart of the Octavia Hill system was the weekly visit to collect rent . From the outset , Hill conceived this as a job for women only . She and her assistants , including Emma Cons combined the weekly rent collection with checking every detail of the premises and getting to know the tenants personally , acting as early social workers . At first Hill believed , " Voluntary workers are a necessity . They are better than paid workers , and can be had in sufficient numbers . " Later , she found it expedient to maintain a paid workforce . Her system required a large staff . Rent was collected on Monday , Tuesday and Wednesday mornings . Rent accounts were balanced in the afternoons and arrangements were made with contractors for repairs . On Thursdays and Fridays arrears were pursued , contractors ' invoices paid , new tenancy lettings and tenants ' moves organised . 
 If any of Hill 's assistants had spare time , whether during normal working hours or in frequent voluntary after @-@ hours working , it was used to promote tenants ' associations and after @-@ work and children 's after @-@ school clubs and societies . In 1859 , Hill created the Southwark detachment of the Army Cadet Force , its first independent unit , which gave training along military lines for local boys . Hill considered that such an organisation would be more like the " real thing " than such existing outfits as the Church Lads ' Brigade and therefore more attractive to young men " who had passed the age of make @-@ believe " . She invited a serving officer of the Derbyshire Regiment to set up the company , and such was its popularity that its numbers had to be capped at 160 cadets . 
 Hill 's principles were summed up in an article of 1869 : " Where a man persistently refuses to exert himself , external help is worse than useless . " She was an outspoken critic of the principles of " outdoor relief " or the Speenhamland system of poor relief as operated by various Poor Law Boards . Because these systems did not encourage recipients to work , she regarded them as " a profligate use of public funds . " Under her methods , personal responsibility was encouraged . She insisted on dealing with arrears promptly ; she appointed reliable caretakers ; she took up of references on prospective tenants , and visited them in their homes ; she paid careful attention to allocations and the placing of tenants , with regard to size of families and the size and location of the accommodation to be offered ; and she made no rules that could not be properly enforced . 
 An American admirer described her as " ruling over a little kingdom of three thousand loving subjects with an iron scepter twined with roses . " Although Hill drove her associates hard , she drove herself harder . In 1877 , she collapsed and had to take a break of several months from her work . Darley ascribes a number of contributory causes : " chronic overwork , a lack of delegation , the death of her close friend Jane Senior , the failure of a brief engagement " , as well as an attack on her by John Ruskin . The Hill family found a companion for her , Harriot Yorke ( 1843 – 1930 ) . Yorke took on a great amount of the everyday work that had caused Hill 's collapse . She remained her companion until Hill 's death . A further palliative was the building of a cottage , at <unk> Hill near Sevenoaks in Kent , where they could take breaks from their work in London . 
 = = = Open spaces = = = 
 Among Hill 's concerns was that her tenants , and all urban workers , should have access to open spaces . She believed in " the life @-@ enhancing virtues of pure earth , clean air and blue sky . " In 1883 , she wrote : 
 There is perhaps no need of the poor of London which more prominently forces itself on the notice of anyone working among them than that of space . ... How can it best be given ? And what is it precisely which should be given ? I think we want four things . Places to sit in , places to play in , places to stroll in , and places to spend a day in . The preservation of Wimbledon and Epping shows that the need is increasingly recognised . But a visit to Wimbledon , Epping , or Windsor means for the workman not only the cost of the journey but the loss of a whole day ’ s wages ; we want , besides , places where the long summer evenings or the Saturday afternoon may be enjoyed without effort or expense . 
 She campaigned hard against building on existing suburban woodlands , and helped to save Hampstead Heath and Parliament Hill Fields from development . She was the first to use the term " Green Belt " for the protected rural areas surrounding London . Three hills in Kent ( Mariners Hill , Toys Hill and Ide Hill ) which she helped to protect from development form part of the belt . 
 In 1876 Hill became the treasurer of the Kyrle Society , founded in that year by her eldest sister , Miranda , as a " Society for the Diffusion of Beauty " . Under the slogan " Bring Beauty Home to the Poor " it aimed to bring art , books , music and open spaces into the lives of the urban poor . For a short period it flourished and expanded , and although it declined after a few years , it was a template for the National Trust , 20 years later . 
 Before that , however , Hill was engaged in a campaign in 1883 to stop the construction of railways from the quarries in the fells overlooking <unk> , in the English Lake District , with damaging effect on the unspoilt scenery . The campaign was led by Canon Hardwicke Rawnsley , who secured the support of Ruskin , Hill , and Sir Robert Hunter , solicitor to the Commons Preservation Society . From 1875 onwards , Hunter had been Hill 's legal adviser on the protection of open spaces in London . Both he and Rawnsley , building on an idea put forward by Ruskin , conceived of a trust that could buy and preserve places of natural beauty and historic interest for the nation . 
 On 16 November 1893 , Hill , Hunter and Rawnsley met in the offices of the Commons Preservation Society and agreed to launch such a trust . Hill suggested that it should be called " The Commons and Gardens Trust " , but the three agreed to adopt Hunter 's suggested title , the " National Trust " . Under its full formal title , the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty was inaugurated the following year . The trust was concerned primarily with protecting open spaces and endangered buildings of historic interest ; its first property was <unk> Clergy House and its first nature reserve was Wicken Fen . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 The number of homes managed by Hill continued to grow . Although Ruskin had turned against her in a bout of mental instability , she found a new supporter , the Ecclesiastical Commissioners , who handed over to her the management of their housing estates in several poor areas of south London . By the end of the nineteenth century , Hill 's women workers were no longer unpaid volunteers but trained professionals . Hill 's influence spread beyond the properties under her own control . Her ideas were taken up and copied , with her enthusiastic support , in continental Europe and the United States of America . Beatrice Webb said that she " first became aware of the meaning of the poverty of the poor , " while staying with her sister , who was a rent collector for Octavia Hill in the East End . Queen Victoria 's daughter , Princess Alice of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt , was taken incognito on a tour of some of Hill 's properties , and she translated Hill 's Homes of the London Poor into German . Among those whom Hill trained was her assistant and secretary , Maud Jeffery , who was later engaged by the Commissioners of Crown Lands to run new housing estates in London on Octavia Hill 's lines . Even some local authorities , despite Hill 's distrust , followed her model : some of the earliest examples of municipal council housing , at Kensington and Camberwell , were run on her lines , with the acquisition of working class houses , and their gradual improvement , without evictions or demolitions . 
 Despite her opposition to interference by national or local government in the provision of housing , Hill had to cope with the newly created London County Council and the involvement of the council and other local authorities in providing housing for the poor . In 1884 a royal commission on the housing of the working classes was set up , but the prime minister , W.E. Gladstone , and his ministerial colleagues vetoed a proposal to include Hill among the members of the commission . The municipal authorities quickly surpassed her in the number of properties under their management . A.S. Wohl notes that in the 1880s Hill had about £ 70 @,@ 000 worth of property under her management , and at the end of her career she was managing the dwellings of " perhaps three or four thousand people at the most . " The London County Council , by contrast , had a budget of £ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 for its programme of rehousing London 's poor in 1901 – 02 . 
 Hill was opposed to other reforms that came about in the early part of the twentieth century . She was against female suffrage on the grounds that " men and women help one another because they are different , have different gifts and different spheres " . She also believed that provision of social services and old @-@ age pensions by the government did more harm than good , sapping people 's self @-@ reliance . 
 Hill died from cancer on 13 August 1912 at her home in Marylebone , at the age of 73 . 
 = = Legacy and memorials = = 
 When John Singer Sargent 's portrait of her was presented by her fellow @-@ workers in 1898 , Hill made a speech in which she said , " When I am gone , I hope my friends will not try to carry out any special system , or to follow blindly in the track which I have trodden . New circumstances require various efforts , and it is the spirit , not the dead form , that should be perpetuated . ... We shall leave them a few houses , purified and improved , a few new and better ones built , a certain amount of thoughtful and loving management , a few open spaces ... " But , she said , more important would be " the quick eye to see , the true soul to measure , the large hope to grasp the mighty issues of the new and better days to come – greater ideals , greater hope , and patience to realize both . " 
 The Horace Street Trust , founded by Hill , became a model for many subsequent housing associations and developed into the present trust that bears her name , Octavia Housing . Today it owns several of the homes , including Gable Cottages , designed by Elijah Hoole , who worked with Hill for many years . Hill 's determination to provide community space can still be seen in the shape of the Red Cross site in Southwark ( 1888 ) , among others . The Octavia Hill Society website states that with a community hall , and soundly maintained attractive houses , Hill here anticipated the fundamental ingredients of town planning by some 15 years . 
 The Settlement Movement ( creating integrated mixed communities of rich and poor ) grew directly out of Hill 's work . Her colleagues Samuel and Henrietta Barnett , founded Toynbee Hall , the first university @-@ sponsored settlement , which together with the Women 's University Settlement ( later called the Blackfriars Settlement ) continues to serve local communities . Overseas , Hill 's name is perpetuated in the Octavia Hill Association in Philadelphia , a small property company , founded to provide affordable housing to low and middle @-@ income city residents . 
 Women who had trained under Hill formed the Association of Women Housing Workers in 1916 . This later changed its name to the Society of Housing Managers in 1948 . After merging with the Institute of Housing Managers in 1965 , the society became the present day Chartered Institute of Housing in 1994 . The <unk> is a professional body for those working in the housing profession in the UK and overseas . The training that Hill gave to Charity Organisation Society volunteers contributed to the development of modern social work , and COS continued to be instrumental in developing social work as a profession during the twentieth century . COS is still in operation today as the charity Family Action . 
 In 1907 , Parliament passed the first National Trust Act , enshrining the trust 's permanent purpose and giving it powers to protect property for the benefit of the nation . The trust now looks after a wide range of coast , countryside and historic buildings . According to the trust 's website , " Staff , volunteers and tenants are engaged daily in providing access to open spaces for people ’ s enjoyment , providing habitats for wildlife and in improving our environment – ' for ever , for everyone ' . " 
 Commemorations of Hill herself include a monument to her at a Surrey beauty spot , on the summit of a hill called <unk> Ball ( now owned by the National Trust ) . Shortly after her death , the family erected a stone seat there , from which walkers can enjoy views over the Surrey countryside . The Octavia Hill Society was set up in 1992 " to promote awareness of the ideas and ideals of Octavia Hill , her family , fellow workers and their relevance in today 's society nationally and internationally " . Under the society 's auspices her birthplace at Wisbech has been turned into the Octavia Hill Birthplace Museum . In 1995 , to mark the centenary of the National Trust , a new variety of rose , " Octavia Hill " , was named in her honour . 
 = Dream On ( Glee ) = 
 " Dream On " is the nineteenth episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on May 18 , 2010 . It was directed by Joss Whedon and written by series creator Brad Falchuk . Neil Patrick Harris guest @-@ stars as former glee club star Bryan Ryan . Working as a school board auditor , he threatens to cut the glee club out of the budget , bitter at never having attained his own show @-@ business dreams . Rachel ( Lea Michele ) attempts to find her birth mother , and Artie ( Kevin McHale ) struggles with his desire to walk . The episode title is a reference to Aerosmith 's song " Dream On " , also performed during the episode . 
 The episode features cover versions of seven songs , four of which were released as singles , available for digital download , and three of which are included on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 3 Showstoppers . " Dream On " was watched by 11 @.@ 59 million American viewers and received generally positive reviews from critics . Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune , Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle , Gerrick . D Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times and Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club all deemed it one of the best episodes of the season , while Aly Semigran of MTV , Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack and Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal praised the musical performances . Blair Baldwin of Zap2it in contrast felt that the songs were inconsistent , and while Harris ' appearance was generally well received , Eric Goldman of IGN felt that his storyline was lacking in impact . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bryan Ryan ( Neil Patrick Harris ) , a former McKinley High glee club member , arrives as an auditor from the school board . He speaks to the glee club , asking everyone to write their biggest dream on a piece of paper . He then takes Artie 's ( Kevin McHale ) paper and tosses it into the trash , making a point that their dreams will never come true . Having failed to realize his own dreams , he intends to cut the glee club . Glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) convinces him that it is not too late to pursue his dreams and sings " Piano Man " with him . They both audition for the role of Jean Valjean in the local production of Les Misérables , singing " Dream On " as a duet . Bryan decides not to cut the glee club , and even presents them with new costumes and sheet music , but changes his mind when cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) announces that Will landed the lead role . Will gives up his role in Les Misérables to Bryan in order to save the glee club . 
 Rachel ( Lea Michele ) confides in Jesse ( Jonathan Groff ) of her lifelong dream to discover the identity of her mother . While they are searching through boxes of records from her basement , Jesse takes a cassette tape from his jacket and pretends that it came from the box . The tape is labeled as a message from mother to daughter . Rachel refuses to listen to the tape , stating that she is not ready . Jesse later meets with Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) , the coach of Vocal Adrenaline , who reveals that she is Rachel 's biological mother , but a contractual agreement with Rachel 's two fathers prevents her from meeting with Rachel until Rachel is 18 . Jesse reveals that though he had " befriended " Rachel just to get more acting practice , he had actually started liking her . She implores Jesse to convince Rachel to listen to the tape . Back at Rachel 's house , Jesse starts the tape playing as Rachel enters her bedroom , then leaves her to listen to it . On the tape , Shelby sings " I Dreamed a Dream " , leading to a duet with Rachel in a dream sequence , ending with Rachel back in her room in tears . 
 After Bryan 's discouraging speech , Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) retrieves Artie 's paper from the trash and learns that his biggest dream is to become a dancer . Tina would like to dance with Artie , but he falls off his crutches when he tries to stand up from his wheelchair . Tina comforts Artie by showing him some of the latest research in spinal cord injury treatments . While waiting for Tina to buy pretzels at the mall , Artie fantasizes about being able to stand up from his wheelchair and dances to " The Safety Dance " in a flash mob dream sequence . He later asks guidance counsellor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) for advice on how to cope with the possibility of walking again in light of the new research , but is disappointed when Emma tells him that such treatments may not become available for a long time . Tina continues to offer to dance with him but he declines , insisting that she choose another partner but agreeing to sing during the dance . Tina chooses Mike ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) as her dance partner as Artie leads the glee club into " Dream a Little Dream of Me " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Dream On " was filmed in March 2010 . In October 2009 , Michael Ausiello of Entertainment Weekly reported that 20th Century Fox , the studio behind Glee , had approached Joss Whedon about directing an episode during the show 's first season . Series creator Ryan Murphy is a fan of Whedon 's work , and praised the musical episode of his series Buffy the Vampire Slayer , commenting : " Joss directed one of the great musical episodes in the history of television on Buffy , so this is a great , if unexpected , fit . I 'm thrilled he 'll be loaning us his fantastic groundbreaking talent . " Whedon deemed Glee his favorite television show , but downplayed his influence over the episode . Asked by <unk> Rudolph of TV Guide whether the episode would feature songs from Buffy , or his 2008 musical Dr. Horrible 's Sing @-@ Along Blog , Whedon replied : " I would have to say a resonant ' no way . ' The episode isn 't about me . It 's the next episode of Glee . Hopefully my hands will be invisible on the show . " Whedon felt that his job was to be anonymous : " to find the most compelling way to present a story without calling attention to himself . " He acknowledged his proclivity for killing off fans ' favorite characters , jesting that he planned to murder Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) . 
 Whedon feels the episode 's title is pertinent to the storylines , explaining that the aim was to examine the desires at the core of the central characters , including Will 's desire to perform , Rachel 's desire to find her biological mother and Artie 's desire to walk again . He stated : " I was really lucky because there 's a real phonetic coherence of the episode that brought them all together on an emotional level . For me , it was just a question that they dovetailed and didn 't feel random and you understood why these three stories were all in the same show . " 
 Kristin Dos Santos of E ! Online commented on Whedon 's tendency to work repeatedly with the same actors , and hoped that Dr. Horrible star Neil Patrick Harris might appear in the episode . Four months later , in February 2010 , Dos Santos reported that Harris had signed a contract to appear on Glee . Murphy created a role especially for the actor , who received clearance from CBS to appear on Fox for the episode . Ausiello reported that Harris would play Bryan Ryan , a former high school rival of glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) , now a member of the Lima school board , intent on revenge for never having fulfilled his own potential by cutting the school arts program . Morrison stated that Harris ' character is two years older than Will , and " got all the girls and the good songs " during their high school days . 
 Recurring characters who appear in " Dream On " are glee club members Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) , Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) , Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) , Matt Rutherford ( Dijon Talton ) and Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) , astronomy teacher Brenda Castle ( Molly Shannon , appearing alongside her Kath & Kim co @-@ star , John Michael Higgins ) , and Vocal Adrenaline coach Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) . The episode features cover versions of seven songs . Will and Bryan duet on " Dream On " by Aerosmith , and " Piano Man " by Billy Joel . Bryan also sings " Daydream Believer " by The Monkees , and a Les Misérables auditionee played by Wendy Worthington sings " Big Spender " from Sweet Charity . Artie performs " The Safety Dance " by Men Without Hats and " Dream a Little Dream of Me " by The Mamas & the Papas , and Shelby and Rachel sing " I Dreamed a Dream " from Les Misérables . Each of the songs except " Piano Man " , " Big Spender " and " Daydream Believer " were released as singles , available for digital download , and " Dream On " , " The Safety Dance " and " I Dreamed a Dream " are also included on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 3 – Showstoppers . " I Dreamed a Dream " charted at number 36 on the Irish Singles Chart . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Dream On " was watched by 11 @.@ 59 million American viewers and attained a 4 @.@ 8 / 12 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . In the United Kingdom , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 54 million viewers and was the most @-@ watched show of the week on the non @-@ terrestrial channels . In Canada , it was watched by 1 @.@ 86 million viewers , making Glee the tenth most @-@ viewed show of the week . In Australia , Glee drew its highest @-@ ever overnight audience with 1 @.@ 30 million viewers , and won its timeslot in all key demographics . Its consolidated ratings were adjusted up to 1 @.@ 56 million , making " Dream On " the eleventh most @-@ viewed program of the week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from critics . Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune deemed " Dream On " a " highly enjoyable " , " emotionally satisfying " episode , and possibly her favorite since the pilot . Ryan praised Whedon 's directing , writing that it is clear " Whedon really gets what this show is good at when it 's working " . Lee Ferguson of CBC also called " Dream On " one of his favorite episodes of the season , commenting that : " NPH easily outperformed some of the other recent celebs ( including Molly Shannon and Olivia Newton @-@ John ) who 've stopped by the show " , and hoped that his character would return in the future . 
 CNN 's Lisa Respers France praised both the Artie and Rachel storylines , and wrote that : " Harris ' Bryan Ryan character had it all : timing , great singing and a crazy chemistry with Jane Lynch 's character , Sue Sylvester . " James Poniewozik of Time deemed the episode " exceptional in ways that went beyond guest appearances " , noting : " it was not just good compared with recent episodes , but entertaining , arresting and moving in an unqualified sense . " Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle called " Dream On " : " one of the best episodes in one of the greatest freshman seasons in recent history " , while Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times similarly deemed the episode one of the best of " an already stellar freshman season " , and Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club graded the episode " A " and called it " one of the two or three best Glee episodes ever . Hell , it might be THE best . " 
 Aly Semigran of MTV reviewed the episode 's musical performances positively , calling " Piano Man " the series ' " most realistic musical number " and writing that " nothing even came close to the amount of awesome " that was the " Dream On " duet . Semigran noted that McHale 's songs " proved he was a force to be reckoned with " , and called the " I Dreamed a Dream " duet " goosebump @-@ inducing " , observing : " Pretty sure that 's what musical theater lovers ' dreams are made of . " Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal called Michele and Menzel 's number " one of the most touching duets in the show so far " , stating : " the vulnerability they both convey is stunning in its simplicity and perfection . " Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack wrote that the " Piano Man " duet was so good he wished it had been released for download . He rated the songs performed " B + " through to " A " and called " Safety Dance " one of his favorite moments of the episode , deeming it a " joyous , huge performance — definitely one of the most elaborate numbers the show has done before . " 
 Blair Baldwin of Zap2it wrote that while the " Dream On " performance began perfectly , Harris " killed the song " with an " ear @-@ wrenching " lead @-@ in to the chorus . Baldwin also highlighted synchronization problems with the " Safety Dance " choreography , and wrote that Shum 's dancing to " Dream a Little Dream " was " terrible " and " sloppy " . Baldwin did enjoy the " I Dreamed a Dream " performance , and hoped for greater consistency in the future . Eric Goldman of IGN rated the episode 7 @.@ 7 / 10 , writing that while he had expected the episode to be " freaking awesome " , instead it was merely " okay " . He felt that the musical numbers " failed to really resonate " , and called Harris ' character " amusing in theory " but ultimately " one @-@ note " and lacking in impact , with a storyline that " fizzled out " . In December 2012 , TV Guide named the " Safety Dance " rendition one of Glee 's best performances . 
 In August 2010 , the 62nd Primetime Creative Emmys awarded Harris an Emmy ( out of two total ) in the ' Best Guest Actor in a Comedy Series ' category for his " Dream On " appearance and performance . 
 = Scandinavian Airlines System Flight 347 = 
 Scandinavian Airlines System Flight 347 was a scheduled domestic flight which , on 3 November 1994 , was hijacked shortly after take @-@ off . The flight , from Bardufoss Airport via Bodø Airport to Oslo Airport , Fornebu in Norway , was operated by a McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 82 belonging to Scandinavian Airlines System ( SAS ) . The hijacker was Haris Keč , a Bosnian living in Norway , who made demands that Norwegian authorities help to stop the humanitarian suffering in his home country caused by the Bosnian War . No one was injured in the incident . 
 Keč hijacked the aircraft with 122 passengers and a crew of six in mid @-@ air after leaving Bardufoss . The aircraft landed as scheduled at Bodø , where all women , children and seniors were let off , along with two of the cabin crew . The aircraft then departed Bodø with 77 passengers and a crew of four . It was diverted to Gardermoen , where Keč made his demands . He surrendered at about 21 : 00 , seven hours after take @-@ off from Bardufoss , after some of his demands had been met . He was sentenced to four years prison for the incident . 
 = = Hijacking = = 
 SAS Flight 347 was a scheduled , domestic flight from Bardufoss Airport via Bodø Airport to Oslo Airport , Fornebu . Check @-@ in and boarding ran as normal , without any security check . At Bardufoss , 122 people boarded the aircraft , including a large group of soldiers who were on leave of absence and on their way home to Southern Norway . Representatives from the ground handlers stated that none of the passengers acted suspiciously . 
 During the first leg of the flight , at about 15 : 00 , Keč , wearing a winter coat , got up from his seat and walked to the front of the aircraft . A flight attendant stopped him . After talking for a short while , and another flight attendant came by , he was let into the cockpit . No information about the hijacking was given to the passengers until arrival at Bodø . Bodø Airport was evacuated and the aircraft parked at Bodø Main Air Station , the military section . After landing , by order of the hijacker , the passengers were informed that all women , children under 18 and people over 60 were to leave the aircraft . After this had happened , there were 77 passengers and four crew members left . The aircraft departed Bodø at about 16 : 00 and headed for Oslo Airport , Gardermoen , which was closed for all other traffic . 
 After the aircraft had landed at Gardermoen at 17 : 20 , contact was established between Keč and the police negotiator Morten , who also had been the prime negotiator during Aeroflot Flight 137 , a hijacking that also had taken place at the airport . Keč predominantly spoke English and insisted that he simply be referred to as " the Bosnian " . He immediately informed that he had not hurt any of the crew or passengers , and that he was not affiliated with anyone . His immediate demands were that official representatives were to tell the world what needed to be done to solve the conflict in Bosnia . He then gave a presentation of the situation and that his only intentions were to help his countrymen . For several minutes , the conversion was about the lack of help Keč felt was being given to his home country . 
 Eventually Morten requested that a helicopter with medical supplies be moved next to the aircraft , for which Keč granted permission . Contact between the pair was lost and Morten had to call Keč six times before getting a response . After 15 minutes , Keč again resumed communication . He demanded that he talk to someone from the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs , and said he wanted media coverage of the incident . " I do not need publicity myself , " he said . " I only need to arrange a press conference for the whole world community and the media , and that someone from the Norwegian government promises me and the world community that they will ensure that the United Nations ( UN ) in New York attempts to open all corridors in Bosnia to feed people in Bosnia so they can survive the winter . " Keč indicated that if this did not lead to anything , he would go to the UN himself and that his friends would support him . He gave the authorities one hour to meet his demands before he would fly to another destination . 
 At 19 : 02 , Keč demanded 10 tonnes ( 9 @.@ 8 long tons ; 11 short tons ) of aviation fuel and food for two to three days for 80 people . Three minutes later , Morten informed Keč that the chief of police had held a press conference where Keč 's demands and goals had been presented and that it had been followed by all major Norwegian newspapers and television channels . Keč responded that he did not need the chief of police , but someone from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , such as Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland , Minister of Foreign Affairs Bjørn Tore Godal or the Norwegian Ambassador to the United Nations . Morten stated that it was not possible to get the prime minister to the airport in just five minutes . Keč responded that if this did not happen within reasonable time , he would fly to another country . 
 At 20 : 04 stated that he did not believe in Thorvald Stoltenberg , the minister of foreign affairs , the prime minister or any UN ambassador . Six minutes later , he demanded 25 tonnes ( 25 long tons ; 28 short tons ) of medicines for Bosnia . After a positive response from Morten , Keč stated that he needed to make Bosnia 's situation known in the media . He then demanded that Godal make a speech from the European Parliament . Later it was confirmed that requested medicines would be sent by air to Bosnia the following day . 
 Morten then stated that they did not feel that Keč was doing things the right way . If he chose to fly to a new airport , negotiations would have to start again , perhaps in a different language . Morten urged Keč to calm down and that they wanted to solve the situation just as much as him . Keč responded by pleading for help for Bosnia . At 20 : 50 , Keč stated " I wish to release everyone and myself . Both Bosnians and Norwegians will understand this " . After confirming his surrender would occur at 21 : 00 , Keč stated that he was " cold and calm " and that he intended to surrender without any trouble . Directed by the negotiation , Keč went to the door , opened it and was arrested . 
 According to the police , the passengers behaved very calmly , given the circumstances . Keč allowed several of the passengers to use their mobile telephones , allowing one of them to communicate with the police and keep Sheriff Jan Bergen updated on the situation . Anti @-@ terror police had been called to the scene , and there were plans to storm the aircraft if the situation escalated . After the incident , the police refused to say if they would have stormed the aircraft if Keč followed through his threats to depart to another airport . During the last stages of the incident , another aircraft was parked beside the MD @-@ 82 , which the police confirmed played a role towards the end of the hijacking . All communication towards the central government was made to the Norwegian Ministry of Justice , and neither the prime minister of the minister of foreign affairs was ever contacted . No weapons were found on either the aircraft nor on the hijacker . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Haris Keč was at the time of the incident 25 years old . Born in Sarajevo , then in Yugoslavia and now in Bosnia and Herzegovina , he was a student and journalist while living in his home country . He moved to Norway on 11 July 1993 , after having been granted a residential permit . After having lived in a refuge reception center in <unk> , he moved into his own home . He was a volunteer journalist for <unk> Bosnia Hercegovina and had written several articles . Until the incident he had a clean criminal record . People who knew him described him as " sympathetic " and " resourceful " , and doubted that he intended to harm anyone . A municipal immigrant consultant stated that he was " a person with initiative " who sought to get to know Norwegians and find work . 
 Keč was charged with three criminal offenses : the hijacking itself , and fraud and forgery related to attempting to take out 50 @,@ 000 Norwegian krone from a friend 's bank account . He had confessed the crime and several witnesses could confirm he had committed the crime . The incident was the second court case in Norway regarding hijacking , after Braathens SAFE Flight 139 had been hijacked by a drunk in 1985 . The law permitted a sentence from 2 to 21 years prison . On 16 June 1995 , Keč was sentenced to four years prison by Eidsivating Court of Appeal . After receiving the sentence , he stated to the press : " I regret hijacking the aircraft . I have apologized to the victims . Hijacking an aircraft was a completely wrong way to create attention for the situation in Bosnia . " 
 = Isidor Isaac Rabi = 
 Isidor Isaac Rabi ( / <unk> / ; born Israel Isaac Rabi , 29 July 1898 – 11 January 1988 ) was an American physicist and Nobel laureate , recognized in 1944 for his discovery of nuclear magnetic resonance , which is used in magnetic resonance imaging . He was also one of the first scientists in the US to work on the cavity magnetron , which is used in microwave radar and microwave ovens . 
 Born into a traditional Jewish family in Rymanów , Galicia , in what was then part of Austria @-@ Hungary , Rabi came to the United States as a baby and was raised in New York 's Lower East Side . He entered Cornell University as an electrical engineering student in 1916 , but soon switched to chemistry . Later , he became interested in physics . He continued his studies at Columbia University , where he was awarded his doctorate for a thesis on the magnetic susceptibility of certain crystals . In 1927 , he headed for Europe , where he met and worked with many of the finest physicists of the time . 
 In 1929 Rabi returned to the United States , where Columbia offered him a faculty position . In collaboration with Gregory Breit , he developed the Breit @-@ Rabi equation and predicted that the Stern – Gerlach experiment could be modified to confirm the properties of the atomic nucleus . His techniques for using nuclear magnetic resonance to discern the magnetic moment and nuclear spin of atoms earned him a Nobel Prize for Physics in 1944 . Nuclear magnetic resonance became an important tool for nuclear physics and chemistry . The subsequent development of magnetic resonance imaging from it has made it important to medicine as well . 
 During World War II he worked on radar at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Radiation Laboratory ( <unk> ) and on the Manhattan Project . After the war , he served on the General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) of the Atomic Energy Commission , and was chairman from 1952 to 1956 . He also served on the Science Advisory Committees ( SACs ) of the Office of Defense Mobilization and the Army 's Ballistic Research Laboratory , and was Science Advisor to President Dwight D. Eisenhower . He was involved with the establishment of the Brookhaven National Laboratory in 1946 , and later , as United States delegate to UNESCO , with the creation of CERN in 1952 . When Columbia created the rank of University Professor in 1964 , Rabi was the first to receive such a chair . A special chair was named after him in 1985 . He retired from teaching in 1967 but remained active in the department and held the title of University Professor Emeritus and Special Lecturer until his death . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Israel Isaac Rabi was born on 29 July 1898 into a Polish @-@ Jewish Orthodox family in Rymanów , Galicia , in what was then part of Austria @-@ Hungary but is now Poland . Soon after he was born , his father , David Rabi , emigrated to the United States . The younger Rabi and his mother , Sheindel , joined David there a few months later , and the family moved into a two @-@ room apartment on the Lower East Side of Manhattan . At home the family spoke Yiddish . When Rabi was enrolled in school , Sheindel said his name was Izzy , and a school official , thinking it was short for Isidor , put that down as his name . Henceforth , that became his official name . Later , in response to anti @-@ Semitism , he started writing his name as Isidor Isaac Rabi , and was known professionally as <unk> Rabi . To most of his friends and family , including his sister Gertrude , who was born in 1903 , he was known simply as " Rabi " , which was pronounced " Robby " . In 1907 , the family moved to Brownsville , Brooklyn , where they ran a grocery store . 
 As a boy , Rabi was interested in science . He read science books borrowed from the public library and built his own radio set . His first scientific paper , on the design of a radio condenser , was published in Modern Electrics when he was in elementary school . After reading about Copernican heliocentrism , he became an atheist . " It 's all very simple " , he told his parents , " who needs God ? " As a compromise with his parents , for his Bar Mitzvah , which was held at home , he gave a speech in Yiddish about how an electric light works . He attended the Manual Training High School in Brooklyn , from which he graduated in 1916 . Later that year , he entered Cornell University as an electrical engineering student , but soon switched to chemistry . After the American entry into World War I in 1917 , he joined the Students Army Training Corps at Cornell . For his senior thesis , he investigated the oxidation states of manganese . He was awarded his Bachelor of Science degree in June 1919 , but since at the time Jews were largely excluded from employment in the chemical industry and academia , he did not receive any job offers . He worked briefly at the Lederle Laboratories , and then as a bookkeeper . 
 = = Education = = 
 In 1922 Rabi returned to Cornell as a graduate chemistry student , and began studying physics . In 1923 he met , and began courting , Helen Newmark , a summer @-@ semester student at Hunter College . In order to be near her when she returned home , Rabi continued his studies at Columbia University , where his supervisor was Albert Wills . In June 1924 Rabi landed a job as a part @-@ time tutor at the City College of New York . Wills , whose specialty was magnetism , suggested that Rabi write his doctoral thesis on the magnetic susceptibility of sodium vapor . The topic did not appeal to Rabi , but after William Lawrence Bragg gave a seminar at Columbia about the electric susceptibility of certain crystals called Tutton 's salts , Rabi decided to research their magnetic susceptibility , and Wills agreed to be his supervisor . 
 Measuring the magnetic resonance of crystals first involved growing the crystals , a simple procedure often done by elementary school students . The crystals then had to be prepared by skillfully cutting them into sections with facets that had an orientation different from the internal structure of the crystal , and the response to a magnetic field had to be painstakingly measured . While his crystals were growing , Rabi read James Clerk Maxwell 's 1873 A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism , which inspired an easier method . He lowered a crystal on a glass fiber attached to a torsion balance into a solution whose magnetic susceptibility could be varied between two magnetic poles . When it matched that of the crystal , the magnet could be turned on and off without disturbing the crystal . The new method was not only much less work , it also produced a more accurate result . Rabi sent his thesis , entitled On the Principal Magnetic <unk> of Crystals , to Physical Review on 16 July 1926 . He married Helen the next day . The paper attracted little fanfare in academic circles , although it was read by <unk> Srinivasa Krishnan , who used the method in his own investigations of crystals . Rabi concluded that he needed to promote his work as well as publish it . 
 Like many other young physicists , Rabi was closely following momentous events in Europe . He was astounded by the Stern – Gerlach experiment , which convinced him of the validity of quantum mechanics . With Ralph Kronig , Francis Bitter , Mark <unk> and others , he set out to extend the Schrödinger equation to symmetric top molecules and find the energy states of such a mechanical system . The problem was that none of them could solve the resulting equation , a second @-@ order partial differential equation . Rabi found the answer in a book by the 19th century mathematician Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi . The equation had the form of a hypergeometric equation to which Jacobi had found a solution . Kronig and Rabi wrote up their result and sent it to Physical Review , which published it in 1927 . 
 = = Europe = = 
 In May 1927 , Rabi was appointed a Barnard Fellow . This came with a stipend of $ 1 @,@ 500 ( $ 20 @,@ 434 in 2016 dollars ) for the period from September 1927 to June 1928 . He immediately applied for a year 's leave of absence from the City College of New York so he could study in Europe . When this was refused , he resigned . On reaching Zürich , where he hoped to work for Erwin Schrödinger , he met two fellow Americans , Julius Adams Stratton and Linus Pauling . They found that Schrödinger was leaving , as he had been appointed head of the Theoretical Institute at Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin . Rabi therefore decided to seek a position with Arnold Sommerfeld at the University of Munich instead . In Munich , he found two more Americans , Howard Percy Robertson and Edward Condon . Sommerfeld accepted Rabi as a postdoctoral student . German physicists Rudolf Peierls and Hans Bethe were also working with Sommerfeld at the time , but the three Americans became especially close . 
 On Willis ' advice , Rabi traveled to Leeds for the 97th annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science , where he heard Werner Heisenberg present a paper on quantum mechanics . Afterwards , Rabi moved to Copenhagen , where he volunteered to work for Niels Bohr . Bohr was on vacation , but Rabi went straight to work on calculating the magnetic susceptibility of molecular hydrogen . After Bohr returned in October , he arranged for Rabi and Yoshio Nishina to continue their work with Wolfgang Pauli at the University of Hamburg . 
 Although he came to Hamburg to work with Pauli , Rabi found Otto Stern working there with two English @-@ speaking postdoctoral fellows , Ronald Fraser and John Bradshaw Taylor . Rabi soon made friends with them , and became interested in their molecular beam experiments , for which Stern would receive the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1943 . Their research involved non @-@ uniform magnetic fields , which were difficult to manipulate and hard to measure accurately . Rabi came up with the idea of using a uniform field instead , with the molecular beam at a glancing angle , so the atoms would be deflected like light through a prism . This would be easier to use , and produce more accurate results . Encouraged by Stern , and greatly assisted by Taylor , Rabi managed to get his idea to work . On Stern 's advice , Rabi wrote a letter about his results to Nature , which published it in February 1929 , followed by a paper entitled Zur Methode der <unk> von <unk> ( " On the method of deflection of molecular beams " ) to Zeitschrift für Physik , where it was published in April . 
 By this time the Barnard Fellowship had expired and Rabi and Helen were living off a $ 182 per month stipend from the Rockefeller Foundation . They left Hamburg for Leipzig , where he hoped to work with Heisenberg . In Leipzig , he found Robert Oppenheimer , a fellow New Yorker . It would be the start of a long friendship . However , Heisenberg departed for a tour of the United States in March 1929 , so Rabi and Oppenheimer decided to go to the ETH Zurich , where Pauli was now the professor of Physics . Rabi 's education in physics was enriched by the leaders in the field he met there , which included Paul Dirac , Walter Heitler , Fritz London , Francis Wheeler Loomis , John von Neumann , John Slater , Leó Szilárd and Eugene Wigner . 
 = = Molecular Beam Laboratory = = 
 On 26 March 1929 , Rabi received an offer of a lectureship from Columbia , with a good annual salary of $ 3 @,@ 000 . The Dean of Columbia 's Physics Department , George B. Pegram , was looking for a theoretical physicist to teach statistical mechanics and an advanced course in the new subject of quantum mechanics , and Heisenberg had recommended Rabi . Helen was now pregnant , so Rabi needed a regular job , and this job was in New York . He accepted , and returned to the United States in August on the SS President Roosevelt . Rabi became the only Jewish faculty member at Columbia at the time . 
 As a teacher , Rabi was underwhelming . Leon Lederman recalled that after a lecture , students would head to the library to try and figure out what Rabi had been talking about . Irving Kaplan rated Rabi and Harold Urey as " the worst teachers I ever had " . Norman Ramsey considered Rabi 's lectures " pretty dreadful " , while William Nierenberg felt that he was " simply an awful lecturer " . Despite his shortcomings as a lecturer , his influence was great . He inspired many of his students to pursue careers in physics , and some became famous . 
 Rabi 's first daughter , Helen Elizabeth , was born in September 1929 . A second girl , Margaret <unk> , followed in 1934 . Between his teaching duties and his family , he had little time for research , and published no papers in his first year at Columbia , but was nonetheless promoted to assistant professor at its conclusion . He subsequently became a professor in 1937 . 
 In 1931 Rabi returned to particle beam experiments . In collaboration with Gregory Breit , he developed the Breit @-@ Rabi equation , and predicted that the Stern – Gerlach experiment could be modified to confirm the properties of the atomic nucleus . The next step was to do so . With the help of Victor W. Cohen , Rabi built a molecular beam apparatus at Columbia . Their idea was to employ a weak magnetic field instead of a strong one , with which they hoped to detect the nuclear spin of sodium . When the experiment was conducted , four <unk> were found , from which they deduced a nuclear spin of 3 ⁄ 2 . 
 Rabi 's Molecular Beam Laboratory began to attract others , including Sidney Millman , a graduate student who studied lithium for his doctorate . Another was Jerrold Zacharias , who , believing that the sodium nucleus would be too difficult to understand , proposed studying the simplest of the elements , hydrogen . Its deuterium isotope had only recently been discovered at Columbia in 1931 by Urey , who received the 1934 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this work . Urey was able to supply them with both heavy water and gaseous deuterium for their experiments . Despite its simplicity , Stern 's group in Hamburg had observed that hydrogen did not behave as predicted . Urey also helped in another way ; he gave Rabi half his prize money to fund the Molecular Beam Laboratory . Other scientists whose careers began at the Molecular Beam Laboratory included Norman Ramsey , Julian Schwinger , Jerome Kellogg and Polykarp Kusch . All were men ; Rabi did not believe that women could be physicists . He never had a woman as a doctoral or postdoctoral student , and generally opposed women as candidates for faculty positions . 
 At the suggestion of C. J. Gorter , the team attempted to use an oscillating field . This became the basis for the nuclear magnetic resonance method . In 1937 , Rabi , Kusch , Millman and Zacharias used it to measure the magnetic moment of several lithium compounds with molecular beams , including lithium chloride , lithium fluoride and dilithium . Applying the method to hydrogen , they found that the moment of a proton was 2 @.@ 785 ± 0 @.@ 02 nuclear magnetons , and not 1 as predicted by the then @-@ current theory , while that of a deuteron was 0 @.@ 855 ± 0 @.@ 006 nuclear magnetons . This provided more accurate measurements of what Stern 's team had found , and Rabi 's team had confirmed , in 1934 . Since a deuteron is composed of a proton and a neutron with aligned spins , the neutron 's magnetic moment could be inferred by subtracting the deuteron and proton magnetic moments . The resulting value was not zero , and had sign opposite to that of the proton . Based on curious artifacts of these more accurate measurements , Rabi suggested that the deuteron had an electric quadrupole moment . This discovery meant that the physical shape of the deuteron was not symmetric , which provided valuable insight into the nature of the nuclear force binding nucleons . For the creation of the molecular @-@ beam magnetic @-@ resonance detection method , Rabi was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1944 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In September 1940 , Rabi became a member of the Scientific Advisory Committee of the U.S. Army 's Ballistic Research Laboratory . That month , the British Tizard Mission brought a number of new technologies to the United States , including a cavity magnetron , a high @-@ powered device that generates microwaves using the interaction of a stream of electrons with a magnetic field . This device , which promised to revolutionize radar , demolished any thoughts the Americans had entertained about their technological leadership . Alfred Lee Loomis of the National Defense Research Committee decided to establish a new laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to develop this radar technology . The name Radiation Laboratory was chosen as both unremarkable and a tribute to the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory . Loomis recruited Lee DuBridge to run it . 
 Loomis and DuBridge recruited physicists for the new laboratory at an Applied Nuclear Physics conference at MIT in October 1940 . Among those who volunteered was Rabi . His assignment was to study the magnetron , which was so secret that it had to be kept in a safe . The Radiation Laboratory scientists set their sights on producing a microwave radar set by 6 January 1941 , and having a prototype installed in a Douglas A @-@ 20 Havoc by March . This was done ; the technological obstacles were gradually overcome , and a working microwave radar set was produced . The magnetron was developed to permit a reduction in wavelength from 150 cm to 10 cm , and then to 3 cm . The laboratory went on to develop air @-@ to @-@ surface radar to detect submarines , the SCR @-@ 584 radar for fire control , and LORAN , a long @-@ range radio navigation system . At Rabi 's instigation , a branch of the Radiation Laboratory was located at Columbia , with Rabi in charge . 
 In 1942 Oppenheimer attempted to recruit Rabi and Robert Bacher to work at the Los Alamos Laboratory on a new secret project . They convinced Oppenheimer that his plan for a military laboratory would not work , since a scientific effort would need to be a civilian affair . The plan was modified , and the new laboratory would be a civilian one , run by the University of California under contract from the War Department . In the end , Rabi still did not go west , but did agree to serve as a consultant to the Manhattan Project . Rabi attended the Trinity test in July 1945 . The scientists working on Trinity set up a betting pool on the yield of the test , with predictions ranging from total dud to 45 kilotons of TNT equivalent ( kt ) . Rabi arrived late and found the only entry left was for 18 kilotons , which he purchased . Wearing welding goggles , he waited for the result with Ramsey and Enrico Fermi . The blast was rated at 18 @.@ 6 kilotons , and Rabi won the pool . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1945 , Rabi delivered the Richtmyer Memorial Lecture , held by the American Association of Physics Teachers in honor of Floyd K. Richtmyer , wherein he proposed that the magnetic resonance of atoms might be used as the basis of a clock . William L. Laurence wrote it up for the New York Times , under the headline " ' Cosmic pendulum ' for clock planned " . Before long Zacharias and Ramsey had built such atomic clocks . Rabi actively pursued his research into magnetic resonance until about 1960 , but he continued to make appearances at conferences and seminars until his death . 
 Rabi chaired Columbia 's physics department from 1945 to 1949 , during which time it was home to two Nobel laureates ( Rabi and Enrico Fermi ) and eleven future laureates , including seven faculty ( Polykarp Kusch , Willis Lamb , Maria Goeppert @-@ Mayer , James Rainwater , Norman Ramsey , Charles Townes and Hideki Yukawa ) , a research scientist ( Aage Bohr ) , a visiting professor ( Hans Bethe ) , a doctoral student ( Leon Lederman ) and an undergraduate ( Leon Cooper ) . Martin L. Perl , a doctoral student of Rabi 's , won the Nobel Prize in 1995 . When Columbia created the rank of University Professor in 1964 , Rabi was the first to receive such a chair . This meant that he was free to research or teach whatever he chose . He retired from teaching in 1967 but remained active in the department and held the title of University Professor Emeritus until his death . A special chair was named after him in 1985 . 
 A legacy of the Manhattan Project was the network of national laboratories , but none was located on the East Coast . Rabi and Ramsey assembled a group of universities in the New York area to lobby for their own national laboratory . When Zacharias , who was now at MIT , heard about it , he set up a rival group at MIT and Harvard . Rabi had discussions with Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , the director of the Manhattan Project , who was willing to go along with a new national laboratory , but only one . Moreover , while the Manhattan Project still had funds , the wartime organization was expected to be phased out when a new authority came into existence . After some bargaining and lobbying by Rabi and others , the two groups came together in January 1946 . Eventually nine universities ( Columbia , Cornell , Harvard , Johns Hopkins , MIT , Princeton , Pennsylvania , Rochester and Yale ) came together , and on 31 January 1947 , a contract was signed with the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) , which had replaced the Manhattan Project , that established the Brookhaven National Laboratory . 
 Rabi suggested to Edoardo Amaldi that Brookhaven might be a model that Europeans could emulate . Rabi saw science as a way of inspiring and uniting a Europe that was still recovering from the war . An opportunity came in 1950 when he was named the United States Delegate to the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) . At a UNESCO meeting at the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence in June 1950 , he called for the establishment of regional laboratories . These efforts bore fruit ; in 1952 , representatives of eleven countries came together to create the Conseil Européen pour la Recherche <unk> ( CERN ) . Rabi received a letter from Bohr , Heisenberg , Amaldi and others congratulating him on the success of his efforts . He had the letter framed and hung it on the wall of his home office . 
 The Atomic Energy Act of 1946 that created the Atomic Energy Commission provided for a nine @-@ man General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) to advise the Commission on scientific and technical matters . Rabi was one of those appointed in December 1946 . The GAC was enormously influential throughout the late 1940s , but in 1950 , the GAC unanimously opposed the development of the hydrogen bomb . Rabi went further than most of the other members , and joined Fermi in opposing the hydrogen bomb on moral as well as technical grounds . However , President Harry S. Truman overrode the GAC 's advice , and ordered development to proceed . Rabi later said : 
 I never forgave Truman for buckling under the pressure . He simply did not understand what it was about . As a matter of fact , after he stopped being President he still didn 't believe that the Russians had a bomb in 1949 . He said so . So for him to have alerted the world that we were going to make a hydrogen bomb at a time when we didn 't even know how to make one was one of the worst things he could have done . It shows the dangers of this sort of thing . 
 Oppenheimer was not reappointed to the GAC when his term expired in 1952 , and Rabi succeeded him as chairman , serving until 1956 . Rabi later testified on Oppenheimer 's behalf at the Atomic Energy Commission 's controversial security hearing in 1954 that led to Oppenheimer being stripped of his security clearance . Many witnesses supported Oppenheimer , but none more forcefully than Rabi : 
 So it didn 't seem to me the sort of thing that called for this kind of proceeding ... against a man who has accomplished what Dr. Oppenheimer has accomplished . There is a real positive record ... We have an A @-@ bomb and a whole series of it , and we have a whole series of super bombs , and what more do you want , mermaids ? 
 Rabi was appointed a member of the Science Advisory Committee ( SAC ) of the Office of Defense Mobilization in 1952 , serving as its chairman from 1956 to 1957 . This coincided with the Sputnik crisis . President Dwight Eisenhower met with the SAC on 15 October 1957 , to seek advice on possible US responses to the Russians ' satellite success . Rabi , who knew Eisenhower from the latter 's time as president of Columbia University , was the first to speak , and put forward a series of proposals , one of which was to strengthen the committee so it could provide the President with timely advice . This was done , and the SAC became the President 's Science Advisory Committee a few weeks later . He also became Eisenhower 's Science Advisor . In 1956 Rabi attended the Project Nobska anti @-@ submarine warfare conference , where discussion ranged from oceanography to nuclear weapons . He served as the US Representative to the NATO Science Committee at the time that the term " software engineering " was coined . While serving in that capacity , he bemoaned the fact that many large software projects were delayed . This prompted discussions that led to the formation of a study group that organized the first conference on software engineering . 
 In the course of his life , Rabi received many honors in addition to the Nobel Prize . These included the Elliott Cresson Medal from the Franklin Institute in 1942 , the Medal for Merit and the King 's Medal for Service in the Cause of Freedom from Great Britain in 1948 , the officer in the French Legion of Honor in 1956 , Columbia University 's Barnard Medal for Meritorious Service to Science in 1960 , the Niels Bohr International Gold Medal and the Atoms for Peace Award in 1967 , the Oersted Medal from the American Association of Physics Teachers in 1982 , the Four Freedoms Award from the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute and the Public Welfare Medal from the National Academy of Sciences 1985 , and the Vannevar Bush Award from the National Science Foundation in 1986 , He was a Fellow of the American Physical Society , serving as its President in 1950 , and a member of the National Academy of Sciences , the American Philosophical Society , and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . He was internationally recognized with membership in the Japan Academy and the Brazilian Academy of Sciences , and in 1959 was appointed a member of the Board of Governors of the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel . 
 Rabi died at his home on Riverside Drive , Manhattan , from cancer on 11 January 1988 . He was survived by his wife , Helen , who died at the age of 102 on 18 June 2005 . In his last days , he was reminded of his greatest achievement when his physicians examined him using magnetic resonance imaging , a technology that had been developed from his ground @-@ breaking research on magnetic resonance . The machine happened to have a reflective inner surface , and he remarked : " I saw myself in that machine ... I never thought my work would come to this . " 
 = = Books = = 
 Rabi , Isidor Isaac ( 1960 ) . My Life and Times as a Physicist . Claremont , California : Claremont College . OCLC <unk> . 
 Rabi , Isidor Isaac ( 1970 ) . Science : The Center of Culture . New York : World Publishing Co . OCLC <unk> . 
 Rabi , Isidor Isaac ; Serber , Robert ; Weisskopf , Victor F. ; Pais , Abraham ; Seaborg , Glenn T. ( 1969 ) . Oppenheimer : The Story of One of the Most Remarkable Personalities of the 20th Century . Scribner 's . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Æthelwold of East Anglia = 
 Æthelwold , also known as Æthelwald or <unk> ( Old English : <unk> " noble ruler " ; reigned c . 654 – 664 ) , was a 7th @-@ century king of East Anglia , the long @-@ lived Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom which today includes the English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . He was a member of the Wuffingas dynasty , which ruled East Anglia from their regio ( centre of royal authority ) at Rendlesham . The two Anglo @-@ Saxon cemeteries at Sutton Hoo , the monastery at Iken , the East Anglian see at Dommoc and the emerging port of Ipswich were all in the vicinity of Rendlesham . 
 Æthelwold lived during a time of political and religious upheaval in East Anglia , whose Christian kings in the decades prior to his succession all died violent deaths , having proved unworthy of the task of defending the newly converted kingdom against attacks from its neighbouring kingdom , Mercia , led by its pagan king , Penda . Æthelwold was the last of the nephews of Rædwald to rule East Anglia . He died in 664 and was succeeded by Ealdwulf , the son of his brother Æthelric . 
 Few records relating to East Anglia have survived and almost nothing is known of Æthelwold 's life or reign . He succeeded his elder brother Æthelhere , after Æthelhere was killed with Penda of Mercia at the Battle of the Winwæd in about 655 . During his rule he witnessed a setback in the aspirations of Mercia to dominate its neighbours , following the Battle of the Winwæd and the murder of Penda 's son , Peada . 
 He was king during the last decade of the co @-@ existence in England of the Christian Roman rite , centred at Canterbury , and the Celtic rite based in Northumbria . At the Synod of Whitby , in 664 , the Roman cause prevailed and the division of ecclesiastical authorities ceased . In 662 , Swithelm of Essex was persuaded to adopt Christianity and was baptised at Rendlesham , with Æthelwold present as his sponsor . East Anglia became more closely allied to Northumbria , Kent and lands in the Fens by means of royal marriages such as that between the Northumbrian Hereswitha and the East Anglian Æthilric . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 = = = The emergence of the Kingdom of the East Angles = = = 
 The history of East Anglia and its kings is known from the The Ecclesiastical History of the English People , compiled by the Northumbrian monk Bede in 731 , and a genealogical list from the Anglian collection , dating from the 790s , in which the ancestry of Ælfwald of East Anglia was traced back through fourteen generations to Wōden . 
 East Anglia was a long @-@ lived Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom in which a duality of a northern and a southern part existed , corresponding with the modern English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . It was formed during the 5th century , following the ending of Roman power in Britain in 410 . The east of Britain became settled at an early date by Saxons and Angles from the continent . During the 5th century , groups of settlers of mixed stock migrated into the Fens and up the major rivers inland . From Bede it is known that the people who settled in what became East Anglia were Angles , originally from what is now part of Denmark . By the 6th century , new settlements had also appeared along the river systems of the east coast of East Anglia , including the Deben , the Alde and the Orwell . The settlers were unaffected by Roman urban civilisation and had their own religion and language . As more of the region fell under their control , new kingdoms were formed , replacing the function of the Roman <unk> . Surrounded by sea , fenland , large defensive earthworks such as the Devil 's Dyke and wide rivers , all of which acted to disconnect it from the rest of Britain , the land of the East Angles eventually became united by a single ruling dynasty , the Wuffingas . 
 = = = Rædwald and his successors = = = 
 The first king of the East Angles of whom more than a name is known was Rædwald , described by Bede as ' the son of Tytil , whose father was Wuffa ' , who reigned from about 599 until approximately 624 . According to Bede , he was converted to Christianity at the court of his overlord Æthelberht of Kent in about 604 . Later in his reign he was powerful enough to hold imperium over several Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms . In 616 , he defeated Æthelfrith of Northumbria and installed the exiled Edwin as the new king . He is thought to have been given a ship burial and interred amongst a magnificent array of personal treasures and symbols of regal power that were discovered under Mound 1 at Sutton Hoo , in Suffolk . His son Eorpwald succeeded him and reigned briefly before he was killed soon after his baptism , by a heathen named Ricberht , after which the East Angles reverted to paganism . Ricberht was replaced by Sigeberht , whose Christian education ensured that Christianity was reestablished . During Sigeberht 's joint reign with Ecgric , the East Anglian see at Dommoc was established . 
 During 632 or 633 , Edwin of Northumbria was overthrown and slain and his kingdom was ravaged by Cadwallon ap Cadfan , supported by Penda of Mercia . The Mercians then turned on the East Angles and their king , Ecgric . In 640 or 641 , they routed the East Anglian army in a battle in which Ecgric and his predecessor Sigeberht both perished . 
 Ecgric 's successor , Æthelwold 's brother Anna , who was renowned for his devout Christianity and the saintliness of his children , proved ineffective in preventing East Anglia from being invaded by the Mercians . Following a Mercian attack in 651 on the monastery at Cnobheresburg , Anna was exiled by Penda , possibly to the kingdom of the Magonsæte . After his return , East Anglia was attacked again by Penda , Anna 's forces were defeated and he was killed . During the reign of his successor , Æthelhere ( another brother of Æthelwold ) , East Anglia was eclipsed by Mercia . In 655 , after the Battle of the Winwæd , near Leeds , in which Æthelhere was slain fighting beside Penda , a new political situation arose . Penda 's son Peada , who had ruled the Mercian province of the Middle Angles as a Christian king from 653 , now succeeded Penda as king of Mercia , but he was murdered a year later . Peada 's death dealt a severe blow to Mercian aspirations of dominion over the other kingdoms of England . 
 = = = The sphere of Rendlesham = = = 
 The royal seat of Rendlesham , specified by Bede , seals the evident importance of the Deben estuary headwaters as a centre of royal power , demonstrated for an earlier period by the royal cemetery of Sutton Hoo . Rendlesham , a short distance from Iken , the site of Botolph 's monastery , stands at a strategic point between the rivers Deben and Alde at the headwaters of the Butley estuary , which intersects the peninsula between the two major rivers . The dedication of Rendlesham 's church to St Gregory suggests its early , perhaps primary connection with the royal dwelling mentioned by Bede . If the Dommoc bishopric was at Walton , as Rochester claimed in the thirteenth century , then this was also immediately within the sphere of Rendlesham . Archaeologists have revealed that the quay of Gipeswic ( now modern Ipswich ) , at a ford of the River Orwell estuary , was then growing in importance as a centre of seaborne trade to the continent , under direct royal patronage . 
 = = Descent , family and accession = = 
 Æthelwold , ( Old English ' noble ruler ' ) was a member of the Wuffingas dynasty , the youngest son of Eni and a nephew of Rædwald of East Anglia . Two of his brothers , Anna and Æthelhere , ruled in succession before him . 
 His accession is mentioned by the 12th @-@ century historian William of Malmesbury , in Gesta Regum Anglorum : 
 " To Anna succeeded his brother Ethelhere , who was justly slain by Oswy king of the Northumbrians , together with Penda , because he was an auxiliary to him , and was actually supporting his brother and his kinsman . His brother <unk> , in due succession , left the kingdom to <unk> and <unk> , the sons of Ethelhere . " 
 Dynastic alliances bound Æthelwold 's kingdom strongly to the Christian kingdom of Kent , where Seaxburh , the eldest daughter of Æthelwold 's elder brother Anna , was Eorcenberht of Kent 's queen . East Anglia 's western stronghold in the Fens was held by Seaxburh 's sister Æthelthryth and , like Kent , it was devoutly attached to the Roman Church . There was also an important Northumbrian connection : in 657 , Hilda established the monastery of <unk> ( identified with Whitby ) , which later became the burial @-@ place of Edwin and other Northumbrian kings . Hilda 's sister Hereswitha married Æthelwold 's youngest brother Æthelric in around 627 – 629 . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Christianity in East Anglia under Æthelwold = = = 
 The influence of the Celtic rite in East Anglia had been strong whilst the monastery of Saint Fursey and Saint Foillan at Cnobheresburg had existed . The authority of East Anglian Christianity still resided in the East Anglian see at Dommoc , obedient to Canterbury . Saint Botolph began to build his monastery at Iken , on a tidal island site in the River Alde , Suffolk , in about 653 , the year that Anna of East Anglia was killed at the Battle of Bulcamp . 
 Oswiu successfully persuaded Sigeberht II of the East Saxons to receive baptism and Cedd , a Northumbrian disciple of Aidan 's , was diverted from the Northumbrian mission to the Middle Angles under Peada to become Bishop of the East Saxons and re @-@ convert the people . Cedd built monasteries at Tilbury in the south and at <unk> , where there was an old Roman fort , at what is now Bradwell @-@ on @-@ Sea , in north @-@ east Essex . Sigebert was assassinated by his own thegns and was succeeded by the pagan Swithelm of Essex . Cedd persuaded him to accept the faith and , according to Bede , his baptism by Cedd took place at Rendlesham , in the presence of King Æthelwold : 
 " Sigebert was succeeded in the kingdom by <unk> , the son of <unk> , who was baptized by the same Cedd , in the province of the East Angles , at the king 's <unk> , called <unk> , that is , <unk> 's Mansion ; and <unk> , king of the East Angles , brother to Anna , king of the same people , was his godfather . " 
 = = = East Anglian marriage alliances = = = 
 In the early 660s , two important marriages took place . Ecgfrith of Northumbria , the fifteen @-@ year @-@ old son of Oswiu , married Æthelthryth of Ely , the daughter of Anna of East Anglia , ( who was about fourteen years older than him ) , and moved to live with him at his Northumbrian court . She had remained a virgin for Christ during her first marriage : she continued in this resolve as <unk> 's bride , with the result that he could not expect to father an heir . Æthelthryth retained Ely as her own possession during this marriage . 
 Meanwhile , Wulfhere of Mercia , a brother of Peada , emerged from safe retreat and was proclaimed king . He was not Christian , but was soon converted and subsequently married <unk> , daughter of Eorcenberht of Kent and Seaxburh . Soon afterwards he founded the monastery of Medeshamstede , which later became known as Peterborough , under abbot <unk> . 
 = = Synod of Whitby = = 
 Following the death of Finan , bishop of Lindisfarne , Alhfrith of Deira , in collusion with Wilfred of York , Agilbert of Wessex and others , were determined to persuade Oswiu to rule in favour of the Roman rite of Christianity within the kingdoms over which he had imperium . The case was debated in Oswiu 's presence at the Synod of Whitby in 664 , with Colmán , Hild and Cedd defending the Celtic rite and the tradition inherited from Aidan , and <unk> speaking for the Roman position . The Roman cause prevailed and the former division of ecclesiastical authorities was set aside . Those who could not accept it , including Colmán , departed elsewhere . 
 At that time plague swept through Europe and Anglo @-@ Saxon England . Amongst its victims was Bishop Cedd , Archbishop Deusdedit of Canterbury , and <unk> of Kent . Æthelwold also died in 664 . 
 = = Quotations = = 
 = No. 77 Squadron RAAF = 
 No. 77 Squadron is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) squadron headquartered at RAAF Base Williamtown , New South Wales . It is controlled by No. 81 Wing , and equipped with McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet multi @-@ role fighters . The squadron was formed at RAAF Station Pearce , Western Australia , in March 1942 and saw action in the South West Pacific theatre of World War II , operating Curtis P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks . After the war , it re @-@ equipped with North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs and deployed to Japan as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force . The squadron was about to return to Australia when the Korean War broke out in June 1950 , after which it joined United Nations forces supporting South Korea . It converted from Mustangs to Gloster Meteor jets between April and July 1951 and remained in Korea until October 1954 , claiming five MiG @-@ 15s and over five thousand buildings and vehicles destroyed during the war for the loss of almost sixty aircraft , mainly to ground fire . 
 The squadron re @-@ equipped with CAC Sabres at Williamtown in November 1956 . Two years later it transferred to RAAF Butterworth in Malaya to join the air campaign against communist guerrillas in the last stages of the Emergency . The squadron remained at Butterworth during the 1960s , providing regional air defence during the Konfrontasi between Indonesia and Malaysia . It returned to Williamtown in early 1969 to re @-@ equip with Dassault Mirage III supersonic jet fighters . No. 77 Squadron began converting to Hornets in June 1987 . It supplied a detachment of four aircraft to the American base on Diego Garcia in 2001 – 02 , supporting the war in Afghanistan , and deployed to the Middle East as part of the military intervention against ISIL in 2015 – 16 . Along with its Hornets , the squadron briefly operated Pilatus PC @-@ 9s in the forward air control role in the early 2000s . The RAAF plans to replace its Hornets with Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II fighters commencing in 2018 , and No. 77 Squadron is scheduled to convert to the new type in 2021 . 
 = = Role and equipment = = 
 No. 77 Squadron is located at RAAF Base Williamtown , New South Wales , and controlled by No. 81 Wing , which is part of Air Combat Group . No. 81 Wing maintains three fighter squadrons for offensive and defensive counter @-@ air operations . As well as air @-@ to @-@ air combat , No. 77 Squadron is tasked with land strike , close air support and maritime strike missions . Its staff includes maintenance , supply and other support personnel . The unit motto is " Swift to Destroy " and the crest features an oriental temple lion , a legacy of No. 77 Squadron 's role in the Korean War . Nicknamed the " grumpy monkey " , the lion represents " a defender of peace , which , when disturbed , is swift to destroy " . 
 The squadron operates McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet multi @-@ role fighters , the first of which was delivered in June 1987 . The twin @-@ engined Hornet is armed with a 20 mm cannon and can carry short- and medium @-@ range air @-@ to @-@ air missiles and a variety of guided and unguided air @-@ to @-@ surface ordnance . It can be refuelled in flight by the RAAF 's Airbus KC @-@ 30A Multi Role Tanker Transports . No. 77 Squadron primarily operates the single @-@ seat F / A @-@ 18A Hornet ; each Hornet squadron also operates one or two F / A @-@ 18Bs , a two @-@ seat model used for pilot conversion . Squadron staff are responsible for day @-@ to @-@ day servicing and some heavy maintenance tasks . Other heavy maintenance is carried out by an industry coalition contracted through Boeing . No. 77 Squadron regularly undertakes exercises with air forces from South @-@ East Asia , New Zealand and the United States . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 As the Japanese advanced in the South West Pacific during early 1942 , the RAAF hurriedly established three fighter units — Nos. 75 , 76 and 77 Squadrons — equipped with Curtiss P @-@ 40E Kittyhawks recently delivered from the United States . No. 77 Squadron was formed at RAAF Station Pearce , Western Australia , on 16 March , with a complement of three officers and 100 men . Temporarily commanded by Squadron Leader D. F. Forsyth , the unit was initially responsible for the defence of Perth . Squadron Leader Dick Cresswell assumed command on 20 April . The squadron transferred to Batchelor Airfield near Darwin , Northern Territory , in August , the first RAAF fighter unit to be stationed in the area . Until this time , air defence over Darwin had been provided by the P @-@ 40s flown by the USAAF 's 49th Fighter Group . No. 77 Squadron moved to another of Darwin 's satellite airfields , Livingstone , in September . Among its pilots was John Gorton , future Prime Minister of Australia . No. 77 Squadron saw action defending Darwin from Japanese air raids and claimed its first aerial victory just after 5 a.m. on 23 November 1942 , when Cresswell destroyed a Mitsubishi " Betty " bomber . It was the first " kill " for an Australian squadron over the mainland , and the first night victory over Australia . As of 24 December , the unit 's strength was twenty @-@ four Kittyhawks . 
 In February 1943 , concurrent with No. 1 Wing and its three Supermarine Spitfire squadrons becoming operational in the Darwin area , No. 77 Squadron was transferred to Milne Bay in New Guinea . Along with Nos. 6 , 75 and 100 Squadrons it came under the control of the newly formed No. 71 Wing , which was part of No. 9 Operational Group , the RAAF 's main mobile formation in the South West Pacific Area . No. 77 Squadron registered its first daytime victory on 11 April , when a Kittyhawk shot down a Mitsubishi Zero taking part in a raid on Allied shipping near Buna . Four days later the Japanese attacked Milne Bay ; the squadron claimed four bombers and a fighter for the loss of one Kittyhawk . By this time , Allied headquarters had finalised plans for a drive north to the Philippines involving heavy attacks on Rabaul and the occupation of territory in New Guinea , New Britain and the Solomon Islands . No. 77 Squadron began moving to Goodenough Island in May , and was fully established and ready for operations by 15 June . As Japanese fighter opposition was limited , the squadron took part in several ground @-@ attack missions in New Britain , armed with incendiary and general @-@ purpose bombs , a practice that had been employed by Kittyhawk units in the Middle East . During one such raid on 2 August , Cresswell 's designated successor as commanding officer , Flight Lieutenant Daryl Sproule , was forced to crash @-@ land on a beach and was captured and executed by the Japanese . Cresswell remained in command until Squadron Leader " Buster " Brown took over on 20 August . Japanese fighter strength in New Britain and New Guinea increased in September and October , and eight of No. 77 Squadron 's Kittyhawks were briefly detached to Nadzab as escorts for the CAC Boomerangs of No. 4 Squadron , which were supporting the 7th Australian Division . 
 In January 1944 , No. 77 Squadron took part in the two largest raids mounted by the RAAF to that time , each involving over seventy aircraft attacking targets in New Britain . It was subsequently assigned to Los Negros in the Admiralty Islands , under the control of No. 73 Wing , along with Nos. 76 and 79 Squadrons . No. 77 Squadron 's ground party went ashore at Los Negros on 6 March , in the middle of a firefight with Japanese forces . Fourteen of the squadron 's Kittyhawks arrived a week later , and another ten on 28 March . Their primary duty was providing air cover for Allied shipping , though no Japanese aircraft were encountered ; they also flew ground @-@ attack missions in support of US troops on Manus Island . Following the capture of the Admiralties , which completed the isolation of Rabaul , No. 77 Squadron remained with No. 73 Wing on garrison duty at Los Negros from May to July 1944 . Between 13 August and 14 September , the squadron transferred to Noemfoor in western New Guinea to join Nos. 76 and 82 Squadrons as part of No. 81 Wing under No. 10 Operational Group ( later the Australian First Tactical Air Force ) , which had taken over the mobile role previously performed by No. 9 Group and was supporting the American landings along the north coast of New Guinea . Cresswell , now a wing commander , arrived for his second tour of duty as commanding officer on 26 September . Operating P @-@ 40N Kittyhawks , No. 77 Squadron bombed Japanese positions on the Vogelkop Peninsula in October and on Halmahera in November . Cresswell handed over command in March 1945 . The squadron moved to Morotai on 13 April and conducted ground @-@ attack sorties over the Dutch East Indies until 30 June , when it redeployed with No. 81 Wing to Labuan to support the 9th Australian Division in North Borneo until hostilities ended in August 1945 . The squadron 's tally of aerial victories during the war was seven aircraft destroyed and four " probables " , for the loss of eighteen pilots killed . 
 = = = Occupation of Japan = = = 
 No. 77 Squadron began re @-@ equipping with North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs at Labuan in September 1945 . In the wake of Japan 's surrender , No. 81 Wing became part of Australia 's contribution to the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) . No. 77 Squadron was the last of the wing 's three flying units to deploy to Japan , arriving at Bofu , a former kamikaze base , on 21 March 1946 . No. 481 ( Maintenance ) Squadron provided technical service for the Mustangs . Occupation duties proved uneventful , the main operational task being surveillance patrols , but units maintained an intensive training regime and undertook combined exercises with other Allied forces . Many RAAF personnel were accompanied to Japan by their families . 
 No. 81 Wing transferred to Iwakuni in April 1948 , the same month that the Federal government decided to reduce Australia 's contribution to BCOF , retaining only No. 77 Squadron in Japan . Wing headquarters and No. 481 Squadron disbanded in November 1948 , and No. 77 Squadron came under the aegis of a new organisation called RAAF Component . The squadron was now the largest operational unit in the RAAF , with a strength of 299 officers and men , forty Mustangs , three CAC Wirraways , two Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas and two Austers . The Dakotas and Austers formed the No. 77 Squadron Communications Flight . In December 1949 , the Mustangs competed in a gunnery competition against three groups of Mustangs and two groups of F @-@ 80 Shooting Star jets belonging to the US Far East Air Force ( FEAF ) . No. 77 Squadron 's Flight Lieutenant " Bay " Adams achieved the highest individual score of the competition , earning the personal congratulations of Lieutenant Generals George E. Stratemeyer , commander of FEAF , and Horace Robertson , commander of BCOF . The RAAF personnel were preparing to return to Australia when , on 25 June 1950 , they were placed on standby for action in the Korean War , which had just broken out . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 Led by Wing Commander Lou Spence , No. 77 Squadron was committed to action over Korea as part of United Nations Command , and came under the operational control of the US Fifth Air Force . The Australian unit was specifically requested by General Douglas MacArthur , commander of UN forces ; the Mustang was considered the best long @-@ range ground @-@ attack aircraft in the theatre , and Stratemeyer contended that No. 77 Squadron was the best Mustang outfit in Japan . The squadron flew its initial escort and patrol sorties from Iwakuni on 2 July 1950 , becoming the first non @-@ American UN unit to commence operations . Several Australian families were still living at Iwakuni pending their repatriation from what had become an operational theatre , and could watch the Mustangs depart for missions over Korea . A friendly fire incident occurred on 3 July , when No. 77 Squadron attacked a train full of US and South Korean troops on the main highway between Suwon and P <unk> , inflicting many casualties , twenty @-@ nine of them fatal . Spence had raised concerns before the mission that the North Koreans could not have penetrated so far south , but was assured by Fifth Air Force controllers that the target was correct ; the incident was widely reported in US newspapers but a public statement by Stratemeyer cleared the RAAF of any blame . No. 77 Squadron did not encounter enemy aircraft in the opening phase of the war but often faced intense ground fire . It suffered its first fatality on 7 July when its deputy commander , Squadron Leader Graham Strout , was killed during a raid on Samchok . He was also the first Australian , and the first non @-@ American UN serviceman , to die in Korea . 
 For the next two months , equipped with bombs , rockets and napalm , No. 77 Squadron supported UN troops retreating before the North Korean advance . To expedite turnaround times between missions , the Mustangs , which were still based at Iwakuni , often refuelled and rearmed at Taegu near the Pusan Perimeter , where UN forces made a last @-@ ditch stand on the southern tip of Korea . One of the squadron 's Dakotas regularly flew between Iwakuni and Taegu carrying ordnance and spare parts . According to the official history of the Air Force in 1946 – 71 , the squadron 's part in the victory at Pusan earned recognition " not only for the RAAF but also Australia at the highest political levels in the United States " . During a visit to Japan in August 1950 , Prime Minister Robert Menzies presented the Gloucester Cup to No. 77 Squadron as the RAAF 's most proficient unit of the past year . That month , the squadron claimed thirty @-@ five tanks , 212 other vehicles , eighteen railway engines or cars , and thirteen fuel or ammunition dumps destroyed . On 3 September , Sergeant Bill Harrop was forced down behind enemy lines and executed by the North Koreans . Six days later , Spence was killed when his Mustang failed to pull out of a dive during a napalm attack on Angang @-@ ni . His death was a serious blow to the squadron , and the RAAF despatched Cresswell on his third tour as commanding officer to replace him . Cresswell arrived at Iwakuni on 17 September and set about restoring morale , undertaking four sorties on his first day of operations three days later . MacArthur had meanwhile launched an amphibious landing behind North Korean lines at Inchon , forcing the communists to retreat from the Pusan Perimeter . No. 77 Squadron was transferred from Iwakuni to Pohang , South Korea , on 12 October , to support UN forces advancing northwards . On 20 October , the squadron became a component of the RAAF 's newly established No. 91 ( Composite ) Wing , which also included No. 391 ( Base ) Squadron , No. 491 ( Maintenance ) Squadron , and No. 30 Communications Flight , formerly the No. 77 Squadron Communications Flight . The wing and all units except No. 77 Squadron , which came under the operational control of the US 35th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Group , were headquartered at Iwakuni . 
 China entered the war in mid @-@ October 1950 , as advancing UN troops closed in on the Yalu River . No. 77 Squadron undertook its first sorties against Chinese ground forces on 1 November . The squadron flew its first missions supporting the Australian Army on 5 November , when it attacked Chinese troops opposing the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment , at Pakchon . No. 77 Squadron personnel were housed in tents in freezing conditions at <unk> ; two pilots died from burns after a fire in their quarters on 14 November . Two days later the Australians began moving forward with the 35th Group to Yonpo , near Hamhung . North Korea 's counter @-@ attack , supported by Chinese forces , led to the squadron being withdrawn to Pusan on 3 December 1950 . The Chinese operated a Russian @-@ designed swept @-@ wing jet fighter , the Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 15 , that outclassed all other fighters in the theatre except the new North American F @-@ 86 Sabre . The RAAF attempted to procure Sabres to replace No. 77 Squadron 's Mustangs but the priority being given to re @-@ equipping the USAF meant that deliveries would not be possible until 1954 . The Australian government agreed to purchase Gloster Meteor straight @-@ wing jet fighters from Britain as the only viable alternative ; the initial order included thirty @-@ six single @-@ seat <unk> interceptors and four two @-@ seat <unk> trainers . No. 77 Squadron completed its last Mustang mission on 6 April 1951 and returned to Iwakuni the next day to begin converting to Meteors . It subsequently transferred to Kimpo , South Korea , and commenced operations with its new aircraft on 29 July . The squadron deployed twenty @-@ two Meteors at Kimpo , and came under the control of the USAF 's 4th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Wing . Although it had operated effectively as a ground @-@ attack unit with its Mustangs , No. 77 Squadron 's primary role in the RAAF was interception , and it was expected that with the Meteor it could again focus on fighter duties , particularly as by this stage the USAF had only two squadrons of Sabres in the theatre . 
 Wing Commander Gordon Steege succeeded Cresswell on 16 August 1951 , by which time No. 77 Squadron 's Meteors had conducted offensive sweeps up the Yalu River with USAF Sabres , and escorted Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortresses on bombing missions . MiG @-@ 15s had appeared on several occasions without engaging the Meteors ; it was speculated at the time , and subsequently confirmed , that they had been observing the performance of the newly arrived RAAF jets . No. 77 Squadron 's first Meteor fatalities occurred on 22 August , when two aircraft collided in mid @-@ air as they returned to Kimpo after a sweep . The Meteors first engaged MiG @-@ 15s on 25 August , but scored no hits . Four days later , eight Meteors and sixteen Sabres fought twelve MiGs ; one RAAF pilot ejected when his aircraft was shot down , and a second Meteor was badly damaged . One week later another Meteor suffered severe damage in a dogfight with MiGs . As a result of these clashes , Steege became convinced that the Meteor was outclassed as a fighter . Following discussions with the Fifth Air Force , he decided to take No. 77 Squadron out of its air @-@ to @-@ air combat role and curtail its operations in " MiG Alley " , the area between the Yalu and Chongchon Rivers on North Korea 's border with Manchuria . This caused controversy among those who believed that proper tactics exploiting the Meteor 's manoeuvrability and heavy armament would have allowed it to remain competitive as a fighter ; for the Australian pilots the change of role amounted to a loss of prestige . The Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal George Jones , backed the decision , which relegated the squadron mainly to escort duty and local air defence . Morale suffered and it was not until Wing Commander Ron Susans succeeded Steege on 26 December 1951 that the Meteors were once more assigned an offensive role , namely ground attack . 
 In the intervening period , Flight Lieutenant " Smoky " Dawson registered No. 77 Squadron 's first jet combat claim when he damaged a MiG during an escort mission on 26 September 1951 . On 27 October , Flying Officer Les Reading was credited with damaging another MiG ; it was subsequently confirmed as having been destroyed , making it the squadron 's first MiG " kill " . The squadron was awarded the Republic of Korea Presidential Unit Citation for " exceptionally meritorious service & heroism " on 1 November . Fifty MiGs attacked a formation of fourteen Meteors on 1 December 1951 ; at least one MiG was shot down and another damaged , for the loss of three Meteors . On 8 January 1952 , Susans led the squadron on its first ground @-@ attack mission in Meteors , which were armed with eight rockets under the wings as well as their four internal 20 mm cannon . They continued to operate mainly in the ground @-@ attack role until the end of the war , but registered two more victories over MiGs on 4 and 8 May 1952 . The squadron took part in a mass air strike on 29 August , when 420 UN aircraft attacked Pyongyang . One Meteor was shot down and another damaged by MiGs on 2 October 1952 . No. 77 Squadron was credited with downing its last MiG on 27 March 1953 . Squadron Leader Len McGlinchey became its final wartime fatality when his Meteor crashed while taking off from Kimpo on 16 July . 
 Following the armistice on 27 July 1953 , the squadron remained in South Korea on garrison duties — initially at Kimpo , later at Kunsan — until transferring to Iwakuni on 12 October 1954 . It departed for Australia on 19 November and arrived in Sydney on 3 December , having been based overseas for eleven years , a record for an RAAF unit . Its performance in the early days of the war has been cited as a factor in the United States ' decision to ratify the ANZUS treaty in September 1951 . The squadron 's casualty rate in Korea was twenty @-@ five percent killed or captured . Forty @-@ one pilots died , thirty @-@ five from the RAAF and six on exchange from the Royal Air Force . A further seven pilots became prisoners of war . Aircraft losses totalled almost sixty , including over forty Meteors , mostly to ground fire . The squadron flew 18 @,@ 872 sorties , including 3 @,@ 872 in Mustangs and 15 @,@ 000 in Meteors . It was credited with shooting down five MiG @-@ 15s and destroying 3 @,@ 700 buildings , 1 @,@ 408 vehicles , ninety @-@ eight railway engines and carriages , and sixteen bridges . 
 = = = Malayan Emergency and Konfrontasi = = = 
 No. 77 Squadron became operational at RAAF Base Williamtown , New South Wales , on 4 January 1955 . On 21 March , it joined Nos. 3 and 75 Squadrons as part of No. 78 Wing , which had recently been reorganised following garrison duty in Malta . No. 77 Squadron ceased Meteor operations in August 1956 and re @-@ formed on 19 November equipped with CAC Sabres . Between October 1958 and February 1959 , Nos. 3 and 77 Squadrons deployed with No. 78 Wing to RAAF Butterworth in Malaya , to support Commonwealth forces in the Emergency . The Sabres were among the first to wear the RAAF 's recently introduced " leaping kangaroo " roundel . No. 478 ( Maintenance ) Squadron provided servicing for the aircraft . No. 77 Squadron undertook its first mission dive @-@ bombing communist guerrillas on 13 August 1959 , and flew two more ground @-@ attack sorties on 10 June 1960 . The RAAF pilots also sometimes tried to startle the communists by diving their jets through the sound barrier to create sonic booms that simulated the sound of artillery fire . Two No. 77 Squadron Sabres collided in mid @-@ air on 22 July , but both pilots ejected safely . The Emergency was declared officially over on 31 July 1960 . 
 The RAAF squadrons remained at Butterworth as part of Australia 's contribution to the Commonwealth Strategic Reserve . Eight Sabres , along with their pilots and ground crew , were detached from No. 77 Squadron in May 1962 to re @-@ form No. 79 Squadron at Ubon , Thailand . The Sabres were flown to Thailand via Singapore to give the appearance that they were not drawn from the Strategic Reserve , thus preserving Malaysia 's neutrality . Personnel and equipment from Nos. 3 and 77 Squadrons continued to rotate through No. 79 Squadron on a regular basis . The Butterworth @-@ based Sabres , armed with Sidewinder missiles , were responsible for regional air defence during the Konfrontasi between Indonesia and Malaysia from July 1963 until August 1966 , though no combat took place . From 26 October until 27 November 1965 , a detachment of six Sabres from No. 77 Squadron was based at Labuan to conduct combat patrols over the Indonesian – Malaysian border on Borneo . Following the disbandment of No. 78 Wing in November 1967 , No. 77 Squadron became an independently operating unit under the command of Headquarters RAAF Butterworth . 
 = = = Supersonic era = = = 
 No. 77 Squadron returned to Williamtown in early 1969 to re @-@ equip with Dassault Mirage III supersonic fighters , undertaking its initial flights on 7 July . The Mirages were charged with interception , high- and low @-@ angle bombing , close air support , and photo reconnaissance ; their armament included 30 mm cannon , Sidewinder missiles and conventional bombs . No. 77 Squadron 's prime role was ground attack , although none of the RAAF 's Mirages ever saw combat . No. 481 Squadron was responsible for day @-@ to @-@ day servicing , as well as most heavy maintenance . No. 77 Squadron suffered its first fatal Mirage accident on 3 April 1973 , when an aircraft crashed during a training flight at low altitude . Another pilot was killed when his Mirage hit the water during formation flying at night on 24 June 1976 . The squadron began training with laser @-@ guided bombs in October 1980 . As of March 1984 , its aircraft complement was nineteen Mirages . Two pilots died following a mid @-@ air collision at low level on 9 April that year . On 1 January 1985 , in preparation for the introduction of the McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet to Australian service , No. 77 Squadron took over all Mirages and Macchi MB @-@ 326s of No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit , assuming responsibility for fighter combat instructor , introductory fighter , and Mirage conversion courses . The transfer swelled the squadron 's strength to fifty @-@ six aircraft — forty Mirages and sixteen Macchis — and over 500 officers and men , making it the largest operational unit in the RAAF . Along with a heavily expanded training program , and its existing Australian Army close support role , No. 77 Squadron 's fleet support commitment was increased to take up the slack resulting from the diminution of the Royal Australian Navy 's fixed @-@ wing capability . Its last fatal accident with the Mirage occurred on 2 May 1986 ; the aircraft crashed into water during air @-@ to @-@ air gunnery practice . 
 The squadron began phasing out the Mirage in July 1986 , and took delivery of its first Hornet on 29 June 1987 . It had come under the control of a newly re @-@ formed No. 81 Wing that February . No. 77 Squadron 's last Mirage departed Williamtown on 27 November 1987 . Hornet maintenance at Williamtown was the responsibility of No. 481 Wing , which had evolved from No. 481 Squadron . One of No. 77 Squadron 's Hornets crashed near Rockhampton , Queensland , on 19 May 1992 , killing the pilot and his passenger , a defence scientist . In September that year , the squadron undertook a proving exercise over Halifax Bay in Far North Queensland , when four of its Hornets — refuelled in flight on the round trip from Williamtown by a Boeing 707 tanker — became the first jet aircraft in Australia to drop aerial mines . No. 481 Wing was reorganised as No. 402 Wing in July 1996 ; the latter transferred its functions to No. 81 Wing 's flying squadrons in July 1998 . No. 77 Squadron operated a detachment of Pilatus PC @-@ 9 aircraft in the forward air control role from 2000 until 2003 ; this role was subsequently filled by the Forward Air Control Development Unit . Four Hornets from No. 77 Squadron were deployed to protect the US base at Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean between November 2001 and February 2002 , during the early phase of the war in Afghanistan . In March 2006 , the squadron sent a detachment of aircraft to RAAF Base East Sale , Victoria , to assist with security for the Commonwealth Games being held in Melbourne . No. 77 Squadron deployed to the Middle East in September 2015 as part of Operation Okra , Australia 's contribution of the military intervention against ISIL ; it handed over to the next rotation , from No. 3 Squadron , in April 2016 . 
 The Australian government plans to replace the Hornet force with seventy @-@ two Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II fighters . Under the Defence Materiel Organisation 's Project AIR 6000 Phase 2A / B , the first Lightnings will be delivered to the RAAF in late 2018 . Each of No. 81 Wing 's three fighter squadrons will operate sixteen of the new aircraft . No. 77 Squadron is scheduled to begin conversion in 2021 ; RAAF Hornet operations are expected to cease the following year . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 World War II : Milne Bay , Morotai , Borneo 1945 , New Guinea 1943 – 1944 , Darwin 1942 – 1943 , Dutch New Guinea , New Britain 1943 
 Korean War : Korea 1950 – 1953 
 Malayan Emergency and Konfrontasi : Malaya 1948 – 1960 , Malaysia ( Confrontation ) 1962 – 1966 
 = = Aircraft operated = = 
 Curtiss P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk ( March 1942 – September 1945 ) 
 North American P @-@ 51 Mustang ( September 1945 – April 1951 ) 
 Gloster Meteor ( April 1951 – August 1956 ) 
 CAC Sabre ( November 1956 – July 1969 ) 
 Dassault Mirage III ( July 1969 – June 1987 ) 
 Macchi MB @-@ 326 ( January 1985 – June 1987 ) 
 McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet ( June 1987 – current ) 
 Pilatus PC @-@ 9 ( 2000 – 03 ) 
 = Grace Banker = 
 Grace D. Banker ( October 25 , 1892 – September 17 , 1960 ) was a telephone operator who served during World War I ( 1917 – 1918 ) as Chief Operator of telephones for the American Expeditionary Forces ( AEF ) in the U.S. Army Signal Corps . She led thirty @-@ three women telephone operators known popularly as Hello Girls . They were assigned in New York to travel to France to operate telephone switch boards at the war front in Paris , and at Chaumont , Haute @-@ Marne . They also operated the telephone switch boards at First Army headquarters at Ligny @-@ en @-@ <unk> , about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) to the south of Saint @-@ Mihiel , and later during the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive . After her return to civilian life , Banker and her team members were treated as citizen volunteers and initially not given recognition as members of the military . In 1919 , Banker was honoured with the Distinguished Service Medal for her services with the First Army headquarters during the St. Mihiel and Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensives , with a commendation . 
 = = Life = = 
 Banker was born at Passaic , New Jersey on 25 October 1892 . After graduating from Barnard College she joined American Telephone and Telegraph Company ( AT & T ) where she worked as a switchboards instructor . During World War I Banker was chosen to head a team of thirty @-@ three telephone operators of Telephone Unit No. 1 assigned to war duty in France for telephone operations . This was the first group of women who were given the popular name Hello Girls . 
 Banker sailed with her team members from New Jersey on 6 March 1918 , to take up the assignment as chief operator for First Army headquarters in Paris . After arriving with her team in England , the group set sail by ferry across the English Channel . However , bad weather , in the form of thick fog , prevented the ferry from reaching French shores , and it had to be anchored a few miles away to wait for the fog to lift . This location made the vessel an easy target for German bombing ( at that time , one vessel out of four had suffered bombing ) , and the team members remained at full readiness to evacuate the vessel at short notice . The women 's group stayed on deck in the open for forty @-@ eight hours continuously . This situation did not dishearten Banker or her team members , and , as Banker later said : " What good sports girls were in that First Unit ! They took everything in their stride . They were the pioneers " . 
 Upon arrival in Paris , Banker and her team were posted to the headquarters of the Advance Section in Chaumont sur Haute Marne , which was then the headquarters of General John J. Pershing . Five months later , Baker was asked to move to the war front , to the First Army headquarters at Ligny @-@ en @-@ <unk> , south of Saint @-@ Mihiel . On 25 August 1918 , she moved to the war front with only five operators helping her . For this operation at Saint @-@ Mihiel , Banker had to make a choice of the best operators for the job , she selected : Suzanne <unk> , Esther Fresnel , Helen Hill , Berthe Hunt , and Marie Lange . Equipped with gas masks and helmets , the women operated from trenches where the danger was real ; despite this , those not chosen to go felt left out . 
 During offensive operations at Saint @-@ Mihiel , though artillery bombing was in force , Banker and her team of operators manned the switchboards . When the First Army headquarters moved to Bar @-@ le @-@ Duc in September , Banker and her operators had to work in a place which was damaged extensively . They operated even under heavy bombing by German planes , but no team members were injured . They worked under severe weather conditions without heating , and their barracks leaked , and were later gutted , making conditions even harsher . 
 Following the Armistice of 11 November 1918 , fighting ceased . Banker and her team were then ordered to return to Paris . In Paris , Banker was deputed initially to work at the temporary residence of President Woodrow Wilson . As she did not find this job exciting compared to the work at the war front , she accepted an offer to move to the Army of Occupation at Coblenz , Germany ; while there she was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal . 
 After working for twenty months at the war front , in September 1919 Banker and the rest of her team returned home . General Edgar Russel , chief signal officer of the AEF , extolled their service as " indispensable " . Reminiscing about her wartime experience as chief operator , Banker humorously noted that " an afternoon in the switchboard office sometimes sounded like a scene from Alice in Wonderland , where only the initiated can make sense of the proceedings " . She also observed on the confidentiality aspect of her assignment when she was tested by an intelligence officer about her ability to keep a secret , which was about her posting out of the unit . About her work at the war front she said that " the secrecy surrounding their operations gave it an aura of romance and set it apart from the civilian work . " After returning from the war front with her team , she reflected : " We missed the First Army with its code of loyalty and hard work . We were back in the petty squabbles of civilian life where even chief operators had ' tantrums ' and where the wives of civilians attached to the Peace Conference spilled all over Paris in Army cars " . 
 After the war , when they returned to civilian life , Banker and her team members were treated as citizen volunteers and not recognized as members of the military . They were not given a " formal discharge or even a certificate of service " . Banker died on 17 September 1960 , in Scarsdale , New York . In 1977 Congress enacted legislation that gave due recognition to Banker and her team , and treated them as " veterans " . 
 = = Awards = = 
 On 26 May 1919 vide Government order no . 70 , Banker was honoured with the Distinguished Service Medal for her services with the First Army headquarters during the St. Mihiel and Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensives , with the commendation which read : " For exceptional ability ... [ and ] untiring devotion to her exacting duties under trying conditions .... to assure the success of the telephone service during the operations of the First Army against the Saint Michel salient and the exertions to the north of Verdun " . 
 = Ragnar Garrett = 
 Lieutenant General Sir Alwyn Ragnar Garrett , KBE , CB ( 12 February 1900 – 4 November 1977 ) was a senior commander in the Australian Army . He served as Chief of the General Staff ( CGS ) from 1958 to 1960 . Born in Western Australia , Garrett graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1921 . He was adjutant and quartermaster in several regiments of the Australian Light Horse before undertaking staff training in England , which he completed just as the Second World War broke out . Garrett joined the Second Australian Imperial Force soon afterwards , and commanded the 2 / 31st Battalion in England before seeing action with Australian brigades in Greece and Crete in 1941 . Promoted to colonel the following year , he held senior staff positions with I Corps in New Guinea and II Corps on Bougainville in 1944 – 45 . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his staff work . 
 After the war , Garrett served two terms as commandant of the Staff College , Queenscliff , in 1946 – 47 and 1949 – 51 . Between these appointments he was posted to Japan with the British Commonwealth Occupation Force . Promoted major general , he became General Officer Commanding ( GOC ) Western Command in August 1951 , and Deputy Chief of the General Staff in January 1953 . He took over Southern Command as a lieutenant general in October 1954 , and was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1957 . As CGS from March 1958 , Garrett focused on rearmament and reorganisation , initiating the Army 's short @-@ lived restructure into a " pentropic " formation . He was knighted in 1959 . After retiring from the military in June 1960 , Garrett became Honorary Colonel of the Royal Australian Regiment , and was principal of the Australian Administrative Staff College until 1964 . He died at Mornington , Victoria , in 1977 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born on 12 February 1900 at Northam , Western Australia , Alwyn Ragnar Garrett was the son of accountant Alwyn Garrett and his Swedish wife Maria Carolina ( née Wohlfahrt ) . Ragnar attended Guildford Grammar School before entering the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1918 . He graduated in 1921 and was posted to the Australian Light Horse as a lieutenant . In December 1922 , Garrett served as an extra aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the new Governor of South Australia , General Sir Tom Bridges . He was appointed adjutant / quartermaster of the 23rd Light Horse Regiment in November 1922 . In November the following year he was seconded to the British Army , and spent the next twelve months attached to the 2nd Dragoon Guards in Bangalore , India . On his return to Australia in January 1925 , Garrett was reappointed adjutant / quartermaster of the 23rd Light Horse . He married Shirley Lorraine Hunter , a nurse , on 9 September at St Peter 's Anglican Church in the Adelaide suburb of Glenelg ; the couple had a son and a daughter . Garrett became adjutant / quartermaster of the 9th Light Horse Regiment at Jamestown , South Australia , in February 1926 . He was promoted to captain in November 1929 . 
 In March 1930 , Garrett was posted as adjutant / quartermaster to the 3rd Light Horse Regiment at Mount Gambier , South Australia . As a speaker at Mount Gambier 's Anzac Day commemorations on 25 April 1934 , he was reported as warning of the poor state of Australia 's preparedness for war , admonishing : " We shall not have the time that we had before the last war , and we shall not be fighting for our homes thousands of miles away . We shall be fighting at our own back door . That is what we have to prepare for . " In August that year he was transferred to the 4th Light Horse Regiment at Warrnambool , Victoria , as adjutant / quartermaster . Garrett was posted to the staff of Army Headquarters , Melbourne , in March 1936 , and departed for England in November the following year to attend the Staff College , Camberley . He was promoted to major in July 1938 , and returned to Australia upon the outbreak of the Second World War . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Garrett joined the Second Australian Imperial Force in November 1939 , and was appointed brigade major of the 18th Brigade under Brigadier Leslie Morshead in January 1940 . The brigade departed for the Middle East in May but , owing to the military situation following the Fall of France , it was diverted to Britain , arriving in June . Garrett was promoted lieutenant colonel on 16 September and took command of the 2 / 31st Battalion the same day ; he handed over the battalion to Selwyn Porter in February 1941 , and departed England for the Middle East . He saw active service with the 19th Brigade and Savige Force in Greece and Crete , under Brigadier Stanley Savige . Returning to Australia , Garrett was promoted to temporary colonel in April 1942 and became senior operations officer in the 1st Armoured Division , which served as a garrison force in case of Japanese invasion . He was posted to Army Headquarters , Melbourne , in October as Director of Armoured Fighting Vehicles . 
 In September 1943 , Garrett was appointed General Staff Officer Grade 1 ( Operations ) of I Corps under Lieutenant General Sir Edmund Herring in New Guinea . Three months later he was promoted temporary brigadier and became Brigadier General Staff of I Corps . He continued to serve in that position as I Corps was redesignated II Corps in April 1944 , New Guinea Force the following month , and finally II Corps again in October 1944 for the campaign on Bougainville under Lieutenant General Savige . Garrett was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his " skill , direction , and supervision " in having " prepared and guided all staff work to meet every conceivable requirement in the complete reorganisation of forces in New Guinea " ; the honour was promulgated in The London Gazette on 19 July 1945 . He was responsible for interrogating the first Japanese peace envoy to make contact with the Australians on Bougainville , on 18 August 1945 , and was present when the instrument of surrender was signed on 8 September . In November 1945 , Garrett took command of the 8th Brigade in New Guinea . He oversaw the brigade 's return to Australia prior to its disbandment in March 1946 . His " exceptional service in the field " in the South West Pacific Area earned him another mention in despatches , which was gazetted on 6 March 1947 and backdated to 2 November 1946 . 
