 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Following a three @-@ month course at Staff College , Camberley , Garrett was appointed commandant of the Staff College , Queenscliff , Victoria , in June 1946 . He was posted to Japan in March 1947 , becoming Brigadier @-@ in @-@ Charge of Administration for the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in July . The size and scope of the occupation declined considerably during his tour , which finished in October 1949 . Approximately 2 @,@ 400 Australians , most from the 67th Battalion , remained by late 1948 , compared to 11 @,@ 000 in October 1946 . In December 1949 , Garrett resumed command of the Staff College , Queenscliff . Promoted temporary major general , he was appointed General Officer Commanding ( GOC ) Western Command , which covered the state of Western Australia , in August 1951 . He became Deputy Chief of the General Staff in February 1953 . 
 In December 1953 , Garrett succeeded Major General Eric Woodward as Adjutant @-@ General and Second Military Member of the Military Board . He was promoted temporary lieutenant general in October 1954 and appointed GOC Southern Command , which covered Victoria , South Australia , and Tasmania and was , as of April 1953 , the superior headquarters for several major Citizen Military Forces ( CMF ) formations including the 3rd Infantry Division , the 4th and 6th Infantry Brigades , the 2nd Armoured Brigade , and two artillery groups . His elevation to lieutenant general was made permanent in December 1954 . Garrett was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the Queen 's Birthday Honours on 13 June 1957 . He succeeded Lieutenant General Sir Henry Wells as Chief of the General Staff ( CGS ) on 23 March 1958 . Garrett was raised to Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1959 New Year Honours . 
 The Army underwent significant change during Garrett 's term as CGS . In March 1959 , he chaired the first meeting of the Military Board at the new Army Headquarters in Canberra , following its move from Melbourne . That August , he announced to his senior officers a radical reorganisation of the Army that would strengthen the regular forces and reduce reliance on the CMF , which since Federation had formed the backbone of Australia 's military . This plan included the abolition of National Service , to which the Federal government had already agreed , and the introduction of a " pentropic " divisional structure . Garrett championed the pentropic structure to overcome what he saw as the weakness of the traditional battalion for overseas deployments , and to ensure compatibility with the US Army 's <unk> formations . The Australian Army 's traditional " triangular " divisional structure of three infantry battalions under a brigade headquarters was to be replaced with an organisation consisting of five larger battalions ( hence " pentropic " ) without a brigade layer between division and battalion headquarters . The plan was opposed by CMF officers as it would result in the disbandment of the citizens ' brigades and many of the old militia battalions . Under the new structure the CMF would not only shrink , its units would lose traditional ties to local communities through the establishment of new multi @-@ battalion state @-@ based regiments , leading to suspicions that the entire process was designed to demolish the CMF . 
 Garrett was concerned not only with changing the Army 's organisation but with upgrading its equipment ; by the early 1960s the Army would acquire the FN 7.62mm rifle , the M60 machine gun , the M101 105mm howitzer , the M113 armoured personnel carrier , and new mortars and radios . He also advocated strongly for the Army to operate its own helicopters and light aircraft ; the Australian Army Aviation Corps was eventually established in July 1968 . Garrett was scheduled to retire from the Army on his sixtieth birthday in February 1960 but the government extended his term . He retired on 30 June 1960 and was succeeded by Lieutenant General Reg Pollard , whom Garrett had recommended for the post in the face of opposition from the Minister for the Army , John Cramer , who had attempted to appoint Major General Ivan Dougherty , a retired CMF officer . Although Garrett 's proposed reorganisation of the Army along pentropic lines went ahead under Pollard , it proved short @-@ lived . The US Army abandoned the system in June 1961 , and the Australian Army returned to the triangular formation following a review commissioned by Pollard 's successor as CGS , Lieutenant General Sir John Wilton , in October 1964 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Upon retiring from the military , Garrett became principal of the Australian Administrative Staff College , a private institution delivering courses to senior business and government personnel at Mount Eliza , Victoria . During his four @-@ year tenure , he lobbied for the reintroduction of conscription , and when the Federal government brought in a new selective service scheme in 1965 , he was invited to draw the first ballot of names . Garrett also advocated that the Army should have a division ready for war at all times . He served as honorary colonel of the Royal Australian Regiment and the Royal Western Australia Regiment from 1960 until 1965 , when he was appointed Chairman of the Western Australian Coastal Shipping Commission , a position he held until 1970 . He died on 4 November 1977 at Mornington , Victoria , and was cremated . His wife had died earlier , and he was survived by his two children . 
 = OverClocked ReMix = 
 OverClocked ReMix , also known as OC ReMix and OCR , is a non @-@ commercial organization dedicated to preserving and paying tribute to video game music through arranging and re @-@ interpreting the songs with new technology and software , as well as by various traditional means . The primary focus of OC ReMix is its website which offers thousands of free fan @-@ made video game music arrangements , information on game music and composers , resources for aspiring artists , and a community forum for video game music fans . 
 The webmaster of OverClocked ReMix is David W. Lloyd ( a.k.a. <unk> ) , who coined the word " ReMix " to refer to interpretive arrangements , as opposed to a remix which typically involves alterations to master recordings . Ambiguity regarding the term ReMix is unintentional , since the organization is dedicated to distinctive rearrangements of video game themes , not to arrangements involving changing minor details or plagiarizing the work of others . 
 = = History = = 
 Lloyd began the organization under the name of DJ Pretzel 's OverClocked ReMix in December 1999 as a spin @-@ off of OverClocked , his 3D webcomic about playing and emulating video games . The format was derived from Commodore 64 arrangement website <unk> ( then a host for many fan arrangements ) ; Lloyd chose to expand the focus to all games regardless of game system . Originally coded in basic HTML and sporting an orange color scheme , the site underwent a conversion to a database @-@ driven system in 2001 , as well as visual redesigns in 2001 ( blue ) , 2002 ( purple ) and its current design in 2004 ( silver & orange ) . OC ReMix was located at the <unk> <unk> before moving to <unk> in July 2003 . Both domains were hosted for several years by <unk> , with OCR eventually becoming self @-@ funded and switching to dedicated hosting with <unk> in late 2006 . Lloyd registered OverClocked ReMix as a limited liability company in 2007 . 
 Originally , music submissions were evaluated solely by David W. Lloyd . To better accommodate the volume of music submissions and improve selection consistency , a panel of judges , composed of accomplished artists and contributors to the community , was instituted in early 2002 to assist Lloyd in music selection . Earlier in 2002 , a dispute over administrative decisions , including the proposal of a judges panel , caused artists <unk> , <unk> , and mp to leave OCR to found <unk> , and they demanded that their ReMixes be removed , to which Lloyd agreed . Other artists who left asked that their works stay , although they would not submit future works . Subsequently , some who removed their ReMixes from the site requested to return , and the request was granted with the provision that they not remove their work from the site again . OC ReMix judge Larry Oji ( a.k.a. <unk> ) became head submissions evaluator for the organization in June 2006 , providing initial evaluation of all submissions and freeing up Lloyd 's time to develop the site . 
 The site 's first fan convention appearance was Otakon 2006 in Baltimore , Maryland . In April 2008 , Lloyd and Oji joined Six Apart 's Anil Dash , <unk> 's Matt Haughey , Reddit 's Alexis Ohanian and <unk> 's Drew Curtis for a panel discussion on virtual communities at Internet meme convention , <unk> , co @-@ sponsored by Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . 
 = = Main features = = 
 There have been more than 3 @,@ 000 " ReMixes " hosted on the site submitted by more than 900 " ReMixers " from a variety of genres . ReMixes are available individually and through bundled BitTorrent distributions , and are searchable through a database of games , composers , companies , systems and ReMixers . ReMixes are released under a non @-@ commercial , attribution @-@ requiring content policy . 
 The site approves ReMixes based on standards and guidelines encouraging arrangement creativity and capable production quality . Throughout the years , more than 150 works have been removed after initially being admitted , generally due to stricter enforcement of the site 's standards after the admission of the work . A common violation is a " MIDI rip " , which involves obtaining a MIDI transcription of the source material , making minor modifications to it , and passing it off as one 's own work . Other violations include stolen or unoriginal recordings , cover versions , arrangements which differ so far from the source material as to be unrecognizable , and obvious sub @-@ par execution . The website currently hosts several digital albums which arrange entire game soundtracks , created through community collaboration , with new albums added periodically . The site also maintains a database of the skills of members of its community to encourage artist collaboration . Lloyd and other staff also conduct interviews with prolific ReMixers , video game music composers and celebrities about video game music creation . 
 OverClocked ReMix 's discussion forums and IRC channel are where the majority of community interaction occurs . Areas of discussion include boards devoted to reviews , works in progress , projects , and competitions , as well as more general boards for discussion of topics less related to remixing . 
 = = Albums and other projects = = 
 In addition to hosting individual files , OC ReMix also publishes albums of entire game soundtracks , created as collaboration among groups of remixers ; as of 2016 , it has released over 70 albums . 
 The musicians of OverClocked ReMix were chosen to handle the Super Street Fighter II Turbo HD Remix soundtrack after Capcom U.S.A. associate producer Rey Jimenez heard the organization 's 2006 Super Street Fighter II Turbo tribute album Blood on the Asphalt . Entitled OC ReMix : Super Street Fighter II Turbo HD Remix Official Soundtrack , the complete 66 @-@ track album was freely released at OverClocked ReMix . Along with several new arrangements , edited versions of Blood on the Asphalt tracks and prior remixes from the site comprise the soundtrack . The remixers arranged the music based on knowledge of the Street Fighter II series alone , as the music for the game was completed before the visuals and gameplay . OC ReMix founder David " <unk> " Lloyd directed the soundtrack and served as the organization 's contact with Capcom " to ensure that working with a large fan community was as close as possible for Capcom to working with a single composer " . 
 Jimenez praised HD Remix 's music as " above and beyond our expectations " and OC ReMix 's efforts as " one of the most rewarding aspects of working on SF HD Remix " . Capcom 's Vice @-@ President of Strategic Planning & Business Development , Christian Svensson , described the soundtrack as " impactful " after guests , to whom he showed a demo of the game , praised the remixed music before any other aspect of the demo . In its review of HD Remix , gaming & entertainment website IGN commended OC ReMix 's work as " a great tribute to the original soundtrack " . Other entities with favorable reviews of the soundtrack included Eurogamer , GameSpot , Official Xbox Magazine , GamesRadar , 1UP.com , as well as long @-@ time game composer " The Fat Man " George Sanger , who referred to the Capcom @-@ OC ReMix collaboration as " Game Audio 2 @.@ 0 " . 
 OC ReMix has freely released official indie game soundtracks for titles including iOS game Trenches , the Xbox Live Arcade game Return All Robots ! , and Missile Master , Episode 1 : Invasion . In addition to its free albums , the site partnered with Capcom to release OC ReMix 's first commercial album , For Everlasting Peace : 25 Years of Mega Man featuring licensed arrangements of various Mega Man soundtracks . 
 The website has an associated record label , OverClocked Records , through which they sell licensed songs and albums . On July 15 , 2015 , they published their first officially licensed remix , an arrangement of " Song of the Ancients " from Nier . It was made available to stream or purchase . 
 In addition to the albums and remixes , the OverClocked ReMix community has undertaken other projects in efforts to enhance or promote its main website . Some , such as an official Winamp skin , the OverClocked <unk> download manager , the <unk> podcast , and the VG Frequency news blog were abandoned after long periods of inactivity . Among the successful projects are <unk> , a Winamp plugin bundle to make chiptunes and video game music sound formats more accessible , and OCR Radio , an endorsed <unk> internet radio stream of OC ReMixes that is a part of <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The community has grown through word of mouth and mention of the website in several publications and on several websites . The most influential early coverage of the site came in a mid @-@ 2002 issue of Electronic Gaming Monthly . OC ReMix has since been covered in reports by sources such as G4techTV , PC Gamer magazine , 1UP.com , Game Informer magazine , Nintendo Power magazine , Ars Technica , Minnesota Public Radio , BBC Radio 1 , Hyper magazine , and others . 
 = = = Industry reaction = = = 
 According to a 2005 interview , the organization has never received negative feedback from a game composer or game publisher , and Lloyd stated , " Like all communities surrounding fan works , we 're out , first and foremost , to honor that which we love , and I think the concept and goals have been well received all around . " 
 Several video game industry professionals have praised the OC ReMixes of their compositions , including Alexander Brandon ( Tyrian / Unreal Tournament / Deus Ex ) , Barry Leitch ( Top Gear ) , Nicholas Varley ( <unk> ) , and David Wise ( Donkey Kong Country ) . OverClocked ReMix has also been praised for its work by several industry figures including Doom lead designer John Romero , Tommy Tallarico , " The Fat Man " George Sanger , and Jeremy Soule . Contra 4 associate producer Tomm Hulett stated he hoped the game 's music , scored by Jake " <unk> " Kaufman , would be arranged for OC ReMix in the future . 
 In late 2002 , the first OC ReMix by a veteran professional game composer was released , The 7th Guest " Fat Dance " by " The Fat Man " George Sanger . In early 2004 , this was followed by the second ReMix of its kind , Final Fantasy VI " Squaresoft Variation " by Jeremy Soule , who dedicated the arrangement to both OC ReMix founder David W. Lloyd and Final Fantasy series composer Nobuo Uematsu . In 2005 , Sanger provided another ReMix performed alongside Team Fat colleagues and game composers , Dave Govett , Joe McDermott and K. Weston Phelan , entitled Wing Commander " Wing Theme Surf . " Tommy Tallarico Studios ' Earthworm Jim Anthology marked the first release of OC ReMixes on a commercial video game music album in late 2006 . In October 2009 , composer Alexander Brandon and <unk> Jimmy " Big Giant Circles " Hinson collaborated to arrange a track Brandon composed for the game Deus Ex . In March 2010 , OC ReMix released its Donkey Kong Country 2 ReMix album , Serious Monkey Business , featuring a closing track performed by the game 's original composer , David Wise , alongside Grant Kirkhope and Robin Beanland , three composers with ties to Rare 's Donkey Kong Country / Land franchise . 
 Several artists beginning as amateurs , many directly drawn to video game music arrangement by OC ReMix , have seen their interest in video game music catalyze into professional music opportunities , including Dain " <unk> " Olsen ( Dance Dance Revolution <unk> 2 ) , Jillian " <unk> " Aversa ( Civilization IV : Beyond the Sword ) , Andrew " zircon " Aversa ( Monkey Island 2 Special Edition : LeChuck 's Revenge ) , Jimmy " Big Giant Circles " Hinson ( Mass Effect 2 ) and Danny Baranowsky ( Super Meat Boy ) . 
 Beginning in 2008 , at the invitation of Tommy Tallarico , OC ReMix promotional CDs have been given away as contest prizes at every performance of orchestral game music concert series , Video Games Live ; OC ReMixes were played in the concert hall before the show at the June 29 and June 30 , 2007 Kennedy Center performances in Washington , D.C. 
 = Harriman ( Erie Railroad station ) = 
 Harriman Station , formerly known as Turner Station until 1910 , was the first station on the Erie Railroad Main Line west of Newburgh Junction tower in Harriman , New York . Built on the side of Grove Street in Harriman , the station depot was constructed originally as Turner Station in 1838 , as a three story hotel @-@ train station combination . This station caught fire in 1873 and was replaced by a one @-@ story wooden structure . That structure survived as long as its predecessor before it began decaying and was replaced in 1911 with a new station on land donated by the widow of Edward Henry Harriman . A new one @-@ story structure was built on the land . The station was maintained as a one @-@ story depot with a large monument to the side dedicated to the work of Charles Minot . Minot was a director of the Erie Railroad who , in 1851 , while his train was stopped at Turner , made the first railroad call by telegraph . 
 The station depot remained in use by the Erie until October 1960 , when that was folded into the Erie @-@ Lackawanna Railroad , which itself would fold in April 1976 , as it was absorbed into the Consolidated Rail Corporation ( Conrail ) . Conrail maintained passenger services until 1983 , when that job was taken over by Metro @-@ North Railroad . On April 18 , 1983 , the last passenger train left the Harriman station , as Conrail and Metro @-@ North abandoned the tracks in favor of using the Graham Line ( a high @-@ speed freight line ) for passenger and freight service . At that time , a new park & ride off of New York State Route 17 in Harriman opened for the newly realigned passenger service along the ex @-@ Graham Line . 
 The station depot remained on its concrete platform when the tracks were torn up on the old main line . In 1996 , workers removed the plaque attached to the Minot monument , but it was soon returned . However , the plaque was stolen shortly afterward and has not been recovered . The station depot itself was left in decrepit condition , and in 2006 , the village of Harriman 's building inspector ordered Norfolk Southern Railroad ( the successor to Conrail and who owned the right @-@ of @-@ way ) to either restore the building or demolish it . Norfolk Southern followed through with a demolition permit and in May 2006 , the station depot was demolished by a front loader . The station remains were taken to a dump in Hillburn , New York . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First station constructed = = = 
 The first station in Harriman , New York , then known as Turner , was first constructed around 1838 by Peter Turner , as one of the many stretches of the New York and Lake Erie Railroad was constructed through town . The station itself was a 400 feet ( 120 m ) long brick depot , three stories tall and topped with a French roof . The station sat alongside the railroad tracks and was called the Orange Hotel . The dining room of the new structure was able to hold 500 people at a time and accommodate them with good food . During planning of the Erie , there was some concern to whether or not the railroad would work its way through Harriman at all , instead bypassing nearby Goshen and Middletown in favor of a terminus at Newburgh , also on the Hudson River . Train service to Harriman began in 1841 , when the New York and Lake Erie ran its first trains on June 30 , 1841 from Piermont @-@ on @-@ Hudson , the determined eastern terminus , to Goshen , the western end . 
 Construction progressed on the Erie Railroad , and by the end of 1841 , grading from Middletown to Goshen was in progress and 410 of the 447 miles ( 719 km ) chartered for the new railroad was contracted . The railroad had been running trains on the 46 miles ( 74 km ) railroad line , carrying about 250 passengers per day . The new railroad was completed in April 1851 at its intended length to Dunkirk on Lake Erie . On May 12 , 1851 , just about a month after the completion , a completion gala was held from Washington D.C .. Then @-@ president Millard Fillmore and several members of his cabinet , along with several former governors of New York , attended . Several other distinguished individuals came from around the United States . On May 14 , the tour arrived in New York City and began their trip on the first 447 miles ( 719 km ) ride at Piermont at 7 : 45 that morning . The Fillmore train arrived at Dunkirk just past 4 : 00 pm the next afternoon . 
 = = = Charles Minot and the telegraph = = = 
 In 1847 , Ezra Cornell of Ithaca , New York worked to expand telegraphic communication through the New York and Lake Erie Railroad right @-@ of @-@ way with the Western Union Telegraph Company , saving a telegraph line he built from New York City to Fredonia . The new telegraph was an instant hit , and was commonly used for gossip and casual chatting . The then @-@ superintendent of the New York and Lake Erie , Charles Minot , looked to expand this new technology with the railroad . He developed a system using telegraphs for train dispatches , for use when trains would want to pass one another along the line , such as at stations . Two @-@ letter telegraph codes were designated , and the new modern system was set up . For the ten years of the new railroad 's existence , passengers had been disgusted as trains waited for hours as another train had to pass them . This new system would relieve this issue . 
 On September 22 , 1851 , Minot was in a parked passenger train at Turner Station . He glanced out the window of the train and saw the new telegraph wires . Departing the train , Minot ran into the station , got on the new telegraph , and wired the next station along the line , Monroe , to see if the eastbound train to Piermont @-@ on @-@ Hudson had gone past . The station agent said no . At that point , Minot ordered the engineer of the train to proceed on their way to Goshen . The engineer refused to take Minot 's order , and instead , Minot got into the cab car himself and drove the train himself to Port Jervis , hours ahead of the planned scheduled time of arrival . This was the second of the several " firsts " the Erie Railroad created in its time , along with the shipment of milk by rail at Chester station in 1842 . The use of the telegraph and Minot 's system remained until 1888 , when a new system of block signaling , developed by the competitor Pennsylvania Railroad , helped expand Minot 's use of telecommunications to control rail traffic . 
 = = = Naming controversy = = = 
 Around 6 : 30 pm on the evening of Friday , December 26 , 1873 , the three @-@ story Orange Hotel station depot caught fire . Some staff of the re @-@ christened Erie Railroad were examining a room in the roof of the building , and upon looking into it , found it engulfed in smoke . The fire quickly spread , consuming the entire story . There was a lull , but the building re @-@ ignited as flames continued through the building . The Mansard roof on top of the building was destroyed by the flames . No fire @-@ ridding materials to douse the blaze were available to staff and no one could get near the building to inspect where the flames were . The flames finally destroyed the entire building , and just two hours after the fire was discovered , the walls began to collapse on the structure . Within a half @-@ hour , the entire hotel / depot had collapsed and was a pile of brick ruins . Train service on the Erie main line was disrupted for several hours due to the fire and station depot collapse . A later study determined the station depot burned down due to a defective flue . 
 The station depot was replaced by a wooden one @-@ story depot , referred to by locals as a shack , along the side of the tracks in downtown Turner . The new station itself lasted around the same amount of time that its predecessor station depot had ; however , the widow of Edward Henry Harriman ( d . September 9 , 1909 ) , a local railroad executive whose Arden estate was in the nearby hills , donated land in February 1910 in a different portion of Turner to build a brand new station to the east . The old one @-@ story depot had a roof and structural supports that were aging and on the verge of collapsing to the ground . 
 Plans for a new station didn 't come without controversy though , as in 1910 with the death of E.H. Harriman , there was a proposal by the Turner Village Improvement Association to rename the borough from Turner to Harriman as an honor to the late executive . On May 25 , 1910 , the association voted 58 to 13 to change the name . Harriman 's widow said if they changed the name , she 'd donate $ 25 @,@ 000 ( 1910 USD , equivalent to $ 635 thousand in 2016 ) to help improvement the look and design of the village and $ 6 @,@ 000 ( 1910 USD , equivalent to $ 152 thousand in 2016 ) more for a brand @-@ new railroad station . It was proposed that by having the Erie Railroad change the station name on the decrepit depot from Turner to Harriman , the local Post Office would adopt the new name almost immediately . Erie conductors were told upon approaching Turner station to call the name Harriman . However , a local priest at the forefront of the controversy , Father <unk> , thought the entire situation regarding the train from New York was a joke . To add to the annoyance of the priest , the old sign attached to the 1873 depot was replaced by a brand new one saying " Harriman " . 
 On the morning of May 26 , the Erie Railroad sent a statement out from Pavonia Terminal in Jersey City , New Jersey to disregard the order from the previous day . The new sign came down instantly and the conductors continued to call the station Turner once again . Old time locals felt the name Turner had more value to them and shouldn 't be touched . A self @-@ appointed committee run by the priest proposed a meeting on Saturday , June 4 , 1910 at nearby Gillette Hall to protest the name change . The priest also offered that if the name was to remain Turner 's , he would contribute $ 500 towards the construction of a new station . The post office also said they would remain named Turner even if the signage on the Erie Railroad station went back to the Harriman name . Sometime during the night between June 1 and June 2 , the Erie Railroad took the station depot sign for Turner down once again and re @-@ attached the Harriman sign to the station depot . Local resolutions were sent to the Erie showing citizens ' displeasure at changing the signage once again . The order from the Erie stated that beginning on July 15 , the station name would remain " Harriman " permanently . Father <unk> returned to his outrage and continued to go to the press and give interviews on the issue at hand . To wrap the issue up , a sign in the front of the local church proclaiming " LONG LIVE <unk> " was destroyed . This hurt the enthusiasm of locals , who suggested renaming the local Arden station near the Harriman estate instead . 
 = = = New station opens at " Harriman " = = = 
 A year after the great naming controversy and the station permanently being established as Harriman , construction began on a new station to replace the " disgraceful shack " that residents called Harriman . That year a new station , built with the $ 6 @,@ 000 from Edward Henry Harriman 's widow , was constructed of brick with a stucco outlier . The roof of the one story depot was built with shingles , which helped it match the Tudor @-@ style used at the Tuxedo station eleven miles eastbound . The station , which was grounded on a large and wide concrete platform that also served as the new station platform , was built on Grove Street and had measurements of 20 ' x 26 @.@ 5 ' x 19 ' , common for a Type @-@ 9 Erie Railroad station design . Just a year after the new station depot opened , the Erie honored the late Charles Minot on May 2 , 1912 at the new station with a large ceremony attend by Mrs. Harriman , Erie president Frederick Underwood , several relatives to Minot , and other distinguished guests . At the ceremony , Minot 's assistance to the railroad community was honored and a bronze tablet on a stone backing was unveiled as a monument to him . 
 At this point , the Erie Railroad continued on with a new station at Harriman , which remained prosperous for years to come . In June 1931 , James Gorney , a resident of Pine Island , allegedly attempted to rob the station and station agent . Harriman police shot Gorney in the leg , which was crippling enough that it required amputation of the leg . His lawyer , who got him off third @-@ degree burglary charges and several acquittals , also negotiated a payment of $ 20 @,@ 000 to Gorney from Harriman for the pain and suffering of the amputated leg , despite the attempted crime he was shot for . The jury deliberated for five hours before reaching a verdict of awarding Gorney the money . 
 = = = End of service and demolition = = = 
 Over the ensuing decades , the Erie Railroad fell into debt along with its competitor , the Delaware , Lackawanna and Western Railroad . On September 16 , 1960 , the Interstate Commerce Commission approved the railroads to go forward with a merger , creating the new Erie @-@ Lackawanna Railroad on October 15 , 1960 . The new railroad lasted only 16 years . In 1976 , the Erie Lackawanna and several other large railroad companies were merged into the newly formed federal Consolidated Rail Corporation ( Conrail ) . At this point , stations had to fight for survival . The station depot at Harriman has been closed and boarded up since at least 1970 . Passenger train service , however , remained intact through the early 1980s . 
 In 1983 , the station was finally closed when Conrail and the newly formed Metro @-@ North Railroad announced that the new stations along the Erie 's former high speed freight line , the Graham Line , would take over freight and passenger service . Trains to Harriman would stop at a new park @-@ and @-@ ride built to the south . The former 1911 station depot , however , remained standing until 2006 , when the Harriman village building inspector forced the new owners of the right @-@ of @-@ way for the old main line , Norfolk Southern , to either revamp or demolish the former station depot . The railway chose the latter , and in May 2006 , a excavator tore down the 1911 depot , with the remains taken to a dump in nearby Hillburn . 
 = = Cited books = = 
 Hungerford , Edward ( 1946 ) . Men of Erie . Kingsport , Tennessee : Random House . OCLC <unk> . 
 <unk> , George P. ( 1999 ) . The Story of Telecommunications . Macon , Georgia : Mercer University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 659 @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Robert J. ( 2006 ) . Erie Railroad Facilities ( In Color ) . Volume 2 : New York . Scotch Plains , New Jersey : Morning Sun Books Inc . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 196 @-@ 2 . 
 = Great Fire of New York ( 1776 ) = 
 The Great Fire of New York was a devastating fire that burned through the night of September 21 , 1776 , on the West Side of what then constituted New York City at the southern end of the island of Manhattan . It broke out in the early days of the military occupation of the city by British forces during the American Revolutionary War . 
 The fire destroyed about one third of the city and some unburned parts of the city were plundered . Many people believed or assumed that one or more people deliberately started the fire , for a variety of different reasons . British leaders accused revolutionaries acting within the city , and many residents assumed that one side or the other had started it . The fire had long @-@ term effects on the British occupation of the city , which did not end until 1783 . 
 = = Background = = 
 When the American Revolutionary War broke out in April 1775 , the city of New York was already an important center of business , but had not yet become a sprawling metropolis . It occupied only the lower portion of the island of Manhattan , and had a population of approximately 25 @,@ 000 . Before the war began , the Province of New York was politically divided , with active Patriot organizations and a colonial assembly that was strongly Loyalist . After Lexington and Concord , Patriots seized control of the city , and began arresting and expelling Loyalists . 
 Early in the summer of 1776 , when the war was still in its early stages , British general , William Howe embarked on a campaign to gain control of the city and its militarily important harbor . After occupying Staten Island in July , he launched a successful attack on Long Island in late August , assisted by naval forces under the command of his brother , Admiral Lord Richard Howe . American general , George Washington recognized the inevitability of the capture of New York City , and withdrew the bulk of his army about 10 miles ( 16 km ) north to Harlem Heights . Several people , including General Nathanael Greene and New York 's John Jay advocated burning the city down to deny its benefits to the British . Washington laid the question before the Second Continental Congress , which rejected the idea : " it should in no event be damaged " . 
 On September 15 , 1776 , British forces under Howe landed on Manhattan . The next morning , some British troops marched toward Harlem , where the two armies clashed again , while others marched into the city . 
 A civilian exodus from the city had begun well before the British fleet arrived in the harbor . The arrival the previous February of the first Continental Army troops in the city had prompted some people to pack up and leave , including Loyalists who were specifically targeted by the army and Patriots . The capture of Long Island had only accelerated the abandonment of the city . During the Continental Army 's presence in the city , many abandoned buildings were appropriated for the army 's use . When the British arrived in the city , the tables were turned , and the property of Patriots was confiscated for the British army 's use . Despite this , housing and other demands of the military occupation significantly strained the city 's available building stock . 
 = = Fire = = 
 In the early morning hours of September 21 , 1776 , a fire broke out in the city . According to the eyewitness account of John Joseph Henry , an American prisoner aboard the HMS Pearl , it began in the Fighting Cocks Tavern , near Whitehall Slip . <unk> by dry weather and strong winds , the flames spread north and west , moving rapidly among tightly packed homes and businesses . Residents poured into the streets , clutching what possessions they could , and found refuge on the grassy town commons ( today , City Hall Park ) . The fire crossed Broadway near Beaver Street , and then burned most of the city between Broadway and the Hudson River . The fire raged into the daylight hours , and was stopped as much by changes in the wind as by the actions of some of the citizenry and British marines sent , according to Henry , " in aid of the inhabitants . " It may also have been stopped by the relatively undeveloped property of King 's College , located at the northern end of the fire @-@ damaged area . The total number of buildings destroyed is not known with precision ; estimates range from 400 to 1 @,@ 000 , between 10 and 25 percent of the 4 @,@ 000 city buildings . Among the buildings destroyed was Trinity Church ; St. Paul 's Chapel survived . 
 = = Suspicions of arson = = 
 Howe 's report to London implied that the fire was deliberately set : " a most horrid attempt was made by a number of wretches to burn the town " . Royal Governor William Tryon suspected that Washington was responsible , writing that " Many circumstances lead to conjecture that Mr. Washington was privy to this villainous act " and that " some officers of his army were found concealed in the city " . Many Americans also assumed that the fire was the work of Patriot arsonists . John Joseph Henry recorded accounts of marines returning to the Pearl after fighting the fire in which men were " caught in the act of firing the houses . " 
 Some Americans accused the British of setting the fire so that the city might be plundered . A Hessian major noted that some who fought the blaze managed to " pay themselves well by plundering other houses near by that were not on fire . " 
 Washington wrote to John Hancock on September 22 , specifically denying knowledge of the fire 's cause . In a letter to his cousin Lund , Washington wrote , " Providence — or some good honest fellow , has done more for us than we were disposed to do for ourselves " . 
 According to historian Barnet Schecter , no accusation of arson has withstood scrutiny . The strongest circumstantial evidence in favor of arson theories is the fact that the fire appeared to start in multiple places . However , contemporary accounts explain that burning flakes from wooden roof shingles spread the fire . One diarist wrote that , " the flames were communicated to several houses " by these flakes " carried by the wind to some distance " . 
 The British interrogated more than 200 suspects , but no charges were ever made . Coincidentally , Nathan Hale , an American captain engaged in spying for Washington , was arrested in Queens the day the fire started . Rumors attempting to link him to the fires have never been substantiated ; there is nothing indicating that he was arrested ( and eventually hanged ) for anything other than espionage . 
 = = Effect on British occupation = = 
 Major General James Robertson confiscated surviving uninhabited homes of known Patriots and assigned them to British officers . Churches , other than the state churches ( Church of England ) were converted into prisons , infirmaries , or barracks . Some of the common soldiers were billeted with civilian families . There was a great influx of Loyalist refugees into the city resulting in further overcrowding , and many of these returning and additional Loyalists from Patriot @-@ controlled areas encamped in squalid tent cities on the charred ruins . The fire convinced the British to put the city under martial law rather than returning it to civilian authorities . Crime and poor sanitation were persistent problems during the British occupation , which did not end until they evacuated the city in November 1783 . 
 = Die Forelle = 
 " Die Forelle " ( German for " The Trout " ) , Op. 32 , D 550 @.@ is a lied , or song , composed in early 1817 for solo voice and piano with music by Austrian composer Franz Schubert ( 1797 – 1828 ) . Schubert chose to set the text of a poem by Christian Friedrich Daniel Schubart , first published in the Schwäbischer <unk> in 1783 . The full poem tells the story of a trout being caught by a fisherman , but in its final stanza reveals its purpose as a moral piece warning young women to guard against young men . When Schubert set the poem to music , he removed the last verse , which contained the moral , changing the song 's focus and enabling it to be sung by male or female singers . Schubert produced six subsequent copies of the work , all with minor variations . 
 Schubert wrote " Die Forelle " in the single key of D @-@ flat major with a varied ( or modified ) strophic form . The first two verses have the same structure but change for the final verse to give a musical impression of the trout being caught . In the Deutsch catalogue of Schubert 's works it is number 550 , or D. 550 . The musicologist Marjorie Wing Hirsch describes its type in the Schubert lieder as a " lyrical song with <unk> of dramatic traits " . 
 The song was popular with contemporary audiences , which led to Schubert being commissioned to write a piece of chamber music based on the song . This commission resulted in the Trout Quintet ( D. 667 ) , in which a set of variations of " Die Forelle " are present in the fourth movement . 
 = = Context = = 
 The lyrics of the lied are from a poem by Christian Friedrich Daniel Schubart . Opinion is divided on his abilities : The Musical Times considers him to be " one of the feeblest poets " whose work was used by Schubert , and comments that he " was content with <unk> pretty ideas " , while the singer and author Dietrich Fischer @-@ Dieskau considered Schubart to be " a very talented poet , musician and orator " . Schubart wrote " Die Forelle " in 1782 , while imprisoned in the fortress of <unk> ; he was a prisoner there from 1777 to 1787 for insulting the mistress of Charles Eugene , Duke of Württemberg . The poem was published in the Schwäbischer <unk> of 1783 , consisting of four stanzas . 
 The Schubert scholar John Reed thought the poem to be " sentimental " and " feeble " , with the final stanza of the poem consisting of a " smug moral " that " pointedly advises young girls to be on their guard against young men with rods " . The academic Thomas Kramer observes that " Die Forelle " is " somewhat unusual with its mock @-@ naive pretense of being about a bona fide fish " , whereas he describes it as " a sexual parable " . Fischer @-@ Dieskau saw the poem as " didactic ... with its Baroque moral " . Schubert did not set this final stanza , however , and instead concentrated on a person 's observation of the trout and the reaction to its being caught by a fisherman . 
 = = Creation = = 
 In 1815 Schubert wrote a series of twenty songs based on the works of Ludwig Gotthard <unk> ( 1758 – 1818 ) . Among them was " Die <unk> " ( D 229 ) , written in July that year ; John Reed sees the song as a forerunner to " Die Forelle " , observing that " Die <unk> " and other similar songs , " convey an intensity of feeling that belies their small scale " . From the following year to 1821 Schubert composed four songs using the poems of Schubart , " An den Tod " ( <unk> ) , " An mein Klavier " ( <unk> ) , " Die Forelle " ( <unk> ) and " <unk> auf einen Soldaten " ( <unk> ) . Although the first draft of " Die Forelle " was lost and the exact date of composition is unknown , the lied is known to have been written in early 1817 , the same year he composed " Der Tod und das Mädchen " and " An die Musik " . 
 After Schubert completed the song , one of his friends , Johann Leopold Ebner , recounted that Schubert was told that " Die Forelle " unconsciously quoted Beethoven 's <unk> Overture ; on hearing the comparison , Schubert decided to destroy the manuscript , but he was stopped by Ebner and others . On 9 December 1820 the song was published in a supplement to the Wiener Zeitung , along with a number of others of Schubert 's lieder . He received no payment for publishing his songs , but was provided with free publicity . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Die Forelle " is written for solo voice and piano in the key of D @-@ flat major . The song is written with a varied ( or modified ) strophic structure , meaning the " verse music " is generally the same , with one different verse . According to the American historian Mark Ringer , Schubert used a " musical structure that reflects both the life cycle of the earth and the progress from innocence to experience " . Schubert directed the piece to be played " <unk> <unk> " , or at a " somewhat lively " pace . 
 The different verse is the third , and it demonstrates the " admixture of dramatic traits " in the lyrical song , which Fischer @-@ Dieskau calls " a classic example of the strophic song with Abgesang ... ' after @-@ strain ' . " The " after @-@ strain " comes at the final stanza ; the composer and Schubert scholar Brian Newbould observed that for three @-@ quarters of the song 's final stanza , Schubert departed from the strophe to give a musical impression of the trout being caught , but returned to the strophe for the final couplet . The primary rhythmic figure in the piano accompaniment suggests the movement of the fish in the water . When the fisherman catches the trout , the vocal line changes from major to minor , the piano figuration becomes darker and the flowing phrases are " broken by startled rests " . According to Mark Ringer , the melody evokes a " <unk> naïveté " that " delivers both delight and emotional power " . 
 Schubart 's poem takes the viewpoint of a male speaker , advising women to be careful of young men . By removing the stanza , Schubert removes the moral and creates uncertainty in the sex of the narrator . 
 = = Variations = = 
 After completing his original in 1817 , Schubert made six subsequent autographs . These differing versions were not necessarily an attempt to improve a work , with some later versions being written from memory with only minor variations ; Newbould considers that Schubert 's close replication was a " feat of musicianship ... and a sign that Schubert spoke the language of music with the naturalness of conversation . " The differences between the autographs are small : according to Reed , they " are concerned ... with the tempo indication and the prelude – postlude . " The first version , marked <unk> , has no introduction , although " the shape of the familiar introduction is already <unk> in a seven @-@ bar postlude " . The draft is undated , although is from 1817 and is kept in the Stadler , Ebner and Schindler collection in Lund . A second copy , written in May or June 1817 , was for Franz Sales <unk> 's album : this version was marked <unk> zu <unk> ( not too fast ) . 
 A third variation was written during the night of 21 February 1818 . Schubert and Anselm <unk> , a friend and fellow composer , had finished a few bottles of Hungarian wine when Anselm commented that his brother Josef was an aficionado of Schubert 's work . Schubert completed a copy of " Die Forelle " that was " somewhat messy " . The messiness was partly accounted for by Schubert 's drunken state , but also explained by the accompanying note he wrote to Josef : " Just as , in my haste , I was going to send the thing , I rather sleepily took up the ink @-@ well and poured it calmly over it . What a disaster ! " The manuscript was held by the <unk> family for a number of years and was photographed in 1870 , before being lost . Schubert wrote a further version in 1820 for publication in the Wiener Zeitung , and a final copy in October 1821 for publication in the Neue Ausgabe . The final version has " a five @-@ bar piano prelude " and is presently in the Gertrude Clarke Whittall Foundation Collection of the Library of Congress . 
 In 1819 Sylvester Baumgartner — a music patron and amateur cellist in Steyr — commissioned Schubert to write a piece of chamber music based on " Die Forelle " ; Schubert then wrote a quintet for piano and strings in which he quoted the song in a set of variations in the fourth movement . The piece later became known as the Trout Quintet ( D. 667 ) . Franz Liszt transcribed and paraphrased " Die Forelle " in two versions for solo piano . The first was in 1844 as the sixth part of his composition Sechs <unk> von Franz Schubert ( S 560 ) ; the second transcription was in 1846 ( S 564 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Information regarding the contemporary reception to " Die Forelle " is scant . Reed relates that the song had " immediate popularity " , and that Schubert composing the Trout Quintet was evidence that " Die Forelle " " was already widely known " by 1819 . Newbould agrees , pointing out that the quintet was " acknowledging the song 's meteoric rise up early nineteenth @-@ century Vienna 's equivalent to the charts " . Fischer @-@ Dieskau takes a longer @-@ term view of the song 's popularity , writing that " the vividness of the imagery , with the alternate troubling and smoothing of the surface of the water along with the exuberance of the melody itself , account for the song 's universal appeal " . 
 = Tonight : Franz Ferdinand = 
 Tonight : Franz Ferdinand ( also known simply as Tonight ) is the third studio album by Scottish indie rock band Franz Ferdinand . It was released on 26 January 2009 through Domino Records in the UK and Epic Records in the US . It is the band 's first studio album since You Could Have It So Much Better , which was released on 3 October 2005 , roughly three and a half years earlier . The album was recorded in a span of two years at Mr. Dan 's Studio in Buckeye , Arizona and the old town hall of Govan , Scotland . It has been described as a concept album loosely based around a night of partying and the morning effects after . The album has more of a dance @-@ oriented sound , featuring styles of dance @-@ punk , new wave , and electropop , marking a departure from the band 's post @-@ punk sound , which was featured on their past two albums . 
 Upon release , the album received generally favourable reviews from music critics and had a positive commercial performance , peaking at number two on the UK Albums Chart , number nine on the US Billboard 200 , and charting in the top ten in several other countries . Five official singles have been released from the album : " Lucid Dreams " , " Ulysses " , " No You Girls " , " Can 't Stop Feeling " , and " What She Came For " . A remix album , titled Blood , was released on 1 June 2009 and contains dub remixes of most songs from Tonight . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Although having written about eight songs while on tour in 2005 , Alex Kapranos and Nick McCarthy decided to write new music because they wanted the album to be " ... quite new , to be quite different sounding from everything we 've ever done before . " Despite having recorded their second album in a short amount of time , Kapranos stressed that the band wanted to take their time . He voices , " This time we wanted to spend more time developing , and also , I suppose , allowing songs and sounds to evolve more before we ended up writing an album , and absorbing more music and ideas and , I suppose , life itself . And when I say life , I mean life off the road , because I wouldn 't classify life on the road as real life . " Franz Ferdinand began working on Tonight in early 2007 . Franz Ferdinand was supposed to record the album with producer Brian Higgins , yet in March 2008 , the two entities parted ways . The drummer , Paul Thomson , says " We wrote with Higgins for a while and initially we thought we 'd work more with him but it didn 't really work out . We just realized that we 're not really a pop group . " However , they also commented they have not given up on the pop concept . The songs on the album were written and recorded at the old town hall of Govan , Scotland as well as Mr. Dan 's Studio in Buckeye , Arizona . The band first moved in to Govan 's old town hall following a year of touring in support of their second studio album and mostly used it for storing and rehearsing . 
 = = Concept and musical style = = 
 Tonight is a concept album that explores the highs and lows associated with an evening of debauchery , as stated by a critic on online publication <unk> . " This album covers all its bases from the initial excitement of the early evening to the numbness of the morning after " , writes the reviewer . The line " come on , let 's get high " from " Ulysses " , the album 's first track , reveals this theme . The album has been influenced by non @-@ British music . It has been inspired by the " heavy dub sound of Jamaican reggae stars " and has " the heavy bass and space echo you would find on a dub mix . " The album also has somewhat of an African influence . Alex Kapranos stated in an XFM article that " We 're one of these bands that are always gonna sound the same no matter what we do , but there are other influences there . I guess the drums are a little different , Paul has been listening to a lot of African stuff so that 's gonna come through . " 
 Tonight features styles of indie rock , dance @-@ punk , new wave , electropop , and art rock . In an interview with Billboard , Kapranos said that the album is " the opposite of punk / pop , which took something that was wonderful and removed all the dirt . " He also said that the band was using Russian <unk> synthesizers . He also stated , in a Rolling Stone interview , that the album is more of a dance than a rock record . A song on the album previously known as " Kiss Me " , presumably re @-@ titled " No You Girls " , uses a human skeleton for percussion , to which The Guardian jokingly , in response , asked " Have Glasgow 's finest gone all goth on us ? What next ? Zombie hunting ? Gigs at the necropolis ? " 
 = = Cover art and album title = = 
 The artwork for the album is a photograph taken by Søren <unk> <unk> just after midnight behind the <unk> Ballroom in Glasgow . Talking to NME , drummer Paul Thomson said , " We wanted to get a Weegee vibe – that famous New York crime scene photographer from the ' 40s and ' 50s . " Subsequently , it is part of a series where the band are taking photos with photographers in different cities they end up in . On the band 's blog , they mention the series of photos as ' imaginary crime scenes , invaded by the photographer ' , and ' a slice of night frozen by flash ' . 
 It was announced on 20 September 2008 that they had finished work on the album but still had no title for it . On 7 October 2008 , reporter Michael Hogan from Vanity Fair interviewed Alex and Paul , who confirmed the title of their third album to be Tonight , with NME reporting the album 's full title and release date a week later . 
 = = Release = = 
 On 19 August 2008 , Franz Ferdinand released " Lucid Dreams " through iTunes and made it available for streaming on their official website . It is also featured on the Madden NFL 09 soundtrack . The track on the album differs from this version and is four minutes longer . The song peaked at number 35 on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 . " Ulysses " was released on 19 January 2009 . The song received its first airplay during Zane Lowe 's radio show on BBC Radio 1 on 17 November 2008 and was made available for streaming on the band 's MySpace Music profile later that day . It peaked at number 20 on the UK Singles Chart and number 20 on the Billboard Alternative Songs chart . It also charted in several other countries , marking a significant chart performance . " No You Girls " was released as a single on 6 April . The song was used in a commercial for the iPod Touch . The song peaked at number 22 in the UK and number 106 on the Billboard Hot 100 , making it their first single to chart in the Hot 100 since " Do You Want To " . It peaked in several other countries , as well , also marking a significant chart performance . On 22 January , Tonight : Franz Ferdinand was made available for streaming through the band 's official MySpace Music profile . " Can 't Stop Feeling " was released as the next single from the album . The song didn 't have a chart performance as positive as " Ulysses " and " No You Girls " , but it did chart at number 19 on the Belgian Flanders Tip singles chart , number 24 on the Polish Singles Chart , number 47 on the Italian Singles Chart , and number 69 on the French Singles Chart . " What She Came For " was released as a single on 31 August 2009 and " Live Alone " was released as a single on 13 November 2009 . Both songs had the worst chart performance out of all songs as they didn 't chart in any country . 
 = = = Blood bonus disc = = = 
 For its release on 26 January , the album is available as a box set which includes the whole album on six 7 @-@ inch vinyl singles and as a 2 disc limited edition . These special editions are only available in Europe and include a bonus disc called Blood which contains dub versions of the tracks from the album . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Tonight received generally positive reviews from music critics . The album has a total score of 70 / 100 on Metacritic , based on 32 reviews , indicating " generally favourable reviews " . It did not receive the amount of critical acclaim their first two studio albums received . Critics often praised the album 's sound and the instrumentation of the songs on the album . The album 's sound was also subject to criticism by some critics , as well as the lyrics and album production . Clash magazine commented that it could be " the band 's most complete work to date . Worth the wait , and in all honesty better than we could ever have hoped for . " The Financial Post states that " Tonight is the band 's best album : Paradoxically , they 've allowed themselves a degree of release from their characteristic tension by creating structures within which they can cut loose . " The Telegraph commented on how Tonight : Franz Ferdinand is a melody @-@ packed re @-@ affirmation of everything that has made the band so popular hitherto , but with a highly contemporary @-@ sounding , keyboard @-@ driven edge . The Trades stated that " this [ album ] is an evolutionary step for the band rather than a revolutionary one . Smart and danceable , Tonight : Franz Ferdinand proves that Franz Ferdinand are the masters of dance @-@ rock . " NBC commented on how ' Franz Ferdinand has once again managed to outdo themselves with their best album to <unk> 
 Uncut 's and The Guardian 's reviews were less enthusiastic . Uncut commented that the album sounds dry and superficial , and the songs are too similar to each other and other Franz Ferdinand songs . The Guardian stated that " if Franz 's songwriting is broader than it was , it is still no deeper " and that " they 'll keep trying to move your hips because they know they 'll never win your heart . " This was echoed by the review in the Daily Mail , which described the album as " a sterile , unwelcoming affair that fails to pack the band 's usual punch . " Paste was similarly severe , stating that the vocals are " leering " , the production " horrific " , and that the lyrics " seem to lack both heart and brain " and conclude by writing that " the layoff suggests that Franz is either too confused or too lazy to move forward " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Franz Ferdinand . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 The album had a significant chart performance . It debuted at number two on the UK Album Chart , as well as number nine on the Billboard 200 in the U.S. , selling about 31 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release . The album , however , suffered a fifty @-@ place decline on the Billboard 200 from # 9 to # 59 in its second week on the chart . The album also charted in the top ten in Australia , Austria , Belgium , Canada , Finland , France , Germany , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , Japan , the Netherlands , New Zealand , Spain , and Switzerland . The album had a chart performance similar to their second studio album , You Could Have It So Much Better , which also charted in the top ten in several countries . 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = Science Fiction Quarterly = 
 Science Fiction Quarterly was an American pulp science fiction magazine that was published from 1940 to 1943 and again from 1951 to 1958 . Charles Hornig served as editor for the first two issues ; Robert W. Lowndes edited the remainder . Science Fiction Quarterly was launched by publisher Louis Silberkleit during a boom in science fiction magazines at the end of the 1930s . Silberkleit launched two other science fiction titles ( Science Fiction and Future Fiction ) at about the same time : all three ceased publication before the end of World War II , falling prey to slow sales and paper shortages . In 1950 and 1951 , as the market improved , Silberkleit relaunched Future Fiction and Science Fiction Quarterly . By the time Science Fiction Quarterly ceased publication in 1958 , it was the last surviving science fiction pulp . 
 Science Fiction Quarterly 's policy was to reprint a novel in each issue as the lead story , and Silberkleit was able to obtain reprint rights to two early science fiction novels and several of Ray Cummings ' books . Both Hornig and Lowndes were given minuscule budgets , and Hornig in particular had trouble finding good material to print . Lowndes did somewhat better , as he was able to call on his friends in the Futurians , a group of aspiring writers that included Isaac Asimov , James Blish , and Donald Wollheim . The second incarnation of the magazine also had a policy of running a lead novel , though in practice the lead stories were often well short of novel length . Among the better @-@ known stories published by the magazine were " Second Dawn " , by Arthur C. Clarke ; " The Last Question " , by Isaac Asimov ; and " Common Time " , by James Blish . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 Although science fiction ( sf ) had been published before the 1920s , it did not begin to coalesce into a separately marketed genre until the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . By the end of the 1930s , the field was booming . Louis Silberkleit , a publisher who had once worked for Gernsback , launched a pulp magazine in March 1939 titled Science Fiction , under his Blue Ribbon Magazines imprint . For an editor , Gernsback recommended Charles Hornig , who had edited Wonder Stories for Gernsback from 1933 to 1936 . Silberkleit took the recommendation , and Hornig was hired in October 1938 . Hornig had no office ; he worked from home , coming in to the office as needed to drop off manuscripts and dummy materials , and pick up typeset materials to proof . He was given broad freedom to select what he wanted to publish , since Silberkleit 's chief editor , Abner J. Sundell , knew little about sf and did not get involved with running the magazine . 
 To spread his costs over more magazines , Silberkleit soon decided to launch two additional titles . In November 1939 the first issue of Future Fiction appeared ; it was followed in July 1940 by Science Fiction Quarterly . Hornig was editor for all three of the magazines . In October 1940 , Hornig , who was a pacifist , received his military call @-@ up . He decided to move to California and register as a conscientious objector ; he continued to edit the magazines from the west coast , but Silberkleit was unhappy with the arrangement . Silberkleit allowed Hornig to retain his post as editor of Science Fiction , and offered the editorship of the other two titles to Sam Moskowitz . Moskowitz declined , saying afterwards that he " would never strike at a man 's job " , but Donald Wollheim , a member of a group of aspiring writers called the Futurians , heard about the offer . Wollheim told Robert W. Lowndes , another member of the Futurians , about the opening , and urged him to write to Silberkleit . Lowndes later recalled Wollheim 's idea : " In the letter , I 'd suggest that it might be a good idea to add a science fiction title to the list , offering my services as editor at a slightly lower price than Hornig was being paid , and also find fault with all the other sf titles presently out , but particularly with Hornig 's " . Lowndes relates that Silberkleit took the bait and hired him in November 1940 ; Hornig recalls the separation as being by mutual consent because of his move to California . Lowndes subsequently agreed that this was likely to be the real reason Silberkleit replaced Hornig . 
 The first issues Lowndes was responsible for were the Spring 1941 issue of Science Fiction Quarterly and the April 1941 issue of Future Fiction . Initially Silberkleit kept tighter control on Lowndes ' editorial selections than he had over Hornig , vetoing five of the seven stories Lowndes proposed for the April 1941 Future , but by the August 1941 issue , Lowndes later recalled , Silberkleit " was satisfied that I knew what I was doing , and [ ... ] didn 't need to oversee any story I had accepted " . 
 In 1950 Silberkleit revived Future Fiction , and the following year he brought back Science Fiction Quarterly , with the first issue of the new series dated May 1951 . A new magazine , Dynamic Science Fiction , followed in 1952 . All three were edited by Lowndes and all were in pulp format . Sales were satisfactory , but Silberkleit decided to experiment with the digest format , which was starting to become more popular . By the end of 1955 he had cancelled Dynamic Science Fiction , switched Future Fiction to digest format , and relaunched Science Fiction as a digest under a new title , Science Fiction Stories . Only Science Fiction Quarterly was left in pulp format — Silberkleit felt that a quarterly digest would not be as successful as a quarterly pulp . The pulps were dying off , and when Other Worlds switched to digest format in 1956 , Science Fiction Quarterly became the only remaining sf magazine still being published as a pulp . In 1957 American News Company , one of the biggest magazine distributors , was liquidated , and the resulting changes in the national magazine distribution network , along with poor sales , finally killed Science Fiction Quarterly . The last issue was dated February 1958 . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 Silberkleit 's magazines were given very limited budgets . Hornig worked with Julius Schwartz , a literary agent who was a friend of his ; this gave him access to stories by the writers Schwartz represented , but Schwartz would not allow his authors ' real names to be used unless they were paid at least one cent per word . Hornig could not afford to pay the one cent rate for everything he bought , so he paid half a cent a word for much of what he acquired through Schwartz , and ran those stories under pseudonyms . Unsurprisingly , given the low rates , the stories sent to Hornig had usually already been rejected by the better @-@ paying markets . The result was mediocre fiction , even from the better known writers that Hornig was able to attract . The magazines paid on publication , rather than acceptance , and this slower payment also discouraged some authors from submitting material . 
 Science Fiction Quarterly was intended by Silberkleit to include a full @-@ length novel in each issue . Silberkleit obtained permission from Hugo Gernsback to reprint two novels from Science Wonder Quarterly : The Moon Conquerors by R.H. Romans , and The Shot Into Infinity by Otto Willi Gail . Although these stories were somewhat dated , they were better quality than the fiction Hornig was able to obtain for his other magazines . When Lowndes took over , the policy of including a novel in every issue continued , and Silberkleit again obtained reprint rights to fill some of these slots , this time with Ray Cummings , five of whose novels would appear in Science Fiction Quarterly over the next two years , starting with <unk> the Conqueror in the Summer 1941 issue . Lowndes bought many stories from the Futurians to fill the remaining space in the magazine . These were of variable quality , but overall Science Fiction Quarterly improved once Lowndes took control , and the fiction was as good as or better than the stories to be found in many of the contemporary magazines . 
 When the magazine was revived , the stated policy was still to publish lead novels and fill the remaining space with short stories , but in fact , with few exceptions , the lead fiction was not of novel length . There were no more reprints , as there had been for the first series . Lowndes was unable to pay his writers rates that were competitive with the magazines that were leading the field , but he was an able editor and produced a magazine of reasonable quality every quarter . The Futurians still occasionally appeared in Science Fiction Quarterly , but Lowndes also attracted some of the newer writers , such as Poul Anderson , William Tenn , and Arthur C. Clarke . Clarke 's " Second Dawn " , which appeared in the August 1951 issue , is among the better stories Lowndes was able to obtain ; he also published Isaac Asimov 's " The Last Question " in the November 1956 issue , and James Blish 's " Common Time " , in August 1953 . Lowndes was also able to acquire some good quality nonfiction for the magazine , including a series of articles by James Blish on science in sf , and articles on science fiction by Thomas D. Clareson and L. Sprague de Camp . Blish , writing as William Atheling , Jr . , commented in 1953 that Lowndes was doing a " surprisingly good job " with all of Silberkleit 's science fiction magazines , despite the low rates and the slow payment to authors . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Charles Hornig was the editor of the first two issues of the first incarnation of Science Fiction Quarterly ; Robert W. Lowndes edited all the subsequent issues . The magazine was printed in pulp format throughout both series . The price was 25 cents throughout the first run , for 144 pages ; the second series began at 25 cents , but the price increased to 35 cents for the August 1957 issue . The page count for the second series was 128 pages for much of the run , but from the November 1953 issue to the May 1957 issue it was 96 pages . The publisher for the first issue was Double Action Magazines , with offices in Holyoke , Massachusetts ; thereafter the publisher was Columbia Publications for both versions of the magazine . Both Double Action and Columbia were owned by Louis Silberkleit . 
 There were three British reprints of the first series , all published by Gerald Swan . The Summer 1940 issue was reprinted twice . It appeared first ( with cuts ) as Yankee Science Fiction , issue 3 , in February 1942 , and then again , uncut , as a paperback , titled The Moon Conqueror , in 1943 . The Winter 1941 / 42 issue was also reprinted in 1943 , titled Into the Fourth Dimension and Other Stories . 
 Ten issues of the second series were reprinted in the U.K. by Thorpe & Porter . The issues , which were cut from the U.S. editions , appeared between February 1952 and August 1955 , and corresponded to 10 of the first 13 issues , from May 1951 to May 1954 . The omitted issues were November 1951 , May 1952 , and August 1953 . The order of publication was not the same as for the US editions : the sequence was May 51 / August 51 / February 52 / November 52 / August 52 / May 53 / February 54 / November 53 / February 53 / May 54 . Each issue was 128 pages and was priced at 1 / - ( 5p ) . 
 There are no anthologies of stories drawn solely from Science Fiction Quarterly . However , in the 1960s Ivan Howard edited several anthologies for Silberkleit 's publishing imprint , Belmont Books , with contents drawn solely from Silberkleit 's magazines . One of these , Rare Science Fiction ( 1963 ) , included three stories from Science Fiction Quarterly . 
 = Black @-@ throated gray warbler = 
 The black @-@ throated gray warbler ( Setophaga nigrescens ) is a passerine bird of the New World warbler family Parulidae . It is 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) long and has gray and white plumage with black markings . The male has the bold black throat of its name , and black stripes on its head , as well as black streaks on its flanks ; the female is a paler version of the male , with a white throat and less distinct black markings on the flanks and wings . It breeds in western North America from British Columbia to New Mexico , and winters in Mexico and the southwestern United States . The habitats it prefers are coniferous and mixed forests and scrubland , especially those with pinyon pines , junipers , sagebrush , and oaks . Its nest is an open cup of plant fibers lined with feathers , built a few metres from the ground in the branches of a tree or shrub . Three to five eggs are laid , and young are fed by both parents . Common in its breeding range , it does not seem to be seriously threatened by human activities , unlike many migratory warblers . 
 = = Description = = 
 The black @-@ throated gray warbler has mostly black , gray , and white plumage , which is soft , lacking gloss . With its striping and the small yellow spot between its eye and bill , it is a distinctive bird . The sexes differ slightly , both having gray upperparts with black streaks , and white underparts with black streaks on the flanks . The adult male is striped with a black on the crown , throat , and below the eye , and has white around its chin and above its eye . The adult female has more dingy plumage on its head , with a white throat and dark gray cheeks . The most similar birds to the black @-@ throated gray warbler are the black @-@ and @-@ white and blackpoll warblers , which although marked in black have entirely different plumage patterns . 
 It is typically 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) long , weighing 8 @.@ 4 g ( 0 @.@ 30 oz ) . Wing lengths are 5 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 9 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 7 in ) , tail lengths 4 @.@ 7 – 5 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 2 in ) , bill lengths 8 @.@ 4 – 9 @.@ 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 33 – 0 @.@ 38 in ) , and tarsus lengths 1 @.@ 66 – 1 @.@ 88 cm ( 0 @.@ 65 – 0 @.@ 74 in ) , with females slightly smaller than males . 
 This bird gives a sharp <unk> or thick call , like that of Townsend 's warbler but flat and unmusical , as well as a high see flight call . The male 's song is a series of buzzy notes , with the earlier notes doubled and the next to last note high . This song has three variations , including a quiet " soft song " given by the males while following females gathering material for a nest . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The black @-@ throated gray warbler was first described by John Kirk Townsend from a specimen collected near today 's Portland , Oregon . It was known to the Chinook inhabitants of the northwest coast , who called it Ah Kah a qual . Townsend described the species as Sylvia nigrescens , placing it with the other New World warblers and the unrelated Old World warblers in the genus Sylvia . It is now placed in the genus Setophaga along with about thirty other species , after having been classified in Dendroica for some time . Within its genus , it is part of a group with black throats and yellow face markings that includes the hermit warbler and Townsend 's warbler . It is usually considered an early offshoot among this group of species , but genetic studies suggest a close relation to Grace 's warbler . 
 Of these relatives , the range of the black @-@ throated gray warbler overlaps with those of Townsend 's warbler and the hermit warbler , but they occur in different habitats . While Townsend 's and hermit warblers commonly hybridize with each other , records of either species hybridizing with the black @-@ throated gray warbler are uncommon . 
 There are two subspecies , which are highly similar and of dubious validity . The nominate subspecies S. n. nigrescens occurs on the Pacific coastal region from British Columbia to northern California , while S. n. <unk> , described by Giraud in 1841 , occupies the inland parts of its range . S. n. <unk> birds are slightly larger and more gray in their upperparts . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The black @-@ throated gray warbler breeds in western North America , its range extending from southwestern British Columbia along the Pacific coast to northern Baja California , and east to New Mexico and southern Montana . It winters mostly in Mexico , from southern Baja California to Oaxaca state . It has spread into parts of Wyoming and Montana only recently , as Juniperus <unk> has expanded its range due to a warming climate . Vagrants have been recorded across eastern North America and in Cuba . 
 The black @-@ throated gray warbler breeds in open coniferous and mixed forest with a brushy understory , in dry open oak forests , and in chaparral and other scrubland . It is particularly associated with pinyon pines , junipers , and oaks . It migrates to the south late in the fall , returning north in mid @-@ spring . While migrating , it forages in any woodland or scrub it passes through . In its wintering grounds , it occurs in dry woodland and tall scrub . Though its status is not well known , it does not appear to be seriously threatened by habitat destruction or other human activities , unlike many migratory warblers . It is a fairly common bird , among the most common in some localities . Because it is common and not in rapid decline , it is assessed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The black @-@ throated gray warbler is usually approachable , and can easily be observed while foraging . Despite this , it is poorly known , especially in its breeding behavior , of which Birds of North America said " almost no information is available " . It forages , often in flocks with other species . It feeds on insects gleaned on low branches , especially caterpillars . 
 The nest is usually placed on a horizontal tree branch or in a shrub , a few metres above the ground . The nest is an open cup constructed of grass stalks and other fibres , and lined with feathers and hair . The female lays three to five pinkish eggs with brown dots from May to July . Incubation and fledging periods are unknown . This species has been recorded giving a distraction display , pretending to be injured to distract predators from its nest . Both parents feed the young , though the female may do so more frequently . 
 = Tomb Raider : Underworld = 
 Tomb Raider : Underworld is an action @-@ adventure video game , the eighth instalment of the Tomb Raider series , following character Lara Croft . The story continues from the events in Tomb Raider : Legend as a direct sequel , but also addresses unexplained plot elements by association with Tomb Raider : Anniversary . Underworld was released by Eidos Interactive for the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 and Microsoft Windows , in North America on 18 November 2008 , Europe on 21 November 2008 and Australia on 5 December 2008 . On 14 June 2012 , Underworld was released on the Mac OS X by Feral Interactive . It is the third game in the series to be developed by Crystal Dynamics and is also the first Tomb Raider game to be released on the PlayStation 3 . Developers implemented new features into the gameplay , such as the dual @-@ target feature and an upgraded inventory system , using an Active Sonar map and a multi @-@ purpose grappling hook . The game also features a hint system and a new melee combat system where Lara has the ability to battle her opponents using kicks and grapple pulls . Downloadable content was also released exclusively for the Xbox 360 , where the player takes control of Lara and her doppelgänger in two new chapters . 
 Underworld received mostly positive reviews for the PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and PC versions . Critics generally praised the environments , Lara 's motion captured movements , story , puzzles , exploration , graphics and the less linear style of gameplay , although some criticism was directed at its " haywire " camera angles and " dodgy " combat system . The PlayStation 2 and Wii versions received mostly moderate to negative reviews . Most cited them as having medium to poor graphics ; being oversimplified ; " dumbed " down ; and bugged , especially the PlayStation 2 version . On 27 February 2009 , Eidos announced that the game had sold around 2 @.@ 6 million copies worldwide . On 22 May 2009 , Tomb Raider : Underworld was re @-@ released as part of the Xbox Classics and Platinum Range lines for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 , respectively . Underworld , along with Legend and Anniversary , was included in the The Tomb Raider Trilogy compilation , which was released in March 2011 for the PlayStation 3 . In the end of 2011 , Tomb Raider : Underworld was offered for free to PlayStation Plus members . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Tomb Raider : Underworld is a single player , action @-@ adventure video game . The game is presented in third person perspective , where the player takes control of Lara Croft . Lara 's environment reproduces a more " interactive world that reacts and remembers " , such that footprints left in the mud or mud transferred to Lara 's knee from kneeling on the ground is washed away by rain , the bodies of the foes she encounters remain where she killed them , and any destruction to the environment she causes are permanent . According to creative director Eric Lindstrom , this is " to not only reward the player for the effect they 're having on the world , but to give them navigational aids . " The game uses an animation blending system that allows Lara to interact dynamically with her environment , such as pushing foliage aside with one or two hands , depending on if she is carrying a weapon . It also features a " hybrid lighting model that combines dynamic lights with carefully created light maps " and a weather system that changes the environment , for example , " If Lara ’ s negotiating a wet ledge she ’ s more apt to slip or lose grip , " which makes " the environment [ ... ] her adversary " for a large part of the game . 
 Lindstrom explained that they integrated the elements of climbing , shooting and puzzle solving . This instalment also features a new melee combat system , requiring Lara in some instances to use " direct combat and evasive manoeuvres to distance herself from her attacker " . Notably , Lara 's bike , among other things , is a key component in solving the puzzles she will encounter in her adventure . Pick @-@ ups have multiple uses as weapons and tools in interaction with the environment , and Lindstrom stated that Lara " can also split up her guns and fire at two different targets simultaneously , " or hold an item with one hand and fire a gun with the other . The grappling hook can be stretched taut and used to pull objects off ledges , illustrating what project lead Rob Pavey said , that " Lara will be able to do anything that you 'd expect her to be able to do , " which he called " the big theme this year . " Lindstrom describes this as " a philosophy called ' What Could Lara Do ? ' — <unk> . It 's short @-@ hand for having the player be able to use their own intuition about what someone with her abilities should be able to do in an environment such as this , and consistency across the different mechanics and abilities . If she can throw a grenade , then if she can pick up this pole , why can 't she throw it ? " Crystal Dynamics also made the game non @-@ linear , offering elaborate multi @-@ stage puzzles . 
 Another new design element was the " adrenaline moments " . Instead of specific button presses , time slows down and gives the player a chance to get out of harm 's way while retaining complete control of Lara . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Tomb Raider : Underworld begins with Lara Croft 's mansion exploding and being engulfed in flames . The game then rewinds back in time to a week before the explosion , just after the events of Tomb Raider : Legend . Lara is searching for Avalon , hoping it will lead her to an explanation for the disappearance of her long lost mother . Underneath the Mediterranean Sea , Lara discovers an ancient temple designating itself as " Niflheim " , one of the many Norse <unk> . Deep within , she recovers one of Thor 's gauntlets , after a lengthy battle with Amanda Evert 's mercenaries and an encounter with an imprisoned Jacqueline Natla , on Amanda 's ship . Natla tells Lara that the Norse underworld , Helheim and Avalon are one and the same and that she will need to find Thor 's Hammer to open the Underworld and find her mother . Lara soon discovers that she will have to find Thor 's other gauntlet and his belt if she wants to find and wield the hammer . Natla provides Lara with a starting point for her search in this quest – coastal Thailand . In Thailand , Lara doesn 't locate the next gauntlet , but she finds evidence that her father had found it there and removed it before he died . She also discovers a message that reveals that her father and Natla had been working together at some point and that the relationship had not ended well . Lara is able to deduce where her father hid the missing gauntlet . 
 Back at the Croft Manor , Lara finds her father 's secret office buried beneath her home . Upon his desk , Lara discovers the gauntlet as well as a tape @-@ recorded message , warning her that <unk> contains a powerful weapon . Suddenly , an explosion occurs and Lara 's home becomes engulfed in flames , leading back to the opening events of the game . Zip tries to shoot Lara and claims that " Lara " detonated the bomb . When Lara returns to the burning office to recover the security footage , she encounters her doppelgänger who kills Alister Fletcher . After his emotional death , Lara resolves to continue with her quest . In Mexico , Lara finds both Thor 's Belt and some ancient pictographs linking the weapon in Helheim to Jörmungandr , a mythical Norse sea @-@ serpent , brought about by the seventh age . Her next stop are ruins on Jan Mayen Island that correlate to Valhalla . It is here that Lara finally recovers Thor 's Hammer . In the meantime , Zip has managed to track Amanda down to a sister @-@ ship of the one Lara sank earlier . Armed with Mjolnir , Lara boards the vessel and interrogates Natla once again . Natla provides Lara with the coordinates of Helheim , but points out that Lara does not know the Ritual of Odin , which is needed to open its gates , so Lara reluctantly strikes a bargain with Natla and frees her from her cell . 
 They rendezvous in the outer chambers of the Helheim complex , deep below the Arctic Sea . With the ritual performed , Lara is able to use Mjolnir to open the gates of Helheim . Along the way , Lara discovers the horrifying truth of her mother 's fate – she has been turned into a thrall , thus Lara forcibly shoots her . Natla reveals the true extent of her manipulation of Lara , also revealing that she was the one who killed Lara 's father . Natla goes , leaving the doppelgänger to kill Lara , but Lara is saved by Amanda . It is revealed that the Midgard Serpent was a Norse metaphor for the many tectonic divisions that encircle the world , beneath the seas . The doomsday device was built upon the most unstable junction of these lines and its activation would cause massive volcanic activity across the whole planet and the destruction of most of humanity . Lara successfully destabilises the device and strikes Natla with Mjolnir , sending her down into the pool of deadly eitr below . Lara and Amanda escape together using the dais , like the one that brought Lara 's mother to Helheim , teleporting back to the temple in Nepal ( from Tomb Raider : Legend ) . 
 = = Development = = 
 In November 2007 , Eidos was reported to have filed for a trademark on the phrase , Tomb Raider Underworld , and soon after reserved the Tomb Raider Underworld domain name . In December 2007 , Eidos filed for a second trademark for Tomb Raider Underworld , reserving the right to provide " computer games that may be accessed network @-@ wide by network users . " In the January 2008 issue of the magazine Play , details from the " first @-@ ever demo " of the game were revealed . <unk> , which owned Eidos at the time , officially announced Tomb Raider : Underworld on 10 January 2008 , and confirmed that all platform versions of the game would be released simultaneously in November 2008 . 
 Play 's assertions that the game is the " first true next gen Lara with one big physics smorgasbord that looks altogether photo @-@ real " led to speculation that Tomb Raider : Underworld might be using a new game engine for its next @-@ generation graphics rather than the system used by Tomb Raider : Legend and Tomb Raider : Anniversary . Later , the Senior Producer and External Designer separately confirmed that Underworld uses an all @-@ new engine that was built especially for it . This new engine is also used in the game Deus Ex : Human Revolution . 
 Tomb Raider : Underworld was developed by Crystal Dynamics and published by Eidos Interactive as the final Tomb Raider title to be published under the Eidos Interactive label prior to its purchase by Square Enix . Different versions of the game were developed by Crystal Dynamics , Buzz Monkey Software , Nixxes Software and Santa Cruz Games , all published by Eidos Interactive . Crystal Dynamics developed the Xbox 360 version and collaborated with Nixxes Software for the PC and PlayStation 3 versions . Santa Cruz Games developed the Nintendo DS version , while the Wii and PlayStation 2 versions were developed by Buzz Monkey Software . The Mac version was developed by Crystal Dynamics and released by Feral Interactive . 
 Lara 's costume was redesigned and she no longer wears her trademark turquoise sleeveless top and khaki shorts , but instead , a dark brown halter top and black shorts . Additionally , her hair is no longer braided , but worn in a ponytail . According to Play , Lara " moves as good as she looks [ and ] no longer moves like a video game character " due to her being fully motion captured . Olympic gymnast and NCAA Women 's Gymnastics champion Heidi Moneymaker was the model used for motion capturing . Keeley Hawes provided the voice of Lara in this instalment , as she did in Anniversary and Legend . Gymnast Alison Carroll was selected as the new official Lara Croft model to promote the game , replacing Karima Adebibe . 
 The first official video , entitled " Beneath the Surface " , was released on 17 July 2008 , and featured interviews with members of the development team and showed screenshots , artwork , and several clips of gameplay footage . A teaser trailer was released on 19 July 2008 , and the first gameplay trailer was released on 15 August 2008 . 
 = = Music = = 
 <unk> Brun <unk> composed the main theme of the game , and was the music supervisor for Underworld while Colin O 'Malley was scoring the bulk of the music . Underworld 's music is purely orchestral in style . There are pieces that do not loop , meaning they will only play one time and will be triggered on specific events . The score is made more of musical fragments , similar to the first five games of the Tomb Raider series , and there is less constant music than in Legend . 
 In addition to gameplay music , Underworld 's theatrical trailer also uses orchestral music . The featured piece is the 3rd movement : Lacrimosa , from Mozart 's Requiem in D minor . 
 = = Release = = 
 Tomb Raider : Underworld was first released in North America on 18 November 2008 , then on 21 November in Europe , and 5 December in Australia . The PlayStation 2 version was subsequently released on 23 January 2009 in Europe and 5 March in North America . On 14 June 2012 , Underworld was released on the Macintosh by Feral Interactive . 
 = = = Retail editions = = = 
 Exclusive to EB Games in Australia and New Zealand was the Tomb Raider : Underworld Ultimate Fan Pack , which was available on Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 and PC . The pack contained the retail version of the game , a Lara Croft calendar , a Lara Croft figurine , a Tomb Raider T @-@ shirt , a trucker cap and a messenger bag . 
 Exclusive to Game in the United Kingdom was the limited edition of Tomb Raider : Underworld , which was available on Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 and PC . The edition included a bonus disc , which contained behind @-@ the @-@ scenes documentary , promotional artwork , an exclusive soundtrack , videos and trailers . In the United States , GameStop offered customers an exclusive The Art of Tomb Raider : Underworld artbook , when the game was pre @-@ ordered . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 After an agreement with Microsoft , Eidos released two new chapters of Tomb Raider : Underworld as exclusive downloadable content on the Xbox Live Marketplace : Beneath the Ashes on 24 February 2009 and Lara 's Shadow on 10 March 2009 . According to an MTV Multiplayer blog post , an Eidos spokesperson has stated that there are no plans to release the content for PlayStation 3 or Microsoft Windows . Following a negative reaction from fans , Eidos released a statement explaining that they were approached by Microsoft , and to confirm " there are no plans for additional downloadable content for PS3 " . 
 It was also announced that two new outfits , made by Quebec fashion designers , would be available for free download on the Xbox Live Marketplace . The outfits were chosen by jury and public vote on the Festival Arcadia 's Virtually Fashionable on 8 November 2008 , and released on 10 March 2009 . On 15 December 2008 , Eidos announced the release of two classic outfits from past Tomb Raider games ( " Classic " and " Legend " ) , which would be released for free exclusively on the Xbox Live Marketplace . On 30 December 2008 , two additional wetsuits for Lara were also released for free on the Xbox Live Marketplace . 
 = = = = Beneath the Ashes = = = = 
 As in the main game , the player controls Lara during Beneath the Ashes . The story of Beneath the Ashes opens with Lara searching her father 's hidden study beneath Croft Manor for an artifact with the power to create and control thralls . The appearance of a thrall leads Lara further beneath Croft Manor than seen in the main game . Upon finding the artifact , Lara uses the phrase carved into it , " Okh Eshivar " , to gain control over a thrall . The doppelgänger suddenly appears and charges towards Lara . Lara orders the thrall to " kill " , but the doppelgänger easily destroys it . Lara says " Okh Eshivar " just as the doppelgänger reaches her , forcing the doppelgänger to stand still and await Lara 's orders . After an inaudible exchange between them , Lara tells the doppelgänger to " make sure Natla suffers " . Beneath the Ashes ends as the doppelgänger runs off , apparently to complete this task . 
 = = = = Lara 's Shadow = = = = 
 In Lara 's Shadow , the player takes control of the doppelgänger . The doppelgänger moves more quickly than Lara and the gameplay has a stronger emphasis on melee combat . The story of Lara 's Shadow opens with the scene from the main game where Amanda rescues Lara from the doppelgänger by throwing her over the side of a cliff . The doppelgänger survives , landing on solid rock rather than in the surrounding eitr . When she regains consciousness , she proceeds to find Natla . Natla appears weakened and thrall @-@ like , but retains her mind and uses " Okh Eshivar " to command the doppelgänger to take her to the doppelgänger 's " birthplace . " Once there , the doppelgänger places Natla in a very large and ancient machine . Natla then gives the doppelgänger her final orders : to kill Lara and then end her own life . The doppelgänger seems to feel anger at this but , being under Natla 's control , continues to obey her . The scene shifts to " 4 days later " , and extends the final scene of Beneath the Ashes . During their previously inaudible exchange , Lara commands the doppelgänger saying " Obey me now . From this moment , ignore all commands . You are a slave to no one . " The doppelgänger returns and destroys part of the machine containing Natla , who falls and is trapped by the debris in a rising pool of eitr . Natla unsuccessfully tries to order the now free doppelgänger to help her . Lara 's Shadow ends with the doppelgänger looking down on Natla smiling as she is submerged in the eitr . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Tomb Raider : Underworld received generally positive reviews from critics . The Xbox 360 , PC and PlayStation 3 versions of the game were generally highly praised , with many critics comparing Underworld to older titles in the series , with GamesRadar commenting " Doing what made the original great , and adding a considerable face @-@ lift " and The Guardian saying " And when you get stuck into Tomb Raider Underworld , it swiftly becomes clear that it is designed to appeal to a generation of gamers – surely now in their 30s – who grew up with Tomb Raider and fell in love with Lara 's attributes and attitude . " In reviews , the environments have been widely praised , many reviewers also praised Lara 's motion captured movements and the much less linear style of gameplay , while some criticisms aimed at its " haywire " camera angles and " dodgy " combat system . 
 IGN described the game as enjoyable for the puzzles , exploration and graphics . They went on to praise that quick time events were replaced with adrenaline moments and noted improvements in combat , such as the ability to aim at two enemies at once and new sticky bombs . However , GamesRadar marked the game down for " dodgy combat " . The exploration was also highly praised , with GamesRadar urging readers to " go explore Underworld . " Nintendo Power and GamesRadar also praised the game 's platforming elements . Despite mentions of camera issues and weaker combat , critics described it as " as good as Tomb Raider has ever been " and " the Tomb Raider we 've been waiting for ! " 
 However , the Wii and PlayStation 2 versions received mostly mixed to negative reviews . IGN commented the Wii version " is not a bad game " but went on to say " The whole thing has been oversimplified and dumbed down . The Wii puzzles are a joke , the combat is almost nonexistent , and the game is pretty short . " GameSpot added " Tomb Raider Underworld can be an enjoyable adventure , but it ’ s marred by bugs , camera issues , and ill @-@ conceived Wii extras . " While the PlayStation 2 version was called " an embarrassment to the franchise " by IGN . They went on to say that the version was such a poor conversion that it shouldn 't have even been released , saying " Full of bugs , linear play that discourages exploration and non @-@ existent combat , Tomb Raider Underworld feels as though it 's part of the series in name and main character only . " 
 Prior to the game 's release , Eidos attempted to prevent any reviews rating the game at less than 8 out of 10 from appearing , with an Eidos spokesman stating " [ t ] he brand manager in the US that 's handling all of Tomb Raider has asked that we just manage the scores before the game is out , really , just to ensure that we don 't put people off buying the game , basically . Tomb Raider : Underworld received a BAFTA nomination in 2009 . For Underworld 's story , Eric Lindstrom and Toby Gard received a nomination for the <unk> ’ s Videogame Writing Award . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 On 9 January 2009 , Eidos announced that Tomb Raider : Underworld sales failed to meet expectations , selling 1 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide as of 31 December 2008 . However , on 27 February 2009 , Eidos announced that the game had sold around 2 @.@ 6 million copies worldwide . Also , on 8 May 2009 , Ian Livingstone , President of Eidos Interactive , said " Underworld has met our target expectations " . In May 2009 , Tomb Raider : Underworld was released as part of both the Xbox Classics and PS3 Platinum Range . In December 2011 , Tomb Raider : Underworld was given away for free to subscribers of the PlayStation Plus service . 
 = The Boat Race 1965 = 
 The 111th Boat Race took place on 26 March 1966 . Held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race was won by Oxford , who led from the start , by three @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter @-@ lengths , in the third fastest time in Boat Race history . Isis won the inaugural reserve race while Cambridge won the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race by six @-@ and @-@ half lengths , and led overall in the event with 61 victories to Oxford 's 48 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . It was the first year of the reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat . According to author and journalist Christopher Dodd , allowing the reserves to race on the Tideway was " a curtain @-@ raiser to the battle of the blues and to give the up @-@ and @-@ coming men some experience of the Putney razzle @-@ dazzle " . Since then , it has usually taken place on the Thames , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 The main race was umpired by Gerald Ellison who had rowed for Oxford in the 1932 and 1933 races . Cambridge 's coaching team comprised Derek Mays @-@ Smith , Chris Addison , J. R. F. Best , James Crowden , David Jennens , J. J. Vernon ( who rowed in the 1955 race ) and Ian Welsh , while Oxford were led by Ronnie Howard . In preparation for the race , Oxford put in " mile after mile of hard rowing " while Cambridge focused on the more technical aspects of training . On 19 March , Oxford beat the existing course record during the lead @-@ up to the race , while Cambridge surpassed their own record two days later . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 8 @.@ 25 lb ( 86 @.@ 1 kg ) , almost 4 pounds ( 1 @.@ 8 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford saw four former Blues return , rowers Sean Morris , Miles Morland and Duncan Spencer ( rowing in his third race ) , and cox M. J. Leigh . Cambridge 's crew included two returning Boat Race veterans in rower and boat club president Joe Fraser and cox Robert <unk> . The Light Blue crew contained a single foreign @-@ registered rower in Australian D. P. Moore while the Dark Blues included four Americans , all formerly of Yale University . According to the journalist Stanley Baker , writing in The Guardian , the Dark Blues were the " strongest and toughest crew Oxford have sent to the Tideway since the war . " 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford , who were considered strong favourites , won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . The race commenced at <unk> Oxford took an early lead and were half a length ahead at Craven Cottage . Cambridge drew back into contention and were nearly level as the crews passed the Mile Post , recording the same times . A push from Oxford saw them move away from Cambridge with a lead of two lengths by Hammersmith Bridge . Although increasing their rate to try to reduce the deficit , Cambridge 's rowing became untidy and Oxford were able to capitalise , passing Chiswick Steps with a lead of three lengths , and shooting Barnes Bridge four up . Passing the finishing post with a lead of 15 seconds , Oxford won by four lengths in a time of 18 minutes 7 seconds , the third @-@ fastest time in the history of the event , slower only than Cambridge 's winning times in the 1934 and 1938 races . A correspondent writing in The Times suggested that " if there were any surprises at all ... they were that this notoriously fickle event went so exactly to form . " 
 In the first reserve race , Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie by two lengths , in a time of 18 minutes 45 seconds . In the 20th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge triumphed , their third consecutive victory . 
 = Amor Gitano = 
 " Amor Gitano " ( English : " Gypsy Love " ) is a latin pop duet by Mexican recording artist Alejandro Fernández and American recording artist Beyoncé . The song contains a mixture of cultures , mostly influenced by the exotic language of Fernández , that is Spanish , and Beyoncé 's pop and R & B influences . Along with Jaime Flores and Reyli Barba , Beyoncé wrote the song , while Rudy Pérez and Beyoncé herself produced the song . " Amor Gitano " serves as the theme song of the telenovela El Zorro and it was released on February 12 , 2007 during the premiere of the episode of the telenovela . 
 " Amor Gitano " generally received positive reception from music critics . While some of them complimented the vocal exchanges between both artists and the flamenco pop genre of the song , others criticized the song for being somehow offensive due to the stereotypical lyrics . Although it failed to make any impact on the main US Billboard Hot 100 chart , it charted on a few Billboard component charts , peaking at number twenty @-@ three on the US Latin Pop Songs chart . Achieving multi @-@ platinum certifications for ringtones and digital downloads in Spain , the song remained at the top of the Spanish Singles charts for thirteen weeks , becoming Beyoncé 's second Spanish chart @-@ topping single , the first being " Beautiful Liar " ( 2007 ) . " Amor Gitano " is ranked at number one on the list of best @-@ selling singles in Spain . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 " Amor Gitano " originated from the collaboration of Sony BMG 's biggest talents and greatest assets . Kevin Lawrie , President of Sony BMG Latin America , contacted the Sony Entertainment Television Latin America as well as the producers of El Zorro to come up with a theme song for the telenovela . At the same time , Beyoncé and Fernandez were in the process of selecting material for their respective upcoming projects . Paul <unk> , the Vice President of the Artists and repertoire division of Sony Entertainment Television Latin America , first heard the song from Reyli Barba and felt it could be perfect for Fernandez . Lawrie later contacted Mathew Knowles , President and CEO Music World Entertainment , about Beyoncé 's Spanish material , and the duet song was recorded partly at The Beach House Recording Studios in Miami Beach , Florida and at the Rock the Mic Studios in New York in mid January 2007 , with Rudy Perez . 
 In an interview with Billboard magazine , Beyoncé discussed how excited she was about the collaboration stating , " I loved working with Alejandro on ' Amor Gitano . ' When I was asked to record with him , I immediately said ' yes . ' He is extremely talented . " Alejandro Fernández stated that as the production and recording of his album was nearly over , he was told that Beyoncé wanted to record a duet with a Latino male for her next album . He stated : " So when they suggested it , I liked the idea . I thought it was spectacular . So we went , I gave her the song and she liked it [ ... ] We recorded it in one day . She seemed like a fine lady to me , very humble , with a great voice . " 
 According to Beyoncé 's publicity material , she grew up in a Texas area where Spanish was a popular language and heard it all the time . She studied the language as a child but forgot it as she grew up and rose to fame . Beyoncé was planning to take Spanish lessons because she had learn the language again and then the song by imitating the sounds . She stated : " I had the best coach ; I did it phonetically , every sentence I recorded maybe four times . " A " Making of ... " video was created while Beyoncé was recording the song with Fernández . While creating the song , Beyoncé had producer Rudy Perez coach her in her Spanish , as she did not want to misrepresent the language . 
 = = Music and theme = = 
 The song was written by Reyli Barba , formerly of the band Elefante , who has worked with Fernández on multiple occasions . Additional writing was done by Jaime Flores and Beyoncé . " Amor Gitano " was produced by Beyoncé as well as Rudy Perez . Labelled as inappropriate for those under the age of 14 , the song features negative stereotyping of Romani or Gypsy people . The entire song is sung in Spanish ; the English translation of the title is " Gypsy Love " . 
 The song contains hints of flamenco pop and strong lyrics dominate the entire track . After opening with " traditional flamenco sounds and generic Gypsy Kings @-@ style guitarra riffs " , " Amor Gitano " adds hints of pop music . As the song progresses , it transcends into a ballad , demonstrating romance , excitement and extreme emotions . " Amor Gitano " is completely dominated by flamenco guitars which is interlaced with alternating vocals . With what has been described as a " thrilling blend of the stars " by James P. <unk> of Common Sense Media , both Beyoncé and Fernández exchange " heated declaration of love and passion . " Lyrically the song contains a broader , melodramatic concept of love with Beyoncé and Fernández exchanging words between verses , for instance in one part , Fernández sings " I 'm your gypsy , your pilgrimage " and Beyoncé replies " I 'm your thief , I 'm going to love you even if they tear my heart out . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Amor Gitano " debuted on February 12 , 2007 on the premiere episode of Telemundo 's El Zorro novella . The song was the first included on Beyonce 's third studio album B 'Day , where it was included on the second disc of the albums deluxe edition which included an additional six Spanish @-@ language tracks . The song was released as a bonus track on all European releases of the original B 'Day albums . " Amor Gitano " also serves as the opening track of Beyoncé 's EP Irreemplazable . " Amor Gitano " was also included on Fernández 's twelfth studio album Viento a favor ( 2007 ) . The promo shoots of the album Viento a favor highlighted the collaboration between Fernández and Beyoncé . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The song garnered generally mixed to positive reception from music critics , most of whom noted that the song may be taken offensively because of its stereotypical lyrics . The song has been described as a " plaintive ballad " by Joseph Woodard of Entertainment Weekly . San Francisco @-@ based non @-@ profit organization , Common Sense Media gave the song a mixed review , stating that it should remain an album track rather than a single . They stated , " With Beyoncé doing a pretty good job of phonetically singing in Spanish ( the occasional verb phrase doesn 't blend ) , this is more about novelty than about being a great single . " Agustin Gurza of the Los Angeles Times gave the song a positive review , naming it a stand @-@ out track off of Alejandro 's Viento a favor . Jason Birchmeier of Allmusic complimented the writing as well as the production on the song and called it " over @-@ bearing in a positive way . " As a positive spoof of the song 's premiere on Zorro : La Espada y la Rosa , Billboard created a wanted poster for Fernández , which stated he was wanted " for stealing the hearts of millions " with his performance in the song . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Amor Gitano " mainly sold in markets with a Latin demographic . It failed to make any impact on the main US Billboard Hot 100 . However , the single charted on the US Latin Pop Songs chart , and peaked at number twenty @-@ three . " Amor Gitano " was more successful on Spanish charts . The song peaked at number one on both the Spanish Singles and Download charts . It remained at the summit of the singles chart for thirteen weeks from May 28 , 2007 to August 27 , 2007 , until later replaced by " Lamento <unk> " by Dani Mata . " Amor Gitano " is also Beyoncé 's second number @-@ one hit on the Spanish Download Chart ( the first was " Beautiful Liar " ) as well as her first Spanish @-@ language number @-@ one hit . The song was certified eight @-@ times platinum ( 160 @,@ 000 copies ) for downloads and sixteen @-@ times platinum ( 320 @,@ 000 copies ) for ringtone sales by the Productores de Música de España ( PROMUSICAE ) . It is ranked at number one on the list of best @-@ selling singles in Spain . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Adapted from the B 'Day 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certification = = 
 = New Jersey Route 90 = 
 Route 90 is a 3 @.@ 22 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 18 km ) state highway in New Jersey in the United States ( U.S. ) . The western terminus is at the Betsy Ross Bridge over the Delaware River in Pennsauken Township , Camden County , where the road continues into Philadelphia , Pennsylvania as an unnumbered road that provides access to Interstate 95 . The eastern terminus is an interchange with Route 73 in Cinnaminson Township , Burlington County . It is a four @-@ to six @-@ lane freeway its entire length , interchanging with U.S. Route 130 and Camden County Route 644 . 
 Route 90 was first proposed in 1964 a year after plans were made to build the Betsy Ross Bridge and was legislated in 1965 to run from the bridge to Route 73 . The portion of the route between the Betsy Ross Bridge and U.S. Route 130 was opened in 1976 while the portion from U.S. Route 130 to Route 73 opened in 1988 . When first proposed , Route 90 was planned to extend farther south to Route 73 in Mount Laurel , intersecting Interstate 295 and the New Jersey Turnpike . There were other proposals that would have taken the freeway farther south to a planned Route 38 freeway , a planned U.S. Route 30 freeway in Berlin , and possibly the Atlantic City Expressway . However , financial and environmental obstacles prevented any southern extension of Route 90 . Across the Delaware River in Philadelphia , a freeway which was to be called the Pulaski Expressway and be designated Pennsylvania Route 90 was to have run from Interstate 95 northwest to U.S. Route 1 . This freeway was not built either due to opposition from residents and financial limitations . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 90 begins at the Pennsylvania @-@ New Jersey border on the Betsy Ross Bridge over the Delaware River , where the road continues into Philadelphia as an unnumbered freeway that heads to an interchange with Interstate 95 . Signs for the interchange along Interstate 95 refer to New Jersey Route 90 . From the Betsy Ross Bridge , Route 90 heads to the southeast into Pennsauken Township , Camden County as a six @-@ lane , 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) freeway maintained by the Delaware River Port Authority , passing over residential areas as well as County Route 543 ( River Road ) and then featuring a toll plaza in the westbound direction . Route 90 passes over County Route 615 ( Union Avenue ) before coming to an interchange with U.S. Route 130 , where maintenance is transferred to the New Jersey Department of Transportation . From here , the speed limit is increased to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . Shortly past the U.S. Route 130 interchange , the freeway narrows to four lanes before coming to a partial interchange with County Route 644 ( Haddonfield Road ) , where there is a westbound on @-@ ramp and an eastbound off @-@ ramp . The route crosses into Cinnaminson Township , Burlington County and passes over the Pennsauken Creek . A short distance later , the Route 90 freeway merges into Route 73 . 
 = = History = = 
 Plans for the Route 90 freeway were first made in 1964 , a year after the Betsy Ross Bridge over the Delaware River was proposed . In 1965 , Route 90 was legislated to run from the proposed bridge in Pennsauken east to Route 73 . In 1969 , construction began on the Betsy Ross Bridge and its approach roads . A 1970 proposal to include the planned Route 90 freeway as a part of the Interstate Highway System was denied . The Betsy Ross Bridge itself was finished in 1974 , but did not open to traffic until April 30 , 1976 due to controversies concerning the approach roads . At this time , Route 90 was completed between the Betsy Ross Bridge and U.S. Route 130 . In March 1986 , construction began on Route 90 between U.S. Route 130 and Route 73 in Cinnaminson . This section of the route , which cost $ 23 million ( $ 40 million today ) , was opened on October 25 , 1988 . 
 Originally , the Route 90 was intended to be a much longer freeway than it is today . When first proposed , it was to extend to Interstate 295 , the New Jersey Turnpike and Route 73 in Mount Laurel . There were two proposed routes of this freeway . The first proposal would have run south of Route 73 through built @-@ up areas of Cherry Hill , Maple Shade , and Mount Laurel , along the South Branch of the Pennsauken Creek . Due to the route of this proposal , it was dropped in favor of a more northerly route that ran to the north of Route 73 through less developed <unk> freeway would have cost $ 42 million ( $ 180 million today ) and was to be completed in 1975 . There were plans to extend the freeway further south than Route 73 in Mount Laurel . In 1966 , a proposal was made for Route 90 to run south to a proposed Route 38 freeway that was to run from Camden to Monmouth County . Another proposal in 1969 called for a $ 14 million ( $ 90 million today ) extension of Route 90 south to a proposed U.S. Route 30 freeway in Berlin and possibly the Atlantic City Expressway . Due to financial limitations and feared environmental impacts , the southern extension of Route 90 to Mount Laurel was canceled by 1980 . 
 Across the Delaware River in Pennsylvania , there were plans of extending the freeway northwest from the Interstate 95 interchange . This limited access highway , which was to be called the Pulaski Expressway and be designated Pennsylvania Route 90 , was to parallel the Frankford Creek and Tacony Creek and connect with U.S. Route 1 , which also was to be a limited access freeway . This proposed freeway , which was to cost from $ 125 to $ 150 million ( $ 300 to $ 400 million today ) and be completed in 1981 , was canceled by 1980 due to community opposition and financial troubles . Vestiges of this extension can be seen from Interstate 95 in the form of stub ramps and the mainline coming to an abrupt end as a barricaded bridge . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Water bull = 
 The water bull , also known as tarbh uisge in Scottish Gaelic , is a mythological Scottish creature similar to the Manx tarroo ushtey . Generally regarded as a nocturnal resident of moorland lochs , it is usually more amiable than its equine counterpart the water horse , but has similar amphibious and shapeshifting abilities . 
 The water bull is said to reproduce with standard cattle , the resulting progeny distinguishable by the small size of their ears . According to some myths , the calves of water bulls and ordinary cows ought to be killed at birth by any method other than drowning – they cannot be killed by drowning – to avoid bringing disaster to the herd . Conversely , in northern areas the calves are considered to be of superior quality . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 <unk> Edward Dwelly translates tarbh uisge or <unk> uisge from the Scottish Gaelic as " water bull , sea bull or cow " with the addition of " fabulous " within parentheses . The Celtic term for a bull is fairly consistently rendered as tarbh in Scottish Gaelic ; tarroo is the Manx variation and <unk> is the Welsh equivalent . <unk> is the Scottish Gaelic word for water , river or stream . 
 = = Folk beliefs = = 
 = = = Description and common attributes = = = 
 Belief in the existence of water bulls persisted in Scotland until at least the last quarter of the 19th century . As with many mythological creatures , descriptions are imprecise . The water bull is able to shapeshift into human form , and live on land or in water . It can be a monstrous , malevolent black beast , especially when described as a tarbh uisge , but not as nasty as the each uisge or water horse . It can also be amiable and sometimes helpful . It differs from the Manx tarroo ushtey , which is more likely to be a resident of marshland . 
 As in the case of kelpies and water horses , most myths about water bulls are about males of the species . Occasionally a water cow is mentioned , as in the Highland tale set at <unk> on Skye , where a water cow was reputed to reside in a small loch . Canine carcases left out to trap the beast were ignored . Sir Walter Scott also refers to a water cow in a story about an attempt to drain Loch na Beiste to kill one believed to be living there . 
 The Manx water bull mating with an ordinary cow usually results in the death of the cow after she produces a dead and " rude lump of flesh and skin without bones " , whereas its Scottish counterpart produces live calves whose only deformity is apparent in their ears . The bulls have no ears themselves and therefore produce calves with only half ears , described by folklorist and Tiree Minister John Gregorson Campbell as " knife @-@ eared " . Water cows living at <unk> produce offspring with disfigured crimson or purple @-@ coloured ears . 
 Folklorist John F. Campbell noted a story told on Islay , one of the Inner Hebridean islands , which demonstrates the usefulness of having a water bull . Just after a calf was born to an ordinary cow , an elderly lady , later identified as a witch , advised the herdsman to keep it separate from the other cattle , presumably after she noticed its deformed ears and suspected it was a water bull . She instructed the herdsman to rear the calf on milk from three different cows and to keep it confined in a stable for a minimum of seven years . Years later , a young woman was grazing cattle at a nearby loch when she was approached by an attractive man . He struck up a conversation with her and shortly afterwards the pair sat on the grass with his head resting in her lap , but as he fell asleep she discovered seaweed entwined in his hair , a sign that he was a water horse . She started to run back to the farm . Her suitor awoke , shapeshifted into his true equine form and chased after her . As the woman ran towards the farm , the witch shouted to the herdsman to release the water bull from the stable . The two creatures fought until they fell into the sea . The water horse never returned , but the remains of the bull were found the following day . 
 = = = Capture and killing = = = 
 Accounts of snaring and destroying the beast are rare , as it is not generally considered to be a threat . In 1819 John MacCulloch , a noted geologist , described how inhabitants around the areas of Loch Awe and Loch Rannoch tried to capture a water bull by <unk> a sheep to an oak tree as an enticement , but the tackle was not strong enough . Another story describes a farmer and his two sons hunting a water bull . The farmer 's musket was filled with silver sixpence coins as the beast can only be killed with silver . 
 According to Celtic mythology scholar James MacKillop , because the calves of water bulls and ordinary cows might bring disaster to the herd , they are supposed to be killed at birth ; it is impossible to kill them by drowning , so other methods have to be used . Conversely , stories published in 1937 by the clergyman George Sutherland suggest these hybrids are considered to be of superior quality to normal pedigree cattle in the far north of Scotland . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The bull appears to have had a sacred role in a number of Celtic cults . The animal was viewed positively by the Celts as an image of fertility and abundance ; one tribe , the <unk> , even adopted the bull 's name . It is unknown how it came to be associated with bodies of water in the form of the water bull , but historian and <unk> Charles Milton Smith has suggested that such mythological creatures might originate with the water spouts that can form over the surface of Scottish lochs , which can give the impression of a living form as they move across the water . 
 = The Boat Race 1904 = 
 The 61st Boat Race took place on 26 March 1904 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Neither boat club president was able to row through injury . In a race umpired by former rower Frederick I. Pitman , Cambridge won by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 21 minutes 37 seconds . Their third victory in a row , it took the overall record in the event to 33 – 27 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2015 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1903 race by six lengths , while Oxford led overall with 33 victories to Cambridge 's 26 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were G. C. Bourne who had rowed for university in the 1882 and 1883 races , William Fletcher , who rowed for them in the 1890 , 1891 , 1892 and 1893 races and C. K. Philips who had represented the Dark Blues four times between 1895 and 1898 . Cambridge were coached by Francis Escombe and Claude Waterhouse Hearn Taylor ( who rowed for Cambridge three times between 1901 and 1903 ) . The umpire for the second year was old Etonian and former Cambridge rower Frederick I. Pitman who rowed in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 Both boat club presidents , Monier @-@ Williams and Edwards @-@ Moss , were unable to row through injury . According to George Drinkwater , contemporary Oxford rower and subsequent author , the Dark Blues " never got together ... and invariably lost form over a long course " . He also noted that " Cambridge were not up to the standard of their last two crews . " 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 9 @.@ 75 lb ( 74 @.@ 1 kg ) , 1 pound ( 0 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Two of the Cambridge crew had previous Boat Race experience , the number six P. H. Thomas ( who was rowing for the third consecutive year ) and the cox B. G. A. Scott . Oxford 's crew had a single returning rower , the stroke A. K. Graham . Two of the participants in the race were registered as non @-@ British , in Cambridge 's Australian number two Stanley Bruce and their number seven Harold Gillies who was from New Zealand . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Pitman started the race at 7 : 45 a.m. in cold and foggy conditions , and on a weak tide . Oxford took an early lead , outrating Cambridge from the start , and getting clear of them by the Mile Post . The Light Blues steadied their rhythm and started to catch Oxford , and errant steering from the Dark Blue cox E. C. T. Warner at Harrods Furniture Depository allowed Cambridge to reduce the deficit . 
 By Hammersmith Bridge , Oxford 's lead was down to two @-@ thirds of a length and by The Doves pub , the crews were level . The Light Blues pushed ahead and were clear by Chiswick Ferry as Oxford struggled to maintain their technique . Cambridge passed the finishing post with a lead of four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , in a winning time of 21 minutes 37 seconds , the slowest winning time since the 1898 race . It was Cambridge 's third consecutive victory and their fifth in six years . Drinkwater remarked that the " race was a good one , for the crews were more evenly matched " . 
 = Glastonbury Abbey = 
 Glastonbury Abbey was a monastery in Glastonbury , Somerset , England . Its ruins , a grade I listed building and scheduled ancient monument , are open as a visitor attraction . 
 The abbey was founded in the 7th century and enlarged in the 10th . It was destroyed by a major fire in 1184 but subsequently rebuilt and by the 14th century was one of the richest and most powerful monasteries in England . The abbey controlled large tracts of surrounding land and was instrumental in major drainage projects on the Somerset Levels . The abbey was suppressed during the Dissolution of the Monasteries under King Henry VIII of England . The last abbot , Richard Whiting ( <unk> ) , was hanged , drawn and quartered as a traitor on Glastonbury Tor in 1539 . 
 From at least the 12th century the Glastonbury area has been associated with the legend of King Arthur , a connection promoted by medieval monks who asserted that Glastonbury was Avalon . Christian legends have claimed that the abbey was founded by Joseph of Arimathea in the 1st century . 
 = = History = = 
 Suggestions that Glastonbury may have been a site of religious importance in Celtic or pre @-@ Celtic times are considered dubious by the historian Ronald Hutton , but archaeological investigations by the University of Reading have demonstrated Roman and Saxon occupation of the site . In 1955 Ralegh Radford 's excavations uncovered Romano @-@ British pottery at the west end of the cloister . The abbey was founded by Britons and dates at least to the early @-@ 7th century . Dark Age occupation of the site is evidenced by pieces of ceramic wine jars that were imported from the Mediterranean . A medieval Christian legend claimed the abbey was founded by Joseph of Arimathea in the 1st century . This fanciful legend is intimately tied to Robert de Boron 's version of the Holy Grail story and Glastonbury 's connection with King Arthur from the early @-@ 12th century . 
 Glastonbury fell into Saxon hands after the Battle of Peonnum in 658 . Saxons under Cenwalh of Wessex conquered Somerset as far west as the River Parrett , perhaps with the intention of gaining control of the abbey . Cenwalh allowed the British abbot , <unk> , to remain in power , a move perhaps intended as a show of good faith to the defeated Britons . After <unk> 's death in 669 , he was replaced by an Anglo @-@ Saxon , Berhtwald , but British monks remained for many years . 
 = = = Saxon era = = = 
 King Ine of Wessex enriched the endowment of the community of monks established at Glastonbury and reputed to have directed that a stone church be built in 712 , the foundations of which form the west end of the nave . A glassworks was established at the site during the 7th century . Glastonbury was ravaged by the Danes in the 9th century . The contemporary reformed soldier Saint <unk> was sacristan at Glastonbury before he founded his own establishment in Somerset . The abbey church was enlarged in the 10th century by the abbot of Glastonbury , Dunstan , the central figure in the 10th @-@ century revival of English monastic life , who instituted the Benedictine Rule at Glastonbury . He also built the cloisters . Dunstan became Archbishop of Canterbury in 960 . In 967 , King Edmund was interred at Glastonbury . In 1016 Edmund Ironside , who had lost England to Canute but held onto the title of King of Wessex , was also buried there . Cnut 's charter of 1032 was " written and promulgated in the wooden church at Glastonbury , in the kings presence " . 
 The medieval Glastonbury Canal was built about the middle of the 10th century to link the abbey with the River Brue , a distance of about 1 @.@ 75 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 900 yd ) . Its purpose is believed to be to transport stone to build the abbey , but later was used to transport produce , including grain , wine and fish , from the abbey 's outlying properties . Much of the building stone came from the abbey 's quarries at Doulting , accessed by way of the River Sheppey at Pilton . From the 11th century the abbey was the centre of a large water @-@ borne transport network as further <unk> and new channels were made , including the diversion of the Brue to access to the estate at Meare and an easier route to the Bristol Channel . In the 13th century the abbey 's head boatman transported the abbot in an eight @-@ oared boat on visits to the abbey 's nearby manors . 
 = = = Medieval era = = = 
 = = = = Norman conquest = = = = 
 At the Norman Conquest in 1066 , the wealth of Glastonbury made it a prime prize . The new Norman abbot , Turstin , added to the church , unusually building to the east of the older Saxon church and away from the ancient cemetery , thus shifting the sanctified site . This was later changed by <unk> the next abbot , who built a larger church . Not all the new Normans were suitable heads of religious communities . In 1077 , Thurstin was dismissed after his armed retainers killed monks by the High Altar . In 1086 , when Domesday Book was commissioned , Glastonbury Abbey was the richest monastery in the country . About 1125 , the abbot Henry of Blois commissioned a history of Glastonbury from the esteemed historian William of Malmesbury , who was a guest of the monks . His work " On the Antiquity of the <unk> Church " was compiled sometime between 1129 and 1139 as part of a campaign to establish the abbey 's primacy against Westminster . It is the source for much of our knowledge of the abbey 's early history but is far below William 's generally excellent standards : his acceptance of the monks ' forged charters and unsubstantiated early legends is apparent and even his list of the community 's abbots cannot be reconciled with 10th @-@ century originals subsequently discovered . These problems and the discrepancies between " On the Antiquity " and his own later histories has led many scholars to assume William 's original text was more careful and its accounts of " Phagan " and " <unk> " , along with various passages about Arthur , were later additions meant to bolster the monks ' case . 
 Early drainage work on the Somerset Levels was carried out in the later years of the 12th century , with the responsibility for maintaining all the watercourses between Glastonbury and the sea being placed on named individuals among whom were Ralph de Sancta Barbara of Brentmarsh . In 1129 , the abbot of Glastonbury was recorded as inspecting enclosed land at Lympsham . Efforts to control flooding on the Parrett were recorded around the same date . In 1234 , 722 acres ( 2 @.@ 9 km2 ) were reclaimed near Westonzoyland and , from the accounts in the abbey 's rent books , this had increased to 972 acres ( 393 ha ) by 1240 . In the 14th century a Fish House was built at Meare for the chief fisherman of the abbot of Glastonbury that was also used for salting and preparing fish . It is the only surviving monastic fishery building in England . At the time of the Dissolution in 1540 , Meare Pool was said to contain a great abundance of pike , tench , roach and eels . In 1638 it was owned by William <unk> , who described it as " lately a fish pool " . The importance of this industry is illustrated by a series of acrimonious disputes between Glastonbury and the Dean and Chapter of Wells Cathedral . The abbey required fish on Fridays , fast days and during Lent . As many as 5000 eels were landed in a typical year . 
 = = = = King Arthur 's tomb = = = = 
 See also Avalon 
 In 1184 , a great fire at Glastonbury destroyed the monastic buildings . Reconstruction began almost immediately and the Lady Chapel , which includes the well , was consecrated in 1186 . There is evidence that , in the 12th century , the ruined nave was renovated enough for services while the great new church was being constructed . Parts of the walls of the aisle and crossing having been completed by 1189 , progress then continued more slowly . 
 Pilgrim visits had fallen and in 1191 the alleged discovery of King Arthur and Queen Guinevere 's tomb in the cemetery provided fresh impetus for visiting Glastonbury . A contemporaneous , though not an eyewitness account was given by Giraldus Cambrensis in his De <unk> <unk> ( " Instruction of a Prince , " ca . 1193 ) and recollected in his Speculum Ecclesiae , ca . 1216 according to which the abbot , Henry de Sully , commissioned a search , discovering at the depth of 16 feet ( 5 m ) a massive hollowed oak trunk containing two skeletons . Above it , under the covering stone , according to Giraldus , was a leaden cross with the unmistakably specific inscription Hic <unk> sepultus <unk> rex <unk> in insula Avalonia ( " Here lies interred the famous King Arthur on the Isle of Avalon " ) . 
 According to Giraldus , the digging for the tomb was prompted by the intelligence obtained by Henry II from an aged British ( Welsh ) bard ( Latin : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . On the other hand , Ralph of Coggeshall writing somewhat later , states more prosaically that they came upon the older tomb by chance while removing the earth to bury a certain monk who had expressed strong desire to be buried there . Both Giraldus and Ralph say that the spot lay in between two pyramids in the abbey . William of Malmesbury does not refer to Arthur 's tomb but elaborates on the pyramids of varying height , upon which were statues with inscriptions " Her <unk> , and <unk> ... <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , etc . " 
 Historians today generally dismiss the authenticity of the find , attributing it to a publicity stunt performed to raise funds to repair the Abbey , which was mostly burned in 1184 . William of Malmesbury 's history of the English kings stated " Arthur ’ s grave is nowhere seen , whence antiquity of fables still claims that he will return " and his work " On the Antiquity of the <unk> Church " — larded as it is with known and suspected pious forgeries — nowhere mentions a connection between the abbey and either Arthur 's grave or Avalon . The fact that the search for Arthur 's body is connected to Henry II and Edward I , both kings who fought major Welsh wars , has had scholars suggest that propaganda may have played a part as well . Gerald , a constant supporter of royal authority , in his account of the discovery clearly aims to destroy the idea of the possibility of King 's Arthur 's messianic return : " Many tales are told and many legends have been invented about King Arthur and his mysterious ending . In their stupidity the British [ i.e. Welsh , Cornish and Bretons ] people maintain that he is still alive . Now that the truth is known , I have taken the trouble to add a few more details in this present chapter . The fairy @-@ tales have been snuffed out , and the true and indubitable facts are made known , so that what really happened must be made crystal clear to all and separated from the myths which have accumulated on the subject . " 
 = = = = Annexation to Bath and Wells = = = = 
 In 1197 , Savaric FitzGeldewin , Bishop of Bath and Wells , traded the city of Bath to the king in return for the monastery of Glastonbury . Savaric secured the support of Pope Celestine III for the takeover the abbey as the seat of his bishopric , replacing Bath . The plan was that Savaric would be bishop of Bath as well as abbot of Glastonbury . In his support , Savaric obtained letters from various ecclesiastics , including the Archbishop of Canterbury , Hubert Walter , that claimed that this arrangement would settle longstanding disputes between the abbey and the bishops . The monks of Glastonbury objected to Savaric 's plan , and sent an appeal to Rome , which was dismissed in 1196 . But King Richard , no longer imprisoned in Germany , sided with the monks , and allowed them to elect an abbot , William Pica , in place of Savaric , who responded by excommunicating the new abbot . With the succession of John as king in place of his brother Richard in 1199 , Savaric managed to force his way into the monastery and set up his episcopal see within the abbey . The monks appealed to Innocent III , the new pope . 
 At first , Innocent took the side of the monks , and lifted Pica 's excommunication . While the newest appeal was taking place , Pica and a number of his supporters , who had travelled to Rome to appeal in person , died in Rome in 1200 , and some of the monks alleged this was by poison administered on the orders of Savaric . Meanwhile , Innocent had changed his mind , and reinstalled Savaric as abbot , ordering some English clergy to judge the specifics of the case , and allot the revenues of the abbey between Savaric and the monks . Savaric then attempted to secure more control over other monasteries in his diocese , but died before he could set the plans in motion . 
 The bishops continued to use the title Bishop of Bath and Glastonbury until finally renouncing their claim to Glastonbury in 1219 . Services in the reconsecrated Great Church had begun on Christmas Day , 1213 , most likely before it was entirely completed . King Edward I and Queen Eleanor attended the magnificent service at the reburial of King Arthur 's remains to the foot of the High Altar in 1278 . 
 = = = = 14th and 15th centuries = = = = 
 In the 14th century , only Westminster Abbey was more richly endowed and appointed than Glastonbury . The abbot of Glastonbury kept great state , now attested to simply by the ruins of the Abbot 's Kitchen , with four huge fireplaces at its corners . The kitchen was part of the magnificent abbot 's house begun under Abbot John de <unk> ( 1334 – 42 ) . It is one of the best preserved medieval kitchens in Europe , and the only substantial monastic building surviving at Glastonbury . Archaeological excavations have revealed a special apartment erected at the south end of the abbot 's house for a visit from Henry VII , who visited the abbot in a royal progress , as he visited any other great territorial magnate . The conditions of life in England during the Wars of the Roses became so unsettled that a wall was built around the abbey 's precincts . 
 The George Hotel and Pilgrims ' Inn was built in the late 15th century to accommodate visitors to the abbey . It has been designated as a Grade I listed building . The abbey also held lands outside the town serving large parts of Somerset and including parts of neighbouring counties . Tithe barns were built to hold the crops due to the abbey including those at Doulting and Pilton . 
 = = = Dissolution of the Monasteries = = = 
 At the start of the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536 , there were over 850 monasteries , nunneries and friaries in England . By 1541 , there were none . More than 15 @,@ 000 monks and nuns had been dispersed and the buildings had been seized by the Crown to be sold off or leased to new lay occupiers . Glastonbury Abbey was reviewed as having significant amounts of silver and gold as well as its attached lands . In September 1539 , the abbey was visited by Richard Layton , Richard Pollard and Thomas Moyle , who arrived there without warning on the orders of Thomas Cromwell . The abbey was stripped of its valuables and Abbot Richard Whiting ( <unk> ) , who had been a signatory to the Act of Supremacy that made Henry VIII the head of the church , resisted and was hanged , drawn and quartered as a traitor on Glastonbury Tor on 15 November 1539 . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 After the Dissolution , two of the abbey 's manors in Wiltshire were sold by the Crown to John Thynne and thereafter descended in his family , who much later became Marquesses of Bath . The <unk> have preserved many of the abbey 's Wiltshire records at Longleat up to the present day . The ruins of the abbey itself was stripped of lead and dressed stones hauled away to be used in other buildings . The site was granted by Edward VI to Edward Seymour , 1st Duke of Somerset who established a colony of Protestant Dutch weavers on the site . When Seymour was attainted in 1551 , the abbey site reverted to the crown , but the weavers remained until they were removed in the reign of Queen Mary . In 1559 Elizabeth I of England granted the site to Peter Carew , and it remained in private ownership until the beginning of the 20th century . Further stones were removed in the 17th century , so that by the beginning of the 18th century the abbey was described as a ruin . The only building to survive intact is the Abbot 's Kitchen , which served as a Quaker meeting house . Early in the 19th century , gunpowder was used to dislodge further stones and the site became a quarry . The Ancient Monuments Protection Act 1882 stopped further damage to the site and led to the first historical and archaeological surveys . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 The ruins of Glastonbury Abbey were purchased by the Bath and Wells Diocesan Trust in 1908 . The ruins are now the property of and managed by the Glastonbury Abbey trust . On acquiring the site the trust appointed Frederick Bligh Bond to direct an archaeological investigation . Bond discovered the Edgar Chapel , North Porch and St Dunstan 's Chapel , however relations with his employers turned sour when he revealed in his 1919 book , The Gates of Remembrance , that he had made many of his interpretations in collaboration with a psychic medium . He was dismissed by Bishop Armitage Robinson in 1921 , because of his use of <unk> and psychic archaeology but is remembered as the man who " galvanised our cultural understanding of Glastonbury " . 
 A pilgrimage to the ruins of Glastonbury Abbey was held by a few local churches in 1924 . Pilgrimages continue today to be held ; in the second half of June for the Anglicans and early in July for the Catholics and they attract visitors from all over Western Europe . Services are celebrated in the Anglican , Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox traditions . The abbey site is visited by over 100 @,@ 000 a year . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The ruins of the great church , along with the Lady Chapel , are grade I listed buildings , and a Scheduled Ancient Monument . It is set in 36 acres ( 150 @,@ 000 m2 ) of parkland and open to the public . It is approached by the abbey gatehouse which was built in the mid 14th century and completely restored in 1810 . The 14th century abbey barn is also open to the public , outside the walls , as part of the Somerset Rural Life Museum . 
 The great church was 220 feet ( 67 m ) in length and 45 feet ( 14 m ) wide . The choir was 155 feet ( 47 m ) long and the transept was 160 feet ( 49 m ) long . St Joseph 's chapel was 110 feet ( 34 m ) long and 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) wide . The remaining portions are of the clerestory and triforium arcades which were the supports of the central square tower . Other fragments of structures which remain include portions of the outer walls of the chancel aisles and the 14th century <unk> . There is also surviving stonework from the south nave aisle wall , west front and the Galilee along with its crypt linked to St Mary 's Chapel . The Lady Chapel , from which the walls survive , was described in 1478 as being 34 yards ( 31 m ) in length and 8 yards ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) wide . 
 The Abbot 's Kitchen is described as " one of the best preserved medieval kitchens in Europe " . The 14th century octagonal building is supported by curved buttresses on each side leading up to a cornice with grotesque gargoyles . Inside are four large arched fireplaces with smoke outlets above them , with another outlet in the centre of the pyramidal roof . The kitchen was attached to the 80 feet ( 24 m ) high abbot 's hall , although only one small section of its wall remains . 
 Work is still underway to analyse the results from excavations during the 20th century , and a new geophysical survey , which may help to specify exactly the size of different buildings and where they were situated . Early work has identified a Saxon enclosure ditch and , potentially the earliest cloister in Britain . 
 = = = Library = = = 
 The abbey library was described by John Leland , King Henry VIII 's antiquary who visited it , as containing unique copies of ancient histories of England and unique early Christian documents . It seems to have been affected by the fire of 1184 , but still housed a remarkable collection until 1539 when it was dispersed at the Dissolution of the Monasteries . Around 40 of the manuscripts from Glastonbury are known to have survived after the dissolution . 
 = = = Abbey retreat house = = = 
 Within the abbey wall , but closed to the public , is the abbey retreat house , which is now used by the Diocese of Bath and Wells . The Tudor Gothic house was built between 1829 and 1830 by John Buckler from the stones of the abbey ruins for John Fry Reeves . It was altered and extended between 1850 and 1860 , with further alterations in 1957 . 
 = = Glastonbury Thorn = = 
 A specimen of Common Hawthorn found at Glastonbury , first mentioned in an early sixteenth century anonymous metrical <unk> of Joseph of Arimathea , was unusual in that it flowered twice in a year , once as normal on " old wood " in spring , and once on " new wood " ( the current season 's matured new growth ) in the winter . This tree has been widely propagated by grafting or cuttings , with the cultivar name ' <unk> ' or ' <unk> ' . The custom of sending a budded branch of the Glastonbury thorn to the Queen at Christmas was initiated by James Montague , Bishop of Bath and Wells during James I 's reign , who sent a branch to Queen Anne , King James I 's consort . Trees survive from earlier grafts to perpetuate the Glastonbury legend , among them two other Holy Thorns in the grounds of St John ’ s Church in Glastonbury . The blossom sent to the Queen now comes from one of these . 
 = Johann von Klenau = 
 Johann von Klenau ( 13 April 1758 – 6 October 1819 ) , also called Johann Josef Cajetan von Klenau und Janowitz was a field marshal in the Habsburg army . Klenau , the son of a Bohemian noble , joined the Habsburg military as a teenager and fought in Austria 's wars with the Ottoman Empire , the French Revolutionary Wars , and the Napoleonic Wars , in which he commanded a corps in several important battles . 
 In the early years of the French Revolutionary Wars , Klenau distinguished himself at the Wissembourg lines , and led a battle @-@ winning charge at Handschuhsheim in 1795 . As commander of the Coalition 's left flank in the Adige campaign in northern Italy in 1799 , he was instrumental in isolating the French @-@ held fortresses on the Po River by organizing and supporting a peasant uprising in the countryside . Afterward , Klenau became the youngest lieutenant field marshal in the history of the Habsburg military . 
 As a corps commander , Klenau led key elements of the Austrian army in its victory at Aspern @-@ Esslingen and its defeat at Wagram , where his troops covered the retreat of the main Austrian force . He commanded the IV Corps at the 1813 Battle of Dresden and again at the Battle of Nations at Leipzig , where he prevented the French from outflanking the main Austrian force on the first day of the engagement . After the Battle of Nations , Klenau organized and implemented the successful Dresden blockade and negotiated the French capitulation there . In the 1814 – 15 campaign , he commanded the Corps Klenau of the Army of Italy . After the war in 1815 , Klenau was appointed commanding general in Moravia and Silesia . He died in 1819 . 
 = = Family and early career = = 
 Johann von Klenau was born into an old Bohemian nobility family at <unk> Castle in the Austrian province of Bohemia on 13 April 1758 . The family of Klenau dates to the fifteenth century , and the family of Janowitz to the fourteenth . The family name of Klenau regularly appears in records after the sixteenth century . The Klenau family was one of the oldest dynasties in Bohemia , and many of the noble families of Bohemia have sprung from marriages into the Klenau line . The original name of the family was <unk> , with the predicate von <unk> . The family was raised to the baronetcy in 1623 with the certificate granted to one Johann von <unk> and , in 1629 , to his son , Wilhelm . The Imperial councilor and judge in Regensburg , Wilhelm von Klenau , was raised to comital status in 1630 , and to the status of Reichsgraf , or imperial count , in 1633 . 
 Johann Klenau entered the 47th Infantry Regiment <unk> in 1774 , at the age of 17 , and became a second lieutenant in 1775 . After transferring to a <unk> regiment as a Rittmeister , or captain of cavalry , Klenau fought in the short War of the Bavarian Succession , also known as the Potato War . Most of this conflict occurred in Bohemia ( part of the modern Czech Republic ) from 1778 to 1779 , between the Habsburg Monarchy , Saxony , Bavaria and Prussia . The war had no battles , but was instead a series of skirmishes and raids , making it the ideal situation for a captain of light cavalry . In their raids , forces from both sides sought to confiscate or destroy the other 's provisions , fodder , and materiel . 
 In the Austro – Turkish War ( 1787 – 1791 ) , one of the House of Habsburg 's many 18th @-@ century wars with the Ottoman Empire , Klenau served in the 26th Dragoon Regiment Toscana , and later transferred to the 1st Dragoon Regiment Kaiser . His regiment repulsed an attack of superior numbers of Ottoman forces on 28 September 1788 , at Zemun , near Belgrade , for which he received a personal commendation and earned his promotion to major . In his early military career Klenau demonstrated , not only at Zemun but also in the earlier skirmishing and raids of 1778 and 1779 , the attributes required of a successful cavalry officer : the military acumen to evaluate a situation , the flexibility to adjust his plans on a moment 's notice , and the personal courage to take the same risks he demanded of his men . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Initially , the rulers of Europe considered the 1789 revolution in France as an affair between the French king and his subjects , and not a matter in which they should interfere . However , as the rhetoric grew more strident after 1790 , the European monarchs began to view the French upheavals with alarm . Among the concerned monarchs were the Holy Roman Emperor Leopold II , who feared for the life and well @-@ being of his sister , the Queen of France , Marie Antoinette . In August 1791 , in consultation with French émigré nobles and Frederick William II of Prussia , he issued the Declaration of Pillnitz , in which they declared the interest of the monarchs of Europe as one with the interests of Louis XVI and his family . They threatened ambiguous , but quite serious , consequences if anything should happen to the royal family . 
 The French Republican position became increasingly difficult . Compounding problems in international relations , French émigrés agitated for support of a counter @-@ revolution . From their base in Koblenz , adjacent to the French – German border , they sought direct support for military intervention from the royal houses of Europe , and raised an army . On 20 April 1792 , the French National Convention declared war on Austria and its allies . In this War of the First Coalition ( 1792 – 1798 ) , France ranged itself against most of the European states sharing land or water borders with her . Portugal and the Ottoman Empire also joined the alliance against France . 
 = = = Klenau and the War of the First Coalition = = = 
 On 12 February 1793 , Klenau received his promotion to lieutenant colonel in a Lancer regiment , and joined the Austrian force in the Rhineland , serving under General of Cavalry Count Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser . He was captured later in the spring near the town of Offenbach , but was freed unexpectedly by two Austrian Hussars from the 17th Regiment Archduke Alexander Leopold , who came upon him and his captors . At the first Battle of Wissembourg , Klenau commanded a brigade in Friedrich , Baron von Hotze 's 3rd Column on 13 October 1793 , during which the Habsburg force stormed the 19 kilometers ( 12 mi ) earthen ramparts held by the French . 
 By the terms of the Peace of Basel ( 22 July 1795 ) , the Prussian army was to leave the Rhine and Main river valleys ; as it did so , the French quickly overran these territories . On 20 September , the fortress at Mannheim surrendered to the French without firing a shot . Mannheim had been garrisoned by a Bavarian commander , Lieutenant General Baron von <unk> , and several battalions of Bavarian grenadiers , fusiliers , and guard regiments , plus six companies of artillery . A small Austrian force augmented the Bavarian contingent . At the same time , further north , the fortified town of Düsseldorf , also garrisoned by Bavarians , capitulated to the French . With these capitulations , the French controlled the Rhine crossings at Düsseldorf and at the junction of the Rhine and the Main rivers . To maintain contact with the forces on their flanks , the Austrian commanders , outraged at this fait accompli , had to withdraw across the Main river . 
 The nearby city of Heidelberg , further south of the Main on the Neckar River , appeared to be the next French target . Lieutenant Field Marshal Peter Quasdanovich , who had remained in the region between Mannheim and Heidelberg , used a hastily enhanced abatis to establish a defensive line at the sleepy country village of Handschuhsheim , east of the city of Heidelberg . The French force of two divisions — about 12 @,@ 000 men — outnumbered the 8 @,@ 000 defenders , and the position seemed untenable . 
 = = = = Klenau 's charge = = = = 
 At Handschuhsheim , Klenau commanded a mounted brigade that included the six squadrons of the 4th Cuirassiers Regiment Hohenzollern , two squadrons of the 3rd Dragoon Regiment Kaiser , six squadrons of the 44th Hussar regiment <unk> , and four squadrons of the French émigré regiment Allemand . On 24 September 1795 , seeing the French , with five battalions and a regiment of Chasseurs overwhelming the troops of General Adam Bajalics von <unk> , Klenau quickly organized his own brigade into three columns and attacked . In a battle @-@ winning charge , Klenau 's brigade ( approximately 4 @,@ 000 men ) dispersed the French divisions of Charles Pichegru 's Army of the Upper Rhine , under the command of General of Division Georges Joseph Dufour . His cavalry caught Dufour 's entire division in the open , dispersed Dufour 's six squadrons of Chasseurs , and cut down Dufour 's infantry . With a loss of 193 men and 54 horses , the Austrians inflicted over 1 @,@ 500 French casualties , including 1 @,@ 000 killed ; they also captured eight guns , nine ammunition caissons and their teams , and General Dufour himself . In the action , General of Brigade <unk> was wounded , as was Dufour before his capture . Additional Austrian losses included 35 men and 58 horses killed , six officers , 144 men and 78 horses wounded , and two men and three horses missing . For his role in this exploit , Klenau was promoted to colonel and awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Military Order of Maria Theresa . At Handschuhsheim , as he had earlier at <unk> , Klenau demonstrated his " higher military calling , " establishing himself as an intrepid , tenacious , and quick @-@ thinking field officer . 
 = = = Action in the Italian theater = = = 
 In 1796 , Klenau commanded the advance guard of Peter Quasdanovich 's right column in northern Italy . As the column descended from the Alps at the city of Brescia , reconnaissance found the local French garrison unprepared . At midnight , Klenau led two squadrons of the 8th Hussar Regiment Wurmser ( named for its Colonel @-@ Proprietor Dagobert von Wurmser ) , a battalion of the 37th Infantry Regiment De Vins , and one company of the Mahony Jäger . With their approach masked by fog and darkness , the small force surprised the Brescia garrison on the morning of 30 July , capturing not only the 600 – 700 French soldiers stationed there , but also three officials of the French Directory : Jean Lannes , Joachim Murat , and François Étienne de Kellermann . However , within two days , Klenau 's force had to face Napoleon Bonaparte and 12 @,@ 000 Frenchmen ; his small advance guard was quickly pushed out of Brescia on 1 August . At the subsequent Battle of <unk> of 2 – 3 August 1796 , the French forced Quasdanovich 's column to withdraw into the mountains . This isolated Quasdanovich 's force from Wurmser 's main army by Lake Garda , and freed the French to concentrate on the main force at Castiglione delle <unk> , further south ; Bonaparte 's victory at the Battle of Castiglione forced Wurmser across the Mincio River , and allowed the French to return to the siege of Mantua . 
 By early September , Klenau 's force had rejoined Wurmser 's column and fought at the Battle of Bassano on 8 September . Here , the Austrians were outnumbered almost two to one by the French . As the Austrian army retreated , Bonaparte ordered a pursuit that caused the Austrians to abandon their artillery and baggage . Most of the third battalion of the 59th <unk> , and the first battalion of the Border Infantry Banat were captured and these units ceased to exist after this battle . The Austrians lost 600 killed and wounded , and 2 @,@ 000 captured , plus lost 30 guns , eight colors , and 200 limbers and ammunition waggons . Klenau was with Wurmser 's column again as it fought its way to besieged Mantua and he participated in the combat at La Favorita near there on 15 September . This was the second attempt to relieve the fortress ; as the Austrians withdrew from the battle , they retreated into Mantua itself , and from 15 September until 2 February 1797 , Klenau was trapped in the fortress while the city was besieged . Following the Austrian loss at the Battle of Rivoli , 48 kilometers ( 30 mi ) north of Mantua , on 14 – 15 January 1797 , when clearly there would be no Austrian relief for Mantua , Klenau negotiated conditions of surrender with French General Jean Sérurier , although additional evidence suggests that Bonaparte was present and dictated far more generous terms than Klenau expected . When the garrison capitulated in February , Klenau co @-@ signed the document with Wurmser . 
 = = = Peace and the Congress of Rastatt = = = 
 Although the Coalition forces — Austria , Russia , Prussia , Great Britain , Sardinia , among others — had achieved several victories at Verdun , Kaiserslautern , Neerwinden , Mainz , Amberg and Würzburg , in Italy the Coalition 's achievements were more limited . In northern Italy , despite the presence of the most experienced of the Austrian generals — Dagobert Wurmser — the Austrians could not lift the siege at Mantua , and the efforts of Napoleon in northern Italy pushed Austrian forces to the border of Habsburg lands . Napoleon dictated a cease @-@ fire at Leoben on 17 April 1797 , which led to the formal peace treaty , the Treaty of Campo Formio , which went into effect on 17 October 1797 . 
 The treaty called for meetings between the involved parties to work out the exact territorial and remunerative details . These were to be convened at a small town in the upper Rhine valley , Rastatt , close to the French border . The primary combatants of the First Coalition , France and Austria , were highly suspicious of each other 's motives , and the Congress quickly derailed in a mire of intrigue and diplomatic posturing . The French demanded more territory than originally agreed . The Austrians were reluctant to cede the designated territories . The Rastatt delegates could not , or would not , orchestrate the transfer of agreed @-@ upon territories to compensate the German princes for their losses . Compounding the Congress 's problems , tensions grew between France and most of the First Coalition allies , either separately or jointly . Ferdinand of Naples refused to pay agreed @-@ upon tribute to France , and his subjects followed this refusal with a rebellion . The French invaded Naples and established the Parthenopean Republic . A republican uprising in the Swiss cantons , encouraged by the French Republic which offered military support , led to the overthrow of the Swiss Confederation and the establishment of the Helvetic Republic . 
 Other factors contributed to the rising tensions . On his way to Egypt in 1798 , Napoleon had stopped on the Island of Malta and forcibly removed the Hospitallers from their possessions . This angered Paul , Tsar of Russia , who was the honorary head of the Order . The French Directory was convinced that the Austrians were conniving to start another war . Indeed , the weaker the French Republic seemed , the more seriously the Austrians , the Neapolitans , the Russians , and the English actually discussed this possibility . 
 = = = Outbreak of war in 1799 = = = 
 Archduke Charles of Austria , arguably among the best commanders of the House of Habsburg in the late 18th and early 19th centuries , had taken command of the Austrian army in late January . Although Charles was unhappy with the strategy set by his brother , the Holy Roman Emperor Francis II , he had acquiesced to the less ambitious plan to which Francis and his advisers , the Aulic Council , had agreed : Austria would fight a defensive war and would maintain a continuous defensive line from the southern bank of the Danube , across the Swiss Cantons and into northern Italy . The archduke had stationed himself at Friedberg for the winter , 4 @.@ 7 kilometers ( 3 mi ) east @-@ south @-@ east of Augsburg . His army settled into cantonments in the environs of Augsburg , extending south along the Lech river . 
 As winter broke in 1799 , on 1 March , General Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan and his army of 25 @,@ 000 , the Army of the Danube , crossed the Rhine at Kehl . Instructed to block the Austrians from access to the Swiss alpine passes , Jourdan planned to isolate the armies of the Coalition in Germany from allies in northern Italy , and prevent them from assisting one another . By crossing the Rhine in early March , Jourdan acted before Charles ' army could be reinforced by Austria 's Russian allies , who had agreed to send 60 @,@ 000 seasoned soldiers and their more @-@ seasoned commander , Generalissimo Alexander Suvorov . Furthermore , if the French held the interior passes in Switzerland , they could prevent the Austrians from transferring troops between northern Italy and southwestern Germany , and use the routes to move their own forces between the two theaters . 
 The Army of the Danube advanced through the Black Forest and eventually established a line from Lake Constance to the south bank of the Danube , centered at the Imperial City of Pfullendorf in Upper Swabia . At the same time , the Army of Switzerland , under command of André Masséna , pushed toward the Grisons , intending to cut the Austrian lines of communication and relief at the mountain passes by <unk> and Feldkirch . The Army of Italy , commanded by Louis Joseph Schérer , had already advanced into northern Italy , to deal with Ferdinand and the recalcitrant Neapolitans . 
 = = = Campaigns of 1799 – 1800 = = = 
 At the onset of the 1799 campaign in Italy , Klenau and his 4 @,@ 500 troops incited and then assisted an uprising of 4 @,@ 000 or more peasants in the Italian countryside , adjacent to the Po River , and the subsequent general insurgency pinned down the French on the river 's east bank . Klenau 's troops , especially some of his Italian @-@ speaking officers , incited peasants against French authority , provided arms and suggested military targets of opportunity , and incorporated the Austrian @-@ armed peasants into their military actions . 
 = = = = Klenau 's siege of Ferrara = = = = 
 The Ferrara fortress had been constructed in the 16th century by Pope Paul V , built in the style of the Trace italienne , or a star , and it straddled the southwest corner of the town 's fortifications . The fortress offered whoever possessed it a strategic point in the region : it was the lynch @-@ pin of the French defense . In spring 1799 , it was commanded by Chef @-@ de @-@ brigade Lapointe with a garrison of close to 2 @,@ 500 . On 15 April , Klenau approached the fortress and requested its capitulation . The commander refused . Klenau blockaded the city , leaving a small group of artillery and troops to continue the siege . For the next three days , Klenau patrolled the countryside , capturing the surrounding strategic points of <unk> , <unk> and the Mirandola fortress . The besieged garrison made several sorties from the Saint Paul 's Gate , which were repulsed by the insurgent peasants . The French attempted two rescues of the beleaguered fortress : In the first , on 24 April , a force of 400 <unk> was repulsed at Mirandola . In the second , General Montrichard tried to raise the city blockade by advancing with a force of 4 @,@ 000 . Finally , at the end of the month , a column of Pierre @-@ Augustin Hulin reached and resupplied the fortress . 
 Klenau took possession of the town on 21 May , and garrisoned it with a light battalion . The Jewish residents of Ferrara paid 30 @,@ 000 ducats to prevent the pillage of the city by Klenau 's forces ; this was used to pay the wages of <unk> 's troops . Although Klenau held the town , the French still possessed the town 's fortress . After making the standard request for surrender at 0800 , which was refused , Klenau ordered a barrage from his mortars and howitzers . After two magazines caught fire , the commandant was summoned again to surrender ; there was some delay , but a flag of truce was sent at 2100 , and the capitulation was concluded at 0100 the next day . Upon taking possession of the fortress , Klenau found 75 new artillery pieces , plus ammunition and six months ' worth of provisions . The peasant uprisings pinned down the French and by capturing Ferrara , Klenau helped to isolate the other French @-@ held fortresses from patrols , reconnaissance , and relief and supply forces . This made the fortresses and their garrisons vulnerable to Suvorov 's main force , operating in the Po River valley . In the course of the summer , Suvorov 's forces took a key position on the <unk> River on 17 June 1799 , west of Piacenza , another at the junction of the Trebbia River and the Po , in northern Italy , on 17 – 20 June 1799 , and the town of Novi <unk> on 15 August 1799 , 22 kilometers ( 14 mi ) southeast of Alessandria on the Tanaro river . 
 = = = = 1800 Campaign in Swabia = = = = 
 In early 1800 , Klenau transferred to the K ( <unk> ) und K ( <unk> ) ( Imperial and Royal ) army of Germany , in Swabia , under the command of Feldzeugmeister Paul , Baron von Kray . The 1800 campaign in southwest Germany began on 1 May 1800 , at the village of <unk> , 4 kilometers ( 2 mi ) east of Schaffhausen ( Switzerland ) ; there a small force of 6 @,@ 000 men under command of General of Brigade François Goullus defeated 4 @,@ 000 men , three battalions of the 7th Infantry Regiment Schröder , commanded by Lieutenant Field Marshal Karl Eugen , Prince von Lothringen @-@ <unk> . Following this clash , the impenetrable Württemberg fortress , Hohentwiel , capitulated to the French , in what the Duke of Württemberg considered a scandalous lack of military courage . 
 After these encounters , the French army moved toward Stockach , less than 10 kilometers ( 6 mi ) northwest of Hohentwiel , where they engaged the Austrian force , under Kray , in the battles of Engen and Stockach and Messkirch against the troops of the French Army of the Rhine , under Jean Victor Moreau . Stockach , at the western tip of Lake Constance , covered east @-@ west and north @-@ south crossroads ; it and near @-@ by Engen , only 20 kilometers ( 12 mi ) west , had been the site of a French loss 14 months earlier . In 1800 , a different general , Moreau , brought 84 @,@ 000 troops against Kray 's 72 @,@ 000 men ; this concentration of French force pushed the Austrian army eastward . Two days later , at Messkirch 23 kilometers ( 14 mi ) northeast of Stockach , Moreau brought 52 @,@ 000 men , including Claude Lecourbe 's and Dominique Vandamme 's divisions , which had experienced the disappointing French loss in 1799 , and Étienne Marie Antoine Champion de Nansouty 's experienced cavalry against Kray 's force of 48 @,@ 000 . Although the French lost more men , once again they drove the Austrians from the field . 
 Despite the Imperial losses at these battles , Klenau 's solid field leadership led to his promotion to lieutenant field marshal . That year he also married the widowed Maria Josephina <unk> de <unk> , daughter of <unk> de <unk> . They had one daughter , Maria , born at the end of the year . From 1801 to 1805 , during which Austria remained aloof from the ongoing friction between Britain and Napoleon 's France , Klenau commanded a division in Prague , and was named as Colonel and Inhaber of the 5th Dragoon Regiment . 
 = = Napoleonic Wars = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In a series of conflicts from 1803 to 1815 , known as the Napoleonic Wars , the alliances of the powers of Europe formed five coalitions against the First French Empire of Napoleon . Like the wars sparked by the French Revolution of 1789 , these wars revolutionized the construction , organization , and training of European armies and led to an unprecedented militarization , mainly due to mass conscription . French power rose quickly , conquering most of Europe , but collapsed rapidly after France 's disastrous invasion of Russia in 1812 . Napoleon 's empire ultimately suffered complete military defeat in the 1813 – 1814 campaigns , resulting in the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy in France . Although Napoleon made a spectacular return in 1815 , known as the Hundred Days , his defeat at the Battle of Waterloo , the pursuit of his army and himself , his abdication , and his banishment to the Island of Saint Helena , concluded the Napoleonic wars . 
 = = = War of the Third Coalition = = = 
 In the War of the Third Coalition , 1803 – 1806 , an alliance of Austria , Portugal , Russia , and others fought the First French Empire and its client states . Although several naval battles determined control of the seas , the outcome of the war was determined on the continent , predominantly in two major land operations . In the Ulm campaign , Klenau 's force achieved the single Austrian victory prior to the surrender of the Austrian army in Swabia . In the second determining event , the decisive French victory at the Battle of Austerlitz over the combined Russian and Austrian force forced a final capitulation of the Austrian forces and took the Habsburgs out of the Coalition . This did not establish a lasting peace on the continent . Prussian worries about growing French influence in Central Europe sparked the War of the Fourth Coalition in 1806 , in which Austria did not participate . 
 = = = = Danube campaign : Road to Ulm = = = = 
 Upon Austria 's entrance into the war in summer 1805 , Klenau joined the Habsburg army in southern Germany and became mired in a short campaign that exposed the worst of the Habsburg military organization . Archduke Charles was sick , and had retired to recuperate . Archduke Ferdinand , the brother @-@ in @-@ law of the Emperor Francis , was theoretically in command , but Ferdinand was a poor choice of replacement , having neither experience , maturity , nor aptitude . Although Ferdinand retained nominal command , decisions were placed in the hands of Karl Mack , who was timid , indecisive , and ill @-@ suited for such an important assignment . Furthermore , Mack had been wounded earlier in the campaign , and was unable to take full charge of the army . Consequently , command further devolved to Lieutenant Field Marshal Karl Philipp , Prince of Schwarzenberg , an able military officer , but as yet inexperienced in the command of such a large army . 
 The campaign began in October , with several clashes in Swabia . At the first , near the Bavarian town of Wertingen , 40 kilometers ( 25 mi ) northwest of Augsburg , on 8 October , Murat 's Cavalry Corps and grenadiers of Lannes ' V Corps surprised an Austrian force half their size . The Austrians had assembled in line , and the cavalry and grenadiers cut them down before the Austrians could form their defensive squares . Nearly 3 @,@ 000 were captured . A day later , at Günzburg immediately south of the Danube , the French again met an Austrian force ; General Mack could not decide on a plan , and the French 59th Regiment of the Line stormed a bridge over the Danube , and , in a humiliating episode , chased two large Austrian columns toward Ulm . In this action , the French secured an important bridgehead on the Danube River . 
 With the string of French victories , Lieutenant Field Marshal Klenau provided the only ray of hope in a campaign fraught with losses . At Ulm @-@ Jungingen , Klenau had arranged his 25 @,@ 000 infantry and cavalry in a prime defensive position and , on 11 October , an over @-@ confident General of Division <unk> de l 'Étang attacked Klenau 's force with fewer than 8 @,@ 000 men . The French lost 1 @,@ 500 dead and wounded , 900 captured , 11 guns and 18 ammunition wagons captured , but possibly of greater significance , the Imperial Eagles and <unk> of the 15th and 17th Dragoons were taken by the Austrians . 
 Despite Klenau 's success at the Battle of Haslach @-@ Jungingen , the Austrians could not sustain their positions around him , and the entire line retreated toward Ulm . Napoleon 's lightning campaign exposed the Austrian weaknesses , particularly of indecisive command structure and poor supply apparatus . The Austrians were low on ammunition and outgunned . The components of the army , division by division , were being separated from one another . Morale sank , " sapped by Mack 's chaotic orders and their [ the troops ] growing lack of confidence in their nominal commander , " Ferdinand . Following the Austrian capitulation at Memmingen , 55 kilometers ( 34 mi ) south of Ulm , the French achieved a morale boost over the Austrians at the Battle of Elchingen , outside of Biberach , on 14 October . Here , 12 kilometers ( 7 mi ) northeast of Ulm , and slightly north of the Danube , Ney 's VI Corps ( 20 @,@ 000 men ) captured half of the Austrian Reserve Artillery park at <unk> . In a further blow , Field Marshal Riesch was unable to destroy the Danube bridges , which Ney secured for the French . Ney received the victory title , Duke of Elchingen . 
 At this point , the entire Austrian force , including Klenau 's column , withdrew into Ulm and its environs and Napoleon himself arrived to take command of the II , V , VI Corps , Ney 's Cavalry and the Imperial Guard , numbering close to 80 @,@ 000 men . Archduke Ferdinand and a dozen cavalry squadrons broke out through the French army and escaped into Bohemia . Again , as he had been at Mantua , Klenau was caught in a siege from which there was no escape , and again , he helped to negotiate the terms , when , on 21 October , Karl Mack surrendered the encircled army of 20 @,@ 000 infantry and 3 @,@ 273 cavalry . Klenau and the other officers were released on the condition that they not serve against France until exchanged , an agreement to which they held . 
 = = = Action on the Danube by Vienna = = = 
 The Austrians abstained from the fighting in 1806 – 1808 , and engaged in a military reorganization , directed by Archduke Charles . When they were ready to join the fight against France , in the spring and summer of 1809 , it was a remodeled Austrian army that took the field . Despite their internal military reorganization , however , in the War of the Fifth Coalition , the army retained much of its cumbersome command structure , which complicated the issuance of orders and the timely distribution of troops . When the Austrian army took the field in 1809 , it battled for the " survival of the [ Habsburg ] dynasty , " as Archduke Charles , the army 's supreme commander , described the situation to his brother John . 
 On the Danubian plains north of Vienna , the summer battles of Aspern @-@ Essling and Wagram shaped the outcome of the 1809 campaign . Klenau 's forces played a critical role at both . At Aspern @-@ Essling , Napoleon 's army was decisively defeated for the first time in northern Europe , demonstrating that the master of Europe could himself be mastered . After their defeat at Wagram , the Austrians withdrew into Moravia , leaving the French in control of that part of the Danube valley ; Wagram was the largest European land @-@ battle to date , engaging 262 battalions and 202 squadrons — 153 @,@ 000 men — for France and her allies , and 160 battalions and 150 squadrons — 135 @,@ 000 men — on the Austrian side . 
 For Klenau , the campaign started badly at the Battle of Eckmühl ( sometimes called <unk> ) , in southeastern Germany on 22 April 1809 . Klenau commanded the Advance Guard , which included the 2nd Archduke Charles Legion , the Merveldt <unk> and a cavalry battery . Archduke Charles misread Napoleon 's intentions and lost the advantage in the battle . Klenau 's division suffered heavily and the Archduke Charles Legion was nearly wiped out in a charge by Louis Friant 's cavalry . Rosenberg 's division on Klenau 's flank was also badly mauled and suffered heavy casualties : 534 killed , 637 wounded , 865 missing , and 773 captured . 
 The disaster at Eckmühl was followed by another at Regensburg ( also called the Battle of Ratisbon ) on 23 April , where Klenau , at the head of six squadrons of Merveldt 's <unk> ( lancers ) , was crushed and scattered by Étienne Marie Antoine Champion de Nansouty 's heavy cavalry . Klenau and Major General Peter Vécsey stormed back at Nansouty 's force with the Klenau <unk> . Although their onslaught threw back the leading French squadrons , the French heavy cavalry returned , joined by Hussars and Chasseurs . In the <unk> , it was difficult to distinguish French from Austrian , but eventually the French horse overwhelmed the Austrian flank and pushed them to the gates of Regensburg . 
 = = = = Aspern and Essling = = = = 
 By May 1809 , the Austrians were pushed to within visual distance of Vienna , and in a critical engagement on the banks of the Danube river , the French and their allies grappled for control of the Marchfeld plain with the Austrians . The French held Lobau island , a vital river crossing , and the Austrians held the heights further to the east . Between them lay several villages , two of which were central in the engagement and gave the battle its name : They lay so close to Vienna that the battle could be seen and heard from the city ramparts and Aspern and Essling ( also spelled in German as <unk> ) are today part of the <unk> , a district of Austrian capital . At the Battle of Aspern @-@ Essling , Klenau commanded a free @-@ standing force of close to 6 @,@ 000 , including a battalion of the 1st Jäger , three battalions of the 3rd Infantry Regiment Archduke Charles , eight squadrons each of the <unk> Hussars and <unk> Uhlans , and a horse artillery battery of 64 guns . Typical confusion in the Austrian command structure meant he received his orders late , and Klenau 's delay in deployment meant that his men approached the French III Corps at Essling in daylight and in close order ; a two @-@ gun French battery on the plain beyond the Essling , " mowed furrows " of enfilade fire in the Austrian ranks . 
 Despite the withering fire , Klenau 's force reached Essling 's edge , where his men set up 64 artillery pieces and bombarded the French for nearly an hour . Taking the village by storm , Austrian cavalry poured into the village from the north , and the French were pushed out in a methodical advance . Klenau 's batteries were able to fire on the French @-@ held bridges south of the village , over which the French had to retreat . In bitter house @-@ to @-@ house fighting , the Austrians entered the village . Combat at the granary was especially brutal , as Hungarian grenadiers battled unsuccessfully to dislodge the French from their positions in the second and third floors . The battle resumed at dawn of 22 April . Masséna cleared Aspern of Austrians , but while he did so , Rosenberg 's force stormed Jean Lannes ' position at Essling . Lannes , reinforced by Vincent Saint @-@ Hilaire 's division , subsequently drove Rosenberg out of Essling . At Aspern , Masséna was driven out by Hiller and Bellegarde 's counter @-@ attacks . 
 Meanwhile , Napoleon had launched an attack on the main army at the Austrian center . Klenau 's force stood on the immediate right flank of the center , opposite the attacking force of Lannes . The French cavalry , in reserve , prepared to move at either flank , or to the center , depending on where the Austrian line broke first . The French nearly broke through at the center but , at the last minute , Charles arrived with his last reserve , leading his soldiers with a color in his hand . Lannes was checked , and the impetus of the attack died out all along the line . In the final hours of the battle , Lannes himself was cut down by a cannonball from Klenau 's artillery . Aspern was lost to the French . The Danube bridges upon which the French relied had been cut again by heavy barges , which the Austrians had released on the river . When he lost his route across the river , Napoleon at once suspended the attack . For his leadership at Essling , Klenau received the Commander 's Cross of the Military Order of Maria Theresa . 
 Both sides lost close to 28 @,@ 000 men , to wounds and death . For Napoleon , whose force was smaller , the losses were more costly . For Charles , the victory , which occurred within visual range of the Vienna ramparts , won him support from the hawks , or the pro @-@ war party , in the Hofburg . The Austrian victory at Aspern @-@ Essling proved that Napoleon could be beaten . His force had been divided ( Davout 's corps had never made it over the Danube ) , and Napoleon had underestimated the Austrian strength of force and , more importantly , the tenacity the Austrians showed in situations like that of Essling , when Klenau marched his force across open country under enemy fire . After Aspern @-@ Essling , Napoleon revised his opinion of the Austrian soldier . 
 = = = = Wagram = = = = 
 In the lull between the Battle of Aspern @-@ Essling and the Battle of Wagram ( 5 – 6 July ) Charles ordered the construction of a several @-@ mile @-@ long entrenchment , but did little else to shore up his force . Conversely , on the other side of the Danube , Napoleon brought in additional troops from Italy and Hungary . The day prior to the battle at Wagram , Klenau replaced General Johann von Hiller , who had fallen ill , to command the 13 @,@ 740 soldiers of VI Corps , and Armand von Nordmann replaced him as commander of the Advance Guard . Klenau 's Corps stood about 8 kilometers ( 5 mi ) ahead of the main Austrian force . The Corps , about 8 @,@ 000 men , were ordered to oppose any French advance on the Marchfeld plain . By mid @-@ afternoon , Klenau could see Napoleon 's massive force advancing toward them through the cornfields . Klenau managed a spirited , and gradual withdrawal to a position behind the Austrian line at the <unk> , and above the Wagram escarpment ; this exposed several of the villages on the western edge of the <unk> Plain , including Aspern and Essling , to French capture . 
 On the next day of battle , Klenau was ordered to a forward position , to complete a double @-@ envelopment of Napoleon 's force , envisioned by Charles as the best means of inducing panic among the French troops . At dawn , or so , at 0400 , his cannonade rained havoc on Boudet 's division of Massena 's IV Corps ; Massena sent another division under Claude Legrand to support Boudet . Klenau 's corps managed to retake both Essling and Aspern , without the same vigorous contest that had occurred two months earlier . Half the pincer movement was well underway , although Klenau 's force could not move further ahead : The guns on the Island of Lobau prevented further advance . There was no support from <unk> 's forces on his flank , and for the closing prong of the pincer movement , Archduke John was no where in sight ; he had not abandoned his baggage , and was plodding slowly , with his army , toward the battlefield , but still a good day 's march away . Despite the mile @-@ long gap in the French line , and the advance of Austrian cavalry , Klenau 's men could not hold them against André Masséna 's prolonged mid @-@ day assault . Charles watched from his command post at Wagram as Klenau 's forces stubbornly clung to their positions , but were overwhelmed by the inexorable progress of Masséna 's troops , what Klenau later called Masséna 's Infernal Column . Klenau organized the rear guard for the Army 's retreat into Moravia , and lost 15 percent of his force . General René Savary , who directed part of the French pursuit , wrote that the Klenau 's soldiers had " fought in a manner calculated to instill a cautious conduct into any man disposed to deeds of rashness . " 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 As a consequence , Austria withdrew from the Coalition . Although France had not completely defeated them , the Treaty of Schönbrunn , signed on 14 October 1809 , imposed a heavy political , territorial , and economic price . France received Carinthia , Carniola , and the Adriatic ports , while Galicia was given to France 's ally Poland . The Salzburg area went to the French ally , Bavaria . Austria lost over three million subjects , about 20 percent of her total population , which dramatically reduced the military force that Austria could field . Francis also agreed to pay an indemnity equivalent to almost 85 million francs , gave recognition to Joseph Bonaparte as the King of Spain , and affirmed Habsburg participation in Napoleon 's Continental System . Francis reluctantly agreed to Napoleon 's marriage with his daughter , Marie Louise , which Napoleon assumed , incorrectly , would eliminate Austria as a future threat . 
 = = War of Liberation 1813 = = 
 Napoleon engaged in his disastrous Russian campaign in 1812 ; by 1813 , the military landscape was dramatically different . Prussia was the first to defect from Napoleon 's cause ; possibly the arrival of the remnants of the Grande Armée in Berlin convinced the Prussian leadership that it was not only safe , but expedient . The remains of Napoleon 's invasion force staggered back from Russia in early 1813 in appalling condition . Of the I Corps , only 2 @,@ 281 men of the original 70 @,@ 000 could be mustered . The Imperial Guard strength fell from 50 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 533 , and 200 of those were disabled by amputation , frostbite , or injuries . Some historians suggest that the nature of the opposition to Napoleon changed in these few months , from opposition by dynasties to opposition by whole peoples , giving the War of the Sixth Coalition its nationalist character . 
 By the end of April , French forces gained control of Leipzig . At Lützen , on 2 May Napoleon lured a combined Prussian and Russian force into a trap . The Russian commander , Peter Wittgenstein , ignored the primary directive of the Trachenberg plan , attempting to undo Napoleon 's capture of Leipzig . After a day of heavy fighting , the combined forces retreated . A few weeks later , at the Battle of Bautzen , 20 – 21 May 1813 , the combined Russian and Prussian force surprised Ney 's corps in a confused assault , which narrowly escaped destruction when Napoleon appeared with reinforcements . The outwitted Blücher and Wittgenstein escaped because Michel Ney failed to block the retreat . Despite his string of victories , Napoleon sought an armistice in early June , to allow a series of negotiations , to take place in Prague . The Armistice of <unk> , signed 4 June 1813 , established a cease @-@ fire throughout central and eastern Europe that was intended to last until mid @-@ July ; the combatants had to give six days ' notice of its termination . The various interested parties — Russian , Prussian , Austrian , Saxon , Swedish , Bavarian , British and others — explored the possibilities of new alliances . 
 = = = Changes in Coalition Strategy = = = 
 While delegates bickered in Prague , similar to the situation in Rastatt in 1799 , the diplomats negotiated throughout the war zone and in the capitals of Europe , to create a new set of alliances . The subsequent Sixth Coalition ( Russia , Prussia , Britain , Sweden and , eventually , Austria ) , differed significantly from the earlier coalitions . Unlike previous coalitions in which the participants had organized their armies independently of one another , the Allies of the Sixth Coalition created multi @-@ national armies . This theoretically accomplished two goals : Napoleon could not defeat them piecemeal , and the presence of soldiers from several states within a single armed force limited " politically motivated acts of national self @-@ interest . " Klenau , promoted to General der Kavallerie ( full general ) on 26 July 1813 , held command of an independent corps in the Army of Bohemia . This Army of Bohemia illustrated one of the biggest differences in the Sixth Coalition 's organizational schema : it included 127 @,@ 435 Austrians , 78 @,@ 200 Russians , and 44 @,@ 907 Prussians . 
 The Coalition also pursued a different operational plan . The Coalition 's operational strategy brought its different forces closer and closer together in concentric circles , to a single point in Saxony . Known as the Trachenberg Plan , the Sixth Coalition 's operating plan established clear , concise and specific guidelines for commanders , from the Army through the basic company level : act offensively against an inferior foe ; act defensively against a superior foe , underscoring to commanders at all levels the risk of underestimating the threat of Napoleon and his army . The new plan divided the Allied force into three armies : Silesia , Bohemia , and Northern Germany . The Silesian army , composed of Prussians and Russians , left 50 @,@ 000 men in the Province of Silesia and moved the remaining 100 @,@ 000 to join with 120 @,@ 000 Austrians in Saxony . The Crown Prince of Sweden , Jean @-@ Baptiste Bernadotte , a former Marshal of France and a favorite of Napoleon 's , established an army of observation at Hamburg and Lübeck , and another 70 @,@ 000 concentrated 50 kilometers ( 31 mi ) southwest of Berlin . Using this plan , the Coalition pushed Napoleon and his allies into an increasingly smaller circle of operation . In theory , while this concentrated Napoleon 's force , it also limited his maneuvering options . Furthermore , it concentrated the Coalition forces around the French and Allied armies , ultimately at the Saxon cities of Dresden , and then Leipzig . 
 = = = Battle of Dresden = = = 
 Strategically , the Battle of Dresden demonstrated the problems of the Coalition 's strategy . On 25 August , the three monarchs — Alexander II of Russia , Francis II of Austria , and Frederick William III of Prussia — and their staffs assembled on an overlook of the city to discuss their strategy . The city 's weak defenses were clear from this vantage point : the French and Saxon garrison of 20 @,@ 000 men under Marshal Saint @-@ Cyr could not hope to hold a city of that size . The Tsar and General Jean Victor Moreau , formerly a General of France and by 1813 an adviser to the Coalition , wanted to attack at once ; Schwarzenberg wanted to wait until additional forces arrived . 
 By waiting one day , the Coalition lost the advantage . As the Coalition assaulted the southern suburbs of the city , Napoleon arrived from the north and west with the Guard and Marmont 's VI Corps , covering 140 kilometers ( 87 mi ) in forced marches over three days . The leading elements of Klenau 's corps were placed on the army 's left flank , separated from the main body by the <unk> , flooded after almost a week of rain . Marshal Joachim Murat took advantage of this isolation and inflicted heavy losses on the Austrians . A French participant observed , separating Klenau 's corps from the Austrian army , Murat " hurl [ ed ] himself upon it at the head of the <unk> and cuirassiers . His movement was decisive ; Klenau could not resist that terrible charge . Nearly all his battalions were compelled to lay down their arms , and two other divisions of infantry shared their fate . " Murat captured intact a division of five infantry regiments ( 15 @,@ 000 men ) under command of Lieutenant Field Marshal Joseph , Baron von Mesko de <unk> @-@ <unk> , plus 15 of their regimental and company colors . As the left wing disintegrated , the French swarmed over the flank ; the right wing was also driven back , and the entire force had to withdraw . 
 After the immediate defense of Dresden , though , Napoleon 's situation deteriorated . Vandamme pursued the retreating Army of Bohemia , expecting to be supported by St. Cyr and General Marmont , who were still busy in Dresden . Vandamme approached the Russian corps commanded by Ostermann @-@ Tolstoy , but left a valley behind him unprotected as he descended out of the mountain into Bohemia . As he engaged Ostermann @-@ Tolstoy , he saw some troops behind him , which soon attacked him ; thus beset from two sides , his young troops were unable to defend themselves ; at the Battle of Kulm , Vandamme lost his entire artillery , and the Austrians acquired about 7 @,@ 500 prisoners , including the general himself . 
 To the north of Dresden , as Napoleon appeared to be engaged , looking elsewhere , Blücher brought his troops south , toward the city . Realizing the danger , Napoleon directed his main army north again , to repel the Prussians ; as he did so , the <unk> Blücher withdrew . Other portions of the French army had comparable difficulties . Marshal Oudinot was repelled by Bernadotte at the Battle of <unk> , and MacDonald , near the <unk> river . Furthermore , Napoleon began to suffer from illness , referred to variously as a colic or fatigue . 
 = = = Battle of Leipzig = = = 
 From 12 to 15 October , the days of skirmishing preliminary to the Battle of Leipzig ( 16 – 19 October ) , Klenau 's force took the heavily defended village <unk> , but were forced out in a French counter @-@ attack . A contemporary witness later described finding dead Austrians at the church cemetery , pinned to the walls with bayonets . Klenau 's primary objective was the village of <unk> . He took the Kolmberg , a nearby height also known as the <unk> ( Swedish fortification ) , a defensive remnant of the Thirty Years ' War about 4 kilometers ( 2 mi ) east of the village , and established a battery there , but did not bring enough troops to support it . An attack by 4 @,@ 000 of Jacques MacDonald 's infantry secured the hill ; although Klenau 's cavalry managed to push the French back , they could not retake the hill . In the action , Klenau 's own horse was shot and killed , and he was nearly captured , but he struggled back to his line , and reorganized his men . 
 Eventually , Klenau 's corps took the village and the Kolmberg several times , to be pushed out by the French , to counter @-@ attack , retreat , counter @-@ attack and retreat and this see @-@ sawing back and forth , the attacks , counter @-@ attacks experienced by Klenau 's force , were characteristic of the battle . On the critical first day of the battle , 16 October , a French 100 @-@ gun artillery barrage forced a hole in the line between the Russian and Prussian forces on Klenau 's flank . When Murat 's cavalry charged the hole , Klenau 's corps , plus reserve cavalry , eventually forced the Murat 's troops back to the cover of the French artillery . Klenau 's force made a short retreat , leaving a detachment at the Kolmberg . By mid @-@ afternoon , the Allied columns had been driven to their starting positions , but had maintained their line ; as one part of the line was forced back , its flanks dropped back with it , maintaining a continuous line and preventing a French flanking operation . In this first @-@ day action , Klenau 's force played a vital role in preventing MacDonald from flanking Prince Schwarzenberg 's main army . On the night of the 16th , the French controlled the Kolmberg that Klenau had fought over all day , and a Hessian soldier wrote : " it was the worst bivouac we had experienced on this campaign . The weather was wet and windy ... we had to use water from puddles in which lay the blood of men and horses ... and half the men remained under arms at all times . " 
 = = = Klenau and the Siege of Dresden = = = 
 After the battle , the allied high command assigned Klenau to blockade the large French garrison at Dresden . His IV Austrian Corps of the Army of Bohemia included the division of Lt. General Alexander Ivanovich , Count Ostermann @-@ Tolstoy , and the militia of Major General Alexey Nikolayevich Titov , a total of approximately 41 @,@ 000 troops . Klenau eventually negotiated a capitulation in which the French troops would return to France with their honors , on condition that they would not fight against the Allies for six months . Marshal Laurent de Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr surrendered to Klenau on 11 November , but <unk> refused to agree to the capitulation and the French troops marched into captivity into Austria instead . The victors took 94 French field guns and 151 Saxon fortress guns , and wrested from the French complete control over the Kingdom of Saxony . 
 = = War in France 1814 – 1815 and post @-@ war career = = 
 During the 1814 campaigns , Klenau remained with the Army of Bohemia as it approached Paris slowly , from the south @-@ east , via the Seine river valley . The armies would be as many as 32 kilometers ( 20 mi ) apart . Their communications would be conducted through Wittgenstein 's cavalry and some irregular cossacks , which was directly opposite to the Trachenberg plan . Schwarzenberg knew it was exactly what Napoleon would want them to do , but reluctantly agreed to it . Afterward , Klenau commanded a corps in Italy , known as the Korps Klenau . After the war ended again in 1815 , Klenau was appointed commanding general in Moravia and Silesia . He held this office until his death on 6 October 1819 at Brno , in the modern @-@ day Czech Republic . 
 = Baila Esta Cumbia = 
 " Baila Esta Cumbia " ( English : English : Dance to this Cumbia ) is a song recorded by American Tejano singer Selena for her second studio album , Ven Conmigo ( 1990 ) . It was released as the second single by EMI Latin on August 28 , 1990 , behind " Ya Ves " . It was composed by her brother – producer A.B. Quintanilla , and Selena y Los Dinos backup dancer , Pete Astudillo . The recording is an up @-@ tempo Mexican cumbia song . It was well @-@ received by music critics who enjoyed its cumbia @-@ feel and rhythm . 
 The track received exposure on radio stations that predominately played cumbia music , and as a result the recording became a hit single for the singer It was named among her best recordings in her career by music critics . " Baila Esta Cumbia " peaked at number ten on the US Billboard Regional Mexican Digital Songs chart . In 2005 , A.B. recorded a remix / duet version of the track with his band Kumbia Kings , which peaked at number 16 on the US Billboard Regional Mexican Airplay chart and number 44 on the Hot Latin Tracks chart . Other cover versions include recordings by Mexican singers Diana Reyes and Yuridia . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Baila Esta Cumbia " was released as the second single from Ven Conmigo ( 1990 ) in the United States and in Mexico . A compilation album of the same name was released in Mexico and sold 150 @,@ 000 copies . It was certified platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas ( AMPROFON ) , denoting sales of 250 @,@ 000 units . " Baila Esta Cumbia " was written by Selena 's brother and principal record producer , A.B. Quintanilla and Selena y Los Dinos ' backup dancer , Pete Astudillo . During an interview in 2002 , A.B. said that the recording helped the band 's exposure on radio stations that predominantly spins cumbia music recordings . 
 The song is an up @-@ tempo Mexican cumbia Tejano song . It is set in common time and moves at a moderate rate of 90 beats per minute . " Baila Esta Cumbia " is written in the key of C major . The vocal range of the melody extends from the note G ♯ 3 to A4 . 
 = = Reception and impact = = 
 The majority of contemporary reviews on " Baila Esta Cumbia " were positive . Billboard contributor Ramiro Burr praised the song for its " melodic hook " . Burr , who wrote in The Billboard Guide to Tejano and Regional Mexican Music ( 1999 ) , opined that Selena " evolved a rhythmic style " which paved way for " catchy cumbias " , giving " Baila Esta Cumbia " as his example of her " increasing prowess " . Italian essayist Gaetano Prampolini , called " Baila Esta Cumbia " a " plain cumbia dance pleasure " in his book The Shade of the Saguaro . In a 2013 contribution to OC Weekly , Marco Torres added that " Baila Esta Cumbia " is a " fun song " and noted its " lively " addictive nature . John Storm Roberts wrote in his book The Latin <unk> , that the recording is an " up @-@ tempo romantic piece " for his review of Selena 's live album , Live ( 1993 ) . Roberts added that with " Como la Flor " , the two " mixes pop <unk> , some quite free scatting , and a classic banda keyboard sound . " Federico Martinez of the San Antonio La Prensa called the recording " upbeat " . 
 Deborah R. Vargas wrote in her book <unk> Divas in Chicana Music : The Limits of la Onda ( 2008 ) , that Selena reconstructed Tejano music with the additions of cumbia music , giving credit to " Baila Esta Cumbia " as an example of Selena 's blended musical compositions . The recording became one of Selena 's biggest hit singles . It has appeared on a number of critics ' " best Selena songs " lists , including OC Weekly ( at number five ) , and Latina magazine ( at number three ) . It entered The <unk> Most Played chart on Billboard on the issue dated April 7 , 2001 , with 1 @.@ 5 million airplay spins . The song was included in the set list for the Selena Forever musical , which ran for one year in 2000 . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Mexican singer Diana Reyes recorded the song for her album <unk> , Bésame ( 2010 ) . Mexican singer Yuridia performed " Baila Esta Cumbia " during her tour in Mexico in 2013 to a positive reception . 
 = = = Kumbia Kings ' version = = = 
 Selena 's brother and principal record producer , A.B. formed Kumbia Kings in 1997 . In 2005 , the band remixed " Baila Esta Cumbia " into a duet version for their album Duetos under the title " Baila Esta Kumbia " . Evan C. Gutierrez music reviewer for AllMusic believed that the Kumbia Kings ' version is a " postmortem love letter " to Selena . Kumbia Kings performed their version for the tribute concert Selena ¡ VIVE ! , which premiered live on Univision on April 7 , 2005 . The track debuted at number 35 on the US Billboard Regional Mexican Airplay chart on the issue dated April 2 , 2005 . It eventually peaked at number 16 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Mycena chlorophos = 
 Mycena chlorophos is a species of agaric fungus in the family Mycenaceae . First described in 1860 , the fungus is found in subtropical Asia , including Japan , Taiwan , Polynesia , Indonesia , and Sri Lanka , in Australia , and Brazil . Fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) have pale brownish @-@ grey sticky caps up to 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter atop stems 6 – 30 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) long and up to a millimeter thick . The mushrooms are bioluminescent and emit a pale green light . Fruiting occurs in forests on fallen woody debris such as dead twigs , branches , and logs . The fungus can be made to grow and fruit in laboratory conditions , and the growth conditions affecting bioluminescence have been investigated . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described scientifically by Miles Berkeley and Moses Ashley Curtis in 1860 as Agaricus chlorophos . The original specimens were collected from the Bonin Islands by American botanist Charles Wright in October 1854 as part of the North Pacific Exploring and Surveying Expedition of 1853 – 56 . Pier Andrea Saccardo transferred the species to the genus Mycena in an 1887 publication . Daniel Desjardin and colleagues redescribed the species and set a lectotype specimen in 2010 . 
 In 1860 Berkeley and Curtis described the species Agaricus <unk> from material also collected from the Bonin Islands . This material was found near the location that the original specimens of M. chlorophos were found , but a couple of weeks later . Japanese mycologists Seiya Ito and Sanshi Imai studied these collections in the late 1930s , and concluded that Agaricus <unk> was the same species as M. chlorophos , despite differences in cap shape , gill attachment , and the color of emitted light . Desjardin and colleagues agreed with this determination after examining the type material of both taxa . M. chlorophos is classified in the section <unk> of the genus Mycena . Other luminescent species in this section are M. <unk> and M. marginata . Some authors have considered M. <unk> to be synonymous with M. chlorophos due to their morphological similarity , but molecular analysis has shown that they are distinct species . 
 In Japan , the mushroom is known as <unk> @-@ take , or " night @-@ light mushroom " . In the Bonin Islands it is called " Green Pepe " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is initially convex before flattening out ( sometimes forming a central depression ) , and measures up to 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter . The cap has radial grooves extending to nearly the center , and sometimes develops cracks in the margin , which has small rounded teeth . Its color is pale brownish gray that fades after expansion , and it is somewhat sticky . The white stem is 6 – 30 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 – 1 @.@ 18 in ) long by 0 @.@ 3 – 1 mm thick , hollow , and translucent . It has tiny hairs on the surface . The base of the stem is disc @-@ shaped or somewhat bulbous , measuring 1 – 2 @.@ 5 mm wide . The thin gills are free from attachment to the stem , or are adnexed ( narrowly attached ) to a slight collar encircling the stem . Initially white then grayish in color , they are somewhat crowded , with 17 – 32 full @-@ length gills and 1 to 3 tiers of lamellulae ( shorter gills that do not extend fully from the cap margin to the stem ) . The gills are 0 @.@ 3 – 1 mm wide with micaceous edges . The flesh is very thin , and has a strong odor of ammonia . Both the caps and the gills are bioluminescent , while the mycelia and stems have little to no luminescence . 
 The spores are white , smooth , roughly elliptical , and have dimensions of 7 – 8 @.@ 5 by 5 – 6 μm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 17 – 23 by 7 @.@ 5 – 10 μm , and four @-@ spored with sterigmata around 3 μm long . The paraphyses are 5 – 8 μm wide , shorter than the basidia , more abundant and form a somewhat gelatinous layer . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the cap edge ) are 60 by 7 – 21 μm , hyaline , conical or ventricose ( inflated ) . The tips of the cheilocystidia are drawn out to a point , or have a short appendage measuring 15 by 2 – 3 μm , which is sometimes branched , and is thin or slightly thick @-@ walled . There are no cystidia on the gill face ( pleurocystidia ) . <unk> ( cystidia on the surface of the cap ) are club @-@ shaped , measuring 25 – 60 by 13 – 25 μm . They are somewhat thick @-@ walled , and spiny on the exposed surface with short simple outgrowths extending up to 3 μm long . The pileocystidia are joined together and form a continuous layer over the young cap , but break up as the cap expands . The caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) are conical or lance @-@ shaped , hyaline , and smooth , with walls that are thin or slightly thickened . They measure up to 300 by 10 – 25 μm , but are shorter in the upper regions of the stem . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of all tissues . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 The two other luminescent species of Mycena section <unk> are similar in appearance to M. chlorophos . M. <unk> fruit bodies have paler caps ; microscopically , they have larger spores measuring 9 @.@ 9 by 6 @.@ 7 μm , and lack the short apical appendage found on M. chlorophos cheilocystidia . M. margarita has smaller spores averaging 6 @.@ 9 by 4 @.@ 4 μm , smaller cheilocystidia , and loop @-@ like clamp connections . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Fruit bodies of Mycena chlorophos are found in forests , where they grow in groups on woody debris such as fallen twigs , branches , and bark . In the Japanese Hachijo and Bonin Islands , mushrooms occur predominantly on decaying petioles of the palm Phenix <unk> . The fungus requires a proper range of humidity to form mushrooms ; for example , on Hachijo Island , fruiting only occurs in the rainy seasons in June / July and September / October when the relative humidity is around 88 % , usually the day after rain falls . Experimental studies have shown that mushroom primordia that are too wet become deformed , while conditions that are too dry cause the caps to warp and break because the delicate gelatinous membrane covering them is broken . 
 In Asia , the species has been found in Japan , Taiwan , Polynesia , Java , and Sri Lanka . In Japan , the fungus is becoming more scarce as its natural habits are decreasing . Several Australian field guides have reported the species from that country . The fungus has also been recorded several times from Brazil . Mycena chlorophos was one of several fungi featured in a set of postage stamps issued in Samoa in 1985 . 
 = = Bioluminescence studies = = 
 Since the mushroom is small , and fruits in only a limited season in a small area , researchers have investigated the conditions needed to artificially cultivate the species in laboratory conditions , in order to have more material to study the mechanism of bioluminescence , and to help preserve the species . The optimum temperature for the growth of mycelia is 27 ° C ( 81 ° F ) , while the optimum for the growth of primordia is 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . These temperatures are consistent with the subtropical climate in which the species is typically found . Maximum luminescence occurs at 27 ° C , and about 25 – 39 hours after the primordia begin to form , when the cap has fully expanded . At 21 ° C , luminescence persists for about 3 days , and becomes undetectable to the naked eyes about 72 hours after primordium initiation . 
 = Main Navy and Munitions Buildings = 
 The Main Navy and Munitions Buildings were constructed in 1918 along Constitution Avenue ( then known as B Street ) on Washington , D.C. ' s National Mall ( Potomac Park ) , to provide temporary quarters for the United States Military . Both buildings were constructed by the Navy 's Bureau of Yards and Docks , with the United States Department of War occupying the Munitions Building . To make the buildings more resistant to fire , the buildings were constructed using concrete . With solid construction , the temporary buildings remained in use long after the end of World War I. 
 In August 1939 , the Secretary of War relocated his offices from the overcrowded State @-@ War @-@ Navy Building ( Old Executive Office Building ) to the Munitions Building . The Department of War headquarters remained in the Munitions Building , through the early years of World War II , until 1942 , when some space became available in the Pentagon , which was under construction . The Munitions Building was turned over to the Navy in 1943 , when the Department of War completely vacated the Munitions Building once construction of the Pentagon was completed . 
 Both buildings suffered serious structural problems in the 1960s . In December 1969 , President Richard Nixon announced that both buildings would be demolished , a plan which was carried out in 1970 . The land was then reclaimed and turned into Constitution Gardens , with the Vietnam Veterans Memorial built near the former Munitions Building site in the early 1980s . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Constructing the Munitions and Main Navy Buildings was an idea conceived by Franklin D. Roosevelt , then the Assistant Secretary of the Navy , who put forth the idea to President Woodrow Wilson . Roosevelt originally suggested a temporary building be placed on the Ellipse , but President Wilson disliked the idea of a building on the White House 's front lawn . Thus , Roosevelt suggested placing the buildings on the National Mall ( Potomac Park ) along B Street ( renamed Constitution Avenue in 1931 ) , near the Lincoln Memorial . Roosevelt wanted them to be ugly wooden buildings , so that people would want to tear them down right away after World War I. However , to make the buildings more fire resistant , concrete and steel materials were recommended . Roosevelt later expressed regret for allowing these building to be constructed , saying in 1941 , " I didn 't think I would ever be let into the Gates of Heaven , because I had been responsible for desecrating the parks of Washington . " 
 The project was originally intended for just the Navy , but the Department of War also wanted in on the project , thus two buildings were proposed . With concrete construction not unreasonably more expensive than a wood frame building , Congress accepted the proposal for concrete buildings , and approved the funds for the project in March 1918 . The task of design and construction of the buildings was given to the Navy 's Bureau of Yards and Docks , and the buildings were completed in 51 ⁄ 2 months . 
 = = Munitions Building = = 
 The Munitions Building , constructed in 1918 , contained 841 @,@ 000 square feet ( 78 @,@ 100 m2 ) of space across three stories , and was designed to provide temporary accommodations for 9 @,@ 000 Department of War employees . During World War I , the War Department had greatly expanded , and by the end of the war , the Main Navy and Munitions Building together housed 14 @,@ 000 military personnel , including the Secretary of the Navy . A large parking lot 100 feet ( 30 m ) wide and 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 800 m ) long , was located at the rear of the Munitions Building , with space to accommodate approximately 1 @,@ 000 cars . Various small exhibits were on display in the corridors of the Munitions Buildings , showing military uniforms , types of gas masks , military daily rations , and Army photographs . The Munitions Building was separated from the Main Navy Building by a vehicle entryway at 19th Street , and the main entrance of the Munitions Building was located at 20th Street . The Munitions Building had a total of eight wings . 
 At the end of World War I , the Munitions Building housed technical branches , including the Quartermaster General , United States Army Corps of Engineers , Ordnance Corps , Chemical Warfare Service , Signal Corps , and Army Air Service . In March 1923 , the Army 's Finance Office also moved into the Munitions Building . In February 1924 , plans were put forth to build an oil steam plant for the Main Navy and Munitions Building . In November 1933 , the Army Inspector General 's office , along with the Organized Reserves , the welfare section of the Secretary 's office , and the Office of Chief of Chaplains moved into the Munitions Building . The National Guard Bureau also was housed in the Munitions Building , as was the Army Industrial College . 
 = = = Headquarters = = = 
 At the time when the Munitions Building was constructed , the War Department was headquartered in the State @-@ War @-@ Navy Building , which was completed in 1888 and located on 17th Street NW , next to the White House . By the 1930s , the War Department was being squeezed out by the Department of State , and the White House was also in need of additional office space . In August 1939 , Secretary of War Harry H. Woodring , along with Acting Chief of Staff of the Army George C. Marshall , moved his office into the Munitions Building . In the late 1930s , a new War Department Building was constructed at 21st and C Streets in Foggy Bottom , but upon completion , the new building did not solve the department 's space problem , and ended up being used by the Department of State . To help deal with the space shortage , a fourth story was added to the Main Navy and Munitions Buildings during World War II . 
 Coming into office , with World War II breaking out in Europe , Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson was faced with the situation of the War Department spread out in numerous buildings across Washington , D.C. , as well as Maryland and Virginia , and the Munitions Building was overcrowded . On July 28 , 1941 , Congress authorized funding for a new Department of War building in Arlington , Virginia , which would house the entire department under one roof . When office space became available in 1942 at the Pentagon in the first completed wing , the Secretary of War vacated the Munitions Building and moved to the Pentagon . The Department of War vacated the Munitions Building in 1943 , once construction of the Pentagon was completed . The Department of Navy took over the Munitions Building once the Department of War relocated out of the building , and placed the Navy 's Material Systems Command offices in the Munitions Building . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The Signal Intelligence Service was located in the Munitions Building during the early years of World War II . In September 1939 , the Signal Intelligence Service was able to break Japan 's cipher , Purple . The Department of War continued to receive intercepted messages , codenamed Magic , including final messages to the Japanese Embassy in Washington before the Attack on Pearl Harbor . 
 = = Main Navy = = 
 The Main Navy building was used by the Navy from the time it was built , until it was demolished in 1970 . The building contained 940 @,@ 000 square feet ( 87 @,@ 000 m2 ) of space , nine wings , and was connected to the Munitions Building by an elevated covered walkway . 
 Navy offices housed in the Main Navy building soon after it opened included the Bureau of Navigation , Bureau of Supplies and Accounts , Bureau of Steam Engineering , Bureau of Construction and Repair , the Bureau of Yards and Docks , Bureau of Ordnance , Bureau of Medicine and Surgery , the Secretary of Navy 's offices , along with Naval Operations , and the Compensation Board . Later on , other Navy Offices moved into Main Navy , including the Dispensary , the Navy Red Cross , Examining Board , and Retiring Board , which were previously housed in Corcoran Courts , an apartment building converted into offices . The Hydrographic Office and United States Marine Corps moved to Main Navy from a Navy Annex building , located at New York Avenue and 18th Street , and the United States Coast Guard relocated from the Munsey Building . The Navy Department Library was relocated to the Main Navy building in 1923 . From 1926 to 1941 , a small reinforced concrete roof penthouse on the Main Navy building was used for radio and communication intercepts training . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 The Main Navy and Munitions Buildings were disliked by many , as going against the intentions of Pierre ( Peter ) Charles L 'Enfant of making the National Mall into an open space surrounded by aesthetically pleasing government buildings . The Munitions and Navy buildings were described as " unsightly shacks , of which many scores sprung up like mushrooms during the war " . Despite their dislike , due to their solid construction , many were concerned that the buildings would remain for a long period . 
 = = Demolition = = 
 By 1960 , the Munitions Building housed approximately 7 @,@ 000 employees of not only the Navy , but also the Army , Air Force , Veterans Administration , and the Department of State . After decades of use , the building experienced structural problems in the late 1950s and 1960s , including cracked concrete piers , numerous interior cracked and bent walls , and settling floors . The buildings , constructed on marshy parkland , were damp and the foundations settling . Portions of the buildings were declared unsafe in 1969 , resulting in approximately 3 @,@ 000 employees relocating to other facilities . In December 1969 , President Richard Nixon announced a plan for demolishing the Main Navy and Munitions Buildings . The plan involved moving Navy employees to new buildings in the Crystal City and Ballston areas in Arlington , Virginia . The Main Navy and Munitions Buildings remained on the Mall until 1970 , when they were demolished . 
 In the 1970s , Constitution Gardens was built on the former site of the Main Navy and Munitions Buildings , and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial was built nearby in the early 1980s . 
 = OXO = 
 OXO is a video game created by Alexander S. Douglas in 1952 for the Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Calculator ( EDSAC ) computer , which simulates a game of noughts and crosses , also called tic @-@ tac @-@ toe . It was one of the first games developed in the early history of video games . Douglas programmed the game as part of a thesis on human @-@ computer interaction for the University of Cambridge . The EDSAC was one of the first stored @-@ program computers , with memory that could be read from or written to , and had three small cathode ray tube screens to display the state of the memory ; Douglas re @-@ purposed one screen to demonstrate portraying other information to the user , such as the state of a noughts and crosses game . After the game served its purpose , it was discarded . OXO , along with a draughts game by Christopher Strachey completed around the same time , is one of the earliest known games to display visuals on an electronic screen . Under some definitions it thus may qualify as the first video game , though other definitions exclude it due to its lack of moving or real @-@ time updating graphics . 
 = = History = = 
 The Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Calculator ( EDSAC ) mainframe computer was built in the University of Cambridge 's Mathematical Laboratory between 1946 and 6 May 1949 , when it ran its first program , and remained in use until 11 July 1958 . The EDSAC was one of the first stored @-@ program computers , with memory that could be read from or written to , and filled an entire room ; it included three 35 × 16 dot matrix cathode ray tubes ( CRTs ) to graphically display the state of the computer 's memory . As a part of a thesis on human @-@ computer interaction , Alexander S. Douglas , a doctoral candidate in mathematics at the university , used one of these screens to portray other information to the user ; he chose to do so via displaying the current state of a game . 
 Douglas used the EDSAC to simulate a game of noughts and crosses , also called tic @-@ tac @-@ toe , and display the state of the game on the screen . Like other early video games , after serving Douglas 's purpose , the game was discarded . Douglas did not give the game a name beyond " noughts and crosses " ; the name OXO first appeared as the name of the simulation file created by computer historian Martin Campbell @-@ Kelly while creating a simulation of the EDSAC several decades later . Around the same time that OXO was completed , Christopher Strachey expanded a draughts program he had originally written in 1951 and ported it to the Ferranti Mark 1 , which showed the state of the game on a CRT display . OXO and Strachey 's draughts program are the earliest known games to display visuals on an electronic screen , though it is unclear which of the two games was displayed first . As it ran on a computing device and used a graphical display , OXO is considered under some definitions to be a contender for the first video game , though under others it does not due to its lack of moving graphics or graphics which update continuously . 
 = = Interaction = = 
 Each game was played by one user against an artificially intelligent opponent , which could play a " perfect " game . The player entered their input using a rotary telephone controller , selecting which of the nine squares on the board they wished to move next . Their move would appear on the screen , and then the computer 's move would follow ; the game display only updated when the game state changed . OXO was not available to the general public and could only be played in the University of Cambridge 's Mathematical Laboratory by special permission , as the EDSAC could not be moved , and both the computer and the game were only intended for academic research purposes . 
 = The Springfield Connection = 
 " The Springfield Connection " is the 23rd episode of the sixth season of The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 7 , 1995 . After watching Snake Jailbird cheat Homer out of US $ 20 in a Three @-@ card Monte con game , Marge successfully chases Snake and knocks him out with the lid of a garbage can . The experience of foiling a crime <unk> her , and she decides to join the Springfield Police . Marge completes her police training and joins a beat as a police officer . She becomes disillusioned with her work after witnessing her friends committing crimes and being exposed to police corruption and resigns from the force . 
 The episode was written by Jonathan Collier with input from David Mirkin , and directed by Mark Kirkland . The episode 's story was inspired by executive producer Mike Reiss ' wife , who had debated becoming a police officer . " The Springfield Connection " drew on influences from the 1980s police drama Hill Street Blues and the 1971 film The French Connection , and includes references to McGruff the Crime Dog and the theme music to Star Wars . 
 Reviews in The Sydney Morning Herald and DVD Movie Guide were favorable , and the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide cited Marge 's police training as the highlight of the episode . Contributors to compilation works analyzing The Simpsons from philosophical and cultural perspectives have cited and discussed the episode . Marge 's experiences in the episode are compared to the character Rita from the stage comedy Educating Rita by Willy Russell in a literary analysis of the play . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer and Marge , on the way back from an orchestra performance , pass through a seedy part of town . Marge cautions Homer , but gets enticed by Snake 's Three @-@ card Monte game . Snake cheats Homer out of $ 20 . Marge exposes the con , and Snake takes off . Marge and Homer chase after him , but Homer fails to catch up . Marge manages to knock Snake unconscious using a garbage can lid . The incident gives her a sense of exhilaration , she finds that her everyday routine is dull and boring , and she decides to spice up her life by joining the Springfield police force . Homer is less than enthused about her becoming a cop , but she assures him that he will remain " man of the house " . Marge reports for police recruit training and performs well in the various tests , eventually becoming part of the force . 
 On her first day , Chief Wiggum assigns Marge to <unk> and <unk> . On her beat , after encountering Lionel Hutz rummaging in a dumpster , she visits the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , where Apu tries to bribe her . On her day off , she orders Bart to wear safety equipment when skateboarding . Lisa tries to encourage Marge to attack the roots of social problems but she changes the subject with a McGriff the Crime Dog puppet . That night , Homer and his friends ( Lenny , Carl , Moe , and Barney , who are joined by Herman ) , play a game of poker . Marge comes in and tells them gambling is illegal , and Homer 's friends and Herman beat a hasty retreat . 
 Marge becomes unenthusiastic about her job , as everyone seems to be breaking the law - especially Homer , who has parked illegally along a disabled parking area and bought liquor for the underage bullies . Marge arrests Homer by writing him a parking ticket . While hosting another poker game and complaining about the drawbacks of Marge 's new job , he finds Herman running a jean @-@ counterfeiting operation in the Simpsons ' garage . As Herman and his henchmen are about to beat him up , Marge bursts in . As she is cuffing the rest of the minions , Herman takes Homer hostage and runs to Bart 's treehouse , with Marge in hot pursuit . Herman tries to escape using a pair of counterfeit jeans as a rope , but they rip and he falls to the ground . Wiggum informs Marge that they can 't hold Herman due to the evidence " mysteriously disappearing " , with Wiggum and the cops openly stealing the jeans for themselves . Marge gets fed up with the obvious " corruption " on the force and finally quits . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Springfield Connection " was written by Jonathan Collier and directed by Mark Kirkland . According to Collier , the inspiration for the episode was former Simpsons executive producer Mike Reiss ' wife . At one point , she had seriously decided that she wanted to become a police officer but it did not happen . The joke where the police officers laugh at Marge for a long time was pitched by David Mirkin and features a " crazy twist " at the end where Wiggum says " welcome aboard . " Mirkin liked the joke so much that he repeated it again at the end of the episode . Marge uses a " McGriff the crime dog " hand puppet who says " Help me bite crime " . The hand puppet is a homage to McGruff the Crime Dog – the producers had wanted to use the real McGruff , but could not get permission to use the character . The idea to have a counterfeit jeans ring was pitched because at the time there had been an explosion in the jeans market , and David Mirkin thought it was right to satirize it . 
 When the Korean animators were animating the sequence with Marge in the gun training course , they did not know how to correctly animate the " shell com [ ing ] out of the gun " because guns were illegal in Korea . They had to consult with the American animators , who advised them to watch movies so they could properly animate the guns . The original design for Marge 's police uniform had Marge 's hair standing up ( as it normally is ) with the hat on top . Director Mark Kirkland found that it made for awkward staging in scenes , so they altered the design to have her hair pulled down . David Mirkin later stated that if the design had been used , he would have asked for it to be changed because they were trying to depict Marge as a serious cop . 
 There has been a dispute in recent years over whether Moe refers to Homer 's garage as a " car hole " or " car hold " . Both Mirkin and Hank Azaria , who voices Moe , have confirmed via Twitter that the line is , in fact , " car hole . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title , as well as Herman 's illegal activities , are references to the 1971 film The French Connection . The couch gag , a parody of the gun barrel sequence in the James Bond films shows some similarities to that of Sean Connery 's own gunbarrel sequences . Several references are made to the 1980s police drama Hill Street Blues : the briefing scene at the police station is similar and the background and end credits music , are parodies of the show 's theme . Marge appears on an episode of COPS , and McGriff the dog is a reference to McGruff the Crime Dog , a US police public relations figure . Additionally , Marge 's training sequences features homages to Police Academy ( 1984 ) and Speed ( 1994 ) . The Springfield Pops play the theme to the Star Wars films at an outdoor venue attended by Homer and Marge , and Homer mistakenly believes that the theme 's composer John Williams is dead , complaining : " Laser effects , mirrored balls — John Williams must be rolling around in his grave ! " . When Marge tries to climb the wall during training is a reference to the film An Officer and a Gentleman . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Kurt M. Koenigsberger analyzes Homer 's comments about the Springfield Pops rendition of the Star Wars theme in Koenigsberger 's piece : " Commodity Culture and Its Discontents : Mr. Bennett , Bart Simpson , and the Rhetoric of Modernism " published in the compilation work Leaving Springfield : The Simpsons and the Possibility of Oppositional Culture edited by John Alberti . Koenigsberger comments : " The joke in this opening scene involves a confusion of high and popular artistic production : Marge treats the Springfield Pops as ' culture ' and expects that the usually boorish Homer will need to be drawn into the spectacle . " However , Koenigsberger notes that Homer actually regards Star Wars as a " classic " , implying that a " classic " work must have a musical composer that is deceased , and be devoid of light @-@ shows or glitter balls . Koenigsberger uses this example to discuss Homer 's application of " a strategy characteristic of literary modernism " . 
 In their book Educating Rita by Willy Russell , Rebecca Mahon and Nick <unk> cite Marge 's desire to " enter the world " as an example of their topic called " Into the World " . Mahon and <unk> note : " Comedy and parody are frequently used in the episode in order to convey the frustrations Marge is forced to deal with — whether these are based around the corruption of her colleagues , the music used on occasion which parodies former police shows , or even the scene where Marge is forced to arrest her husband . " The authors compare Marge 's experiences to those of the character Rita from the stage comedy Educating Rita by Willy Russell , commenting that both women later regret the decision to " move into the world " . 
 In the compilation book The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer edited by William Irwin , Mark T. Conard and Aeon J. Skoble , contributors Gerald J. <unk> and Joseph A. <unk> cite the episode as an example in their piece titled : " Marge 's Moral Motivation " . <unk> and <unk> assert that Marge has " virtuous personality traits " which they compare to Aristotle , commenting : " Whether breaking up a counterfeit jeans ring run out of her garage in " The Springfield Connection , " escaping a cult commune in " The Joy of Sect , " or standing up to a Poe @-@ <unk> " Treehouse of Horror , " Marge is rarely short on courage . " They also note that " .. Marge 's crime @-@ stopping vigilantism in " The Springfield Connection " and her dangerous escape from the Movementarian commune in " The Joy of Sect " demonstrate that she is genuinely brave , but not foolhardy . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Springfield Connection " finished 58th in ratings for the week of May 1 – 7 , 1995 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 9 . It was the 4th highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Beverly Hills , 90210 , The X @-@ Files and Melrose Place . 
 Robin Oliver rates the episode " thumbs up " in a review in The Sydney Morning Herald , where she says of The Simpsons series : " this encouragingly funny show knows how to tug at the heartstrings " . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood comment on the episode in their book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide : " .. the highlight of this episode has to be Marge 's training , especially her sharpshooting on the firing range . " In a review of the sixth season of The Simpsons , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide writes that the episode surpasses the quality of the previous " ' Round Springfield " : " After the dull ' ’ Round ' , Season Six rebounds with the pretty good ' Connection ' . I can ’ t quite figure out how Marge stays in such good shape , but her escapades as a cop are funny , and the episode works best when she arrests Homer . I especially like his refusal to remain silent . " 
 = <unk> skate = 
 The barndoor skate , Dipturus laevis , is a species of marine cartilaginous fish in the skate family ( family <unk> ) of the order Rajiformes . It is native to the northwestern Atlantic Ocean , and is found from the Grand Banks of Newfoundland and the southern side of the Gulf of St. Lawrence south to North Carolina . The fish is one of the largest skates found in the North Atlantic Ocean , reaching lengths of up to 1 @.@ 5 meters ( 5 ft ) . It is carnivorous , feeding on invertebrates and other fish found near the sea floor . 
 After peaking in the 1950s , the population of the barndoor skate dramatically declined in the 1960s and early 1970s as a result of overfishing . In 2003 it was listed as endangered by the World Conservation Union . <unk> populations have increased substantially since 1990 . In most cases , the barndoor skate is not intentionally harvested by the commercial fishing industry — it is usually considered by @-@ catch in the trawling nets used to target other species of fish . 
 = = Description = = 
 The barndoor skate is a flat @-@ bodied fish with a large , disk @-@ like body with sharply angled corners and a pointed snout . Its pectoral fins have evolved into broad , flat , wing @-@ like appendages used to propel the fish through the water . These fins have a concave front edge with rounded posterior corners . Like sharks , it has a boneless skeleton made of cartilage , a tough , elastic substance composed of collagenous and / or elastic fibers , cells , and a firm , gel @-@ like substance called the matrix . It has slot @-@ like body openings called gill slits on the underside of the body beneath the pectoral fins that lead from the gills . The dorsal fins are close together and far removed from the tail . It has two eyes on its dorsal surface , located approximately 5 @.@ 5 centimeters ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) apart . 
 The fish 's upper surface is brown to reddish brown with many scattered darker spots , lighter streaks , and reticulations . The center of each pectoral fin is marked with an oval spot or blotch . The lower surface is light , white to grey , blotched irregularly with gray spots . The barndoor skate is unique from other species of skate in its having a straight line that begins at the snout and ends at the anterior margin of the outer corner of the disk , but stopping short of the disk . 
 The barndoor skate is one of the largest skates found in the North Atlantic Ocean . It can reach lengths of up to 1 @.@ 5 meters ( 5 ft ) and can weigh up to 18 kilograms ( 40 lb ) . There have been unconfirmed reports of individuals reaching lengths of 1 @.@ 8 meters ( 6 ft ) . A 71 – 76 @-@ centimeter ( 28 – 30 in ) barndoor skate weighs an average of 2 – 3 kilograms ( 4 – 7 lb ) . 
 The tail is moderately short and does not have large thorn @-@ like structures called dermal denticles that are normally found on skates . This lack of denticles distinguishes it from all but two species of skates that are found in the western Atlantic . Larger individuals do have three rows of smaller denticles on the tail , and mature females also possess denticles on the head and shoulders , and along the dorsal <unk> of the disk and tail . <unk> are completely absent on small individuals . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 The barndoor skate occurs in a range extending from the banks of Newfoundland , the southern Gulf of St. Lawrence , and along the northeastern coast and offshore banks of Nova Scotia down to North Carolina . There were reports in the 19th century that the range of the fish extended as far south as northeastern Florida , but more recent research suggests that the Florida discoveries may have actually been a misidentification of R. floridana . It is found on various types of ocean bottoms including soft muddy , sandy , and rocky bottoms . It can be found from the shoreline to depths of up to 750 meters ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) , although it is most commonly found at depths of less than 150 meters ( 500 ft ) . It inhabits waters in a broad range of temperatures , from just above freezing to 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) . It appears to move closer to shore in the autumn and further out to sea in the warmer months . It tolerates brackish water where the salinity is as low as 21 to 24 parts per thousand , but it prefers salinity between 31 and 35 parts per thousand . It is believed to not exhibit any north @-@ south migratory patterns . 
 = = Diet = = 
 The fish is carnivorous , with its prey consisting mainly of benthic invertebrates and fishes . Such food items include polychaetes , gastropods , bivalve mollusks , rock crabs , cancer crabs , spider crabs , lobsters , shrimps , squids , and fishes including spiny dogfish , alewife , Atlantic herring , menhaden , hakes , sculpins , <unk> , <unk> , sand lance , butterfish , and various flounders . Juveniles primarily subsist on benthic invertebrates such as polychaetes , copepods , amphipods , isopods , <unk> shrimp , and euphausiids . Individuals have been found with the denticles on the snout worn smooth , indicating that the snout is used to dig in the mud or sand to obtain bivalve mollusks . 
 = = Importance to humans = = 
 The barndoor skate is one of five skates in the Gulf of Maine that has commercial value , but of those , the species that are most frequently targeted are the winter skate ( <unk> ocellata ) and the thorny skate ( <unk> radiata ) . The barndoor skate is most commonly considered by @-@ catch by commercial trawlers operating in the northwestern Atlantic that target other commercially valuable species of fish using bottom trawling . When harvested , the flesh of the barndoor skate is used as bait , fish meal , pet food , and the meat from its wings is sold for human consumption . Since 1981 , landings of skates have increased substantially , partly in response to increased demand for lobster bait , and more significantly , to the increased export market for skate wings . Currently , commercial retention and sale of barndoor skate is prohibited in the United States . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Abundances of barndoor skate dropped precipitously in the 1960s and early 1970s , coinciding with the period of intense fishing by foreign factory trawlers . The abundance remained very low through around 1990 , but increased nearly exponentially from 1990 – 2005 , and have been approaching the levels observed in the 1960s . In 1998 , Casey and Myers published a controversial study claiming that barndoor skate was nearly extinct . However , they only presented data through 1993 , so that the recovery that started in the early 1990s was not clearly evident . In 1999 , two conservation groups , <unk> , based in Cambridge , Massachusetts , and The Center for Marine Conservation , based in Washington , D.C. , petitioned the National Marine Fisheries Service ( NMFS ) to have the barndoor skate listed under the Endangered Species Act . After a 12 @-@ month study , the NMFS announced in 2002 that listing the species as endangered or threatened was not warranted . It cited increases in abundance and biomass of barndoor skate observed during surveys since 1993 , which had become quite rapid by that time . NOAA . " endangered species ruling " ( PDF ) . NOAA . Retrieved 12 April 2012 . In 1994 , the World Conservation Union had listed the barndoor skate as " vulnerable " under the 1994 Categories and Criteria , but in 2003 , it reassessed the species as " endangered " on the IUCN Red List . 
 Each year the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) estimates current population levels for a variety of aquatic species of special interest , and releases an annual report showing the progress being made to reduce harvesting of overfished species . When a species has been determined to be either overfished or subject to overfishing , the regional fishery management councils are required to develop a plan to correct the problem . In 2006 , NOAA published a press release stating that as a result of conservation efforts , between 2004 and 2005 , monitored stocks of the barndoor skate had grown to a level that the NOAA no longer considers " overfished " . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The fish was originally described as Raja laevis by Samuel Latham <unk> in 1818 . The scientific name was later changed to the currently valid name Dipturus laevis . It has also been misidentified as Raia granulata by Theodore Gill , an American ichthyologist , in 1879 . The genus name , Dipturus , is derived from the Greek words di , meaning two , and pteryx , meaning wing . Raja , the original genus which was coined by Carolus Linnaeus in 1758 , is still recognized as a valid subgenus . 
 = Janet Jackson as a gay icon = 
 Janet Jackson ( born May 16 , 1966 ) is an American pop singer @-@ songwriter and actress , who is considered to be a gay icon . Jackson garnered a substantial gay following during the 1990s as she gained prominence in popular music . Recognized as a long @-@ term ally of the LGBT community , Jackson received the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Music Album for her Grammy Award @-@ winning sixth studio album The Velvet Rope ( 1997 ) , which spoke out against homophobia and embraced same @-@ sex love . In 2005 , Jackson received the Humanitarian Award from the Human Rights Campaign and AIDS Project Los Angeles in recognition of her involvement in raising funds for AIDS Charities and received the Vanguard Award at the 19th Annual GLAAD Media Awards in 2008 . In June 2012 , Jackson announced she is currently executive producing a documentary on the lives of transgender people around the world titled Truth , saying she agreed to sign on to help stop discrimination against the transgender community . 
 = = The Velvet Rope and AIDS charities = = 
 During the recording of Jackson 's sixth studio album The Velvet Rope , the singer reportedly suffered from depression , which became a central theme to the album among other subjects including domestic abuse , low self @-@ esteem , sadomasochism , homophobia and sexual orientation . In his review of the album , Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph observed , " [ Jackson ] even makes a bid for gay icon status , delivering a diva @-@ ish performance reminiscent of Diana Ross on ' Together Again ' ( a post @-@ Aids pop song ) , singing a paean to homosexuality on the jazzy ' Free Xone ' and climaxing ( if that 's the right word ) with a bizarre lesbian reinterpretation of Rod Stewart 's ' Tonight 's the Night ' . " The song " Free Xone " dealt specifically with homophobia and same @-@ sex relationships . Speculation over Jackson 's own sexual orientation began circulating after the release of The Velvet Rope — particularly regarding her cover version of Rod Stewart 's " Tonight 's the Night ( Gonna Be Alright ) " — however , Jackson denied rumors that she has had sexual relationships with other women . 
 I don 't mind people thinking that I 'm gay or calling me gay . People are going to believe whatever they want . Yes , I hang out at gay clubs , but other clubs too . I go where the music is good . I love people regardless of sexual preference , regardless of race . No , I am not bisexual . I have been linked with dancers in our group because we are so close . I grew up in a big family . I love being affectionate . I love intimacy and I am not afraid to show it . We fall asleep in each other 's arms . We hug , we kiss , but there is nothing beyond that . Because [ René Elizondo , Jr . ] and I broke up , it 's like people need some sort of drama , some sort of gossip . 
 The album 's second single " Together Again " , a hit in several countries , became an homage to loved ones Jackson has lost to AIDS , as well as an elegy to AIDS victims and their families worldwide . The upbeat dance song was arranged to celebrate the spirit of those who have passed on , rather than mourn their deaths , as Jackson comments . A portion of the single 's sales were donated by Jackson to The American Foundation for AIDS Research . On November 17 , 1997 , Jackson was honored by the National Black Lesbian and Gay Leadership Forum for the album 's sexual orientation @-@ related content , in addition to receiving the award for Outstanding Music Album at the 9th Annual GLAAD Media Awards in 1998 . In June 2005 , Jackson was given the Humanitarian Award by the Human Rights Campaign and AIDS Project Los Angeles in honor of her activism . 
 What I 've learned in these recent months is that there is a light at the end of the tunnel , and it 's real . It 's a beautiful light that both comforts our minds and strengthens our souls . Tonight my heart is filled with gratitude for that light . I 'm so grateful that prayers are answered , that faith is rewarded and tolerance is celebrated as a virtue . I 'm grateful that God is of unconditional love . 
 She has also been a strong advocate of practicing safe sex as a means of inhibiting the spread of the AIDS virus , criticizing those who are " careless " when it comes to sexual intercourse . 
 = = LGBT social movements = = 
 LGBT social movements , which include the Gay and Lesbian Rights Movement , Gay Liberation , lesbian feminism , and transgender activism , have often garnered celebrity endorsement from many entertainers including Jackson . She has often voiced her support for same @-@ sex marriage , advocating all people have the right to fall in love . In 2008 , Jackson appeared in a public service announcement sponsored by the Logo television network and the Gay , Lesbian and Straight Education Network ( GLSEN ) in response to the E.O. Green School shooting . The announcement discusses the murder of fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Lawrence " Larry " King and the safety of LGBT youth in public schools . Jackson states that " none of us are safe , until all of us are safe " . On April 26 , 2008 , fellow gay icon Ellen DeGeneres presented Jackson with the Vanguard Award at the 19th Annual GLAAD Media Awards at the Kodak Theatre in Los Angeles . 
 We are delighted to honor Janet Jackson at the 19th Annual GLAAD Media Awards in Los Angeles as such a visible , welcoming and inclusive ally of the lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender ( LGBT ) community . Ms. Jackson has a tremendous following inside the LGBT community and out , and having her stand with us against the defamation that LGBT people still face in our country is extremely significant . 
 Jackson spoke with Larry King on CNN , supporting the It Gets Better Project and The Trevor Project , a non @-@ profit organization providing crisis and suicide prevention for LGBT youth , in light of the high profile suicides committed in Fall , 2010 . She stated : " ( I was ) one of those kids ... holding everything inside ... internalizing everything . And that really can affect you , and feeling helpless and hopeless , and finding that person that you can trust , that adult , like I did later on in life , that I felt comfortable and safe to tell my issues , my worries , my pains , my aches to . This is what the Trevor Project is really all about . And they have a 24 @-@ hour hotline ... There 's someone there that you can speak with 24 hours that will be there for you . " She made an official It Gets Better video which was released on December 1 , 2010 . 
 Jackson is currently producing a documentary on the lives of transgender people around the world titled " Truth " , saying she agreed to sign on to help stop discrimination against the transgender community . " All people are very important to me . I 've been fortunate to make friends and learn about very different lives , " Jackson said in a statement . " ' Truth ' is our small chance to ask that you try and understand someone who lives their life in a way that is a little bit different from yours , even though all of our hearts are the same . We want to stop the hate and find understanding . " Director Robert Jason , who previously directed the Style Network documentary " Style Exposed : Born Male , Living Female , " about four transgender New Yorkers , said Jackson will play a prominent part in the finished product . " Janet Jackson will take us on a visually innovative , cerebral journey through the turbulent lives of transgendered [ sic ] people of all ages around the world and their epic struggle for equality , " he said in a statement announcing the project . " This film will highlight landmark mainstream stories and provide a glimpse at others that will change the gender landscape of the world forever . Just as it is hard to believe that there ever was a time when different components of society were required to use separate drinking fountains , it is as incredible that one 's gender expression remains just such a target for discrimination . " Jackson is working behind @-@ the @-@ scenes on the movie and will also take part in some of the on @-@ camera interviews as well . 
 = Too Short a Season = 
 " Too Short a Season " is the 16th episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . It first aired on February 8 , 1988 , in broadcast syndication . The teleplay was written by Michael Michaelian and D. C. Fontana , based on a story by Michaelian , and the episode was directed by Rob Bowman . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , the Enterprise transports the elderly Admiral Mark Jameson ( Clayton Rohner ) to deal with a hostage negotiation on the planet Mordan IV . Jameson took a drug to reverse his aging , and must defuse the situation with a former adversary . 
 During re @-@ writes of the script by Fontana , various elements introduced by Michaelian were changed , including the ending . Guest stars included Michael Pataki , who had appeared in the Star Trek : The Original Series episode " The Trouble with Tribbles " . Reviews were mixed , with particular criticism directed at the acting of Clayton Rohner as Admiral Jameson . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Federation starship Enterprise , under the command of Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) , brings aboard the elderly Admiral Mark Jameson and his wife Anne ( Marsha Hunt ) on request of Karnas ( Michael Pataki ) , the Governor of Mordan IV . Karnas warns that a dissident terrorist group has taken a Federation Ambassador and his staff hostage , and demand to speak to a negotiator . Jameson had negotiated a previous settlement on Mordan IV . As the ship travels to Mordan IV , they find that Jameson is becoming stronger and more able to move about on his own , and is no longer showing signs of the terminal Iverson 's Disease he was known to have before he was beamed aboard . The crew discovers that Jameson has been taking an array of drugs to reverse the aging process over the last two years , and only recently has taken an overdose of the drugs to prepare himself for the negotiations . Jameson begins to appear younger and full of energy , but has frequent pains as a result of the overdose . By the time they are nearing Mordan , Jameson now appears as a young adult . 
 As they approach the planet , Jameson begins audio communication with Karnas to learn more of the situation , but soon discovers that it is Karnas himself that has taken the Federation staff . Karnas reminds Jameson that his treachery during their last encounter on Mordan IV resulted in years of war . Against the advice of Picard , Jameson devises plans to rescue the hostages by transporting the away team , now including the captain , to the tunnels beneath Karnas ' mansion , where Jameson believes the hostages are being held . Picard privately confronts Jameson about Karnas ' motives . Jameson reveals that in the past , Karnas had captured a Federation starliner in revenge for the death of his father by another local tribe . Jameson had negotiated for the passengers ' release by giving Karnas what he demanded , a supply of Federation weapons . However , Jameson , in his interpretation of the Prime Directive , also supplied the warring tribes with an equal number of weapons . Jameson had thought this would only lead to a short @-@ lived skirmish , and had not expected a war that would last over forty years . Jameson is now insistent on correcting his past mistake and thus took the reverse aging drug in order to be at his best . 
 In orbit , the Enterprise crew and Jameson beam down into the tunnels beneath Karnas ' manor , but find that their arrival was anticipated and face off against armed guards . Jameson collapses during the fight , and the crew beams back to the Enterprise , where they discover Jameson was not shot but instead the reverse aging drug is destroying his body . Karnas demands to see Jameson or he will kill a hostage every 15 minutes . Picard opts to beam himself , Dr. Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) , Jameson , and eventually Jameson 's wife Anne directly to Karnas ' office . Though Karnas initially refuses to believe that the young man is Jameson , Picard shows him the images of his reverse aging over the last few days after which Jameson reveals a scar on his wrist inflicted by Karnas years ago . Karnas prepares to fire on Jameson to get his revenge , but decides to get his revenge by watching Jameson suffer and die horribly from the drug instead . Jameson dies shortly afterward in his wife 's embrace . Karnas agrees to let the hostages go , and to allow Jameson to be buried on Mordan IV at Anne 's request . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Michael Michaelian originally pitched a story idea based on <unk> , sometimes referred to as " male menopause " . He wrote a treatment and first draft script involving reverse aging . D. C. Fontana later explained that the terrorist MacGuffin ( an ambiguous but central plot point ) was not quite right . Fontana was brought in to overhaul the ending , and explained that a " lot of what I put in at the end was also in Michael 's story and drafts , but approached with a different emphasis " . One significant alteration she made was to change the plot from involving actual terrorists to a trap that the crew must defuse . The original ending also had the two opposing parties on the planet sit down for peace talks with Jameson surviving the effects of the de @-@ aging drugs . He would have been reduced in age to fourteen and could no longer remember his wife . 
 Clayton Rohner was cast as Admiral Mark Jameson . Prior to filming , Rohner and director Rob Bowman worked together on weekends on the characterisation of Jameson . Bowman criticised the style of the script , describing it as " sit @-@ and @-@ tell " . He also had a variety of problems with the wheelchair used in this episode which cost $ 10 @,@ 000 to construct . It was referred to by plot designer Joe Longo as the " big albatross " , and when a wheelchair was required for the Deep Space Nine episode " Melora " they instead created a much simpler version . Karnas was played by Michael Pataki , who had previously portrayed the Klingon <unk> in The Original Series episode " The Trouble with Tribbles " . 
 Make @-@ up supervisor Michael Westmore had previously used makeup to age DeForest Kelley in the season premiere " Encounter at Farpoint " , but " Too Short a Season " proved a unique challenge as four stages of make @-@ up were required to show Admiral Jameson de @-@ aging . The initial stage to show Jameson at his oldest , involved Rohner wearing a bald @-@ cap and wig plus latex prosthetics applied to his eyes , forehead , throat and jowls . That stage took up to four hours to apply to the actor . Westmore found himself worn out by the volume of work during this episode , as at the time the make @-@ up team on the series included just him and Werner Keppler . On the second day of shooting the first stage make @-@ up , Westmore arrived after Rohner had been in make @-@ up for three hours only to find that he was only half finished . Keppler and Westmore rushed to get him so as not to delay the filming of the episode . Bowman later criticised the make @-@ up used on Rohner , describing it as sub @-@ par . Westmore said that " if I was working on a film , and had several months to test Clayton 's make @-@ up beforehand , it probably would have turned out more to my liking . With less than a week to work with , I don 't think it turned out too badly . " 
 " Too Short a Season " marked the last time a cityscape would be built as a model for the show until the sixth season episode " Birthright " . They were instead replaced with matte paintings . <unk> from The Original Series and movies , along with a staff from " The Last Outpost " were used to decorate Karnas ' office . 
 <unk> — Seems that humans in 24th Century do not bother about accessibility . At least Galaxy class ships were not constructed under this concern . The first hint to it is when Admiral Mark Jameson is beamed up and you start to ask yourself how his wheelchair will get out from there since the transport ' stage ' is one tall step above the floor . Certainly the wheelchair would have to be carried down by two crewmen . The second hint is that clearly the narrow doors ( to the quarters , for instance ) aren 't wide enough to allow his large chair to pass . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Too Short a Season " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing February 14 , 1988 . It received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 9 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was the highest ratings received by the series since " The Big Goodbye " four episodes earlier . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com in June 2011 . He said that he liked the episode , but not because it was a typical Next Generation episode , saying that it was instead " a story about an old man who has been carrying guilt for four decades over something stupid he did in his youth , and he tries to recapture his youth in a move of even greater stupidity " . He described the return of Michael Pataki to Star Trek as " triumphant " but thought that Clayton Rohner was " simply horrible " , and that Marsha Hunt " creates no impression whatsoever " . He summed up the episode saying that it was a " missed opportunity " , and gave it a score of 5 / 10 . James Hunt watched the episode in January 2013 for the website Den of Geek . He felt that the episode had a good story at the core but highlighted the " rather dubious make @-@ up and over @-@ acting " . His main criticism was that Jameson was " fundamentally unlikeable " , and the lack of a Subplot in the episode . 
 Zack Handlen watched the episode for The A.V. Club in May 2010 , and also found that the character of Jameson was " thoroughly unlikable " . He described Rohner as " acting like a Muppet when he 's supposed to be elderly and weak , then laying on the over @-@ heated angst once his youth is restored " . Overall he felt that the main characters were sidelined in the episode , and so it was difficult to be involved in what went on . He gave the episode a grade of C + . Michelle Erica Green reviewed the episode for TrekNation in June 2007 . She said that the plot seen in " Too Short a Season " involving an " Evil Admiral " was one which had been more commonly seen on The Original Series such as Commodore Decker in " The Doomsday Machine " . She too criticised the makeup used on Rohner , but said that his acting became more " modulated , but then both Karnas and the actor playing him seem over @-@ the @-@ top by comparison " . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The first home media release of " Too Short a Season " was on VHS cassette , appearing on July 1 , 1992 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 , and then released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = Stress Relief = 
 " Stress Relief " is a two @-@ part episode of the American comedy television series The Office . They constituted the fourteenth and fifteenth episode of the fifth season , and the 86th and 87th overall episodes of the series . Both episodes were directed by Jeffrey Blitz and written by Paul Lieberstein , who also plays Toby Flenderson on the show . 
 In this episode , Dwight stages a fire in the office to test the office 's fire safety skills , but things go from bad to worse when Stanley suffers a heart attack , causing Michael to come up with ways to relieve stress in the office , including a comedic roast of himself . Meanwhile , Andy , Jim , and Pam watch an illegally downloaded movie at work starring Jack Black , Jessica Alba and Cloris Leachman , and Pam deals with her parents ' recent argument that 's caused her father to move in with her and Jim . 
 Both parts of " Stress Relief " originally aired together immediately following the broadcast of Super Bowl XLIII , and The Office writers and producers sought to attract newcomers to the series with the expected increase in viewership . Guest stars Black , Alba and Leachman do not interact with the regular characters themselves , but rather appear in a film within the episode . The Office creator Greg Daniels said this was done to keep the episode more grounded in reality . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews , with Time magazine declaring it the best overall television episode of any series in 2009 . Many commentators particularly praised the chaotic cold open scene , in which Dwight panics his co @-@ workers with a simulated fire as part of a twisted safety demonstration . Because of its proximity to the Super Bowl , " Stress Relief " is the most viewed episode of The Office with 22 @.@ 9 million viewers according to Nielsen Media Research during its original broadcast . It won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series , and received another nomination for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part one = = = 
 Annoyed that none of his co @-@ workers paid attention to the fire safety seminar he gave last week , Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) tries another approach by sealing the office exits shut , cutting the phone lines and starting a fire in a trash can . Dwight calmly explains the proper safety procedures as the panicked employees try to flee , smashing windows , crawling through air ducts and destroying office equipment . Dwight eventually reveals it was just a drill , but Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) suffers a heart attack and collapses in the commotion . Dwight is subsequently censured by Dunder Mifflin CFO David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) , and Michael ( Steve Carell ) strips him of his position as safety officer . After Stanley is released from the hospital , his doctors warn him to keep his stress levels under control to avoid further damaging his health . Michael arranges for a CPR training session for the employees , but they are too easily distracted and the lesson proves fruitless . The session ends badly when Dwight destroys the expensive CPR dummy , earning another rebuke from David Wallace . Dwight is ordered to apologize to his co @-@ workers and get signatures acknowledging that they forgive him , but after he openly declares that his apology is insincere and denies that he is responsible for Stanley 's heart attack , they refuse to sign . 
 With tensions running high in the office , Michael tries to calm his workers down with yoga and meditation sessions . However , Michael soon realizes he is actually the source of his employees ' stress when Stanley ’ s stress reader beeps uncontrollably whenever Michael is nearby . Michael hands the stress reader to Oscar ( Oscar Nunez ) and is horrified when the same result occurs . Meanwhile , Pam ’ s ( Jenna Fischer ) parents are going through a rough patch in their marriage , and Pam ’ s father is staying with her and Jim ( John Krasinski ) . Jim attempts to cheer Pam up by watching an unlicensed movie with Andy ( Ed Helms ) ( they do not know how to access such films while Andy does , so they have to watch the movie in Andy 's company ) . The film stars Jack Black , who is engaged to a character played by Jessica Alba , but falls in love with her elderly grandmother , played by Cloris Leachman . During the movie , Jim and Pam discuss the situation with Pam ’ s parents but , Andy believes their comments are directed at the characters in the film , leading him to conclude they are " movie geniuses " finding hidden depths in the film . 
 = = = Part two = = = 
 Michael decides the workers are stressed because they are reluctant to express their feelings , so he organizes a comedic roast of himself in the warehouse . Dwight tricks most of the employees into signing his apology letter by pretending it is a sign @-@ in sheet , but Phyllis ( Phyllis Smith ) catches on and refuses to sign it . Each of the office and warehouse workers gleefully take jabs at Michael , who initially seems to enjoy the jokes , but grows increasingly uncomfortable and offended . When it comes time for him to roast his employees , Michael ends up storming out of the warehouse , visibly upset . After the roast , Michael takes a personal day ( much to the concern of his employees , who start to feel bad about the scathing jokes towards Michael ) and spends time at a playground to reflect , feeding pigeons by tossing whole slices of bread on the ground and making bird noises , despite the lack of birds in the winter weather . Dwight tricks Phyllis into signing his apology letter by bribing a mailman to ask her to sign for a fake package . Michael returns to the office , where he roasts each of his co @-@ workers with one @-@ liners . Stanley laughs heartily when Michael roasts him , breaking the tension . Michael tells his employees that they are the reason he got into the paper business , and they applaud him . 
 Pam asks Jim to talk to her father and convince him to work things out with her mother . But shortly after they talk , Pam learns her father has sought a separation and will be looking for his own apartment . Pam assumes it is because of something Jim said to her father , and blames him for their breakup . Pam later confronts her father about why he left her mother while Jim looks on through the window . Pam returns to the office and tells Jim her father left because Jim told him how much he loves Pam , and he realized that he had never felt that way about her mother even at their best . Pam comes to terms with the separation and tearfully embraces Jim . Later , she expresses confidence that the two are true soul mates . Andy overhears her comments about her real life scenario , still thinks she is talking about the film they watched and concludes that he cannot be a movie critic because he is not as insightful as Jim and Pam . 
 In the final scene of the episode , the ending of the illegally downloaded movie is revealed : Jack Black visits Cloris Leachman with flowers and a new walker , only to discover her affair with another young man and he walks away heartbroken . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Stress Relief " was directed by Jeffrey Blitz and written by Paul Lieberstein , who also plays Toby Flenderson on the show . The episode originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 1 , 2009 , immediately after the broadcast of Super Bowl XLIII . NBC decided to air The Office after the Super Bowl , rather than another show , due to positive feedback the series received from short promo commercials it aired during the 2008 Summer Olympics . Some criticized the decision to place an episode of The Office , an already established NBC series , after the Super Bowl instead of a new show , and suggested it meant the network lacked any exceptional new material . 
 In writing the episode , Lieberstein said he sought to appeal to newcomers to the series and attract them to the show , without alienating regular The Office watchers : " We wanted to do a stand @-@ alone comedy episode that could bring people in . " Lieberstein said the script drew less attention to long @-@ standing story arcs , which new viewers would not understand . Lieberstein said , " It almost had an air of a pilot in a way , where we had to reintroduce everything . We wanted it to be extremely funny and extremely funny up front . " The Office creator Greg Daniels said he felt the episode had to focus on physical comedy and easily accessible set pieces . Daniels said , " I looked at all the shows that followed the Super Bowl in years past and I feel that a comedy would be a good choice in the current climate . People want to laugh so we 're trying our best to supply some laughs . " Actor Rainn Wilson said of the episode , " It 's a great opportunity for people to revisit the world of The Office and hopefully get into our style of comedy . " 
 The two parts of " Stress Relief " ran an hour long ( including commercials ) , compared to the typical half @-@ hour length of most The Office episodes . Since the end of the second season , the series had begun occasionally showing longer episodes ( which they dubbed " super @-@ sized " ) on special occasions . Unlike other episodes of The Office , " Stress Relief " included an extended main title sequence that included the names and images of the entire supporting cast of the series , in order to afford them recognition in anticipation of the high post @-@ Super Bowl viewership . The opening scene , in which the characters frantically scramble to escape the Dunder Mifflin office due to what they believe is a fire , took about a day @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half to shoot . It took much longer than the average 45 minutes of shooting time for a scene of that length due to the amount of stunt work involved . Due to the pressure of following the Super Bowl , actress Jenna Fischer said , " I don 't think we 've ever worked so hard on an episode in the history of our show . " The Office actor and writer B.J. Novak , who did not appear in " Stress Relief " , said of the episode , " It 's awesome . After this airs , people are going to refer to the Super Bowl as the Pre @-@ Office Football Spectacular . " 
 In anticipation of particularly high viewership due to the Super Bowl , NBC officials encouraged The Office producers to feature celebrity guest appearances in the episode . Jack Black , Jessica Alba and Cloris Leachman all made guest appearances in " Stress Relief " as a result . However , they do not interact with the cast and characters of The Office , but rather appear separately in a bootleg film called Mrs. Albert Hannaday , which the characters watch within the episode . Greg Daniels said this was done because it " helps keep the show grounded and less like I Love Lucy " . Lieberstein also said the casting decision made sense because , " If we 're just casting some salesman that comes into the office and it 's Jack Black , it 's hard to believe that . " " Stress Relief " marked Black 's fourth television appearance in five years : he previously appeared in the Fox sitcom Cracking Up in 2004 , the Comedy Central series The Naked Trucker and T @-@ Bones Show in 2004 , and the Fox animated comedy series The Simpsons in 2007 . Steve Carell said of Leachman 's performance , " She is that extra seasoning . That extra spice to the pot that makes for a delicious comedy gumbo . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Just before Dwight starts his fire simulation , he said his co @-@ workers previously failed to listen because he made a presentation on the computer program Microsoft PowerPoint , of which he said , " PowerPoint is boring " . Michael refers to Barack Obama , the first African American president of the United States , to Stanley while he is suffering a heart attack by shouting , " Stanley ! Barack is president ! You are black ! Stanley ! " A deleted scene further addresses Obama 's election , with Michael praising the choice and Darryl , with Darryl half @-@ jokingly telling the Caucasian office workers what will change for them ( they no longer have to pretend to like jazz , and Morgan Freeman won 't get any more acting work because " he 's more for you guys " ) . Michael calls an employee from the Red Cross , an international humanitarian movement , to conduct a lesson about CPR . The instructor suggests they pump the heart to the tune of " Stayin ' Alive " , a disco song by the pop band , the Bee Gees , but Michael mixes the song up with " I Will Survive " by Gloria Gaynor . At the end of the lesson , Dwight cuts the face off the CPR dummy and places it on his face in the manner of Hannibal Lecter , a fictional cannibalistic serial killer who cut the face off a man and wore it as a mask in the 1991 thriller film , The Silence of the Lambs . Watching Mrs. Albert Hannaday , Andy says the Cloris Leachman character was originally supposed to be played by the much younger actress , Nicole Kidman , and the last @-@ minute replacement prompted a minor overhaul in the film 's script . The songs " You Make My Dreams Come True " by Hall and Oates , " All Out of Love " by the soft rock duo Air Supply , " Have a Little Faith in Me " by singer @-@ songwriter John Hiatt , and " Lady " by Little River Band play during scenes in Mrs. Albert Hannaday . 
 Michael describes the roast as an event in the style of televised comedy specials that air on the cable network , Comedy Central . In describing the upcoming roast , Michael says he plans to call YouTube , an online video sharing website , to record the event . During the roast , Pam says Michael 's penis is so small , " If it were an iPod , it would be a Shuffle " , a reference to the smallest of the Apple Inc. portable media player brands . Kelly said she would rather kiss Lord Voldemort , the hideous antagonist of the Harry Potter novels and films , than Michael . Andy sings a song about Michael , " What I Hate About You " , to the tune of the rock song by The Romantics , " What I Like About You " . Angela makes a joke , " If you put sunblock on a window , you might be Michael Scott " , which is modeled after the " you might be a redneck " one @-@ liner jokes by comedian Jeff Foxworthy . While roasting his co @-@ workers at the end of the episode , Michael says to Andy , " Cornell called and they think you suck " , a reference to Cornell University , the Ithaca , New York college the Andy character attended . 
 = = Ratings = = 
 In its original American broadcast on February 1 , 2009 , " Stress Relief " was viewed by 22 @.@ 9 million viewers in 13 @.@ 34 million homes , according to Nielsen Media Research , making it the most watched episode of The Office and the only episode to reach over 20 million viewers . The episode drew a 10 @.@ 6 rating and 14 @.@ 46 million viewers between the ages 18 and 49 . It more than doubled the show 's previously highest rating in the age group , and constituted the largest 18 @-@ 49 rating for an NBC entertainment telecast in four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years , since the tenth season finale of the medical drama series ER on May 13 , 2004 . An estimated 37 @.@ 7 million viewers watched at least six minutes or more of " Stress Relief " . As expected , The Office benefited highly from following the broadcast of Super Bowl XLIII , which was seen by 98 @.@ 7 million average viewers , making it the most watched Super Bowl in history at the time . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Stress Relief " received generally positive reviews . Time magazine named it the best overall television episode of any series in 2009 . " Stress Relief " was voted the third highest @-@ rated episode out of 26 from the fifth season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally ; the episode was rated 8 @.@ 89 out of 10 . Stanley 's heart attack in response to Dwight 's fake fire drill ranked number 10 in phillyBurbs.com 's top ten moments from the fifth season of The Office . Many critics particularly praised the opening scene , in which Dwight panics his co @-@ workers by simulating a fire . The sequence included scenes such as Kevin looting a vending machine amid the chaos , Oscar 's legs crashing through the ceiling as he tries to crawl out , Angela tossing her cat through an open ceiling tile only for it to fall through another tile , and Andy 's reaction to a series of popping caps : " The fire is shooting at us ! " 
 Alan Sepinwall , television columnist for The Star @-@ Ledger called it a " balls to the wall , gut @-@ busting , amazing Office episode " , and called the fire opening scene " not only the best Office pre @-@ credits sequence ever , but an all @-@ time sitcom classic " . Sepinwall said " Stress Relief " was accessible to newcomers and regular viewers , and displayed both the comedic and human sides of the characters . He said the only drawback of the episode was the Mrs. Albert Hannaday subplot , which he felt was an unnecessary gimmick added solely to accommodate the guest stars . TV Guide writer Shahzad Abbas wrote , " This was one of my favorite episodes ever . It had me laughing the whole way through . " Abbas particularly praised the fire opening scene and the final scene in which Michael insults everybody , which he called " a very satisfying ending to the roast saga " . He called the Black / Leachman romance " creepy and hilarious " , but described the Jim and Pam romance subplot as the weak link of the episode . 
 David Krone of the Los Angeles Daily News said although he had mixed feelings about the fifth season so far , he found " Stress Relief " to be " one of the season 's best efforts " . Krone specifically praised the Jim and Pam subplot and Dwight 's character , adding , " It 's a pretty perfect way to unwind - or , if your team lost , to become reanimated - after the Super Bowl . " Rick Ingebritson of The Palm Beach Post said the episode " was funny from start to finish " , particularly praising Dwight Schrute 's role and the Michael Scott roast . However , Ingebritson said he was disgusted by the Leachman nude scene from Mrs. Albert Hannaday . Will Leitch of New York magazine , said the episode was funny , but " curiously unfocused [ like ] two half @-@ hour episodes awkwardly spliced together . He praised the Black / Leachman film , the trouble Dwight kept getting in , and the Jim and Pam subplot , which he called " a rare Pam @-@ Jim plot point that worked " . However , he called the Michael roast " yet another Michael @-@ wanting @-@ to @-@ be @-@ loved @-@ and @-@ still @-@ be @-@ the @-@ Boss subplot that takes over the second half " . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Entertainment Weekly writer Whitney Pastorek said the episode started strong with the fire scare scene , but " tapered off into a disjointed plot " that she felt would not win new viewers . She said many jokes went too long and lost momentum , but nevertheless wrote " a lot of the episode ’ s humor was engaging and smart " . Lorenzo Perez of The News & Observer said the Pam subplot was " overworked " and lacked impact , and the Dwight character was over @-@ the @-@ top , proving The Office writers clearly have no idea how to rein in Dwight Schrute . Perez also expressed doubt the show would attract a new audience because it ran too late into the night following the Super Bowl . However , Perez said he enjoyed the Black / Leachman cameos . Terry Morrow of the Knoxville News Sentinel said , " This particular visit to The Office doesn 't pop like most episodes " . Morrow praised the Black / Leachman film , but said , " To be upstaged by a B @-@ plot , one not involving the show 's main characters at all , is a bit of a misdirection the show doesn 't need in a post @-@ Super Bowl time slot . " USA Today critic Robert Bianco said the plot was extremely thin and the Black and Leachman cameos were humorless and grotesque . Bianco wrote , " Unfortunately , in an hour you get at most a handful of funny moments . So if you want funny from a comedy , look elsewhere . " 
 = = Awards = = 
 Jeffrey Blitz won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series for " Stress Relief " . Dean Holland and David Rogers were also nominated for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series . " Stress Relief " accounted for two of the ten Primetime Emmy Award nominations The Office received for the show 's fifth season . 
 = Siege of Eretria = 
 The Siege of Eretria took place in 490 BC , during the first Persian invasion of Greece . The city of Eretria , on Euboea , was besieged by a strong Persian force under the command of Datis and Artaphernes . 
 The first Persian invasion was a response to Greek involvement in the Ionian Revolt , when the Eretrians and Athenians had sent a force to support the cities of Ionia in their attempt to overthrow Persian rule . The Eretrian and Athenian force had succeeded in capturing and burning Sardis ( the regional capital of Persia ) , but was then forced to retreat with heavy losses . In response to this raid , the Persian king Darius I swore to have revenge on Athens and Eretria . 
 Once the Ionian revolt was finally crushed by the Persian victory at the Battle of Lade , Darius began to plan to subjugate Greece . In 490 BC , he sent a naval task force under Datis and Artaphernes across the Aegean to subjugate the Cyclades , and then to make punitive attacks on Athens and Eretria . Reaching Euboea in mid @-@ summer after a successful campaign in the Aegean , the Persians proceeded to put Eretria under siege . The siege lasted six days before a fifth column of Eretrian nobles betrayed the city to the Persians . The city was plundered , and the population enslaved on Darius 's orders . The Eretrian prisoners were eventually taken to Persia and settled as colonists in <unk> . 
 After Eretria , the Persian force sailed for Athens , landing at the bay of Marathon . An Athenian army marched to meet them , and won a famous victory at the Battle of Marathon , thereby ending the first Persian invasion . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first Persian invasion of Greece had its immediate roots in the Ionian Revolt , the earliest phase of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars . However , it was also the result of the longer @-@ term interaction between the Greeks and Persians . In 500 BC the Persian Empire was still relatively young and highly <unk> , but prone to revolts amongst its subject peoples . Moreover , the Persian king Darius was a usurper , and had spent considerable time extinguishing revolts against his rule . Even before the Ionian Revolt , Darius had begun to expand the Empire into Europe , subjugating Thrace , and forcing Macedon to become a vassal of Persia . Attempts at further expansion into the politically fractious world of Ancient Greece may have been inevitable . However , the Ionian Revolt had directly threatened the integrity of the Persian empire , and the states of mainland Greece remained a potential menace to its future stability . Darius thus resolved to subjugate and pacify Greece and the Aegean , and to punish those involved in the Ionian Revolt . 
 The Ionian revolt had begun with an unsuccessful expedition against Naxos , a joint venture between the Persian satrap Artaphernes and the Miletus tyrant Aristagoras . In the aftermath , Artaphernes decided to remove Aristagoras from power , but before he could do so , Aristagoras abdicated , and declared Miletus a democracy . The other Ionian cities followed suit , ejecting their Persian @-@ appointed tyrants , and declaring themselves democracies . <unk> then appealed to the states of Mainland Greece for support , but only Athens and Eretria offered to send troops . 
 The reasons that Eretria sent assistance to the Ionians are not completely clear . Possibly commercial reasons were a factor ; Eretria was a mercantile city , whose trade was threatened by Persian dominance of the Aegean . Herodotus suggests that the Eretrians supported the revolt in order to repay the support the Milesians had given Eretria in a past war against Chalcis . 
 The Athenians and Eretrians sent a task force of 25 triremes to Asia Minor to aid the revolt . Whilst there , the Greek army surprised and outmaneuvered Artaphernes , marching to Sardis and there burning the lower city . However , this was as much as the Greeks achieved , and they were then pursued back to the coast by Persian horsemen , losing many men in the process . Despite the fact their actions were ultimately fruitless , the Eretrians and in particular the Athenians had earned Darius 's lasting enmity , and he vowed to punish both cities . The Persian naval victory at the Battle of Lade ( 494 BC ) all but ended the Ionian Revolt , and by 493 BC , the last hold @-@ outs were vanquished by the Persian fleet . The revolt was used as an opportunity by Darius to extend the empire 's border to the islands of the East Aegean and the Propontis , which had not been part of the Persian dominions before . The completion of the pacification of Ionia allowed the Persians to begin planning their next moves ; to extinguish the threat to the empire from Greece , and to punish Athens and Eretria . 
 In 492 BC , once the Ionian Revolt had finally been crushed , Darius dispatched an expedition to Greece under the command of his son @-@ in @-@ law , Mardonius . Mardonius re @-@ conquered Thrace and compelled Alexander I of Macedon to make Macedon a client kingdom to Persia , before the wrecking of his fleet brought a premature end to the campaign . However , in 490 BC , following up the successes of the previous campaign , Darius decided to send a maritime expedition led by Artaphernes , ( son of the satrap to whom Hippias had fled ) and Datis , a Median admiral . Mardonius had been injured in the prior campaign and had fallen out of favor . The expedition was intended to bring the Cyclades into the Persian empire , to punish Naxos ( which had resisted a Persian assault in 499 BC ) and then to head to Greece to force Eretria and Athens to submit to Darius or be destroyed . After island hopping across the Aegean , including successfully attacking Naxos , the Persian task force arrived off Euboea in mid summer , ready to fulfil their second major objective - to punish Eretria . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 When the Eretrians had discovered that the Persian task force was heading to attack them , they had appealed to the Athenians to send reinforcements . The Athenians agreed to this , and instructed the 4 @,@ 000 Athenian colonists from the nearby <unk> city of Chalcis to aid the Eretrians . These colonists had been planted on Chalcidian land after Athens had defeated Chalcis some 20 years previously . However , when these Athenians arrived at Eretria , they were told by a leading citizen , Aeschines , of the divisions amongst the Eretrians , and he advised them to leave and save themselves . The Athenians followed Aeschines ' advice and sailed to <unk> , thus avoiding the fate of the Eretrians . 
 The Eretrians failed to come to a clear plan of action ; in Herodotus 's words " it seems that all the plans of the Eretrians were unsound ; they sent to the Athenians for aid , but their counsels were divided " . There were three competing plans - one group wanted to surrender to the Persians , seeking to profit thereby , others wanted to flee to the hills above Eretria , whilst others wanted to fight . However , when the Persians landed in their territory the Eretrians , some consensus was obviously reached not to leave the city , but to try to withstand a siege , if possible . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 = = = Eretrians = = = 
 Herodotus does not estimate numbers for the Eretrians . Presumably , the majority of the citizen body would have been involved in the defence of the city , but the population of Eretria at the time cannot be clearly established . 
 = = = Persians = = = 
 According to Herodotus , the fleet sent by Darius consisted of 600 triremes . Herodotus does not estimate the size of the Persian army , only saying that they were a " large infantry that was well packed " . Among ancient sources , the poet Simonides , another near @-@ contemporary , says the campaign force numbered 200 @,@ 000 ; while a later writer , the Roman Cornelius Nepos estimates 200 @,@ 000 infantry and 10 @,@ 000 cavalry , of which only 100 @,@ 000 fought in the battle , while the rest were loaded into the fleet that was rounding Cape Sounion ; Plutarch and Pausanias both independently give 300 @,@ 000 , as does the Suda dictionary . Plato and Lysias assert 500 @,@ 000 ; and Justinus 600 @,@ 000 . 
 Modern historians have proposed wide ranging numbers for the infantry , from 20 @,@ 000 – 100 @,@ 000 with a consensus of perhaps 25 @,@ 000 ; estimates for the cavalry are in the range of 1 @,@ 000 
 = = Siege = = 
 The Eretrian strategy was to defend their walls , and undergo a siege . Possibly this was the only plan that could be agreed on , or became the default option when no plan was agreed . At any rate , since the Persian army had only suffered two defeats in the last century , and since a Greek army had never successfully fought the Persians , this was probably a sensible strategy . Since the Persians arrived by ship , it is probable they had little siege equipment , and indeed , they had already been foiled in the siege of Lindos earlier in the expedition . 
 The Persians landed their army at three separate locations , disembarked , and made straight for Eretria . The Persians then began besieging the city . Rather than passively besieging the city , the Persians seem to have vigorously attacked the walls . Herodotus reports that the fighting was fierce and both sides suffered heavy losses . However , after six days of fighting , two eminent Eretrians , <unk> and <unk> , opened the gates for the Persians . Once inside the city , the Persians plundered the city , burning the temples and sanctuaries in revenge for the burning of Sardis . Those citizens who were captured were enslaved , as Darius had ordered . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After staying at Eretria for a few days , the Persians made their way down the coast towards Attica . The Persians dropped the captured Eretrians off on the island of <unk> , before landing at the bay of Marathon in Attica . The Persians ' next target was Athens . However , the Athenians had marched out from Athens to meet the Persians , and blocked the exits from the plains of Marathon . After several days of stalemate , the Athenians finally resolved to attack the Persians , winning a famous victory at the ensuing Battle of Marathon . After the battle , the remaining Persians fled to their ships , picked up the Eretrians from <unk> , and then sailed back to Asia Minor , thereby ending the campaign , and the first Persian invasion of Greece . 
 When the Persian fleet arrived in Asia Minor , Datis and Artaphernes took the Eretrians before Darius in Susa . The Eretrians were not harmed by Darius who decided to settle them in the town of <unk> in <unk> . They were still there , using their own language and customs , when Herodotus wrote his history , and were encountered by Alexander the Great during his conquest of Persia a further century later . 
 In the meanwhile , Darius began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece ; however , in 486 BC , his Egyptian subjects revolted , indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition . Darius then died whilst preparing to march on Egypt , and the throne of Persia passed to his son Xerxes I. Xerxes crushed the Egyptian revolt , and very quickly restarted the preparations for the invasion of Greece . The epic second Persian invasion of Greece finally began in 480 BC , and the Persians met with initial success at the battles of Thermopylae and Artemisium . However , defeat at the Battle of Salamis would be the turning point in the campaign , and the next year the expedition was ended by the decisive Greek victory at the Battle of Plataea . 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 Herodotus , The Histories Perseus online version 
 Ctesias , Persica ( excerpt in Photius 's epitome ) 
 Diodorus Siculus , Biblioteca Historica . 
 Thucydides , History of the Peloponnesian War 
 Cicero , On the Laws 
 Cornelius Nepos , Miltiades 
 Plutarch , Moralia 
 Pausanias , Description of Greece 
 Suda Dictionary ( unknown author ) 
 Plato , Menexenus 
 Justin , epitome of <unk> Pompeius 's <unk> History 
