 The lead up to the match was controversial . The All Blacks ' manager George Dixon and the Welsh Rugby Union ( WRU ) could not agree on a referee . Dixon rejected all of the WRU 's proposed referees , and the WRU all of Dixon 's . The rules of the day dictated that in that case , the WRU could ask another union to appoint a referee . They asked the Scotland Rugby Union , who appointed Scotsman John Dallas . Dallas was heavily criticised during the Test , for wearing clothing considered inappropriate for refereeing a match , and for being unable to keep up with play . 
 As well as the referee , the selection of Mynott at first five @-@ eighth over Billy Stead was highly controversial . Several explanations were given for Stead 's omission . One was that he was originally selected , but gave up his spot in the team for a disappointed Mynott . The official reason given for Stead 's omission was injury — although he was fit enough to act as touch judge during the Test . 
 After the match 's kick @-@ off there was soon a scrum ordered The All Blacks were repeatedly penalised by the referee whenever they had a scrum . The reason for this was the All Blacks 2 – 3 – 2 scrum formation where they had only two front @-@ rowers . The Welsh team used a three @-@ man front row , and had studied the All Blacks scrummaging technique . The Welsh countered the All Blacks 2 – 3 – 2 scrum formation by setting their front row after the All Blacks , and hence preventing the All Blacks from gaining the loosehead . Consequently , every time the All Blacks tried to hook the ball they were penalised , and this prompted All Blacks ' captain Gallaher to order his team not to contest the scrums , and to instead let the Welsh win the ball . 
 The All Blacks first half play was generally considered poor — with aimless kicking to Welsh fullback Winfield returning much better kicks into touch . The first ten minutes saw New Zealand 's Roberts break the line twice only to be caught by Winfield without support . Eventually Wales had a scrum feed 25 yards out from the All Blacks ' try @-@ line . From this Wales executed a planned move — Owen got the Wales ' scrum @-@ ball and <unk> to on his right to Bush . He then turned left and passed to Cliff Pritchard . Pritchard then passed to Gabe , who passed to Bush , who eventually passed to Morgan . Morgan then raced 25 yards down the touchline whilst eluding Gillett to score for Wales . Winfield missed the resulting conversion — leaving the score at 3 – 0 . In the final stages of the first half the All Blacks began to assert themselves and were attacking strongly when halftime was sounded . Dixon claimed halftime was called two minutes early , and Wallace that it was three minutes early . 
 The All Blacks kicked off for the second half and the two teams were evenly matched . The All Blacks first five @-@ eighth Mynott was having a poor game — dropping the ball frequently . Eventually Roberts stopped passing to him , and would instead run the ball himself . The Welsh had try scoring opportunities , but drop @-@ goal attempts and dropped passes prevented them scoring . Some time during the second half ( various accounts are given — all identifying different times in the match ) the All Blacks got their best attacking opportunity of the match . The Welsh won a line @-@ out on the All Blacks side of half @-@ way , and with the resulting ball kicked diagonally across @-@ field which was fielded by New Zealand 's Wallace . Wallace then ran and broke through the Welsh line before confronting their fullback Winfield . Wallace then passed to Deans who was tackled either on , or near the Welsh line . The referee Dallas awarded a scrum to Wales five yards from their line . The All Blacks had further opportunities to score during the match , with Mynott held up over the line , Deans nearly scoring before being tackled by the Welsh , and McGregor nearly scoring except for a forward pass . 
 = = = Welsh games = = = 
 Following the Wales Test Dixon and the WRU continued to clash over referee appointments . The dispute escalated to the point where Dixon threatened to pull out of the All Blacks ' remaining Welsh fixtures . The WRU responded by threatening to cancel the fixtures if their referee choices were rejected . The dispute was resolved when the chairman of the RFU , Rowland Hill , got the WRU to accept Gil Evans ( a Welshman from Birmingham ) as referee for the final three matches . Gil Evans had refereed the All Blacks versus England Test and was well respected by the New Zealanders . 
 The All Blacks played Glamorgan in Swansea on 21 December . The All Blacks had the advantage of the wind in the first 30 minutes . Late in the first half Roberts worked a move from a scrum to pass to Smith , who passed to Harold Abbott . Abbott then passed back to Smith who scored in the corner . In the second half Glamorgan attacked but could not score , and late in the game the All Blacks scored tries to McDonald and Wallace to win 9 – 0 . 
 Two days later the All Blacks faced Newport at the city 's Athletic Ground . The All Blacks scored a try early to Eric Harper and Wallace recalled " It looked as though we were going to win comfortably . " Wallace then scored a penalty for the All Blacks and they ended the first half ahead 6 – 0 . Newport 's Rowland Griffiths scored a penalty early in the second half , but despite their strong display in the second half they could not score again and the All Blacks won 6 – 3 . 
 The next game was against Cardiff on 26 December . It was billed as a virtual second Test against a side that boasted several Test players . The match was played at Cardiff Arms Park in front of 50 @,@ 000 spectators . After a missed drop goal and missed penalty Cardiff scored with a try to Nicholls that was set up by Gabe . The conversion was successful giving Cardiff a 5 – 0 <unk> about 20 minutes into the match Jim O 'Sullivan broke his collarbone after being tackled heavily ; as a result the All Blacks played the rest of the match with only 14 men . The All Blacks attacked with every opportunity they could and before half time Mona Thomson scored in the corner for the All Blacks . Wallace converted the try to leave the scores 5 – 5 at half time . For the first 30 minutes of the second half the two teams attacked one after the other . After Cardiff captain Percy Bush failed to force down a ball behind his own goal @-@ line George Nicholson dived on the ball to score a try . Wallace converted to give the All Blacks a 10 – 5 lead . Cardiff responded by scoring a try themselves , but Winfield failed to convert it and the All Blacks won 10 – 8 . The loss was Cardiff 's only loss of the season , and the next year they defeated the touring South Africans 17 – 0 . 
 The All Blacks last match in the British Isles was against Swansea at Saint Helen 's Ground on 30 December . Swansea had only lost once in over two seasons ( to Cardiff ) and were the champion club team of Great Britain . Wallace said of the match " This was the thirty @-@ second match of the tour and our hearts rejoiced at the thought that this was to be the last . " The first half was mainly spent in the All Blacks half as they struggled to gain territory kicking into a strong wind , and after 25 minutes Swansea scored a try through Fred <unk> that was unconverted . The half finished 3 – 0 to Swansea . The All Blacks playing with the wind to their backs nearly scored a try to McGregor but he was ruled to have stepped out . However soon after Wallace gained possession and ran towards Swansea 's 25 @-@ yard line before kicking a drop goal in the strong wind to give the All Blacks a 4 – 3 lead . The All Blacks then kept forcing Swansea back with kick after kick for the next 15 minutes to win the match 4 – 3 . 
 The loss to Wales and the fact that they had only narrowly avoided losing to all of the Welsh club teams confirmed Wales as the pre @-@ eminent rugby force of this era . 
 = = = France and North America = = = 
 The All Blacks travelled to Paris on New Year 's Eve and on 1 January faced France at Parc des Princes . The match was France 's first Test ever . French captain Henri Amand gave the All Blacks choice of ends and the kick off . Although the All Blacks dominated , France scored a try to Noel <unk> in the first half ; the half ended 18 – 3 to the All Blacks . Georges Jérôme then scored for France after the break to make it 18 – 8 for the All Blacks . The All Blacks ended up scoring another six tries for a total of ten , and a 38 – 8 win . The eight points , and two tries scored by France were more than any team in the British Isles had against the All Blacks . 
 After spending several days sight seeing around Paris , the All Blacks returned to London . Instead of returning to New Zealand directly , they discovered that New Zealand Prime Minister Richard Seddon had organised for the team to travel home via the United States . Although the team wanted to return home immediately , Seddon insisted . The All Blacks had two weeks before they departed . Many of them stayed with friends of relatives , while Stead and Gallaher wrote The Complete Rugby Footballer . The team reassembled on 19 January and were farewelled by a dinner with the London New Zealand Society before departing Southampton on the SS New York the next day . 
 After arriving in New York City , they stayed for several days and an exhibition game was organised . The match was played in Brooklyn and was supposed to be New Zealand versus New York , however several New Zealanders played for New York to make up their numbers . Despite this New Zealand won the match . The team then travelled to San Francisco , via the Niagara Falls , Chicago , and the Grand Canyon . In San Francisco they played two matches against British Columbia ; the first won 43 – 6 and the second 65 – 6 . From there they sailed back to New Zealand . 
 = = Innovations and tactics = = 
 The Original All Blacks introduced several innovations to rugby in France and the British Isles . At the time of their tour many critics in the Northern Hemisphere blamed the use of the wing – forward for the All Blacks success . These critics claimed this player — who fed the ball into the scrum — would obstruct opposition players , and that the only reason they were not being penalised was due to poor refereeing . Their success however was due to a combination of factors , the most important being the team 's discipline and organisation , which was described at the time as a scientific approach . 
 Each forward in the team had a specific role in the scrum ; they would each have a predetermined position within the scrum . This was different from their opposition — their forwards ' position in a scrum was determined by the order in which they arrived . This was described as " first @-@ up , first @-@ down " , and meant that the All Blacks were better drilled — giving them a significant advantage . The All Blacks had also practised their line @-@ outs , and as a result had a very good understanding between the player that threw in the line @-@ out ball , and the player who was supposed to receive it . 
 The All Blacks back @-@ line formation was also different from that in Britain . They played two five @-@ eighths , a position invented in New Zealand , that refers to the player between the half @-@ back and three @-@ quarters . These two five @-@ eighths gave the All Blacks a defensive advantage . The British press were also surprised to see All Blacks fullback Billy Wallace attacking so often — They had generally viewed the fullback as a defensive position . The All Blacks also thought that every player , whether a back or a forward , should make themselves available to take a pass in support of an attacking player . The teams they encountered had forwards that understood their main role of winning possession for their backs , but would not support them when attacking . 
 The other major factor that helped the All Blacks to success was their superior fitness . In New Zealand each half was 45 minutes , not 35 like in Britain . As well as that , the All Blacks spent much time on fitness . This enabled them to play with speed much longer than their opposition . 
 = = Name = = 
 The team departed New Zealand as the New Zealand Football Team , or , simply The New Zealanders , though names such as <unk> and Colonials were also applied . Reference to the team by the name " All Blacks " first appeared during the Originals tour when , according to Billy Wallace , a London newspaper reported that the New Zealanders played as if they were " all backs " . Wallace claimed that due to a typographical error , subsequent references were to " All Blacks " . Wallace was the last of the Originals to pass away , so this explanation for the name 's origins is widely believed . However , the Express and Echo in Devon , reporting after the Originals match there , referred to " The All Blacks , as they are styled by reason of their sable and unrelieved costume . " The new name quickly became popular throughout Britain , though its acceptance into popular culture took a longer time back home in New Zealand . On 5 March when the team returned home , the Herald acclaimed the " New Zealand Footballers " , however , the following day its report of the official function was headed " Return of the All Blacks " . 
 = = Results = = 
 Scores and results list New Zealand 's points tally first . 
 = = Squad = = 
 The squad , manager , and coach for the Northern Hemisphere tour : 
 Manager – George <unk> – Jimmy Duncan 
 = Pikes Hotel = 
 Pikes Hotel ( pronounced Peek @-@ <unk> ) , now known as Ibiza Rocks House , is a luxury hotel in Ibiza , in the Balearic Islands of Spain . It is located in the countryside , 1 @.@ 6 miles ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) to the northeast of the town of Sant Antoni de Portmany , and 10 @.@ 2 miles ( 16 @.@ 4 km ) to the northwest of Ibiza Town . A 15th @-@ century stone mansion which was a finca ( farm estate ) , it was converted into a hotel in 1978 by British @-@ born Australian Anthony Pike . 
 The hotel , cited as one of the most famous or infamous hotels on the island , developed a notorious reputation for hedonism in the 1980s , and is associated with being a playground for the rich and famous . It is best known for being the location of filming for Wham ! ' s 1983 hit " Club Tropicana " and for Freddie Mercury 's 41st birthday bash in 1987 , cited as one of the most lavish parties ever to be held on Ibiza . 
 By the 1990s the hotel had fallen into difficulties and after Pike 's son was murdered in 1998 attempting to sell the hotel , it was later sold to the Ibiza Rocks organization , which also owns clubs on the island and the Ibiza Rocks Hotel in the nearby town . Today it has 26 rooms with king @-@ sized beds , and the restaurant , named Room 39 , has gained critic acclaim on the island . 
 = = History = = 
 Tony Pike arrived in Hull in 1978 . <unk> and former hat maker Pike led a very colourful life , which had already seen him shipwrecked in the Caribbean , injured in a bobsleigh accident , serving in the military , indulge in heavy drinking , and married and divorced three times . Pike had rented a finca for three months during which time he met his next partner Lyn . Together they bought a derelict finca called Ca ’ n Pep <unk> in the countryside east of Sant Antoni and they decided to renovate it into a hotel . Tony , along with Lyn and his two sons , did most of the work themselves . Bo Palk , the managing director of MGM Studios , checked into the hotel just as Pike was finishing the last bathroom of the hotel . An acquaintance of Palk ’ s , Simon Napier @-@ Bell , visited him at the hotel whilst scouting for a video shoot location . As a result Wham ! ' s " Club Tropicana " was shot at the hotel in 1983 . The video was directed by Duncan Gibbins with scenes shot of George Michael , the lead singer of the band and his fellow band member Andrew Ridgeley and their backing singers Dee C. Lee and <unk> Holliman . The scenario saw George Michael " floating about on a <unk> in his <unk> and shades " , relaxing with the boys by Pike ’ s pool sipping cocktails . The scene of the trumpet @-@ playing took place in the pool itself . Tony Pike got on well with the band and he was persuaded to take a small part in the video as the barman in one of the scenes . The success of the video and Wham ! ' s status at the time firmly placed Pike ’ s Hotel in the circles of the music industry and within a short time the hotel was attracting other stars and people connected to the industry . 
 In the 1980s , the authorities on Ibiza grew very concerned about the wild orgies and drug use which were taking place at the hotel . They showed particular concern over the extensive cocaine use at the hotel . Julio Iglesias , a close friend of Pike , confronted the chief of police , inviting him and his wife to dinner at the hotel , and ever since the trouble with the law has been dropped . In 1987 , Freddie Mercury celebrated his 41st birthday at Pikes , several months after discovering that he had contracted AIDS . Mercury sought much comfort at the retreat , and was a close friend of Pike . The party , held on 5 September 1987 , has been described as " the most incredible example of excess the Mediterranean island had ever seen " , and " the most lavish party even Pike had ever thrown . " It has been cited as a legendary party , with a celebrity guest list of some 500 people and up to 700 people in total which included Julio Iglesias , Grace Jones , Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme , Kylie Minogue , Nigel Benn , Anthony Quinn , Bon Jovi , Boy George , Five Star , Tony Curtis , Robert Plant , Naomi Campbell , and Spandau Ballet . A notable feature of the party was its thousands of gold and black helium balloons which reportedly took three days to inflate , and a grand firework display at the end which was reported to have been seen on Majorca . 350 bottles of Moet & Chandon champagne , and a cake in the shape of Gaudi 's Sagrada Familia Cathedral were provided for the party , although the original cake collapsed and was replaced with a 2 metre @-@ long sponge with the notes from Mercury 's song " Barcelona " . The bill , which included 232 broken glasses , was presented to Queen 's manager , Jim Beach . 
 By the 1990s the hotel was beginning to lose it reputation and a slow decline in popularity began which would culminate in tragedy for Tony Pike . In 1998 , Pike had put the hotel up for sale . A deal was set up for the sale which turned out to be a scam and Pike was swindled out of £ 50 @,@ 000 . His son , Anthony Dale Pike , flew to Miami to resolve the situation for his father . However , he was killed the same day of his arrival on 15 February 1998 , shot twice in the head and dumped in a secluded forest at Virginia Key beach . Miami Dade Police detectives believed it was clear that he was killed by the people plotting to seize control of the hotel . The police arrested and questioned German tennis professional Thomas Heinz Knott over the murder , but the investigation led them to charge Italian TV producer Enrico Forti with fraud over the transfer of £ 50 @,@ 000 from Anthony ’ s father . In June 2000 , Forti was also convicted of murdering Anthony Dale Pike in Miami . Forti is now serving a lifetime prison sentence at the Everglades Correctional Institution in Florida . 
 Pike estimated that the hotel was worth $ 5 million ( £ 3 @.@ 2 million ) in 2002 . He later sold it to Ibiza Rocks in 2008 . At the time of sale , The Mail on Sunday said of Pike , " <unk> and shrunken , his face looks like a weathered Easter Island statue and when he walks he shuffles unsteadily , bowed by a life of excess . Pike 's powers are fading . " A 2008 Sky Living TV documentary also showed him and the hotel in an unfavourable light , and it appeared to be living on its past reputation . 
 In the summer of 2011 , Pikes Hotel was re @-@ launched as Ibiza Rocks House at Pikes Hotel . The hotel has been restored under the ownership Andy McKay and Dawn Hindle , the partnership behind the Ibiza Rocks , Ibiza Rocks Hotel and Mallorca Rocks brands , with new décor , whilst trying to maintain its rock 'n'roll image of its most glamorous years . The new owners have made Tony Pike the first full @-@ time resident of the hotel and he lives permanently in Room 25 . Ibiza Rocks publicizes the hotel and its chain as " After sex and drugs , comes rock and roll " . Scottish band Biffy Clyro and Kylie Minogue stayed at the hotel during the Ibiza Rocks Festival in 2011 . The hotel has long been the favourite of Minogue in Ibiza since the 1980s and she is a friend of Pike who considers her " lovely and a real star " . 
 = = Features = = 
 Pikes Hotel is a luxury hotel , set in a 15th @-@ century stone mansion , a finca , which was a farm for centuries . It is accessed off a long lane leading from the main road from Sant Antoni de Portmany . Stuart Husband of The Independent describes Pikes Hotel as " a notorious Ibiza hotel where anything goes . " It is considered to be one of the most famous or infamous hotels on the island and has been cited as one of the " world 's true spiritual homes of rock 'n'roll hedonism . " Iain Stewart of the The Rough Guide to Ibiza considers Pikes Hotel to be an " almost legendary , relaxed and idiosyncratic rural hotel , popular with visiting celebrities . " The Mail on Sunday has referred to the hotel as an " atmosphere of complete sexual licence . " Anthony Pike himself said " it 's been claimed we break every law , but I wouldn 't be in business if that was the case . " Boy George referred to Pike as the " Hugh Hefner of Ibiza " . 
 At the time of sale in 2008 , Pikes Hotel had 29 bedrooms , with a pool , sauna , health centre , and tennis court . Today it has 26 rooms with king @-@ sized beds , one restaurant named Room 39 which has received much critical acclaim , and 2 bars . As of 2009 it costs £ 157 to stay at the hotel . The rooms retain the sense of the original farmhouse , and are furnished in the Moroccan style with some heavy dark wood furnishings . The rooms each have different themes , including " Honeysuckle " and " Sunset " , the latter of which is set behind the middle of three dark wood doors on the second floor of a small outhouse . According to author Stephen Armstrong , this room had a " modest sitting room with a huge antique mirror , plush sofas and a CD player which didn 't work . The bedroom was enormous , and the bathroom was decorated in a vaguely Moroccan style with a curtained bath nestling behind a low arch . 
 A wide range of entertainment is put on at the hotel , from flamenco shows to costume balls . The hotel also offers a VIP card to visitors to many of the notable clubs , bars , and casinos in the town . The garden has a memorial to Anthony Dale Pike ( 1955 @-@ 1998 ) , which says , " In loving memory of eldest son Dale . Here a portion of his ashes are laid to rest while the remainder flow within the currents of his beloved Pacific Ocean . May his spirit strive no more but rest within this tree in peace and tranquility . I loved you , my son . " 
 = USS Boxer ( CV @-@ 21 ) = 
 USS Boxer ( CV / CVA / CVS @-@ 21 , LPH @-@ 4 ) was one of 24 Essex @-@ class aircraft carriers of the United States Navy , and the fifth ship to be named for HMS Boxer . She was launched on 14 December 1944 and christened by the daughter of a US Senator from Louisiana . 
 Commissioned too late to see any combat in World War II , Boxer spent much of her career in the Pacific Ocean seeing 10 tours in the western Pacific . Her initial duties involved mostly training and exercises , including launching the first carrier @-@ based jet aircraft , but demobilization prevented much activity in the late 1940s . At the outbreak of the Korean War , she was used as an aircraft transport before arriving off Korean waters as the third U.S. carrier to join the force . She supported the Inchon landings and subsequent invasion of North Korea , and was among the ships that provided support during the Chinese counteroffensive against an under @-@ prepared and spread out United Nations ( UN ) force . She saw three subsequent combat tours in Korea conducting close air support and strategic bombing in support of UN ground troops fighting along the 38th parallel , as the battles lines had largely solidified by this time . She was awarded eight battle stars for her service in Korea . 
 After the Korean War , Boxer saw a variety of duties , including as an anti @-@ submarine warfare carrier and an amphibious assault platform . She participated in a number of training exercises including Operation Hardtack and Operation Steel Pike , as well as several contingencies including Operation <unk> and the Cuban Missile Crisis . In her later years , she served as a pickup ship for spacecraft during the Apollo program as well as an aircraft transport to troops during the Vietnam War . 
 Although she was extensively modified internally as part of her conversion to an Landing Platform Helicopter ( LPH ) , external modifications were minor , so throughout her career Boxer retained the classic appearance of a World War II Essex @-@ class ship . She was decommissioned on 1 December 1969 after 25 years of service and sold for scrap . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Boxer was one of 24 Essex @-@ class ships to be completed , among the largest and most numerous capital ships produced for World War II . She was ordered in 1943 . 
 The ship was one of the " long @-@ hull " designs of the class , which had begun production after March 1943 . This " long hull " variant involved lengthening the bow above the waterline into a " clipper " form . The increased rake and flare provided deck space for two quadruple 40 mm mounts ; these units also had the flight deck slightly shortened forward to provide better arcs of fire . Of the Essex @-@ class ships laid down after 1942 , only Bon Homme Richard followed the original " short bow " design . The later ships have been variously referred to as the " long @-@ bow units " , the " long @-@ hull group " , or the " Ticonderoga class " . However , the U.S. Navy never maintained any institutional distinction between the long @-@ hull and short @-@ hull members of the Essex class , and postwar refits and upgrades were applied to both groups equally . 
 Like other " long @-@ hull " Essex @-@ class carriers , Boxer had a displacement of 27 @,@ 100 tonnes ( 26 @,@ 700 long tons ; 29 @,@ 900 short tons ) . She had an overall length of 888 feet ( 271 m ) , a beam of 93 feet ( 28 m ) and a draft of 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) . The ship was powered by eight 600 psi Babcock & Wilcox boilers , and Westinghouse geared steam turbines that developed 150 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 110 @,@ 000 kW ) that turned four propellers . Like other Essex @-@ class carriers , she had a maximum speed of 33 knots ( 61 km / h ; 38 mph ) . The ship had a total crew complement of 3 @,@ 448 . Like other Essex @-@ class ships , she could be armed with 12 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 38 caliber guns arrayed in four pairs and four single emplacements , as well as eight quadruple Bofors 40 mm guns and 46 Oerlikon 20 mm cannons . However , unlike her sisters , Boxer was armed instead with 72 40 mm guns and 35 20 mm cannons . 
 Her keel was laid on 13 September 1943 by the Newport News Shipbuilding Company at its facility in Newport News , Virginia . She was the fifth ship of the US Navy to be named Boxer , after HMS Boxer , which had been captured by the U.S. during the War of 1812 . The last ship to bear the name had been a training ship in 1905 . The new carrier was launched on 14 December 1944 and she was christened by Ruth D. Overton , the daughter of U.S. Senator John H. Overton . The ship 's cost is estimated at $ 68 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to $ 78 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Boxer was commissioned on 16 April 1945 under the command of Captain D. F. Smith . She subsequently began sea trials and a shakedown cruise . Before these were complete , the Empire of Japan surrendered on V @-@ J Day , marking the end of World War II before Boxer could participate . She joined the Pacific Fleet at San Diego in August 1945 and the next month she steamed for Guam , becoming the flagship of Task Force 77 , a position she held until 23 August 1946 . During this tour , she visited Japan , Okinawa , the Philippines , and China . 
 She returned to San Francisco on 10 September 1946 , embarked Carrier Air Group 19 flying the Grumman F8F Bearcat fighter . With this complement , Boxer began a series of peacetime patrols and training missions off the coast of California during a relatively uneventful period during 1947 . In spite of manning difficulties brought on by the demobilization of the US military after World War II , Boxer remained active in Pacific readiness drills around the West Coast and Hawaii . In 1948 , she conducted a number of short cruises with US Navy Reserve personnel . On 10 March 1948 , a North American FJ @-@ 1 Fury launched from Boxer , the first such launch of an all @-@ jet aircraft from an American carrier , which allowed subsequent tests of jet aircraft carrier doctrine . For the remainder of 1948 and 1949 , she participated in numerous battle drills and acted as a training carrier for jet aircraft pilots . 
 She was dispatched to the Far East on another tour on 11 January 1950 . She joined the 7th Fleet in the region , making a goodwill visit to South Korea and entertaining South Korean president Syngman Rhee and his wife Franziska <unk> and at the end of the tour returned to San Diego on 25 June 1950 , the same day as the outbreak of the Korean War . At the time , she was overdue for a maintenance overhaul , but she did not have time to complete it before being dispatched again . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 With the outbreak of the Korean War , the U.S. forces in the Far East had an urgent need for supplies and aircraft . The only aircraft carriers near Korea were USS Valley Forge and HMS Triumph . Boxer was ordered into service to ferry aircraft from California to the fighting on the Korean Peninsula . She made a record @-@ breaking crossing of the Pacific Ocean , leaving Alameda , California on 14 July 1950 and arriving at Yokosuka , Japan on 23 July , a trip of 8 days and 7 hours . She carried one hundred forty @-@ five North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs and six Stinson L @-@ 5 Sentinels of the United States Air Force destined for the Far East Air Force as well as 19 Navy aircraft , 1 @,@ 012 Air Force support personnel , and 2 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 000 long tons ; 2 @,@ 200 short tons ) of supplies for the United Nations troops fighting the North Korean invasion of South Korea , including crucially needed spare parts and ordnance . Many of this equipment had been taken from Air National Guard units in the United States because of a general shortage of materiel . She began her return trip from Yokosuka on 27 July and arrived back in California on 4 August , for a trip of 7 days , 10 hours and 36 minutes , again breaking the record for a trans @-@ Pacific cruise . She carried no jet aircraft , though , because they were deemed too fuel inefficient for the initial defense mission in Korea . By the time Boxer arrived in Korea , the UN forces had established superiority in the air and sea . 
 After rapid repairs in California , Boxer embarked Carrier Air Group 2 , flying the Vought F4U Corsair propeller driven fighter @-@ bomber , and departed again for Korea on 24 August , this time in a combat role . She had 110 aircraft aboard , intended to complement the hundreds of aircraft already operating in Korea . En route to the peninsula , the carrier narrowly avoided Typhoon Kezia which slowed her trip . She was the fourth aircraft carrier to arrive in Korea to participate in the war , after Triumph and Valley Forge had arrived in June and USS Philippine Sea followed in early August . She arrived too late to participate in the Battle of Pusan Perimeter , but instead she was ordered to join a flotilla of 230 US ships which would participate in Operation Chromite , the UN counterattack at Inchon . On 15 September , she supported the landings by sending her aircraft in a close air support role , blocking North Korean reinforcements and communication to prevent them from countering the attack . However , early in the operation , her propulsion system was damaged when a reduction gear in the ship 's engine broke , a casualty of her overdue maintenance . The ship 's engineers worked around the problem to keep the carrier in operation , but she was limited to 26 knots . 
 She continued this role as the UN troops recaptured Seoul days later . Boxer continued this support as UN troops advanced north and into North Korea , but departed for the United States on 11 November for refit and overhaul . US military commanders believed the war in Korea was over , and had ordered a number of other carriers out of the area and were subsequently under @-@ prepared at the beginning of the Chosin Reservoir Campaign when the Chinese People 's Liberation Army entered the war against the UN . Battlefield commanders requested Boxer return to Korea as soon as possible , but she did not immediately return as commanders feared it might reduce the Navy 's ability to respond if another conflict or emergency broke out elsewhere . 
 Boxer 's propulsion problems required extensive repair so she returned to San Diego to conduct them . Upon arrival , she offloaded Air Group 2 , which then embarked for Korea again aboard Valley Forge . After a repair and refit in California , Boxer was prepared for a second tour in Korea . She embarked Carrier Air Group 101 . The group was composed of Navy Reserve squadrons from Dallas , Texas , Glenview , Illinois , Memphis , Tennessee and Olathe , Kansas , and most of its pilots were reservists who had been called to active duty . She rejoined Task Force 77 , and began operations in Korea on 29 March 1951 , and her squadrons were the first Naval Reserve pilots to launch strikes in Korea . Most of these missions were airstrikes against Chinese ground forces along the 38th parallel , and this duty lasted until 24 October 1951 . During this time , the carrier operated around " Point Oboe " , an area 125 miles ( 201 km ) off the coast of Wonsan . They would withdraw another 50 miles ( 80 km ) east when they needed replenishment or refueling . A large destroyer screen protected the carriers , though MiG @-@ 15 attacks against them did not occur . 
 After another period of rest and refits , Boxer departed California 8 February 1952 for her third tour in Korea , with Carrier Air Group 2 embarked , consisting of F9F in VF @-@ 24 , F4U in VF 63 and VF @-@ 64 , and AD in VF @-@ 65 . Rejoining Task Force 77 , her missions during this tour consisted primarily of strategic bombing against targets in North Korea , as the front lines in the war had largely solidified along the 38th Parallel . On 23 and 24 June , her planes conducted strikes against the Sui @-@ ho hydro @-@ electric complex in conjunction with Princeton , Bon Homme Richard and Philippine Sea . 
 On 5 August 1952 , a fire broke out on the hangar deck of Boxer at 05 : 30 when a fuel tank of an aircraft caught fire while the ship was conducting combat operations in the Sea of Japan . The fire raged on the carrier 's hangar deck for 4 – 5 hours before being extinguished . The final total of casualties was 8 dead , 1 missing , 1 critically injured , 1 seriously burned and some 70 overcome by smoke . Of the 63 who had gone over the side , all were rescued and returned to the ship . Eighteen aircraft , mostly Grumman F9F @-@ 2 Panthers , were damaged or destroyed . She steamed for Yokosuka for emergency repairs from 11 to 23 August . She returned to the Korean theatre , and from 28 August to 2 September she tested a new weapons system , with six radio guided Grumman F6F Hellcats loaded with 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 450 kg ) bombs guided to targets , resulting in two hits and one near miss . They are considered to be the first guided missiles to be launched from a carrier in combat . On 1 September her aircraft also took part in a large bombing mission of an oil refinery near <unk> , on the Manchurian border . She returned to San Francisco for more extensive repairs on 25 September . In October 1952 , she was re @-@ designated CVA @-@ 21 , denoting an " attack aircraft carrier . " 
 Following extensive repairs , she steamed for Korea again on 30 March 1953 , and resumed operations a month later with her Corsairs embarked . Her missions around this time were generally strategic bombing missions , however the effectiveness of these final missions were mixed , with some failing to achieve strategic results . She also provided close air support for UN troops for the final weeks of the war before an armistice was reached at Panmunjom in July 1953 , ending major combat operations in Korea . During this time , the two sides often conducted costly attacks in order to strengthen their bargaining positions at the negotiating table . Boxer remained in Korean waters until November 1953 . She received eight battle stars for her service in Korea . 
 In 1951 she appears in the film Submarine Command , with William Bendix , and William Holden , then carrying a compliment of helicopters . 
 = = = Post @-@ Korea = = = 
 Following the Korean War , Boxer returned to the United States . She conducted a tour of the Pacific throughout 1954 which was relatively uneventful , followed by a rest in the United States and another tour in the Pacific in late 1955 and early 1956 , which was similarly uneventful . 
 She was converted to an anti @-@ submarine warfare carrier in early 1956 , re @-@ designated CVS @-@ 21 . She completed another tour of the western Pacific in late 1956 and early 1957 , which was her tenth and final deployment to the area . In late 1957 , the navy began experimenting with the concept of a carrier operating entirely with attack helicopters , and Boxer was used to test the concept . 
 In 1958 , Boxer was the flagship during Operation Hardtack , a series of nuclear weapons tests in the central Pacific . Later that year , she was transferred to the Atlantic Fleet , and became part of a new amphibious assault squadron with four Landing Ship Tank vessels equipped with helicopter platforms . The experimental concept would allow for rapid deployment of US Marine Corps personnel and helicopter squadrons . For the remainder of 1958 elements of this force were organized aboard Boxer and she was reclassified LPH @-@ 4 , denoting a " Landing Platform Helicopter " , on 30 January 1959 . 
 For the next 10 years , Boxer operated mainly out of the Caribbean as an amphibious assault carrier . During this duty , she was on station during the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis . In 1964 , she undertook her first tour to the Mediterranean when she took part in Operation Steel Pike , the largest amphibious exercise in history . 
 With two Landing Ship Docks , Boxer was dispatched to Hispaniola on 29 August 1964 on a humanitarian mission to aid Haiti and the Dominican Republic whose infrastructure had been damaged by Hurricane Cleo . The ships provided medical aid and helped to evacuate civilians displaced by the storm . On 27 April 1965 Boxer returned to the Dominican Republic with Helicopter Squadron 264 and a complement of Marines . They evacuated about 1 @,@ 000 US nationals from the country in the wake of a revolution in the country . It was a part of Operation <unk> which would eventually see the US occupation of that country . Later in 1965 , she was used as a transport vessel for the Vietnam War . The carrier transported 200 helicopters of the US Army 's 1st Cavalry Division to South Vietnam . She made a second trip to Vietnam in early 1966 when she transported Marine Corps aircraft to South Vietnam . However , she did not participate in combat operations during that war . 
 On 26 February 1966 , Boxer recovered AS @-@ 201 , an unmanned test flight of the Apollo program which had launched from Cape Kennedy , Florida aboard a Saturn 1B rocket . The capsule had landed 200 miles ( 320 km ) east of Ascension Island and one of Boxer 's helicopters picked it up . From 16 – 17 March 1966 , Boxer was the designated Atlantic prime recovery ship for Gemini 8 , although USS Leonard F. Mason recovered the spacecraft and two crewmen . 
 She was decommissioned on 1 December 1969 after 25 years of service , and she was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register . She was sold for scrap on 13 March 1971 . 
 = Three @-@ cent silver = 
 The three @-@ cent silver , also known as the three @-@ cent piece in silver or <unk> , was struck by the Mint of the United States for circulation from 1851 to 1872 , and as a proof coin in 1873 . Designed by the Mint 's chief engraver , James B. Longacre , it circulated well while other silver coinage was being hoarded and melted , but once that problem was addressed , became less used . It was abolished by Congress with the Coinage Act of 1873 . 
 After a massive importation of gold bullion during the California Gold Rush , silver could be traded for increasing amounts of gold , so U.S. silver coins were exported and melted for their metal . This , and the reduction of postage rates to three cents , prompted Congress in 1851 to authorize a coin of that denomination made of .750 fine silver , rather than the conventional .900 . The three @-@ cent silver was the first American coin to contain metal valued significantly less than its face value , and the first silver coin not to be legal tender for an unlimited amount . The coin saw heavy use until Congress acted again in 1853 , making other silver coins lighter , which kept them in circulation . Congress also lightened the three @-@ cent silver , and increased its fineness to 900 silver . 
 With the return of other denominations to circulation , the three @-@ cent silver saw less use , and its place in commerce was lost with the economic chaos of the American Civil War , which led to hoarding of all gold and silver coins . A three @-@ cent piece in copper @-@ nickel was struck beginning in 1865 , and the three @-@ cent silver saw low mintages for its final decade before its abolition . The series is not widely collected , and the pieces remain inexpensive relative to other U.S. coins of similar scarcity . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although the Mint of the United States had been striking silver coins since the 1790s , they did not always circulate due to fluctuations in the price of the metal . In 1834 , for example , half dollars sold on the market at a premium of one percent . The U.S. was then on a bimetallic standard , and though Congress had slightly overvalued silver with respect to gold , enough Mexican silver flowed into the country to produce a rough equilibrium . 
 By early 1849 , most of the silver coins in circulation were small coins of the Spanish colonial real , including the " levy " ( one real ) and " fip " ( half real ) . The levy and fip often passed for twelve and six cents respectively in the Eastern U.S. The mint accepted them as payment at a slightly lower figure , but even so , lost money on the transactions as many of the pieces were lightweight through wear . The odd denominations of the levy and fip were a convenience , allowing payment or change to be made without the use of cents , which were at that time large , made of copper , and not accepted by the government as legal tender due to their lack of precious metal . In the Western U.S. , the levy and fip were accepted as the equivalent of the silver dime and half dime , although the Spanish pieces contained more silver . 
 = = Inception = = 
 Bullion from the California Gold Rush and other discoveries came to the Eastern U.S. in considerable quantities beginning in 1848 . By the following year , the price of gold relative to silver had dropped , making it profitable to export American silver coins , sell them as bullion , and use the payment in gold to buy more U.S. coins . Silver coins consequently vanished from circulation , meaning the highest @-@ value American coin actually circulating that was worth less than the quarter eagle ( $ 2 @.@ 50 piece ) was the half @-@ dollar @-@ sized copper cent , which saw no use in much of the country because of its lack of legal tender status . Early in 1849 , Congress authorized a gold dollar to help bridge the gap . Spanish silver coins were the bulk of what was left in commerce for small change , although there was disagreement as to the value to be assigned to them . Additionally , they were often heavily worn , reducing their intrinsic worth at a time when Americans expected coins to contain metal worth the value assigned to them . 
 In 1850 , New York Senator Daniel S. Dickinson introduced legislation for a three @-@ cent piece in .750 fine silver , that is , three parts silver to one part copper ( American silver coins were then .900 fine ) . He proposed to offer it in exchange for the Spanish silver , which would be valued at eight reals to the dollar for the purpose , higher than the going rate . The new coin would weigh three @-@ tenths as much as the dime , but the debasement of the silver would compensate the government for the losses it would take in redeeming the underweight , worn Spanish coins . The three @-@ cent denomination was chosen as it coordinated well with the six and twelve cent values often assigned the fip and levy . The House of Representatives instead considered legislation to reduce the valuation of the Spanish coins to ten cents per real , and to strike a twenty @-@ cent piece , of .900 silver , to facilitate the exchange . Neil Carothers , in his book on small @-@ denomination American money , suggests that the House 's plan would have resulted in the Spanish coins staying in circulation , and any twenty @-@ cent pieces issued being hoarded or melted . No legislation passed in 1850 , which saw continued export of America 's silver coinage . 
 Impetus for the passage of a three @-@ cent coin came when Congress , in January 1851 , considered reducing postage rates from five cents to three . In 1849 , House Committee on Ways and Means chairman , Samuel Vinton , had written to Mint director Robert M. Patterson that his committee was considering both reducing the postage rate and instituting a three @-@ cent coin . Although no legislative action was then taken , Patterson had the mint prepare experimental pattern coins . The House committee proposing the 1851 bill included Dickinson 's three @-@ cent piece , and provided that it be legal tender up to 30 cents . When the bill was debated in the House on January 13 , 1851 , New York Congressman William Duer indicated that he felt both coin and stamp should be denominated at 21 ⁄ 2 cents , and his fellow New Yorker , <unk> Matteson , offered an amendment to that effect . The amendment failed , as did every other attempt to change the legislation , including Dickinson 's plea , in the Senate , to restore the requirement that the new coin be used to retire some of the Spanish silver . The bill passed both houses , and became the Act of March 3 , 1851 when President Millard Fillmore signed it . 
 Carothers pointed out the precedent @-@ setting nature of the legislation , the first to authorize an American silver coin containing an amount of metal worth considerably less than its face value : 
 This almost forgotten statute is one of the most significant measures in American currency history . After resisting for sixty years every attempt to introduce any form of fiduciary silver coinage , Congress adopted a subsidiary silver coin as an adjunct to the postal service , without realizing that the first step had been taken in the relegation of silver to the status of a subordinate monetary material . The new piece was the first silver coin in the history of the United States that was not legal tender for an unlimited amount . Subsidiary coinage had been established , but in a trivial way , by an unworkable law , and at a time when the entire silver currency was flowing out of the country . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 In addition to striking the pattern coins in 1849 , officials at the Philadelphia Mint continued to experiment with three @-@ cent silvers . The matter was caught up in ongoing conflict between Mint chief coiner Franklin Peale , and the chief engraver , James B. Longacre , who each prepared designs . Peale produced a coin depicting a Liberty cap , based on a design prepared by Longacre 's late predecessor , Christian Gobrecht , in 1836 . Longacre prepared a design similar to the coin that was eventually released . 
 On March 2 , 1851 , the day before the legislation was passed , Longacre , with the reluctant permission of Patterson ( a Peale ally ) sent Treasury Secretary Thomas Corwin samples of his proposed three @-@ cent piece , along with a letter explaining the symbology . Patterson preferred Peale 's design , but recommended Longacre 's for approval on the ground that it was in lower relief . Patterson , writing to Corwin on March 7 , indicated that if the three @-@ cent were struck in .900 silver , it would be hoarded , but as the silver in the .750 pieces was worth only two and a half cents , the Mint would profit via seignorage from coining the new pieces . Patterson also suggested that the New Orleans Mint could be used to strike the new coin . 
 Despite the provision of the Mint Act of 1837 entrusting Longacre , by virtue of his office , with responsibility for preparing dies , Peale prepared his own and ran off some sample three @-@ cent pieces . Both types of pattern coin were sent by Patterson to Corwin on March 25 , 1851 , with the Mint director 's recommendation that the chief engraver 's design be selected . The next day , acting Treasury Secretary William L. Hodge approved Longacre 's design . Knowing there was a large demand for the new coins , Patterson thought it best to build up a stock of 500 @,@ 000 before beginning distribution . 
 = = Design = = 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule , in his book on American coins and medals , considered the silver three @-@ cent piece one of the ugliest U.S. coins , though it " has the redeeming feature of delicate workmanship " . Dennis Tucker , head of Whitman Publishing , in 2016 described the coin as " something of a ' Sarah plain and small ' . " Congress had required , in the authorizing act for the three @-@ cent silver , that the piece bear a design distinct from both the gold dollar and the other silver coins . As Longacre wrote in his letter to Corwin of March 2 , 1851 @,@ 
 On so small a coin it is impossible that the device can be at once conspicuous and striking unless it is simple — complexity would defeat the object . For the obverse I have therefore chosen a star ( one of the heraldic elements of the National crest ) bearing on its centre the shield of the Union , surrounded by the legal inscription and date . For the reverse I have devised an ornamental letter C embracing in its centre the Roman numeral III , the whole encircled by the thirteen stars . 
 Longacre 's original design for the reverse ( type 1 ) was altered when the fineness of the coin was increased in 1854 , to aid the public in distinguishing between them . For the type 2 and type 3 , ( the reverses of which are identical , the only differences between the two types are on the obverse ) an olive sprig , a symbol of peace , was added over the III , and a bundle of three arrows , a symbol of war , below it . The arrows are bound by a ribbon . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Type 1 ( 1851 – 1853 ) = = = 
 According to numismatic historian Walter Breen , " the new 3 ¢ coins were minted in large quantities , went immediately into circulation , and stayed there " . Despite mechanical difficulties in striking so small a piece , a total of 5 @,@ 446 @,@ 400 were struck at Philadelphia in 1851 , and 720 @,@ 000 at New Orleans — the latter would prove the only mintage of three @-@ cent pieces outside Philadelphia . The coins were shipped directly to post offices for use with stamps . Members of the public who wanted pieces were refused them by mint officials , who advised would @-@ be purchasers to seek them at treasury depository branches . 
 The small size of the coins , which were dubbed " fish scales " , was disliked as they were easily lost . The mint used them to redeem some of the Spanish silver , but the bulk of those foreign coins remained in circulation . A shopper paying for a small purchase with a gold dollar might receive fifteen or so three @-@ cent pieces and the remainder in badly worn <unk> and other small silver coins . One Philadelphia newspaper reported , derisively , that merchants were reduced to giving ladles full of three @-@ cent pieces in change for a five @-@ dollar banknote . 
 Silver coins continued to flow out of the U.S. in 1852 , and the three @-@ cent silver saw its highest mintage , 18 @,@ 663 @,@ 500 , all from Philadelphia . The value of these pieces was larger than that of all other silver coins struck by the mints in 1852 . The chaotic state of commerce , with no circulating federal coin valued between the three @-@ cent piece and gold dollar , was a source of concern , and mint officials and congressmen corresponded in 1852 concerning a reduction in weight of silver coins such as the half dime and half dollar . Congress at last responded by laws passed on February 21 , 1853 and March 3 , 1853 . These reduced the weight of all silver coins except for the silver dollar . The three @-@ cent piece had its weight reduced from .8 grams to .75 , but its fineness increased to .900 . Although the other reduced @-@ weight silver coins were given legal tender limits of five dollars , that of the three @-@ cent piece remained at thirty cents . Carothers theorized , " Congress , probably realizing that the 3 cent piece was a misfit at best , preferred to leave it with a discordant legal tender value " . Pursuant to these congressional acts , mintage of the type 1 three @-@ cent silver stopped on March 31 , 1853 . These changes to the silver coinage alleviated the problem of small change , as the new lightweight coins remained in circulation and were not then hoarded . 
 = = = Type 2 ( 1854 – 1858 ) = = = 
 The shift to .900 silver for the three @-@ cent silver was intended to help drive the Spanish coins out of circulation . Longacre made changes to both sides of the three @-@ cent silver , engraving a triple line around the star on the obverse and adding an olive branch and bunch of arrows to the reverse . These parallel changes were made to the other silver coins of less than a dollar to distinguish the new , lighter coins from the old . Since it was more urgent to complete work on the modifications to silver coins such as the half dollar and quarter , Longacre left the three @-@ cent piece for last , and did not complete work on the coin until late 1853 . The new treasury secretary , James Guthrie , approved the changes on November 10 . 
 Starting with 1854 , small quantities of proof coins were struck and apparently distributed in sets with the other silver coins . Beginning in 1858 , Mint director James Ross Snowden made the proof sets available to the general public . 
 The 1853 acts had prohibited the mint from buying silver from the public . Since the silver dollar was heavy relative to its value , little silver was presented for striking into that piece . As the statutes did not permit the public to deposit silver and receive it back in the form of subsidiary silver coins ( the three @-@ cent piece through half dollar ) , this effectively placed the U.S. on the gold standard . Despite the statutes , in 1853 and 1854 , Snowden had the mint purchase large quantities of silver bullion at a fixed price , generally above the market rate , and struck it into coin . Since the subsidiary coins were only legal tender to five dollars , and could not be redeemed for gold , this led to a glut of silver coins in commerce . This oversupply , which persisted through 1862 , led to lower mintages of silver coins in the mid @-@ 1850s , including the three @-@ cent piece . The largest mintage for the type 2 three @-@ cent silver was in 1858 , when 1 @,@ 603 @,@ 700 were struck for circulation . 
 = = = Type 3 ( 1859 – 1873 ) = = = 
 Although there is no archival evidence , Breen theorized that in 1858 Snowden ordered Longacre to make changes to improve striking quality , as most type 2 pieces were weakly struck . The changes include removal of one of the outlines around the star , with smaller and more evenly spaced lettering . Breen suggested that the lettering displays the influence of Assistant Engraver Anthony C. Paquet , who likely assisted Longacre . These changes only affected the obverse ; the reverse was not altered . 
 The economic chaos of the civil war brought the introduction of legal tender notes , backed only by the credit of the government , and by mid @-@ 1862 , gold and silver coins had vanished from circulation in much of the nation , their place taken by such makeshifts as fractional currency and postage stamps . The three @-@ cent silver remained in circulation longer than the other silver coins , apparently because the public thought it was still made of debased silver , but by the autumn of 1862 , it too was hoarded . With little point to issuing coins that would not circulate , mintage of the three @-@ cent silver dropped from 343 @,@ 000 in 1862 to 21 @,@ 000 in 1863 , a figure that would be exceeded only once ( 22 @,@ 000 in 1866 ) during the rest of the series . In March 1863 , Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase wrote in a letter that the three @-@ cent silver had entirely vanished from circulation , and suggested that it be issued in aluminum to avoid hoarding . 
 Congress began the task of restoring federal coins to circulation in 1864 with a two @-@ cent piece in bronze , and by authorizing a three @-@ cent piece in copper @-@ nickel the following year . In 1866 , it authorized a five @-@ cent piece in the latter alloy , the nickel , as it has come to be known . With the three @-@ cent silver effectively replaced by base @-@ metal pieces , it did not share in the increased mintage of silver coins that began in 1868 . The three @-@ cent silver was struck at the rate of a few thousand per year into the 1870s . 
 In 1870 , Treasury Secretary George Boutwell sent Congress a draft bill to replace the outdated 1837 Mint Act and the bits of legislation passed over the years regarding the mint and coinage . Even in the draft bill , no provision was made for the three @-@ cent silver , though some in Congress wished to retain the coin in anticipation of the resumption of specie payments . After much debate in Congress , President Ulysses S. Grant signed the Coinage Act of 1873 on February 12 of that year . The law abolished the two @-@ cent piece , three @-@ cent silver , half dime , and standard silver dollar ( later restored in 1878 ) . Carothers called the abolition of the silver three- and five @-@ cent pieces " a necessity if the 3 cent and 5 cent nickel pieces were to be continued after the revival of silver coinage " . Breen deemed the decision to eliminate the silver three @-@ cent piece and the half dime , which might have directly competed with the two copper @-@ nickel coins , a favor to industrialist Joseph Wharton , whose mines produced much of the nickel ore used in coinage . According to numismatist R. W. Julian , the three @-@ cent silver " had played its part well in the U.S. monetary system , but there was no longer any need for it " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Large quantities of the three @-@ cent silver , including much of the production from 1863 and later , were held by the treasury and were melted after the coin was <unk> . The three @-@ cent nickel went the way of its silver counterpart . After years of low mintages and decreasing popularity , it was abolished by the Act of September 26 , 1890 along with the gold dollar and three @-@ dollar piece . 
 The three @-@ cent silver was made fully legal tender by the Coinage Act of 1965 , which proclaimed all coin and currency of the United States good to any amount for payment of public and private debt . By then , that coin had long since disappeared from circulation . 
 = = Collecting = = 
 According to Kevin Flynn and Winston Zack in their book on the three @-@ cent silver , " Lower interest [ in that piece ] means that it is the type of coin [ on ] which you can find great deals on pricing , even on dates in which rarity is high . " According to R. S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins , published in 2015 , the ones that catalog the highest are the proof issues from before 1858 , with the 1854 issue leading the way , listed at $ 35 @,@ 000 . Not listed is the 1851 proof three @-@ cent silver , of which only one is known , which was last sold in 2012 for $ 172 @,@ 500 , and once formed part of the Louis Eliasberg collection . Flynn and Zack theorize that this was the specimen viewed by Hodge in approving Longacre 's design , as there is no record of its return to the Philadelphia Mint . 
 The 1873 coin , the final issue , was struck in proof only , and is listed at between $ 825 and $ 2 @,@ 000 , depending on condition . Most U.S. coins of that year were struck with a " close 3 " in the date , and , following a complaint that the 3 too closely resembled an eight , an " open 3 " variety . The three @-@ cent silver exists only as a close 3 . Of coins struck for circulation , Yeoman 's highest listings are for the 1868 , at $ 11 @,@ 000 in near pristine MS @-@ 66 condition . 
 Yeoman lists all three @-@ cent pieces before 1863 at $ 27 in worn G @-@ 4 condition , except the 1851 @-@ O ( $ 40 ) and the 1855 ( $ 38 ) . All three @-@ cent pieces from and after 1863 are less valuable in proof than in uncirculated MS @-@ 63 condition . Much of the mintage of later dates were melted by the Mint after the end of the series . 
 = = Mintages and rarity = = 
 The mint mark appears on the reverse , to the right of the III , in the opening of the C that encloses it . 
 Blank ( Philadelphia Mint in Philadelphia ) 
 O ( New Orleans Mint in New Orleans , 1851 only ) 
 = John Van Antwerp MacMurray = 
 John Van Antwerp MacMurray ( 1881 – 1960 ) was an American attorney , author and diplomat best known as one of the leading China experts in the U.S. government . He served as Assistant Secretary of State from November 1924 to May 1925 , and was subsequently appointed Minister to China in 1925 . Although MacMurray had coveted the China post , he soon fell into disagreement with the State Department over U.S. policy towards the ruling Kuomintang government . He resigned the position in 1929 and briefly left the foreign service . Following several years in academia , MacMurray returned to the State Department to become Minister to Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania from 1933 to 1936 . He later served as ambassador to Turkey from 1936 to 1941 , and then was made a special assistant to the Secretary of State until his retirement in 1944 . 
 In 1935 , MacMurray was commissioned to write a memorandum on the conflict between China and Japan . In it , he suggested that the United States , China , and Great Britain were partly to blame for Japan 's aggression , and anticipated that unless the United States recognized Japan 's grievances , a war between the two powers was likely . His warnings proved prescient , and the Pacific war broke out when Japan attacked the United States at Pearl Harbor in December 1941 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 MacMurray was born in Schenectady , New York to Junius Wilson MacMurray and Henrietta MacMurray ( née Van Antwerp ) . His father was a career soldier , serving as a captain in the Union Army during the American Civil War , and later joining the regular army . MacMurray 's father also taught military tactics at the University of Missouri and Cornell University , and was the author of several books . His mother , Henrietta <unk> Van Antwerp , was the daughter of a bank president . 
 In 1892 , at the age of eleven , MacMurray attended Captain Wilson ’ s boarding school near Princeton , New Jersey . Later , while he was attending the nearby Lawrenceville School , his father 's death dealt a “ deep emotional blow ” , according to historian Arthur Waldron . After graduating in 1898 , MacMurray enrolled at Princeton University . The school ’ s president , Woodrow Wilson , encouraged him to pursue a career in academia , noting his aptitude for language and literature . MacMurray was also said to display an independent nature , declining to participate in eating clubs or attend chapel . 
 In 1903 , MacMurray was admitted to the Columbia University Law School , and gained admission to the New York State Bar Association in 1906 . He concurrently pursued a master of arts degree in Elizabethan drama at Princeton University , which he received in 1907 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Following his admission to the New York Bar , MacMurray sought a career in government . A letter of commendation from Woodrow Wilson helped MacMurray secure an opportunity to take the foreign service examination . In 1907 , he was appointed as Consul @-@ General and Secretary of Legation in Bangkok , Siam , and then became second secretary at the U.S. embassy in St. Petersburg . There he worked under ambassador William Woodville Rockhill , who was credited with helping to shape the United States ’ open door policy towards China . 
 Upon returning to Washington in 1911 , MacMurray was made chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs , a position he held until 1913 . He then had several appointments in East Asia : from 1913 to 1917 , he was secretary of Legation in Peking , China , and from 1917 to 1919 , he was counselor of the embassy in Tokyo . He had been offered a post as Minister to Siam in 1913 , but declined in order to pursue the position in Peking . He again returned to the State Department in 1919 to serve as Chief of Division for Far Eastern Affairs from 1919 to 1924 . During that time , MacMurray was involved as an observer to negotiations between China and Japan concerning the status of the Shandong Peninsula , and authored a book titled Treaties and Agreements with and Concerning China . The book was a compilation of all treaties and agreements with China from 1894 to 1919 , and was published by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . 
 MacMurray briefly served as Assistant Secretary of State from 1924 to 1925 . In 1925 , he was appointed Minister to China under President Calvin Coolidge , who described him as " our top China expert " . He assumed the post in July 1925 . MacMurray was well regarded within the diplomatic community in Peking ; Sir Ronald Macleay with the British delegation described him as friendly and agreeable , and relatively unburdened by the preconceived ideas and sentimentality towards China that afflicted several of his predecessors . Macleay noted that MacMurray could express himself well and forcefully in diplomatic meetings , but that he was " rather academic " , and may have lacked confidence in himself . " I imagine that he allows himself very little freedom of action and refers to Washington on every possible occasion , " wrote Macleay . Another British diplomat , Sir Miles W. Lampson , recorded MacMurray 's complaints that Washington allowed him little initiative , and seldom adopted his proposals . 
 Soon after arriving in China , MacMurray fell into disagreement with Washington over U.S. policy towards the ruling Kuomintang ( Nationalist ) government , which had been demanding immediate revisions to or a cessation of the treaty system in place between the two countries . Whereas Washington wished to make concessions to the Nationalist government , MacMurray favored the enforcement of existing treaties . These differences of opinion led him to resign in November 1929 , whereupon he became a professor of International Relations at Johns Hopkins University . 
 In 1933 , MacMurray returned to the foreign service . On September 9 of that year , he was appointed Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania — a position he held until 1936 . From 1936 to 1941 , MacMurray served as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary in Turkey . He returned to Washington in 1942 and worked as a special assistant to the Secretary of State until his retirement in 1944 . 
 = = = 1935 Memorandum = = = 
 In 1935 , as tensions in East Asia were mounting , the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs , Stanley Hornbeck , commissioned MacMurray to write a memorandum on the situation . The memorandum , " Developments Affecting American Policy in the Far East " , challenged many of the underlying assumptions of U.S. policy towards Japan . The conventional wisdom held that Japan was the unprovoked aggressor in the brewing conflict with China . However , MacMurray posited that Chinese and American policies were partly to blame for Japan ’ s actions ; whereas Japan had closely adhered to the treaties and agreements brokered during the Washington Disarmament Conference , the United States , Great Britain and China frequently undermined them . Up until the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931 , the " Japanese Government ... was endeavoring in unimpeachable good faith to live up to its undertakings " , wrote MacMurray . " The issue of success or failure for the policies evolved at the Washington Conference was actually in the hands of China herself , of Great Britain , and of the United States . " 
 According to Arthur Waldron , MacMurray found that China in particular " systematically flouted the legal framework that alone guaranteed her international position , and by so doing invited Japan ’ s wrath . " MacMurray believed that the United States should have valued Japan ’ s efforts to comply with the treaty agreements , and suggested that the United States should acknowledge Japanese grievances , rather than aligning ever more closely with China . Barring that , he wrote , an American war with Japan was likely : 
 To oppose the Japanese domination of China and actively take all available means and occasions to frustrate it ... would , if pursued consistently and determinedly , almost inevitably mean war with Japan ... Such a war would be a major misfortune for us , even assuming our victory ... It would be a hideously long and costly process ... Even the elimination of Japan , if it were possible , would be no blessing to the Far East or to the world . It would merely create a new set of stresses , and substitute for Japan the USSR as the successor of Imperial Russia as a contestant ( and at least an equally unscrupulous and dangerous one ) for mastery of the East . Nobody except perhaps Russia would gain from our victory in such a war . 
 MacMurray 's classified memorandum was immediately shelved by the State Department , and his warnings went unheeded . Following the Second World War , it was available only in select archives . In 1992 , the memorandum was published for first time with an introduction by University of Pennsylvania historian Arthur Waldron . Although it had been suppressed and largely disregarded at the time it was written , MacMurray 's analysis was considered prescient by later generations of scholars and diplomats . George F. Kennan wrote of the 1935 memorandum : " I know of no document on record in our government with respect to foreign policy which is more penetrating and thoughtful and prescient than this one . " 
 = = Films and photography = = 
 Throughout his diplomatic tours in China , MacMurray captured thousands of photographs and recorded hours of footage of everyday life . A collection consisting of more than 1 @,@ 600 of MacMurray 's photographs taken in rural China between 1913 and 1917 is held by the Princeton University library . 
 In 1925 , just two years after the advent of the Cine @-@ Kodak motion picture camera , MacMurray began making amateur films of life and travels in China , such as his trips to the Great Wall of China and a journey down the Yangtze River . One film depicted the procession of Sun Yat @-@ sen 's body from its original burial place in Peking to a new mausoleum in Nanking . Another film recorded in April 1928 captured scenes of daily life in Kalgan , north of Peking . MacMurray , along with his wife and sister , had traveled to Kalgan and Changpeh with Roy Chapman Andrews , an American explorer and naturalist who made multiple expeditions to the Gobi desert . During the civil war in 1928 , however , rogue brigands and soldiers had made travel difficult in the region . To secure passage between Kalgan and Changpeh , MacMurray enlisted the aid of local warlord Chang Tso @-@ lin , who provided an escort of 50 cavalry , 8 cars , and 150 camels . 
 = = Family = = 
 In 1916 , MacMurray married Lois R. Goodnow , the daughter of Frank Johnson Goodnow — a legal scholar , president of Johns Hopkins University , and a former advisor to the government of the Republic of China . Goodnow had been one of MacMurray 's professors at Columbia University . The couple had three children : Joan Goodnow MacMurray , Frank Goodnow MacMurray , and Lois Van Antwerp MacMurray . 
 = = Works = = 
 Treaties and Agreements with and Concerning China , 1894 @-@ 1919 : Manchu period ( 1894 @-@ 1911 ) 
 = Dick Healey ( footballer ) = 
 Richard " Dick " Healey ( 20 September 1889 – 1974 ) was an English footballer who played as an inside right or centre forward in the Football League for Sunderland , Middlesbrough and Darlington . 
 Healey began his football career as an amateur in his native Darlington . He helped Bishop Auckland win two Northern League titles and to reach the 1911 Amateur Cup Final , and also played non @-@ league football for Stockton . He signed amateur forms with Football League club Sunderland in 1910 , for whom he played three times and scored twice in the First Division . He won four caps for the England amateur team . Returning to Darlington F.C. in 1912 , Healey was the club 's top scorer as they won the 1912 – 13 North @-@ Eastern League title , and was a member of the Amateur XI that opposed a team of professionals in the 1913 FA Charity Shield . In 1914 , he turned professional with Middlesbrough , but played only four times , scoring twice . After the First World War , he returned to Darlington . He captained the team to the North @-@ Eastern League title in 1921 and made 17 appearances in the Third Division North in the club 's first two seasons in the Football League . 
 As a cricketer , he played a few matches for Durham in the Minor Counties Championship , and had a long association with Darlington Cricket Club , as player , captain and president . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Healey was born in Darlington , County Durham , the older child of Albert Healey and his wife Elizabeth née Jackson , daughter of a Stockton @-@ on @-@ Tees draper . The family was sufficiently well off to keep a live @-@ in servant . Albert taught at the Bluecoat School in Stockton before moving to Darlington where he opened a hardware shop , and later worked for the National Telephone Company ; he died in February 1899 . Elizabeth remarried ; at the time of the 1911 Census , Healey and his sister Winifred were assisting in their stepfather 's business as licensee of the Three Tuns Hotel in Bishop Auckland . 
 Healey attended Darlington Grammar School , where he captained both the cricket and the football teams , and went on to Armstrong College , Newcastle , to train as a teacher . He taught for the rest of his working life , and retired in about 1950 from the post of headmaster of Rise Carr school . During the First World War , he served as a gunner with the 151st ( Darlington ) Heavy Battery , Royal Garrison Artillery . 
 He married Florence Bradley , the daughter of a local florist , in a Bishop Auckland Presbyterian church in 1914 ; a daughter , Winifred , was born the following year . Healey died in Darlington in late 1974 . 
 = = Club football = = 
 = = = Early career and Sunderland = = = 
 Healey began his football career with Darlington while still a schoolboy , and was playing for Bishop Auckland as they won the Northern League title in the 1908 – 09 season . His play attracted attention . In February 1910 , he was selected for an amateur international trial , and in March , he appeared for Sunderland 's North @-@ Eastern League team , creating two goals and scoring the last in a 6 – 0 defeat of Darlington . He made his Football League debut in April , in a 2 – 0 defeat away to Manchester United in the First Division . The Sunderland Daily Echo commented that he and fellow inside forward George Holley " perhaps did not make the most of their opportunities , for when in possession in the shooting zone they failed to shoot with sufficient power . " He kept his place for the last home match of the season , against Bradford City , " proved a keen worker " , according to the Echo correspondent , and scored the first two goals in a 3 – 0 win . The first resulted from Bradford 's goalkeeper Harry <unk> losing the ball when attempting a clearance ; he then " seized Healey , but the latter struggled free and jumping over <unk> he put the ball in the net " . The second was a header from a corner . He missed Sunderland 's last match of the season to play for Bishop Auckland in a 2 – 1 win against Scarborough that secured them the Northern League title . Sunderland retained Healey 's Football League registration for each season up to 1913 – 14 , but he played only once more for the first team , at Aston Villa in October 1911 . 
 = = = Back to non @-@ league football = = = 
 For family reasons , Healey began the 1910 – 11 season with Stockton , but soon returned to Bishop Auckland , whom he helped reach the 1911 FA Amateur Cup final . He scored in the semi @-@ final , against Ilford , but Bishops lost to Bromley in the final , despite their opponents having a man sent off for striking another player . He moved on to Darlington in February 1912 , and the following season was their top scorer with 41 league goals as the club won the North @-@ Eastern League title . Healey was included at inside right in a forward line " about as strong as it could be made " for the Amateur XI that faced a Professional XI in the 1913 FA Charity Shield . Although the amateurs lost 7 – 2 , the Daily Mirror 's reporter picked him out as the " most consistent forward in the line " . 
 He was selected for the North @-@ Eastern League eleven to face the Central League in February 1914 . In March , Scottish club St Mirren were without the services of the injured George Elmore for their Scottish Cup quarter @-@ final , and had hoped to use Healey in his place ; he had previously played in the area with the Northern Nomads travelling team . Sunderland made no objection , but it was reported first that business prevented Healey obliging , and later that he had an injured knee . 
 = = = Professional football with Middlesbrough = = = 
 Four days later , he turned professional with First Division Middlesbrough . He was described as " [ possessing ] fine physique , and is a remarkably clever dribbler and good shot " – he had already reached the 20 @-@ goal mark for Darlington – and it was expected that " professional training will increase his pace " . He made his first @-@ team debut on 4 April at home to Preston North End , scored Middlesbrough 's third goal 15 minutes into the second half as they won 4 – 1 , and " proved himself well up to the first grade of Association Football " . He was retained for the 1914 – 15 season – the last before league football was discontinued for the duration of the First World War – but played mainly for the reserve team in the North @-@ Eastern League , in which capacity he was chosen for the Rest of the League team for the annual fixture against the league champions . He made three more Football League appearances , and scored one more goal , a second @-@ half header against Bradford in November 1914 in what was Middlesbrough 's first home defeat of the season . 
 = = = Post @-@ war football with Darlington = = = 
 After Darlington F.C. folded during the war , a new club , Darlington Forge Albion , was formed to represent the town in the Northern Victory League . Healey resumed his football career with that club , which was renamed Darlington for the first post @-@ war season of the North @-@ Eastern League . His goals contributed to their second @-@ place finish – he was the league 's top scorer half @-@ way through the season – and earned him selection for the representative match against the Central League . 
 His goals also helped Darlington reach the second round proper ( last 32 ) of the 1919 – 20 FA Cup . Healey scored twice against Bishop Auckland in the fifth qualifying round , and repeated the feat in the sixth , as well as creating two for Aaron Travis , as Darlington beat Southern League club Norwich City 5 – 0 . In the first round proper , Darlington faced Sheffield Wednesday of the First Division . A damaged shoulder meant Healey was unfit for the scheduled date , but a waterlogged Feethams pitch gave him an extra few days to recover . The match ended goalless ; Healey was unusually indecisive in front of goal , and was standing in an offside position when Travis did put the ball in the net . Although reported doubtful for the replay , he did appear , pressuring goalkeeper Arnold Birch into conceding a corner from which Darlington took the lead – the goal variously attributed to George Stevens or to Healey himself . He missed the second @-@ round tie at Birmingham because his wife was ill ; Darlington lost 4 – 0 . 
 Under Healey 's captaincy , Darlington won the North @-@ Eastern League title in 1920 – 21 . In the FA Cup , they hosted Second Division club Blackpool in the first round . Healey scored the opener , was involved in Darlington 's late equaliser , and missed another chance by heading wide when well placed ; they lost the replay . 
 Darlington formed part of the new Northern Section of the Third Division in 1921 – 22 . Healey was no longer a first choice in the forward line , but appeared not infrequently , particularly when the ground was heavy . He made his first appearance on 24 December and played in nine of the next twelve fixtures . Replacing the injured Arthur Wolstenholme for the FA Cup match against Manchester City , he opened the scoring with a header , but City won 3 – 1 . He kept his place for the next match , and even after Wolstenholme 's return to fitness continued in the team , with a winning goal against Rochdale , four of Darlington 's six to beat Hartlepools United in the Durham Senior Cup , and profiting from a defensive error to score the only goal of the league visit to Tranmere Rovers . Healey was retained for the 1922 – 23 season , and he scored against Accrington Stanley in September , but he played mainly in the reserves . In a match against Hartlepools ' reserves in November , he was the butt of the crowd 's mockery because he had , as the Northern Daily Mail put it , " now lost some of his former vigour " . He finished his Football League career with 5 goals from 21 matches . 
 = = International football = = 
 Healey played at centre forward for The North in an amateur trial match in February 1910 ; his side lost 3 – 2 , and he was not selected for the upcoming fixtures . His first international selection came in the form of a last @-@ minute call @-@ up when Frank Monk and Vivian Woodward dropped out of the England Amateur XI 's visit to mainland Europe in March 1911 . Healey made his debut against the French national team at the Stade de Paris , opening the scoring as his team won 3 – 0 , and scored again a couple of days later against Switzerland in a 4 – 1 win . His next involvement at international level was nearly a year later , against the Wales Amateur XI at the ground of his former club , Bishop Auckland , in February 1912 . He was involved in the buildup to the second goal , scored by Sydney Sanders , and scored the third himself as England won 3 – 0 . He was selected as a reserve for matches at home to the Netherlands and away to Belgium in March and April , but did not make his next , and what turned out to be final , appearance until November against Belgium , in which he scored the second of England 's four goals . He had to withdraw from the selection to face Wales in February 1913 , and was an unused reserve for the visits to Germany and Belgium in March and to Wales the following February . 
 = = Cricket career = = 
 Healey 's first involvement with Darlington Cricket Club was as a nine @-@ year @-@ old . He made his debut for the second eleven in 1906 , finished at the top of both batting and bowling averages the following season , and played for the first eleven in 1908 . In 1910 , he played in a Durham county trial match and for Durham Colts against a full county side . A sound performance with the bat in the corresponding fixture in 1911 earned him selection for Durham . He played in five Minor Counties matches that season , two in 1913 , and his eighth and last in 1920 . In 1913 , Healey was appointed captain of Darlington CC , a position he held until the end of the 1930 season , when he resigned after leading the club to a seventh North Yorkshire and South Durham League title under his captaincy . In 25 seasons as a first @-@ eleven player , he scored 6 @,@ 586 runs at an average of 28 @.@ 76 , a total that included four centuries and forty half @-@ centuries ; he also took 66 wickets and " over 80 " catches . In 1951 , after he retired from teaching , Healey became president of the club , an office he retained until his death . 
 = Ashford , Kent = 
 Ashford is a town in the county of Kent , England . It lies on the River Great Stour at the south edge of the North Downs , about 61 miles ( 98 km ) southeast of central London and 15 @.@ 3 miles ( 24 @.@ 6 km ) northwest of Folkestone by road . In the 2011 census , it had a population of 74 @,@ 204 . The name comes from the Old English <unk> , indicating a ford near a clump of ash trees . It has been a market town since the 13th century , and a regular market continues to be held . 
 Ashford has been a communications hub and has stood at the centre of five railway lines since the 19th century . The arrival of the railways became a source of employment and contributed to the town 's growth . With the opening of the international passenger station it is now a European communications centre , with new lines running between London and the Channel Tunnel ( via High Speed 1 ) . The M20 motorway also links Ashford to those two destinations for road traffic . 
 The town has been marked as a place for expansion since the 1960s and appeared on several Government plans for growth . Changes have included the County Square shopping centre , the redevelopment of the Templer Barracks at Repton Park , and the award winning Ashford Designer Outlet . In the 1970s , a controversial ring road scheme and construction of the multi storey Charter House building destroyed significant parts of the old town , though some areas were spared and preserved . 
 St Mary 's Church in Ashford has been a local landmark since the 13th century , and expanded in the 15th . Today , the church functions in a dual role as a centre for worship and entertainment . Ashford has two grammar schools ; the Norton Knatchbull School and <unk> Grammar School . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early developments = = = 
 There has been evidence of human habitation around Ashford since the Iron Age , with a barrow on what is now Barrow Hill dating back to 1500 BC . Two axes from the Lower Paleolithic period have been found near Ashford . During the construction of the Park Farm estate in the late 1990s , excavation in the area revealed tools from the Upper Palaeolithic and Mesolithic period dating back to the 7th century BC . A number of other Mesolithic tools were discovered during construction of the Channel Tunnel Rail Link through Ashford . 
 During Roman Britain , iron ore was mined in the Weald and transported to Ashford where two ironworks processed the ore into a workable metal . Archaeological studies have revealed the existence of a Roman town to the north of the current centre , roughly at the junction of Albert Road and Wall Road . 
 The present town originates from an original settlement established in 893 AD by inhabitants escaping a Danish Viking raid , who were granted land by a Saxon Lord for their resistance . The name comes from the Old English <unk> , indicating a ford near a clump of ash trees . At the time of the Domesday Book of 1086 it was still known by its original Saxon name of <unk> ( or <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) . The manor was owned by Hugh de Montford , Constable of England , and had a church , two mills and a value of 150 shillings ( £ 7 @.@ 50 ) at the time . One of the earliest houses in the area still in existence is Lake House at Eastwell Park to the north of the town , which contains the grave of Richard Plantagenet . 
 = = = Middle ages = = = 
 Ashford 's importance as an agricultural and market town grew in the 13th century , and in 1243 , Henry III granted the town a charter to hold a market for livestock . The pottery industry expanded in the 13th and 14th centuries , with the main works based at what is now Potter 's Corner , a few miles west of the town centre . Later evidence from examining waste suggests that production was on a large scale . The Kent Archaeological society have discovered sandy ware at this location dating from around 1125 – 1250 . 
 Jack Cade , who led the Cade 's Rebellion against corrupt Royal officials in 1450 , is believed to be from Ashford . In William Shakespeare 's Henry VI , part 2 , Cade is shown conversing with " Dick , the Butcher from Ashford " . 
 In the 16th and 17th centuries , Ashford became known for nonconformism . A local resident , John Brown was executed for heresy in 1511 , and may have inspired the later namesake of the song " John Brown 's Body " . Thomas Smythe acquired the manor of Ashford as dowry from Queen Elizabeth I in the mid 16th century and is buried in the parish church . 
 Dr John Wallis , the internationally recognised mathematician and one of Isaac Newton 's main tutors was born in Ashford in 1616 , but moved to Tenterden in 1625 to avoid the plague . He was a promising student , and subsequently graduated from Emmanuel College , Cambridge . 
 = = = Modern developments = = = 
 By the 1780s , local farmers had begun to hold informal market days , and advertised the town 's ideal location between London , Chatham and the Kent Coast . The market was held in the High Street until 1856 when local farmers and businessmen relocated to Elwick Road and formed a market company that is the oldest surviving registered company in England and Wales . There is still a regular street market in the town , although the market company has had to be relocated outside of the town due to part of the 19th century site being demolished to make way for the Channel Tunnel Rail Link . It is still used by around 5 @,@ 000 farmers . 
 The Army first established a presence in Ashford in 1797 when it built a garrison on Barrow Hill , and storerooms along what is now Magazine Road . The military presence was scaled back during the 19th century , though the town was still considered strategically important in the event of an invasion . The Territorial Army established a presence in Ashford in 1910 . 
 During World War I , Ashford 's importance as a transport hub and its location between the continent and London made it a target for aerial bombing . On 25 March 1917 , a bomb targeted for the railway works fell on the town , killing 61 people . The town was targeted again during the Battle of Britain in World War II including an attack on 15 September 1940 . 
 The Joint Services School of Intelligence was based at Templer Barracks to the west of town . Robert Runcie , later to become the Archbishop of Canterbury , was stationed at Ashford during the war while Prince Andrew , Duke of York attended a course here in 1982 while he was stationed in the Royal Navy . The barracks closed in 1997 to build the Channel Tunnel Rail Link , and the site was sold to developers in 2002 , Repton Manor House , in the centre of the barracks , is a Grade II listed building and remains intact . 
 Ashford has been associated with the German town Bad Münstereifel since the 20th century . British forces occupied the town in 1919 under the command of Major J Goode , following the end of World War I. Goode subsequently formed close friendships with some Bad Münstereifel residents . John Wiles , Major Goode 's brother in law , later became mayor of New Romney in 1946 , and subsequently arranged a visit to the Rhineland with Winston Churchill . Wiles arranged several other exchange visits between British and German families at a time where travel between the two countries was rare . He was declared an honorary citizen of Bad Münstereifel in 1961 , which led to the two towns being formally twinned in 1964 . Bad Münstereifel was twinned with the French town of Fougères , Brittany two years later , which led to a twinning with Ashford in 1984 . 
 During the early and mid 20th century , print and media became a noted industry in Ashford . The Headley Brothers , a printing services company , was founded in 1881 and by the mid @-@ 1950s were printing and exporting over 2 million books . The Letraset company set up an arts material factory in Ashford in the 1960s . It closed in 2013 , following the decline of Letraset and the company 's decision to relocate works abroad . 
 Little is left of the old Ashford town centre , apart from a cluster of medieval half @-@ timbered buildings in Middle Row and around the churchyard in the town centre . A number of old buildings were removed to make way for the controversial ring road around the centre , including four public houses . Further demolition was required to build Charter House , an eight @-@ story office building for Charter Consolidated , that opened in 1975 . Charter subsequently moved back to London in 1985 , and the building is now being converted into flats , though progress was stalled due to the discovery of asbestos . Charter compensated for the demolition by funding a restoration scheme on North Street , preserving several historic buildings . 
 The motto of Ashford Borough Council is " With stronger faith " , taken from , To <unk> , Going to the <unk> , a poem by the 17th @-@ century poet Richard Lovelace from the borough . The relevant verse is : 
 The council 's coat of arms uses gold to symbolise richness , three sprigs of ash tree representing former council areas , and a lion to commemorate nearby Tenterden as one of the Cinque Ports . 
 = = Geography = = 
 By road , Ashford is about 61 miles ( 98 km ) southeast of central London , 20 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 13 @.@ 0 mi ) southeast of Maidstone , and 15 @.@ 3 miles ( 24 @.@ 6 km ) northwest of Folkestone . The town lies at the intersection of two valleys in Kent – the south edge of the North Downs and the valley of the River Stour , at the confluence of the Great Stour and East Stour rivers . This made it an ideal place for a settlement . The Borough of Ashford lies on the eastern edge of the ancient forest of " <unk> " or " <unk> " . This originally stretched as far west as Hampshire and formed the basis from which the Weald is formed . 
 The original town of Ashford , like many other settlements , has outgrown its original size and has combined with smaller villages in a conurbation . These villages include <unk> , Kennington , <unk> , Singleton and Willesborough . In addition , housing estates have been built in the open spaces amongst <unk> , <unk> , Kingsnorth , Park Farm and Stanhope . 
 In 1727 , an underground fire was reported in nearby <unk> , while a larger earthquake struck the town on 1 June 1756 . The 2007 Kent earthquake , which registered 4 @.@ 3 on the Richter magnitude scale , was felt in Ashford , though its effects were greatest in Folkestone . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Ashford gets around 750 millimetres ( 30 in ) of rain a year , though the town generally has less rainfall than areas closer to the North Downs . The area around the Stour , and particularly south of the station is prone to flooding , which means it has been generally uninhabited . Recent development has been possible by putting foundations on concrete stilts . 
 The nearest official Met Office station located in Faversham which is 12 miles ( 19 km ) north of the town . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Ashford has been targeted as a key area for population development since the 1960s . In 1959 , the London County Council negotiated 5000 new homes to be built in Ashford as overspill from London , which created most of what is now South Ashford and Kennington . The Buchanan Report , published in 1967 , identified Ashford as a major town for growth . In 2001 , Ashford was identified as one of four key areas for expansion in South East England . Subsequently , the Ashford 's Future Company was set up to support a mix of publicly and privately funded projects in the town . 
 The soup manufacturer Batchelors became a significant employer in Ashford when they opened a £ 2.5m factory in Willesborough , east of the town centre , in 1957 . A substantial proportion of Batchelors staff moved from their main production unit in Sheffield to Ashford . The factory is now owned by Premier Foods . Proprietary Perfumes Ltd ( PPL ) , a division of Unilever opened a fragrance and flavour factory and research laboratory next door to the Batchelors factory in 1962 . It was subsequently renamed as Quest international and purchased by Givaudan in 2007 . 
 The wholesale frozen food firm Brake Brothers was established in 1957 . Initially based at nearby Lenham , it later moved to Ashford and expanded . The current European headquarters are based in Eureka Park to the north of the town . 
 In 2004 Regional Planning Guidance set out plans to invest £ 2.5m in Ashford , including a targets of 31 @,@ 000 new homes and 28 @,@ 000 new jobs in the area . In 2005 a Channel 4 poll ranked Ashford the fourth @-@ best place to live in the United Kingdom . However , the formation of the coalition government in 2010 saw regional planning targets scrapped , along with growth area status . Ashford has continued to develop , with new homes planned for urban areas such as Repton Park , Park Farm , Singleton and Chilmington , and planning permission granted for a new £ 25m college campus . The extension of Victoria Road has created new development space in Ashford , though plans to build a Morrisons supermarket here were scrapped in May 2014 . 
 The 2011 census revealed that the borough of Ashford saw the largest population growth in Kent , with records showing a 14 @.@ 6 % rise to 118 @,@ 000 inhabitants . In 2012 , Ashford Borough Council predicted there would be a net gain of 620 jobs per year . The increase in the town 's commercial importance , as well as its strategic location , is witnessed by the number of industry , business and retail parks in the town . These include <unk> Park , where there is dedicated space for HGV parking , Eureka Science and Business Park , including manufacturing sites and office complexes ; and Orbital Park , the market 's current location , which has a regular boot fair . 
 Three modern shopping centres are located in the town . Park Mall opened in 1985 on the former Folkestone Glass Works site . The town 's main shopping centre is County Square , which was built over <unk> Street , opening in 1973 as the Tufton Centre . In 1989 , the centre was renamed to County Square and refurbished by <unk> Properties , who added a glass roof . In 2008 , the centre was expanded to include 50 @,@ 000 sq ft of new retail space including a Debenhams store . Outside of the town centre is the Ashford Designer Outlet designed by Richard Rogers , which attracts around 3 million customers a year . The centre has won industry awards for Retail Destination of the Year and Best Shopping Venue and has been praised by the British Parking Association for its range of facilities , cleanliness and lack of crime . A Waitrose store opened in November 2009 on the former Templar Barracks site , followed by a John Lewis store in November 2013 . 
 In 2014 , Ashford Borough Council launched <unk> , a website designed to promote new businesses in the town centre as part of the Portas Pilot scheme , which encourages regeneration of town high streets in decline . Brandon Lewis , High Streets Minister said he would " encourage all businesses in Ashford to sign up and be part of this excellent opportunity to boost their trade in the town centre . " 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 St Mary 's parish church lies in the town centre . Parts of it date from the 13th century , including a brass of the first rector , Robert de Derby . John <unk> supervised substantial changes to the church in the late 15th century , including creating the 120 feet ( 37 m ) tower and raising the roof . He was buried in the church and a memorial window is dedicated to him . In the 17th century , a free grammar school was founded here ; it was built on the churchyard 's west side , and remained there until 1846 , now used as a museum . 
 On 7 October 2010 , the church was reordered by the Bishop of Dover , Trevor Willmott , to improve its dual function as both a place of worship and an arts centre and performance space for up to 350 people , in a similar style to Union Chapel , Islington . Around £ <unk> was spent improving the venue , of which £ 1.2m was provided by European Union funding through the Green <unk> Cluster programme . Acts that have since appeared at the church include the Lightning Seeds , Tim Burgess , Gaz Coombes and Turin Brakes . 
 A Mk . IV tank built in Lincoln and used in the First World War was presented to the town on 1 August 1919 to thank the townsfolk for their war efforts . It is situated in St Georges Square near the town centre . For some years , electricity provider <unk> fitted an electricity substation inside the tank , but this has now been removed . A protective cover was built over the tank in 1988 . 
 H.S. Pledge & Sons Ltd built two flour mills in Ashford , and became an important employer in the town . The first opened on Victoria Road in 1890 while the second opened on East Hill in 1901 . The mills closed in 1972 and were both partially destroyed by subsequent fires . The East Hill Mill fire occurred in 1974 , but the main six @-@ storey tower block survived . It was used as a nightclub until 2014 , when the nearby Ashford School , which acquired the building in 2011 , decided not to renew the lease . The Victoria Mills were almost completely destroyed by a fire in September 1984 , and the remainder of the building had to be demolished . 
 The Corn Exchange , situated at the junction of Bank Street and Elwick Road , opened on 3 December 1861 . As the name implies , it was originally used for trade , but during the early 20th century its role expanded to cover dinners , dances and trade shows . The building was extended to improve capacity in the 1930s . It was demolished in 1963 . 
 Ashford 's main library originally opened in 1966 on a war @-@ damaged site on Church Road . In 2010 , the building was redeveloped to house Ashford Gateway Plus , which provides local council services in addition to the library itself . Other attractions near the town include Ashford Borough Museum , <unk> House and Gardens and the New Mill at Willesborough , which is Grade II listed . 
 The first cinema in Ashford was the Odeon on Lower High Street , which opened in 1936 and closed in 1976 . The current main cinema in Ashford is a 12 screen theatre in Eureka Leisure Park to the north of town . In 2013 , Ashford Borough Council announced plans to build a new cinema in the town , using vacant land off Elwick Road . 
 The Ashford Green Corridor is a linear park alongside the two main rivers through the town , which is protected from development by lying on the main flood plain . Most of the area covered by the park has been marked by Ashford Borough Council as a nature reserve . This area includes Victoria Park , which lies to the immediate south of the town centre and the railway . It includes an ornate fountain first shown at the 2nd International Exhibition in London in 1862 , and presented to the park by George Harper on 24 July 1912 . The <unk> Lakes Country Park opened on a former quarry site to the northeast of town in 2015 . 
 = = Education = = 
 Ashford has twelve primary schools two grammar schools , two further secondary schools and a college . The Norton Knatchbull School was founded in Ashford around 1630 as a free grammar school by its namesake , Sir Norton Knatchbull . The school continued to be led and funded by Knatchbull 's family due to a stipulation in his will in 1636 . It was known simply as Ashford Grammar School until 1980 . The original school was based next to the church in the town centre , but has moved several times . By the 20th century it had moved to its present location on Hythe Road . The current school premises were built in the late 1990s . The corresponding grammar school for girls is <unk> Grammar School for Girls to the west of town . It opened as the County School for Girls in 1908 , before moving to its current premises on Maidstone Road in 1928 . There is also a private independent school , Ashford School on East Hill , which was founded in 1898 . For much of its history , it has only allowed girls , though boys started to be admitted in 2006 . 
 Some of the most recent schools to open in Ashford are Repton Manor Primary School , built on the former Templar Barracks , which opened in September 2012 and the Goat Lees Community Primary School , which opened in September 2013 . In addition to the grammar schools , there are a number of other secondary schools , including those catering for special needs . Ashford College is on Henwood , to the east of town . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Ashford United Football Club is based at the Homelands , about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) south of the town centre . The club was formed in 1891 as Ashford United but was renamed to Ashford Railway Works in 1909 before settling on the name " Town " in 1930 . The club was reformed in 2011 after financial difficulties , including the resignation of owner Tony Betteridge and became known once more as " United " . The club was promoted to the Southern League Premier Division in the 1986 – 87 season and best FA Cup performance was the second round in the 1996 – 97 season . 
 Ashford has a local youth football team , South Ashford Football Club . The club formed in 2007 and caters for players from 4 to 21 years of age . 
 The Julie Rose Stadium is an athletics stadium in nearby Willesborough . It opened in 1997 and was named after the local middle @-@ distance runner Julie Rose , who was killed in a plane crash in 1985 . The stadium is part funded by the National Lottery . It is home to Ashford Athletics Club , and has held several international events . It can accommodate up to 800 people . 
 The Stour Centre , managed on behalf of Ashford Borough Council by Ashford Leisure Trust , is located in a park near the railway station and provides a range of recreational and leisure services including several pools , water slides , gyms and athletic facilities . 
 Ashford Rugby Football Club was formed in 1885 . The club plays at Kinneys Field , near the Canterbury Road . The club 's 1st XV play in London Division 3 South East . 
 Ashford Hockey Club is based at Ball Lane , Kennington and was formed in 1898 . Ashford also has several cricket clubs , including Great Chart Cricket Club , which celebrated their 150th Anniversary in 2006 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 Ashford station was established when the South Eastern Railway 's London to Dover line opened between 1842 and 1845 , and the company established its locomotive works in the town . A line to Canterbury opened in 1846 , followed by the <unk> Line to Hastings and a line to Maidstone in 1884 , which was served by Ashford West until 31 December 1898 . The railway community had its own village containing shops , schools , pubs and bathhouse . It was first known as Alfred , but later renamed Newtown . By 1864 , there were 3000 people living around the railway line . The railway works declined in use from the 1960 onwards , finally closing in 1982 . 
 The Ashford International station opened by British Rail with the Channel Tunnel in 1994 . It now serves Eurostar trains on High Speed 1 , with trains to London , Lille , Brussels and Paris and connections to the rest of Europe . In 1999 , the Channel Tunnel Rail Link was approved , which involved an extensive upgrade of the railways around Ashford . A trench between 20 metres ( 66 ft ) and 42 metres ( 138 ft ) was dug near the station to house the new line , a new tunnel was dug at Westwell <unk> , and a 19th @-@ century level crossing near South Willesborough , the last remaining one between London and Folkestone , was removed . 
 From 2007 to 2009 , services to Brussels were withdrawn due to the opening of Ebbsfleet International railway station , but were restored after a petition . Since December 2009 , domestic train services run along this route , reducing journey times to London from 88 to about 38 minutes . 
 = = = Road = = = 
 In Roman Britain , what is now Ashford was the meeting point of two main roads . One led from London to Lympne ( <unk> ) , the other from the Weald , through Canterbury ( Durovernum ) and ending at the port of Richborough ( Rutupiae ) . Ashford was one of the towns in Kent to become a hub when the roads were turnpiked in the second half of the 18th century . 
 Ashford 's first bypass was opened on 19 July 1957 by the then Minister of Transport , Harold Watkinson . The main road through Ashford is now the M20 , which opened in stages between 1981 and 1991 . Junctions 9 and 10 serve the town . The other main roads are the A28 to Canterbury , the <unk> to Romney Marsh and Rye and the <unk> to Faversham . 
 The Ashford Ring Road was completed in November 1974 around the town centre in an attempt to relieve congestion , though part of it involved demolition of existing properties and part of the old market . It initially opened as one way , but was converted back into a two @-@ way operation in 2007 , at a total cost of £ 14m , so the town centre could expand and accommodate more people . The two @-@ way route incorporates the first shared space scheme in the country . An art installation , Lost O , curated by the artist Michael Pinsky , was created as part of this redevelopment but confused drivers . 
 Operation Stack is a traffic management system on the M20 through and near Ashford , which allows HGVs to queue for the Channel Tunnel and the Port of Dover when there is bad weather or industrial action . The scheme is controversial as it involves closing the entire eastbound motorway to through traffic . In 2013 , Kent County Council sought funding to build a dedicated lorry park in Ashford . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Stagecoach in East Kent provide bus services around the town . Most services include access from the station to the Designer Outlet . Out of town buses serve neighbouring towns , including Canterbury , Tenterden , Maidstone and Folkestone . 
 Until 1974 , Ashford was served by Lympne Airport , with commercial services to Beauvais , The airport at Lydd , designated London Ashford Airport and approximately 13 miles ( 21 kilometres ) south of Ashford , has regular flights to Le Touquet , France by Lydd Air . London Gatwick Airport , the nearest fully international airport is 45 miles ( 72 kilometres ) from Ashford . 
 The National Cycle Network , a network of cycle routes in the United Kingdom , includes two routes through Ashford . These are NCR 17 from Rochester to Hythe and NCR 18 from Canterbury to Tunbridge Wells . The Stour Valley Walk also follows the main river , connecting Ashford with Lenham and Canterbury , and links with other long distance footpaths in this part of Kent . 
 = = Health = = 
 Ashford now has the oldest surviving St John 's Ambulance Association unit . John Furley , founder of the association , was born in Ashford . He established the British Red Cross Society in 1868 , gaining support from the Duke of Edinburgh via a royal admiral living at Eastwell Park , close to the town . 
 The Grosvenor Sanatorium opened in 1915 to help patients suffering from tuberculosis , and could cater for 110 male patients , and 78 female . The philosopher Simone Weil lived in Ashford after escaping from France during World War II . She felt guilty about leaving French people behind in suffering and did not eat well . She subsequently contracted tuberculosis and was moved to the sanatorium where she died in 1943 . A section of the old Ashford Bypass is now named Simone Weil Avenue , while the sanatorium subsequently became the Ashford Police Training Centre . 
 Ashford Hospital opened to the west of town on 3 August 1928 , replacing a smaller 19th century building in town . It has more recently been used as a health centre and retirement home but plans to redevelop it into a local health unit were cancelled in 2012 . 
 The main hospital in Ashford is William Harvey Hospital , in nearby Willesborough . It is named after William Harvey , the doctor who discovered the blood circulatory system . The hospital was built because the government decided the old hospital would be too small for demand as Ashford grew , and looked for a 30 @-@ acre site that could have a hospital built on a budget of £ 7 – 8 million . Work started on building the hospital in 1973 and it was commissioned in 1977 , opening in 1979 . 
 = = Media = = 
 Ashford 's local commercial radio station was KMFM Ashford . The Ashford studios hosted both local and networked programmes for KMFM stations until all output across the network was amalgamated to be county wide . The town is also served by other county wide stations BBC Radio Kent , Heart Kent and Gold . Ashford also has its own community radio station – 107 @.@ 1 FM <unk> Community Radio . This started broadcasting in May 2011 and includes programmes from the Ashford Hospital Broadcasting Service , Ashford 's hospital radio station , which has been operating in Ashford since 1971 . 
 Ashford has had several newspapers , some of which are still in production . The Kent Messenger in Ashford was established in the 19th century , with main offices on the High Street . It remained in operation until the 1970s . There are currently three local newspapers being produced – the Kentish Express , published by the KM Group ; <unk> , published by KOS Media ; and the Ashford Herald , which has been published by Kent Regional News and Media since July 2009 . 
 = Hylton Castle = 
 Hylton Castle ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> ) is a ruined stone castle in the North Hylton area of Sunderland , Tyne and Wear , England . Originally built from wood by the Hilton ( later Hylton ) family shortly after the Norman Conquest in 1066 , it was later rebuilt in stone in the late 14th to early 15th century . The castle underwent major changes to its interior and exterior in the 18th century and it remained the principal seat of the Hylton family until the death of the last " baron " in 1746 . It was then <unk> but neglected until 1812 , when it was revitalised by a new owner . Standing empty again until the 1840s , it was briefly used as a school until it was purchased again in 1862 . The site passed to a local coal company in the early 20th century and was taken over by the state in 1950 . 
 One of the castle 's main features is the range of heraldic devices found mainly on the west façade , which have been retained from the castle 's original construction . They depict the coats of arms belonging to local gentry and peers of the late 14th to early 15th centuries and provide an approximate date of the castle 's reconstruction from wood to stone . 
 Today , the castle is owned by English Heritage , a charity which manages the historical environment of England . The surrounding parkland is maintained by a community organisation . The castle and its chapel are protected as a Grade I listed building and a Scheduled Ancient Monument . In February , 2016 , plans were announced to turn the castle into a community facility and visitor attraction , with the Heritage Lottery Fund awarding £ 2 @.@ 9 million , and Sunderland Council £ 1 @.@ 5 million , to provide classrooms , a cafe and rooms for exhibitions , meetings and events . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The Hylton family had been settled in England since the reign of King Athelstan ( <unk> – 939 ) . At this time , Adam de Hylton gave to the monastery of Hartlepool a pyx or crucifix , weighing 25 ounces ( 710 g ) in silver and emblazoned with his coat of arms – argent , two bars azure . On the arrival of William the Conqueror , Lancelot de Hilton and his two sons , Robert and Henry , joined the Conqueror 's forces , but Lancelot was killed at Faversham during William 's advance to London . In gratitude , the king granted the eldest son , Henry , a large tract of land on the banks of the River Wear . 
 The first castle on the site , built by Henry de Hilton in about 1072 , was likely to have been built of wood . It was subsequently re @-@ built in stone by Sir William Hylton ( 1376 – 1435 ) as a four storey , gatehouse @-@ style , fortified manor house , similar in design to Lumley and Raby . Although called a gatehouse , it belongs to a type of small , late @-@ 14th @-@ century castle , similar to Old Wardour , Bywell and Nunney castles . The castle was first mentioned in a household inventory taken in 1448 , as " a gatehouse constructed of stone " and although no construction details survive , it is believed the stone castle was built sometime between 1390 and the early 15th century , due to the coat of arms featured above the west entrance ( see Heraldry below ) . It has been suggested that Sir William intended to erect a larger castle in addition to the gatehouse , but abandoned his plan . 
 The household inventory taken on Sir William 's death in 1435 mentions , in addition to the castle , a hall , four chambers , two barns , a kitchen , and the chapel , indicating the existence of other buildings on the site at that time . Apart from the castle and chapel , the other buildings were probably all of timber . In 1559 , the gatehouse featured in another household inventory as the " Tower " , when floors and galleries were inserted to subdivide the great hall . 
 The eccentric Henry Hylton , de jure 12th Baron Hylton left the castle to the City of London Corporation on his death in 1641 , to be used for charitable purposes for ninety @-@ nine years . It was returned to the family after the Restoration , to Henry 's nephew , John Hylton , de jure 15th Baron Hylton . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 Early in the 18th century , John Hylton ( died 1712 ) , the second son of Henry Hylton , de jure 16th Baron Hylton , gutted the interior to form a three @-@ storeyed block ( one room on each floor ) . He also inserted large , alternating , pedimented sash windows in the Italianate style and added a three @-@ storeyed north wing to the castle ( as seen in Bucks ' engraving of 1728 ) . A doorway to the new wing was added and approached by a semi @-@ circular staircase . Above the doorway was a coat of arms , believed to be the one created to commemorate the marriage between John Hylton and his wife , Dorothy Musgrave . It is now located above the doorway to The Golden Lion Inn at South Hylton , on the opposite side of the River Wear . 
 After 1728 , Hylton 's second son , John Hylton , de jure 18th Baron Hylton added a complementary south wing ( its foundation wall still extant ) , crenellations to both wings and removed the door on the north wing . He also changed the circular bartizan on the north end of the west front , to an octagonal turret and removed the portcullis from the west entrance . 
 When the 18th and last " baron " died without male heirs in 1746 , the castle passed to his nephew , Sir Richard Musgrave , Bt , who took the name of Hylton . It was sold by a private bill ( 23 Geo . II <unk> ) in 1749 . The new owner was to be a Mr. Wogan who returned from the East Indies to buy the castle for £ 30 @,@ 550 ( £ 3 @.@ 7 million in 2007 ) , but the sale never went through . It was instead bought by Lady Bowes , the widow of Sir George Bowes of <unk> and <unk> in County Durham . No record of her , or any of her family , ever taking up residence exists and the castle later passed to her grandson , John Bowes , 10th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne . At this time , a stucco decoration ( long since disappeared ) to the wine and drawing rooms was added by Pietro La <unk> , who worked for Daniel Garrett ( who had worked for Lady Bowes on <unk> Banqueting House ) . William Howitt 's Visits to Remarkable Places ( 1842 ) notes the rooms had " stuccoed ceilings , with figures , busts on the walls , and one large scene which seemed to be Venus and Cupid , Apollo fiddling to the gods , Minerva in her helmet , and an old king " . Garrett probably designed the Gothic porch installed in the west entrance and the Gothic screen and single @-@ storey , bow @-@ fronted rooms installed to close off the east entrance . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 After a long period of remaining empty , the castle slowly began to decay , until in 1812 , when Simon Temple , a local businessman , leased the castle from the Strathmores and made it habitable . He re @-@ roofed the chapel ( allowing it to be used for public worship again ) , added battlements to the wings and cultivated the gardens . However , his failed business ventures prevented him from completing his work , and in 1819 the castle was lived in by a Mr. Thomas Wade . 
 By 1834 , the castle was unoccupied again . In 1840 , an advert was placed in the Newcastle Courant by Revd . John Wood for " Hylton Castle Boarding School " and the 1841 census shows Wood , his family , pupils and staff as living on the estate . The school does not seem to have existed for long as Howitt commented in 1842 , that it was " a scene of great desolation ... the windows for the most part , all along the front , are boarded up ... the whole of this large old house is now empty ... and in the most desolate state " . However , he does go on to say the kitchen was occupied a poor family . By 1844 , the chapel was used as a carpenter 's workshop , and according to the Durham Chronicle in January 1856 , the castle set on fire while in the occupation of a farmer , Mr. Maclaren . 
 In 1862 , the castle was put up for sale by the Strathmores and purchased by William Briggs , a local timber merchant and ship builder . Briggs set about to change the appearance of the castle to what he believed to be more " authentic [ ally ] medieval " . He demolished the north and south wings , gutted the interior and added one , two and three @-@ light cusp @-@ headed windows . He also replaced the Gothic porch with a more " severe " Gothic doorway ( three @-@ bayed with cinquefoil arches ) and an overhead balcony . To carry out these changes to the west front , he moved the stone @-@ carved Hylton banner from above the west entrance to the front , left @-@ flanking tower . The interior walls of the four @-@ vaulted ground floor rooms were demolished , the whole floor was raised three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half feet and two reception rooms were formed . At the east end of the former central passage , dog @-@ leg stairs were constructed leading to the first floor , requiring removal of the oratory and rendering the main staircase inaccessible from the ground floor . The side walls of the great hall were removed to create a large salon and a large bay window was added to the south façade , where the entrance to the south wing would have been . The rooms above were kept untouched , except that a new entrance to the family / chaplain 's room had to be formed via the main staircase . 
 Alongside the medieval masonry , Briggs ' alterations can still be seen today ( albeit in ruins ) . Briggs ' son , Colonel Charles James Briggs ( father of Sir Charles James Briggs ) inherited the castle in 1871 and built the nearby St Margaret 's church ( now demolished ) . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 After Colonel Brigg 's death in 1900 , the castle passed into the hands of the Wearmouth Coal Company about 1908 , and from there to the National Coal Board . Due to the expansion of Sunderland in the 1940s , the castle became surrounded by housing estates including those of Castletown and Hylton Castle . The castle was vandalised and had the lead from its roof stolen . In 1950 , due to local pressure and the threat of demolition , the castle and chapel were taken into the care of the Ministry of Works . Due to the advanced decay of the 19th @-@ century alterations , the ministry removed all internal partitions and consolidated the shell to reveal the remaining medieval masonry . The ministry also appointed a full @-@ time custodian and replaced the missing lead roof with roofing felt to make the site waterproof . 
 In 1994 , Channel 4 's Time Team undertook excavations on the Eastern Terrace . Their investigations revealed evidence of a medieval hall to the east of the castle ; it has been suggested that the hall was used as a dining area . 
 = = = Chapel = = = 
 A chapel dedicated to St Catherine of Alexandria is known to have existed on the site since 1157 , when the Prior of Durham agreed to allow Romanus de Hilton to appoint his own chaplain for the chapel , subject to the prior 's approval . In return , de Hilton was to provide an annual contribution of 24 sheaves of oats for every draught ox he owned , to the nearby monastery at Monkwearmouth , and was required to attend the mother church of St Peters for the feasts of the Nativity , Easter , Whitsuntide and Saints Peter and Paul . In 1322 , there was a chantry dedicated to the Virgin Mary and there were three chantry priests in 1370 . 
 The chapel , which is on a small hill to the north east of the castle , was rebuilt in stone in the early 15th century . It was modified from the late 15th to late 16th century , when a Perpendicular Gothic , five @-@ light east window and transepts were added . Bucks ' engraving of 1728 , shows a short nave and a large six @-@ light west window , and that the chapel was disused by this time , as it had no roof . The west façade of the chapel was later demolished and the chancel arch was built up to form a new one with a Gibbs surround . A bell @-@ turret was added c . 1805 . On the north and south sides of the chapel are two <unk> , semi @-@ octagonal bays . 
 Although repairs to the chapel were carried out by the last Baron Hylton and the successive owners in the 19th century , it fell into disrepair until , like the castle , it was taken over by the state in 1950 . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 The castle and chapel have been Grade I listed buildings since 1949 and form a Scheduled Ancient Monument under the care of English Heritage , who took over the site in 1984 , although Sunderland City Council own the land . In 1999 , the Friends of Hylton Dene group was formed by residents of the estates around North Hylton " with the aim of co @-@ operating with Sunderland City Council , Durham Wildlife Trust and other agencies to actively involve the local community in the development and upkeep of Hylton Dene and Castle " . In December 2007 , the group was awarded £ 50 @,@ 000 by the Heritage Lottery Fund to carry out a survey for the future for the site . Once restored , the castle could be opened . The chairman of the Castle in the Community John Coulthard described the castle , Sunderland 's second oldest building , as " an asset in the city – it is a lovely setting and we would love to see it bring in some income " . 
 There have been four organised International Reunion ( s ) of Hylton Families over the past few years ; most notably on 4 July 2004 , when around fifty American descendents of the Hylton family visited the castle to present a flag featuring the Hylton blazon . The flag now flies from the recently installed flagpole , provided by English Heritage . 
 = = Exterior = = 
 The west façade of the castle has square towers flanking the central bay , with others at the south west and north west , all topped with octagonal , machicolated turrets . The north and south façades are relatively simple . The east façade has a central projection in the centre rising a storey above the parapet , to form a tower . The tower 's south angle is splayed to accommodate the main staircase and only the corbels of its parapet survive . The screen closing off the east entrance has a three @-@ bay cusped arcade on the ground floor and three ogee arches on the shafts above . 
 The roof was originally covered with sheet lead and adorning the roof are stone warriors and other figures , similar to those of Raby , Alnwick and the gates of York . Originally there were four figures on each corner turret and bartizan ; only five have survived . Between the central towers once stood a sculpture of a knight in combat with a serpent ( of which only fragments survive ) , believed to pertain to the tale of the Lambton Worm . The parapet is also machicolated ( except on the north façade ) and continued between the central towers by a carved @-@ foliage arch ( originally with <unk> which fell in 1882 ) , instead of corbels . Another feature of the roof was shallow stone troughs on the battlements which fed scalding oil or water into the <unk> as a means of defence . In a small chamber in each turret or bastion , a brazier was kept burning to bring the liquids to a suitable temperature . 
 = = Interior layout = = 
 Before the changes made by John Hylton ( died 1712 ) , the castle 's layout plan was as follows : 
 The ground floor , accessed directly from the outside courtyard , led into a portcullis @-@ protected , vaulted passage , eleven feet wide and extending the depth of the building . On either side of the passage were two vaulted rooms . The room nearest the entrance on the right was a guardroom or the porter 's room , which housed a well ; the back @-@ right room , with a garderobe located in the south west turret ( accessed via a passage running along the south wall ) , was for an official . The other two rooms to the left were used to house staff or storage . 
 The first was floor was accessed via the main staircase , situated in the east tower . The first room encountered was the great hall , which rose three floors . To the viewer 's immediate left was a kitchen ( with clerestory lighting ) , and further on to the left was a <unk> and pantry with a garderobe . To the viewer 's back right was a small passage containing a private staircase and the entrance to the oratory ( its roof vaulted with an east window ) in the east tower . The oratory was entered via a five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half high pointed @-@ arch doorway and contained an altar and piscina , of which only an ornamental niche remains . There was a fireplace on the north wall of the great hall and behind the north wall was the great chamber containing a fireplace , garderobe and a window seat on the east wall . To the west of the hall was the head of the west window . The portcullis is believed to have been raised into the hall in front of this window . 
 The kitchen , oratory and great chamber rose two floors , therefore only the minstrels ' gallery was accessed via the main staircase on the second floor . However , the <unk> and pantry was single @-@ storeyed , but held the butler 's chamber ( with a garderobe ) above it , accessed either via a staircase in that room or via the gallery . 
 The rooms on the north and east sides of the third floor were accessed via the private staircase . The rooms were two family rooms , one above the oratory and a larger one above the great chamber . The larger one had a fireplace and a garderobe , and was likely the baron 's bedroom ; the smaller room was either the chaplain 's quarters or a family room . Both were connected via a lobby at the top of the private staircase . 
 The room on the south side ( separated by the other rooms due to the hall 's height ) was accessed via the main staircase . This room also had a fireplace and a garderobe , and was probably used by guests . 
 Above the small family / chaplain 's room on the third floor , was the servant 's room with a corner fireplace and two windows on the mezzanine floor , accessed via the main staircase . Above , on the roof level , was the Warder 's Chamber containing a stone @-@ hooded fireplace , beamed ceiling , two small windows in the east wall and a garderobe . There were also four closet @-@ chambers in the turrets on the roof , used by staff . 
 = = Heraldry = = 
 The castle and chapel are adorned with heraldic devices and shields of arms , providing information as to when the castle was constructed . 
 = = = West façade = = = 
 Above the main entrance on the western façade of the castle , there are twenty shields of arms . They are believed to show the political alliances of the early <unk> , as the banner of the king , and the arms of nobles and knights of Northumberland and the County Palatine of Durham are shown . In relation to the photograph , the shields are : 
 Although it was necessary for Briggs to move the Hylton banner to make way for a new entrance , it can be seen from a colour version of Bucks ' engraving that the shields were previously placed not as they are today ( particularly Weston and <unk> 's ) . Briggs is believed to have re @-@ arranged the shields , disrupting their original hierarchical arrangement . Nevertheless , the arms give a date for the construction and completion of the castle as between 1390 and the early 15th century , due to the following reasons : 
 The Earl of Northumberland quartered his own arms with those of his second wife , Maud Lucy , after their marriage in <unk> 
 Sir Henry " Hotspur " Percy did not quarter his own arms with those of Lucy , until he inherited the Honour of Cockermouth from his stepmother in 1398 . 
 The arms shown of Henry IV are those he adopted c . 1400 , after simplifying the French quarters ( see Armorial of Plantagenet ) 
 = = = East façade = = = 
 The east façade of the castle features a slanted shield containing the Hylton arms ( Argent , two bars Azure ) and a white hart ( male deer ) , lodged , chained and collared with a coronet , Or . The hart is possibly the badge used by Richard II of England ( indicating construction began before Richard 's deposition in 1399 ) or an earlier crest used by the family after it was granted by William I of England , in reward for the services of the previously mentioned Lancelot de Hilton . A " Moses head " ( the crest of the Hylton arms ) also features on the east façade . 
 = = = Chapel = = = 
 Above the south window : Hylton quartering Vipont and Stapleton . Supporters , two stags . Over the north window : the same arms without supporters , but with the Moses crest . On the west front , five shields , Hylton quartering Vipont and Stapleton ; supporters two Lions , no crest ; twice repeated . Hylton and Vipont quarterly ; the crest without supporters ; twice repeated : and Hylton quarterly Vipont and Stapleton , with the stags for supporters . 
 = = Hauntings = = 
 There is a local tradition that Hylton Castle is haunted by the spirit of Robert Skelton , known as the <unk> ( a pronunciation of " cold " in <unk> ) Lad of Hylton . Various versions of how he was killed exist , the most popular being that he was decapitated by Sir Robert Hylton ( later de jure 13th Baron Hylton ) , after falling asleep and failing to get his master 's horse ready on time . Skelton 's spirit then began to haunt the castle and would move objects , either misplacing them or tidying up . The spirit was said to have been finally laid to rest when the castle servants put a cloak out for him . 
 = Amy Rose = 
 Amy Rose ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ ザ · <unk> , <unk> <unk> za Hejjihoggu , lit . Amy Rose the Hedgehog ) , originally nicknamed Rosy the Rascal , is a fictional character in Sega 's Sonic the Hedgehog series . She is a pink anthropomorphic hedgehog with a cheerful , competitive personality . Amy is known for her unrequited and obsessive love for the series ' main character Sonic . They have saved each other 's lives on a number of occasions , however , and are very good friends . During the series ' early years , her appearance changed several times . 
 Amy debuted in the Sonic the Hedgehog manga series created by Kenji Terada in 1992 . Her first video @-@ game appearance was in 1993 's Sonic the Hedgehog CD and she was first playable in 1994 's Sonic Drift . Amy has become one of the series ' most popular and recognizable characters , appearing in dozens of main @-@ series and spinoff titles , several comic book series , the anime Sonic X , and the computer @-@ animated Sonic Boom . She has received a mixed response from critics . Although some found her cute and powerful , others criticized her for her voice acting and personality . She has frequently appeared in Sonic merchandise . 
 = = Design and characteristics = = 
 = = = Conception and visual design = = = 
 Amy is a 12 @-@ year @-@ old , pink @-@ furred anthropomorphic hedgehog girl created by Kenji Terada for the Sonic the Hedgehog manga serial . She debuted in 1992 , wearing a dress and with her then @-@ orange hair pulled into two ponytails . The character was redesigned the next year for the Sega CD game , Sonic the Hedgehog CD . Like the Sonic CD introduction Metal Sonic , an early grayscale concept sketch shows her very similar to her appearance in the game ( except her shoes , which became larger and flatter ) . Her coloring was red at first ( including her skirt ) , except for a green shirt . The character had two other names in game previews : Rosy the Rascal and Princess Sally ( a character in the Sonic the Hedgehog TV series ) . Amy received her present design , with a red dress and boots , in Sonic Adventure . 
 Although the character was redesigned for the Sonic Boom video game and TV series , these are not considered canonical . Matching Sonic Boom 's shift in tone , Sonic series newcomer Big Red Button Entertainment wanted her to be a more capable character to stand out from Sonic and offset her frequent placement on game sidelines . She became more " agile and graceful " , able to perform difficult physical tasks with ease . 
 = = = Personality and abilities = = = 
 Amy has a cheerful , exuberant , driven , competitive and intuitive personality . She is infatuated with Sonic the Hedgehog and spends much of her time chasing him , making sure he is safe and demonstrating her affection . Although Sonic does not reciprocate her feelings and is annoyed by them ( to the point of avoiding her ) , he does not dislike her . Former Sonic Team head Yuji Naka said that Amy was designed " to always chase Sonic " , and ( despite frequent questions from fans ) it is unlikely that they will ever get married . 
 Like most characters in the Sonic series , Amy can run at superhuman speeds but not as fast as Sonic . She attacks foes with her ever @-@ present signature weapon , the Piko @-@ Piko Hammer with which she is very proficient in using . The character also has supernatural skills ( tarot card reading and dowsing ) . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 In Sonic CD , Amy falls in love with Sonic . She follows him to Never Lake , where Metal Sonic kidnaps her and Sonic must rescue her . When he does ( on one of the game 's last levels ) , Amy kisses him . Sonic defeats Metal Sonic and Doctor Eggman ( known in this game as Doctor Robotnik ) , and then leaves with her . 
 In Sonic Adventure , after Amy ( a playable character ) complains about being bored a bird wearing a Chaos Emerald necklace crashes into her . She keeps the bird safe from E @-@ 100 Alpha , one of Eggman 's robots . Amy later meets Sonic , and invites him to an amusement park ( where they become separated ) . Alpha reappears , imprisoning Amy and the bird on Eggman 's airship the Egg Carrier . Another Eggman robot , E @-@ 102 Gamma , orders Amy to give the bird to him ; she refuses , asking him why he wants it . He does not know , and changes his mind when she tells him he is missing out on love . E @-@ 102 Gamma lets them leave and , touched , Amy becomes his friend before she escapes into the ship 's interior . On the deck , Eggman confronts her and grabs the bird 's Chaos Emerald . Sonic and Gamma appear , and when Sonic tries to destroy Gamma Amy defends him . Sonic agrees to spare Gamma , and Amy leaves with Tails . She later sees a photo of the bird and its parents ( whom Eggman has also stolen ) in its necklace . When Amy looks for them in the jungle , she again finds the Egg Carrier . The bird 's parents emerge on the deck ; Alpha appears , and injures Amy 's bird . Amy destroys Alpha , and waves goodbye to the three departing birds . 
 In Sonic Adventure 2 , Amy rescues Sonic from imprisonment and asks him to marry her but yet again Sonic refuses to . When she looks for Sonic ( to save him again ) , she finds Shadow the Hedgehog after mistaking him for Sonic . Eggman attacks her with his mecha and Tails defends her ; she then spends much of the remaining game searching for Chaos Emeralds with Tails and Knuckles . At the game 's climax , Amy pleads with Shadow to help her and the other characters neutralize a catastrophic energy buildup at the space colony ARK . She reminds him of Maria Robotnik , his friend on the ARK before her death , and he agrees to help . 
 Amy is a playable character in Sonic Advance , Sonic Advance 2 and Sonic Advance 3 , platformers for the Game Boy Advance . With Sonic , Tails , Knuckles and ( in the latter two games ) Cream , she frees animals from inside Eggman 's robots to keep him from building an empire . Although in Sonic Advance Amy 's attacking power was restricted by her inability to spin while jumping ( unlike those of the other characters ) , this was changed in the latter two games . 
 She is a playable Team Rose " speed " character in Sonic Heroes with Cream the Rabbit and Big the Cat . Worried about Sonic ( whom she has not seen in over a month ) , Amy finds his picture in a newspaper and joins Cream and Big to look for their own friends : Cream for a Chao named Chocola and Big for his frog friend Froggy . They travel through several stages before reaching the Egg Fleet , another Eggman aircraft , where they find a mecha piloted by one of his clones . When they defeat it , the clone dissolves into a puddle of liquid out of which rise Chocola , Froggy and ( to Amy 's delight ) Sonic . Amy , Big and Cream help their friends defeat the game 's true antagonist , Metal Sonic , who locked Eggman away on his own ship . 
 Amy is a selectable racer in the racing spinoffs Sonic Riders , Sonic Riders : Zero Gravity and Sonic Free Riders . In Sonic Riders , she participates in a racing tournament to keep an eye on Sonic . When Eggman shows up to steal the Treasure of Babylon ( a key item ) Amy hops aboard his hovercraft , which flies off into the distance . Sonic arrives at the base where Eggman is holding Amy hostage , using his <unk> to stir up a dust bowl and recapture her and the treasure . She is uncharacteristically furious at his recklessness for charging at Eggman ( and her ) . In Zero Gravity Amy shows Sonic a strange item she has found , the Ark of the Cosmos , which the Babylon Rogues rival gang believes she stole . She disappears from the gang and is later found , helping them find the Ark of the Cosmos with information she overheard from the Rogues . Team Rose returns ( with Vector the Crocodile replacing Big ) in Sonic Free Riders . Although the team arrives late at a tournament they can still register , and Amy is delighted face Sonic and his team . They later battle other teams , with Amy insulting Vector for his incompetence and obsession with money . 
 Amy has non @-@ playable roles in a number of other game plots . Her attraction to Sonic is useful to Cream and Blaze the Cat in Sonic Rush , since they are also looking for him . In Shadow the Hedgehog Amy appears at a castle level to ask Shadow to help her find Cream , who has not returned . In the game 's final story , unlocked after the player reaches the rest of the endings , Amy admiringly cheers Shadow on . In the 2006 Sonic the Hedgehog game , she mistakes Silver the Hedgehog for Sonic ; when he tells her he is looking for someone , she insists on helping him . When Silver attacks Sonic , Amy finds them and blocks Silver 's way ( saving Sonic 's life ) ; he escapes , and Amy yells at Silver . She rescues Elise ( who also likes Sonic , although Amy does not know this at the time ) from confinement . In Sonic Lost World , Amy and Knuckles care for forest animals while Sonic and Tails rescue the animals ' friends . The Deadly Six ( the game 's antagonists ) control one of Eggman 's machines to drain life from the world ; Amy and Knuckles die , but are brought back to life when Sonic and Tails replenish it . 
 Amy appears in cutscenes to flirt with Sonic in other games , including Sonic Unleashed , Sonic Generations and the Nintendo DS version of Sonic Colors . In Sonic Chronicles : The Dark Brotherhood , her playable character pretends to have a boyfriend to make Sonic jealous ; her success depends on player input . In Sonic and the Black Knight Sonic agrees to a date with Amy before he is whisked into the world of King Arthur , with an alternate version of Amy as the Lady of the Lake . 
 She is a playable character in a number of Sonic spinoffs in several genres , including the fighting games Sonic the Fighters and Sonic Battle ; the racers Sonic R and Sonic Drift , and the party title Sonic Shuffle . She is also planned as a playable character in Sonic Boom , a platformer . Amy has also appeared in games outside the series : Sega Superstars titles , including Sega Superstars Tennis and Sonic & Sega All @-@ Stars Racing ; Mario crossovers ( including Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games ) and as a collectible trophy in Super Smash Bros. Brawl . 
 = = = Comics = = = 
 Amy is a major character in the Sonic the Hedgehog manga . She is the girlfriend of protagonist Nicky , whose alter ego is Sonic , and is unaware that they are identical . Antagonist Anton Brooke is also attracted to her ; he kidnaps her a number of times , forcing Nicky to become Sonic and rescue her . In Sonic Adventures , a 1994 two @-@ issue French comic book published by <unk> , Doctor Robotnik ( Eggman ) uses Amy as bait to lure Sonic . When Sonic , Amy and Tails fall into a pit of lava , they are saved by a giant ring which transports them to a different location . 
 In the Sonic the Hedgehog series from Archie Comics , Amy learns about Sonic from folktales in her home kingdom of Mercia . She admires him , and tries several times to join the Freedom Fighters ( a resistance group to which he belongs ) ; however , she is rejected because of her age . She sends Sonic fan mail , but Eggman intercepts it and kidnaps her . Sonic rescues her and Tails ( another Freedom Fighter captured by Eggman ) , and they leave for the city of <unk> . Although Amy continues trying to join the Freedom Fighters , she is still rejected ; when she wishes on an ancient artifact to become older , her immature mind gives her away . She helps the group defeating a number of powerful enemies , however , and is admitted after defending a fort from Eggman and his robots . 
 Amy continues to pursue Sonic , seeking out combat training so she can rival his abilities , and continues rescuing friends with the Freedom Fighters from Eggman and other antagonists . She joins Freedom Fighter subsidiaries — notably the Team Fighters , which includes supporting characters Antoine D <unk> and <unk> <unk> and with whom she rescues Sally and a number of echidnas from Eggman and his army of robots . In the crossover spinoff series Trouble on Two Worlds , Amy battles Dr. Wily and other Mega Man antagonists with Sonic and Mega Man . 
 She was a major character in Sonic the Comic during its run from 1993 to 2002 . Amy is arrested early by two of Eggman 's robots for associating with Sonic when she claims to be his girlfriend . Annoyed , Sonic rescues her and realizes she is a fugitive and must remain with the Freedom Fighters . Amy becomes a valued member , frequently fighting with a bow and arrow . She occasionally saves the day without Sonic , once leading the Freedom Fighters in his absence . Unlike most other Sonic media , Amy 's love for Sonic in Sonic the Comic is shallow ( although others assume they are dating , and she plays along ) . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Amy is also a major character in the 2003 – 2006 anime series Sonic X. Attacking one of Eggman 's machines , Sonic triggers Chaos Control and sends him , Amy , Tails and other characters from their world to Earth . On Earth , they befriend a human boy , Chris Thorndyke and his family and friends ; Amy particularly likes his maid , Ella , who teaches her to cook . She frequently tries to woo Sonic and his discomfort angers her . In one episode Amy makes a seashell bracelet , which Sonic graciously accepts ; shortly afterward he saves her from drowning , and she returns the favor when one of Eggman 's robots holds him underwater . Sonic also rescues Amy from Eggman 's creations on other occasions . She sometimes flares up at Sonic , attacking him when she realizes that he has tricked her into acting insane . The second season opens with arcs based on Adventure and Adventure 2 , where Amy reprises her role in the games . During the first and second seasons Amy and her friends — often without Sonic — are frequently together , capturing ( and recapturing ) Chaos Emeralds from Doctor Eggman and adjusting to their celebrity status on Earth . 
 The series moves to outer space for season three , when the animal characters return to their world . Early in the series she and Cream befriend a plant @-@ like creature , Cosmo the <unk> , and they are frequently together . Sonic is kidnapped by the Metarex , plant @-@ based robots , and Amy destroys one to rescue Sonic from drowning again . She continues her adventures with the gang , looking for scattered Chaos Emeralds and defeating Metarex . In one episode Amy nearly wins Sonic 's heart with an alien race 's love magic , but Tails and Cosmo trigger the magic before Sonic arrives ; while their existing affection for each other increases , Amy yells at them . During the show 's climax , Amy jumps to save Sonic from the Metarex 's watery planet . She is knocked unconscious by the impact , but Chris saves them both . Cosmo fuses with the planet , forcing Tails to destroy her to save the galaxy , and Amy , Cream and Tails sob in despair as the other characters solemnly watch . Amy and Cream later bring Tails some snacks to cheer him up . 
 Amy Rose is also one of the five main characters in the CGI series Sonic Boom , along with Sonic , Tails , Knuckles , and the new character Sticks , the latter of whom she is best friends with . Her personality has been changed into a stronger , more independent role , being a natural @-@ born leader and the backbone of the team . Her romantic feelings towards Sonic are kept intact , with a notable change being that she actively keeps her crush on him a secret , even from Sonic himself . 
 = = Reception and impact = = 
 Amy has received a mixed response from critics . Jeff <unk> of the Huffington Post expressed an interest in " more Amy Rose " from the Sonic series ( such as a game featuring her and Tails ) in an article critical of the series ' overall direction . IGN 's Lucas M. Thomas wrote , " One of the coolest things about [ Amy ] is her enormous , walloping hammer " ( often used for comedic effect ) , and hoped she would be a playable character in Super Smash Bros. Brawl . Although Amy was described as cute by Alex Huhtala of Computer and Video Games and the staff of Sega Saturn Magazine , Jem Roberts of the British Official Dreamcast Magazine called her a " little @-@ pink @-@ dog @-@ type @-@ thing . " 
 The character 's personality has been described as annoying . Thomas East of Official Nintendo Magazine called her his third @-@ least @-@ favorite Sonic character , saying she " really isn 't an interesting character " and is " annoying " . Ranking Amy third @-@ lowest on a similar list , Jim Sterling of GamesRadar simply wrote : " Total bitch " ( in contrast to several paragraphs each for other characters on his list ) . On the same website , Justin Towell called her a " whiny , annoying brat " in Sonic Adventure . Patrick Farren of What Culture called her " one of gaming 's most irritating females " , criticizing the way she " contacts Sonic seemingly just to bag him . " Jem Roberts called Amy " kind @-@ hearted " but " intolerably whiny " . The character 's voice has been criticized since Cindy Robinson took over the role , with Rogers and Farren comparing it to Minnie Mouse 's . Towell and Mean Machines expressed general displeasure at her introduction in Sonic CD . The developers ' treatment of Amy as a female character and its implications for gender representation in video games have also been questioned ; the Electronic Gaming Monthly staff found her pink coloring and tendency to run from danger to be stereotypical and common in Japanese @-@ created female characters . 
 The character has been used in Sonic merchandise , with a 2010 toy line reflecting her Sonic CD design instead of her modern one . Exemplifying the culture of the decade , Amy and Sonic appeared in the Simpsons episode " That ' 90s Show " on a billboard promoting abstinence : Sonic proposes to Amy with the caption , " Sonic the Hedgehog says wait until marriage . " 
 = Baby Don 't Lie = 
 " Baby Don 't Lie " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani . Written by Stefani , Ryan Tedder , Benny Blanco and Noel Zancanella , and produced by Tedder and Blanco , " Baby Don 't Lie " is a midtempo electropop and reggae @-@ pop track . The song was made available for digital download on October 20 , 2014 , and a day later to mainstream radio stations . It serves as Stefani 's musical comeback as a solo artist ; her last solo single , " Early Winter " , was released in January 2008 . 
 Lyrically , " Baby Don 't Lie " discusses insecurities in a relationship . The song received generally mixed to favorable reviews , with some being receptive towards its reggae environment , while a few were ambivalent towards the song , noting that it wasn 't as assertive as they expected . Its music video was released on October 21 , 2014 and was directed by Stefani 's longtime collaborator Sophie Muller , who directed a handful of videos for Stefani 's solo career . Intended to be featured on Stefani 's third studio album , This Is What the Truth Feels Like , the single , along with others , was scrapped in favor of new material . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 After releasing two solo albums , Love . Angel . Music . Baby ( 2004 ) and The Sweet Escape ( 2006 ) , Stefani returned to work with her band No Doubt . In 2012 they released their sixth studio album , Push and Shove . During that time , she claimed , " I never need to do that or want to do it again . I 'm happy being in No Doubt . " However , after an appearance during Pharrell Williams ' performance at the 2014 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , Pharrell teased that the rare live appearance from Stefani was the start of a comeback effort for the singer . In July 2014 , during an interview for Idolator , record producer Diplo announced that he had produced some songs for her new album . In September , during an interview for MTV News during New York Fashion Week , she confirmed to be working on a solo album and a No Doubt album , stating , " I 'm going into the studio tonight with Pharrell [ Williams ] , I 'm going to be writing and also just seeing what comes along my way . I 've been recording a few things . " Williams completed , " When I tell you she 's killing it , it 's another level . " 
 Later in the same month , music website Popjustice announced that Stefani was going to release a single called " Baby Don 't Lie " and it was set to premiere on October 6 , 2014 . The news was accidentally posted on Interscope 's <unk> , a site that lists current and upcoming radio releases . Furthermore , the song was reportedly co @-@ written by Ryan Tedder and produced Benny Blanco , while its video was going to be directed by Sophie Muller , whom Stefani has worked numerous times on videos from No Doubt and her solo career . On October 18 , 2014 , the song leaked online , ahead of its premiere date , October 19 , 2014 . The same day , Stefani premiered the single 's cover art through her social media . As stated by Jocelyn Vena , " the <unk> is a colorful piece of pop art , " with Stefani appear [ ing ] on it , in front of a clear blue sky , with bright yellow hair and neon pink lipstick , while holding a big gemstone up to her face . The song was released for digital download on October 20 , 2014 , and it officially impacted mainstream radio on October 21 , 2014 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Baby Don 't Lie " was written by Stefani , Ryan Tedder , Benny Blanco , and Noel Zancanella , with Tedder and Blanco also serving as the song 's producers . It is a midtempo electropop and reggae @-@ pop song which begins with Stefani announcing , " Uh huh , here we go , " to a rubbery bass line and hand claps . The song also has a hip hop @-@ inflected breakdown , in which Stefani raps , " You can tell me what you 're <unk> ' boy / And you can tell me if I 'm gettin ' warm " . Lyrically , the song discusses insecurities in a relationship , where Stefani questions her man 's love . Nolan Feeney of Time complimented that the song is " about falling in love with someone who 's got a few skeletons in their closet . " As noted by Spin 's Brennan Carley , " Stefani sounds shattered as she sings , " But there 's something behind those eyes / Those eyes / That you can 't that you can 't disguise / Disguise . " In the " stomping , infuriatingly catchy " chorus she sings , " Baby don 't , baby don 't , baby don 't lie … / I don 't want to cry no longer . " Melodically , " Baby don 't Lie " is written in the key of B ♭ minor , performed in a common time moderate tempo of 100 beats per minute and follows the sequence B ♭ m - G ♭ - D ♭ as its chord progression . Stefani 's voice spans two octaves from the lowest note A ♭ 3 to the highest note A ♭ 5 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Baby Don 't Lie " received generally mixed to favorable reviews from music critics , who commended the song 's reggae @-@ flavour , but some dismissed Stefani 's performance on the track . Sal Cinquemani wrote for Slant Magazine that the single " doesn 't venture too far from her band 's established template , " claiming that " it finds Stefani effortlessly grooving to a reggae @-@ flavored beat and an admittedly catchy hook , complete with her signature yelp , but it hews too close to the sound of No Doubt 's slept @-@ on sixth album , Push and Shove . " Cinquemani also noted that during the song 's breakdown " she feels forced , even for the eternally youthful Stefani , on an otherwise breezy track . " Bradley Stern wrote for MuuMuse that the song is " dangerously catchy , and an obvious radio smash upon first listen . " Nolan Feeney of Time remarked that , " In less capable hands , ' Baby Don 't Lie ' would leave a weaker impression , but Stefani and all her vocal idiosyncrasies find a way to make it her own . " 
 Christina Lee from Idolator noted that " Stefani hiccups through her lyrics like Rihanna does in 2012 's Sia @-@ written " Diamonds " , save for the <unk> @-@ ready sung @-@ rap breakdown " . However , Lee observed that , " Considering the song 's subject matter , her bold @-@ faced collaborators ( Ryan Tedder , Benny Blanco and Noel Zancanella ) and , of course , her own track record , Stefani 's new song isn 't nearly as assertive as I had expected . " Brennan Carley of Spin simply called it " a pretty broadly pop effort in line with 2012 's No Doubt record , Push and Shove . " Lucas Villa of AXS was mixed with the song , writing that " Gwen had always been ahead of the pop curve on her past two albums but ' Baby Don 't Lie ' sees her on par with everyone else currently on the charts . " Mike Ayers of The Wall Street Journal believed that Gwen " doesn 't sound too inspired here , " while Carolyn Menyes of Music Times disagreed , noting that the song " doesn 't seem to have quite the infectious annoyance of some of Stefani 's other works , but it 's a more solid , well @-@ rounded pop single " . Menyes also praised " her signature sassy , slightly reggae @-@ touched vocals , which according to herself , sells the emotions of this song . " Steven J. Horowitz from Billboard noted that even though the song " embraces her [ Stefani ] less experimental side , " it misses her " signature bite " , rating it three stars out of five . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Baby Don 't Lie " charted moderately in North America after its release . The track debuted at number 35 on the Billboard Adult Pop Songs chart and at number 29 on the Billboard Pop Songs chart , respectively , for the week ending November 8 , 2014 . In the US , it debuted and peaked at number 46 on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming one of Stefani 's highest charting single entries . On the Canadian Hot 100 , it peaked at number 21 for the week ending December 6 , 2014 and spent a total of 14 weeks on the chart , before dropping off the chart on the week ending February 14 , 2015 . In Europe , the track also received moderate success . In Belgium , the track peaked at number 26 on both Ultratip charts , while peaking at number 19 in Finland , number 58 in France , and number 26 in Germany . Elsewhere , the song peaked at the lower positions of several charts , including number 53 in Australia , number 78 in Italy , and number 128 in Russia . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and storyline = = = 
 The music video for the song was directed by Sophie Muller and <unk> ; Muller has worked with Stefani in numerous videos from her band No Doubt and her solo career . On October 20 , 2014 , Stefani posted on her Instagram a sneak peek of the behind the scenes from the video . It was released on October 21 , 2014 , the day after the song 's release . According to Daniel Kreps from Rolling Stone , the video , which is " a play on The Wizard of Oz , stars a wildly polygonal yellow brick road , an army of dancers and mountains of reoccurring Stefani patterns like bold black @-@ and @-@ white stripes , houndstooth and plenty of pink . " Kreps continued the description , commenting that , " in the eye @-@ popping video , Stefani and her dancers are shown with bright pink Beats by Dre headphones around her neck while using the Beats Music app . " Jason Lipshutz of Billboard added that the video has Gwen " tiptoeing down a morphing yellow road and showing off the first in her array of polka @-@ dotted outfits , " with " a dance troupe eventually <unk> [ ing ] to jazz up the clip a little . " The beginning of the music video finds the singer in a gray world , but by the end of the video , the same scenes are now shown in full color . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video received mainly divided reviews from critics . Lipshutz was disappointed , commenting that " the colorful video lacks the innovation of , say , Stefani 's ' What You Waiting For ? ' visual . " James Grebey of Spin stated how he was frustrated with the video 's " glitchy , low @-@ resolution land of colorful patterns and shapes , " calling it " a jarring rejection of aesthetic design , made all the more confusing when the last third of the video suddenly changes the scenery from a computer generated <unk> to a back alley filled with live @-@ action cars . " Jeff Benjamin of Fuse noted that the video is " not wacky and sassy like past Stefani visuals like ' Wind It Up ' or ' Hollaback Girl , ' but praised the video , writing that it " oozes sophistication while still adding Gwen 's signature quirky side with its crazy computer effects . " Carolyn Menyes of Music Times was favorable , remarking that the video " fits the song 's strong reggae vibes , with Stefani channeling everything that 's chaotic and trippy not just about her own genre but also about her single . " Bradley Stern was more negative , claiming that the video lacks a storyline , complaining about its resolution and named it a " phoned @-@ in green screen affair with some poorly rendered graphics . " Bianca Gracie wrote for Idolator that the video 's geometric and graphic animation is nothing new , but praised " the fun dance scene towards the end , which breaks the monotony of the video . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Baby Don 't Lie " — 3 : 21 
 Digital download ( The Remixes ) 
 " Baby Don 't Lie " ( Kaskade & <unk> Remix ) — 3 : 01 
 " Baby Don 't Lie " ( Dave Matthias Remix ) — 5 : 06 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hell @-@ O ( Glee ) = 
 " Hell @-@ O " is the fourteenth episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on April 13 , 2010 . It was written by series creator Ian Brennan and directed by Brad Falchuk . In " Hell @-@ O " , cheer @-@ leading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) attempts to sabotage the relationship between glee club members Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) and Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) . Glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) attempts to begin a relationship with school guidance counsellor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) , but several obstacles come between them , including the coach of rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline . 
 " Hell @-@ O " introduces special guest stars Idina Menzel as Shelby Corcoran , the coach of Vocal Adrenaline , and Jonathan Groff as Jesse St. James , the group 's lead singer . Glee fans had previously lobbied for Menzel to be cast as Rachel 's biological mother . The episode features cover versions of six songs , five of which were released as singles , available for digital download . 
 The episode was watched by 13 @.@ 66 million American viewers , making it the second @-@ highest rated episode of the series thus far , after the post @-@ Super Bowl XLV episode " The Sue Sylvester Shuffle " , and received mixed reviews from television critics . Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk and the Houston Chronicle 's Bobby Hankinson felt the episode was haphazard and uneven , while IGN 's Eric Goldman observed that " Hell @-@ O " reset the events of the preceding episode " Sectionals " , and in doing so felt rushed . David Hinckley of the Daily News agreed with this assessment , but felt that resetting character development was a positive move in the long @-@ term . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following the suspension from her position at William McKinley High School , cheer @-@ leading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) blackmails Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , slipping him a date rape drug and taking an incriminating photograph of them in a compromising position . He allows her to return to work at the school , where she immediately returns to plotting to bring down the New Directions . Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) and Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) are now dating , although Finn still is not over his ex @-@ girlfriend Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) . He expresses his feelings through a performance of " Hello , I Love You " as part of the week assignment of performing songs with the word " Hello " . 
 Sue enlists cheerleaders Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) and Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) to seduce Finn . He breaks up with Rachel , who angrily sings " Gives You Hell " in retaliation , and goes on a date with both Brittany and Santana , but comes to the realization that he does want to be with Rachel . In the interim , Rachel meets Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) , the lead singer of New Directions ' rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline , at a local music library . The two perform an impromptu duet of Lionel Richie 's " Hello " , and Rachel becomes enamoured with him . Eventually , the New Directions members learn about the blossoming relationship and conclude that Jesse is using Rachel , and threaten to expel her from the club unless she breaks up with him . Rachel asks Jesse to keep their relationship a secret and turns Finn down when he asks her to get back together with him . 
 Glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) begins dating guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) . Emma suffers from <unk> and is uncomfortable kissing Will . She admits that she is still a virgin , and requests that they take their relationship slowly . While dancing , Will sings Neil Diamond 's " Hello Again " to her . When Emma is preparing dinner for Will several nights later , his ex @-@ wife Terri Schuester ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) arrives at the apartment , and tells Emma that she and Will danced to " Hello Again " at their prom in 1993 , leaving Emma distressed . 
 On a visit to Carmel High School , Will meets Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) , the coach of Vocal Adrenaline , while she has the club perform a rendition of " Highway to Hell " . She and Will end up at his apartment making out , but Will is unable to continue and tells her about his relationship problems . Shelby suggests that as Will had been with Terri since he was 15 and has immediately moved on to a new relationship , he ought to take some time out for himself . She later observes as Jesse and Rachel kiss , and exchanges knowing looks with Jesse . 
 When Emma later confronts Will with a copy of his high school yearbook , confirming that " Hello Again " was his and Terri 's song , he is apologetic . He and Emma decide to put their relationship on hold in order to deal with their separate issues . New Directions performs " Hello , Goodbye " , with Emma watching . 
 = = Production = = 
 Glee was originally commissioned by Fox for a thirteen episode run , culminating with " Sectionals " . On September 21 , 2009 , the network announced an extension of the first season , ordering a further nine episodes , of which " Hell @-@ O " is the first . The episode 's airdate was set for April 13 , 2010 , with the announcement made that Glee would move from Wednesdays to the 9 : 00 pm Tuesday time @-@ slot . However , due to a scheduling conflict with American Idol , Glee 's return was pushed back to 9 : 30 pm , and then later to 9 : 28 pm for " Hell @-@ O " , before moving to the earlier timeslot from the next episode , " The Power of Madonna " , onwards . " Hell @-@ O " was written by Ian Brennan and directed by Brad Falchuk . It was exclusively screened for the first time for around 2 @,@ 000 Glee fans at the Paley Festival on March 13 , 2010 , which was Paley 's largest ever audience . 
 During its initial run of episodes , Glee fans lobbied for Broadway actress Idina Menzel to be cast as the biological mother of Rachel Berry , due to the strong resemblance between Menzel and Michele . On December 17 , 2009 , series creator Ryan Murphy commented that he had met with Menzel , but had not yet decided upon a role for her . The actress was ultimately cast as the coach of rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline , with Murphy comparing her character to Faye Dunaway 's character Diana Christensen in Network . Menzel makes her first appearance in " Hell @-@ O " . The episode also introduces Groff as Jesse St. James , the lead singer of Vocal Adrenaline , and Rachel 's new love @-@ interest . 
 " Hell @-@ O " features cover versions of six songs , five of which were released as singles , available for digital download . Monteith performs The Doors ' " Hello , I Love You " , Michele sings " Gives You Hell " by The All @-@ American Rejects , Michele and Groff duet on Lionel Richie 's " Hello " , Jesse and Vocal Adrenaline perform AC / DC 's " Highway to Hell " , and New Directions sing " Hello , Goodbye " by The Beatles . Each of these songs were released as singles . The episode also includes Morrison performing Neil Diamond 's " Hello Again " . Diamond previously licensed his song " Sweet Caroline " for use in the Glee episode " Mash @-@ Up " . He experienced some trepidation over the decision , and retracted clearance after the performance had already been recorded . Glee 's music supervisor P.J. Bloom was able to convince him to reverse his decision , and Diamond went on to also license Glee the song " Hello Again " . " Gives You Hell " charted at number 1 on the Irish Singles Chart , while " Hello , Goodbye " reached number 45 . 
 A scene with Rachel and Jesse that included a performance of the song " Montage , Part 1 : Hello Twelve , Hello Thirteen , Hello Love " from A Chorus Line was filmed for the episode , but was cut before it aired . Over two years later , on August 3 , 2012 , Murphy uploaded the complete scene to his YouTube page . An instrumental version of the song was played in the following episode , " The Power of Madonna " , as background in the scene near the beginning in which Rachel and Jesse were making out . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Hell @-@ O " was watched by 13 @.@ 66 million American viewers and attained a 5 @.@ 6 / 15 rating / share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . This was a 46 percent increase on Glee 's previous series high , and made it the most watched episode of the series since its premiere . In Canada , Glee was the ninth most @-@ watched show of the week , bringing in 2 @.@ 12 million viewers . In the United Kingdom , " Hell @-@ O " also attained Glee 's ratings high at the time . It was watched by 2 @.@ 041 million viewers , and was the second most @-@ watched show of the week on the non @-@ terrestrial channels , beaten only by the Sky News general election debate . In Australia , Glee again attained a new ratings high , watched by 1 @.@ 27 million viewers , making " Hell @-@ O " the 17th most @-@ viewed program of the week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Lisa Respers France of CNN was pleased with the series ' return , and praised the " drama , treachery , tension , romance , and best of all , the diabolical deliciousness that is Cheerio coach Sue Sylvester . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club graded the episode " A- " . He felt that " Hell @-@ O " had " clumsy moments " but overall found it " a vastly enjoyable hour of television , reintroducing a show that 's starting to realize just how far it can go . " 
 IGN 's Eric Goldman rated the episode 8 @.@ 5 / 10 . He commented that in resetting the events of " Sectionals " , it " felt a bit rushed " , but concluded : " Glee continues to work because it has its cake and eats it too . It 's an over the top , overly cheerful musical – but also a biting comedy that always winks at the audience and acknowledges how cheesy musical theater can be , even while also proving how fun it is . " The Daily News ' David Hinckley shared Goldman 's concerns about resetting the characters , and while he believed that doing so was the right long @-@ term move , he commented that : " the immediate effect is to make the episode feel a little jerky . " Hinckley felt that the episode 's greatest problems were its pace and execution , observing : " Too many twists and turns feel a little too sudden , leaving us not quite sure how we got from here to there . " 
 Bobby Hankinson of The Houston Chronicle wrote that he was " only so @-@ so " about the episode , which he deemed " uneven " , but was still pleased that the series was back . Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk called the episode " a bit haphazard " , and commented : " this kind of spiraling frenzy is not only unsustainable , but ultimately dizzying and , dare I say it , a little boring . " Randee Dawn of The Hollywood Reporter reported that " Hell @-@ O " had a " stagy quality " , and was " not an episode that would have sold the series early on " . Dawn felt that there were too many musical performances , commenting : " They might be fun performances , but they 're not all necessary , and yes , it is possible to have too much music even on a successful narrative musical TV series . " 
 = Church of St Demetrius , Patalenitsa = 
 The Church of St Demetrius ( Bulgarian : църква „ Свети <unk> “ , tsarkva „ Sveti Dimitar “ ) is a medieval Eastern Orthodox church in southwestern Bulgaria . It lies in the village of Patalenitsa , administratively part of Pazardzhik Municipality within Pazardzhik Province . The church was built in the 11th – 14th century , with a possible dating to 1091 based on a stone plate inscription , the present location or even existence of which is unclear . Its frescoes , discovered in 1961 and restored in the 1970s , are a work of the 12th – 13th century . 
 Built in the vicinity of an older church , the Church of St Demetrius is a crossed @-@ dome stone building . According to several legends , the church was dug into the ground as the Ottomans conquered Bulgaria , so that it may be protected from desecration . It was only unearthed in the middle of the 19th century , when it was dedicated to Saint Demetrius . It was proclaimed a monument of culture of national importance in 1956 . 
 = = History and dating = = 
 According to Bulgarian National Revival <unk> Stefan <unk> from Pazardzhik , St Demetrius was not the first church in this location . In his description of the Pazardzhik district ( kaza ) published in 1870 , he writes that a previously existing church in roughly the same place was dedicated to Saint Pantaleon and had given its name to the village of Patalenitsa . The Church of St Pantaleon was , according to <unk> , previously an Ancient Greek sanctuary of Asclepius . He writes that a column from this church with an inscription dedicated to Asclepius was preserved in the newer village church . 
 The time of the present church 's construction cannot be exactly defined . Scholars such as Atanas <unk> are of the opinion that the Church of St Demetrius was built in the early 12th century , while <unk> Miyatev and <unk> <unk> – <unk> date it to the late 12th or early 13th century . One author has placed its construction in the late 13th or early 14th century and others include the 11th century among the possibilities . 
 Some publications refer to a marble plate found in the church and bearing a Medieval Greek inscription with the following text : " [ by ] Gregory Kourkouas , pro [ <unk> ] and duke of Ph [ <unk> ] , indiction 14 , year <unk> ( = 1090 / 1091 ) " . The plate is preserved in the National Archaeological Museum in Sofia ( <unk> n . 253 ) . Nevertheless , in the late 19th century the church was known as the Holy <unk> ( Света <unk> , Sveta <unk> ) to the locals , which may indicate a connection to the name of Gregory Kourkouas from the plate . 
 Another legend tells of the digging of the church into the ground after the Ottoman conquest of Bulgaria ( 14th – 15th centuries ) , so that the Ottomans would not desecrate it . According to that story , the church was buried and forgotten about by the villagers until the mid @-@ 19th century , when a local coincidentally rediscovered it while tying his donkey to a nearby cherry tree . A different version places the cherry tree on top of the hill under which the church stood . Reportedly , that cherry tree was struck by a thunderbolt , which enabled the villagers to reach the buried gate through the now @-@ hollow trunk . The church was reconsecrated soon thereafter and dedicated to the 4th @-@ century military saint Demetrius of Thessaloniki . 
 The church was listed among the architectural monuments of culture of national importance in 1956 , and the subsequent discovery of its early murals led to its inclusion on the list of artistic monuments of culture in 1971 . 
 = = Architecture and decoration = = 
 The Church of St Demetrius in Patalenitsa was built of stone , though the dome and side bays also exhibit brickwork . The church is 9 @.@ 20 metres ( 30 @.@ 2 ft ) long and 7 @.@ 60 m ( 24 @.@ 9 ft ) wide , and is among the relatively few medieval churches of the crossed @-@ dome type still standing in Bulgaria . It has an octagonal dome and a five @-@ sided apse . The south facade features three bays with narrow windows attached . The church 's floor was originally covered with marble , though the marble was removed in one of the possibly three rounds of reconstruction that the church underwent . For example , the present narthex was not added until the final reconstruction some time in the 19th century . 
 Medieval frescoes used to cover the entirety of the church 's interior , though only some 70 fragments survive until today . Until 1961 , the existence of a medieval mural layer was unknown because the walls were covered with oil paint in the 1910s . The medieval frescoes were uncovered and restored between 1970 and 1975 by a team under Dragomir <unk> . The dating of the frescoes is as controversial as that of the church itself . <unk> places the painting of the murals in the 12th century , while scholars Bistra Nikolova and V. <unk> believe they were created in the 13th century . According to Nikolova , the mural inscriptions in Medieval Greek ( as opposed to Middle Bulgarian ) are evidence that the frescoes were painted during the Byzantine rule of Bulgaria ( 1018 – 1185 ) . At the time , the region of Patalenitsa would have belonged to the Byzantine bishopric centred at Philippopolis ( modern Plovdiv ) . 
 Among the biblical scenes painted inside the Church of St Demetrius are the Ascension of Jesus , which adorns the altar vault , as well as the Resurrection of Lazarus and the Transfiguration of Jesus , which decorate the vault left of the apse . Images of a number of saints have also been preserved , including these of the patron saint Demetrius , Saint George riding a white horse , Saint <unk> of Larissa and Saint Nicholas . 
 = Nimrod Expedition = 
 The British Antarctic Expedition 1907 – 09 , otherwise known as the Nimrod Expedition , was the first of three expeditions to the Antarctic led by Ernest Shackleton . Its main target , among a range of geographical and scientific objectives , was to be first to the South Pole . This was not attained , but the expedition 's southern march reached a Farthest South latitude of 88 ° 23 ' S , just 97 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 180 @.@ 6 km ; 112 @.@ 2 mi ) from the pole . This was by far the longest southern polar journey to that date and a record convergence on either Pole . A separate group led by Welsh Australian geology professor Edgeworth David reached the estimated location of the South Magnetic Pole , and the expedition also achieved the first ascent of Mount Erebus , Antarctica 's second highest volcano . 
 The expedition lacked governmental or institutional support , and relied on private loans and individual contributions . It was beset by financial problems and its preparations were hurried . Its ship , Nimrod , was less than half of the size of Robert Falcon Scott 's 1901 – 04 expedition ship Discovery , and Shackleton 's crew lacked relevant experience . Controversy arose from Shackleton 's decision to base the expedition in McMurdo Sound , close to Scott 's old headquarters , in contravention of a promise to Scott that he would not do so . Nevertheless , although the expedition 's profile was initially much lower than that of Scott 's six years earlier , its achievements attracted nationwide interest and made Shackleton a public hero . The scientific team , which included the future Australasian Antarctic Expedition leader Douglas Mawson , carried out extensive geological , zoological and meteorological work . Shackleton 's transport arrangements , based on Manchurian ponies , motor traction , and sled dogs , were innovations which , despite limited success , were later copied by Scott for his ill @-@ fated Terra Nova Expedition . 
 On his return , Shackleton overcame the Royal Geographical Society 's initial scepticism about his achievements and received many public honours , including a knighthood from King Edward VII . He made little financial gain from the expedition and eventually depended on a government grant to cover its liabilities . Within three years his southernmost record had been surpassed , as first Amundsen and then Scott reached the South Pole . In his own moment of triumph , Amundsen nevertheless observed : " Sir Ernest Shackleton 's name will always be written in the annals of Antarctic exploration in letters of fire " . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Shackleton had been a junior officer on Scott 's first Antarctic expedition in the Discovery . He had been sent home on the relief ship Morning in 1903 , after a physical collapse during the expedition 's main southern journey . Scott 's verdict was that he " ought not to risk further hardships in his present state of health " . Shackleton felt this physical failure as a personal stigma , and on his return to England he was determined to prove himself , in the words of Discovery 's second @-@ in command Albert Armitage , as " a better man than Scott " . He nevertheless declined the opportunity of a swift Antarctic return as chief officer of Discovery 's second relief ship Terra Nova , after helping to fit her out ; he also helped to equip Uruguay , the ship being prepared for the relief of Otto <unk> ’ s expedition , stranded in the Weddell Sea . During the next few years , while nursing intermittent hopes of resuming his Antarctic career , he pursued other options . In 1906 he was working for the industrial magnate Sir William Beardmore as a public relations officer . 
 According to his biographer Roland Huntford , the references to Shackleton 's physical breakdown made in Scott 's The Voyage of the Discovery , published in 1905 , reopened the wounds to Shackleton 's pride . It became a personal mission that he should return to the Antarctic and outperform Scott . He began looking for potential backers for an expedition of his own ; his initial plans appear in an unpublished document dated early 1906 . These include a cost estimate of £ 17 @,@ 000 ( updated value £ 1 @,@ 620 @,@ 000 ) for the entire expedition . He received his first promise of financial backing when early in 1907 his employer , Beardmore , offered a £ 7 @,@ 000 loan guarantee ( updated value £ 670 @,@ 000 ) . With this in hand , Shackleton felt confident enough to announce his intentions to the Royal Geographical Society ( RGS ) on 12 February 1907 . One reason for Shackleton 's sense of urgency was the knowledge that the Polish explorer Henryk <unk> was planning an expedition , which was announced at the RGS on the same day as Shackleton 's . In the event , <unk> 's plans were stillborn . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Initial plans = = = 
 Shackleton 's original unpublished plan envisaged basing himself at the old Discovery Expedition headquarters in McMurdo Sound . From there he proposed to launch attempts to reach the geographical South Pole and the South Magnetic Pole . Other journeys would follow , and there would be a continuous programme of scientific work . This early plan also revealed Shackleton 's proposed transport methods , involving a combination of dogs , ponies and a specially designed motor vehicle . Neither ponies nor motor traction had been used in the Antarctic before , though ponies had been used by Frederick Jackson during the Jackson @-@ Harmsworth Arctic expedition of 1894 – 97 . Despite Jackson 's confused reports of his ponies ' prowess , and contrary to specific advice from Nansen , the renowned Norwegian polar traveller , Shackleton decided he would take 15 ponies , later scaled down to 10 . By the time he announced his plans to the RGS in February 1907 Shackleton had revised his cost estimate to a more realistic £ 30 @,@ 000 ( updated value £ 2 @,@ 860 @,@ 000 ) . However , the response of the RGS to Shackleton 's proposals was muted ; Shackleton would learn later that the Society was by this time aware of Scott 's wish to lead a new expedition and that the Society wished to reserve its full approval for Scott . 
 = = = Nimrod = = = 
 Shackleton intended to arrive in Antarctica in January 1908 , which meant leaving England during the 1907 summer . He therefore had six months to secure the financing , acquire and fit out a ship , buy all the equipment and supplies , and recruit the personnel . In April , believing that he had got the backing of Scottish businessman Donald Steuart , Shackleton travelled to Norway intending to buy a 700 @-@ ton polar vessel , Bjorn , that would have served ideally as an expedition ship . When Steuart withdrew his support , however , Bjorn was beyond Shackleton 's means . Bjorn was eventually acquired by German explorer Wilhelm Filchner and , renamed Deutschland , was used in his 1911 – 13 voyage to the Weddell Sea . Shackleton had to settle for the elderly , much smaller Nimrod , a 40 @-@ year @-@ old wooden sealer of 334 gross register tons , which he was able to acquire for £ 5 @,@ 000 ( updated value £ 477 @,@ 000 ) . 
 Shackleton was shocked by his first sight of Nimrod after her arrival in London from Newfoundland in June 1907 . " She was much dilapidated and smelt strongly of seal oil , and an inspection [ ... ] showed that she needed caulking and that her masts would have to be renewed . " However , in the hands of experienced ship @-@ fitters she soon " assumed a more satisfactory appearance . " Later , Shackleton reported , he became extremely proud of the sturdy little ship . 
 = = = Fundraising = = = 
 By early July 1907 Shackleton had secured little financial support beyond Beardmore 's guarantee and was lacking the funds to complete the refit of the ship . In mid @-@ July he approached the philanthropic Earl of Iveagh , otherwise known as Edward Guinness , head of the Anglo @-@ Irish brewing family , who agreed to guarantee the sum of £ 2 @,@ 000 ( updated value £ 190 @,@ 000 ) provided that Shackleton found other backers to contribute a further £ 6 @,@ 000 . Shackleton was able to do this , the extra funds including £ 2 @,@ 000 from Sir Philip Brocklehurst , who paid this sum to secure a place on the expedition . 
 A last @-@ minute gift of £ 4 @,@ 000 from Shackleton 's cousin William Bell still left the expedition far short of the required £ 30 @,@ 000 , but enabled Nimrod 's refit to be finished . Fundraising continued in Australia after the ship arrived there ; a further £ 5 @,@ 000 was provided as a gift from the Government of Australia , and the New Zealand Government gave £ 1 @,@ 000 . By these means , and with other smaller loans and donations , the £ 30 @,@ 000 was raised , although by the end of the expedition total costs had risen , by Shackleton 's estimate , to £ 45 @,@ 000 . 
 Shackleton expected to make large sums from his book about the expedition and from lectures . He also hoped to profit from sales of special postage stamps bearing the cancellation stamp of the Antarctica post office that Shackleton , appointed temporary postmaster by the New Zealand government , intended to establish there . None of these schemes produced the anticipated riches , although the post office was set up at Cape Royds and used as a conduit for the expedition 's mail . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 Shackleton hoped to recruit a strong contingent from the Discovery Expedition and offered his former comrade Edward Wilson the post of chief scientist and second @-@ in @-@ command . Wilson refused , citing his work with the Board of Agriculture ’ s Committee on the Investigation of Grouse Disease . Further refusals followed from former Discovery colleagues Michael Barne , Reginald Skelton and finally George Mulock , who inadvertently revealed to Shackleton that the Discovery officers had all committed themselves to Scott and his as yet unannounced expedition plans . The only Discovery hands to join Shackleton were the two Petty Officers , Frank Wild and Ernest Joyce . Apparently Shackleton spotted Joyce on the top deck of a bus as it passed the expedition 's London offices , whereupon someone was sent to find him and bring him in . 
 Shackleton 's second @-@ in @-@ command — although this was not clarified until the expedition reached the Antarctic — was Jameson Boyd Adams , a Royal Naval Reserve lieutenant who had turned down the chance of a regular commission to join Shackleton . He would also act as the expedition 's meteorologist . Nimrod 's captain was another naval reserve officer , Rupert England ; 23 @-@ year @-@ old John King Davis , who would later make his own reputation as an Antarctic captain , was appointed chief officer at the last moment . Aeneas Mackintosh , a merchant navy officer from the P & O shipping line , was originally second officer , but was later transferred to the shore party , being replaced as second officer by A. E. Harbord . Others in the shore party were the two surgeons , Alistair Mackay and Eric Marshall , Bernard Day the motor expert , and Sir Philip Brocklehurst , the subscribing member who had been taken on as assistant geologist . 
 The small scientific team that departed from England included 41 @-@ year @-@ old biologist James Murray and 21 @-@ year @-@ old geologist Raymond Priestley , a future founder of the Scott Polar Research Institute . Two important additions to the team were made in Australia . The first of these was Edgeworth David , a professor of geology at the University of Sydney , who became the party 's chief scientific officer . The second was a former pupil of David 's , Douglas Mawson , a lecturer in mineralogy at the University of Adelaide . Both had originally intended to sail to Antarctica and then immediately back with Nimrod but were persuaded to become full members of the expedition . David was influential in securing the Australian government 's £ 5 @,@ 000 grant . 
 Before departure for the Antarctic in August 1907 Joyce and Wild took a crash course in printing methods , as it was Shackleton 's intention to publish a book or magazine while in the Antarctic . 
 = = Promise to Scott = = 
 Shackleton 's February 1907 announcement that he intended to base his expedition at the old Discovery headquarters was noted by Scott , whose own future Antarctic plans were at that stage unannounced . In a letter to Shackleton Scott claimed priority rights to McMurdo Sound . " I feel I have a sort of right to my own field of work " , he wrote , adding : " anyone who has had to do with exploration will regard this region primarily as mine " . He concluded by reminding Shackleton of his duty of loyalty towards his former commander . 
 Shackleton 's initial reply was accommodating : " I would like to fall in with your views as far as possible without creating a position that would be untenable to myself " . However , Edward Wilson , asked by Shackleton to mediate , took an even tougher line than Scott . " I think you should retire from McMurdo Sound " , he wrote , advising Shackleton not to make any plans to work from anywhere in the entire Ross Sea quarter until Scott decided " what limits he puts on his own rights " . To this Shackleton replied : " There is no doubt in my mind that his rights end at the base he asked for [ ... ] I consider I have reached my limit and I go no further " . 
 The matter was unresolved when Scott returned from sea duty in May 1907 . Scott pressed for a line of demarcation at 170 ° W — everything to the west of that line , including Ross Island , McMurdo Sound , and Victoria Land , would be Scott 's preserve . Shackleton , with other concerns pressing on him , felt obliged to concede . On 17 May he signed a declaration stating that " I am leaving the McMurdo base to you " , and that he would seek to land further east , either at the Barrier Inlet visited briefly during the Discovery expedition , or at King Edward VII Land . He would not touch the coast of Victoria Land at all . It was a capitulation to Scott and Wilson , and meant forfeiting the expedition 's aim of reaching the South Magnetic Pole which was located within Victoria Land . Polar historian Beau Riffenburgh believes this was " a promise that should never ethically have been demanded and one that should never have been given , impacting as it might on the entire safety of Shackleton 's expedition " . The dispute soured relations between the two men ( who nevertheless maintained public civilities ) , and would eventually lead to the complete rupture of Shackleton 's formerly close friendship with Wilson . 
 In his own account of the expedition Shackleton makes no reference to the wrangle with Scott . He merely states that " before we finally left England I had decided that if possible I would establish my base in King Edward VII Land instead of [ ... ] McMurdo Sound " . 
 = = Expedition = = 
 = = = Voyage south = = = 
 After inspection by King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra , Nimrod sailed on 11 August 1907 . Shackleton remained behind on expedition business ; he and other expedition members followed on a faster ship . The entire complement came together in New Zealand , ready for the ship 's departure to Antarctica on New Year 's Day , 1908 . As a means of conserving fuel , Shackleton had arranged with the New Zealand government for Nimrod to be towed to the Antarctic circle , a distance of approximately 1 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 600 km ; 1 @,@ 600 mi ) , the costs of the tow being met partly by the government and partly by the Union Steam Ship Company as a contribution to the expedition . On 14 January , in sight of the first icebergs , the towline was cut ; Nimrod , under her own power , proceeded southward into the floating pack ice , heading for the Barrier Inlet where six years earlier Discovery had paused to allow Scott and Shackleton to take experimental balloon flights . 
 The Barrier ( later known as the Ross Ice Shelf ) was sighted on 23 January , but the inlet had disappeared ; the Barrier edge had changed significantly in the intervening years , and the section which had included the inlet had broken away to form a considerable bay , which Shackleton named the Bay of Whales after the large number of whales seen there . Shackleton was not prepared to risk wintering on a Barrier surface that might calve into the sea , so he turned the ship towards King Edward VII Land . After repeated efforts to approach this coast had failed , and with rapidly moving ice threatening to trap the ship , Nimrod was forced to retreat . Shackleton 's only choice now , other than abandonment of the expedition 's goals , was to break the promise he had given to Scott . On 25 January he ordered the ship to head for McMurdo Sound . 
 = = = Cape Royds = = = 
 = = = = Establishing the base = = = = 
 On arriving in McMurdo Sound on 29 January 1908 , Nimrod ’ s progress southward to the Discovery base at Hut Point was blocked by frozen sea . Shackleton decided to wait a few days in the hope that the ice would break up . During this delay , second officer Aeneas Mackintosh suffered an accident that led to the loss of his right eye . After emergency surgery by Marshall and Mackay , he was forced to relinquish his shore party place and go back to New Zealand with Nimrod . He recovered sufficiently to return with the ship in the following season . 
 On 3 February Shackleton decided not to wait for the ice to shift but to make his headquarters at the nearest practicable landing place , Cape Royds . Late that evening the ship was moored , and a suitable site for the expedition 's prefabricated hut was selected . The site was separated from Hut Point by 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ; 23 mi ) of sea , with no landward route to the south . Shackleton believed the party was " fortunate to get winter quarters as near as this to our starting point for the south . " 
 The following days were occupied with the landing of stores and equipment . This work was hampered by poor weather and by the caution of Captain England , who frequently took the ship out into the bay until ice conditions at the landing ground were in his view safer . The next fortnight followed this pattern , leading to sharp dissent between Shackleton and the captain . At one point Shackleton asked England to stand down on the grounds that he was ill , but England refused . The task of unloading became , in Riffenburgh 's description , " mind @-@ numbingly difficult " but was finally completed on 22 February . Nimrod at last sailed away north , England unaware that ship 's engineer Harry Dunlop was carrying a letter from Shackleton to the expedition 's New Zealand agent , requesting a replacement captain for the return voyage next year . This knowledge was an open secret among the shore party ; Marshall recorded in his diary that he was " glad to see the last of [ England ] ... whole thing damned disgrace to name of country ! " 
 = = = = Ascent of Mount Erebus = = = = 
 After Nimrod 's departure , the sea ice broke up , cutting off the party 's route to the Barrier and thus making preparatory sledging and depot @-@ laying impossible . Shackleton decided to give the expedition impetus by ordering an immediate attempt to ascend Mount Erebus . 
 This mountain , 12 @,@ 450 feet ( 3 @,@ 790 m ) high , had never been climbed . A party from Discovery ( which had included Frank Wild and Ernest Joyce ) had explored the foothills in 1904 but had not ascended higher than 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) . Neither Wild nor Joyce was in the Nimrod Expedition 's main Erebus party , which consisted of Edgeworth David , Douglas Mawson and Alistair Mackay . With Marshall , Adams and Brocklehurst forming a support group , the ascent began on 5 March . 
 On 7 March the two groups combined at around 5 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 700 m ) , and all advanced towards the summit . On the following day a blizzard held them up , but early on 9 March the climb resumed ; later that day the summit of the lower , main crater , was achieved . By this time Brocklehurst 's feet were too frostbitten for him to continue , so he was left in camp while the others advanced to the active crater , which they reached after four hours . Several meteorological experiments were carried out , and many rock samples were taken . Thereafter a rapid descent was made , mainly by sliding down successive snow @-@ slopes . The party reached the Cape Royds hut " nearly dead " , according to Eric Marshall , on 11 March . 
 = = = = Winter 1908 = = = = 
 The expedition 's hut , a prefabricated structure measuring 33 x 19 feet ( 10m x <unk> ) , was ready for occupation by the end of February . It was divided into a series of mainly two @-@ person cubicles , with a kitchen area , a darkroom , storage and laboratory space . The ponies were housed in stalls built on the most sheltered side of the hut , while the dog kennels were placed close to the porch . Shackleton 's inclusive leadership style , in contrast to that of Scott , meant no demarcation between upper and lower decks — all lived , worked and ate together . Morale was high ; as assistant geologist Philip Brocklehurst recorded , Shackleton " had a faculty for treating each member of the expedition as though he were valuable to it " . 
 In the ensuing months of winter darkness Joyce and Wild printed around 30 copies of the expedition 's book , Aurora Australis , which were sewn and bound using packaging materials . The most important winter 's work , however , was preparing for the following season 's major journeys , which were to include attempts on both the South Pole and the South Magnetic Pole . By making his base in McMurdo Sound Shackleton had been able to reinstate the Magnetic Pole as an expedition objective . Shackleton himself would be leading the South Pole journey , which had suffered a serious setback during the winter when four of the remaining ponies died , mainly from eating volcanic sand for its salt content . 
 = = = Southern journey = = = 
 = = = = Outward march = = = = 
 Shackleton 's choice of a four @-@ man team for the southern journey to the South Pole was largely determined by the number of surviving ponies . Influenced by his experiences on the Discovery Expedition , he had put his confidence in ponies rather than dogs for the long polar march . The motor car , which ran well on flat ice , could not cope with Barrier surfaces and was not considered for the polar journey . The men chosen by Shackleton to accompany him were Marshall , Adams and Wild . Joyce , whose Antarctic experience exceeded all save Wild 's , was excluded from the party after Marshall 's medical examination raised doubts about his fitness . 
 The march began on 29 October 1908 . Shackleton had calculated the return distance to the Pole as 1 @,@ 494 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 767 km ; 1 @,@ 719 mi ) . His initial plan allowed 91 days for the return journey , requiring a daily average distance of about 16 nautical miles ( 30 km ; 18 mi ) . After a slow start due to a combination of poor weather and lameness in the horses , Shackleton reduced the daily food allowance to extend the total available journey time to 110 days . This required a shorter daily average of around 13 ½ nautical miles . Between 9 and 21 November they made good progress , but the ponies suffered on the difficult Barrier surface , and the first of the four had to be shot when the party reached 81 ° S. On 26 November a new farthest south record was established as they passed the 82 ° 17 ' mark set by Scott 's southern march in December 1902 . Shackleton 's party covered the distance in 29 days compared with Scott 's 59 , using a track considerably east of Scott 's to avoid the surface problems the earlier journey had encountered . 
 As the group moved into unknown territory , the Barrier surface became increasingly disturbed and broken ; two more ponies succumbed to the strain . The mountains to the west curved round to block their path southward , and the party 's attention was caught by a " brilliant gleam of light " in the sky ahead . The reason for this phenomenon became clear on 3 December when , after a climb through the foothills of the mountain chain , they saw before them what Shackleton later described as " an open road to the south , [ ... ] a great glacier , running almost south to north between two huge mountain ranges " . 
 Shackleton christened this glacier the " Beardmore " after the expedition 's biggest sponsor . Travel on the glacier surface proved to be a trial , especially for Socks the remaining pony , who had great difficulty in finding secure footings . On 7 December Socks disappeared down a deep crevasse , very nearly taking Wild with him . Fortunately for the party , the pony 's harness broke , and the sledge containing their supplies remained on the surface . However , for the rest of the southward journey and the whole of the return trip they had to rely on man @-@ hauling . 
 As the journey continued , personal antagonisms emerged . Wild privately expressed the wish that Marshall would " fall down a crevasse about a thousand feet deep " . Marshall wrote that following Shackleton to the Pole was " like following an old woman . Always panicking " . However , Christmas Day was celebrated with crème de <unk> and cigars . Their position was 85 ° 51 ' S , still 249 nautical miles ( 461 km ; 287 mi ) from the Pole , and they were now carrying barely a month 's supply of food , having stored the rest in depots for their return journey . They could not cover the remaining distance to the Pole and back with this amount of food . However , Shackleton was not yet prepared to admit that the Pole was beyond them and decided to go forward after cutting food rations further , and dumping all but the most essential equipment . 
 On Boxing Day the glacier ascent was at last completed , and the march on the polar plateau began . Conditions did not ease ; Shackleton recorded 31 December as the " hardest day we have had " . On the next day he noted that , having attained 87 ° 6 ½ ′ S , they had beaten North and South polar records . That day , referring to Marshall and Adams , Wild wrote : " if we only had Joyce and Marston here instead of those two <unk> useless beggars we would have done it [ the Pole ] easily . " On 4 January 1909 Shackleton finally accepted that the Pole was beyond them , and revised his goal to the symbolic achievement of getting within 100 geographical miles of the Pole . The party struggled on , at the borders of survival , until on 9 January 1909 , after a last dash forward without the sledge or other equipment , the march ended . " We have shot our bolt " , wrote Shackleton , " and the tale is 88 ° 23 ' S " . They were 97 @.@ 5 geographical miles from the South Pole . The British flag was duly planted , and Shackleton named the polar plateau after King Edward VII . 
 = = = = Return journey = = = = 
 The party turned for home after 73 days ' southward travel . Rations had been cut several times to extend the return journey time beyond the original 110 @-@ day estimate . Shackleton now aimed to reach Hut Point in 50 days , since according to Shackleton 's prior orders Nimrod , having returned to take the expedition home , would depart on 1 March at the latest . The four men were now much weakened , yet in the following days they achieved impressive distances , reaching the head of the glacier on 19 January . As they began the descent they had five days ' food at half rations , to last them until the Lower Glacier depot ; during the ascent the same distance had taken 12 days . Shackleton 's physical condition was by now a major concern , yet according to Adams " the worse he felt , the harder he pulled " . 
 The depot was reached on 28 January . Wild , ill with dysentery , was unable to pull or to eat anything but biscuits , which were in short supply . On 31 January Shackleton forced his own breakfast biscuit on Wild , a gesture that moved Wild to write : " BY GOD I shall never forget . Thousands of pounds would not have bought that one biscuit " . A few days later the rest of the party were struck with severe enteritis , the result of eating tainted pony @-@ meat . But the pace of march had to be maintained ; the small amounts of food carried between depots would make any delay fatal . Fortunately a strong wind behind them enabled them to set a sail on the sledge and maintain a good marching rate . 
 " We are so thin that our bones ache as we lie on the hard snow " , wrote Shackleton . From 18 February onward they began to pick up familiar landmarks , and on the 23rd they reached Bluff Depot , which to their great relief had been copiously resupplied by Ernest Joyce . The range of delicacies over and above the crates of regular supplies was listed by Shackleton : " Carlsbad plums , eggs , cakes , plum pudding , gingerbread and crystallised fruit " . Wild 's laconic comment was " Good old Joyce " . 
 Their food worries were now resolved , but they still had to get back to Hut Point before 1 March deadline . The final leg of their march was interrupted by a blizzard , which held them in camp for 24 hours . On 27 February , when they were still 33 nautical miles ( 61 km ; 38 mi ) from safety , Marshall collapsed . Shackleton then decided that he and Wild would make a dash for Hut Point in hopes of finding the ship and holding her until the other two could be rescued . They reached the hut late on 28 February . Hoping that the ship was nearby , they sought to attract its attention by setting fire to a small wooden hut used for magnetic observations . Shortly afterwards Nimrod , which had been anchored at the Glacier Tongue , came into view : " No happier sight ever met the eyes of man " , wrote Wild later . It was a further three days before Adams and Marshall could be picked up from the Barrier , but by 4 March the whole southern party was aboard and Shackleton was able to order full steam towards the north . 
 = = = Northern Party = = = 
 While preparing for his southern journey , Shackleton gave instructions to Edgeworth David to lead a Northern party to Victoria Land to carry out magnetic and geological work . The party was to try to reach the Magnetic Pole , and was to carry out a full geological survey in the Dry Valley area . David 's party consisted of himself , Douglas Mawson and Alistair Mackay . It would be a man @-@ hauling party ; the dogs remained at base to be used for depot @-@ laying and other routine work . The party had orders to plant the Union Jack at the Magnetic Pole and to take possession of Victoria Land for the British Empire . After several days ' preparatory work they started out on 5 October 1908 , drawn for the first few miles by the motor car . 
 Due to sea ice conditions and adverse weather , progress was initially very slow . By the end of October they had crossed McMurdo Sound and advanced 60 miles ( 100 km ) up the difficult Victoria Land coast , at which point they decided to concentrate all their efforts on reaching the Magnetic Pole . After traversing the <unk> Ice Tongue and the treacherous Drygalski Glacier they were finally able to leave the coast and turn north @-@ west , towards the Magnetic Pole 's approximate location . Before then , David had a narrow escape after falling into a crevasse but was rescued by Mawson . 
 Their way up to the inland plateau was via a labyrinthine glacier ( later named the Reeves Glacier after the Royal Geographical Society 's main map curator ) , which brought them on 27 December to a hard snow surface . This enabled them to move more swiftly , at a rate of about 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) daily , taking regular magnetic observations . On 16 January these observations showed them to be about 13 nautical miles ( 24 km ; 15 mi ) from the Magnetic Pole . The next day , 17 January 1909 , they reached their goal , fixing the pole 's position as 72 ° 15 ' S , 155 ° 16 ' E , at an elevation of 7 @,@ 260 feet ( 2 @,@ 210 m ) . In a muted ceremony , David took formal possession of the area for the British Empire . 
 Exhausted , and short of food , the party faced a return journey of 250 nautical miles ( 460 km ; 290 mi ) , with just 15 days to complete it if they were to make their prearranged coastal rendezvous with Nimrod . Despite increasing physical weakness they maintained their daily distances , and on 31 January were 16 nautical miles ( 30 km ; 18 mi ) from their agreed pick @-@ up point . Bad weather then delayed them , and the rendezvous was not reached until 2 February . That night , in heavy drifting snow , Nimrod passed by them , unable to make out their camp . Two days later , however , after Nimrod had turned south again , the group was spotted from the ship and was able to scramble to safety , although in the rush to get aboard Mawson fell 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) down a crevasse . The party had been travelling for four months and were wearing the same clothes in which they had departed Cape Royds ; reportedly " the aroma was overpowering " . Before this rescue , Nimrod had picked up a geological party consisting of Priestley , Brocklehurst and Bertram Armytage , who had been carrying out geological work in the Ferrar Glacier region . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 23 March 1909 , Shackleton landed in New Zealand and cabled a 2 @,@ 500 @-@ word report to the London Daily Mail , with which he had an exclusive contract . Amid the acclamation and unstinting praise that Shackleton received from the exploring community , including Nansen and Amundsen , the response of the Royal Geographical Society was more guarded . Its former president , Sir Clements Markham , privately expressed his disbelief of Shackleton 's claimed latitude . However , on 14 June , Shackleton was met at London 's Charing Cross Station by a very large crowd , which included RGS president Leonard Darwin and a rather reluctant Captain Scott . 
 As to the latitude claimed , the reason for doubting its accuracy was that after 3 January all positions had been computed by dead reckoning : on direction , speed and elapsed time . The last proper observation , on 3 January had calculated the latitude as 87 ° 22 ' . Shackleton 's table of distances show that over the next three days they covered just over 40 nautical miles ( 74 km ; 46 mi ) , to reach an estimated 88 ° 7 ' on 6 January . They were then held up for two days by a blizzard . On 9 January 1909 the table shows that the party travelled a further 16 nautical miles ( 30 km ; 18 mi ) to reach their farthest south , and the same distance back to camp . This distance in a single day far exceeded those for any other stage of the journey . Shackleton explained that this was a dash , " half running , half walking " , unencumbered by the sledge or other equipment . Each of the four men independently confirmed his belief in the latitude achieved , and none gave any subsequent cause for his word to be doubted . 
 Shackleton was made a Commander of the Royal Victorian Order ( CVO ) by King Edward , who later conferred a knighthood on him . The RGS presented him with a gold medal , although apparently with reservations — " We do not propose to make the Medal so large as that which was awarded to Captain Scott " , recorded an official . Although in the eyes of the public he was a hero , the riches that Shackleton had anticipated failed to materialise . The soaring costs of the expedition and the need to meet loan guarantees meant that he was saved from financial embarrassment only by a belated government grant of £ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 The farthest south record of the Nimrod Expedition stood for less than three years , until Amundsen reached the South Pole on 15 December 1911 . For his trail @-@ breaking achievements Shackleton received a fulsome tribute from Amundsen : " What Nansen is to the North , Shackleton is to the South " . Thereafter Shackleton 's Antarctic ambitions were fixed on a transcontinental crossing , which he attempted unsuccessfully with the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , 1914 – 17 , although his status as a leading figure in the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration was by then assured . Other members of the Nimrod Expedition also achieved fame and standing in future years . Edgeworth David , Adams , Mawson and Priestley all eventually received knighthoods , the latter two continuing their polar work on further expeditions , though neither went south again with Shackleton . Mawson led the 1911 – 13 Australian Antarctic Expedition , and Priestley was part of the Terra Nova expedition 's scientific team . Frank Wild was second @-@ in @-@ command to the " Boss " on the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition and on the short Quest expedition where he took over command after Shackleton 's death in South Georgia in 1922 . Ten years after her return from the Antarctic , Nimrod was battered to pieces in the North Sea , after running aground on the Barber Sands off the Norfolk ( UK ) coast on 31 January 1919 . Only two of her 12 @-@ person crew survived . 
 Several mostly intact cases of whisky and brandy left behind at Cape Royds in 1909 were recovered in 2010 , for analysis by a distilling company . A revival of the vintage ( and since lost ) formula for the particular brands found has been offered for sale with a portion of the proceeds to benefit the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust which discovered the lost spirits . 
 = = = Online sources = = = 
 " Purchasing Power of British Pounds from 1264 to Present " . MeasuringWorth . Retrieved 12 October 2011 . 
 " Explorers ' century @-@ old whisky found in Antarctic " . USA Today . 5 February 2010 . Retrieved 14 October 2011 . 
 Katz , Gregory ( 18 January 2011 ) . " Explorer 's century @-@ old scotch returns from Antarctica " . Toronto Star . Associated Press . Retrieved 14 October 2011 . 
 " Whisky buried by Ernest Shackleton expedition recreated " . BBC News . 4 April 2011 . Retrieved 4 February 2012 . 
 = Trading Places ( song ) = 
 " Trading Places " is a song by American recording artist Usher . Released on October 17 , 2008 as the fifth and final single from his fifth studio album Here I Stand , Usher wrote the song with The @-@ Dream and Carlos " Los Da Mystro " McKinney . Produced by McKinney , it is a slow @-@ tempo R & B number with hip hop influences , and focuses on an idea of role reversal in a relationship . 
 The song received mixed reviews from critics ; its production drew differing opinions . It appeared on the US Billboard Hot 100 and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , peaking at numbers forty @-@ five and four , respectively . A music video was filmed for the song , which demonstrated intimate sexual scenes , and promoted Usher 's lingerie line . Usher performed " Trading Places " on both his One Night Stand : Ladies Only Tour ( 2008 ) and OMG Tour ( 2010 – 11 ) . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Trading Places " was written by The @-@ Dream , Carlos " Los Da Mystro " McKinney and Usher , and produced by McKinney , while Jaycen Joshua mixed the record . The song was recorded at Music Line Studio , Triangle Sound Studios and Chalice Recording Studios , and was released on October 17 , 2008 . 
 " Trading Places " is a slow @-@ tempo R & B ballad , and contains influences of hip hop music . McKinney used the drums that appear in J. Holiday 's " Bed " ; " Trading Places " also uses guitar instrumentation . The theme of the song surrounds role reversal in a relationship , predominantly in sexual situations , with its hook consisting of the lyrics , " I 'm always on the top , tonight I 'm on the bottom / ' cause we trading places " . Usher described the song 's idea as " wishful thinking for all men to have a woman who takes control and compliments us the way we compliment them " , and Steve Jones of USA Today saw the song as a way for Usher to " satisfy his inner freak ... within the confines of marriage . " Angela Barrett of Rap @-@ Up noted " Trading Places " as a male version of " Cater 2 U " ( 2004 ) by Destiny 's Child . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Digital Spy 's David Balls gave " Trading Places " three out of five stars , and wrote that the song 's lyrics " may be verging on the sickly , but Usher just about gets away with it " . Mark Edward Nero of About.com called it " all @-@ around excellent : the vocals , production and ( especially the ) lyrics all excel " . Andy Kellman from Allmusic said that the song was the best of " the small handful of brow @-@ raising moments " on Here I Stand . IGN 's Chad Grischow criticized the song 's production , calling it " a muddled mess " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Trading Places " debuted on the United States Billboard Hot 100 at number one hundred on November 15 , 2008 . The next week it moved ten places to number ninety . The song peaked in its seventh charting week , when it reached number forty @-@ five on the final chart of 2008 . " Trading Places " fell off the Hot 100 after seventeen weeks . The song was more successful on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , where it entered at number ninety @-@ six . On January 3 , 2009 , it climbed to its high position of number four , and slipped off the chart in April 2009 after thirty @-@ three weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Trading Places " was shot on September 9 , 2008 in Venice , Los Angeles , and was directed by Chris Robinson . Of the video 's concept Usher said , " We wanted to do something ... very hot and very forward @-@ thinking " . The video also serves as his media to introduce his new line of lingerie , with his love interest in the video wearing some designs . 
 In the video Usher and his love interest simulate sexual intercourse , with the woman maintaining dominance , echoing the song 's theme . Interspersed are scenes of him playing the song on a transparent piano , sitting in a chair singing and dancing against a brick backdrop . In some of the sex scenes the camera is rotated 180 degrees , so that an illusion is given from Usher being " on the top " to being " on the bottom " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Usher performed " Trading Places " along with " Here I Stand " and " What 's Your Name " at the warmup concert for the 2008 National Football League Kickoff game on September 4 . Usher sang the song on his 2008 One Night Stand : Ladies Only tour . He began the song seated at a grand piano , while a female backup dancer removed Usher 's shirt and , while wearing the shirt herself , lay on top of the piano . 
 He also performed " Trading Places " on his international OMG Tour , which commenced in November 2010 , and concluded in June 2011 . During the performance , he calls a female fan from the audience and sings to her as they dance seductively . This resulted in a mishap during a December 2010 performance at the Madison Square Garden when a fan tried to swing her foot over Usher but accidentally kicked him in the head . At the Glendale , Arizona show , he called American Idol season six winner Jordin Sparks onto the stage to perform the number with him . At one of the London dates , English singer Alesha Dixon accompanied him onstage for the performance . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = SMS Strassburg = 
 SMS Strassburg was a light cruiser of the Magdeburg class in the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) . Her class included three other ships : Magdeburg , Breslau , and Stralsund . Strassburg was built at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Wilhelmshaven from 1910 to October 1912 , when she was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet . The ship was armed with a main battery of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) SK L / 45 guns and had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 Strassburg spent the first year of her service overseas , after which she was assigned to the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . She saw significant action at the Battle of Heligoland Bight in August 1914 and participated in the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby in December 1914 . By 1916 , the ship was transferred to the Baltic to operate against the Russian Navy . She saw action during Operation Albion in the Gulf of Riga in October 1917 , including screening for the battleships König and Markgraf during the Battle of Moon Sound . She returned to the North Sea for the planned final operation against the British Grand Fleet in the last weeks of the war , and was involved in the mutinies that forced the cancellation of the operation . 
 The ship served briefly in the new Reichsmarine in 1919 before being transferred to Italy as a war prize . She was formally transferred in July 1920 and renamed Taranto for service in the Italian Navy . In 1936 – 1937 , she was rebuilt for colonial duties and additional anti @-@ aircraft guns were installed . She saw no significant action during World War II until the Armistice that ended Italy 's participation in the war . She was scuttled by the Italian Navy , captured and raised by the Germans , and sunk by Allied bombers in October 1943 . The Germans raised the ship again , which was sunk a second time by bombers in September 1944 . Taranto was finally broken up for scrap in 1946 – 1947 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Strassburg was ordered under the contract name Ersatz Condor and was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Wilhelmshaven in 1910 and launched on 24 August 1911 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 9 October 1912 . The ship was 138 @.@ 70 m ( 455 ft 1 in ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 50 m ( 13 @.@ 50 m ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 25 m ( 4 @.@ 25 m ) forward . She displaced 5 @,@ 281 t ( 5 @,@ 198 long tons ; 5 @,@ 821 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of AEG @-@ Vulcan steam turbines driving two 3 @.@ 40 @-@ meter ( 11 ft 2 in ) propellers . They were designed to give 25 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 18 @,@ 390 kW ; 24 @,@ 660 shp ) , but reached 33 @,@ 482 PS ( 24 @,@ 626 kW ; 33 @,@ 024 shp ) in service . These were powered by sixteen coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers , although they were later altered to use fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . These gave the ship a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . Strassburg carried 1 @,@ 200 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 200 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 106 tonnes ( 104 long tons ) of oil that gave her a range of approximately 5 @,@ 820 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 780 km ; 6 @,@ 700 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Strassburg had a crew of 18 officers and 336 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , eight were located amidships , four on either side , and two were side by side aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 41 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 800 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She was also equipped with a pair of 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . She could also carry 120 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Strassburg spent the first year of service overseas , from 1913 to 1914 . She was selected to participate in a long @-@ distance cruise to test the reliability of the new turbine propulsion system in the battleships Kaiser and König Albert . The three ships were organized in a special " Detached Division " . The trio departed Germany on 9 December 1913 and proceeded to the German colonies in western Africa . The ships visited Lomé in Togoland , Duala and Victoria in Kamerun , and Swakopmund in German South @-@ West Africa . From Africa , the ships sailed to St. Helena and then on to Rio de Janeiro , arriving on 15 February 1914 . Strassburg was detached to visit Buenos Aires , Argentina before returning to meet the two battleships in Montevideo , Uruguay . The three ships sailed south around Cape Horn and then north to Valparaiso , Chile , arriving on 2 April and remaining for over a week . 
 On 11 April , the ships departed Valparaiso for the long journey back to Germany . On the return trip , the ships visited several more ports , including Bahía Blanca , Argentina , before returning to Rio de Janeiro . On 16 May the ships left Rio de Janeiro for the Atlantic leg of the journey ; they stopped in Cape Verde , Madeira , and Vigo , Spain while en route to Germany . Strassburg , Kaiser , and König Albert arrived in Kiel on 17 June 1914 . In the course of the voyage , the ships traveled some 20 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 37 @,@ 000 km ; 23 @,@ 000 mi ) . A week later , on 24 June , the Detached Division was dissolved . After returning to Germany , Strassburg spent majority of her career in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . On 16 August , some two weeks after the outbreak of World War I , Strassburg and Stralsund conducted a sweep into the Hoofden to search for British reconnaissance forces . The two cruisers encountered a group of sixteen British destroyers and a light cruiser at a distance of about 10 @,@ 000 m ( 33 @,@ 000 ft ) . Significantly outnumbered , the two German cruisers broke contact and returned to port . 
 Strassburg was heavily engaged at the Battle of Heligoland Bight less than two weeks later , on 28 August . British battlecruisers and light cruisers raided the German reconnaissance screen commanded by Rear Admiral Leberecht Maass in the Heligoland Bight . Strassburg was the first German cruiser to leave port to reinforce the German reconnaissance forces . At 11 : 00 , she encountered the badly damaged British cruiser HMS Arethusa , which had been hit several times by Stettin and SMS Frauenlob . Strassburg attacked Arethusa , but was driven off by the 1st Destroyer Flotilla . She lost contact with the British in the mist , but located them again after 13 : 10 from the sound of British gunfire that destroyed the cruiser Mainz . Along with Cöln , she badly damaged three British destroyers — Laertes , Laurel , and Liberty — before being driven off again . Shortly thereafter , the British battlecruisers intervened and sank Ariadne and Maass 's flagship Cöln . Strassburg and the rest of the surviving light cruisers retreated into the haze and were reinforced by the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . 
 Strassburg was present during the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December , as part of the screening force for the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group . After completing the bombardment of the towns , the Germans began to withdraw , though British forces moved to intercept them . Strassburg , two of the other screening cruisers , and two flotillas of torpedo boats steamed between two British squadrons . In the heavy mist , which reduced visibility to less than 4 @,@ 000 yd ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) , only her sister ship Stralsund was spotted , though only briefly . The Germans were able to use the bad weather to cover their withdrawal . The ship had been transferred to the Baltic by 1916 , and so missed the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 . 
 By 1917 , she was assigned to the VI Scouting Group , which saw action during Operation Albion against the Russian naval forces in the Gulf of Riga . At 06 : 00 on 14 October 1917 , Strassburg , Kolberg , and Augsburg left Libau to escort minesweeping operations in the Gulf of Riga . They were attacked by Russian 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) coastal guns on their approach and were temporarily forced to turn away . By 08 : 45 , however , they had anchored off the Mikailovsk Bank and the minesweepers began to clear a path in the minefields . Two days later , Strassburg and Kolberg joined the dreadnoughts König and Kronprinz for a sweep of the Gulf of Riga . In the ensuing Battle of Moon Sound , the battleships destroyed the old pre @-@ dreadnought Slava and forced the pre @-@ dreadnought Grazhdanin to leave the Gulf . On 21 October , Strassburg and the battleship Markgraf were tasked with assaulting the island of <unk> . The two ships bombarded the island ; Strassburg expended approximately 55 rounds on the port of <unk> . On 31 October , Strassburg carried the first military governor of the captured islands from Libau to Arensburg . 
 By October 1918 , Strassburg was assigned to the IV Scouting Group , which was to participate in a final , climactic attack by the High Seas Fleet . Admirals Reinhard Scheer and Hipper intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to secure a better bargaining position for Germany , whatever the cost to the fleet . On the morning of 27 October , days before the operation was scheduled to begin , around 45 crew members from Strassburg 's engine room slipped over the side of the ship and went into Wilhelmshaven . The crewmen had to be rounded up and returned to the ship , after which the IV Scouting Group moved to Cuxhaven . Here , men from all six cruisers in the unit refused to work in protest of the war , and in support of the armistice proposed by Prince Maximilian . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . In early November , Strassburg and Brummer steamed to Sassnitz . There , the commander of Strassburg took command of the naval forces in the port and invited a sailor 's council to be formed to assist in controlling the forces there . 
 = = = Italian service = = = 
 After the war , Strassburg served briefly with the reorganized Reichsmarine in 1919 . She was stricken from the naval register on 10 March 1920 and ceded to Italy as a war prize . She was transferred under the name " O " on 20 July 1920 in the French port of Cherbourg . Strassburg was commissioned into the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) on 2 June 1925 and her name was changed to Taranto . Her two 8 @.@ 8 cm anti @-@ aircraft guns were replaced with two Italian 3 @-@ inch / 40 anti @-@ aircraft guns . The following year , she was modified to handle a Macchi M.7 reconnaissance seaplane . Taranto was reclassified as a cruiser on 19 July 1929 , and in 1931 , her M.7 seaplane was replaced with a CANT 24 R seaplane . 
 The ship was rebuilt for colonial service in 1936 – 37 . Two boilers and the forward funnel were removed , which reduced the ship 's speed to 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) , though by World War II only 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) could be maintained . Eight 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) / 65 and ten 13 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 52 in ) machine guns were added for close @-@ range anti @-@ aircraft defense . She did not see significant service during World War II , though in early July 1940 , Taranto , two minelayers , and a pair of destroyers laid a series of minefields in the Gulf of Taranto and in the southern Adriatic , totaling 2 @,@ 335 mines . She was scuttled in La Spezia on 9 September 1943 , a day after the armistice that ended the war for Italy was declared . The Germans captured the ship and re @-@ floated her , though she was sunk by Allied bombers on 23 October . The Germans re @-@ floated the ship again , and again she was sunk by bombers , on 23 September 1944 in the outer La Spezia roadstead . Taranto was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1946 – 1947 . 
 = Massey Poyntz = 
 Edward Stephen Massey Poyntz ( 27 October 1883 – 26 December 1934 ) was an English first @-@ class cricketer , who played for Somerset in the early twentieth century . An amateur , Poyntz was an aggressive right @-@ handed batsman . He generally played as part of the middle order , and though his batting was not exceptional , he was highly praised for his fielding ability . He captained Somerset in the two years prior to the First World War . 
 The youngest son of the Chief Constable of Essex , Poyntz made his county cricket debut in 1905 , hitting a half @-@ century to help Somerset win their only match of that season . He achieved his best batting average in that year , while each of the following four were of little note . In 1910 he captained Somerset for the first time , and scored over 300 runs in a season for the second of five occasions . His only attempts at bowling occurred during 1911 , when he claimed eight wickets at an average of almost forty . He was named as Somerset 's official captain in 1913 , and remained in charge for the following season . After serving in the Army during the First World War , Poyntz scored his only century in first @-@ class cricket in a match for the Army against Cambridge University in 1919 . He played two further matches for Somerset that year , after which he did not appear in first @-@ class cricket again . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Poyntz was born on 27 October 1883 in Chelmsford , Essex . He was the youngest of seven children born to Major William Henry Poyntz and Henrietta Laycock . His father had achieved the rank of Major in the Royal Marines , and having served as the Chief Constable of Nottingham from 1872 until 1881 , held the equivalent position in Essex at the time of his youngest son 's birth . Poyntz senior was a cricket enthusiast , and during his time in Nottingham , he ran the police team , and wrote effusively in his reminiscences about watching Nottinghamshire face Yorkshire and Surrey . Educated at Haileybury College , Massey made the school 's cricket team in 1901 . The family had moved to Gotham House in Tiverton , north Devon , and after leaving school , Poyntz followed his older brother Hugh into the Somerset side . 
 On his debut for Somerset , Poyntz batted strongly in the lower order to help secure Somerset 's only victory of the season . Poyntz 's score of 32 in the first innings could not prevent the follow @-@ on , but in the second innings , he hit 60 runs to widen Somerset 's lead to almost 150 runs , a total Gloucestershire failed to chase down . His success against Gloucestershire continued in the return fixture later that season , in which he scored 89 of Somerset 's total of 169 in the first innings , and 42 runs in the second innings , though their opponents won by an innings after amassing 521 runs in their only innings . In all , Poyntz played five matches in his debut season , totalling 307 runs . His season 's batting average of 34 @.@ 11 was the highest of his career . 
 In David Foot 's history of Somerset cricket , after the 1903 season he wrote that " it 's time discreetly to leap over undistinguished seasons . " Between 1903 and the cessation of county cricket due to the First World War , Somerset never finished higher than tenth in the County Championship . Poyntz himself struggled for runs between 1906 and 1909 : in thirty matches for the county , he failed to score a half @-@ century . Statistically , his worst season came in 1907 , when he averaged just 4 @.@ 66 runs per innings . His most notable incident that season occurred during the match against Middlesex at Lord 's . In his own benefit match , Albert Trott claimed two hat @-@ tricks ; Poyntz was one of the victims , falling for a second innings duck . 
 = = County captain = = 
 In 1910 , Poyntz captained Somerset for the first time , standing @-@ in during the absence of the regular captain , John Daniell . In that season , he struck his first half @-@ century since 1905 , scoring 50 runs in the second innings of a match against Middlesex at Bath . He followed that with another in his next innings , finishing on 52 not out against Lancashire , though Somerset lost both matches by an innings . He finished the 1910 season with 363 runs at an average of 16 @.@ 50 , and appeared in a representative match for the West of England against the East . In their summary of the 1911 season , Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack claimed that " the outlook for Somerset is cheerless . " The county finished bottom of the championship with only one victory , against Hampshire at Bath . Despite this , Poyntz had one of his most successful seasons : he scored 597 runs at an average of 22 @.@ 96 , and his five half @-@ centuries were the most in any year of his career . He began the season with half @-@ centuries in both innings of a drawn match with Hampshire in Southampton , and two matches later , he bowled for the first time in first @-@ class cricket . Facing Lancashire , Poyntz was called upon as Somerset 's ninth bowler in their opponent 's second innings : only the captain Daniell and the wicket @-@ keeper , Harry <unk> , did not bowl . Poyntz bowled eight overs and three balls , and claimed five wickets ; his best analysis in first @-@ class cricket . He continued to bowl occasionally for the remainder of the season , but only claimed three further wickets , and finished his career with a bowling average of 39 @.@ 62 . Poyntz was unable to appear as often in 1912 ; he only played eight times for Somerset , six less than the season before . He scored 253 runs at an average 18 @.@ 07 that year , and did not pass fifty run in an innings . 
 Somerset 's difficulties were not confined to the pitch . In 1912 , the club made a loss of £ 327 , and they could not persuade Daniell to remain at the club rather than travel to India . Initially the county asked Arthur Newton , who was at that time 50 years old , to serve as captain , but after consideration he declined the role , and Poyntz was appointed instead . The team that he inherited remained a poor one : the Wisden summary in 1913 stated that they had , " no temptation to deal at any great length with the doings of Somerset " . During a season in which his side had finished bottom of the championship with only two wins , Poyntz scored 363 runs at an average of 15 @.@ 12 , with a single half @-@ century ; 50 runs exactly scored against Derbyshire . The club once again recorded a loss during the season , and at the club 's annual general meeting , the mood was negative . Despite this , Poyntz was reappointed as captain for 1914 after a proposal made by Bruce Hylton @-@ Stewart and seconded by Newton . Rare optimism was shown by Newton and Poyntz , with the latter claiming that it was due to " a lot of bad luck that they [ Somerset ] did not finish half way up the table instead of at the bottom . " 
 That optimism was not reflected in Somerset 's results the following year . Further financial losses were made , and the county finished second @-@ bottom of the championship . On a personal level , Poyntz scored more runs than in any other season , accruing 642 during his 19 matches at an average of 18 @.@ 34 , and scored three half @-@ centuries . The start of the First World War during the summer of 1914 resulted in the cancellation of some matches , along with a number of players joining the armed forces , disrupting the end of the cricket season . Although Somerset fared poorly under his charge , David Foot claims that Poyntz received " more praise than criticism " for his captaincy . 
 = = Wartime career and later life = = 
 In September 1914 , Poyntz was appointed to the 3rd Battalion , Bedfordshire Regiment . He received promotion to Lieutenant , and then Captain in 1915 , before being transferred to the 2nd Battalion in December of that year , serving in the Somme under the command of his brother , Major Hugh Stainton Poyntz . He was shortly thereafter assigned command of " B " Company . He continued to command B Company during the Battle of the Somme . Poyntz commanded the 2nd Battalion for a while in 1917 during his brother 's leave , but spent most of the remainder of the war in reserve with the 3rd Battalion . He completed his military service as a Major . 
 Poyntz only played three further first @-@ class cricket matches after the war . He made his highest total during a match for the Army against Cambridge University , at Fenner 's . Batting at number eight , he struck 15 fours and 3 sixes to reach 114 runs in the second innings . The Army lost the match by 10 wickets . Later in the season , he his final appearances for Somerset , playing against Sussex and Hampshire under the captaincy of Daniell , averaging 10 @.@ 00 from three innings . In all , Poyntz scored 3 @,@ 127 runs during his first @-@ class career at an average of 17 @.@ 08 . He died on 26 December 1934 in Minehead , Somerset . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 Although not highly thought of as a batsman , Poyntz was known for being able to hit the ball hard . A right @-@ handed batsman , he is described as lacking " technique and consistency " by David Foot , but obituaries suggest that his shortage of talent was offset by application of effort . Wisden declared him " an excellent fielder " , but Foot is more reserved , describing him as a " passable slip fielder " . Sammy Woods was Poyntz 's godfather , while Poyntz in turn acted as a godfather to John Daniell 's son Nigel . David Foot portrays an element of caricature about Poyntz , describing him as , " a tall man who slammed his hair back with a distinctive parting in the middle . " He also related a story from a Somerset teammate in which Poyntz claimed that he could trace him family all the way back to William the Conqueror , and had a massive coat of arms in his Bristol flat . 
 = Iván Nova = 
 Iván Manuel Nova <unk> ( born January 12 , 1987 ) is a Dominican professional baseball pitcher for the New York Yankees of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Nova made his MLB debut in 2010 . He bats and throws right @-@ handed . 
 Nova grew up poor in the Dominican Republic , where he started playing baseball at a young age . An unheralded prospect , the Yankees signed Nova as an international free agent in 2004 . After pitching in minor league baseball through the 2008 season , the San Diego Padres selected Nova from the Yankees in the Rule 5 draft . The Padres opted not to carry Nova on their 25 @-@ man roster , however , and returned him to the Yankees . 
 Nova enjoyed a breakout season in the minors for the Yankees in 2009 . He reached MLB with the Yankees in 2010 . Nova established himself as a key member of the Yankees ' starting rotation during the 2011 season . After struggling in 2012 , Nova reemerged in 2013 , winning the American League Pitcher of the Month Award for August 2013 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nova was raised in San Cristóbal , Dominican Republic . His father , Manuel , managed a restaurant on the beach . To make ends meet , Nova and his four siblings slept in the same bed and often worked in their father 's restaurant . 
 Nova rooted for the New York Yankees of Major League Baseball and the Leones del Escogido of the Dominican Professional Baseball League as a child . He played baseball as a shortstop and outfielder , but was not highly regarded as a prospect . He went unnoticed by scouts until he experienced a growth spurt at the age of 15 . Local scouts asked Nova to pitch in a game against older players , and he continued to train as a pitcher . 
 The Boston Red Sox invited Nova to their Dominican academy , where they attempted to sign him . Nova declined their contract offer , however , as the Red Sox are rivals of the Yankees . When he was 17 years old , a trainer recommended Nova to Victor Mata , a Yankees scout , who invited Nova to attend their Dominican academy . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Minor league career = = = 
 After a two @-@ week tryout , the Yankees signed Nova as an international free agent on July 15 , 2004 . Nova received an $ 80 @,@ 000 signing bonus , about the average bonus given to a Dominican prospect . Though other teams would have offered Nova more money , he insisted on signing with the Yankees . 
 Nova made his professional debut with the Gulf Coast Yankees in the Rookie @-@ level Gulf Coast League in 2006 , where he accumulated a 3 – 0 win – loss record with a 2 @.@ 72 earned run average ( ERA ) . After starting the 2007 season in extended spring training , the Yankees assigned him to the Charleston RiverDogs of the Class A South Atlantic League . 
 In 2008 , Nova pitched for the Tampa Yankees of the Class A @-@ Advanced Florida State League . Nova started the season with an 0 – 5 win – loss record and a 5 @.@ 06 ERA , at which point he considered quitting baseball . But Nova persevered , and he rebounded to finish the season with an 8 – 13 win – loss record and a 4 @.@ 36 ERA in 26 games , 24 of which he started . He recorded 109 strikeouts and 46 walks . 
 The Yankees opted not to add Nova to their 40 @-@ man roster after the 2008 season , exposing him to the Rule 5 draft that off @-@ season . They calculated that Nova , if selected , would be returned to the organization by the end of spring training , as he was unlikely to last the entire season on a team 's 25 @-@ man roster , as required by the Rule 5 process . In December 2008 , the San Diego Padres selected Nova with the twentieth selection in the Rule 5 draft . Competing for a spot on the Padres ' roster , Nova had an 8 @.@ 31 ERA in spring training , allowing eight earned runs and 13 hits in 8 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched , while walking four and striking out three . He was returned to the Yankees after clearing outright waivers at the end of spring training . 
 Nova began the 2009 season with the Trenton Thunder of the Class AA Eastern League . He started the season with a 2 @.@ 36 ERA in 12 games started . His performance led the Yankees to promote him to the Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre Yankees of the Class AAA International League , where he made his first start on June 29 , pitching 5 2 ⁄ 3 innings of no @-@ hit baseball against the Rochester Red Wings . Combined , Nova finished with a 6 – 8 win – loss record and a 3 @.@ 68 ERA during the regular season , and had a 1 – 0 record and a 1 @.@ 93 ERA in two postseason starts with Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre . Following the 2009 season , the Yankees added Nova to their 40 @-@ man roster , to ensure he was not selected in the Rule 5 draft again . 
 = = = New York Yankees = = = 
 = = = = 2010 – 2011 = = = = 
 After recording a 2 @.@ 43 ERA and 1 @.@ 27 walks plus hits per inning pitched ( WHIP ) ratio over his first six starts for Scranton / Wilkes Barre , Nova was promoted to the major leagues on May 10 , 2010 , to serve as a long reliever in the Yankees ' bullpen . He pitched three shutout innings in relief before he was optioned back to Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre . Nova was recalled to the majors on August 21 , and he made his first career major league start on August 23 . He impressed the Yankees in his first start , going 5 1 ⁄ 3 innings and allowing two runs on six hits against the Toronto Blue Jays . He was given his second start , replacing Javier Vázquez in the Yankees ' starting rotation . Nova struck out seven Chicago White Sox in his first MLB victory on August 29 . 
 At the time of his MLB debut , the league investigated Nova and fellow Yankees pitching prospect Wilkins de la Rosa for injecting each other with Vitamin B12 . Overall , Nova made seven starts for the Yankees in 2010 , pitching to a 1 – 2 record and a 4 @.@ 50 ERA . Nova reached the sixth inning only once , however , as he allowed a higher opponents ' batting average and ERA in the fifth inning than in the first four . The Yankees did not include Nova on their postseason roster . 
 Nova entered spring training in 2011 expected to secure a spot in the starting rotation . Nova was named to the Yankees ' starting rotation . On June 20 , Nova had the longest start in his career , allowing one run in eight innings against the Cincinnati Reds , while striking out seven . Through June , Nova had an 8 – 4 win – loss record and 4 @.@ 15 ERA , including a 4 – 1 record and 3 @.@ 35 ERA in his six most recent starts . 
 Despite Nova 's success , he was demoted to Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre due to the return of Bartolo Colón and Phil Hughes from the disabled list , as Nova had minor league options remaining . Nova used the time with Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre to work on his slider . 
 Nova was called up to the majors due to a double @-@ header against the Baltimore Orioles on July 30 . Nova solidified himself in the Yankee rotation after a 7 2 ⁄ 3 inning , six hit , one run , ten strikeout , zero walk performance against the Chicago White Sox . He remained in the rotation , as manager Joe Girardi went with a six @-@ man rotation , in place of the usual five @-@ man rotation , in order to keep starting Nova . After his July 30 promotion , Nova had an 8 – 0 record with a 3 @.@ 18 ERA . The Yankees selected Nova for their three @-@ man postseason starting rotation at the end of the season . Girardi named Nova the starter in Game 2 of the 2011 American League Division Series ( ALDS ) . When Game 1 was postponed by rain in the third inning , he pitched 6 2 ⁄ 3 innings of the resumed game , while allowing only two runs and earning the win . He pitched again for the Yankees in Game 5 but the team lost the series . 
 Nova compiled a 16 – 4 record in 2011 , the most wins for a Yankees rookie since Stan Bahnsen won 17 games in 1968 . He also had a 3 @.@ 70 ERA . He was named to the Baseball America All @-@ Rookie Team following the season . Nova finished fourth in balloting for the American League ( AL ) Rookie of the Year Award , finishing behind Jeremy Hellickson , Mark Trumbo , and Eric Hosmer . 
 = = = = 2012 – present = = = = 
 Nova secured for a spot in the starting rotation for the 2012 season in spring training . He won 15 consecutive games from June 2011 through May 2012 , one short of the franchise record set by Roger Clemens . He surpassed the Yankees ' rookie record of twelve consecutive wins , set by Atley Donald in 1939 , during the 2011 season . 
 Nova struggled at the beginning of the 2012 season , recording a 5 @.@ 60 ERA through May , but decreased it to 3 @.@ 92 by the All @-@ Star break . During an interleague game against the Atlanta Braves on June 11 , 2012 , Nova got his first career base hit off of Randall Delgado in a 3 – 0 win . Nova was not very effective after the All @-@ Star break , pitching to a 2 – 5 record with a 6 @.@ 40 ERA in 10 starts , and was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list due to rotator cuff inflammation . Due to his struggles late in the season , the Yankees decided to demote Nova to the bullpen for the postseason roster until the team lost in the 2012 ALCS to the Detroit Tigers . Despite his 5 @.@ 02 ERA , he still finished the 2012 season with a record of 12 – 8 in 28 starts . 
 Nova struggled in his first four starts of the 2013 season , in which he failed to pitch past the fifth inning , pitching to a 1 – 1 record and a 6 @.@ 28 ERA . On April 27 , 2013 , Nova was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list after an MRI revealed he had inflammation of his right triceps . Nova was activated on May 24 , 2013 , and demoted to the bullpen . He pitched an immaculate inning on May 29 , 2013 against the New York Mets . However , he was demoted to Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre the next day , as the Yankees decided they wanted Nova to continue to start . 
 The Yankees recalled Nova on June 23 . On July 5 , he pitched his first career complete game in a 3 – 2 win against the Orioles . Again facing the Orioles , Nova pitched his first career shutout on August 31 . Nova was named the AL Pitcher of the Month for August 2013 , in which he recorded a 4 – 0 record and a 2 @.@ 08 ERA . From July 5 through August 31 , Nova made seven consecutive starts in which he pitched at least seven innings and allowed three or fewer runs . Nova compiled a 7 – 5 record and a 2 @.@ 70 ERA in 17 games , 16 of them starts , after being recalled from the minor leagues . His final 2013 record was 9 – 6 with a 3 @.@ 10 ERA in 23 games pitched , 20 of them starts . 
 Eligible for salary arbitration , Nova and the Yankees agreed on a $ 3 @.@ 3 million salary for the 2014 season . He was removed from his April 19 start with an elbow injury , which was diagnosed as a partially torn ulnar collateral ligament and required Tommy John surgery , ending Nova 's season . He had a 2 – 2 record and a 8 @.@ 47 ERA in four starts before the surgery . 
 Nova began a throwing program to rehabilitate his arm in September , and spent the winter at the Yankees ' spring training facility in Tampa , Florida , rather than returning to the Dominican Republic . The Yankees signed Nova to a $ 3 @.@ 3 million contract for the 2015 season , avoiding arbitration . On April 11 , 2015 , the Yankees placed Nova on the 60 @-@ day disabled list to begin the season recovering from his Tommy John surgery . He made his first rehabilitation start on June 8 , and returned to the Yankees on June 24 . Nova pitched to a 5 @.@ 11 ERA in 14 starts before the Yankees took Nova out of the starting rotation on September 16 ; however , Nova remained in the rotation due to an injury to Masahiro Tanaka . He finished the 2015 season with a 6 – 11 record and a 5 @.@ 07 ERA . 
 In his final year of arbitration , Nova signed a contract worth $ 4 @.@ 1 million for the 2016 season . Nova began the 2016 season as a relief pitcher before making his first start on May 9 . 
 = = Scouting report = = 
 Nova throws four pitches : a four @-@ seam fastball between 91 to 95 miles per hour ( 146 – 153 km / h ) ( tops out at 97 mph ) , a circle changeup between 85 to 88 miles per hour ( 137 – 142 km / h ) , a slider / cut fastball between 85 to 89 miles per hour ( 137 – 143 km / h ) , and a 12 – 6 curveball between 79 to 82 miles per hour ( 127 – 132 km / h ) . He relies heavily on his four @-@ seamer against hitters from both sides of the plate . A high percentage ( 20 – 25 % ) of his pitches are curveballs , especially when facing left @-@ handers . Nova worked in 2011 to develop his slider , changing his grip at the suggestion of Yankees executive Billy Connors . The work paid off , as his slider garnered a whiff rate of 43 % in 2011 . Nova 's changeup is not his main weapon and is not used against right @-@ handed hitters . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nova 's family resides in the Dominican Republic . His father traveled to the United States to watch his second MLB start in person . Nova dedicated his 2011 season to his grandfather , who died in 2010 . 
 Nova is married to Ada de la Cruz , a Dominican beauty pageant champion . 
 = SS Kroonland = 
 SS Kroonland was an ocean liner for International Mercantile Marine ( IMM ) from her launch in 1902 until scrapped in 1927 . Kroonland was the sister ship of Finland and a near sister ship of Vaderland and Zeeland of the same company . Kroonland sailed for IMM 's Red Star Line for 15 years , and also sailed for IMM 's American Line and Panama Pacific Line . During World War I , the ship served as United States Army transport USAT Kroonland through April 1918 , and as the Navy auxiliary USS Kroonland ( ID @-@ 1541 ) from April 1918 to October 1919 . 
 Announced by the Red Star Line in 1899 , Kroonland was completed in 1902 by William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia . When launched , she was the largest U.S. steamship ever built . Kroonland sailed from New York City to Antwerp on her maiden voyage in June 1902 , beginning service on the route she would sail for the next twelve years . According to The New York Times , Kroonland became the first ship to issue a wireless distress call at sea when she radioed for help during a storm in 1903 . In another radio first , Kroonland heard the " first real broadcast of history " in December 1906 . Kroonland was one of ten ships that came to the aid of the burning liner Volturno in the mid @-@ Atlantic in October 1913 . Despite stormy seas , Kroonland was able to take aboard 89 survivors , for which captain and crew received accolades that included U.S. Congressional Gold Medals . 
 When the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 disrupted service to Belgium , Kroonland shifted to alternate routes . On a trip to the Mediterranean in October 1914 , Kroonland was detained by British authorities at Gibraltar , and part of her cargo was confiscated amidst diplomatic wrangling between the then @-@ neutral United States and the United Kingdom . During a chartered circumnavigation of South America in February 1915 , Kroonland became the largest passenger ship to date to transit the Panama Canal . Kroonland was placed in New York – Panama Canal – San Francisco service until a landslide temporarily closed the canal to navigation . Returned to transatlantic service , Kroonland was one of the first U.S. ships armed by the Navy for defense against German submarine attacks . In May 1917 Kroonland was struck by a torpedo , which failed to detonate and only slightly damaged the ship . 
 After the United States entered World War I , Kroonland served as a troopship for the U.S. Army and Navy . She made six trips carrying troops to France before the Armistice and eight voyages after , transporting nearly 38 @,@ 000 troops in total . Returned to IMM in late 1919 , Kroonland was scorched in a shipyard fire in January 1920 while she was being refitted for passenger service . The liner resumed North Atlantic service in April , remaining there until returning to New York – San Francisco service in 1923 . Kroonland inaugurated IMM 's winter New York – Miami service from December 1925 to March 1926 , but was laid up in Hoboken , New Jersey , when IMM did not resume the Miami service the following year . The ship was sold and scrapped at Genoa in 1927 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 In July 1899 , the Red Star Line announced plans for the construction of four large ocean liners . Two ships , Kroonland and Finland , were to be built at William Cramp and Sons in Philadelphia , and the others , Vaderland and Zeeland , at John Brown & Company of Clydebank in Scotland . By April 1901 , the two Scottish @-@ built ships were completed and in service for Red Star , with the construction of the American pair well underway . 
 Kroonland and the virtually identical Finland , at 12 @,@ 760 gross register tons ( GRT ) each , were slightly larger than Vaderland and Zeeland . The American pair were the largest steamships built in the United States at the time of their launch , and were the highest tonnage civilian ships ever built by William Cramp . Kroonland was 560 feet ( 170 @.@ 7 m ) long ( pp ) and 60 @-@ foot ( 18 @.@ 3 m ) abeam , with a molded depth of 42 feet ( 12 @.@ 8 m ) . Her hull was steel and nearly all the rivets were set with pneumatic rivet guns . 
 Kroonland was propelled at up to 17 knots ( 31 km / h ) by twin triple @-@ expansion steam engines . The engines were each rated at 5 @,@ 100 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 800 kW ) and had cylinders of 32 @.@ 5 inches ( 83 cm ) , 54 inches ( 140 cm ) , and 89 @.@ 5 inches ( 227 cm ) with a 42 @-@ inch ( 110 cm ) stroke . There were nine single @-@ ended coal @-@ fired Scotch boilers with a heating area of 22 @,@ 400 square feet ( 2 @,@ 080 m2 ) , a grate area of 643 square feet ( 59 @.@ 7 m2 ) , and an operating pressure of 170 pounds per square inch ( 1 @,@ 200 kPa ) . Kroonland had eleven watertight compartments with reinforced bulkheads , and was designed to remain afloat with up to two compartments flooded . Kroonland 's coal bunkers surrounded the boilers , to offer limited protection in case the ship was used in wartime . 
 The area below the main deck could carry up to 11 @,@ 000 long tons ( 11 @,@ 000 t ) of freight and stores . Kroonland 's water tanks could carry 200 long tons ( 200 t ) of fresh water . Refrigerated storage was provided for meats and other perishables . 
 Third @-@ class passenger accommodations were located on the main deck : three compartments for men located forward , and a single compartment for families at the rear . The family compartment had state rooms containing either two , four , or six bunks . All compartments had well @-@ lighted dining areas and wide hallways that led to lavatories and sanitary facilities on the upper deck . 
 The upper deck housed facilities for officers and first- and second @-@ class passengers . A long forecastle contained the accommodations for the crew and petty officers , as well as a hospital and the third @-@ class lavatories . First @-@ class staterooms for 106 passengers were located close to the middle of the ship . To their rear , between the funnels , was the first @-@ class passenger dining room , spanning the width of the ship . With seating for 208 , it featured mahogany furniture and <unk> paneling with inlays , and a glass skylight ceiling that extended up through two decks . Beyond this area were the galleys , <unk> , and pantries that served all passenger classes . Moving further aft , the second @-@ class passenger dining room , which could accommodate 120 diners , was next . It , too , spanned the width of the ship and featured mahogany furniture , but was paneled with tapestry upon a cream @-@ colored ground . Beyond the dining area were cabins for 76 second @-@ class passengers . 
 A 220 @-@ foot ( 67 m ) long bridge deck amidships contained state rooms for another 204 first @-@ class and 120 second @-@ class passengers . In the rear was a deck house that contained a social room for third @-@ class passengers . A promenade deck was located above and was permanently enclosed by a boat deck , where Kroonland 's 20 steel lifeboats were stowed . The promenade deck housed the library and smoking room for first @-@ class passengers . 
 Kroonland was launched on the afternoon of 20 February 1902 in a small , informal ceremony . Mrs. Rodman <unk> christened the ship , but Kroonland did not budge on the launching way ; cold weather had frozen the tallow used to grease the timbers . Hydraulic jacks eventually freed the ship for her plunge into the Delaware River . 
 = = Red Star Line service , 1902 – 1914 = = 
 Kroonland sailed on her maiden voyage from New York to Antwerp on 28 June 1902 . Kroonland remained on New York – Antwerp service for the next twelve years . In these early years of service , she was involved in two radio firsts . After the steering gear failed 130 nautical miles ( 240 km ) west of Fastnet Rock during a moderate gale in early December 1903 , the ship 's crew was able to communicate their predicament via Marconi wireless system , becoming , according to one contemporary news account , the first ship in distress ever to use wireless . Kroonland put in at Queenstown , Ireland , for repairs , and transferred her passengers and freight to ships of the White Star Line , another IMM subsidiary . The other radio first came on 24 December 1906 , when the ship 's wireless operator heard — rather than the expected dots and dashes of morse code — the voice of a woman singing . The singing was followed by a recording of Handel 's " Largo " , a poetry reading , and more music played from phonographs . The steamer was on the receiving end of what journalist and author Robert St. John called the " first real broadcast of history " , originated by early radio pioneer Reginald Fessenden from Brant Rock in Massachusetts . 
 During her time on the New York – Antwerp route , Kroonland was frequently battered by the storms that were typical in the North Atlantic . In November 1904 , a Brussels news agency reported a rumor that the ship had foundered in a mid @-@ ocean storm . The report — proved false when Kroonland safely docked in New York — received wide coverage in the American press . While in a heavy December gale , the ship was struck by what contemporary news accounts referred to as a " tidal wave " as high as the tops of her funnels . The wave crashed over the deck , and brought the ship to a standstill . A Belgian passenger 's leg was broken when he was thrown into a wall , and a crewman on watch in the crow 's nest was sent tumbling to the deck 40 feet ( 12 m ) below with only minor injuries . 
 In another December gale in 1907 , one of the two propeller shafts on Kroonland broke while the liner was off the Isles of Scilly . Using the lone remaining propeller , the liner was able to make her way back to Southampton , where two tugs brought her into port . Passengers were transferred to Majestic to continue their transit to New York , while Kroonland entered drydock at Southampton . Fitted with a new shaft , she sailed — without passengers and cargo — for New York , where she arrived on 2 January 1908 . In February 1910 , severe winter storms on the North Atlantic extended one of Kroonland 's westbound trips , delaying her arrival in New York by three days . In May , Kroonland broke another propeller shaft , and again headed to Southampton for repairs . 
 Not all of the ship 's mishaps were storm @-@ related . In late April 1911 , Kroonland hit the breakwater in Dover Harbour , disabling the steering gear and delaying the ship by a day . On 8 January 1913 , Kroonland ran aground in Ambrose Channel during a heavy fog while outbound from New York . It took more than six hours for tugs to free the liner from the soft mud . 
 The Red Star Line changed Kroonland from American to Belgian registry on 6 November 1908 in Antwerp . One reason given for the change was to allow Red Star to hire non @-@ American crews at lower cost . She made her maiden voyage under the Belgian flag the next day . In May 1911 , Kroonland 's crew , acting on rumors of an impending British mariner 's strike , refused to sign on for the ship 's next voyage , forcing Red Star to hire a replacement crew . 
 International Mercantile Marine submitted a bid for a ten @-@ year contract for Kroonland and Finland to carry U.S. mail between New York and San Francisco after the opening of the Panama Canal . By law , only U.S.-flagged ships could carry U.S. mail under contract . It was also anticipated that U.S.-flagged vessels would receive preferential treatment for canal tolls . In a short ceremony aboard the liner in New York Harbor on 27 December 1911 , the Belgian flag was lowered and the American flag was raised to the playing of " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " by the steamer 's band , shortly before she sailed for Antwerp . 
 = = = Volturno rescue = = = 
 At about 06 : 00 on 9 October 1913 , Volturno , a Royal Line ship under charter to the Uranium Line , caught fire in a gale on the North Atlantic . The crew fought the fire for about two hours , but , realizing the severity of the fire and the limited options for dousing it in the high seas , Captain Francis Inch of Volturno had his wireless operator send out SOS signals . The westbound Kroonland , already beyond Volturno 's location , turned east to aid the burning liner . In the meantime , several of Volturno 's lifeboats with women and children aboard were launched with tragic results : all those aboard the lifeboats were killed as the boats capsized or were smashed by the hull of the heaving ship . 
 In all , ten ships heeded the distress calls , arriving throughout the day and into the next . Kroonland arrived at about 17 : 00 , and by 20 : 00 had launched a lifeboat with a volunteer crew . The boat was unable to get close to the burning liner . Kroonland 's lifeboat returned at 22 : 30 with an exhausted crew and the one person who had dared to brave the jump into the stormy water . Captain J. C. Barr of Carmania , the first ship to arrive , took command of the rescue effort . Barr had the vessels form a " battle line " of sorts and slowly circle the burning ship , while his ship kept a searchlight on Volturno and another sweeping the ring of rescue ships to help them avoid collisions . Despite Carmania 's efforts , Kroonland and the French Line steamer La Touraine almost collided , coming — according to one passenger — within 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) of impact . 
 Kroonland 's lifeboat , manned by a fresh crew , headed back out and returned with 13 steerage passengers . On board Volturno , the crew and some of the male passengers , unable to extinguish the fire , were at least able to keep it from spreading to the aft cargo holds , over which the others on board were gathered . Shortly before dawn , a large explosion — probably of her boilers — rocked Volturno , and the rescuers felt that the ship , which had not been in imminent danger of sinking up to this point , might founder at any time . The tanker Narragansett turned on her pumps and sprayed lubricating oil on the sea to help calm the surface . The combined effect of the oil and the lessening of the storm allowed many more lifeboats to be sent to Volturno 's aid . Kroonland launched two more boats herself and saved 75 more , including Captain Inch , the last person to leave the stricken ship . In all , some 520 passengers and crew were rescued by the ten ships — 89 on Kroonland alone . The loss of life was limited to around 130 , mostly women and children from the early lifeboat <unk> . 
 With all boats recovered by 09 : 00 , the liners resumed their original courses . Kroonland turned west and continued on to the United States , hampered by a cracked crankshaft that slowed her to 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) . During her slow passage to New York , Kroonland 's cabin passengers drafted a resolution honoring Captain Kreibohm and the crew for their actions during the rescue , and raised $ 700 for the benefit of the Volturno survivors . Kroonland finally docked in New York on 16 October . 
 The crew , like those of the other nine ships involved , received many accolades for its rescue efforts . After sending the ship a congratulatory telegram at the time of the rescue , King Albert of Belgium made Capt. Kreibohm a Chevalier ( Knight ) of the Order of the Crown in January 1914 . At the same time , the Belgian government awarded its Third Class Civic Cross to Kroonland 's third officer , and First Class Civic Medals to six crewmen and a steward . In March , King George V of the United Kingdom , on recommendation of the Board of Trade , awarded 39 of the ship 's crew the Silver Sea Gallantry Medal , along with a £ 3 award . Crewmen from all ten ships received Sea Gallantry Medals , but no other ship had more medals awarded than Kroonland . Later in March , the United States Congress honored Kreibohm with a gold watch , Kroonland 's officers — including Kreibohm — with Congressional Gold Medals , and other crewmen with five silver and 25 bronze medals . In April , the Life Saving Benevolent Association of New York awarded its Life Saving Medal to Kreibohm , four officers , and 35 crewmen . In June 1916 , Kreibohm was presented with the American Cross of Honor by Congressman Henry Bruckner . 
 Kroonland resumed her normal New York – Antwerp service until 11 August 1914 , when she arrived at New York with passengers that had narrowly escaped the hostilities beginning to engulf the European continent . 
 = = = Notable passengers = = = 
 During her pre @-@ war New York – Antwerp sailings , Kroonland carried some notable and interesting passengers . On 1 August 1904 , one of the ship 's passengers arrived in New York as somewhat of a mystery woman . She recounted that she had gone out for dinner in Antwerp and awakened to find herself at sea with only the white silk evening gown she was wearing . Having no money or luggage , she was barred from entering the United States and was compelled to remain on board the ship . After her predicament was reported in The New York Times , she received letters and telegrams that included marriage proposals . Her background story and a letter of credit eventually verified her identity , but she was deported after a New York doctor pronounced her insane . Later the same month The New York Times reported on first @-@ class passengers ' complaints over privileges for their dogs and the conditions in the kennel aboard the liner . One passenger was determined to have her dog in her state room , and after others joined her in removing canine companions from the kennel , Kroonland 's crew took all the dogs back to the kennel . Many of the dog owners refused to speak to the others involved for the duration of the voyage . 
 On 27 May 1905 , American author Molly Elliot Seawell sailed for Europe on Kroonland on a day when six liners , with over 1 @,@ 500 passengers , departed New York . In October , Helen Taft returned from Europe on Kroonland and was met by her husband , Secretary of War William Howard Taft . The next August , Henry Yates Satterlee , the first Episcopal Bishop of Washington , returned on Kroonland from a six @-@ week tour of cathedrals of Europe , during which he noted both good and bad design elements of cathedrals in preparation for the building of the Washington National Cathedral . Also returning on the same voyage were Admiral Charles Sperry and Lieutenant Daniel W. <unk> of the U.S. Navy , and Brigadier General Robert O 'Reilly , the Surgeon General of the U.S. Army ; all were American delegates to the Second Geneva Convention . It was not the first trip on Kroonland for either Satterlee and O 'Reilly . Satterlee had traveled on the liner the previous May to visit the spa town of Bad Nauheim in Hesse ; O 'Reilly had been on the November 1904 trip in which Kroonland had been reported as sunk . 
 Kroonland was the scene of an attempted murder @-@ suicide in October 1908 . Two acquaintances in steerage had an argument over a young female second @-@ class passenger that both men knew . One man threw a knife at the other — only slightly wounding him — and then fled and jumped over the railing into the English Channel near Dover . U.S. Senator Benjamin Tillman and his wife were aboard the liner at the time and saw the young man jump overboard . Although the ship lowered a boat to look for him , no trace of him was found , and he was presumed drowned . 
 American actresses Kitty Cheatham and Isabel Irving — each married to a different man named " W. H. Thompson " — traveled on Kroonland in May 1910 . Alerted to each other 's presence when mail addressed to " Mrs. W. H. Thompson " was confused , the actresses — old friends , having both worked in the theatre company of Augustin Daly — shared a state room for the voyage . Later that month , the ship was the official " World Missionary Conference Steamship " for delegates and representatives on their way to the World Missionary Conference in Edinburgh , Scotland . Honda <unk> , said to be the only Japanese Methodist Episcopal bishop , was among those on the liner when she sailed on 31 May . News accounts reported on some of the unusual activities aboard Kroonland during this trip . Among them were morning devotional services held daily in the ship 's dining room , and the spontaneous singing of hymns on deck every evening . 
 Kroonland was tangentially involved in a more sinister affair in July 1910 . American physician Hawley Crippen and his lover , Ethel La Neve , had fled England after the circumstances around his wife 's death were questioned . After a body was found in the basement of Crippen 's North London residence , Scotland Yard Chief Inspector Walter Dew sought the couple for murder charges . One theory had the couple sailing from Dover on Kroonland , but when inspected in New York on arrival , Crippen and Le Neve were not to be found . The fleeing couple had instead sailed from Antwerp on the Canadian Pacific liner Montrose . Crippen , identified during Montrose 's crossing , was arrested , convicted of his wife 's murder , and hanged ; La Neve was acquitted . 
 The American novelist Theodore Dreiser , returning from an extended European tour in April 1912 , briefly considered returning on RMS Titanic , but instead sailed two days later on the American @-@ flagged — and less expensive — Kroonland . Dreiser recounted the gloomy mood of Kroonland 's passengers after hearing the news of Titanic 's sinking , observing that the " terror of the sea had come swiftly and directly home to all " . On Kroonland 's next return trip to New York , Horst von der Goltz , a self @-@ described German secret agent , eluded German authorities by working as a steward in steerage aboard the liner . 
 = = American Line service , 1914 – 1915 = = 
 With the German invasion of Belgium in early August 1914 , Kroonland was switched to New York – Liverpool service . After two circuits on that route , IMM announced that the ship would be moved to service in the Mediterranean to attract business to offset that lost because of the war . Sailing from New York on 15 October for Gibraltar , Naples , and Piraeus , Kroonland became what IMM called the first large , American @-@ flagged steamer " to engage in trade with the far corners of the Mediterranean " . Along with passengers , the ship carried a cargo of rubber and 1 @,@ 500 long tons ( 1 @,@ 520 t ) of copper destined for Italy . 
 On 28 October , British authorities detained the ship at Gibraltar . Because neutral Italy did not restrict the shipment of copper ( which could be used in war munitions ) to Germany or Austria @-@ Hungary , the British claimed the right to detain the ship — a claim disputed by the U.S. State Department . Kroonland was allowed to resume her journey on 8 November after the copper and rubber were unloaded and taken to a prize court . The ship arrived at Naples on 11 November , then completed the rest of her Mediterranean trek . Returning to New York , she carried the new minister from Bulgaria to the United States , arriving on 4 December . IMM had advertised that Kroonland would sail the Mediterranean route again in December , but the liner was removed from the route . 
 In late January 1915 , Kroonland departed on a business tour of South America under charter to the American Trade Tour Company . The tour was designed as a showcase for American companies hoping to expand into South America , and Kroonland circumnavigated that continent , traveling over 15 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 28 @,@ 000 km ) in 82 days . During the voyage , the liner docked at various ports where businessmen or trade representatives , like the Babson Statistical Organization , made sales pitches and showed films of factories to potential customers aboard Kroonland . During this South American foray , the ship sailed westbound through the Panama Canal on 2 February , becoming the largest passenger ship to transit the canal to that date . Also on the trip , while transiting the Straits of Magellan in late February , Kroonland passed British cruiser Bristol refueling from a collier , and , on 26 February , when entering the harbor of Punta Arenas , Chile , passed the departing HMS Glasgow , on the hunt for the German cruiser Dresden . Kroonland returned to New York on 14 April . 
 = = Panama Pacific Line service , 1915 = = 
 In May 1915 , Kroonland and sister ship Finland were chartered to the Panama Pacific Line for the long @-@ planned service between New York and San Francisco via the Panama Canal . Kroonland departed from New York for California on 22 May and counted 50 honeymooning couples and a large cargo of flour from St. Paul , Minnesota , among her payload . The intercoastal trip took about 17 days each way and the ships called at either Los Angeles or San Diego on eastbound and westbound trips . With two ships on the route , one ship departed from either New York or San Francisco about every three weeks . The service was marketed as the ideal manner to visit the Panama @-@ California Exposition in San Diego and the Panama @-@ Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco . At the San Francisco exhibition , a detailed model of Kroonland was one of ten that comprised a part of IMM 's 6 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 600 m2 ) exhibit in the Palace of Transportation . 
 Frequent and progressively worse landslides in the canal disrupted Kroonland 's and Finland 's service . In August 1915 , Kroonland 's arrival in New York was delayed a day by a Gaillard Cut slide . In early September , both ships were delayed ten days while waiting for the canal to be dredged after another slide . In early October , another landslide in the Gaillard Cut — this one in excess of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 760 @,@ 000 m3 ) of mud and dirt — closed the canal , and it was expected that it might remain closed for as long as ten months . Kroonland was en route to the canal from San Francisco , while Finland was at the canal 's eastern terminus , Colón . After Kroonland arrived at the canal 's western end at Balboa , the two liners exchanged passengers — including former First Lady Helen Taft and her daughter , Helen — by rail across the isthmus . 
 = = American Line service , 1915 – 1917 = = 
 The delay caused by the October slide in the Panama Canal created uncertainty for the immediate future of Kroonland . Her sister ship Finland was transferred to a New York – London route almost immediately after the canal 's closure , but Kroonland was " trapped " on the west side of the continent . By early November , Kroonland — loaded with cargo destined for the United Kingdom , and sailing under the banner of the American Line — departed San Francisco for London , via the Straits of Magellan . On 21 December , the liner arrived at Rio de Janeiro after having run aground , but was found to be undamaged . Continuing on to London , Kroonland departed for New York on 30 January 1916 . Although plans were announced in mid 1916 for the two sister ships to return to the Panama Pacific Line , and to add the Hawaiian port of Honolulu to the canal route , both ships remained in North Atlantic service . 
 On 20 February , Kroonland , continuing to sail for the American Line , returned to New York – Liverpool service after an absence of 18 months . As a ship of the still @-@ neutral United States sailing in a war zone , Kroonland had her name painted in large letters on each side of her hull . The name was flanked on either side by large American flags and kept illuminated at night . In June , she carried US $ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 of Argentine gold from London for deposit with the Guaranty Trust Company of New York . On late 1916 , a cook aboard Kroonland was arrested for smuggling feathers , wings , and heads of birds of paradise and crowned pigeons . The man , who was paid $ 300 for each load of feathers , smuggled in at least three loads of the avian contraband before his arrest . In January 1917 , a jumble sale held in the saloon on Kroonland raised £ 73 15s 11d for The Times Fund , for the benefit of the British Red Cross and the Order of St. John . 
 While returning from Liverpool in early February 1917 , passengers and crew on Kroonland witnessed the German U @-@ boat UC @-@ 46 sink the Dutch ship Gamma off the Irish coast . On 1 February 1917 , at around 15 : 30 , passengers and crew saw the German submarine overtake and stop the Dutch freighter . At about 16 : 15 , the U @-@ boat , by then on the far side of the Dutch ship and out of view from Kroonland , fired three shots from her deck gun . Gamma immediately began listing to port and sank within five minutes . Kroonland was less than 5 nautical miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km ) away , and was prepared to rescue the crew of the sunken ship , but stopped when the German submarine took Gamma 's lifeboat in tow . Four days later , a suspected submarine was seen 5 nautical miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km ) off Kroonland 's port side , and there were other reports of a ship that passengers took to be a German commerce raider or submarine tender . 
 Because Germany had resumed unrestricted submarine warfare again on 1 February , Kroonland was laid up for almost two months at the American Line piers in New York , along with sister ship Finland and three other vessels . During this forced downtime , Kroonland was converted from coal burning to oil burning , a long @-@ awaited modification that had been announced in October 1915 . The conversion reduced the number of stokers needed from 75 to 12 , lowering Kroonland 's payroll . Because fuel oil was stored inside the double bottom of her hull , her cargo capacity was increased through the elimination of her coal bunkers . The labor savings and the additional freight revenues from the increased cargo space resulted in a net gain of $ 25 @,@ 000 income per trip . 
 = = Troopship duties = = 
 Kroonland served as a troopship for about the next year . In early March , U.S. Navy ordnance officers inspected Kroonland and took measurements in preparation to arm her for defense against submarine attacks . On 13 March , she was assigned guns by the Navy , becoming one of the first seven ships to be armed . With her arming complete , and carrying an armed naval guard to man the guns , Kroonland sailed for Liverpool on 25 March 1917 . Twelve days later , the United States formally declared war on Germany . 
 On the morning of 20 May , while the liner steamed toward Liverpool through a heavy fog , a torpedo struck her without exploding . Two minutes later her lookouts spotted a submarine bearing down on Kroonland so close alongside the liner that her guns could not be depressed enough to open fire on the raider . Although the U @-@ boat , apparently also taken by surprise , reversed her screws and tried to turn to avoid a collision , she lightly struck the liner 's hull and scraped along her side before diving out of sight . Meanwhile , two more torpedoes came within some 20 feet ( 6 m ) of hitting Kroonland 's stern . That afternoon the liner sighted another submarine , surfaced some 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) off her port quarter . Kroonland immediately began shelling the U @-@ boat , forcing the submarine to dive for safety . In early June , this failed torpedo attack on the ship made front page news in American newspapers . 
 In September , elements of the U.S. 42nd Infantry Division sailed from New York to Halifax on Kroonland . The ship sailed from Halifax on 30 September in an Allied convoy with the American ship Mongolia and Commonwealth ships Carmania ( which had led the Volturno rescue in 1913 ) , Anchises , Canada , Grampian , <unk> , Themistocles , Victoria , Carpathia , Medic , Miltiades , <unk> , and Ruahine . Two days out from Halifax , the last five ships split off from the convoy and headed to Scotland ; Kroonland 's group sailed to Liverpool . 
 On 15 October 1917 , the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) requisitioned all American passenger ships over 2 @,@ 500 GT for use by the government in the war effort . Though it is not clear what immediate impact this had on Kroonland , it is known that the liner was operating as a U.S. Army transport ( under the name USAT Kroonland ) by February 1918 , when she was loaded with materiel and departed New York for Saint @-@ Nazaire , France . 
 In February 1918 the USSB assigned Kroonland to the transport fleet as an U.S. Army Chartered Transport ( <unk> ) , and after her return from France on 9 April , she was converted to a troop transport in New York by the William J. Kennedy Company . A typical conversion from passenger liner to troop transport involved having all of the second- and third @-@ class accommodations ripped out and replaced with berths for troops . Cooking and toilet facilities also had to be greatly expanded to handle the large numbers of men aboard . 
 = = U.S. Navy transport duties = = 
 After problems with crew discipline aboard Army transports Antilles and Finland when they were torpedoed , the U.S. Navy , led by the recommendations of Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves , insisted that all troop transports be manned entirely by Navy personnel . This was accomplished soon after , to avoid the need for what Gleaves called " ignorant and unreliable men " who were " the sweepings of the docks " . Accordingly , Kroonland was handed over to the Navy on 22 April and commissioned the same day , with Commander Manley H. Simons in command . 
 = = = Transporting troops to France = = = 
 USS Kroonland was assigned to the Cruiser and Transport Force after being commissioned . The ship departed New York on 30 April with the transports Matsonia , Manchuria , and Finland . Martha Washington and Powhatan — two transports that sailed from Newport News , Virginia — rendezvoused with Kroonland 's group . South Dakota provided the convoy with protection until its arrival in France on 12 May . Kroonland returned to New York on 1 June . 
 Kroonland next left New York on 15 June with Finland , DeKalb , George Washington , Covington , Rijndam , the Italian steamer Dante Alighieri , and the British steamer Vauban and met up with the Newport News portion of the convoy — consisting of Lenape , Wilhelmina , Princess Matoika , Pastores , and the British troopship Czar ( another fellow Volturno rescuer ) — the next morning and set out for France . The convoy was escorted by the cruisers North Carolina and Frederick , and the destroyers Stevens and Fairfax ; the battleship Texas and several other destroyers joined in escort duties for the group for a time . The convoy had a false alarm when a floating barrel was mistaken for submarine , but the otherwise uneventful trip concluded at Brest on the afternoon of 27 June . 
 On 10 July , as Kroonland steamed homeward from France , a lookout spotted a periscope rising from the water about 200 yards ( 180 m ) away . Kroonland opened fire and the fourth shot from her No. 4 gun " burst with a tremendous cloud of dirty blue smoke " exactly on the periscope . The submarine zig @-@ zagged " erratically back and forth until she was directly in the disturbed water " of Kroonland 's wake . The transport continued firing until the submarine disappeared , leaving an oil slick which could be seen for at least 15 minutes . Kroonland arrived safely in New York on 13 July . 
 On 26 July , Kroonland , loaded with 3 @,@ 248 officers and men , departed on her next trip to France . In the company of Finland and the Italian steamer Taormina , she met up with Pocahontas , Susquehanna , and the Italian steamers Duca d 'Aosta and Caserta from Newport News . The cruisers Pueblo , Huntington , and destroyers Rathburne and Colhoun escorted the transports . Gordon Van Kleeck , a private in Company F of the U.S. 51st Pioneer Infantry , one of the units aboard Kroonland on this trip , recorded his day @-@ to @-@ day activities in a journal . He stated that the soldiers wore overalls rather than uniforms , and were required to wear life jackets at all times . During the early mornings , the most dangerous time for submarines according to Van Kleeck , the soldiers had to stand by their life rafts until the sun was completely up . Bathing facilities were too small , so several times during the trip the soldiers gathered on deck for salt water baths , which consisted of a hose turned on them by the ship 's crew . On 2 August , Finland developed engine trouble and fell back from the convoy , but by the next day , she and a destroyer that stayed with her had rejoined the convoy . The convoy arrived in Brest on 7 August , and Kroonland arrived back in the United States on 19 August . 
 After embarking 3 @,@ 334 soldiers , Kroonland began her next crossing on 30 August when she sailed from New York with Susquehanna , Harrisburg and Plattsburg to join the Newport News contingent of Duca d 'Aosta , Caserta , and America . Kroonland 's convoy was escorted by Frederick and Colhoun . As with other Navy ships throughout 1918 , Kroonland was not immune to the worldwide Spanish flu pandemic . On this particular crossing , two of her crewmen were felled by the disease as her convoy reached France on 12 September . Kroonland returned to New York on 27 September . 
 At 20 : 00 on 7 October , Kroonland departed New York on her fifth Navy voyage with 2 @,@ 567 men . She joined Caserta and the British steamer Euripides in rendezvousing with Tenadores , Susquehanna , America , and Czar from Newport News . The cruisers Seattle and Rochester and the destroyers Murray and Fairfax served as convoy escorts for the group , which arrived in France on 20 October . Kroonland arrived in New York on 3 November , and was in port when the Armistice was signed on 11 November . In total , Kroonland carried 14 @,@ 125 troops to France during the five trips of her Navy career . 
 = = = Returning troops home = = = 
 At war 's end , the task of bringing home American soldiers began almost immediately . Kroonland did her part by carrying home 26 @,@ 152 passengers in eight trips . The ship departed from Brest in late November with her first load of nearly 2 @,@ 000 wounded and convalescing soldiers , many of whom were from the U.S. 76th Infantry Division . The former liner arrived at the Quarantine Station on 10 December 1918 , and docked in New York the next day . One of the men aboard was Captain Walter Camp who had been wounded and gassed in the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive ; Camp was the son of the Yale University football coach of the same name . Another passenger on board was Sarah Wilmer , an American YWCA front @-@ line worker who had become lost in the Argonne forest and gassed when a German shell exploded nearby . Before departing on her next voyage , Kroonland hosted a party for 150 newsboys from New Jersey at her Hoboken , New Jersey , pier on Christmas Day . With a Christmas tree in the troops ' mess , the newsboys were treated to a dinner and entertainment by the ship 's band , and all received presents . 
 Kroonland arrived at Newport News on 18 February with 2 @,@ 805 passengers , including units from the U.S. 36th Infantry Division , after a rough trip from Saint @-@ Nazaire . On her next voyage , she carried another 2 @,@ 943 officers and men from Saint @-@ Nazaire to Newport News , arriving there on 24 March . The 132nd Regiment of the 61st Field Artillery Brigade returned on the ship , and brigade historian Rex F. Harlow called Kroonland " probably the best vessel on which any units of the brigade returned to America " . 
 On 18 April , Kroonland began her next homeward journey , embarking several companies of the 111th Infantry Regiment of the U.S. 28th Infantry Division among the 3 @,@ 100 troops carried . Though the fighting was over , the men still wore life jackets for the first three days at sea amidst fears of striking floating mines . George W. Cooper , historian of the 2nd Battalion of the 111th Infantry , reported that some of the men had to serve as stokers during the trip because of a " shortage of help " . In the middle of the crossing , the ship " sprung a leak " and took on 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) of water ; she had a list for a day or so , until repairs were made . The troops later disembarked at New York on 29 April . 
 Kroonland returned to Saint @-@ Nazaire in May and loaded Major General Joseph E. Kuhn and some 3 @,@ 000 men of his U.S. 79th Infantry Division , which included the 304th Engineer Regiment , and departed France on 18 May . The band of the 304th Engineers gave concerts on deck every evening on the voyage home to entertain the men . Though initially bound for Newport News , Kroonland 's crew received orders in mid ocean to head instead to New York , where they arrived on 29 May . After completing another passage to Newport News in late June , Kroonland sailed on 19 July with 3 @,@ 642 passengers — including officers , men , thirteen war brides , and one war baby — from Saint @-@ Nazaire , in the final transport departure from that port before it was closed as a port of embarkation by U.S. military authorities . Among the passengers was Brigadier General Samuel D. <unk> , the founder of the United States Tank Corps . 
 On 21 August , the USSB announced that Kroonland would be released from government service after surveys for repairs had been completed . After leaving New York on 10 August , the ship was in the middle of what would be her final trip returning soldiers . After arriving at Brest , 1 @,@ 532 officers and men boarded Kroonland for New York , where the transport arrived on 10 September . Also on board was Michael Gilhooley , a 15 @-@ year @-@ old stowaway making his fourth unsuccessful attempt to sneak into the United States aboard a Navy transport . 
 The ship was decommissioned and returned to the USSB on 13 September , and returned to International Mercantile Marine shortly thereafter . In her eight trips returning troops , Kroonland — affectionately called the " Empress of the Seas " by her crew — averaged just under 39 days per turnaround , beating the overall average of all ships by almost a full day , and edging out sister ship Finland by less than that . 
 = = Red Star Line service , 1920 – 1923 = = 
 After her return to International Mercantile Marine ( IMM ) , the ship underwent a refit at the W. & A. Fletcher Marine Works yard in Hoboken that outfitted her for 242 first- , 310 second- , and 876 third @-@ class passengers . On 8 January 1920 , while Kroonland was still under repair , the American Line ship St. Louis , berthed next to her at the Fletcher yard , caught fire . In the multi @-@ alarm fire , firefighters believed that St. Louis was a lost cause , and so focused their efforts on saving Kroonland . At one point , St. Louis heeled over and leaned on Kroonland but the only resulting damages were scorch marks on her side . 
 Kroonland resumed her civilian career in April 1920 , sailing once again for the Red Star Line on the New York – Antwerp route . She sailed from Pier 61 on the North River opposite sister ships Finland and Zeeland and the newer Lapland until early 1923 . Rough weather on the North Atlantic took its toll on Kroonland while sailing this route . A storm off Sable Island in December 1920 was so intense that the liner was only able to travel 126 nautical miles ( 233 km ) during one 24 @-@ hour stretch and nearly exhausted her fuel supply . When the liner arrived in New York , tugs were required to tow her from the quarantine station to the pier . Heavy seas in another storm in October 1921 broke Kroonland 's port propeller shaft 350 nautical miles ( 650 km ) past Sandy Hook . She returned to New York at 8 knots ( 15 km / h ) and transferred most of the passengers to Lapland . Another eastbound crossing four months later was marked by almost continuous gales with winds up to 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) ; the liner arrived at Plymouth covered in ice and snow . 
 Kroonland was also involved in several non @-@ weather @-@ related events . On 12 November 1920 , after departing Antwerp for New York , she collided with a Dutch tug in the Scheldt , killing two of the tug 's crew . In March 1921 , a Czechoslovakian woman gave birth to fraternal twins on board the liner shortly after she and her husband sailed from Antwerp . Because the twins were born on a U.S.-flagged vessel , they were automatically American citizens . On 10 June 1922 , The New York Times reported that Charles Simmons , Kroonland 's Chief Steward , was found dead in his bunk . Crewmen aboard the ship , which had been docked in New York since 4 June , said Simmons had been seen on deck in apparently good health the day before . The medical examiner nevertheless asked police to investigate , because it appeared to him that Simmons had been dead for three to four days . During an August eastbound crossing , Kroonland stood by for two hours after receiving a report of an explosion and fire on RMS Adriatic , some 70 nautical miles ( 130 km ) behind . The gas explosion in one of Adriatic 's forward cargo holds killed five crewmen and seriously wounded three others . It also spawned a fire that was quickly extinguished and left little damage . Offers of help from ten liners ( including Kroonland ) were politely declined and Adriatic arrived in New York three days later . In October , U.S. Federal judge Learned Hand issued a restraining order preventing the Prohibition @-@ related seizure of alcohol aboard Kroonland , Finland , and St. Paul . IMM had sought the order to enable her to continue to carry Italian third @-@ class passengers ; Italian law required a minimum number of a ship 's crew to be Italian , with Italian wine of at least 12 % alcohol provided for them . 
 Kroonland also carried some notable passengers during her time on this route including a majority of the U.S. delegates to the International Chamber of Commerce for its meeting in Paris in June 1920 . Among those on board were Myron T. Herrick , former U.S. Ambassador to France ; Paul M. Warburg , former member of the Federal Reserve Board ; and 14 current and former directors of the United States Chamber of Commerce . Dr. Samuel Eyde , the newly appointed Norwegian Minister to the United States , sailed for his diplomatic post in December on Kroonland . On the same trip , Max Goldberg , a 14 @-@ year @-@ old flower delivery boy , returned from an accidental roundtrip , begun in New York when the gangway was raised and the ship departed while he was making a last @-@ minute delivery . Four of the United States ' seven delegates to the 19th Inter @-@ Parliamentary Union Convention in Stockholm — Congressmen Alben W. Barkley and Edwin B. Brooks , and Senators Thomas J. Walsh and William B. McKinley — returned on Kroonland in September 1921 . 
 Passengers were not the ship 's only cargo during this time . The New York press reported on gold deposits carried to the United States on the liner several times on the Antwerp route . In a storm @-@ tossed December 1920 voyage , for example , she carried $ 1 @,@ 650 @,@ 000 in gold , and the following June she carried £ 100 @,@ 000 gold to the Equitable Trust Company in New York . Another notable cargo arrived in New York in November 1922 , when Kroonland brought 840 @,@ 000 pounds ( 380 @,@ 000 kg ) of cheese from Switzerland . The shipment was said to be the first big shipment from that country since before World War I. A more unwelcome cargo was carried in March 1921 , when a Hungarian immigrant in steerage was found to have typhoid fever . Discovery of the disease necessitated that all 731 steerage passengers be quarantined indefinitely . 
 Kroonland began her last voyage on the Antwerp route in January 1923 , after which she underwent a refit during the first half of 1923 . The ship was converted to <unk> and third @-@ class passengers only , and was painted white . In preparation for her announced return to the Panama Pacific Line in October 1923 , more refrigeration and cool air space were added for transporting Southern California agricultural products . 
 After this refit , the ship was briefly assigned to the American Line for three roundtrips on a New York to Hamburg route , with intermediate stops at Plymouth and Cherbourg . On her first Hamburg trip , she carried American comedic actress Florence Shirley and her husband , headed for a European vacation . Cecil Arden , a mezzo @-@ soprano with the Metropolitan Opera , and botanist Otto Warburg sailed on the same trip . 
 = = Panama Pacific Line service , 1923 – 1925 = = 
 In April 1923 , IMM announced that Kroonland and sister ship Finland would be returned to the Panama Pacific Line beginning in late September , sailing from New York to San Francisco via Havana , the Panama Canal , and Los Angeles , with Los Angeles being the west coast hub of operations . On 18 October , Kroonland departed on her first voyage on the route since 1915 . Kroonland arrived in Los Angeles Harbor on 3 November amidst fanfare , becoming the largest liner to date to enter that harbor . 
 In contrast to her time on the North Atlantic , Kroonland encountered few weather or mechanical delays on the coast @-@ to @-@ coast route . In December 1923 , however , the ship was delayed one day by unusually heavy seas and gales off Baja California . Another delay in October 1924 proved to be fatal , according to the ship 's physician . An arrival two days late , caused by adverse currents north of Panama , cost a female passenger her life . Had the ship not been delayed , the physician believed , prompt hospital care could have saved her . On this same trip , Kroonland passed through a " hurricane zone " but was not adversely affected by the storm . 
 In December 1924 , the Panama Pacific Line announced that it would add Mongolia to the New York – California route in February to replace Kroonland . Even though press accounts reported as late as March 1925 that Kroonland had sailed her last on the route , she continued carrying passengers and cargo through at least June 1925 because of booming business . Although plans had been announced to convert Kroonland and Finland to freighters upon the delivery of two new ships ordered for the route in late 1924 , there is no evidence that this was ever carried out . 
 = = = Notable passengers = = = 
 Kroonland carried her share of notable passengers during her second stint for the Panama Pacific Line . On her first voyage , passengers included American Modernist poet Wallace Stevens and his wife , Elsie . After transiting the Panama Canal , the liner headed north along the western coast of Mexico . The ship passed the Gulf and Isthmus of Tehuantepec in early November , inspiring Stevens to later pen the poem " Sea Surface Full Of Clouds " . First published in the July 1924 issue of literary magazine The Dial , it was later included in the 1931 edition of Stevens ' <unk> . Each of the five stanzas begins with the line " In that November off Tehuantepec " and is a different portrayal of the surface of the sea . The poem has been called one of Stevens ' " most persuasive statements of the imagination 's powers " , and considered " the most perfect example of a ' pure poem ' " . 
 Other notable passengers included Brooklyn Dodgers shortstop Ray E. French , who sailed with his wife to their home in California on the same voyage as Stevens . California artist William Barr , American author Frederick O 'Brien , and actress Mary Carr all sailed on Kroonland in December 1923 . In February 1924 , Daniel Willard , president of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad , sailed from New York to Los Angeles . Acknowledging that the Panama Canal had " detract [ ed ] volumes of freight " from railroads , Willard said that there was no cause for alarm because the railroad business was booming . In January 1925 , Gene Byrnes , creator of the comic strip Reg <unk> Fellers , sailed from New York to Los Angeles with his wife . On the same voyage , University of Southern California president Rufus B. von <unk> boarded Kroonland at Panama after attending the Pan @-@ American Scientific Congress in Lima . In mid @-@ June the same year , short story author and screenwriter H. C. Witwer and his family returned to New York aboard the ship . 
 = = American Line service , 1925 – 1926 = = 
 In October 1925 , the American Line announced plans for the liner to sail on a weekly New York – Miami route . Kroonland , supplanted H. F. Alexander of the Admiral Line as the largest ship in Miami service , and sailed from Pier 62 in New York on Thursdays , arrived and departed Miami on Sundays , and returned to New York on Wednesdays . Though Kroonland 's passenger capacity was potentially much larger , she was outfitted for 500 passengers in first class only . She sailed on her first voyage with 400 passengers , including American professional golfer Gene Sarazen , on 10 December . 
 By the time the seasonal service to Miami ended in late March 1926 , Kroonland had carried 11 @,@ 000 passengers on the route . Though plans were announced for the liner to resume the route the following winter , this did not happen . IMM offered no reasons , but conditions in Miami at the end of 1926 were very different from the previous year . The wild South Florida real estate boom had collapsed in mid 1926 , and the Great Miami Hurricane struck on 18 September , killing more than 325 and leaving as many as 50 @,@ 000 residents homeless , while causing some $ 100 million damage ( just over $ 2 billion in 2005 dollars ) . With no place to put the aging ship , IMM laid up Kroonland in Hoboken . 
 The ship was later sold to shipbreakers in Italy and departed the United States for the last time on 29 January 1927 . After delivering a cargo of grain to her old homeport of Antwerp , she was taken to Genoa and scrapped . According to an Associated Press report , Kroonland had completed 234 voyages totaling 1 @,@ 635 @,@ 468 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 028 @,@ 887 km ) during the course of her career without serious accident . 
 = Ara Parseghian = 
