 Ara Raoul Parseghian ( born May 21 , 1923 ) is a former American football player and coach who guided the University of Notre Dame to national championships in 1966 and 1973 . He is noted for bringing Notre Dame 's football program from years of futility back into a national contender in 1964 and is widely regarded alongside Knute Rockne and Frank Leahy as a part of the " Holy Trinity " of Notre Dame head coaches . 
 Parseghian grew up in Akron , Ohio and played football starting in his junior year of high school . He enrolled at the University of Akron , but soon quit to join the U.S. Navy for two years during World War II . After the war , he finished his college career at Miami University in Ohio , and went on to play halfback for the Cleveland Browns of the All @-@ America Football Conference in 1948 and 1949 . Cleveland won the league championship both of those years . 
 His playing career cut short by a hip injury , Parseghian left the Browns and took a job as an assistant coach at Miami . When head coach Woody Hayes left in 1951 to coach at Ohio State University , Parseghian took over his job . He stayed in that position until 1956 , when he was hired as head coach at Northwestern University in Illinois . In eight seasons there , he amassed a win @-@ loss @-@ tie record of 36 – 35 – 1 and helped turn a perennial loser into a consistent contender in the national polls . Parseghian 's success attracted the interest of the University of Notre Dame , which had not posted a winning record in five straight seasons . He joined as coach in 1964 and quickly turned the program around , coming close to capturing a national championship in his first year . He proceeded to win two national titles in 11 seasons as coach of the Notre Dame Fighting Irish , a period often referred to as " the Era of Ara " . He never had a losing season at Notre Dame and posted an overall record of 95 – 17 – 4 , giving him the third @-@ most wins of any coach in school history after Rockne and Lou Holtz . 
 Parseghian quit coaching in 1974 and began a broadcasting career calling college football games for ABC and CBS . He also dedicated himself to medical causes later in life after his daughter was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis and three of his grandchildren died of a rare genetic disease . Parseghian was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame as a coach in 1980 . His career coaching record is 170 – 58 – 6 . 
 = = Early life and high school = = 
 Parseghian was the youngest of three children born to an Armenian father and a French mother in Akron , Ohio . His father , Michael , had come to the United States from Turkey in 1915 , fleeing the Armenian Genocide during World War I and settling in part of the country where there was a large Armenian population . Despite his mother 's protectiveness , Parseghian became involved in sports from an early age , and developed a reputation as the toughest kid in his class . He was hired by Akron 's Board of Education in the eighth grade to patrol his school 's grounds at night to deter vandals . 
 Parseghian played basketball at the local YMCA , but did not play organized football until his junior year at South High School in Akron because his mother would not allow him to participate in contact sports . He joined his high school team , coached by Frank " Doc " <unk> , initially without his parents ' permission . 
 = = College and professional career = = 
 After graduating in 1942 , Parseghian enrolled at the University of Akron . American involvement in World War II had intensified after the Attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 , however , and he quit school to join the U.S. Navy . The Navy transferred him for training to Naval Station Great Lakes near Chicago , where Paul Brown was coaching a service football team . Brown was a well @-@ known high school coach in Ohio , having led his Massillon Washington High School teams to a series of state championships . Parseghian was named the team 's starting fullback before the 1944 season , but he was sidelined with an ankle injury and did not play in any games as Great Lakes amassed a 9 – 2 – 1 win @-@ loss @-@ tie record and was ranked 17th in the nation in the AP Poll . Parseghian later said that despite not playing , watching Brown 's methodical and strict coaching methods – and the ease with which he commanded players much larger than he was – was a " priceless " experience . 
 After his military service , Parseghian enrolled at Miami University in Ohio and played halfback on the school 's football team in 1946 and 1947 under coach Sid Gillman . As with Brown , Parseghian paid close attention to Gillman , a post @-@ war football pioneer who helped popularize deep downfield passes as the T formation came into vogue . He was named an All @-@ Ohio halfback and a Little All @-@ American by sportswriters in 1947 . 
 Parseghian was selected by the Pittsburgh Steelers of the National Football League in the 13th round of the 1947 draft . He was also selected by the Cleveland Browns of the rival All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) , a team coached by Paul Brown , his old Great Lakes coach . Parseghian left Miami with six semester credit hours remaining and signed with the Browns . 
 Parseghian played halfback and defensive back for the Browns starting in 1948 . While he only started one game that season , he was part of a potent offensive backfield that featured quarterback Otto Graham and fullback Marion Motley . The Browns won all of their games and a third straight AAFC championship in 1948 . Parseghian suffered a serious injury to his hip in the second game of the 1949 season against the Baltimore Colts , however , ending his playing career . He stayed with the Browns for the rest of the season , and the team went on to win another AAFC championship . With the Browns he had 44 carries for 166 yards , three receptions for 33 yards , scored two touchdowns , and intercepted one pass . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 = = = Miami of Ohio = = = 
 While his injury and the end of his professional career were a source of frustration , Parseghian soon got the chance to try coaching instead . Woody Hayes , the head coach back at Miami , contacted him about a job as coach of the freshman team . He was recommended for the position by athletic director John Brickels , who had been an assistant coach with the Browns in 1948 . Parseghian led the freshmen to a 4 – 0 record in the 1950 season , and was chosen the following year as Hayes 's successor when Hayes departed to become head coach at Ohio State University . 
 Parseghian 's teams at Miami consistently did well in the Mid @-@ American Conference , posting a 7 – 3 record in 1951 and improving to 8 – 1 the following year . Miami 's Redskins ( now known as RedHawks ) were conference champions in 1954 and in 1955 , when they went undefeated . Parseghian 's success , which included two wins over larger Big Ten Conference schools , raised his profile nationally as a head coaching prospect . In late 1955 , he was hired to coach at Northwestern University in Evanston , Illinois , one of the Big Ten schools Miami had beaten . Parseghian compiled a 39 – 6 – 1 record in five seasons at Miami . 
 = = = Northwestern = = = 
 When Parseghian arrived at Northwestern , its football program was in transition . Bob Voigts had quit as head coach in February 1955 , leaving his assistant Lou Saban to guide the team . Under Saban , a former Browns teammate of Parseghian 's , Northwestern finished at 0 – 8 – 1 , the worst @-@ ever record in its history at the time . Ted <unk> , the school 's athletic director , resigned after the season under pressure from alumni and was replaced by Stu Holcomb . One of Holcomb 's first moves was to fire Saban and replace him with Parseghian . 
 Parseghian was the 20th head coach of the Northwestern Wildcats football team , and was the youngest coach in the Big Ten when he took the job at 32 years old . His Northwestern career began in 1956 with just one win in his first six games . The Wildcats put together three wins at the end of the season , however , and finished with a 4 – 4 – 1 record . Northwestern proceeded to lose all nine of its games in the 1957 season . Bo Schembechler -- a member of the 1957 Northwestern staff and teammate of Parshegian 's at Miami -- called Parshegian 's performance during the 1957 season the best job of coaching Schembechler ever witnessed . Despite the losses ( many of them by close margins ) , Parshegian kept his team united and focused . That crucible set the stage for a much more successful campaign in 1958 , when Northwestern finished with a 5 – 4 record that included victories over conference rivals Michigan and Ohio State . 
 Northwestern began the 1959 season in the top ten in the AP Poll , and began with a 45 – 13 win over Oklahoma , then the top @-@ ranked team in the country . It was the first of a string of victories that propelled Northwestern to the number @-@ two spot in the AP Poll . Led by quarterback John Talley and star halfback Ron Burton , the team beat Michigan again and won a match @-@ up in October against Notre Dame , a school Northwestern had not played since 1948 . Three straight losses at the end of the season ended the team 's run at the conference championship , however . 
 The following four seasons brought a mix of success and challenges . Parseghian 's best year at Northwestern was in 1962 , when the team finished at 7 – 2 . Parseghian was a shrewd recruiter , using Northwestern 's small budget to find versatile players overlooked by the bigger rival programs . In 1962 , he put his faith in sophomore quarterback Tom Myers to guide the team . Myers , aided by a big offensive line and by star receiver Paul Flatley , led a passing attack that helped Northwestern to the top of the AP Poll in the middle of the season following wins against Ohio State and Notre Dame . Parseghian called the close win against Hayes and Ohio State " one of Northwestern 's greatest victories " . The following week 's Notre Dame game drew a 55 @,@ 752 people , which remained the largest crowd ever to see a home game at Northwestern as of 2005 . Despite those wins , late @-@ season losses to Michigan State and Wisconsin cost the team a chance at the Big Ten championship . 
 At Northwestern , Parseghian developed a reputation as an affable , down @-@ to @-@ earth coach . While he took his job seriously , he cultivated an informal rapport with players , who called him " Ara " rather than " coach " or " Mr. Parseghian " . Given his closeness in age to many of the players , he " empathizes with us well " , Northwestern tackle Andy <unk> said in 1959 . Parseghian occasionally joined in practices with the players and organized games of touch football . He had other quirks , like lowering the intensity of practices as game day approached to let the players " build up psychologically " , something he learned from Paul Brown . 
 Parseghian remained at Northwestern for eight seasons , until 1963 . His career coaching record there was 36 – 35 – 1 . This ranks him third at Northwestern in total wins and ninth at Northwestern in winning percentage . Parseghian 's teams beat Notre Dame four straight times after their annual series was renewed in 1959 following a decade @-@ long hiatus . 
 Toward the end of his tenure at Northwestern , Parseghian grew frustrated by the school 's limited financial resources , curbs on football scholarships and academic standards for athletes that were more stringent than at other Big Ten schools . He also clashed with Holcomb , the athletic director , who told him in 1963 that his contract would not be renewed after that season despite coaching the team to within two wins of a national championship the previous year . " I took them to the top of the polls in 1962 , and that was not good enough for Northwestern " , Parseghian said many years later . 
 = = = Notre Dame = = = 
 As the end of his Northwestern career approached in November 1963 , Parseghian called Father Edmund Joyce , the vice president and chairman of the athletics board at Notre Dame , a Catholic university near South Bend , Indiana . He asked whether Hugh Devore , who was then interim head football coach , was going to be given the job on a longer @-@ term basis . When Joyce said the university was searching for a new coach , Parseghian expressed interest in the job . Joyce did not immediately seem warm to the idea , however , and Parseghian explored an offer to coach at the University of Miami , where his old friend Andy Gustafson had been promoted from head coach to athletic director . Notre Dame was also considering Dan Devine for its coaching job , but ultimately offered it to Parseghian . Parseghian waffled at first , recalling his father 's dislike of Catholics who had played a role in the Armenian deportations , but accepted in December and was given a salary of about $ 20 @,@ 000 a year ( $ 154 @,@ 587 today ) . 
 Parseghian 's candidacy for the head coaching job at Notre Dame was unusual because he was not a Notre Dame graduate , as every head coach since Knute Rockne had been . Parseghian was also an Armenian Presbyterian , making him the first non @-@ Catholic coach since Rockne , who converted in 1925 . Joyce made it clear before his hiring that he did not care about Parseghian 's religion , but simply wanted someone who could lead the football team to success . 
 As had been the case at Northwestern , Notre Dame 's football program was in a state of flux when Parseghian arrived . While Notre Dame built a proud history under Rockne and Frank Leahy , its two most successful coaches , the late 1950s and early 1960s had been a disaster . The team had finished 5 – 5 in 1962 under Joe Kuharich , who lost the confidence of his players and Notre Dame 's administrators during his four years as coach . Kuharich 's surprise departure at the end of that season to become supervisor of officials in the National Football League , a position created by his friend and NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle , left the program in disarray . Devore , a long @-@ time Notre Dame employee who had played for Rockne and coached under Leahy , was brought in to lead the team on an interim basis in 1963 . Notre Dame managed only a 2 – 7 finish that year . 
 = = = = Turnaround and the 1964 season = = = = 
 Parseghian quickly turned things around in 1964 , re @-@ establishing a sense of confidence and team spirit that had been lost under Kuharich and Devore . Practices were carefully planned and organized with the help of a coaching staff that consisted of three assistants from Northwestern and four former Notre Dame players . Parseghian listened to players ' concerns about the program and addressed them . He updated the team 's offense by favoring passing and bringing in smaller and quicker players . A rule change allowing unlimited substitutions starting in 1964 helped make this strategy successful ; fast @-@ running receivers could now be taken out of the game and rested as others replaced them . 
 Parseghian also recognized talent in quarterback John Huarte and wide receiver Jack Snow , who had been used only sparingly for two seasons by previous coaches . Huarte could throw far and accurately but was soft @-@ spoken , a trait Parseghian and his staff helped change . Snow was large for a receiver of his era , but Parseghian thought his athleticism and sure hands would make him a good wideout . Still , expectations were muted for the 1964 season : Parseghian told his coaches that the team would have a 6 – 4 record if they were lucky . Sports Illustrated predicted a 5 – 5 record at best , and the team did not rank among the top 20 programs in the country in the pre @-@ season AP Poll . 
 Notre Dame nonetheless opened the season with a 31 – 7 victory over heavily favored Wisconsin , a game in which Huarte threw for more yards than the team 's leading passer had over the entire 1963 season . Notre Dame players carried Parseghian off the field after the win , which vaulted the team to ninth place in the polls . A string of victories followed , first against Purdue and then Air Force and UCLA . Notre Dame rose to first place in the national polls following a 40 – 0 win over Navy in October . The team went undefeated until the last game of the year against USC , who won 20 – 17 in the final minutes on a touchdown pass from Craig Fertig to Rod Sherman . The loss unseated Notre Dame from the top ranking in the national polls , but the team still won the MacArthur Trophy , a championship awarded by the National Football Foundation . 
 Huarte passed for 2 @,@ 062 yards and set 12 school records in 1964 , four of which still stood as of 2009 . He also won the Heisman Trophy . Snow led the country in receptions , with 60 . Parseghian , meanwhile , won numerous coach of the year awards for engineering the turnaround , including from the American Football Coaches Association , the Football Writers Association of America , the Washington Touchdown Club , the Columbus Touchdown Club and Football News . 
 Huarte and Snow graduated after the 1964 season , and Notre Dame felt their absence the following year , posting a 7 – 2 – 1 record . While the team did not contend for a national title , defensive back Nick <unk> led the nation in punt returns and came in sixth in interceptions ; he was named a first @-@ team All @-@ American by sportswriters . 
 = = = = First national title = = = = 
 In 1966 , Parseghian guided Notre Dame to its first national championship since the Leahy era . Led by quarterback Terry Hanratty , running back Nick Eddy , star receiver Jim Seymour , and fullback Larry <unk> , the offense was best in the nation in scoring , with an average of 36 @.@ 2 points per game . The defense was second in the country in points allowed , thanks to strong performances by linebacker Jim Lynch and defensive end Alan Page . 
 The season began with eight straight victories , propelling Notre Dame to the top of the national polls . The team then faced Michigan State , which ranked second in the polls and was also undefeated . The contest , one among a number referred to as the " game of the century " , ended in a 10 – 10 tie . Parseghian was criticized for winding down the clock instead of trying to score despite having the ball in the final seconds of the game . He defended his strategy by maintaining that several key starters had been knocked out of action early in the game and that he did not want to spoil a courageous comeback from a 10 – 0 deficit by risking a turnover deep in his own territory late in the game . When Parseghian 's team beat USC 51 – 0 the following week , critics alleged that he ran up the score to impress poll voters who had split the number @-@ one ranking between Notre Dame and Michigan State following the tie . Subsequent to the USC rout , the final wire service polls gave Parseghian 's team the national championship . Nine members of the team were selected as All @-@ Americans , and Parseghian was named coach of the year by Sporting News . 
 Several winning seasons followed , but Notre Dame did not repeat as national champion in the late 1960s . The team finished with an 8 – 2 – 1 record in 1969 and was invited to play in the postseason Cotton Bowl . The school had a long @-@ standing policy in place forbidding the team from playing bowl games , but the university urgently needed funds for minority scholarships and decided to use the proceeds from the bowl to fund them . Parseghian 's team lost the game 21 – 17 to the eventual national champion Texas Longhorns . 
 = = = = Later Notre Dame career = = = = 
 Notre Dame continued to succeed under Parseghian in the early 1970s . Led by senior quarterback Joe Theismann , the team finished second in the polls in 1970 and avenged its Cotton Bowl loss , defeating the Longhorns 24 – 11 in an upset . In 1973 , Parseghian had a perfect season and won a second national championship , topped off by a 24 – 23 win over Alabama in the Sugar Bowl . Both teams were undefeated going into the game , but Alabama had held the top spot in the national polls . Parseghian was named coach of the year after the season by Football News . 
 Before the 1974 season started , six Notre Dame players were accused of rape and suspended for a year , although no charges were ultimately filed . Parseghian called the loss of the those key defensive players " a great disappointment " . Several other key players were injured . An upset loss to underdog Purdue in the third game of the season derailed the team 's hopes to repeat as national champions . The ever @-@ present pressure to win took its toll , and Parseghian privately decided in the middle of the season to resign for the sake of his health . He was also dealing with the death of three close friends that year and one of his daughters ' battle with multiple sclerosis . He officially stepped down in mid @-@ December after rumors began to surface that he was leaving for a post with another college program or professional team . He said he was " physically exhausted and emotionally drained " after 25 years of coaching and needed a break . His last game was Notre Dame 's 13 – 11 win in a rematch against Alabama in the Orange Bowl . He was succeeded by Dan Devine after 11 seasons as head coach . His record at Notre Dame was 95 – 17 – 4 , giving him the second @-@ most wins by any football coach in school history at the time behind Rockne . 
 Parseghian , who was 51 at the time , said he planned to at least a year off from coaching before considering a run at a job in the professional ranks . Rumors circulated throughout 1975 that he might return to Notre Dame , but both he and Devine denied them . He finally decided that December that he would not coach in 1976 despite reportedly being pursued by the New York Jets of the National Football League , but would instead host a television show beginning the following fall . His last coaching appearance was with the college players in the annual Chicago College All @-@ Star Game against the defending Super Bowl champion Pittsburgh Steelers on July 23 , 1976 at Chicago 's Soldier Field . The game was halted in the second half when a torrential thunderstorm broke out . Fans rushed onto the field , and play was never resumed . It was the last such game ever played . 
 During Parseghian 's tenure at Notre Dame , the school 's long @-@ dormant football rivalry with Michigan was revived through an agreement signed in 1970 . The schools , which had not met since 1943 , agreed to restart the series starting in the 1978 season . Notre Dame athletic director Moose Krause orchestrated the deal with Don Canham , his counterpart at Michigan , but Parseghian 's friendship with Wolverine head coach Bo Schembechler also played a role . Parshegian and Schembechler were teammates at Miami University in Ohio and Schembechler served on Parshegian 's staff at Northwestern in 1956 and 1957 . Schembechler told Parseghian in 1970 that he was looking forward to facing Notre Dame , but Parseghian replied that he would " never have that opportunity " . 
 While at Notre Dame , Parseghian did away with all ornamentation on players ' uniforms , eliminating shamrocks and shoulder stripes , and switched the team 's home jerseys to navy blue . The Irish never wore green jerseys during his tenure . His successful run at Notre Dame is sometimes referred to as the " Era of Ara " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Parseghian launched a broadcasting career after leaving Notre Dame . He served as a color analyst for ABC Sports from 1975 to 1981 , initially alongside Keith Jackson covering a series of regional and national college football games . He jumped to CBS Sports in 1982 , and covered college games for that network until 1988 . 
 Parseghian , who amassed a career coaching record of 170 – 58 – 6 at Miami , Northwestern and Notre Dame , was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1980 . He was inducted into the Miami University Athletic Hall of Fame as part of its charter class in 1969 , and became a member of the Indiana Football Hall of Fame in 1984 . He was also inducted into the Cotton Bowl Classic Hall of Fame in 2007 . Parseghian was awarded an honorary doctorate in humanities by Miami in 1978 and served on the school 's board of trustees between 1978 and 1987 . He also got an honorary degree from Notre Dame in 1997 and won the Amos Alonzo Stagg Award the same year for his contributions to the sport . 
 Parseghian was portrayed by his late friend Jason Miller in the 1993 film Rudy , which chronicled Rudy Ruettiger 's determination to overcome his small size and dyslexia and play for Notre Dame in 1974 . Parseghian saw Ruettiger 's drive and placed him on the scout team , but resigned at the end of the year . Devine , Parseghian 's successor , put Ruettiger in on defense at the end of the final game of the 1975 season , and Ruettiger recorded a sack . 
 Parseghian served as one of two honorary coaches along with Lou Holtz in Notre Dame 's 2007 spring game , an annual scrimmage held in April . Holtz 's Gold team defeated Parseghian 's Blue team , 10 – 6 . The same year , Notre Dame unveiled a statue in Parseghian 's honor by sculptor Jerry McKenna , depicting players carrying him off the field in triumph following the 1971 Cotton Bowl victory over Texas . In 2011 , Miami also unveiled a statue in his honor to add to the RedHawks ' Cradle of Coaches plaza . It shows him wearing a Notre Dame sweater as he kneels and looks ahead to the field . 
 Parseghian , who is married to the former Kathleen Davis , also became involved with medical causes later in life . Along with Mike and Cindy Parseghian , his son and daughter @-@ in @-@ law , he founded the Ara Parseghian Medical Research Foundation in 1994 . The foundation is seeking a cure for Niemann @-@ Pick disease Type C , a genetic disorder affecting children that causes the buildup of cholesterol in cells , resulting in damage to the nervous system and eventually death . Three of his grandchildren , Michael , Marcia , and Christa Parseghian , died from the disease . He is also active in the cause to find a cure for multiple sclerosis ; his daughter Karan was diagnosed with the disease . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 * Note : before the 1974 season , the final Coaches ' Poll , also known then as the UPI Poll , was released before the bowl games , so a team that lost its bowl game could still claim the UPI national championship . This was changed as a result of Alabama winning the 1973 Coaches ' Poll national championship despite losing to Notre Dame in the Sugar Bowl . 
 = Eliza Meek = 
 Eliza Meek ( March 3 , 1832 – February 8 , 1888 ) was the daughter of Captain John Meek , an early American settler of the Kingdom of Hawaii . In her early youth , she was renown for her equestrian skills on her father 's land . She later became the royal mistress of King Lunalilo and formed a contentious relationship with Queen Emma of Hawaii and was rumored to the be main obstacle between a possible marriage between the two . Along with a group of other members of the royal court , Eliza accompanied the king to Kailua @-@ Kona during his last illness and remained by Lunalilo 's side until his death from tuberculosis on his return to Honolulu on February 3 , 1874 . Little is known about her later life ; Eliza was financially well @-@ off until her death on February 8 , 1888 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Eliza Meek was born on March 3 , 1832 , to Captain John Meek ( 1792 – 1875 ) and Betsy W. Meek ( 1807 – 1848 ) . John was a New Englander from Marblehead , Massachusetts , who first arrived in Hawaii about 1809 and served for many years as harbor master and pilot of Honolulu . Betsy was the Hawaiian wife of Captain Meek and died on May 5 , 1848 . Eliza grew up with many siblings including her youngest sister Elizabeth " Betsy " Meek ( 1841 – 1895 ) , who married American settler Horace Gate Crabbe in 1857 and had five children . In her youth , Eliza was noted for her equestrian skills on her father 's lands at Lihue and <unk> on the island of Oʻahu where their family raised thorough @-@ bred horses which were well known across the islands . According to archivist and historian Albert Pierce Taylor , Eliza was often " seen riding the horse through the streets of Honolulu garbed in a wonderful pa @-@ u , with a dozen or more followers riding behind her wearing the same color of garment " . Eliza was considered a great beauty in her youth and possessed green @-@ color eyes indicative of her hapa @-@ haole ( half @-@ European , half @-@ Hawaiian ) heritage . 
 = = Relationship with Lunalilo = = 
 Eliza became the mistress of King Lunalilo , who had remained a bachelor for his entire life . She developed a contentious relationship with Queen Emma of Hawaii , the widow of Kamehameha IV and a close friend of Lunalilo . According to one of Emma 's letters , an elderly palace attendant <unk> and several other older women had given Lunalilo a " piece of <unk> [ sic ] stalk pressed to drink , medicated with love potions , to produce intense affections for Eliza Meek " . Along with a group of Lunalilo 's personal attendants and relatives ( including his chamberlain and Eliza 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Horace Crabbe ) , Eliza was present during the king 's final months of illness . During this period , Eliza was notoriously hostile to Emma , who occasionally visited the ailing King to help nurse him . According to Dr. Georges Phillipe Trousseau , the King 's personal physician , Lunalilo would have married Emma had it not been for Eliza 's interference . Eliza would refuse to leave Emma alone with Lunalilo even at the king 's command . One night , in a fit of rage , Lunalilo threw a chair and a <unk> at Eliza 's head after an argument with between the two . Emma recounted the instance in a letter to her cousin Peter <unk> : 
 The last bit of news yesterday morning is the King 's anger against Eliza Wednesday ( yesterday ) night for being impudent to him . He threw a chair at her head and a <unk> also , which made a great cut on the side of her head . The nearest Doctor was sent for [ and ] both McGrew and McKibbin arrived . It seems the King told her to come to bed — she replied what right has a dog or a bitch there , which instantly gave vent to his ill temper that he had been brooding some days , and used a word of four letters belonging only to <unk> . She retorted , " Oh , I suppose that is what you eat to exist on . " This brought the King 's rage to an instant climax and [ he ] threw the articles at her head . I had intended to call yesterday to see how he continues to improve , but this domestic fracas of the Royal household puts it out of the question , till a few days more when the King will be settled and not so upset . 
 Despite the scuffle , Eliza was part of the royal party who accompanied Lunalilo when he sailed to Kailua @-@ Kona , in November 1873 , the following month , in the hope that the dry weather would improve his tuberculosis . However , the trip had no lasting effect on Lunalilo 's health . After returning to Honolulu , Lunalilo succumbed to the disease and died on February 3 , 1874 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Little is known of Eliza 's life after Lunalilo 's death . She died at <unk> – her brother @-@ in @-@ law and sister 's residence – on February 8 , 1888 , at the age of fifty @-@ five . In her later life , Eliza was financially well @-@ off and owned a half interest in property on King Street , near <unk> . According to The Daily Bulletin newspaper , she had been ill for a month before she died and her death was " caused by a general breaking " . 
 = Keith Bostic ( American football ) = 
 William Keith Bostic ( born January 17 , 1961 ) is a former professional American football player who played for seven seasons in the National Football League ( NFL ) . During his career he played safety for the Houston Oilers and the Cleveland Browns . Bostic served as the Oiler defensive captain under Jerry Glanville . He earned one Pro Bowl selection and missed another based on a tiebreaker for the last safety chosen . In his Pro Bowl season , he led the American Football Conference in interceptions . 
 Prior to playing in the NFL , he played for the Michigan Wolverines football team of the Big Ten Conference from 1979 – 1982 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season . During this time Michigan won two Big Ten Conference Championships and Bostic was named first team All @-@ Big Ten . While at Michigan , he accumulated fumble recovery and interception statistics that continue to rank among the leaders in school history . Bostic had a reputation as a very physical safety . 
 = = College = = 
 Born in Ann Arbor , Michigan , Bostic starred at his hometown Pioneer High School in Ann Arbor . He then stayed in Ann Arbor to play for the University of Michigan where he earned four varsity letters in football from 1979 @-@ 1982 while wearing the # 13 . In college at the University of Michigan , Bostic started eight games in 1980 , and he had an interception in the January 1 , 1981 Rose Bowl for the 1980 Big Ten Conference Champions . This game was the first bowl game victory for Bo Schembechler . He started eleven games in 1981 and twelve in 1982 . Bostic was first team All @-@ Big Ten for the 1982 Big Ten Champions who also went to the Rose Bowl . When he was drafted into the NFL , he was second on the modern Michigan career interceptions list ( since 1965 ) with ten career interceptions , which places him in a tie for seventh on the list now . He ranks tenth on the All @-@ time list . He ranks second on the All @-@ time single @-@ season fumble recovery list with four and fourth on the career list with six . His 119 interception return yards in 1982 ranks fifth all @-@ time . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Bostic Oilers = = = 
 During the 1970s Bum Phillips had traded away draft picks for veterans several times and between the 1974 NFL Draft and the 1981 NFL Draft the team only had four first round picks , but reached the AFC Championship game twice during the decade with veterans . They went to the playoffs in 1980 as well . However , by 1981 they were below .500 with an aging team . From the 1982 NFL Draft to the 1987 NFL Draft they had nine first round choices . They complemented their drafting with the signing of Warren Moon out of the Canadian Football League and Mike Rozier out of the United States Football League ( USFL ) , a league that attempted to compete with the NFL in the 1980s . 
 = = = Biles , Studley , Campbell era = = = 
 Bostic was drafted with the fourteenth pick of the second round of the 1983 NFL Draft with the 42nd pick overall by the Houston Oilers . He was also drafted by the Michigan Panthers of the United States Football League ( USFL ) in the 1983 Territorial Draft . Bostic joined the Oilers who were rebuilding from being the oldest average age NFL team in 1981 . 
 Bostic started the last 12 games of the 1983 NFL season and every game thereafter as an Oiler until leaving the team in 1989 . The 1983 Houston Oilers under coaches Ed Biles and Chuck Studley went 2 – 14 . The 1984 and 1985 teams of Hugh Campbell also were below .500 . By 1985 he had nonetheless become one of the best safeties in the league . During the 1985 NFL season he had a career @-@ high five quarterback sacks , three interceptions and a fumble recovery . 
 = = = Glanville era = = = 
 Bostic 's physical style of play was well @-@ suited for Jerry Glanville who took over the Oilers ' head coaching job for the 1986 NFL season after having been the team 's defensive coordinator . Bostic signed a contract extension before the 1987 NFL season . Then , Bostic earned a Pro Bowl birth in 1987 and was named second @-@ team All @-@ Pro the same season . During the 1987 season he finished second in the NFL with a career @-@ high six interceptions . That total led the American Football Conference ( AFC ) , and he added three quarterback sacks and a fumble recovery that season . Glanville took the team to both the 1987 @-@ 88 and 1988 @-@ 89 NFL Playoffs . The unheralded 1987 team was a surprise playoff entrant in the first round Wild Card game . Even after a surprise 1987 – 88 NFL playoff run the Oilers fired their defensive backs coach , Tom Bettis who had taken over from Ken Houston . Bostic earned All @-@ Pro honorable mention in 1988 . That season he finished tied for the third and final AFC safety Pro Bowl spot with David Fulcher and missed being invited due to the tiebreaker . 
 With all the rebuilding turnover Bostic was one of the four longest tenured Oilers by his sixth season with the team . He started 88 consecutive non @-@ strike games for the Oilers . He was replaced by Bubba McDowell as the Oilers ' starting strong safety . In 1989 , the Oilers became fed up with Bostic for his untimely penalties and his moody and unpredictable personality . The Indianapolis Colts signed Bostic as a plan B free agent to a two @-@ year $ 900 @,@ 000 contract , but released him during training camp . They released him during the second week of training camp and it was rumored he might head to the Los Angeles Raiders . The Oilers lost a league high fifteen plan B free agents that season . In 1990 , the Cleveland Browns signed Bostic as a free agent . However , they waived him during the season . 
 = = = Overall reputation = = = 
 Bostic 's physical style of play was respected by his peers : Lester Hayes said Raider tight end Todd Christensen is the best receiving tight end and that " The only guy I 've ever seen cover Todd is my son , Keith Bostic ... Bostic 's the only guy I 've ever seen pulverize him . I mean he really pulverized him . I call Bostic and Frank Minnifield ( Cleveland cornerback ) my sons , my sons of dirt . " Hayes meant that Bostic and Minnifield played a physical style , just like Hayes . Bostic is known as a big hitter blessed with athletic ability . He combined strength and speed to play his physical style according to Ozzie Newsome : " He 's as strong as any linebacker and can run like any of the guys on the corner . " Bostic earned the nickname " Batman " for his style of play . Instead of instructing his team to elect captains , Glanville instructed his team to " ... pick the three toughest guys . If somebody throws a grenade into a room , they 're the ones who 'll jump on it . " Bostic was the player chosen from the Oilers ' defense . Although much is made of his strength and toughness , it should also be mentioned that he once collared Tony Dorsett from behind in a footrace . At one point in Bostic 's career , while Glanville was still defensive coordinator , the Oilers considered moving him to cornerback because of his speed . 
 = = = NFL Single Season Record = = = 
 Fewest interception return yards ( 1987 ) : <unk> 
 = = Personal = = 
 During the offseasons , Bostic was a regular on the Oilers ' summer basketball team that traveled around the state raising money for charities by playing various local All @-@ star teams . After the team 's twelfth season , Bostic had a reputation as the best player ever to play for the team . During one NFL training camp Bostic played with tape over his mouth to try to win a $ 20 bet with Steve Brown over who could keep from talking the longest . 
 His son , Tony Bostic , played running back for the New Mexico State Aggies as a non @-@ recruited walk @-@ on . His nephew , Nigel Bostic was a promising college football player who won a scholarship to Oklahoma State but was later arrested for gun trafficking . 
 = The Raft of the Medusa = 
 The Raft of the Medusa ( French : Le <unk> de la Méduse ) is an oil painting of 1818 – 1819 by the French Romantic painter and lithographer Théodore Géricault ( 1791 – 1824 ) . Completed when the artist was 27 , the work has become an icon of French Romanticism . At 491 cm × 716 cm ( 16 ' 1 " × 23 ' 6 " ) , it is an over @-@ life @-@ size painting that depicts a moment from the aftermath of the wreck of the French naval frigate Méduse , which ran aground off the coast of today 's Mauritania on 2 July 1816 . On 5 July 1816 , at least 147 people were set adrift on a hurriedly constructed raft ; all but 15 died in the 13 days before their rescue , and those who survived endured starvation and dehydration and practised cannibalism . The event became an international scandal , in part because its cause was widely attributed to the incompetence of the French captain . 
 Géricault chose to depict this event in order to launch his career with a large @-@ scale uncommissioned work on a subject that had already generated great public interest . The event fascinated him , and before he began work on the final painting , he undertook extensive research and produced many preparatory sketches . He interviewed two of the survivors and constructed a detailed scale model of the raft . He visited hospitals and morgues where he could view , first @-@ hand , the colour and texture of the flesh of the dying and dead . As he had anticipated , the painting proved highly controversial at its first appearance in the 1819 Paris Salon , attracting passionate praise and condemnation in equal measure . However , it established his international reputation , and today is widely seen as seminal in the early history of the Romantic movement in French painting . 
 Although The Raft of the Medusa retains elements of the traditions of history painting , in both its choice of subject matter and its dramatic presentation , it represents a break from the calm and order of the prevailing Neoclassical school . Géricault 's work attracted wide attention from its first showing and was then exhibited in London . The Louvre acquired it soon after the artist 's death at the age of 32 . The painting 's influence can be seen in the works of Eugène Delacroix , J. M. W. Turner , Gustave Courbet , and Édouard Manet . 
 = = Background = = 
 In June 1816 , the French frigate Méduse departed from Rochefort , bound for the Senegalese port of Saint @-@ Louis . She headed a convoy of three other ships : the storeship Loire , the brig Argus and the corvette <unk> . Viscount Hugues <unk> de <unk> had been appointed captain of the frigate despite having scarcely sailed in 20 years . After the wreck , public outrage mistakenly attributed responsibility for his appointment to Louis XVIII , though his was a routine naval appointment made within the Ministry of the Navy and far outside the concerns of the monarch . The frigate 's mission was to accept the British return of Senegal under the terms of France 's acceptance of the Peace of Paris . The appointed French governor of Senegal , Colonel Julien @-@ Désiré Schmaltz , and his wife and daughter were among the passengers . 
 In an effort to make good time , the Méduse overtook the other ships , but due to poor navigation it drifted 100 miles ( 161 km ) off course . On 2 July , it ran aground on a sandbank off the West African coast , near today 's Mauritania . The collision was widely blamed on the incompetence of De <unk> , a returned émigré who lacked experience and ability , but had been granted his commission as a result of an act of political preferment . Efforts to free the ship failed , so , on 5 July , the frightened passengers and crew started an attempt to travel the 60 miles ( 97 km ) to the African coast in the frigate 's six boats . Although the Méduse was carrying 400 people , including 160 crew , there was space for only about 250 in the boats . The remainder of the ship 's complement — at least 146 men and one woman — were piled onto a hastily built raft , that partially submerged once it was loaded . Seventeen crew members opted to stay aboard the grounded Méduse . The captain and crew aboard the other boats intended to tow the raft , but after only a few miles the raft was turned loose . For sustenance the crew of the raft had only a bag of ship 's biscuit ( consumed on the first day ) , two casks of water ( lost overboard during fighting ) and six casks of wine . 
 According to critic Jonathan Miles , the raft carried the survivors " to the frontiers of human experience . Crazed , parched and starved , they slaughtered mutineers , ate their dead companions and killed the weakest . " After 13 days , on 17 July 1816 , the raft was rescued by the Argus by chance — no particular search effort was made by the French for the raft . By this time only 15 men were still alive ; the others had been killed or thrown overboard by their comrades , died of starvation , or thrown themselves into the sea in despair . The incident became a huge public embarrassment for the French monarchy , only recently restored to power after Napoleon 's defeat in 1815 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Raft of the Medusa portrays the moment when , after 13 days adrift on the raft , the remaining 15 survivors view a ship approaching from a distance . According to an early British reviewer , the work is set at a moment when " the ruin of the raft may be said to be complete " . The painting is on a monumental scale of 491 × 716 cm ( 193 @.@ 3 × 282 @.@ 3 in ) , so that most of the figures rendered are life @-@ sized and those in the foreground almost twice life @-@ size , pushed close to the picture plane and crowding onto the viewer , who is drawn into the physical action as a participant . 
 The makeshift raft is shown as barely seaworthy as it rides the deep waves , while the men are rendered as broken and in utter despair . One old man holds the corpse of his son at his knees ; another tears his hair out in frustration and defeat . A number of bodies litter the foreground , waiting to be swept away by the surrounding waves . The men in the middle have just viewed a rescue ship ; one points it out to another , and an African crew member , Jean Charles , stands on an empty barrel and frantically waves his handkerchief to draw the ship 's attention . 
 The pictorial composition of the painting is constructed upon two pyramidal structures . The perimeter of the large mast on the left of the canvas forms the first . The horizontal grouping of dead and dying figures in the foreground forms the base from which the survivors emerge , surging upward towards the emotional peak , where the central figure waves desperately at a rescue ship . 
 The viewer 's attention is first drawn to the centre of the canvas , then follows the directional flow of the survivors ' bodies , viewed from behind and straining to the right . According to the art historian Justin Wintle , " a single horizontal diagonal rhythm [ leads ] us from the dead at the bottom left , to the living at the apex . " Two other diagonal lines are used to heighten the dramatic tension . One follows the mast and its rigging and leads the viewer 's eye towards an approaching wave that threatens to engulf the raft , while the second , composed of reaching figures , leads to the distant silhouette of the Argus , the ship that eventually rescued the survivors . 
 Géricault 's palette is composed of pallid flesh tones , and the murky colours of the survivors ' clothes , the sea and the clouds . Overall the painting is dark and relies largely on the use of sombre , mostly brown pigments , a palette that Géricault believed was effective in suggesting tragedy and pain . The work 's lighting has been described as " <unk> " , after the Italian artist closely associated with tenebrism — the use of violent contrast between light and dark . Even Géricault 's treatment of the sea is muted , being rendered in dark greens rather than the deep blues that could have afforded contrast with the tones of the raft and its figures . From the distant area of the rescue ship , a bright light shines , providing illumination to an otherwise dull brown scene . 
 = = Execution = = 
 = = = Research and preparatory studies = = = 
 Géricault was captivated by accounts of the widely publicised 1816 shipwreck , and realised that a depiction of the event might be an opportunity to establish his reputation as a painter . Having decided to proceed , he undertook extensive research before he began the painting . In early 1818 , he met with 2 survivors : Henri Savigny , a surgeon , and Alexandre Corréard , an engineer from the École nationale supérieure d <unk> et métiers . Their emotional descriptions of their experiences largely inspired the tone of the final painting . According to the art historian Georges @-@ Antoine <unk> , " Géricault established his studio across from <unk> hospital . And here began a mournful descent . Behind locked doors he threw himself into his work . Nothing repulsed him . He was dreaded and avoided . " 
 Earlier travels had exposed Géricault to victims of insanity and plague , and while researching the Méduse his effort to be historically accurate and realistic led to an obsession with the stiffness of corpses . To achieve the most authentic rendering of the flesh tones of the dead , he made sketches of bodies in the morgue of the Hospital <unk> , studied the faces of dying hospital patients , brought severed limbs back to his studio to study their decay , and for a fortnight drew a severed head , borrowed from a lunatic asylum and stored on his studio roof . 
 He worked with Corréard , Savigny and another of the survivors , the carpenter <unk> , to construct an accurately detailed scale model of the raft , which was reproduced on the finished canvas , even showing the gaps between some of planks . Géricault posed models , compiled a dossier of documentation , copied relevant paintings by other artists , and went to Le Havre to study the sea and sky . Despite suffering from fever , he travelled to the coast on a number of occasions to witness storms breaking on the shore , and a visit to artists in England afforded further opportunity to study the elements while crossing the English Channel . 
 He drew and painted numerous preparatory sketches while deciding which of several alternative moments of the disaster he would depict in the final work . The painting 's conception proved slow and difficult for Géricault , and he struggled to select a single pictorially effective moment to best capture the inherent drama of the event . 
 Among the scenes he considered were the mutiny against the officers from the second day on the raft , the cannibalism that occurred after only a few days , and the rescue . Géricault ultimately settled on the moment , recounted by one of the survivors , when they first saw , on the horizon , the approaching rescue ship Argus — visible in the upper right of the painting — which they attempted to signal . The ship , however , passed by . In the words of one of the surviving crew members , " From the delirium of joy , we fell into profound despondency and grief . " 
 To a public well @-@ versed in the particulars of the disaster , the scene would have been understood to encompass the aftermath of the crew 's abandonment , focusing on the moment when all hope seemed lost — the Argus reappeared two hours later and rescued those who remained . 
 The author Rupert Christiansen points out that the painting depicts more figures than had been on the raft at the time of the rescue — including corpses which were not recorded by the rescuers . Instead of the sunny morning and calm water reported on the day of the rescue , Géricault depicted a gathering storm and dark , heaving sea to reinforce the emotional gloom . 
 = = = Final work = = = 
 Géricault , who had just been forced to break off a painful affair with his aunt , shaved his head and from November 1818 to July 1819 lived a disciplined monastic existence in his studio in the Faubourg du <unk> , being brought meals by his concierge and only occasionally spending an evening out . He and his 18 @-@ year @-@ old assistant , Louis @-@ Alexis Jamar , slept in a small room adjacent to the studio ; occasionally there were arguments and on one occasion Jamar walked off ; after two days Géricault persuaded him to return . In his orderly studio , the artist worked in a methodical fashion in complete silence and found that even the noise of a mouse was sufficient to break his concentration . 
 He used friends as models , most notably the painter Eugène Delacroix ( 1798 – 1863 ) , who modelled for the figure in the foreground with face turned downward and one arm outstretched . Two of the raft 's survivors are seen in shadow at the foot of the mast ; three of the figures were painted from life — Corréard , Savigny and <unk> . Jamar posed nude for the dead youth shown in the foreground about to slip into the sea , and was also the model for two other figures . 
 According to Hubert Wellington , Delacroix — who would become the standard @-@ bearer of French Romanticism after Géricault 's death — wrote , " Géricault allowed me to see his Raft of Medusa while he was still working on it . It made so tremendous an impression on me that when I came out of the studio I started running like a madman and did not stop till I reached my own room . " 
 Géricault painted with small brushes and viscous oils , which allowed little time for reworking and were dry by the next morning . He kept his colours apart from each other : his palette consisted of vermilion , white , <unk> yellow , two different yellow ochres , two red ochres , raw sienna , light red , burnt sienna , crimson lake , Prussian blue , peach black , ivory black , <unk> earth and bitumen . <unk> has a velvety , lustrous appearance when first painted , but over a period of time discolours to a black treacle , while contracting and thus creating a wrinkled surface , which cannot be renovated . As a result of this , details in large areas of the work can hardly be discerned today . 
 Géricault drew an outline sketch of the composition onto the canvas . He then posed models one at a time , completing each figure before moving onto the next , as opposed to the more usual method of working over the whole composition . The concentration in this way on individual elements gave the work both a " shocking physicality " and a sense of deliberate theatricality — which some critics consider an adverse effect . Over 30 years after the completion of the work , his friend Montfort recalled : 
 [ Géricault 's method ] astonished me as much as his intense industry . He painted directly on the white canvas , without rough sketch or any preparation of any sort , except for the firmly traced contours , and yet the solidity of the work was none the worse for it . I was struck by the keen attention with which he examined the model before touching brush to canvas . He seemed to proceed slowly , when in reality he executed very rapidly , placing one touch after the other in its place , rarely having to go over his work more than once . There was very little perceptible movement of his body or arms . His expression was perfectly calm ... 
 Working with little distraction , the artist completed the painting in eight months ; the project as a whole took 18 months . 
 = = Influences = = 
 The Raft of the Medusa fuses many influences from the Old Masters , from the Last Judgment and Sistine Chapel ceiling of Michelangelo ( 1475 – 1564 ) and Raphael 's Transfiguration , to the monumental approach of Jacques @-@ Louis David ( 1748 – 1825 ) and Antoine @-@ Jean Gros ( 1771 – 1835 ) , to contemporary events . By the 18th century , shipwrecks had become a recognised feature of marine art , as well as an increasingly common occurrence as more journeys were made by sea . Claude Joseph Vernet ( 1714 – 1789 ) created many such images , achieving naturalistic colour through direct observation — unlike other artists at that time — and was said to have tied himself to the mast of a ship in order to witness a storm . 
 Although the men depicted on the raft had spent 13 days adrift and suffered hunger , disease and cannibalism , Géricault pays tribute to the traditions of heroic painting and presents his figures as muscular and healthy . According to the art historian Richard Muther , there is still a strong debt to Classicism in the work . The fact that the majority of the figures are almost naked , he wrote , arose from a desire to avoid " <unk> " costumes . Muther observes that there is " still something academic in the figures , which do not seem to be sufficiently weakened by privation , disease , and the struggle with death " . 
 The influence of Jacques @-@ Louis David can be seen in the painting 's scale , in the sculptural tautness of the figures and in the heightened manner in which a particularly significant " fruitful moment " — the first awareness of the approaching ship — is described . In 1793 , David also painted an important current event with The Death of Marat . His painting had an enormous political impact during the time of the revolution in France , and it served as an important precedent for Géricault 's decision to also paint a current event . David 's pupil , Antoine @-@ Jean Gros , had , like David , represented " the <unk> of a school irredeemably associated with a lost cause " , but in some major works , he had given equal prominence to Napoleon and anonymous dead or dying figures . Géricault had been particularly impressed by the 1804 painting Bonaparte Visiting the Plague @-@ Victims of Jaffa , by Gros . 
 The young Géricault had painted copies of work by Pierre @-@ Paul Prud <unk> ( 1758 – 1823 ) , whose " thunderously tragic pictures " include his masterpiece , Justice and Divine Vengeance Pursuing Crime , where oppressive darkness and the compositional base of a naked , sprawled corpse obviously influenced Géricault 's painting . 
 The foreground figure of the older man may be a reference to Ugolino from Dante 's Inferno — a subject that Géricault had contemplated painting — and seems to borrow from a painting of Ugolini by Henry Fuseli ( 1741 – 1825 ) that Géricault may have known from prints . In Dante , Ugolino is guilty of cannibalism , which was one of the most sensational aspects of the days on the raft . Géricault seems to allude to this through the borrowing from Fuseli . An early study for The Raft of the Medusa in watercolour , now in the Louvre , is much more explicit , depicting a figure gnawing on the arm of a headless corpse . 
 Several English and American paintings including The Death of Major Pierson by John Singleton Copley ( 1738 – 1815 ) — also painted within two years of the event — had established a precedent for a contemporary subject . Copley had also painted several large and heroic depictions of disasters at sea which Géricault may have known from prints : Watson and the Shark ( 1778 ) , in which a black man is central to the action , and which , like The Raft of the Medusa , concentrated on the actors of the drama rather than the seascape ; The Defeat of the Floating Batteries at Gibraltar , September 1782 ( 1791 ) , which was an influence on both the style and subject matter of Géricault 's work ; and Scene of a Shipwreck ( 1790s ) , which has a strikingly similar composition . A further important precedent for the political component was the works of Francisco Goya , particularly his The Disasters of War series of 1810 – 12 , and his 1814 masterpiece The Third of May 1808 . Goya also produced a painting of a disaster at sea , called simply Shipwreck ( date unknown ) , but although the sentiment is similar , the composition and style have nothing in common with The Raft of the Medusa . It is unlikely that Géricault had seen the picture . 
 = = Exhibition and reception = = 
 The Raft of the Medusa was first shown at the 1819 Paris Salon , under the title Scène de <unk> ( Shipwreck Scene ) , although its real subject would have been unmistakable for contemporary viewers . The exhibition was sponsored by Louis XVIII and featured nearly 1 @,@ 300 paintings , 208 sculptures and numerous other engravings and architectural designs . Géricault 's canvas was the star at the exhibition : " It strikes and attracts all eyes " ( Le Journal de Paris ) . Louis XVIII visited three days before the opening and said : " Monsieur , vous <unk> de faire un <unk> qui n 'en est pas un pour vous " , or " Monsieur Géricault , you 've painted a shipwreck , but it 's not one for you " . The critics were divided : the horror and " <unk> " of the subject exercised fascination , but devotees of classicism expressed their distaste for what they described as a " pile of corpses " , whose realism they considered a far cry from the " ideal beauty " represented by Girodet 's Pygmalion and Galatea , which triumphed the same year . Géricault 's work expressed a paradox : how could a hideous subject be translated into a powerful painting , how could the painter reconcile art and reality ? Marie @-@ Philippe <unk> de la <unk> , a French painter and contemporary of Géricault , provided one answer : " Monsieur Géricault seems mistaken . The goal of painting is to speak to the soul and the eyes , not to repel . " The painting had fervent admirers too , including French writer and art critic Auguste Jal , who praised its political theme , its liberal position – its advancement of the negro and critique of ultra @-@ royalism – and its modernity . The historian Jules Michelet approved : " our whole society is aboard the raft of the Medusa " . 
 Géricault had deliberately sought to be both politically and artistically confrontational . Critics responded to his aggressive approach in kind , and their reactions were either ones of revulsion or praise , depending on whether the writer 's sympathies favoured the Bourbon or Liberal viewpoint . The painting was seen as largely sympathetic to the men on the raft , and thus by extension to the anti @-@ imperial cause adopted by the survivors Savigny and Corréard . The decision to place a black man at the pinnacle of the composition was a controversial expression of Géricault 's abolitionist sympathies . The art critic Christine Riding has speculated that the painting 's later exhibition in London was planned to coincide with anti @-@ slavery agitation there . According to art critic and curator Karen Wilkin , Géricault 's painting acts as a " cynical indictment of the bungling malfeasance of France 's post @-@ Napoleonic officialdom , much of which was recruited from the surviving families of the Ancien Régime " . 
 The painting generally impressed the viewing public , although its subject matter repelled many , thus denying Géricault the popular acclaim which he had hoped to achieve . At the end of the exhibition , the painting was awarded a gold medal by the judging panel , but they did not give the work the greater prestige of selecting it for the Louvre 's national collection . Instead , Géricault was awarded a commission on the subject of the Sacred Heart of Jesus , which he clandestinely offered to Delacroix , whose finished painting he then signed as his own . Géricault retreated to the countryside , where he collapsed from exhaustion , and his unsold work was rolled up and stored in a friend 's studio . 
 Géricault arranged for the painting to be exhibited in London in 1820 , where it was shown at William Bullock 's Egyptian Hall in Piccadilly , London , from 10 June until the end of the year , and viewed by about 40 @,@ 000 visitors . The reception in London was more positive than that in Paris , and the painting was hailed as representative of a new direction in French art . It received more positive reviews than when it was shown at the Salon . In part , this was due to the manner of the painting 's exhibition : in Paris it had initially been hung high in the Salon Carré — a mistake that Géricault recognised when he saw the work installed — but in London it was placed close to the ground , emphasising its monumental impact . There may have been other reasons for its popularity in England as well , including " a degree of national self @-@ congratulation " , the appeal of the painting as lurid entertainment , and two theatrical entertainments based around the events on the raft which coincided with the exhibition and borrowed heavily from Géricault 's depiction . From the London exhibition Géricault earned close to 20 @,@ 000 francs , which was his share of the fees charged to visitors , and substantially more than he would have been paid had the French government purchased the work from him . After the London exhibition , Bullock brought the painting to Dublin early in 1821 , but the exhibition there was far less successful , in large part due to a competing exhibition of a moving panorama , " The Wreck of the Medusa " by the Marshall brothers firm , which was said to have been painted under the direction of one of the survivors of the disaster . 
 The Raft of the Medusa was championed by the curator of the Louvre , comte de Forbin who purchased it for the museum from Géricault 's heirs after his death in 1824 . The painting now dominates its gallery there . The display caption tells us that " the only hero in this poignant story is humanity " . 
 At some time between 1826 and 1830 American artist George Cooke ( 1793 – 1849 ) made a copy of the painting in a smaller size , ( 130 @.@ 5 x 196 @.@ 2 cm ; approximately 4 ft × 6 ft ) , which was shown in Boston , Philadelphia , New York and Washington , D.C. to crowds who knew about the controversy surrounding the shipwreck . Reviews favoured the painting , which also stimulated plays , poems , performances and a children 's book . It was bought by a former admiral , Uriah Phillips , who left it in 1862 to the New York Historical Society , where it was <unk> as by Gilbert Stuart and remained inaccessible until the mistake was uncovered in 2006 , after an enquiry by Nina <unk> @-@ <unk> , a professor of art history at the University of Delaware . The university 's conservation department undertook restoration of the work . 
 Because of deterioration in the condition of Géricault 's original , the Louvre in 1859 – 60 commissioned two French artists , Pierre @-@ Désiré <unk> and Étienne @-@ Antoine @-@ Eugène <unk> , to make a full size copy of the original for loan exhibitions . 
 In the autumn of 1939 , the Medusa was packed for removal from the Louvre in anticipation of the outbreak of war . A scenery truck from the Comédie @-@ Française transported the painting to Versailles in the night of 3 September . Some time later , the Medusa was moved to the Château de Chambord where it remained until after the end of the Second World War . 
 = = Interpretation and legacy = = 
 In its insistence on portraying an unpleasant truth , The Raft of the Medusa was a landmark in the emerging Romantic movement in French painting , and " laid the foundations of an aesthetic revolution " against the prevailing Neoclassical style . Géricault 's compositional structure and depiction of the figures are classical , but the contrasting turbulence of the subject represents a significant change in artistic direction and creates an important bridge between Neoclassical and Romantic styles . By 1815 , Jacques @-@ Louis David , then in exile in Brussels , was both the leading proponent of the popular history painting genre , which he had perfected , and a master of the Neoclassical style . In France , both history painting and the Neoclassical style continued through the work of Antoine @-@ Jean Gros , Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres , François Gérard , Anne @-@ Louis Girodet de <unk> @-@ <unk> , Pierre @-@ Narcisse Guérin — teacher of both Géricault and Delacroix — and other artists who remained committed to the artistic traditions of David and Nicolas Poussin . 
 In his introduction to The Journal of Eugène Delacroix , Hubert Wellington wrote about Delacroix 's opinion of the state of French painting just prior to the Salon of 1819 . According to Wellington , " The curious blend of classic with realistic outlook which had been imposed by the discipline of David was now losing both animation and interest . The master himself was nearing his end , and exiled in Belgium . His most docile pupil , Girodet , a refined and cultivated classicist , was producing pictures of astonishing frigidity . Gérard , immensely successful painter of portraits under the Empire — some of them admirable — fell in with the new vogue for large pictures of history , but without enthusiasm . " 
 The Raft of the Medusa contains the gestures and grand scale of traditional history painting ; however , it presents ordinary people , rather than heroes , reacting to the unfolding drama . Géricault 's raft pointedly lacks a hero , and his painting presents no cause beyond sheer survival . The work represents , in the words of Christine Riding , " the fallacy of hope and pointless suffering , and at worst , the basic human instinct to survive , which had superseded all moral considerations and plunged civilised man into barbarism " . 
 The unblemished musculature of the central figure waving to the rescue ship is reminiscent of the Neoclassical , however the naturalism of light and shadow , the authenticity of the desperation shown by the survivors and the emotional character of the composition differentiate it from Neoclassical austerity . It was a further departure from the religious or classical themes of earlier works because it depicted contemporary events with ordinary and unheroic figures . Both the choice of subject matter and the heightened manner in which the dramatic moment is depicted are typical of Romantic painting — strong indications of the extent to which Géricault had moved from the prevalent Neoclassical movement . 
 Hubert Wellington said that while Delacroix was a lifelong admirer of Gros , the dominating enthusiasm of his youth was for Géricault . The dramatic composition of Géricault , with its strong contrasts of tone and unconventional gestures , stimulated Delacroix to trust his own creative impulses on a large work . Delacroix said , " Géricault allowed me to see his Raft of Medusa while he was still working on it . " The painting 's influence is seen in Delacroix 's The Barque of Dante ( 1822 ) and reappears as inspiration in Delacroix 's later works , such as The Shipwreck of Don Juan ( 1840 ) . 
 According to Wellington , Delacroix 's masterpiece of 1830 , Liberty Leading the People , springs directly from Géricault 's The Raft of the Medusa and Delacroix 's own Massacre at Chios . Wellington wrote that " While Géricault carried his interest in actual detail to the point of searching for more survivors from the wreck as models , Delacroix felt his composition more vividly as a whole , thought of his figures and crowds as types , and dominated them by the symbolic figure of Republican Liberty which is one of his finest plastic inventions . " 
 The art and sculpture historian Albert <unk> believed that The Raft of the Medusa and Delacroix 's Massacre at Chios provided the inspiration for the grandiose sweep of Auguste Rodin 's monumental sculpture The Gates of Hell . He wrote that " Delacroix 's Massacre at Chios and Géricault 's Raft of the Medusa confronted Rodin on a heroic scale with the innocent nameless victims of political tragedies ... If Rodin was inspired to rival Michelangelo 's Last Judgment , he had Géricault 's Raft of the Medusa in front of him for encouragement . " 
 While Gustave Courbet ( 1819 – 1877 ) could be described as an anti @-@ Romantic painter , his major works like A Burial at <unk> ( 1849 – 50 ) and The Artist 's Studio ( 1855 ) owe a debt to The Raft of the Medusa . The influence is not only in Courbet 's enormous scale , but in his willingness to portray ordinary people and current political events , and to record people , places and events in real , everyday surroundings . The 2004 exhibition at the Clark Art Institute , Bonjour Monsieur Courbet : The <unk> Collection from the Musee Fabre , Montpellier , sought to compare the 19th @-@ century Realist painters Courbet , Honoré Daumier ( 1808 – 1879 ) , and early Édouard Manet ( 1832 – 1883 ) with artists associated with Romanticism , including Géricault and Delacroix . Citing The Raft of the Medusa as an instrumental influence on Realism , the exhibition drew comparisons between all of the artists . The critic Michael Fried sees Manet directly borrowing the figure of the man cradling his son for the composition of Angels at the Tomb of Christ . 
 The influence of The Raft of the Medusa was felt by artists beyond France . Francis Danby , a British painter born in Ireland , probably was inspired by Géricault 's picture when he painted Sunset at Sea after a Storm in 1824 , and wrote in 1829 that The Raft of the Medusa was " the finest and grandest historical picture I have ever seen " . 
 The subject of marine tragedy was undertaken by J. M. W. Turner ( 1775 – 1851 ) , who , like many English artists , probably saw Géricault 's painting when it was exhibited in London in 1820 . His A Disaster at Sea ( c . 1835 ) chronicled a similar incident , this time a British catastrophe , with a swamped vessel and dying figures also placed in the foreground . Placing a coloured figure in the centre of the drama was revisited by Turner , with similar abolitionist overtones , in his The Slave Ship ( 1840 ) . 
 The Gulf Stream ( 1899 ) , by the American artist Winslow Homer ( 1836 – 1910 ) , replicates the composition of The Raft of the Medusa with a damaged vessel , ominously surrounded by sharks and threatened by a waterspout . Like Géricault , Homer makes a black man the pivotal figure in the scene , though here he is the vessel 's sole occupant . A ship in the distance mirrors the Argus from Géricault 's painting . The move from the drama of Romanticism to the new Realism is exemplified by the stoic resignation of Homer 's figure . The man 's condition , which in earlier works might have been characterised by hope or helplessness , has turned to " sullen rage " . 
 In the early 90 's , sculptor John Connell , in his Raft Project , a collaborative project with painter Eugene <unk> , recreated The Raft of the Medusa by making life @-@ sized sculptures out of wood , paper and tar and placing them on a large wooden raft . 
 Remarking on the contrast between the dying figures in the foreground and the figures in the mid @-@ ground waving towards the approaching rescue ship , the French art historian Georges @-@ Antoine <unk> wrote that Géricault 's painting represents , " on the one hand , desolation and death . On the other , hope and life . " 
 For Kenneth Clark , The Raft of the Medusa " remains the chief example of romantic pathos expressed through the nude ; and that obsession with death , which drove Géricault to frequent mortuary chambers and places of public execution , gives truth to his figures of the dead and the dying . Their outlines may be taken from the classics , but they have been seen again with a craving for violent experience . " 
 Today , a bronze bas @-@ relief of The Raft of the Medusa by Antoine <unk> adorns Géricault 's grave in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris . 
 = Japanese settlement in the Federated States of Micronesia = 
 Japanese settlement in what now constitutes modern @-@ day Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) dates back to the end of the 19th century , when Japanese traders and explorers settled on the central and eastern Carolines , although earlier contacts can not be completely excluded . After the islands were occupied by Japan in 1914 , a large @-@ scale Japanese immigration to them took place in the 1920s and 1930s . The Japanese government encouraged immigration to the islands belonging to the South Pacific Mandate to offset demographic and economic problems facing Japan at that time . 
 The earliest immigrants worked as traders , although most of the later settlers worked as fishermen , farmers or conscript labourers . The majority of immigrants settled in Pohnpei and Chuuk , while other islands were home for only a few Japanese . The total Japanese population reached about 100 @,@ 000 by 1945 . The Japanese immigrants in the central and eastern Carolines were Japanese , Okinawans , and a few Koreans . The settlers brought Shinto and Buddhism religions to the islands , although they were not popular with indigenous people . By 1945 the Japanese language replaced Micronesian languages in day @-@ to @-@ day communications . 
 Ethnic relations between the Japanese settlers and civil officers with the Micronesians were initially <unk> and intermarriage was encouraged between the Japanese and Micronesians , although relations soured as the Japanese administration implemented policies that favoured the Japanese populace and were insensitive to Micronesian cultural norms . After the Japanese surrender in 1945 , virtually all Japanese were repatriated back to Japan . People of mixed Japanese and Micronesian descent were allowed to remain , which most of them chose to do . Many of them assumed leading roles in the political , public and business sectors after World War II , and constitute a large minority within FSM itself . Micronesia began to engage with Japan again in the business and cultural spheres from the 1970s , and established formal diplomatic ties in 1988 , two years after Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) became an independent country . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early contacts = = = 
 The first recorded contact between the Japanese and Pacific Islanders ( believed to be Micronesians ) was reflected in the <unk> Chomon <unk> , when eight men arrived at Okinoshima ( an ancient town in modern @-@ day Izu Province ) in July 1171 . They were described to be tall , having dark @-@ brown and tattooed skin , wearing ornaments as well as having coarse hair . The Japanese served them some millet and sake . When the eight men attempted to take the bows and spears , a fight ensued between the Japanese and the eight men , before the latter left Okinoshima . Japanese contact was also suggested by some anthropologists in the 19th century , and at least one , James McKinney Alexander suggested that Micronesians may have intermarried with Japanese fishermen who were strayed off course and stranded in the islands . In an 1895 study , Alexander noted similarities between the cultural traditions , vocabulary and the pre @-@ Christian beliefs between <unk> and Kosraeans . Studies done by other Japanese anthropologists in the 19th and 20th centuries noted that at least 60 Japanese vessels drifted into the Pacific Ocean between the 17th and 19th centuries and could have made windfalls in the Pacific Islands . 
 A Japanese corvette , Ryujo under the command of Enomoto Takeaki stopped by Pohnpei and Kosrae between 1882 and 1883 . The entire tenth class of the Japanese naval academy was aboard the ship , and was noted as the first Japanese warship to stop by Micronesian waters . The king of Kosrae accorded the Japanese crew a warm welcome , and personally claimed that the Kosraeans had some Japanese ancestry . Some years later , a Japanese cattle farmer , <unk> Mizutani from the Bonin Islands visited Pohnpei in 1887 and 1889 . In both visits , Mizutani stayed for a few days in the islands before he was chased out by the Spanish . 
 = = = Late Spanish and German colonial eras ( 1890 – 1914 ) = = = 
 In 1890 , two Japanese businessmen , <unk> Taguchi and <unk> Suzuki , formed the <unk> Shokai ( South Seas Trading Company ) with the aim of developing Japanese commercial interests in Micronesia . They bought a sailing ship , <unk> Maru and sailed for Yap in June and befriended a shipwrecked Irish American missionary , Daniel O 'Keefe , but set sail for Pohnpei after two days . They set up a small store peddling Japanese wares under strict conditions imposed by the Spanish , and returned to Japan in December because of dwindling funds . The ship was later sold to the <unk> company which established two trading stations at Chuuk and Pohnpei . More Japanese businessmen arrived in Chuuk in 1892 under the charge of Mizutani and established a store at Chuuk in 1892 . A few Japanese , notably Koben Mori , began socialising with the Chuukese and led semi @-@ nomadic lifestyles until 1896 before gaining the protection of Spanish guards . Mori lived with a few Japanese compatriots , and became the resident agent for Hiki Shokai , another Japanese trading company that came to set up a shop at Moen . 
 The Japanese businessmen that were based at Moen were repatriated from Micronesia in 1900 , a year after Spain ceded its sovereignty to Germany as part of the German – Spanish Treaty of 1899 . Only Mori and another Japanese business agent remained behind in Chuuk and Pohnpei , respectively . At the time of German annexation , Mori was serving as the resident agent for a German trading company at that time . Mori lived in isolation until 1907 when the German authorities allowed Japanese trade in Chuuk , and another trading company – Murayama Shokai established a trading post in Tol . Japanese settlers also started to come in small numbers to Chuuk to engage in farming or fishing activities . The German colonial administration granted the Japanese settlers equal rights with other European settlers in German @-@ mandated territories , considering them citizens of an imperialist power . In official statistics the Japanese were legally classified as " White " . 
 = = = Japanese colonial era ( 1914 – 1945 ) = = = 
 The First World War saw many nations leap to take Germany 's overseas possessions for themselves , and Micronesia was no exception . A Japanese warship sailed into Truk Lagoon in October 1914 ; it was greeted by Japanese settlers living in the nearby islands . The navy set up its regional headquarters at Chuuk and stationed a garrison at Pohnpei until 1922 , where the region 's administrative capital Kolonia was established under the South Pacific Mandate . When a civilian government was established in March 1922 , there were about 150 Japanese living in Pohnpei , which consisted of traders and government officials . Another seventy Japanese immigrated to Pohnpei by 1930 , and a few individuals settled in neighbouring Chuuk , Kosrae and Yap . In Chuuk , another hundred Japanese businessmen settled at <unk> by the late 1920s to cater to governmental and business interests . A few elementary schools were set up to serve both the local Japanese and Chuukese populace . 
 The majority of the settlers who came before 1930 consisted of Okinawans . A tuna canning factory was set up at Pohnpei in 1930 , and Japanese settlers from the Tōhoku region and Hokkaido came in greater numbers after that . Some of them became fishermen , while others organised farming communes . The civilian government persuaded twenty @-@ four families to establish a farming commune at Palikir in 1931 , but the settlers faced problems adapting to the tropical climate and bringing their vegetable produce to Kolonia for sale . The civilian government moved in to quickly improve the transport network and electrical supplies throughout Pohnpei . In addition , they granted larger tracts of land to the settlers , and as a result the settlers went into rice cultivation . More settlers followed suit , and an anthropologist , <unk> Tadao reported that the farming settlement in Pohnpei was well established by 1941 . 
 The Japanese populace at the other islands grew at a slower rate — although less so for Chuuk , and Japanese tend to prefer settling in low @-@ lying areas like <unk> and Tol . Road and electrical infrastructure were built in new towns and hamlets , which were founded or expanded by Japanese settlers . Many towns and hamlets had at least a thousand Japanese inhabitants by 1941 . Some conscript and contract labourers from mainland Japan , Okinawa and Korea hired to build naval facilities at Chuuk and Pohnpei contributed to the increasing immigrant population in the central and eastern Carolines . Kolonia and Palikir had the largest Japanese populace after the Marianas and Palau , and the Japanese outnumbered the natives by a thin margin in 1941 . Kosrae was populated by no more than a few hundred Japanese throughout the colonial era ; a few Japanese policemen were stationed on the island to keep law and order . Japanese and Korean labourers briefly stayed on the island to carry out phosphate mining operations and establish a cotton plantation , but were repatriated back after the plantation failed . 
 Intermarriage between Japanese men and Micronesian women were encouraged , especially in Pohnpei and Chuuk where there are large Japanese populations . The number of intermarriages between the Japanese and Micronesians were the highest among Okinawan fishermen in the 1930s , many of whom were single men . A sizable community of mixed Japanese – Micronesians by the 1930s , and children of legitimate unions were conscripted into the Japanese military forces . Micronesians and Japanese – Micronesians came under the suspicion of the Kempeitai for sympathies with the Americans , and many reportedly faced harassment as a result . Micronesian islands reverted to military administration in 1943 , and the regional headquarters was relocated from Palau to Chuuk . As food supplies ran scarce during the later months of the Second World War , the Japanese military began stealing breadfruit and food supplies from Micronesian farms . The Japanese military avoided Japanese and Japanese – Micronesian families , especially those that wielded political influence within the local community . In Chuuk , land was also confiscated from Micronesians and Japanese – Micronesians to facilitate the construction of new military facilities . 
 = = = Recent years ( 1945 – present ) = = = 
 The Japanese settlers in the central and eastern Carolines were repatriated after the Japanese surrender . The civilians were repatriated first , while the soldiers stayed on as Prisoners of war to carry out repair works to the islands ' infrastructure until 1946 . Most people of mixed Japanese – Micronesian descent stayed behind and were brought up by their mothers , although a few chose to return to Japan with their fathers . The American military government permitted some thirty @-@ three Japanese and Korean settlers to remain with their families , but this was allowed only under exceptional circumstances . Within the first few years after the war , some former Japanese settlers formed philanthropic organisations to promote public understanding and memory of Japan 's colonial legacy in Micronesia . These organisations arranged visitation trips for the former settlers to the Carolines , usually with the purpose of maintaining kinship ties with their Japanese – Micronesian descendants . 
 Japanese – Micronesians assumed leading positions in the public and private sector , particularly in Chuuk where there is a substantial percentage of Micronesians with Japanese ancestry . Micronesia began to engage with Japan in the business and cultural spheres from the 1970s , and established formal diplomatic ties in 1988 , two years after Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) became an independent country . In turn , Japan is one of the key aid providers to Micronesia . Many mixed Japanese – Micronesians sought closer cultural and business ties with Japan , and politicians of Japanese – Micronesian descent — notably Manny Mori — have made publicised visits to their ancestral homelands as well as personal friendship ties with some former Japanese leaders . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 A 1998 census conducted by the Japanese foreign affairs ministry showed 141 Japanese nationals residing in the FSM , the majority whom of are expatriate businessmen . Another 2007 census counted a 114 Japanese nationals in the FSM . The Spanish counted fifteen Japanese traders based in Chuuk in 1895 , after American missionaries reported the Japanese involvement in smuggling weapons and liquor . An 1899 census counted a total of 30 Japanese nationals , mainly businessmen living in the Caroline Islands , with the majority being located on Pohnpei , Chuuk and Palau . The German authorities chased out most of the businessmen in 1900 , leaving only a few Japanese in the Micronesian islands . A few Japanese began settling in the islands in 1907 after the German authorities allowed the Japanese traders to establish their enterprises in Pohnpei and Chuuk . Early Japanese settlers consisted of single men , and official statistics showed a gender imbalance with five Japanese males to one female . Many Japanese men took on Micronesian wives and raised mixed Japanese – Micronesian families . 
 Japanese arrivals to Micronesia remained modest until the 1920s , following which the islands experienced a quick increase in the number of immigrants , especially in Pohnpei . Immigrants consisted largely of single men in the 1920s , the majority of whom were Okinawan fishermen . The influx of Japanese immigrants to the central and eastern Carolines was not as intense as compared to the Marianas and Japanese settlement in Palau until the early 1930s , and constituted a little more than 10 percent of the total Japanese populace through Micronesia in 1939 . In urban areas , Japanese settlers outnumbered Micronesians around the late 1930s . Many Japanese families migrated to the central and eastern Carolines in the 1930s , and by 1935 there were three Japanese males to two females in the islands . More Japanese were brought to the Central and Eastern Carolines during the Second World War , and the Japanese populace outnumbered the native Micronesians in many islands immediately after the Japanese surrender in 1945 . The majority of Japanese who were brought to the central and eastern Caroline islands consisted of labourers as well as military personnel , and soon outnumbered both Japanese and Micronesian civilians alike . 
 The Japanese population were repatriated back to Japan after the war , but most people of mixed Japanese – Micronesian remained in the islands and constituted a substantial percentage in the islands ' population . They became assimilated with the Micronesians , and in all official census they are identified by their Micronesian heritage . In 2001 , the director of Japan 's Institute for Pacific Studies Izumi Kobayashi estimated that at least 23 % of FSM 's population was of Japanese ancestry . An official estimate in 2006 puts the number a little below 20 % . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Japanese settlers were generally followers of Shinto and Buddhism . In the central and eastern Carolines , religious activities were less widely publicised than in the Marianas or Palau . In towns with a sizeable Japanese populace , the civilian government would fund the construction of at least one public shrine in each town , and in smaller Japanese settlements , community leaders would direct the construction of a small shrine for communal purposes . Two Buddhist temples were also constructed during the Japanese colonial era , one at <unk> in Pohnpei and another in Chuuk . 
 Christian missionary activities — particularly Protestant — were more commonly seen in the central and eastern Carolines than in the other mandated islands . Four Congregationalist missionaries were sent to the Chuuk and Pohnpei in 1920 and received partial funding from the government . Although Christian missionary activities were intended to cater to the spiritual needs of Micronesians , a few Japanese settlers and government officials also patronised the missionaries . Missionary and church services were suppressed in the late 1930s , but the continued presence of Japanese Christians prompted the civilian government to permit private church services until the Japanese surrender . After the Japanese settlers were repatriated , the Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples were either abandoned or demolished . People of mixed Japanese – Micronesian heritage adopted Christianity in favour of Shinto and Buddhism . 
 = = Language = = 
 Early Japanese settlers taught their children to speak Japanese . Some , like traders and settlers with Micronesian wives , learned to speak some Micronesian languages . Japanese replaced the Micronesian languages as the lingua franca for day @-@ to @-@ day communication and administrative purposes for both Japanese and Micronesians . However , regular use of Japanese was discouraged when Micronesia came under United Nations trusteeship , and people of mixed Japanese – Micronesian heritage switched to English and various Micronesian languages . Japan 's economic influence has led cultural organisations to promote learning Japanese among FSM citizens . Elementary Japanese had been offered as a foreign language in some schools , notably in the College of Micronesia @-@ FSM . 
 = = Economy = = 
 A few Japanese trading companies established businesses at Chuuk and Pohnpei in the 1890s , and Koben Mori acted as its resident agent , helping to facilitate trade with the islanders . The early Japanese businessmen traded on alcoholic products , explosives and <unk> . Contraband products like alcohol and weapons were also illegally traded , and the Spanish administration made futile attempts to suppress these activities . The Japanese traders were expelled from Chuuk and Pohnpei in 1900 when the Germans purchased the islands from Spain , but Japanese traders returned to Chuuk in 1907 and set up a trading firm dealing with copra production . After the Japanese annexed Micronesia from Germany in 1914 , they gained a monopoly over the shipping routes in all of the mandated islands . The rate of copra production reached twelve thousand tons per year by the 1920s , and had an export value of two million yen . In the late 1920s , an Okinawan fisherman , <unk> established a tuna production factory at <unk> . The Japanese government provided incentives for fishermen to open new fishery production factories , and in 1937 there were at least 1500 Okinawans and Japanese who were employed in the fishery industry . Japanese settlers introduced commercial agriculture in Pohnpei and to a smaller extent in Chuuk and Yap . A few Japanese businessmen also set up firms to oversee the plantation of cash crops , including copra , rice and pineapples . They constituted the main exports in the central and eastern Carolines . 
 After the Japanese surrender in 1945 , the Allied occupation authorities scrapped all organisations pertaining to overseas trade , banking , finance and colonisation , and effectively led to an end of Japanese influence in Micronesia . Trade restrictions were then enforced between Japan and Micronesia in the first two decades after the war , but were gradually removed between 1973 and 1983 . Japanese tourists began to visit the islands from the 1960s onwards , and private businesses were allowed to invest in hotel construction and fisheries . Japanese tourists — 30 million travel abroad every year — were seen as a possible economic driver for FSM . Sites of historical interests such as the sunken Japanese ships at Chuuk Lagoon received the highest concentration of Japanese visitors . 
 = = Interethnic relations in society = = 
 Racial segregation was practiced from the early days of civilian rule , and policies were enforced to restrict Micronesians in the education , work force , health care benefits and civil service to inferior positions as compared to their Japanese counterparts . The local populace was classified according to ethnicity , with the Japanese at the top of the social strata , followed by the Okinawans , Koreans , with the Micronesians at the bottom , although some scholars argued that the Micronesians were accorded a more privileged position than the Koreans , who were often subjected to abuse by the Japanese authorities . In the education sector , Micronesian children attended public schools ( <unk> in Japanese ) that emphasised teaching vocational skills , self @-@ discipline and a basic command of Japanese . Japanese , Okinawan and Korean children attended primary schools ( <unk> ) with lessons that were based on the mainstream Japanese curriculum . Very few Micronesians progressed beyond the elementary level , and those who did usually had family connections with influential Japanese figures . Micronesians were generally accorded lower @-@ ranking jobs , and most were employed as language interpreters , administrative assistants or jobs that required menial labour . 
 The Japanese actively discouraged the practice of Micronesian customs and religions , which they viewed as " primitive " and " barbaric " . Christian missionary activity among the Micronesians was encouraged by the civilian government during the interwar period in order to encourage them to adopt modern cultural practices . Japanese cultural practices were actively encouraged ; many Micronesians learned to speak Japanese fluently and adopted Japanese manners and customs . On the other hand , many Koreans did not speak Japanese well , and the eagerness of Okinawans to engage in manual labour occasionally motivated Micronesians to criticize the Japanese culture promoted by the Japanese administrators . Japanese cultural influences were the strongest in Chuuk and Pohnpei ; in most towns by the 1920s , most Micronesians were dressed in Western or Japanese style @-@ clothing . Micronesians in these two states were also very receptive to promiscuous liaisons between Japanese men and Micronesian women ; the first brothels appeared in both states in the 1910s . Separate brothels were established for Japanese and Micronesian men , although women in both types of brothels were mainly Micronesian women . 
 In Kosrae and Yap , the Japanese administration had to contend with considerable resistance from the islanders to accept Japanese political and cultural influences . Anti @-@ Japanese sentiment was developed from the early days of Japanese rule in Kosrae , when a Japanese sergeant who was placed in @-@ charge of the island 's administrative affairs often threatened the islanders with physical abuse when dealing with conflicts . A Japanese custom frowned upon by Kosraeans was the practice of cremation of the dead . In addition , the administrators ' indifference towards nudity clashed with the Christian moral values that the islanders held to . Similarly in Yap , the islanders ' negative attitudes towards the Japanese was developed as a result of incidences of cultural insensitivity from the Japanese administrators . In particular , the introduction of Chamorros by the Japanese administration to work as policemen in the island incited racial hatred of <unk> chiefs against the Japanese . As a consequence , few Japanese immigrants chose to settle in Yap or Kosrae . 
 = = Notable individuals = = 
 Hiroshi Ismael , former Vice President and physician 
 Mori Koben , businessman and adventurer 
 Manny Mori , former President 
 Masao Nakayama , former politician and diplomat 
 <unk> Nakayama , former President 
 Regina Shotaro , Olympic athlete 
 = Gone to Coney Island and Booming Business = 
 Gone to Coney Island and Booming Business are two 1910 American silent short comedy productions by the Thanhouser Company . Both were released together on a single film reel on July 5 , 1910 . Gone to Coney Island is a comedy that features Coney Island , which the mere subject would make for a successful film . Booming Business may have been the very type of slapstick comedy that Edwin Thanhouser specifically said the Thanhouser Company would not produce . The productions of both films have no credits for the cast or crew , but possible candidates for these roles exist . Reviews of the films favored Gone to Coney Island , but some reviewers specifically refused to explain the plot because Coney Island subjects were deemed self @-@ explanatory . Booming Business received one detailed review in The New York Dramatic Mirror which was negative . The films are presumed lost . 
 = = Plots = = 
 Though the films are presumed lost , a synopsis of Gone to Coney Island survives in The Moving Picture World from July 9 , 1910 . It states : " Kate has been employed for a number of years as a maid in the home of Mrs. Greene . Her ' young man , ' Henry , works down at Coney [ Island ] . He induces Kate to leave her place and take a situation as a ticket seller at Luna Park . Kate tries to tell her mistress of her intended departure , but Mrs. Greene is busy and refuses to listen . Mrs. Greene goes out , during her absence , Kate takes French leave , leaving a note saying she is going to Coney Island . Never having visited the Island , Mrs. Greene considers it a jungle place . When she gets Kate 's note , she thinks that her duty to immediately start in pursuit of the misguided girl . Not knowing how to get to the island , she appeals to her old friend , Professor Griggs . He also is ignorant of the ways of Coney , but in turn appeals to his friend Casey , a ward politician , who of course knows the Island , and consents to act as their escort . The three set out for Coney and start on their search for Kate . The hunt is almost forgotten in the joys of looping the loop , shooting the chutes and various other diversions of the Island . When they finally find Kate , she is at her post , selling tickets at Luna . She laughs at Mrs. Greene 's fears for her safety and announces the fact that she is happily married , and presents the lucky man . In a cool Coney corner , Mrs. Greene confesses that she found Coney wasn 't as bad as it was painted , and she is going to revisit it often . " 
 The second production , Booming Business , was also featured in the same issue of the publication with a short summary . It states : " Jack is an industrious young businessman , who has invested in a small stock of stationery , and set up shop . He unfortunately has no customers , and his various schemes to bring trade prove extremely unlucky but mighty laughable . What they are we had better let the little picture tell . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the two scenarios is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . Members cast may have included the leading players of the Thanhouser productions , Anna Rosemond , Frank H. Crane and Violet Heming . 
 The setting of Gone to Coney Island is Coney Island , a popular amusement park and picture subject . One review in The Moving Picture World went so far as to give a review that was devoid of meaning by stating , " Not much further explanation is needed . Those who have been there and those who have heard of it know what it means . Perhaps nothing further is required . " Bowers notes that the popularity of Coney Island was itself able to make a successful film regardless of the scenario involved . Booming Business is notable because it appears to have contained slapstick comedy if The New York Dramatic Mirror review was accurate . Edwin Thanhouser specifically stated that the company would not produce slapstick comedy in an article in The Moving Picture World . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The two comedy productions were released on a single reel , approximately 1000 feet in total , on July 5 , 1910 . A Thanhouser Filmography Analysis , provided by Thanhouser Company Film Preservation , lists each film as comprising half a reel without further detail . The films were shown together in theaters , with known advertisements in Indiana , Kansas , Pennsylvania , and North Carolina . 
 Reviews for the Gone to Coney Island were positive with two positive , but altogether undetailed reviews in The Moving Picture World . A detailed review in the The Moving Picture News acknowledged that the film will have a lasting impact " as it is one of a class of pictures which can almost be shown as a repeater without hurting the reputation of the theatre . " The reviewer praised the photography and found the acting adequate , but the decision to include the marriage scene was deemed peculiar . For Booming Business the The Moving Picture World gave it two sentences which said the film was funny beyond description , but the The New York Dramatic Mirror provides a more detailed and negative review of the film by stating , " This ' comic ' is not up to the usual Thanhouser standard . In fact , it is rather silly all through , the only laughs being brought about by blows , falls , and smashing furniture . The principal character comes down to the camera and indicates the things he intends doing all through the picture , robbing it of every element of reality . He has a small store and adopts various schemes to boom business , such as giving health treatment with a magnetic battery , teaching boxing , and so on . Everything turns out badly and ends in general confusion . " Bowers notes that The New York Dramatic Mirror was not an unbiased reviewer , for the publication was slanted to the favor the Licensed companies instead of the Independents . Another window into the film is provided by an advertisement by the <unk> in The Twin @-@ City Daily Sentinel which states the grocery @-@ man attempts to spur business in a variety of comical ways . 
 = Til It Happens to You = 
 " Til It Happens to You " is a song produced and performed by American singer Lady Gaga . She co @-@ wrote the song with Diane Warren for the 2015 documentary film The Hunting Ground , which deals with campus rape in the United States . The song had leaked onto the Internet through an unofficial recording made at the film 's premiere at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival . It was later released by Interscope Records to digital retailers on September 18 , 2015 . The director and producer of the film had looked for someone influential to write a song for it , and music supervisor Bonnie Greenberg contacted Warren who was interested . She wrote the song with Gaga and producer Nile Rodgers accompanied them during the recording , providing his suggestions . 
 A universal song about any kind of loss in life , " Til It Happens to You " was placed during two sequences in the film , highlighting the pain of sexual assault . The song consists of an orchestral production with strings , and an emotional vocal delivery from Gaga . Lyrically it asks listeners to stand in a victim 's position and try to understand the turmoil they go through . " Til It Happens to You " was later included as part of a public service announcement video directed by Catherine Hardwicke . The video depicts various instances of violence against women and sexual assaults . It ends with a cautionary note about the effects of such distress , and individuals finding solace with their close friends and relatives . 
 Both the song and the video received positive critical response . Reviewers complimented Gaga 's vocal delivery , the sympathetic tone of the lyrics as they related to the subject , as well as the realistic depictions of the sexual assaults in the clip , and Hardwicke 's direction . A portion of the proceeds from retail sales was donated to organizations supporting victims of sexual assault . Commercially , the song reached the top thirty in Finland , Greece , and Spain , and it peaked at number 95 on the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States in March 2016 . " Til It Happens to You " was nominated for a Best Song Written for Visual Media at the 58th Annual Grammy Awards , and for Best Original Song at the 88th Academy Awards , along with numerous awards . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Til It Happens to You " was written by Diane Warren and Lady Gaga , and recorded by the latter for The Hunting Ground ( 2015 ) , a documentary film about campus rape in the United States . Director Kirby Dick and producer Amy Ziering wanted someone with " major " influence to record a song for the film , believing it would generate publicity and promote the subject . They contacted executive producer Paul Blavin , explaining their idea and added that they did not have the resources to find someone . Blavin started searching and met with music supervisor Bonnie Greenberg , who introduced him to Warren . Warren was moved by the idea saying : " I cannot not write a song for you . And not only can I not not write a song for this movie , I 'm going to gift it to you . " She wrote the song after viewing scenes from the film almost a year before the track 's release . Warren then called Gaga and played her a rough demo , but was unsure about her involvement . So she decided to fly to New York and try to work with Gaga ; the latter accepted the song and decided to record it . Warren said of the song and Gaga 's contributions : 
 I heard about [ the film ] and it just really touched me , and she had stuff in her life that she could relate to . Gaga is one of the most talented artists I have worked with in my life and I 'm excited about doing more with her ... There are a lot of levels to the song . There 's something very vulnerable about it and something very defiant about it , especially the way [ Gaga ] sings it . The first verse is vulnerable — ' You tell me it 's going to get better ? ' — and the second verse comes in and it builds . Really ? It gets better ? No . You don 't know until it happens to you ... 
 Warren also added that the song 's message was universal in nature and relatable to any loss faced in life . Gaga , who herself is a victim of rape , revealed during the Producers Guild of America Awards 2015 , that the song 's theme was important to her family as well . Her father 's sister Joanne had been sexually assaulted while attending college , and the subsequent torment worsened her prevailing lupus , resulting in her death and profoundly affecting Gaga 's family . The singer became involved with New York state Governor Andrew Cuomo 's push for new legislation to help eradicate " rape culture " in American universities , signing a letter supporting it . Titled " Enough Is Enough " , the legislation went into effect in July 2015 . 
 The documentary features two versions of the song , one during the body of the film and the second at its closing , and highlights the sequences of the pain of sexual assault . While the song played , the lead subject , an assault survivor , reminisced about the impact of rape while walking around a college campus . Ziering concluded that having Gaga sing the track fulfilled their need for publicity since she " [ brought ] a whole other demographic . Anyone who has that kind of platform to reach all sorts of people that maybe would not necessarily be inclined to be interested in your issue ... it 's incredible . " " Til It Happens to You " leaked onto the Internet before it was officially released , through an unofficial recording made at the film 's premiere at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival . In April 2015 , Warren confirmed that the song would have an official release and was waiting for a final audio mixing by Gaga . It was later released as a digital download single on September 18 , 2015 . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 In an interview for a Billboard podcast , Nile Rodgers spoke about the song 's recording sessions and working with Gaga and Warren . He had met Gaga in a party and she invited him to join them in the studio . During recording , Gaga was singing in a D note , over the F note of the music that was being played . Rodgers suggested to Warren that since the D vocals made the song sound like a country track , they could instead inverse the chords into thirteenth ( an octave plus a sixth ) , thus serving a dominant function . Warren accepted the suggestion and the song was re @-@ recorded . Gaga reportedly struggled while recording the song , since it caused her to recall her own trauma . Warren explained that it was : " very emotional for her . She couldn 't even talk through it at times " . Gaga told an interviewer with Variety that Warren had helped her feel comfortable about the song and its subject matter , allowing her to transcend the singing and put the correct emotional depth in her performance . 
 When Diane first played me what she had begun with the song , I needed no convincing about the record ... it was about sharing that part of myself with the world ... We talked a lot about what I felt the song needed in order to reach as many young people as possible . I felt that it needed to not stay in a purely emotional state , but that it was going to somehow grow throughout the performance and the song and by the end , kind of be full of rage . I feel like what this song accomplishes is women — or men — rising to say , ' You think you can hurt me ? You don 't know about power . Because after what you did to me , you don 't even know how much stronger I <unk> 
 " Til It Happens to You " is a somber tune featuring orchestral production and soaring strings . The pop ballad delivers an empowering message : " Hold your head up and be strong / When you fall you gotta get up " , and has been described as " stirring and emotional " . Featuring a classical production , the song emphasizes Gaga 's vocals , keeping focus on the lyrics : " Til it happens to you / You don 't know how it feels , how it feels / Til it happens to you , you won 't know , it won 't be real / No , it won 't be real , won 't know how I feel . " The lyrics ask those who tell victims how to cope , or pretend to understand their assault , to try to stand in their shoes . Gaga feels that some events need to be experienced in order to understand them . The first verse is sung by Gaga in a vulnerable voice , which gradually changes into an aggressive tone , which then changes to sound like that of a survivor during the final verses . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com , " Til It Happens to You " is set in the time signature common for a slow tempo of 59 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of A minor with Gaga 's vocals spanning from E3 to D5 . The song follows a basic sequence of Am – C – Fmaj7 – C – G / B as its chord progression . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Jeff <unk> from Fuse noted that the song contains a " powerful message " while the composition was evocative of her " biting " ballads like " Dope " . Brennan Carly from Spin said the song " highlights [ Gaga ] ' s evocative voice " and is similar in tone to " Speechless " and " Gypsy " . While reviewing the documentary , Leslie Felperin of The Hollywood Reporter said that the song provided " an extra jolt of poignancy " in the film . Lauren Valenti from Marie Claire described the track as " robust and orchestral " , adding that the lyrics " command attention " . She complimented the decision to have Gaga sing the track , given her connection to sexual abuse . Bradley Stern from MuuMuse also compared it to " Dope " and " Speechless " , while comparing the string arrangement to the music of Lana Del Rey . Stern described it as a " massive production " complimenting the lyrics by being straightforward . For Manohla Dargis of The New York Times , Dick was able to successfully change the sombre mood of the documentary with the inclusion of the song . Spencer Kornhaber from The Atlantic praised the song and Gaga 's vocals , saying that : " Even with such somber subject matter , [ the singer 's ] booming delivery and dramatic phrasing will probably remind people of the time when [ Gaga 's 2009 single ] ' Bad Romance ' ruled the radio . " 
 Declaring the song Gaga 's " most stirring " release , Michelle <unk> from Consequence of Sound called the track : " a sweeping and intensely powerful number — it 's not just any ordinary pop song " . Christopher Tapley from Variety praised both Gaga and Warren 's songwriting , describing it as : " something of an anthem for the cause ... It is one of the strongest contenders in this year 's race for best original song [ in the Academy Awards ] . But far more than that , it is a rally cry for a movement . " Lisa Wright wrote in NME that the song is : " a somber piano ballad befitting of the topic with lyrics that depict the frustration of being told to pick yourself up and carry on by people who couldn 't possibly understand your situation . " Idolator 's Robbie Daw claimed that the " powerful , unsettling " visuals were complimented by a " strong vocal performance " from Gaga . Brittany Spanos from Rolling Stone called it an " evocative track " , which highlighted Gaga 's vocals and believed it to be " a perfect follow @-@ up to [ Gaga 's Cheek to Cheek album ] with Tony Bennett " . Spanos added that " [ an Academy Award win would be a triumph ] following [ Gaga 's ] critical and commercial miss with most recent album Artpop and help break Warren 's losing streak at the show . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Til It Happens to You " charted on the Ultratip charts of Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) while in Finland it debuted and peaked at number 21 on the Finnish Download Chart . Across Europe it peaked at number 46 in France , number 29 in Spain , and also reached number 5 on the Greece Digital Songs chart published by Billboard . In the United Kingdom , the song entered the UK Download Chart at number 67 , while on the official UK Singles Chart it reached a peak of number 171 . The song also reached a peak of number 52 in Scotland . On the Belgian Ultratip charts , " Til It Happens to You " reached number 45 in Flanders region and number 42 in Wallonia . 
 In the United States , the song initially failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , but later entered at number 95 in March 2016 , following Gaga 's performance of the song at the 88th Academy Awards . According to Billboard , the song had sold less than 2 @,@ 000 downloads during the week before the Academy Awards sales period . Following the performance , the song sold nearly 28 @,@ 000 downloads ( 2 @,@ 120 % sales increase ) , becoming its best digital sales week , and debuted at number 27 on the Hot Digital Songs chart . It also garnered one million streams ( up by 546 % ) for the tracking week , contributing its debut on the Hot 100 . Billboard reported that the song sold more than " Writing 's on the Wall " by Sam Smith , the latter having won the Academy Award for Best Original Song . According to Nielsen SoundScan , " Til It Happens to You " has sold a total of 71 @,@ 000 downloads in the country . 
 On the Dance Club Songs , the song became Gaga 's 14th entry to reach the top of the chart on the issue dated January 23 , 2016 , landing her in 10th place in the ranking of artists with the most number @-@ ones on the dance chart . It was her first song to reach the top of the chart since " Applause " ( 2013 ) . The rise to the top of the dance chart was aided by 30 remixed versions of the track , including those from Dave Audé , Tracy Young and Dirty Pop . On the Billboard issue dated February 20 , 2016 , the song debuted at number 24 on the Adult Contemporary chart ; it has reached a peak of number 19 . According to radio program directors , the song received positive response from their listeners prompting airplay . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 " Til It Happens to You " won the award for Best Song in a Documentary , at the 2015 Hollywood Music in Media Awards , which took place in November 11 , 2015 , for Best Original Song at the 20th Satellite Awards , and for Best Song from a Movie at the 3rd iHeartRadio Music Awards . Other nominations for the song came from 21st Critics ' Choice Awards and the St. Louis Film Critics Association ( <unk> ) , where it was listed for Best Song category , from Georgia Film Critics Association and Denver Film Critics Society in the category for Best Original Song , and from the 58th Annual Grammy Awards for Best Song Written for Visual Media . " Til It Happens to You " also received a nomination for an Academy Award in the category of Best Original Song for the 2016 ceremony . It is the fifth song from a documentary to be listed for an award in that category . Gaga dedicated the nomination to survivors of sexual assault , through a message on her Twitter account . In February 2016 , Gaga and Warren were honored at the 11th Annual Los Angeles Italia Film , Fashion and Art Fest , with the festival 's Song of the Year Award . The song also received a nomination at the 68th Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics , however , just Warren was credited because of their cue sheet accreditation requirement . With its nomination , " Til It Happens to You " became the first song ever to be nominated at the Grammys , Oscars and Emmys in the same year . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and synopsis = = = 
 In August 2015 , it was announced that the song would be released as part of a public service announcement ( PSA ) video , directed by Catherine Hardwicke , to raise awareness about sexual assaults in college campuses . The Hollywood Reporter described it as casting " an emotional spotlight on young women in vulnerable situations that college students will readily recognize " . Hardwicke said of the PSA 's important message : " You can 't watch the documentary without screaming at the screen . We tried to capture those stories in a very visceral way and add another voice to this powerful call to action . " Production costs were underwritten by the film 's executive producers , Paul Blavin and Regina K. Scully . The video was released the same day as the digital release , with Gaga tweeting out a link to it and adding : " We hope u feel our love & solidarity through the song & perhaps find some peace in knowing u r not alone through this film " . Warren believed that the PSA video highlighted her observations about victims coming forward to speak about the assault on them : 
 It seems like it 's all coming out of this dark closet it was in ... It was secretive . It wasn 't what you talked about . But now , people are saying , ' We 're not going to be victims anymore , we 're going to call you on it , whether it 's on a campus or anywhere ' . I want [ people ] to know they 're not alone and they 're not victims , but they 're survivors . 
 The clip portrays sexual assaults mostly against women , and how they cope after the incident . The black @-@ and @-@ white video opens with a warning message : " The following contains graphic content that may be emotionally unsettling but reflects the reality of what is happening daily on college campuses . " It then shows a girl walking through an empty corridor , followed by young people in various activities in a college campus : reading ( portrayed by actress Nikki Reed ) , a trans man adjusting his chest binder in the bathroom , attending a party ( one of the partygoers being portrayed by actress <unk> Clemons ) . However they are all sexually assaulted , with one of the scenes showing a couple of young girls being drugged and raped at the party . The heartbroken girls and the trans man cry , while alternate images show them expressing their emotions by inscribing words on themselves . Ultimately they find solace and hope in friendship , and leave the college with their friends , as the words inscribed on their bodies change to positive messages . Near its ending , the music video displays the message : " One in five college women will be sexually assaulted this year unless something changes " , following which the message points the audience to the Facebook page for The Hunting Ground and <unk> , the White House support website for people who have endured a sexual crime . A portion of the earnings from the song 's digital sales will be donated to organizations supporting victims of sexual assault . 
 = = = Reception and analysis = = = 
 Kornhaber described the video as a " sombre , socially conscious curveball " but wondered why Gaga released the PSA @-@ like video , adding that she has : " always been good at surprises , and unfortunately , no time is better than any other when it comes to discussing the issues she 's singing about " . Christopher Rosen from Entertainment Weekly described the clip as " powerful , disturbing and emotional " . Writing for The Daily Telegraph , Radhika <unk> declared that each scenario in the video appeared realistic and wrote : " by making sure the attacks differ in location , scenario and the appearances of both rapist and victim , Gaga is breaking the myth of there being a ' typical rape ' " . Corinne Heller from E ! believed that the " graphic , emotional and hard to watch " video was able to deliver a " powerful message " , one that was close to Gaga due to her real @-@ life rape experience . Wright described the video for NME as a " brutal , monochrome rendering " of the subject matter , with " harrowing " depictions of the rapes . She added that the rape statistics at the end of the video were " horrifying " but complimented Gaga for using her popularity to promote awareness of the subject . Loretta <unk> from Bustle believed that Gaga 's previous music videos had political aspects but were open to interpretations . But with the music video of " Til It Happens to You " , she showed maturity by featuring " chilling scenes of staged sexual assaults " . 
 Alex Rees from Cosmopolitan felt that the video contained " uncomfortable footage " , but added that the " emotionally unsettling " images were able to reflect on the actual reality of what happens on college campuses . Claire Hodgson from the same publication described the clip as a " beautifully shot , brilliantly acted short film " , which " really does not hold back when it comes to portraying the real horror of sexual assault in the most graphic way possible " . Emily Shire from The Daily Beast was positive about the clip , calling it : " both chilling and beautiful . The overall effect is as much , if not more , a credit to acclaimed director Catherine Hardwicke . The brutality of these snapshot scenes are remarkably moving in the scariest and most sickening way possible " . However , Shire was disappointed with one aspect of the PSA – that the victims are supported by their friends and close @-@ ones and that was enough to cope through the trauma . Instead Shire wanted to see the legal ramifications of such traumatic incidents , with the victims going to the police . Shire concluded the review saying : " Gaga and Hardwicke deserve props for creating such a powerful , visceral , and aesthetically striking PSA . They 've brought a tremendous amount of attention to rape and sexual assault . Yet , attention alone is inadequate balm for the victims of rape . " Conversely , Dan Solomon of Fast Company believed the video to be an " important statement " from Gaga and believed that it would direct further attention to The Hunting Ground . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Gaga performed " Til It Happens to You " live for the first time on October 29 , 2015 at the annual amfAR gala , along with cover versions of " Call Me Irresponsible " , " Bang Bang ( My Baby Shot Me Down ) " and " La Vie en rose " . She also performed the song at the Billboard Women in Music event on December 11 , 2015 , where she was presented with the award for Woman of the Year . The song was also performed at an intimate gathering at the Peninsula Hotel in Beverly Hills . The audience consisted of the filmmakers and the rape survivors featured in the documentary . Gaga reportedly became emotional while performing the song , and thanked the filmmakers for including the song in the film . She also performed the song at the 2015 Producers Guild of America Awards , where The Hunting Ground was awarded a special recognition trophy . Actress America Ferrera introduced Gaga but she did not appear on stage for sometime leading to a few moments of " nervous laughter from the audience " as Ferrera tried to joke about the situation , until the singer finally arrived in front of her piano on stage . 
 Gaga performed the song at the 88th Academy Awards after an introduction by Joe Biden , the vice president of the United States . She sang it while sitting in front of a white piano , and near its conclusion survivors of sexual assaults joined her onstage , with words like " survivor " and " not your fault " written on their bodies . Mike Ayers from The Wall Street Journal called it a " poignant performance " of the night . Katie Atkinson from Billboard listed the performance as one of the best moments of the awards show , saying that Gaga " made a huge impact on the Oscars stage . Her performance alone would have been powerful enough , but when the curtains opened behind her to reveal a sea of sexual assault survivors standing in solidarity , the emotional bar was raised to the next level . " Kesha performed a cover of the song , accompanied with Warren on piano , at the Humane Society Gala in Los Angeles on May 7 , 2016 . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 Digital download 
 " Til It Happens to You " – 4 : 18 
 Remixes promotional CD single 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Tracy Young 's Ferosh Reconstruction Extended ) – 9 : 18 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Tracy Young 's Ferosh Reconstruction Radio Edit ) – 3 : 52 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Tracy Young 's Ferosh Reconstruction Mixshow ) – 6 : 04 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Tracy Young 's Ferosh Reconstruction Dub ) – 9 : 18 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Mike Rizzo Funk Generation Club Mix ) – 5 : 12 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Mike Rizzo Funk Generation Radio Mix ) – 3 : 54 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Frank Lamboy Late Mix Vocal ) – 7 : 48 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Frank Lamboy Late Instrumental ) – 7 : 48 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Dirty Pop Club Remix ) – 6 : 24 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Division 4 & Matt Consola Mix ) – 7 : 10 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Division 4 & Matt Consola Radio Edit ) – 4 : 05 
 " Til It Happens to You " ( Division 4 & Matt Consola Instrumental ) – 7 : 10 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Stefani Germanotta P / K / A Lady Gaga ( BMI ) Sony ATV Songs LLC / House of Gaga Publishing , LLC / GloJoe Music Inc . ( BMI ) 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from <unk> 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Tear down this wall ! = 
 " Tear down this wall ! " is a line from a speech made by US President Ronald Reagan in West Berlin on June 12 , 1987 , calling for the leader of the Soviet Union , Mikhail Gorbachev , to open up the barrier which had divided West and East Berlin since 1961 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The " tear down this wall " speech was not the first time Reagan had addressed the issue of the Berlin Wall . In a visit to West Berlin in June 1982 , he 'd stated " I 'd like to ask the Soviet leaders one question [ ... ] Why is the wall there ? " , and in 1986 , 25 years after the construction of the wall , in response to West German newspaper Bild @-@ Zeitung asking when he thought the wall could be " torn down " , Reagan said , " I call upon those responsible to dismantle it [ today ] " . 
 On the day before Reagan 's 1987 visit , 50 @,@ 000 people had demonstrated against the presence of the American president in Berlin . During the visit itself , wide swaths of Berlin were shut off hermetically from the event to suppress further anti @-@ Reagan protests . The district of Kreuzberg , in particular , was targeted in this respect , with movement throughout this portion of the city in effect restrained completely ( for instance the subway line 1 was shut down ) . 
 The speech was also a source of considerable controversy within the Reagan administration itself , with several senior staffers and aides advising against the phrase , saying anything that might cause further East @-@ West tensions or potential embarrassment to Gorbachev , with whom President Reagan had built a good relationship , should be omitted . American officials in West Germany and presidential speechwriters , including Peter Robinson , thought otherwise . Robinson traveled to West Germany to inspect potential speech venues , and gained an overall sense that the majority of West Berliners opposed the wall . Despite getting little support for suggesting Reagan demand the wall 's removal , Robinson kept the phrase in the speech text . On May 18 , 1987 , President Reagan met with his speechwriters and responded to the speech by saying , " I thought it was a good , solid draft . " White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker objected , saying it sounded " extreme " and " <unk> , " and Deputy US National Security Advisor Colin Powell agreed . Nevertheless , Reagan liked the passage , saying , " I think we 'll leave it in . " 
 Chief speechwriter Anthony Dolan gives another account of the line 's origins , however , attributing it directly to Reagan . In an article published in The Wall Street Journal in November 2009 , Dolan gives a detailed account of how in an Oval Office meeting that was prior to Robinson 's draft Reagan came up with the line on his own . He records vivid impressions of his own reaction and Robinson 's at the time . This led to a friendly exchange of letters between Robinson and Dolan over their differing accounts , which The Wall Street Journal published . 
 = = The speech = = 
 Arriving in Berlin on June 12 , 1987 , President and Mrs. Reagan were taken to the Reichstag , where they viewed the wall from a balcony . Reagan then made his speech at the Brandenburg Gate at 2 : 00 pm , in front of two panes of bulletproof glass . Among the spectators were West German president Richard von Weizsäcker , Chancellor Helmut Kohl , and West Berlin mayor Eberhard <unk> . 
 That afternoon , Reagan said , 
 We welcome change and openness ; for we believe that freedom and security go together , that the advance of human liberty can only strengthen the cause of world peace . There is one sign the Soviets can make that would be unmistakable , that would advance dramatically the cause of freedom and peace . General Secretary Gorbachev , if you seek peace , if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe , if you seek liberalization , come here to this gate . Mr. Gorbachev , open this gate . Mr. Gorbachev , tear down this wall ! 
 Later on in his speech , President Reagan said , " As I looked out a moment ago from the Reichstag , that embodiment of German unity , I noticed words crudely spray @-@ painted upon the wall , perhaps by a young Berliner , ' This wall will fall . Beliefs become reality . ' Yes , across Europe , this wall will fall . For it cannot withstand faith ; it cannot withstand truth . The wall cannot withstand freedom . " 
 Another highlight of the speech was Reagan 's call to end the arms race with his reference to the Soviets ' SS @-@ 20 nuclear weapons , and the possibility " not merely of limiting the growth of arms , but of eliminating , for the first time , an entire class of nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth . " 
 = = Response and legacy = = 
 The speech received " relatively little coverage from the media " , Time magazine reported 20 years later . East German Politburo member Guenter Schabowski considered the speech to be " absurd " , and the Soviet press agency TASS accused Reagan of giving an " openly provocative , war @-@ mongering speech . " 
 Former West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said he would never forget standing near Reagan when he challenged Gorbachev to tear down the Berlin Wall . " He was a stroke of luck for the world , especially for Europe . " 
 In an interview with Reagan himself , he recalls the East German police not allowing people to get near the wall , which prevented the citizens from experiencing the speech at all . The fact that West German police acted in a similar way has however seldom been noted in accounts such as these . 
 Peter Robinson , the White House wordsmith who drafted the address , said its most famous line was inspired by a conversation with Ingeborg Elz of West Berlin who had remarked in a conversation with him , " If this man Gorbachev is serious with his talk of Glasnost and perestroika he can prove it by getting rid of this wall . " 
 Despite Reagan urging Gorbachev to tear down the Berlin Wall , there are some such as <unk> <unk> of Time who commented that there is little evidence that the speech had any impact on the decision to tear down the wall , let alone an impact on the people he addressed . Another critic is Liam Hoare in a 2012 article in The Atlantic , who points to the many reasons for the tendency for American media to focus on the significance of this particular speech , without weighing the complexity of the events as they unfolded in both East and West Germany and the Soviet Union . 
 John <unk> , senior US diplomat in Berlin at the time of Reagan 's speech , and US Ambassador to Germany from 1997 to 2001 , said " [ The speech ] wasn 't really elevated to its current status until 1989 , after the wall came down . " 
 = 2 / 5th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 5th Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army that operated during World War II . It was raised at Melbourne , Victoria , on 18 October 1939 as part of the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) , attached to the 17th Brigade of the 6th Division . The 2 / 5th was one of only two Australian infantry battalions to fight against all of the major Axis powers during the war , seeing action against the Germans and Italians in Egypt , Libya , Greece and Crete , and the Vichy French in Syria , before returning to Australia in 1942 to fight the Japanese following a period of garrison duties in Ceylon , where it formed part of an Australian force established to defend against a possible Japanese invasion . 
 Following its return to Australia , the battalion was re @-@ organised for jungle warfare and took part in two campaigns in New Guinea . The first of these campaigns came in 1942 – 43 when it was involved in the defence of Wau and the Salamaua – Lae campaign , and then again in 1944 – 45 when it took part in the Aitape – Wewak campaign . Following the end of the war , the battalion embarked for Australia on 1 December 1945 and disbanded at Puckapunyal in early February 1946 . Its battle honours are maintained by the 5th / 6th Battalion , Royal Victoria Regiment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and training 1940 – 41 = = = 
 Following the outbreak of World War II on 3 September 1939 , the Australian government announced the decision to raise the all @-@ volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) , since the Defence Act precluded sending Australia 's part @-@ time military forces overseas . As part of the force , the 2 / 5th Battalion was raised in Melbourne , Victoria , on 18 October 1939 and began to receive its first intake of men on 2 November 1939 when it moved to Puckapunyal . Many of the battalion 's initial recruits came from the Victorian Scottish Regiment , a Militia unit associated with the 5th Battalion , which had been raised as part of the First Australian Imperial Force during World War I. The battalion 's first commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Cook , although he was replaced as commander by Major Hugh Wrigley before the battalion went into combat , as Cook was considered too old to lead troops in combat . 
 Along with the 2 / 6th , 2 / 7th and 2 / 8th Battalions , the 2 / 5th formed the 17th Brigade , and was assigned to the 6th Division , the first infantry division formed as part of the 2nd AIF . The colours chosen for the battalion 's Unit Colour Patch ( UCP ) were the same as those of the 5th Battalion . These colours were black over red , in a horizontal rectangular shape , although a border of gray was added to the UCP to distinguish the battalion from its Militia counterpart . With an authorised strength of around 900 personnel , like other Australian infantry battalions of the time , the battalion consisted of four rifle companies , from ' A ' to ' D ' , each consisting of three platoons . These companies were supported by a battalion headquarters and a headquarters company with six specialist platoons : signals , pioneer , anti @-@ aircraft , transport , administrative and mortars . The battalion also had a regimental aid post attached . The battalion 's personnel assembled between November 1939 and April 1940 , undertaking basic training in Australia before embarking for the Middle East on 14 April 1940 aboard the transport HMT Ettrick from Port Melbourne . 
 = = = North Africa , Greece and Syria 1941 – 42 = = = 
 The battalion arrived in Egypt on 18 May 1940 , and joined the 17th Brigade 's other two infantry battalions in camp at Beit Jirja . A further period of training in Palestine followed before the battalion took part in the fighting against the Italians in Libya in January – February 1941 , during which the 2 / 5th was involved in attacks on Bardia and Tobruk , as the Australians went into battle for the first time . During the fighting around Bardia , the battalion 's commander , Wrigley , was seriously wounded in an artillery bombardment , and was temporarily replaced by Major George Sell , as the battalion was committed to the fighting in the second phase of the assault , advancing through the bridgehead that had been established towards the railway <unk> . Later , during the assault on Tobruk , the 2 / 5th was tasked with conducting a diversionary attack to the east of the Italian perimeter . The battalion 's time in Libya cost it 32 killed , and 60 wounded . 
 A few months later in April the 6th Division was sent to Greece in order to defend against a possible German invasion of that nation . The invasion took place as anticipated , although in the end the British and Commonwealth forces were unable to stem the tide of the German onslaught . The 2 / 5th Battalion began the campaign at <unk> on 14 April . In a series of withdrawals made necessary by the lightning advance of German forces , it was pushed back all the way to the port of Kalamata , where it was evacuated a couple of weeks later on 27 April 1941 . The battalion lost 21 men killed , 26 wounded and 47 as prisoners of war ; most of the prisoners were drivers who were captured having been unable to make it out in time . The majority of the battalion , consisting of 560 personnel , was evacuated to Alexandria , and from there concentrated in Palestine ; a few – 74 men – in the confusion of the evacuation were landed on Crete , where they formed a composite battalion along with other 17th Brigade units and personnel , including about 260 personnel from the 2 / 6th Battalion . These personnel were assigned to <unk> Force in the Suda Sector , and occupied a position around <unk> . They then took part in the Battle of Crete following the German invasion on 20 May , during which the majority of the 2 / 5th personnel assigned to the composite battalion were captured . The battalion 's casualties for the campaign amounted to three killed in action or died of wounds , three wounded and 58 captured . Six men from the battalion are known to have evaded capture during the fighting in Greece or Crete , although one of these was later killed in action while fighting alongside Yugoslav resistance forces . Those that were taken prisoner were eventually moved to camps in Germany or Poland until they were liberated at the end of the war . 
 In June – July 1941 , the Australians were deployed to Syria and Lebanon for the campaign against the Vichy French , which was launched by the British in order to prevent the French @-@ held colonies from being controlled by the Germans ; the majority of the Australian forces were drawn from the 7th Division , although the 17th Brigade was called upon to provide reinforcements , detaching the 2 / 3rd and 2 / 5th Battalions . The 2 / 5th Battalion 's initial involvement in the campaign came in mid @-@ June during the French counterattack , when one of its companies went into action around <unk> . After this , the battalion 's main involvement came in early July , when it took part in the Battle of Damour , which proved to be the final battle of the campaign . After a preliminary move across the Damour River , during the final assault on Damour , the 2 / 5th Battalion , in concert with the 2 / 3rd , advanced from El Boum , moving through the 21st Brigade 's position , to cut the road to the north of the Damour , while other forces advanced from the east . In the days following the capture of Damour , the 2 / 5th had continued the advance north towards <unk> on the coastal road to Beirut ; meanwhile , the Vichy commanders sought an armistice , bringing the campaign to an end on 12 July . The 2 / 5th 's casualties during the brief campaign amounted to 41 men killed or wounded . In the aftermath , the battalion remained in the Middle East , serving as an occupation force in Syria and Lebanon until January 1942 . Following Japan 's entry into the war , the Australian government requested the return of the battalion as it was needed for the fighting in New Guinea and elsewhere in the Pacific . 
 = = = New Guinea 1942 – 45 = = = 
 The battalion departed the Middle East on 10 March 1942 aboard the troopship SS Otranto ; however , on the voyage back to Australia the 16th and 17th Brigades were disembarked in Ceylon , due to fears of a Japanese attack . For nearly four months they were stationed on the island , initially in Galle , around the fort , and then later around the bay , where observation posts and section defensive positions were established . Throughout April and May , the 2 / 5th Battalion endured heavy rains but nevertheless undertook a series of exercises and training . In early July , the battalion finally received orders to return to Australia and , after being relieved at the Galle Fort by the 3rd Battalion , 8th Gurkhas , was transported to Colombo to embark upon the Athlone Castle . On 4 August 1942 , the battalion arrived in Melbourne , having been away for over two years . 
 A short period of home leave followed , before the battalion 's personnel concentrated at Royal Park for a march through Melbourne . A draft of reinforcements arrived around this time also , incorporating men from New South Wales and several others states . In mid @-@ September , the battalion moved to Greta , New South Wales , travelling by rail through Shepparton , Tocumwal and Newcastle . A brief period of training was undertaken there , during which the battalion 's khaki uniforms were dyed green . During this time , the battalion was re @-@ organised and converted to the jungle establishment ; as part of this process its authorised strength was reduced to around 800 personnel of all ranks . The situation in the Pacific had deteriorated dramatically , and the Australian forces holding out against the Japanese in New Guinea were hard @-@ pressed and desperately in need of reinforcement . Thus in early October 1942 , not more than two months after returning to Australia , the 2 / 5th moved to Brisbane , Queensland , where it deployed to Milne Bay , which had only recently been held in the face of a Japanese landing , aboard the Dutch transport <unk> . 
 The battalion did not take part in any fighting until a few months later when , in January 1943 , it took part in the defence of Wau after the 17th Brigade was despatched to reinforce Kanga Force . Sailing to Port Moresby from Milne Bay on the MV Duntroon , an advance party of two companies from the battalion was flown into Wau on 24 January to hastily reinforce the small force around <unk> . The remainder – totalling about 450 men – arriving on 29 January , after which they secured the airfield , which was now under direct Japanese fire , as the two companies that had arrived earlier were pulled back from <unk> . In early February , as the Australians gained the initiative , the battalion was relieved from holding the airfield , and went on the offensive , attacking alongside the 2 / 7th Battalion , in an effort to push the Japanese away from their positions on the bank of the Bulolo River , around Crystal Creek , to the south @-@ west of Wau . The fighting was intense , and over the course of three days , the battalion lost 27 killed and 31 wounded . 
 After Wau was secured , the battalion undertook patrolling operations around Mubo , along with the rest of Kanga Force , before joining the advance on Salamaua in support of the 3rd Division , with a view to drawing Japanese reinforcements away from Lae , where a landing was planned for September . The Japanese put up a strong resistance and the battalion became involved in heavy fighting around Mubo in May , before fighting at <unk> Junction and Mount Tambu in July and August as part of actions to secure Komiatum ; around <unk> , two companies were deployed in a holding action and to attempt to outflank Mount Tambu to cut the Japanese line of communication , while the other two companies attacked Mount Tambu itself . Casualties for the battalion between April and September amounted to 34 killed and 95 wounded . As the 5th Division arrived to take over from the 3rd following the capture of Mount Tambu and the link up with US forces , the 2 / 5th Battalion was withdrawn from the line , concentrating around Nassau Bay in late August as the 17th Brigade was relieved by the 29th . After a fortnight of unloading ships around the bay , the battalion was moved by landing craft to Milne Bay , where it embarked on the Liberty ship Charles Steinmetz and the Dutch transport <unk> . On 23 September 1943 , the battalion arrived back in Australia , landing at Cairns , Queensland . The fighting in the Salamaua area resulted in the following losses for the 2 / 5th : 94 killed and 165 wounded . 
 Concentrating at Wondecla , on the Atherton Tablelands in north Queensland , after an extended period of home leave during which time the Victorian and South Australian personnel took part in a march through Melbourne , the 2 / 5th Battalion spent the next year training on the Tablelands along with the rest of the 6th Division . There was also a large turn over in the battalion 's personnel at this time , as it had been severely depleted due to illness during its previous campaign , and it was brought up to strength by April 1944 with several drafts of reinforcements , with the majority coming from New South Wales . To counter boredom and malaise amongst the men during late 1944 , the battalion was occupied with a series of various sporting events and further leave . In the new year , a series of amphibious exercises were undertaken during this time with a view to preparing the battalion for future operations . 
 Finally , late in the war , the battalion received orders to deploy overseas again . Boarding the Duntroon on 24 November 1944 , a week later the battalion arrived at Aitape in New Guinea . There , the 6th Division took over from the American garrison in order to free up the US troops for further fighting in the Philippines . Following disembarkation , the 2 / 5th concentrated around Tadji airstrip . In December , the Australians began offensive operations against the Japanese forces that were operating in the surrounding areas . For the next seven months until the war ended the 2 / 5th undertook patrols through the Torricelli and Prince Alexander mountain ranges , as the 17th Brigade worked to initially establish and hold the Australian base around Aitape , before moving inland towards Maprik and then on to Kiarivu to pursue the Japanese forces that had withdrawn into the interior . Although only intended as a mopping up campaign , it was an arduous and costly period . Consisting primarily of small unit actions which resulted in disproportionately heavy casualties for the Australians , throughout the course of the campaign the 2 / 5th suffered 146 casualties , including eight officers killed or wounded . 
 = = = Disbandment and legacy = = = 
 Following the end of the war , the 2 / 5th remained in New Guinea as personnel were posted into the unit from other units that were being disbanded . In September , the battalion was withdrawn from the Kaboibus area and flown back to Wewak . The battalion took part in a divisional parade in October while later that month it was declared " redundant " under demobilisation plans , and during this time many soldiers undertook educational or vocational training to prepare them for civilian life while they waited to return to Australia . In November , there was a considerable turn over in the battalion 's troops , as members were posted to other units depending upon their demobilisation priority : these units included the 2 / 1st , the 2 / 2nd , the 2 / 6th , the 2 / 7th , and the 30th Infantry Battalions . After this , the battalion was left with only 108 personnel , all of whom possessed the required points for discharge . Finally , on 1 December 1945 , the remaining personnel embarked upon the transport Duntroon , bound for Brisbane . A brief stay in camp at Chermside , in the Brisbane suburbs , followed before the battalion moved by rail to Victoria . Personnel detrained at Seymour and then moved by road to Puckapunyal . From there the Victorian , South Australian and Western Australian contingents marched out for discharge , leaving behind a small cadre staff . 
 The battalion was subsequently disbanded in early February 1946 while at Puckapunyal . Throughout its involvement in the war , a total of 2 @,@ 967 men served with the 2 / 5th Battalion of whom 216 were killed , and 390 wounded . Members of the battalion received two Distinguished Service Orders , 14 Military Crosses , six Distinguished Conduct Medals , 20 Military Medals , and 56 Mentions in Despatches ; one member of the battalion was appointed as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire and three were appointed Members of the Order of the British Empire . Alongside the 2 / 3rd Battalion , the 2 / 5th was the only other Australian infantry battalion to fight against all the major Axis powers during the war . 
 In 1948 , the Citizen Military Forces was re @-@ constituted and the 5th Battalion , Victorian Scottish Regiment was re @-@ raised . At the time many of its members were drawn from the 2 / 5th Battalion and because of its territorial and personnel links it was decided that the Victorian Scottish Regiment would take custody of the 2 / 5th Battalion 's World War II battle honours . As a result of the reorganisation of the Australian Army in the 1960s , which saw the disbandment of the regionally @-@ based single battalion regiments and the raising of new multi @-@ battalion state @-@ based regiments these battle honours were inherited by the 5th / 6th Battalion , Royal Victoria Regiment , an Australian Army Reserve battalion based around Melbourne . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 2 / 5th Battalion received the following battle honours for its service during World War II : 
 North Africa , Bardia 1941 , Capture of Tobruk , Syria 1941 , Merjayun , Damour , Greece 1941 , South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 1945 , Wau , Bobdubi II , Mubo II , Mount Tambu , Komiatum , Liberation of Australian New Guinea , <unk> , <unk> , Yamil – Ulupu , Kaboibus – Kiarivu . 
 In 1961 – 62 , these battle honours were entrusted to the 5th Battalion , and through this link are maintained by the Royal Victoria Regiment . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers commanded the 2 / 5th Battalion during the war : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Page Cook ( 1939 – 40 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Wrigley ( 1940 – 41 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Roy King ( 1941 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Patrick Daniel Sarsfield Starr ( 1942 – 43 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Mayo Conroy ( 1943 – 44 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Alfred William <unk> ( 1944 – 45 ) . 
 = 563d Rescue Group = 
 The 563d Rescue Group is a United States Air Force unit stationed at Davis @-@ Monthan Air Force Base , Arizona . The group also controls the rescue squadrons at Nellis Air Force Base , Nevada . It is assigned to the 23d Wing at Moody Air Force Base , Georgia . The group directs flying operations dedicated to personnel recovery and is part of Air Combat Command . The group was activated under its current designation at Davis @-@ Monthan in 2003 to command rescue units in the western United States . 
 The group was first activated during World War II as the 3d Emergency Rescue Squadron at Keesler Field , Mississippi . After training on the Gulf Coast , the squadron moved to the Southwest Pacific Theater in the fall of 1944 , and served in combat until the surrender of Japan , earning a Philippine Presidential Unit Citation . After the war , the squadron moved to Japan , where it became part of the occupation forces , and was located there when the Korean War began . It again served in combat , expanding to become the 3d Air Rescue Group in 1952 , and earning two Distinguished Unit Citations and two Korean Presidential Unit Citations during the war . The group was inactivated in 1957 , when Air Rescue Service eliminated its groups and assigned its squadrons directly to its regional rescue centers . 
 The group was organized again at Tan Son Nhut Airport in 1966 as the 3d Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Group , to command United States Air Force rescue units engaged in the War in Vietnam . It participated in every campaign after 1966 , winning an additional four Presidential Unit Citations , an Air Force Outstanding Unit Award with Combat " V " Device and two Vietnamese Gallantry Cross with Palm during combat in Southeast Asia . When the United States withdrew from Vietnam , the group moved its headquarters to Thailand and , after participating in the evacuations of Phnom Penh and Saigon , was inactivated there in 1976 . 
 = = Mission = = 
 The 563d Rescue Group directs flying operations dedicated to personnel recovery and is part of Air Combat Command . The group is responsible for training , readiness , and operations of one Lockheed HC @-@ 130J Combat King squadron , two Sikorsky HH @-@ 60G Pave Hawk squadrons , two " Guardian Angel " squadrons , and an operations support squadron . 
 = = Units = = 
 The 48th Rescue Squadron at Davis @-@ Monthan , and the 58th Rescue Squadron at Nellis Air Force Base , Nevada , are " Guardian Angel " squadrons that train , equip and employ <unk> ( commonly known as " <unk> " ) , combat rescue officers , and supporting personnel worldwide . During combat rescue operations , they use various fixed and rotary wing aircraft for insertion and extraction . The squadrons provide survivor contact , treatment , and extraction during combat rescue operations . They provide combat and humanitarian search , rescue , and medical assistance . 
 The 55th Rescue Squadron operates the Sikorsky HH @-@ 60G Pave Hawk and deploys combat rescue forces worldwide . It employs its helicopter and aircrews in hostile environments to recover downed aircrew and isolated personnel during day , night , or marginal weather conditions . The squadron also conducts civil search and rescue , disaster relief , international aid , emergency medical evacuation , and counter @-@ drug activities . 
 The 66th Rescue Squadron at Nellis Air Force Base , Nevada operates the HH @-@ 60G Pave Hawk , and its mission is similar to the 55th Rescue Squadron . The squadron also meets HH @-@ 60G logistical and maintenance support requirements for the USAF Weapons School and Air Combat Command directed operational test missions . 
 The 79th Rescue Squadron operates the HC @-@ 130J Combat King II and provides combat rescue forces to theater commanders worldwide . It conducts helicopter air refueling , airdrop , and landing of pararescue personnel on unimproved runways , and equipment to recover combat personnel . Its crews fly low @-@ level operations and perform these missions day or night . 
 The 563d Operations Support Squadron supports the training and employment of the 563d Rescue Group 's six combat and support squadrons . It provides support functions , including weapons and tactics , current operations , intelligence , training , life support , and mobility . It manages programmed flying hours to insure that operational and training requirements are met within parameters set by higher headquarters . It is also responsible for implementing contingency and theater war plans . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II and occupation of Japan = = = 
 = = = = World War II = = = = 
 The unit was first activated at Gulfport Army Air Field , Mississippi in February 1944 as a Consolidated OA @-@ 10 Catalina unit . As with most Army Air Forces rescue units , especially those deploying to the Pacific , the unit was organized primarily for water recovery of downed aircrews . A number of the squadron 's cadre had already received training from the United States Navy with the Catalina at Naval Air Station Pensacola . The unit continued its training at Keesler Field , Mississippi in April . On 18 May the ground echelon departed for the Southwest Pacific Theater , while the air echelon continued training at Keesler . The ground echelon arrived at Oakland Army Base , California on 20 May 1944 to ship out for Australia on the SS <unk> , arriving at Archerfield Airport near Brisbane , Australia on 17 June . It moved to Oro Bay Airfield , New Guinea three days later , and moved forward to <unk> Airfield on Biak in the Netherlands East Indies on 2 September 1944 . 
 The squadron 's air echelon continued training at Keesler until 5 July 1944 , when it flew to the Sacramento Air Depot , California , arriving the following day . It moved to Fairfield @-@ Suisun Army Air Field , California on 15 August , and arrived at Archerfield Airport on 1 September 1944 . It was finally reunited with the ground echelon at <unk> on 29 September 1944 . 
 The squadron 's first combat mission was flown on 21 September 1944 , when it picked up two downed Navy fliers . In November 1944 , the squadron began operating from the Philippines . Initially the Army was unable to support its OA @-@ 10s , and for several months , they were supported by the Navy 's seaplane tenders , USS Orca ( AVP @-@ 49 ) and USS Half Moon ( AVP @-@ 26 ) . This support continued even after the arrival of the squadron 's ground echelon . During the last four months of the war , the squadron began to operate Boeing SB @-@ 17 Dumbos , which were equipped with a 27 foot long life boat with survival equipment that could be dropped to downed aircrews , in addition to its Catalinas . This permitted the rescue of crews who were downed in seas that were too high for the Catalinas to land and pick them up . The Dumbos would frequently accompany strike aircraft , orbiting off the coast during the attack , so as to be in position to accompany distressed aircraft on the return flight . If needed , the life boat , whose engines gave it a range 500 miles , could be dropped to crews that ditched or bailed out of their aircraft . The squadron also provided courier service , carried supplies and messages , evacuated allied prisoners and wounded personnel , and occasionally provided reconnaissance . 
 The squadron 's flights frequently operated at bases separated from the squadron headquarters . For example , in the last month of the war , August 1945 , squadron flights or detachments were located at Mindoro , <unk> Airfield and Laoag on Luzon , and on Ie Shima near Okinawa . During its eleven months of operating in the Pacific , it was credited with rescuing 325 persons . 
 = = = = Occupation of Japan = = = = 
 The squadron was one of the first American military units to move to Japan after VJ Day . Elements of the unit were at Atsugi Airfield in September 1945 , and the squadron headquarters joined them in October . Although the squadron became part of the occupation forces , its personnel did not , and by early 1946 , only one qualified Catalina pilot was assigned to the unit . It was not until the summer of 1946 that regular Army Air Forces officers and soldiers were assigned in sufficient strength for the squadron to resume operations . Squadron flights were located at Atsugi , Chitose Air Base , Itazuke Air Base and Itami Air Base in Japan and at Kimpo Air Base in Korea . 
 From 1946 through 1950 , the squadron , called the 3d Rescue Squadron after 1948 , provided rescue capabilities in Japan . Its primary mission was to intercept distressed aircraft and escort them over the Japanese Home Islands and the adjacent waters . Experience in the China Burma India Theater had demonstrated the need for land rescue capabilities using helicopters and light planes . In response , the squadron added Sikorsky R @-@ 6 helicopters and Stinson L @-@ 5 Sentinels to its inventory in 1947 . In 1949 , Air Rescue Service , which had been formed and assigned to Air Transport Command in 1946 to control rescue units in the United States and along that command 's overseas routes , took over command of rescue units in the Pacific , although they remained attached to Far East Air Forces units for operational control . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 = = = = Deployment of elements to Korea = = = = 
 Following the North Korean invasion of South Korea on 25 June 1950 , the squadron deployed two L @-@ 5 Sentinels and one Douglas SC @-@ 47 Skytrain to Pusan West Air Base to perform search and rescue missions . These were replaced a week later by Sikorsky H @-@ 5 helicopters . By late August , a squadron representative was stationed with the Joint Operations Center to coordinate rescue operations . Three months later , this single officer expanded into a Rescue Control Center , under the command of the squadron 's deputy commander , and was also known as " 3d Air Rescue Squadron in Korea . " 
 = = = = Operations in Korea = = = = 
 Combat operations in Korea , and the changing tactical situation there , soon added the missions of rescuing aircrew downed behind enemy lines , and evacuating wounded personnel with the squadron 's helicopters . The squadron 's first rescue of a downed pilot behind enemy lines occurred on 4 September , when a North American F @-@ 51 Mustang pilot of the 35th Fighter @-@ Bomber Squadron was rescued by a squadron helicopter . Initially , because of the aircraft available to the unit , now called the 3d Air Rescue Squadron , efforts were limited to short range missions . The squadron 's H @-@ 5 helicopters could operate from Korea 's many rice paddies , sometimes escorted by the unit 's L @-@ 5 Sentinels , which also flew aeromedical evacuation missions from small unprepared fields . Because of the limited resources of the squadron , it was augmented by crews and aircraft of the 2d Air Rescue Squadron at Clark Air Base in the Philippines . The augmentation by the 2d was particularly in the form of Boeing SB @-@ 29 <unk> , which operated offshore from strike areas , much as the SB @-@ 17 Dumbos had during World War II . 
 The squadron 's Boeing SB @-@ 17 Dumbos and SC @-@ 47 Skytrains were used in the search role , with the C @-@ 47 " <unk> " being commandeered on occasion to fly critical supply missions . Early in the war , both these planes began to be replaced by SB @-@ 29 <unk> . When the war began , Air Rescue Service 's newest plane , the Grumman SA @-@ 16 Albatross amphibian , was not on the strength of any unit in the Pacific . To remedy this , a detachment of four Albatrosses from the 5th Rescue Squadron at Lowry Air Force Base , Colorado was dispatched in July 1950 to augment the 3d Squadron . By November , the squadron began to receive its own SA @-@ 16s , and it was fully equipped by the following March . In March 1951 , the squadron received a YH @-@ 19 test model of the Sikorsky helicopter to evaluate in combat . Replacement of the H @-@ 5s by the Sikorsky H @-@ 19 greatly extended the range of the squadron 's rotary wing elements . 
 The squadron 's helicopters frequently flew wounded soldiers to Army Mobile Army Surgical Hospital ( MASH ) units , typically stationing one H @-@ 5 and one L @-@ 5 with each MASH . In December 1951 , the squadron successfully evacuated troops to a Navy hospital ship sailing off the Korean coast . Dr. Elmer Henderson , a former chairman of the American Medical Association , credited the drop in the mortality rate for wounded soldiers to half that experienced during World War II to their quick evacuation by rescue helicopters . Over 7 @,@ 000 casualties were evacuated by the 3d during the war . Squadron elements operated out of <unk> @-@ do and Cho @-@ do islands off the coast of North Korea , enabling its limited range helicopters to rescue aircrew far behind enemy lines . 
 Associated in part with these forward locations , the squadron assumed a secondary mission of special operations . Shortly after the arrival of the YH @-@ 19 , it was used to extract " United Nations personnel " ( most likely Korean guerillas ) from behind enemy lines . During November 1950 , squadron SB @-@ 17s dropped a number of agents near the Chinese border , along with radio equipment , to provide intelligence data on enemy components . In April 1951 , the unit recovered components of a MiG @-@ 15 that had crashed near Sinanju for study by military intelligence . 
 = = = = Squadron to group = = = = 
 While still flying combat missions , in November 1952 , the squadron was expanded , becoming the 3d Air Rescue Group . Each of the squadron 's flights was replaced by a newly @-@ activated squadron , assigned to the new group : 
 At the same time , Detachment 1 of the squadron at Seoul , Korea was expanded into the <unk> Air Rescue Squadron 
 The group was credited with rescuing almost 10 @,@ 000 United Nations personnel during the Korean War , including almost 1 @,@ 000 combat saves from behind enemy lines , and 200 water rescues . Its actions earned the unit a Distinguished Unit Citation and two Korean Presidential Unit Citations . 
 Following the war , the group returned to providing rescue capability in Japan . As Air Rescue Service shrank from a peak of 50 squadrons in 1954 , the 37th Squadron was inactivated in May 1955 . During 1955 , the group replaced its SB @-@ 29s with Douglas SC @-@ 54 Skymasters . The SC @-@ 54 carried four 40 man inflatable rafts that were safer to drop than the single wooden boat carried by the SB @-@ 29 . In 1957 , group headquarters and the 38th Squadron were inactivated , and the 36th and 39th Squadrons were transferred to the 2d Air Rescue Group . By 1961 Air Rescue Service would have only eleven squadrons assigned . 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 = = = = Buildup of rescue forces = = = = 
 Coordination of USAF rescue operations in Southeast Asia had begun with the establishment of Detachment 3 , Pacific Air Rescue Center , which was replaced in July 1965 by the 38th Air Rescue Squadron , with rescue detachments at several bases in South Vietnam and Thailand . The squadron also manned the Joint Search and Rescue Center at Tan Son Nhut Airport , which operated through regional rescue coordination centers at Da Nang Air Base , South Vietnam and Udorn Royal Thai Air Force Base . The Joint Center also directed Seventh Fleet rescue operations in the Gulf of Tonkin . 
 Rising aircraft losses in late 1965 led to the expansion of Air Force rescue assets in Southeast Asia . The group was reactivated as the 3d Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Group , with Detachment 1 at Da Nang , and Detachment 2 at Udorn , manning the regional rescue centers . The 38th Squadron became responsible for local base rescue detachments at bases in Vietnam and Thailand , using Kaman HH @-@ 43 Huskies . The 37th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron was established at Da Nang , and was responsible for rescue missions in North Vietnam , Laos and for Air Force rescue efforts in the Gulf of Tonkin . It used Sikorsky HH @-@ 3 Jolly Green Giants for combat rescue , and Lockheed HC @-@ 130s as command and control aircraft to coordinate rescue operations . It was also assigned HU @-@ 16s for long range water rescue over the Gulf of Tonkin . Later , the HC @-@ 130s at Da Nang and Udorn were combined to form the group 's third squadron , the 39th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron . 
 = = = = Improved equipment = = = = 
 The capabilities of the off the shelf rescue helicopters assigned to it limited the group 's effectiveness . The HH @-@ 43 could not hover at higher altitudes , and the HH @-@ 3 needed to stage from forward bases in Laos to provide rescue coverage for North Vietnam . This deficiency was partially remedied by the addition of air refueling capability to the HH @-@ 3s . Within a few months after the first combat refueling in June 1967 , in flight refueling became standard , but staging bases in Laos continued to be used . In addition to extending the range of the group 's <unk> helicopters , air refueling permitted them to dump fuel when needed to lighten the aircraft , and to enable it to hover for rescues at high altitudes , knowing that it would be able to connect with a tanker after the rescue attempt and on @-@ load sufficient fuel to return to its home base . 
 In parallel with the introduction of the HC @-@ 130H air refueling aircraft , in the spring of 1967 , the group implemented Operation High Drink , which enabled the HH @-@ 3s to take on fuel from virtually any Navy ship operating in the Gulf of Tonkin , either landing on larger ships , or hovering alongside smaller ones . Combined with the Jolly Green Giant 's ability to land on water , this permitted the withdrawal of the HU @-@ 16 amphibians , which flew their last combat rescue sortie on 30 September 1967 . 
 In the fall of 1967 , the group received its first Sikorsky HH @-@ 53 Super Jolly Green Giant , which were stationed at Udorn Royal Thai Air Force Base . These helicopters improved capabilities over Laos and North Vietnam , since they were faster , could hover at altitudes up to 6 @,@ 500 ft pressure altitude and were armed with three GAU @-@ 28 / A 7.62mm miniguns . Because of their larger size , HH @-@ 53s also carried a second pararescue specialist . However , despite the improved capability provided by the <unk> ( as it was called by crewmembers ) , the unit 's night rescue capability remained very limited and night rescue attempts were rarely successful . In March 1968 , expanded rescue missions over Laos and North Vietnam led to the formation of a second squadron at Udorn , the 40th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron . 
 = = = = Reductions in rescue operations = = = = 
 Reductions in the size of the group began in December 1969 , when the local base rescue detachment at Binh Thuy Air Base was discontinued . Closure of these detachments continued through 1970 as bases were closed or transferred to the Army or the Vietnamese Air Force . The closure of Tuy Hoa Air Base required the group 's 39th Squadron to move to Cam Ranh Bay Air Base in the fall of 1970 . By July 1971 reductions in local base rescue reached the point where the 38th Squadron was inactivated and the few remaining detachments were transferred directly to the group . That same month , the 40th Squadron moved to Nakhon Phanom Royal Thai Air Force Base , to better support the campaign against the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos , where air strikes had been concentrated since the bombing halt above the 20th parallel . 
 Although the group did not directly participate in the Son Tay Raid in November 1970 , when the Joint Contingency Task Force arrived in theater , it used seven HH @-@ 53s from the group 's 40th Squadron , and two HH @-@ 3s from the 37th Squadron . 
 In March 1972 , the HC @-@ <unk> of the 39th Squadron left Vietnam for Korat Royal Thai Air Force Base . Shortly after its arrival there , the squadron was inactivated , and its planes were temporarily absorbed by the Korat local base rescue detachment . However , in July , the 56th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron was activated to manage these aircraft . By late in the year , withdrawals in connection with the cease fire had resulted in the withdrawal of almost all rescue forces from Vietnam . The 37th Squadron at Da Nang Air Base was inactivated in November , and its remaining assets were absorbed by the 40th Squadron . The group moved with Seventh Air Force to Nakhon Phanom , and the existing Joint Rescue Centers were replaced by one located with group headquarters . Rescue operations continued in Laos and Cambodia , but the group also began to participate in training exercises . 
 = = = = 1975 : Eagle Pull , Frequent Wind and the Mayaguez incident = = = = 
 On 3 April 1975 , group forces were placed on alert for the possible implementation of Operation Eagle Pull , the evacuation of Americans from Phnom Penh , as Khmer Rouge forces surrounded Cambodia 's capital . A group helicopter flew a United States Marine Corps command element into Phnom Penh to assume control of the evacuation . On 12 April , the group 's helicopters positioned for evacuation , and flew a combat control team to the beleaguered city . After Marine helicopters had evacuated civilians , two group helicopters returned to the landing zone to extract the combat control team and remaining security forces . One HH @-@ 53 was hit by ground fire and badly damaged , but was able to return to base for an emergency landing . 
 As conditions in Southeast Asia continued to deteriorate , Operation Frequent Wind , the evacuation of Saigon , was implemented at the end of the month . The group placed rescue helicopters on alert at bases in Thailand and aboard USS Midway ( CV @-@ 41 ) . On 29 April , the two helicopters aboard Midway accompanied Marine CH @-@ 53s on three missions to evacuate people at the Defense Attaché Compound . The last flight carried as many as 97 refugees aboard one of the aircraft . By the end of the last mission , both Super <unk> were out of commission , having flown the group 's last mission in Vietnam . 
 On 12 May , Khmer Rouge forces seized the SS Mayaguez , a U.S. merchant ship . The group initially flew two of its HH @-@ 53s to transport Security Policemen from Nakhon Phanom for use as a possible rescue force . On 15 May , group HH @-@ 53s again joined CH @-@ 53s of other units in transporting a Marine assault force from U @-@ Tapao Royal Thai Navy Airfield to the island where the Mayaguez had been run aground . After offloading their Marines on the USS Howard E. Holt , the Jolly Greens headed for one of the CH @-@ 53s , Knife 21 , which had been shot down after offloading its Marines . Although the crew was rescued , one of the <unk> on the Jolly was lost in the effort . The <unk> then escorted another CH @-@ 53 , which had been struck while attempting to land its Marines . As the attempt to extract the Marines from Koh Tang Island began , additional HH @-@ 53s transported a relief force of Marines for additional security . Evacuation efforts continued under heavy enemy fire throughout the afternoon and evening in the Air Force 's last combat operation in Southeast Asia . 
 In October 1975 , the 56th Squadron was inactivated , and its remaining HC @-@ 130s absorbed by the 40th Squadron . As the United States continued its withdrawal from Southeast Asia , the Rescue Coordination Center was shut down on 15 December 1975 , and the group and the 40th Squadron were inactivated at the end of January 1976 . The group was credited with 3 @,@ 681 saves during the war , including 2 @,@ 632 combat saves . 
 = = = Reactivation = = = 
 Since reactivating in 2003 as the 563d Rescue Group , the group has deployed airmen and aircraft almost annually in support of Operation Enduring Freedom , Operation Iraqi Freedom , and Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa . It has conducted humanitarian operations during Hurricane Katrina ( which included evacuation support along the Gulf Coast ) , Hurricane Rita , and other hurricanes , and has supported NASA during launch and recovery of the space shuttle . 48th Squadron recovery teams have saved hundreds of lives in combat and noncombat situations . 
 = = = Medal of Honor , Distinguished Service Cross and Air Force Cross = = = 
 Three members of the group received the second highest award for heroism awarded by the United States military . After a later review , one of these awards was upgraded to the nation 's highest award , the Medal of Honor . 
 During June 1951 , Lt John J. Najarian landed his SA @-@ 16 amphibian in the Taedong River , which was not only shallow , but filled with floating debris , while low @-@ hanging high @-@ tension power lines ran over the river , to rescue a Mustang pilot , who had bailed out of his plane at twilight . Assisted by covering flights of Mustangs to suppress enemy flak , Lt Najarian was able to make the difficult night landing , pick up the pilot and take off successfully . For this mission , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . 
 Airman First Class William H. Pitsenbarger of the group 's 38th Squadron was the first enlisted man to be awarded the Air Force Cross . Flying as a <unk> , or PJ , on an HH @-@ 43 sent to extract an Army unit caught in a Viet Cong ambush on 7 March 1966 , he descended to assist with hoisting soldiers up to the helicopter . When the Pedro had been loaded with all the wounded soldiers it could hold , Airman Pitsenbarger elected to remain behind to render aid to the remaining soldiers , all of whom were wounded . When a second HH @-@ 43 arrived on the scene , its PJ descended and found that the Viet Cong had killed Airman Pitsenbarger and the remaining soldiers . On 8 December 2000 , following a review , Airman Pitsenbarger 's Air Force Cross was replaced by an award of the Medal of Honor , and he was posthumously promoted to the rank of Staff Sergeant . 
 Airman First Class Duane D. Hackney , a PJ with the 37th Squadron , was awarded the Air Force Cross for actions on 13 March 1967 in a rescue operation for two Marine helicopters , a Sikorsky CH @-@ 37 Mojave that had been shot down , and a Boeing Vertol CH @-@ 46 Sea Knight that had crashed while attempting to aid the first Marine chopper , when it reported that enemy forces were closing in on the crash site . Airman Hackney made multiple trips to the ground while exposed to enemy fire , loading as many Marines on his HH @-@ 3 's Stokes litter as possible each trip . The HH @-@ 3 was struck by enemy fire , losing hydraulic pressure , and forcing the pilot to head for an emergency landing field . Airman Hackney continued to tend to the wounded on board , even after being rendered temporarily unconscious from a bullet that had struck his helmet . 
 = = Lineage = = 
 The lineage of the 563d Rescue Group from inception to today : 
 Constituted as the 3d Emergency Rescue Squadron on 14 February 1944 
 Activated on 15 February 1944 
 Redesignated 3d Rescue Squadron on 28 January 1948 
 Redesignated 3d Air Rescue Squadron on 10 August 1950 
 Redesignated 3d Air Rescue Group on 14 November 1952 
 Inactivated on 18 June 1957 
 Redesignated 3d Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Group and activated on 14 December 1965 ( not organized ) 
 Organized on 8 January 1966 
 Inactivated on 31 January 1976 
 Redesignated 563d Rescue Group on 29 July 2003 
 Activated on 1 October 2003 
 = = = Assignments = = = 
 Assignments of the 563d Rescue Group from inception to today : 
 Army Air Forces Training Command , 15 February 1944 
 AAF Eastern Technical Training Command , 4 March 1944 
 Thirteenth Air Force , 28 July 1944 
 Fifth Air Force , 17 August 1944 
 Under operational control of V Bomber Command , 26 August – 2 October 1944 
 <unk> Rescue Composite Group ( Provisional ) , 2 October 1944 
 5th Emergency Rescue Group , 16 March 1945 
 V Bomber Command , 21 November 1945 
 314th Composite Wing , 31 May 1946 
 Fifth Air Force , 6 June 1946 
 Air Rescue Service , 1 May 1949 – 18 June 1957 ( attached to Fifth Air Force , 1 May 1949 , 314th Air Division , 18 May 1951 , Japanese Air Defense Force , 14 November 1952 , Far East Air Forces , 1 August 1954 – 18 June 1957 ) 
 Military Air Transport Service , 14 December 1965 ( not organized ) 
 Military Airlift Command , 1 January 1966 ( not organized ) 
 Pacific Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Center ( later 41st Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Wing , 41st Rescue and Weather Reconnaissance Wing ) , 8 January 1966 – 31 January 1976 
 347th Rescue Wing , 1 October 2003 
 23d Wing , 1 October 2006 – present 
 = = = Components = = = 
 Operational Squadrons 
 Operational squadrons of the 563d Rescue Group from 1952 to today : 
 <unk> Air Rescue Squadron : 20 September 1955 – 18 June 1957 
 36th Air Rescue Squadron : 14 November 1952 – 18 June 1957 
 37th Air Rescue Squadron ( later 37th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron ) : 14 November 1952 – 8 May 1955 ; 8 January 1966 – 20 August 1972 
 38th Air Rescue Squadron ( later , 38th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron ) : 14 November 1952 – 18 June 1957 ; 8 January 1966 – 1 July 1972 
 39th Air Rescue Squadron ( later , 39th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron ) : 14 November 1952 – 18 June 1957 ; 18 January 1967 – 30 April 1972 
 40th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron : 18 March 1968 – 20 August 1972 
 48th Rescue Squadron : 1 October 2003 – present 
 55th Rescue Squadron : 1 October 2003 – present 
 56th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron : 8 July – 20 August 1972 
 58th Rescue Squadron : 1 October 2003 – present 
 60th Air Rescue Squadron : 8 April 1956 – 18 June 1957 
 66th Rescue Squadron : 1 October 2003 – present 
 79th Rescue Squadron : 1 October 2003 – present 
 <unk> Air Rescue Squadron : 1 March 1953 – 8 April 1956 
 Detachments 
 Detachment F , 14 September 1950 – 22 June 1951 
 Detachment 1 , 22 June 1951 – 1 March 1953 
 Detachment 1 , 8 January 1966 – 15 December 1966 
 Detachment 2 , 8 January 1966 – 15 December 1966 
 = = = Stations = = = 
 Stations of the 563d Rescue Group from inception to today : 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 Aircraft of the 563d Rescue Group from inception to today : 
 = = = Awards and campaigns = = = 
 = Close Encounters of the Third Kind = 
 Close Encounters of the Third Kind is a 1977 American science fiction film , written and directed by Steven Spielberg and starring Richard Dreyfuss , François Truffaut , Melinda Dillon , Teri Garr , Bob Balaban , and Cary Guffey . It tells the story of Roy Neary , an everyday blue collar worker in Indiana , whose life changes after an encounter with an unidentified flying object ( UFO ) . 
 Close Encounters was a long @-@ cherished project for Spielberg . In late 1973 , he developed a deal with Columbia Pictures for a science fiction film . Though Spielberg received sole credit for the script , he was assisted by Paul Schrader , John Hill , David Giler , Hal Barwood , Matthew Robbins , and Jerry Belson , all of whom contributed to the screenplay in varying degrees . The title is derived from UFO @-@ <unk> J. Allen Hynek 's classification of close encounters with aliens , in which the third kind denotes human observations of aliens or " animate beings . " Douglas Trumbull served as the visual effects supervisor , while Carlo Rambaldi designed the aliens . 
 Made on a production budget of $ 18 million , Close Encounters was released in a limited number of cities on November 16 , 1977 or November 23 , 1977 before expanding into a wide release the following month . It was a critical and financial success , eventually grossing over $ 337 million worldwide . 
 A Special Edition of the film , featuring additional scenes , was released theatrically in 1980 . A third cut of the film was issued on VHS and laserdisc in 1998 ( and later DVD and Blu @-@ ray ) . The film received numerous awards and nominations at the 50th Academy Awards , 32nd British Academy Film Awards , the 35th Golden Globe Awards , the Saturn Awards and has been widely acclaimed by the American Film Institute . In December 2007 , it was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the Sonoran Desert , French scientist Claude Lacombe ( François Truffaut ) and his American interpreter , mapmaker David Laughlin ( Bob Balaban ) , along with other government scientific researchers , discover Flight 19 , a squadron of Grumman TBM Avengers that went missing more than 30 years earlier . The planes are intact and operational , but there is no sign of the pilots . An old man who witnessed the event claimed " the sun came out at night , and sang to him . " They also find a lost cargo ship in the Gobi Desert named SS Cotopaxi . At an air traffic control center in Indianapolis , a controller listens as two airline flights narrowly avoid a mid @-@ air collision with an apparent unidentified flying object ( UFO ) , which neither pilot chooses to report , even when invited to do so . In Muncie , Indiana , 3 @-@ year @-@ old Barry Guiler ( Cary Guffey ) is awakened in the night when his toys start operating on their own . Fascinated , he gets out of bed and discovers something or someone ( off @-@ screen ) in the kitchen . He runs outside , forcing his mother , Jillian ( Melinda Dillon ) , to chase after him . 
 Investigating one of a series of large @-@ scale power outages , Indiana electrical lineman Roy Neary ( Richard Dreyfuss ) experiences a close encounter with a UFO , when it flies over his truck and lightly burns the side of his face with its bright lights . The UFO , joining a group of three other UFOs , is pursued by Neary and three police cars , but the spacecraft fly off into the night sky . Roy becomes fascinated by UFOs , much to the dismay of his wife , Ronnie ( Teri Garr ) . He also becomes increasingly obsessed with subliminal , mental images of a mountain @-@ like shape and begins to make models of it . Jillian also becomes obsessed with sketching a unique @-@ looking mountain . Soon after , she is terrorized in her home by a UFO which descends from the clouds . The presence of the UFO energy field makes every appliance in Jillian 's house malfunction and Barry is abducted by unseen beings . 
 Lacombe and Laughlin — along with a group of United Nations experts — continue to investigate increasing UFO activity and strange , related occurrences . Witnesses in Dharamsala , India report that the UFOs make distinctive sounds : a five @-@ tone musical phrase in a major scale . Scientists broadcast the phrase to outer space , but are mystified by the response : a seemingly meaningless series of numbers ( 104 44 30 40 36 10 ) repeated over and over until Laughlin , with his background in cartography , recognizes it as a set of geographical coordinates ( this is actually a goof ; those coordinates are near Ft . Collins , Colorado ... if the 40 had been a 44 , the coordinates would have been plot @-@ correct ) . The coordinates point to Devils Tower near <unk> , Wyoming . Lacombe and the U.S. military converge on Wyoming . The United States Army evacuates the area , planting false reports in the media that a train wreck has spilled a toxic nerve gas , all the while preparing a secret landing zone for the UFOs and their occupants . 
 Meanwhile , Roy 's increasingly erratic behavior causes Ronnie to leave him , taking their three children with her . When a despairing Roy inadvertently sees a television news program about the train wreck near Devils Tower , he realizes the mental image of a mountain plaguing him is real . Jillian sees the same broadcast , and she and Roy , as well as others with similar visions and experiences , travel to the site in spite of the public warnings about nerve gas . 
 While most of the civilians who are drawn to the site are apprehended by the Army , Roy and Jillian persist and make it to the site just as dozens of UFOs appear in the night sky . The government specialists at the site begin to communicate with the UFOs by use of light and sound on a large electrical billboard . Following this , an enormous mother ship lands at the site , releasing animals and over a dozen long @-@ missing adults and children , all from different past eras . Among these returned abductees include the missing pilots from Flight 19 and sailors from the Cotopaxi , all of whom have strangely not aged since their abductions . Barry is also returned and reunited with a relieved Jillian . The government officials decide to include Roy in a group of people whom they have selected to be potential visitors to the mothership , and hastily prepare him . As the aliens finally emerge from the mothership , they select only Roy to join them on their travels . As Roy enters the mothership , one of the aliens pauses for a few moments with the humans . Lacombe uses Curwen hand signs that correspond to the five @-@ note alien tonal phrase . The alien replies with the same gestures , smiles , and returns to its ship , which ascends into the galaxy . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Richard Dreyfuss as Roy Neary , an electrical lineman in Indiana who encounters and forms an obsession with unidentified flying objects . Steve McQueen was Spielberg 's first choice . Although McQueen was impressed with the script , he felt he was not right for the role as he was unable to cry on cue . Dustin Hoffman , Al Pacino and Gene Hackman turned down the part as well . Jack Nicholson turned it down because of scheduling conflicts . Spielberg explained when filming Jaws , " Dreyfuss talked me into casting him . He listened to about 155 days ' worth of Close Encounters . He even contributed ideas . " Dreyfuss reflected , " I launched myself into a campaign to get the part . I would walk by Steve 's office and say stuff like ' Al Pacino has no sense of humor ' or ' Jack Nicholson is too crazy ' . I eventually convinced him to cast me . " 
 François Truffaut as Claude Lacombe , a French government scientist in charge of UFO @-@ related activities in the United States . Gérard Depardieu , Philippe <unk> , Jean @-@ Louis Trintignant and Lino Ventura were considered for the role . During filming , Truffaut used his free time to write the script for The Man Who Loved Women . He also worked on a novel titled The Actor , a project he abandoned . 
 Melinda Dillon as Jillian Guiler , Barry 's mother . She forms a similar obsession to Roy 's , and the two become friends . Teri Garr wanted to portray Jillian , but was cast as Ronnie . Hal Ashby , who worked with Dillon on Bound for Glory , suggested her for the part to Spielberg . Dillon was cast three days before filming began . 
 Teri Garr as Veronica " Ronnie " Neary , Roy 's wife . Amy Irving also auditioned for the role . 
 Cary Guffey as Barry Guiler , Jillian 's young child abducted in the middle of the film . Spielberg conducted a series of method acting techniques to help Guffey , who was cast when he was just three years old . 
 Bob Balaban as David Laughlin , Lacombe 's assistant and English @-@ French interpreter . They meet for the first time in the Sonoran Desert at the beginning of the film . His former position as a cartographer allows him to interpret the alien signals as coordinates leading to the meeting at Devils Tower . 
 Josef Sommer as Larry Butler , a man who meets Roy and Jillian in Wyoming and attempts to scale Devils Tower with them . 
 Lance Henriksen as Robert , Lacombe 's assistant 
 Roberts Blossom as Farmer , a radical who claims to have seen Bigfoot . 
 J. Allen Hynek and Stanton T. Friedman make cameo appearances in the closing scene . Spielberg 's friends Hal Barwood and Matthew Robbins cameo as two World War II pilots returning from the mother ship . Real @-@ life ARP technician Phil Dodds cameos as the operator of the ARP 2500 synthesizer communicating with the alien ship . Musician Jerry Garcia also makes an appearance in the crowd scene . Carl Weathers appeared as a soldier in the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The film 's origins can be traced to director Steven Spielberg 's youth , when he and his father watched a meteor shower in New Jersey . As a teenager , Spielberg completed the full @-@ length science fiction film <unk> . Many scenes from <unk> would be incorporated in Close Encounters on a shot @-@ for @-@ shot basis . In 1970 he wrote a short story called Experiences about a lovers ' lane in a Midwestern United States farming community and the " light show " a group of teenagers see in the night sky . In late 1973 , during post @-@ production on The Sugarland Express , Spielberg developed a deal with Columbia Pictures for a science fiction film . 20th Century Fox previously turned down the offer . Julia and Michael Phillips instantly signed on as producers . 
 He first considered doing a documentary or a low @-@ budget feature film about people who believed in UFOs . Spielberg decided " a film that depended on state of the art technology couldn 't be made for $ 2 @.@ 5 million . " Borrowing a phrase from the ending of The Thing from Another World , he retitled the film Watch the Skies , rewriting the premise concerning Project Blue Book and pitching the concept to Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz . Katz remembered " It had flying saucers from outer space landing on Robertson Boulevard [ in West Hollywood , California ] . I go , ' Steve , that 's the worst idea I ever heard . " Spielberg brought Paul Schrader to write the script in December 1973 with principal photography to begin in late @-@ 1974 . However , Spielberg started work on Jaws in 1974 , pushing Watch the Skies back . 
 With the financial and critical success of Jaws , Spielberg earned a vast amount of creative control from Columbia , including the right to make the film any way he wanted . Schrader turned in his script , which Spielberg called , " one of the most embarrassing screenplays ever professionally turned in to a major film studio or director . It was a terribly guilt @-@ ridden story not about UFOs at all . " Titled Kingdom Come , the script 's protagonist was a 45 @-@ year @-@ old Air Force Officer named Paul Van Owen who worked with Project Blue Book . " [ His ] job for the government is to ridicule and debunk flying saucers . " Schrader continued . " One day he has an encounter . He goes to the government , threatening to blow the lid off to the public . Instead , he and the government spend 15 years trying to make contact . " Spielberg and Schrader experienced creative differences , hiring John Hill to rewrite . At one point the main character was a police officer . Spielberg " [ found ] it hard to identify with men in uniform . I wanted to have Mr. Everyday Regular Fella . " Spielberg rejected the Schrader / Hill script during post @-@ production on Jaws . He reflected , " they wanted to make it like a James Bond adventure . " 
 David Giler performed a rewrite ; Hal Barwood and Matthew Robbins , friends of Spielberg , suggested the plot device of a kidnapped child . Spielberg then began to write the script . The song " When You Wish upon a Star " from Pinocchio influenced Spielberg 's writing style . " I hung my story on the mood the song created , the way it affected me personally . " Jerry Belson and Spielberg wrote the shooting script together . In the end , Spielberg was given solo writing credit . During pre @-@ production , the title was changed from Kingdom Come to Close Encounters of the Third Kind . J. Allen Hynek , who worked with the United States Air Force on Project Blue Book , was hired as a scientific consultant . Hynek felt " even though the film is fiction , it 's based for the most part on the known facts of the UFO mystery , and it certainly catches the flavor of the phenomenon . Spielberg was under enormous pressure to make another blockbuster after Jaws , but he decided to make a UFO movie . He put his career on the line . " USAF and NASA declined to cooperate on the film . In fact , NASA reportedly sent a 20 @-@ page letter to Spielberg , telling him that releasing the film was dangerous . In an interview , he said : " I really found my faith when I heard that the Government was opposed to the film . If NASA took the time to write me a 20 @-@ page letter , then I knew there must be something happening . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on May 16 , 1976 , though an Associated Press report in August 1975 had suggested filming would start in late 1975 . Spielberg did not want to do any location shooting because of his negative experience on Jaws and wanted to shoot Close Encounters entirely on sound stages , but eventually dropped the idea . 
 Filming took place in Burbank , California ; Devils Tower National Monument in Wyoming ; two abandoned World War II airship hangars at the former Brookley Air Force Base in Mobile , Alabama ; and the Louisville and Nashville Railroad depot in Bay Minette . The home where Barry was abducted is located outside the town of Fairhope , Alabama . Roy Neary 's home is at Carlisle Drive East in Mobile . The UFOs fly through the former toll booth at the Vincent Thomas Bridge , San Pedro , California . The Gobi Desert sequence was photographed at the Dumont Dunes , California , and the <unk> @-@ India exteriors were filmed at the small village of Hal near <unk> , 35 miles ( 56 km ) outside Bombay , India . The hangars in Alabama were six times larger than the biggest sound stage in the world . Various technical and budgetary problems occurred during filming . Spielberg called Close Encounters " twice as bad and twice as expensive [ as Jaws ] " . 
 Matters worsened when Columbia Pictures experienced financial difficulties . Spielberg estimated the film would cost $ 2 @.@ 7 million to make in his original 1973 pitch to Columbia , but the final budget came to $ 19 @.@ 4 million . Columbia studio executive John <unk> remembered , " If we knew it was going to cost that much , we wouldn 't have greenlighted it because we didn 't have the money . " Spielberg hired Joe Alves , his collaborator on Jaws , as production designer . In addition the 1976 Atlantic hurricane season brought tropical storms to Alabama . A large portion of the sound stage in Alabama was damaged because of a lightning strike . Columbia raised $ 7 million from three sources : Time Inc . , EMI , and German tax shelters . 
 Cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond said that , during the time of shooting for the film , Spielberg got more ideas by watching movies every night which in turn extended the production schedule because he was continually adding new scenes to be filmed . Zsigmond previously turned down the chance to work on Jaws . In her 1991 book You 'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again , producer Julia Phillips wrote highly profane remarks about Spielberg , Zsigmond , and Truffaut , because she was fired during post @-@ production due to a cocaine addiction . Phillips blamed it on Spielberg being a perfectionist . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Douglas Trumbull was the visual effects supervisor , while Carlo Rambaldi designed the aliens . Trumbull joked that the visual effects budget , at $ 3 @.@ 3 million , could have been used to produce an additional film . His work helped lead to advances in motion control photography . The mother ship was designed by Ralph McQuarrie and built by Greg Jein . The look of the ship was inspired by an oil refinery Spielberg saw at night in India . Instead of the metallic hardware look used in Star Wars , the emphasis was on a more luminescent look for the UFOs . One of the UFO models was an oxygen mask with lights attached to it , used because of its irregular shape . As a subtle in @-@ joke , Dennis Muren ( who had just finished working on Star Wars ) put a small R2 @-@ D2 model onto the underside of the mothership . The model of the mothership is now on display in the Smithsonian Institution 's Air and Space Museum Udvar @-@ Hazy Annex at Washington Dulles Airport in Chantilly , Virginia . 
 Since Close Encounters was filmed <unk> , the visual effects sequences were shot in 70 mm film to better conform with the 35 mm film used for the rest of the movie . A test reel using computer @-@ generated imagery was used for the UFOs , but Spielberg found it would be too expensive and ineffective since CGI was in its infancy in the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 The small aliens in the final scenes were played by local girls in Mobile , Alabama . That decision was requested by Spielberg because he felt " girls move more gracefully than boys . " Puppetry was attempted for the aliens , but the idea failed . However , Rambaldi successfully used puppetry to depict two of the aliens , the first being a marionette ( for the tall alien that is the first to be seen emerging from the mothership ) and an articulated puppet for the alien that communicates via hand signals with Lacombe near the end of the film . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Close Encounters is the first collaboration between film editor Michael Kahn and Spielberg . Their working relationship has continued for the rest of Spielberg 's films . Spielberg stated that no film he has ever made since has been as hard to edit as the last 25 minutes of Close Encounters and he and Kahn would go through thousands of feet of footage just to find the right shots for the end sequence . When Kahn and Spielberg completed the first cut of the film , Spielberg was dissatisfied , feeling " there wasn 't enough wow @-@ ness " . 
 Pick @-@ ups were commissioned but cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond could not participate due to other commitments . John A. Alonzo , László Kovács , and Douglas Slocombe worked on the pick @-@ ups . 
 Lacombe was originally to find Flight 19 hidden in the Amazon Rainforest , but the idea was changed to the Sonoran Desert . Composer John Williams wrote over 300 examples of the iconic five @-@ tone motif before Spielberg chose the one used in the film . Spielberg called Williams ' work " When You Wish upon a Star meets science fiction " . Spielberg wanted to have " When You Wish upon a Star " in the closing credits , but was denied permission ( though the song 's signature melody can be heard briefly just before Roy Neary turns to board the mothership ) . He also took 7 @.@ 5 minutes out from the preview . 
 Post @-@ production was completed by June 1977 , too late for the film to be released as a ' summer blockbuster ' which might have been just as well , as Star Wars opened that summer . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The score was composed , conducted and produced by John Williams , who had previously won an Academy Award for his work on Spielberg 's Jaws . Much like his two @-@ note Jaws theme , the " five @-@ tone " motif for Close Encounters has since become ingrained in popular culture ( the five tones are used by scientists to communicate with the visiting spaceship as a mathematical language as well as being incorporated into the film 's signature theme ) . The score was recorded at Warner Bros. Scoring studios in Burbank , California . 
 Williams was nominated for two Academy Awards in 1978 , one for his score to Star Wars and one for his score to Close Encounters . He won for Star Wars , though he later won two Grammy Awards in 1979 for his Close Encounters score ( one for Best Original Film Score and one for Best Instrumental Composition for " Theme from Close Encounters " ) . 
 The soundtrack album was released on vinyl album ( with a gatefold sleeve ) , 8 @-@ track tape and audio cassette by Arista Records in 1977 , with a total running time of 41 minutes ( it was later released on compact disc in 1990 ) . The soundtrack album was a commercial success , peaking at # 17 on the US Billboard album chart in February 1978 and was certified Gold by the RIAA for 500 @,@ 000 copies shipped . It also peaked at # 40 in the UK album charts . 
 Although not included on the original soundtrack album , a 7 " single of a disco treatment of the five @-@ note motif , titled , " Theme from Close Encounters of the Third Kind " , was included with the album as a free bonus item . Despite being a giveaway , Billboard chart rules at that time allowed the single itself to chart , and it peaked at # 13 on the US Billboard Hot 100 in March 1978 . The single was later added as a bonus track to the cassette . 
 Following the release of the " Collector 's Edition " of the film in 1998 , a new expanded soundtrack was released on compact disc by Arista . The " Collectors Edition Soundtrack " was made using 20 @-@ bit digital remastering from the original tapes , and contained 26 tracks totalling 77 minutes of music . The CD also came with extensive liner notes including an interview with Williams . Cues were given new titles , and it also contained previously unreleased material , as well as material that was recorded but never used in the film . 
 = = = 1977 original album = = = 
 † 1978 reissue - bonus track ( cassette ) , free bonus 7 " single ( vinyl album ) . 
 = = = 1998 Collector 's Edition = = = 
 = = Themes = = 
 Film critic Charlene Engel observed Close Encounters " suggests that humankind has reached the point where it is ready to enter the community of the cosmos . While it is a computer which makes the final musical conversation with the alien guests possible , the characteristics bringing Neary to make his way to Devils Tower have little to do with technical expertise or computer literacy . These are virtues taught in schools that will be evolved in the 21st century . " The film also evokes typical science fiction archetypes and motifs . The film portrays new technologies as a natural and expected outcome of human development and indication of health and growth . 
 Other critics found a variety of Judeo @-@ Christian analogies . Devils Tower parallels Mount Sinai , the aliens as God and Roy Neary as Moses . Cecil B. DeMille 's The Ten Commandments is seen on television at the Neary household . Some found close relations between Elijah and Roy ; Elijah was taken into a " chariot of fire " , akin to Roy going in the UFO . Climbing Devils Tower behind the faltering Jillian , Neary exhorts Jillian to keep moving and not to look back , similar to Lot 's wife who looked back at Sodom and turned into a pillar of salt . Spielberg explained , " I wanted to make Close Encounters a very accessible story about the everyday individual who has a sighting that overturns his life , and throws it into complete upheaval as he starts to become more and more obsessed with this experience . " 
 Roy 's wife Ronnie attempts to hide the sunburn caused by Roy 's exposure to the UFOs and wants him to forget his encounter with them . She is embarrassed and bewildered by what has happened to him and desperately wants her ordinary life back . The expression of his lost life is seen when he is sculpting a huge model of Devils Tower in his living room , with his family deserting him . Roy 's obsession with an idea implanted by an alien intelligence , his construction of the model , and his gradual loss of contact with his wife , mimic the events in the short story " Dulcie and Decorum " ( 1955 ) by Damon Knight . 
 Close Encounters also studies the form of " youth spiritual yearning " . Barry Guiler , the <unk> child who refers to the UFOs and their paraphernalia as " toys " ( although that was unscripted , with the child being drawn to smile by being shown toys offstage ) , serves as a motif for childlike innocence and openness in the face of the unknown . Spielberg also compared the theme of communication as highlighting that of tolerance . " If we can talk to aliens in Close Encounters of the Third Kind , " he said , " why not with the Reds in the Cold War ? " Sleeping is the final obstacle to overcome in the ascent of Devils Tower . Roy , Jillian Guiler and a third invitee climb the mountain pursued by government helicopters spraying sleeping gas . The third person stops to rest , is gassed , and falls into a deep sleep . 
 In his interview with Spielberg on Inside the Actors Studio , James Lipton suggested Close Encounters had another , more personal theme for Spielberg : " Your father was a computer engineer ; your mother was a concert pianist , and when the spaceship lands , they make music together on the computer " , suggesting that Roy Neary 's boarding the spaceship is Spielberg 's wish to be reunited with his parents . In a 2005 interview , Spielberg stated that he made Close Encounters when he did not have children , and if he were making it today , he would never have had Neary leave his family and go on the mother ship . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The film was originally to be released in summer 1977 , but was pushed back to November because of the various problems during production . Upon its release , Close Encounters became a box office success , grossing $ 116 @.@ 39 million in North America and $ 171 @.@ 7 million in foreign countries , totaling $ 288 million . It became Columbia Pictures ' most successful film at that time . Jonathan Rosenbaum refers to the film as " the best expression of Spielberg 's benign , dreamy @-@ eyed vision . " A.D. Murphy of Variety gave a positive review but felt " Close Encounters lacks the warmth and humanity of George Lucas 's Star Wars " . Murphy found most of the film slow @-@ paced , but praised the film 's climax . Pauline Kael called it " a kid 's film in the best sense . " Jean Renoir compared Spielberg 's storytelling to Jules Verne and Georges Méliès . Ray Bradbury declared it the greatest science fiction film ever made . Based on 46 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 96 % ( " Certified Fresh " ) of the reviewers have enjoyed the film and the site 's consensus states " Close Encounters ' most iconic bits ( the theme , the mashed @-@ potato sculpture , etc . ) have been so thoroughly absorbed into the culture that it 's easy to forget that its treatment of aliens as peaceful beings rather than warmongering monsters was somewhat groundbreaking in 1977 . " 
 = = = Reissue and home video = = = 
 On the final cut privilege , Spielberg was dissatisfied with the film . Columbia Pictures was experiencing financial problems , and they were depending on this film to save their company . " I wanted to have another six months to finish off this film , and release it in summer 1978 . They told me they needed this film out immediately , " Spielberg explained . " Anyway , Close Encounters was a huge financial success and I told them I wanted to make my own director 's cut . They agreed on the condition that I show the inside of the mother ship so they could have something to hang a [ reissue marketing ] campaign on . I never should have shown the inside of the mother ship . " In 1979 , Columbia gave Spielberg $ 1 @.@ 5 million to produce what became the " Special Edition " of the film . Spielberg added seven minutes of new footage , but also deleted or shortened various existing scenes by a total of ten minutes , so that the Special Edition was three minutes shorter than the original 1977 release . The Special Edition featured several new character development scenes , the discovery of the SS Cotopaxi in the Gobi Desert , and a view of the inside of the mothership . Close Encounters of the Third Kind : The Special Edition was released in August 1980 , making a further $ 15 @.@ 7 million , accumulating a final $ 303 @.@ 7 million box office gross . Roger Ebert " thought the original film was an astonishing achievement , capturing the feeling of awe and wonder we have when considering the likelihood of life beyond the Earth . ... This new version ... is , quite simply , a better film ... Why didn 't Spielberg make it this good the first time ? " 
 The 1980 Special Edition was the version officially available on video for years , until The Criterion Collection offered both versions on LaserDisc in 1990 . This triple @-@ disc LaserDisc set also included an interactive " Making Close Encounters " documentary featuring interviews with Spielberg and other cast and crew involved with the film , as well as stills and script excerpts . 
 In 1998 , Spielberg recut Close Encounters again for what would become the " Collector 's Edition , " to be released on home video and laserdisc . This version of the film is a re @-@ edit of the original 1977 release with some elements of the 1980 Special Edition , but omits the mothership interior scenes which Spielberg felt should have remained a mystery . The laserdisc edition also includes a new 101 @-@ minute documentary , The Making of Close Encounters , which was produced in 1997 and features interviews with Spielberg , the main cast and notable crew members . There have also been many other alternate versions of the film for network and syndicated television , as well as a previous LaserDisc version . Some of these even combined all released material from the 1977 and 1980 versions , but none of these versions were edited by Spielberg , who regards the " Collector 's Edition " as his definitive version of Close Encounters . The Collector 's Edition was given a limited release as part of a roadshow featuring select films to celebrate Columbia Pictures ' 75th anniversary in 1999 . It was the first and only time this version of the film has been shown theatrically . 
 Close Encounters was released on DVD in June 2001 as a two @-@ disc set that contained the " Collector 's Edition " . The second disc contained a wealth of extra features including the 101 @-@ minute " Making Of " documentary from 1997 , a featurette from 1977 , trailers and deleted scenes that included , among other things , the mothership interiors from the 1980 Special Edition . 
 Close Encounters was given a second DVD release and its first release on Blu @-@ ray Disc in November 2007 for the film 's 30th anniversary . These sets contain all three official versions of the film from 1977 , 1980 and 1998 , and a new 2007 interview with Spielberg , who talks about the film 's impact 30 years after its release . The set also includes the 1977 featurette , various trailers and the 1997 " Making Of " documentary – though this is now split over three discs on the DVD version rather than as a single feature as with the 2001 DVD release ( on the Blu @-@ ray release , it remains all on one disc ) . In addition to these features , the 2 @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set also included storyboard @-@ to @-@ scene comparisons , an extensive photo gallery , and a " View from Above : Editor 's Fact Track " highlighting the different scenes in each version of the movie . A single disc version has also been released on Blu @-@ ray , which is basically the first disc of the 30th anniversary edition , which contains the three versions of the film with the " View from Above " feature . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Shortly after the film 's release in late 1977 , Spielberg desired to do either a sequel or prequel , before deciding against it . He explained , " The army 's knowledge and ensuing cover @-@ up is so subterranean that it would take a creative screen story , perhaps someone else making the picture and giving it the equal time it deserves . " 
 The film was nominated for eight Oscars at the 50th Academy Awards , including Best Director , Supporting Actress ( Melinda Dillon ) , Visual Effects , Art Direction ( Joe Alves , Daniel A. <unk> , Phil Abramson ) , Original Music Score , Film Editing , and Sound ( Robert Knudson , Robert Glass , Don MacDougall and Gene Cantamessa ) . The film 's only win was for Vilmos Zsigmond 's cinematography , although the Academy honored the film 's sound effects editing with a Special Achievement Award ( Frank Warner ) . At the 32nd British Academy Film Awards , Close Encounters won Best Production Design , and was nominated for Best Film , Direction , Screenplay , Actor in a Supporting Role ( François Truffaut ) , Music , Cinematography , Editing , and Sound . 
 Close Encounters lost the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation to Star Wars , but was successful at the Saturn Awards . There , the film tied with Star Wars for Direction and Music , but won Best Writing . Richard Dreyfuss , Melinda Dillon and the visual effects department received nominations . Close Encounters was nominated for Best Science Fiction Film . The film received four more nominations at the 35th Golden Globe Awards . 
 When asked in 1990 to select a single " master image " that summed up his film career , Spielberg chose the shot of Barry opening his living room door to see the blazing orange light from the UFO . " That was beautiful but awful light , just like fire coming through the doorway . [ Barry 's ] very small , and it 's a very large door , and there 's a lot of promise or danger outside that door . " In 2007 , Close Encounters was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the United States Library of Congress , and was added to the National Film Registry for preservation . In American Film Institute polls , Close Encounters has been voted the 64th greatest film of all time , 31st most heart @-@ pounding , and 58th most inspiring . Additionally , the film was nominated for the top 10 science fiction films in AFI 's 10 Top 10 and the tenth anniversary edition of the 100 Movies list . The score by John Williams was nominated for AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores . 
 Alongside Star Wars and Superman , Close Encounters led to the reemergence of science fiction films . In 1985 Spielberg donated $ 100 @,@ 000 to the Planetary Society for <unk> <unk> Assay . In the 1979 James Bond film Moonraker the five @-@ note sequence is heard when a scientist punches the combination into an electronic door lock . In the South Park episode " Imaginationland " , a government scientist uses the five @-@ note sequence to try to open a portal . In " Over Logging " , a government scientist uses the five @-@ note sequence to try to get the central Internet router working . The " mashed potato " sculpture was parodied in the film UHF , the film Canadian Bacon , an episode of Spaced , an episode of The X @-@ Files , an episode of That ' 70s Show , and an episode of The Simpsons . It was satirized in the 200th issue of Mad Magazine , July 1978 , by Stan Hart and Mort Drucker as Clod Encounters of the Absurd Kind . 
 In 1977 , Saturday Night Live had Dreyfuss as a guest host and spoofed the film as Cone Encounters of the Third Kind featuring the recurring characters the Coneheads . 
 The 1980 short Closet Cases of the Nerd Kind spoofs the entire film ( in condensed form ) . 
 In 2007 , Muse have used one of the communications melodies to open their most popular live track , titled " Knights of Cydonia " 
 In 2011 , ABC aired a primetime special , Best in Film : The Greatest Movies of Our Time that counted down the best movies chosen by fans based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and People . Close Encounters of the Third Kind was selected as the # 5 Best Sci @-@ Fi Film . 
 In the 2012 Deadmau5 album Album Title Goes Here , track no . 9 , titled " Closer , " features the five @-@ note sequence as the basis for the song 's opening and main melodic motif . 
 In 2013 , the TV Show Futurama spoofed the note sequence and Devil 's Tower sequence in episode " Games of Tones " . 
 In the Homestar Runner cartoon " The House That Gave <unk> Tricks , " the King of Town dresses up as the mashed potato sculpture of Devil 's Tower . 
 American Film Institute Lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies - # 64 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills - # 31 
 AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores - Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Cheers - # 58 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) - Nominated 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 - Nominated Science Fiction Film 
 = John Pope ( military officer ) = 
 John Pope ( March 16 , 1822 – September 23 , 1892 ) was a career United States Army officer and Union general in the American Civil War . He had a brief but successful career in the Western Theater , but he is best known for his defeat at the Second Battle of Bull Run ( Second Manassas ) in the East . 
 Pope was a graduate of the United States Military Academy in 1842 . He served in the Mexican @-@ American War and had numerous assignments as a topographical engineer and surveyor in Florida , New Mexico , and Minnesota . He spent much of the last decade before the Civil War surveying possible southern routes for the proposed First Transcontinental Railroad . He was an early appointee as a Union brigadier general of volunteers and served initially under Maj. Gen. John C. Frémont . He achieved initial success against Brig. Gen. Sterling Price in Missouri , then led a successful campaign that captured Island No. 10 on the Mississippi River . This inspired the Lincoln administration to bring him to the Eastern Theater to lead the newly formed Army of Virginia . 
 He initially alienated many of his officers and men by publicly denigrating their record in comparison to his Western command . He launched an offensive against the Confederate army of General Robert E. Lee , in which he fell prey to a strategic turning movement into his rear areas by Maj. Gen. Stonewall Jackson . At Second Bull Run , he concentrated his attention on attacking Jackson while the other Confederate corps attacked his flank and routed his army . Following Manassas , Pope was banished far from the Eastern Theater to the Department of the Northwest in Minnesota , where he commanded U.S. Forces in the Dakota War of 1862 . He was appointed to command the Department of the Missouri in 1865 and was a prominent and activist commander during Reconstruction in Atlanta . For the rest of his military career , he fought in the Indian Wars , particularly against the Apache and Sioux . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Pope was born in Louisville , Kentucky , the son of Nathaniel Pope , a prominent Federal judge in early Illinois Territory and a friend of lawyer Abraham Lincoln . He was the brother @-@ in @-@ law of Manning Force , and a distant cousin married the sister of Mary Todd Lincoln . He graduated from the United States Military Academy in 1842 , and was commissioned a brevet second lieutenant in the Corps of Topographical Engineers . He served in Florida and then helped survey the northeastern border between the United States and Canada . He fought under Zachary Taylor in the Battle of Monterrey and Battle of Buena Vista during the Mexican @-@ American War , for which he was appointed a brevet first lieutenant and captain , respectively . After the war Pope worked as a surveyor in Minnesota . In 1850 he demonstrated the navigability of the Red River . He served as the chief engineer of the Department of New Mexico from 1851 to 1853 and spent the remainder of the antebellum years surveying a route for the Pacific Railroad . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 Pope was serving on lighthouse duty when Abraham Lincoln was elected and he was one of four officers selected to escort the president @-@ elect to Washington , D.C. He offered to serve Lincoln as an aide , but on June 14 , 1861 , he was appointed brigadier general of volunteers ( date of rank effective May 17 , 1861 ) and was ordered to Illinois to recruit volunteers . 
 In the Department of the West under Maj. Gen. John C. Frémont , Pope assumed command of the District of North and Central Missouri in July , with operational control along a portion of the Mississippi River . He had an uncomfortable relationship with Frémont and <unk> behind the scenes to get him removed from command . Frémont was convinced that Pope had treacherous intentions toward him , demonstrated by his lack of action in following Frémont 's offensive plans in Missouri . Historian Allan Nevins wrote , " Actually , incompetence and timidity offer a better explanation of Pope than treachery , though he certainly showed an insubordinate spirit . " Pope eventually forced the Confederates under Sterling Price to retreat southward , taking 1 @,@ 200 prisoners in a minor action at Blackwater , Missouri , on December 18 . Pope , who established a reputation as a braggart early in the war , was able to generate significant press interest in his minor victory , which brought him to the attention of Frémont 's replacement , Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck . 
 Halleck appointed Pope to command the Army of the Mississippi ( and the District of the Mississippi , Department of the Missouri ) on February 23 , 1862 . Given 25 @,@ 000 men , he was ordered to clear Confederate obstacles on the Mississippi River . He made a surprise march on New Madrid , Missouri , and captured it on March 14 . He then orchestrated a campaign to capture Island No. 10 , a strongly fortified post garrisoned by 12 @,@ 000 men and 58 guns . Pope 's engineers cut a channel that allowed him to bypass the island . Assisted by the gunboats of Captain Andrew H. Foote , he landed his men on the opposite shore , which isolated the defenders . The island garrison surrendered on April 7 , 1862 , freeing Union navigation of the Mississippi as far south as Memphis . 
 Pope 's outstanding performance on the Mississippi earned him a promotion to major general , dated as of March 21 , 1862 . During the Siege of Corinth , he commanded the left wing of Halleck 's army , but he was soon summoned to the East by Lincoln . After the collapse of Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan 's Peninsula Campaign , Pope was appointed to command the Army of Virginia , assembled from scattered forces in the Shenandoah Valley and Northern Virginia . This promotion infuriated Frémont , who resigned his commission . 
 Pope brought an attitude of self @-@ assurance that was offensive to the eastern soldiers under his command . He issued an astonishing message to his new army on July 14 , 1862 , that included the following : 
 Let us understand each other . I have come to you from the West , where we have always seen the backs of our enemies ; from an army whose business it has been to seek the adversary and to beat him when he was found ; whose policy has been attack and not defense . In but one instance has the enemy been able to place our Western armies in defensive attitude . I presume that I have been called here to pursue the same system and to lead you against the enemy . It is my purpose to do so , and that speedily . I am sure you long for an opportunity to win the distinction you are capable of achieving . That opportunity I shall endeavor to give you . Meantime I desire you to dismiss from your minds certain phrases , which I am sorry to find so much in vogue amongst you . I hear constantly of " taking strong positions and holding them , " of " lines of retreat , " and of " bases of supplies . " Let us discard such ideas . The strongest position a soldier should desire to occupy is one from which he can most easily advance against the enemy . Let us study the probable lines of retreat of our opponents , and leave our own to take care of themselves . Let us look before us , and not behind . Success and glory are in the advance , disaster and shame lurk in the rear . Let us act on this understanding , and it is safe to predict that your banners shall be inscribed with many a glorious deed and that your names will be dear to your countrymen forever 
 Despite this bravado , and despite receiving units from McClellan 's Army of the Potomac that swelled the Army of Virginia to 70 @,@ 000 men , Pope 's aggressiveness exceeded his strategic capabilities , particularly since he was now facing Confederate General Robert E. Lee . Lee , sensing that Pope was indecisive , split his smaller ( 55 @,@ 000 man ) army , sending Maj. Gen. Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson with 24 @,@ 000 men as a diversion to Cedar Mountain , where Jackson defeated Pope 's subordinate , Nathaniel Banks . As Lee advanced on Pope with the remainder of his army , Jackson swung around to the north and captured Pope 's main supply base at Manassas Station . Confused and unable to locate the main Confederate force , Pope walked into a trap in the Second Battle of Bull Run . His men withstood a combined attack by Jackson and Lee on August 29 , 1862 , but on the following day Maj. Gen. James Longstreet launched a surprise flanking attack and the Union Army was soundly defeated and forced to retreat . Pope compounded his unpopularity with the Army by blaming his defeat on disobedience by Maj. Gen. Fitz John Porter , who was found guilty by court @-@ martial and disgraced . 
 Brigadier General Alpheus S. Williams , who served briefly under Pope , held the general in particularly low esteem . In a letter to his daughter , he wrote : 
 " All this is the sequence of Gen. Pope 's high sounding manifestoes . His pompous orders ... greatly disgusted his army from the first . When a general boasts that he will look only on the backs of his enemies , that he takes no care for lines of retreat or bases of supplies ; when , in short , from a snug hotel in Washington he issues after @-@ dinner orders to gratify public taste and his own self @-@ esteem , anyone may confidently look for results such as have followed the bungling management of his last campaign ... I dare not trust myself to speak of this commander as I feel and believe . Suffice it to say ( for your eye alone ) that more insolence , <unk> , ignorance , and pretentiousness were never combined in one man . It can with truth be said of him that he had not a friend in his command from the smallest drummer boy to the highest general officer . All hated him . " 
 Pope himself was relieved of command on September 12 , 1862 , and his army was merged into the Army of the Potomac under McClellan . He spent the remainder of the war in the Department of the Northwest in Minnesota , dealing with the Dakota War of 1862 . His months campaigning in the West paid career dividends because he was assigned to command the Military Division of the Missouri on January 30 , 1865 , and received a brevet promotion to major general in the regular army on March 13 , 1865 , for his service at Island No. 10 . On June 27 , 1865 , the War Department issued General Order No. 118 dividing the entire United States , including the states formerly a part of the Confederacy , into five military divisions and 19 subordinate geographical departments . Major General William T. Sherman was assigned to command the Division of the Missouri . Pope then became commander of its Department of the Missouri , replacing Major General Grenville M. Dodge . 
 Shortly after Lee 's surrender at Appomattox Court House , Pope wrote a letter to Edmund Kirby @-@ Smith offering the Confederates in Louisiana the same surrender terms that Grant allowed for Lee . He told Kirby @-@ Smith that further resistance was futile and urged the general to avoid needless bloodshed , devastation , and misery by accepting the surrender terms . Kirby @-@ Smith , however , rejected Pope 's overtures and said that his army remained " strong and well equipped and that despite the ' disparity of numbers ' his men could outweigh the differences ' by valor and skill ' . " Five weeks later Confederate General Simon Bolivar Buckner signed the surrender in New Orleans . 
 = = Postbellum years = = 
 In April 1867 , Pope was named governor of the Reconstruction Third Military District and made his headquarters in Atlanta , issuing orders that allowed African Americans to serve on juries , ordering Mayor James Williams to remain in office another year , postponing elections , and banning city advertising in newspapers that did not favor Reconstruction . President Andrew Johnson removed him from command December 28 , 1867 , replacing him with George G. Meade . Following this , Pope was appointed head of the Department of the Lakes from January 13 , 1868 , to April 30 , 1870 . 
 Pope returned to the West as commander of the Department of the Missouri and served with distinction in the Apache Wars . He made political enemies in Washington when he recommended that the reservation system would be better administered by the military than the corrupt Indian Bureau . He engendered controversy by calling for better and more humane treatment of Native Americans , but author Walter Donald Kennedy notes that he also said " It is my purpose to utterly exterminate the Sioux " and planned to make a " final settlement with all these Indians " . 
 Pope 's reputation suffered a serious blow in 1879 when a Board of Inquiry led by Maj. Gen. John Schofield concluded that Fitz John Porter had been unfairly convicted and that it was Pope himself who bore most of the responsibility for the loss at the Second Battle of Bull Run . The report characterized Pope as being reckless and dangerously uninformed about the events of the battle , and credited Porter 's perceived disobedience with saving the army from complete ruin . Pope was promoted to major general in the Regular Army in 1882 , was assigned to command of the Military Division of the Pacific in 1883 , and retired in 1886 . He died at the Ohio Soldiers ' Home near Sandusky , Ohio . He is buried in Bellefontaine Cemetery , St. Louis , Missouri . 
 = The 100 @-@ Mile Diet = 
 The 100 @-@ Mile Diet : A Year of Local Eating ( or Plenty : One Man , One Woman , and a Raucous Year of Eating Locally ) is a non @-@ fiction book written by Canadian writers Alisa Smith and J.B. MacKinnon . In the book , the authors recount their experiences , including motivations and challenges , on restricting their diet , for one year , to include only foods grown within 100 miles of their residence . Beginning in March 2005 , with little preparation the urban couple began only purchasing foods with ingredients they knew were all from within 100 miles . Finding little in grocery stores , they relied on farmers ' markets and visits to local farms . Staples in their diet included seafood , chicken , root vegetable , berries , and corn . They lacked cooking oils , rice , and sugar . They preserved foods for use in the winter but ended with extra supplies . 
 The couple first wrote about the experience in articles for the online magazine The Tyee . The popularity of the articles led to a book deal . In the book , Smith and MacKinnon each write alternate chapters , 12 in total . The first chapter is written by MacKinnon and focuses on the first month of their experience . They write in the first person as a memoir that explores their own dietary experiences and personal feelings . 
 In the Canadian market , the book spent five weeks on Maclean 's nonfiction bestseller list . The book spent 20 weeks on The Vancouver Sun 's nonfiction bestseller list . The authors won the Roderick Haig @-@ Brown Regional Prize from the British Columbia Booksellers Association for the best contribution to the enjoyment and understanding of British Columbia . The 100 @-@ mile diet concept , along with advocates of local food , were covered by media across North America . In 2009 , Food Network Canada aired The 100 Mile Challenge , a television series co @-@ created by MacKinnon and Smith and based on the book . 
 = = Background = = 
 Alisa Smith and J. B. MacKinnon 's idea of local eating began while visiting their cabin in northern British Columbia in August 2004 . Their food supplies were nearly exhausted so to feed their dinner guests they scrounged the surrounding land for food . Their dinner of Dolly Varden trout , wild mushrooms , dandelion leaves , apples , sour cherries , and rose hips , along with potatoes and garlic from the garden , so impressed the couple that once back home , in their <unk> apartment in Vancouver , they pursued the idea of eating only local food . They eventually decided to try a diet consisting of eating food , for one year , grown within 100 miles of their home . They began the diet symbolically on the first day of spring , March 21 . Beginning in June , they wrote articles for The Tyee about their experience . The couple , both in their 30s , each had experience in writing : Smith as a freelance journalist who had taught non @-@ fiction writing , and MacKinnon as the author of the award @-@ winning historical non @-@ fiction book Dead Man in Paradise and a past editor of <unk> magazine . 
 They were overwhelmed by the response , first from other <unk> and then from local and international news media . Eleven articles were published in the The Tyee series over the year , plus an additional four articles afterwards , between August 2006 and May 2007 . They launched an independent website , <unk> , in April 2006 and began writing the book . Random House published the hardcover version on 12 March 2007 in Canada as The 100 Mile Diet : A Year of Local Eating and on 24 April in the United States as Plenty : One Man , One Woman , and a Raucous Year of Eating Locally . The trade paperback was released in Canada by Random House 's Vintage Canada imprint on 2 October and in the United States by the Three Rivers Press imprint on 22 April 2008 . 
 = = Content = = 
 The book consists of twelve chapters , plus an Epilogue and an Acknowledgements section at the end . Smith and MacKinnon individually write alternating chapters , each of which covers one month from March 2005 to February 2006 . In the first chapter MacKinnon tells how his idea for the 100 @-@ mile diet began and Smith agrees to try it for one year . They begin symbolically on the first day of Spring , March 21 , and define ' local ' as 100 miles , a convenient radius that would include the Lower Mainland , the southern half of Vancouver Island , and Whatcom County and Skagit County in Washington State . Their exceptions to this rule include meals eaten while traveling , meals prepared by friends , and business lunches . Their initial month was expensive as they scoured grocery stores for whatever they could find . In the second chapter , Smith describes her and MacKinnon as an unwed urban couple in their early thirties with no children and living in a rented apartment . They recount how eating impacted their relationship before and after the diet , the anonymity of prepackaged foods , the traceability of their diet , and the diets of the Coast Salish . 
 The farmers ' market opens in May and they are able to buy local honey to replace sugar . Seafood from the Strait of Georgia becomes a staple in their diet . The couple spend August at their cabin in northwestern BC where they fish the Skeena River , pick wild berries , and eat whatever grows in their garden . Back in the Lower Mainland , the September harvest provides them with melons , peppers , eggplant , grapes , and tomatoes . To prepare for winter they preserved corn and tomatoes , made jam from berries , collected herbs from their community garden , and bought many potatoes . 
 During the fall , each write on the troubles in their relationship . David Beers , the founder of the Tyee , hosts a 100 @-@ mile Thanksgiving dinner for Smith while MacKinnon was away . In November , during a family emergency , MacKinnon travels to Kamloops where he suspends his 100 @-@ mile diet a few days . They finally find a source of flour when they discover a farmer on Vancouver Island who grows his own fruits , vegetables , meats , and wheat . In December , Smith travels to Edmonton where her grandmother feeds her <unk> pasta which she accepts . 
 In January they find a restaurant that specializes in local cuisine and , previously vegetarians , they cook and eat beef for the first time in years . Working in Malawi , MacKinnon is struck by the contrast between their western diet and that of the poor country 's : there is ample food supplies in Malawi but most is exported to Canada and the United States who buy the food they do not require . The couple learn about Mexican and Maya cuisine while in Merida , Mexico for a wedding . The book ends with an epilogue , written by both Smith and MacKinnon six months after their one year diet . They make a symbolic journey to <unk> , within their 100 @-@ mile radius , to collect sea water for its salt and prove they could obtain their own salt supply . 
 = = Style and genre = = 
 The book uses a first person memoir style with Smith and MacKinnon taking turns writing each chapter . The authors purposely avoided writing a self @-@ help book in favour of the memoir style , saying , " We wanted to show readers that process , and how it affected us and let them see it through our eyes . " The topics sometimes go beyond the motivations and challenges of the diet into more personal relationship issues . Prior to writing the book they created a general plan on where the narrative would lead . They took turns writing so they could monitor each other 's progress . As the two alternate there are shifts in perspectives , though the overall theme of " traceability " persisted . The general tone has been described as charming , innocent , and sometimes funny . Smith 's chapters have been said to demonstrate more honesty and vulnerability , while MacKinnon 's were more " show pieces , little tours de force " . The final chapter was authored together by Smith and MacKinnon writing as a disembodied third @-@ person narrator to summarize and conclude the book . 
 = = Reaction to the book = = 
 In the Canadian market , The 100 @-@ Mile Diet debuted at # 10 on Maclean 's nonfiction bestseller list on May 14 . It spent five weeks on the list , peaking at # 4 . In the Vancouver market , the book spent 20 weeks on The Vancouver Sun 's nonfiction bestseller list , peaking at # 5 . At the British Columbia Booksellers Association 's BC Book Prizes , in April 2008 , the book was short @-@ listed for the Hubert Evans Non @-@ Fiction Prize , while the authors won the Roderick Haig @-@ Brown Regional Prize , awarded to the authors of the book that best contributes to the enjoyment and understanding of British Columbia . 
 The book has been called engagingly written , wisely researched , and honestly told . Critics admired the wit and humour . The book reviewer for The Globe and Mail admitted he grew impatient with the grand and repetitive statements about the changing global food system and the authors ' hyperbole regarding their modest culinary discoveries . Compared to Kingsolver 's Animal , Vegetable , Miracle , The 100 @-@ Mile Diet was found to be more compelling and easier to read , with Smith and MacKinnon more relatable and sympathetic than Kingsolver . 
 = = Reaction to the diet = = 
 While the concept of only eating locally grown food is not new , the book coincided with the emerging popularity of the <unk> movement and farmer 's markets . Media outlets in North America examined the feasibility of only eating food produced locally , local food @-@ themed events , and <unk> groups . During World Food Day in 2006 , playing off the popularity of Smith and MacKinnon 's articles in The Tyee , the Vancouver City Hall held a 100 @-@ mile themed breakfast . <unk> groups have held local @-@ only dinner parties and week @-@ long challenges . Some restaurants and caterers offered 100 @-@ mile menus , one being The <unk> Restaurant in Woodinville , Washington . Some farmers , gardeners , or regional food producers began offering subscription services to deliver produce or urban farming or gardening services . The 100 @-@ mile diet spawned many variations to allow for various circumstances and motivations . Examples include the allowance of a few non @-@ local items , like Barbara Kingsolver chose to include spices into her local diet , or expanding the geographic area to more convenient boundaries , like the economic region , or the entire state or province . A ' made @-@ in @-@ Manitoba ' diet challenge led to a government Manitoba Food Charter recognizing and encouraging local food markets . 
 In 2014 , the American writer Vicki Robin published Blessing the Hands That Feed Us which descried her experiment to eat food sourced within a ten mile radius of her home in Washington State . 
 = Hurricane Baker ( 1950 ) = 
 Hurricane Baker was a major hurricane that affected the Leeward Islands , Greater Antilles , and the Gulf Coast of the United States . The tropical cyclone was the second intense hurricane , second hurricane , and second tropical storm of the 1950 Atlantic hurricane season . Hurricane Baker attained peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) near the Leeward Islands , traversed Antigua , and weakened to a tropical depression southwest of Puerto Rico . It re @-@ intensified south of Cuba , strengthened to a strong Category 2 hurricane in the Gulf of Mexico , and hit the United States near Gulf Shores , Alabama , with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Hurricane Baker produced extensive damage in the Lesser Antilles and Cuba , but impacts were minimal in the United States . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On the morning of August 20 , a strong tropical storm developed about 446 miles ( 718 km ) east of Basse @-@ Terre , Guadeloupe . The tropical storm deepened to hurricane intensity . On August 21 , it rapidly attained maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) , equivalent to a Category 3 hurricane . The hurricane passed over Antigua during the evening , while still producing winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . On August 22 , it lost intensity and weakened to a tropical storm . On August 23 , Baker made landfall near the Puerto Rican town of Guánica as a minimal tropical storm . The highest winds on the island of Puerto Rico were 35 – 40 mph ( 55 – 65 km / h ) . The storm then degenerated into an easterly tropical wave , and moved west @-@ northwestward over northeastern Hispaniola . On August 24 , it re @-@ entered the Atlantic Ocean , and Tropical Depression Baker crossed the coast of eastern Cuba early on the next day . 
 On August 25 , Baker redeveloped a center over the Caribbean Sea off southern Cuba , and re @-@ intensified to tropical storm status . On August 27 , Baker affected the Pinar del Río Province with 60 mph ( 75 km / h ) winds , and then turned northward over the southern Gulf of Mexico . On August 28 , Baker re @-@ strengthened to hurricane intensity ; reconnaissance and ship reports suggest the hurricane attained a second peak intensity of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) on August 30 . The minimum central pressure was 979 mbar ( 28 @.@ 92 inHg ) on this date . The cyclone diminished in intensity prior to landfall . On August 31 , the hurricane struck Gulf Shores , Alabama as a Category 1 hurricane with sustained winds estimated near 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . The estimated central pressure at landfall was 980 mbar ( 28 @.@ 95 inHg ) . Baker moved inland over Alabama and dissipated over southeastern Missouri on September 1 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 On Antigua , the Pan American Airways station 's power failed when winds reached 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) around midnight on August 22 . Unofficial estimates placed winds between 95 – 120 mph ( 150 – 195 km / h ) at the location , although damages and casualties were unknown . Subsequent reports indicated light damage occurred on the island ; later , information from the island indicated extensive damage . More than 100 homes were destroyed or damaged in the Willkie and Piggott areas , and large homes were destroyed in <unk> . Additionally , a manse was also demolished in <unk> . Electronic communications were dismantled , and thousands of homeless people sheltered in churches and schools . No deaths occurred on the island , but damages were expected to reach several thousand dollars . In Cuba , 37 people died , and the property losses reached several million dollars . 
 In the United States , the greatest property and crop damage occurred from Mobile , Alabama to Saint Marks , Florida , where losses approached $ 2 @,@ 550 @,@ 000 ( 1950 USD ) ; high tides and winds inflicted minimal damage in both cities . Panama City , Florida incurred heavy damage to homes and businesses from high tides and rainfall , which peaked at 14 @.@ 96 inches ( 380 mm ) . The highest rainfall total was 15 @.@ 49 inches ( 393 mm ) at <unk> , Florida . Peak gusts exceeded 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) on Santa Rosa Island , Florida . 200 to 300 cottages received damage in Panama City , and homes were flooded near the bay . Losses reached $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1950 USD ) in Gulf Shores , Alabama . Hurricane Baker spawned two tornadoes . On August 30 , a F1 tornado touched down in Apalachicola , Florida , destroying four dwellings and a store building and damaging another eleven buildings . On August 31 , a F0 tornado demolished one building near Marianna , Florida , in Jackson County . Inland , Birmingham International Airport recorded 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) wind gusts ; higher gusts were estimated near 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) in elevated , mountainous locations . Hundreds of trees were prostrated as far north as the Birmingham , Alabama area , and one person was killed and two more injured by live wires falling from utility poles . 
 = Suavemente = 
 Suavemente ( English : Smoothly ) is the debut studio album by American <unk> recording artist Elvis Crespo . Released by Sony Music Latin on April 14 , 1998 , the album popularized merengue music and established Crespo as a leading artist in the Latin music market . He collaborated with several songwriters and record producers ( including Homero d <unk> , <unk> Vázquez , Luis Cruz , and Juan Perez ) , and wrote three songs creating an overall tropical music @-@ flavored recording . 
 With romantic ballads and uptempo songs , Suavemente received favorable reviews from music critics who praised its " energetic " and " catchy fan @-@ pleasing " songs . The album was the first merengue recording to peak at number one on the United States Billboard Top Latin Albums chart , and two of its singles ( " Suavemente " and " Tu Sonrisa " ) peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart ; Crespo is the first merengue artist with two number @-@ one merengue singles . Suavemente peaked at number 106 on the US Billboard 200 chart . The album was Crespo 's commercial breakthrough , introducing him to the popular music market with the Spanglish remix of its title track . 
 Suavemente received several accolades , including Billboard Latin Music Awards for Album of the Year and New Artist Album of the Year and a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Tropical Latin Performance . It won five Lo Nuestro Awards , including Tropical Album of the Year . The album has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and has sold more than 1 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . Its title song remains a staple at Latin music nightclubs and festivals , and Suavemente has been ranked among the most essential Latin albums of the past 50 years by Billboard magazine . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1993 , brothers Héctor and Oscar Serrano formed Grupo Manía in Puerto Rico . They enlisted Alfred Cotto , Reynaldo Santiago , and Elvis Crespo ( lead singer with the Serrano brothers ) to tour and record two @-@ step merengue music , popularizing the genre to a younger audience . In 1996 , Crespo left Grupo Manía and signed with Sony Music Latin ( the company which signed his former band ) , beginning his solo career . He said in a May 1999 Billboard interview that leaving the band was " a very hard decision " , since they worked well together . While Crespo was writing " Suavemente " , he began singing the song and discovered that his son " spent all afternoon singing it " . This led him to record the track , since he thought " [ it ] would be a hit " . Crespo originally intended for " Suavemente " and " Tu Sonrisa " , the singles which brought him international recognition , to be recorded with Grupo Manía . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The album was released in the United States on April 14 , 1998 . Suavemente and American merengue singer Manny Manuel 's album , Es Mi Tiempo , increased US tropical @-@ music sales by 27 percent over the previous year . On November 28 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified Suavemente gold for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies , the first merengue record certified gold . The album was certified gold in Chile , platinum in Venezuela , and platinum in Central America . During the 1998 Christmas season , Suavemente was among the top @-@ selling Latin albums in the United States . On February 20 , 1999 , Sony Discos president Oscar Llord expressed an interest in promoting Suavemente in Latin America and Europe since he believed that the album would sell over one million copies . In May , it sold 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . By June 2007 Suavemente had sold 800 @,@ 000 copies in the US , and by 2012 the album had sold an additional 64 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 Crespo performed at the 23rd New York Salsa Festival at Madison Square Garden on September 5 , 1998 with El Gran Combo de Puerto Rico , and Latin jazz recording artist Eddie Palmieri . He was part of the Hot Latin Nights show at Walt Disney World 's Pleasure Island on September 19 , which was broadcast as a two @-@ part Telemundo special on December 14 and 31 . On October 11 Crespo ( performing with other Latin acts ) sang " Suavemente " on the seven @-@ hour Puerto Rico Se <unk> , a benefit concert broadcast live on Telemundo which raised $ 13 million for victims of Hurricane Georges on Hispaniola . He performed " Suavemente " at the 1999 Billboard Latin Music Awards . Crespo 's appearance was praised by Billboard 's John Lannert , who believed that it foreshadowed possible dominance at future music awards . He appeared at El Concierto Del Amor , an annual tropical @-@ music festival held at the Continental Airlines Arena in East Rutherford , New Jersey on February 14 , 1999 , with fellow salsa singers Jerry Rivera , Frankie Negron , Tito Nieves , and Michael Stuart . To promote Suavemente Crespo toured Uruguay , Argentina , Chile , Colombia , and Peru in the first quarter of the year , and he performed at Billboard 's 10th annual Latin Music conference on April 20 , 1999 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In Billboard , Latin music contributor John Lannert called the album a " merengue @-@ bomba disc " and Crespo a " midtempo pop / merengue " artist . In his 2003 book , The Latin Beat , Ed Morales described the title song as a " salsa classic or pop hit . " True crime novelist M. William Phelps called " Suavemente " a " romantic Latin ballad " in his 2008 book , I 'll Be Watching You . In her 2005 book , Pop Culture Latin America , Lisa Shaw called " Suavemente " " an example of some of the best merengue with a rock @-@ pop sound . " According to <unk> magazine , Suavemente is " intoxicating , feverish , pure <unk> merengue . <unk> in the summer streets to the fast @-@ paced beats , ear busting horns and percussive stamina " ; Latina magazine noted the album 's " feverish beat " . Spanish @-@ language magazine <unk> called Crespo the new sensation of merengue music , and his album a favorite of listeners who enjoy <unk> . 
 Sony Music International Latin America president Frank <unk> called Crespo a " genius " who wrote " catchy fan @-@ pleasing " songs . Terry Jenkins of AllMusic praised the album 's " seductive Latin ballads " and found the focal mode of the recording to be sentimental , strong , lively , and swinging . Business Wire noted its popularity in the American and Latino markets . The Los Angeles Times called Suavemente and Crespo 's repertoire " energy @-@ packed " . Billboard 's Lannert wrote that other Latin acts tried to emulate Crespo 's style . 
 = = Chart history = = 
 Suavemente debuted at number six on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums chart for the week ending May 2 , 1998 . In its second week the album rose to number five , selling 3 @,@ 000 copies . Suavemente was number three on the chart for the week ending May 16 , selling 5 @,@ 000 copies ( a 60 @-@ percent increase ) . The following week the album rose to number two , behind Selena 's Anthology box set , and sold 7 @,@ 000 copies . The sales increase placed Suavemente at number 188 on the US Billboard 200 chart , only the second merengue album to make that chart . In its fifth week , album sales fell 50 percent and it dropped to number eight . The following week ( which included the Memorial Day weekend ) , Suavemente moved up to number six . For the week ending June 13 , the album re @-@ entered the Billboard 200 chart at number 170 and peaked at number one on the Top Latin Albums chart . The next week it dropped to number three and 197 on the Top Latin Albums and Billboard 200 charts , respectively . Suavemente sold 6 @,@ 000 copies for the week ending June 13 , rising to number two on the Top Latin Albums chart behind Ricky Martin 's Vuelve . The album dropped to third the following week . Suavemente sold 6 @,@ 000 copies the next week , rising to number two behind Vuelve . After five weeks behind Vuelve , Suavemente passed it on the Top Latin Albums chart when its sales increased 16 percent to 8 @,@ 600 copies . For the week of August 8 , 1998 , it fell back to number two behind Vuelve . After three weeks of declining sales , Suavemente was number three when it sold 5 @,@ 000 copies as " Tu Sonrisa " ( its second single ) topped the Hot Latin Songs chart . It ended 1998 as the year 's eighth @-@ bestselling Latin album . Suavemente spent 98 consecutive weeks in the top 10 of the Top Latin Albums chart , the second @-@ longest run in history . 
 The album remained atop the US Tropical Albums chart for seven consecutive weeks after its release . It began sliding down the chart , but remained near the top . Suavemente returned to the top of the Tropical Albums chart after twelve weeks behind the Dance with Me soundtrack . The following week it sold 4 @,@ 000 copies , remaining at number one . In the album 's fourth consecutive week atop the chart , it sold 6 @,@ 500 copies . During its fifth straight week atop the Tropical Albums chart , it sold 6 @,@ 000 copies , down 16 percent . Suavemente ended 1998 as the fourth @-@ bestselling tropical @-@ music album . In its ninth consecutive week atop the Tropical Albums chart the album sold 7 @,@ 000 copies , down 17 percent from the previous week . The following week , its tenth consecutive at number one , it sold 7 @,@ 500 copies ( up seven percent ) . For the week ending February 6 , 1999 , although sales of Suavemente dipped 13 percent to 6 @,@ 500 copies the album remained atop the chart . On the February 27 , 1999 chart , album sales increased by 67 percent . The following week sales decreased 30 percent to 7 @,@ 000 copies , but Suavemente remained atop the Tropical Albums chart for its fourteenth straight week . 
 The album debuted at number 43 on the US Billboard Heatseekers Albums chart for the week ending May 2 , 1998 ; the following week , it rose to number 39 . For the week ending May 16 , the album jumped to number 13 ; the following week , it rose to number nine . In subsequent weeks , the album continued to rise up the chart ; for the week ending June 13 , it was number five . 
 = = Singles = = 
 After " Suavemente " debuted at number 15 on the US Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart for the week ending April 25 , 1998 , the magazine 's John Lannert predicted that Crespo could " easily win a new artist award " in 1999 . Billboard music analyst Karl Ross called the album 's title song " a sultry [ track ] about the power of a kiss " . For the week ending May 16 " Suavemente " peaked at number one , displacing " Una Fan Enamorada " by Servando y Florentino . Crespo became the first merengue recording artist with a number @-@ one single on the Hot Latin Songs chart since Dominican singer Juan Luis Guerra 's " El <unk> De la Vida " six years earlier . " Suavemente " remained at number one with 13 million audience impressions , a four @-@ percent increase over the previous week . The song broke the record for most weeks at number one for a tropical @-@ music recording on the Hot Latin Songs chart ( six ) since Billboard began monitoring Latin airplay in 1986 , and it was number one on the Tropical Songs chart for nine consecutive weeks . " Suavemente " ended 1998 as the year 's most @-@ successful tropical single . Sony Discos president Oscar Llord told Billboard about the " carefulness " of crossing over into the English @-@ language market , calling the lead single a process done " naturally " as a result of two US radio stations ( in Miami and New ) York requesting a Spanglish version . On <unk> , Timothy Borden wrote that the song 's Spanglish version had " unexpected crossover appeal " . The bilingual version was released in Germany in the second quarter of 1999 . " Suavemente " became Crespo 's most @-@ popular song and a " teenage anthem " in the Latino community . It was the first Sony Music Latin release to debut on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart , peaking at number 84 . 
 The album 's second single , " Tu Sonrisa " , was distributed to US radio stations in the second week of July 1998 . It debuted at number 21 on the U.S. Hot Latin Tracks chart , as " Suavemente " remained in the top five . The song peaked at number one on the Tropical Songs chart , Crespo 's second number one . " Tu Sonrisa " topped the Hot Latin Tracks chart in its sixth week , the singer 's second number one on that chart . It displaced " Te Quiero Tanto Tanto " by Mexican Latin pop group Onda <unk> , and Crespo became the first merengue artist with two number @-@ one Hot Latin Tracks singles . After a week at number one , " Tu Sonrisa " was displaced by Gloria Estefan 's " Oye ! " . A week later it again topped the chart for one week before being displaced by " Perdido Sin Ti " , Martin 's fourth single from Vuelve . After the success of " Suavemente " ' s bilingual version , Sony Music distributed a club mix of " Tu Sonrisa " to radio stations in February 1999 . Billboard Latin music contributor Leila Cobo called the song " catchy " and ( with " Suavemente " ) " irresistible " . " Tu Sonrisa " is the fifteenth @-@ most @-@ successful Sony Discos single on the Hot Latin Tracks chart since the chart was established in 1999 . 
 " Luna <unk> " , Suavemente 's third single , debuted and peaked at number 29 on the Hot Latin Tracks chart for the week ending December 12 , 1998 . It dropped off the chart after a week before charting on Hot Latin Tracks and Tropical Songs at 33 and 13 , respectively , for the week ending January 16 , 1999 . The song peaked at 26 and 11 on the Hot Latin Songs and Tropical Songs charts , respectively . The fourth and final single from the album , " Nuestra <unk> " , was less successful ; it peaked at number 17 on the Tropical Songs chart in 1999 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Suavemente is considered to have revolutionized merengue music , making it a popular subgenre of Latin music , and the album brought Crespo international recognition in the merengue market . The singer is the first merengue artist with an album atop the US Top Latin Albums chart , and two number @-@ one songs on the US Hot Latin Songs chart . Billboard cited Crespo and American singer @-@ actor Carlos Ponce as jump @-@ starting the US market with their albums . According to Billboard 's Karl Ross , Crespo transcended the US Latino market and his success may have been felt in Europe and the Pacific Rim . Sony Discos president Oscar Llord called Suavemente the " most successful debut album of a Tropical artist in history . " Suavemente was listed as the third best @-@ charting and <unk> Sony Discos album during the Top Latin Albums twenty @-@ fifth year in 1999 . Crespo was ranked fifth on the Hot Latin Songwriters in 1998 , eleventh on the Top Latin Albums Artists , seventh on the Hot Latin Tracks Artists , fourth on the Top Tropical Album Artists , and second on the Tropical Tracks Artists lists . Suavemente has been named one of the most essential Latin albums of the past 50 years by Billboard , and its title song became a staple in Latin @-@ music nightclubs . The lead single also became a popular tune in Mexico , where it was used in festivals around the country . 
 At the 1999 Billboard Latin Music Awards Crespo received four nominations ( including Album of the Year and Hot Latin Track of the Year ) , tying him with Selena for the most nominations in a single year ; the record was later broken by Tito El Bambino , with 18 nominations in 2010 . He won New Artist Album of the Year and Latin Dance Maxi @-@ Single of the Year . Crespo was the Latin 50 Artist of the Year at the 2000 Billboard Latin Music Awards ( the top @-@ selling Latin artist from January 1999 to January 2000 ) . He was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Tropical Latin Performance in 1999 , losing to Marc Anthony 's Contra la Corriente . At the 11th Premio Lo <unk> , Crespo received six nominations and won five awards : Tropical Album of the Year , Tropical Song of the Year , Tropical Male Artist of the Year , Tropical @-@ Salsa Duo or Group of the Year ( shared with Milly Quezada ) , and Tropical New Artist of the Year . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Erotica ( Madonna album ) = 
 Erotica is the fifth studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . It was released on October 20 , 1992 , by the Maverick and Warner Bros. Records . The album was released simultaneously with Madonna 's first book publication , Sex , a coffee table book containing explicit photographs featuring the singer . It marked Madonna 's first release under her own multi @-@ media entertainment company , Maverick . Erotica is a concept album about sex and romance ; she incorporated an alter ego named Mistress Dita , inspired by actress Dita Parlo . Some songs also take on a more confessional tone , influenced by the loss of Madonna 's two close friends to AIDS . 
 Madonna recorded the album in New York City with Shep Pettibone and André Betts while she was working on other projects . Pettibone sent her a tape with three songs when she was in Chicago , and shortly after they started the album 's production in his apartment . During the sessions , they had problems during sequencing , and , as a result , Pettibone kept trying to move development as fast as possible as he did not want Madonna to lose interest in the music . According to him , Madonna 's compositions were serious and intense , directing the creative direction of the songs into a deeply personal territory . The album 's production was chronicled by Pettibone in an article called " Erotica Diaries " , in Madonna 's Icon magazine . 
 Erotica received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who regarded it as one of Madonna 's most adventurous albums and praised her comments on taboos and AIDS . Commercially , the album was less successful than Madonna 's previous records . It peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 , becoming her first studio album not to top the chart since her debut . Internationally , it topped the charts in Australia and France , while peaking inside the top five in many other countries , such as Canada , Germany , Japan , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . Erotica was certified double @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and has sold more than six million copies worldwide . 
 Six singles were released from the album , with the title track and " Deeper and Deeper " becoming top @-@ ten hits on the Billboard Hot 100 . The album was supported by Madonna 's fourth concert tour , The Girlie Show World Tour , which visited cities in Europe , North America , Latin America , Asia and Australia in 1993 . Overlooked due to the controversy surrounding her coffee table book Sex , Erotica has been considered as one of the most underrated albums of Madonna 's career . The album was later listed as one of " The 100 Best Albums of the 1990s " by Slant Magazine . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1992 , Madonna founded her own multi @-@ media entertainment company , Maverick , consisting of a record company ( Maverick Records ) , a film production company ( Maverick Films ) , and associated music publishing , television broadcasting , book publishing and merchandising divisions . The deal was a joint venture with Time Warner and paid Madonna an advance of $ 60 million . It gave her 20 % royalties from the music proceedings , one of the highest rates in the industry , equaled at that time only by Michael Jackson 's royalty rate established a year earlier with Sony . Madonna said that she envisioned the company as an " artistic think tank " and likened it to a cross between the Bauhaus , the innovative German arts institute formed in Weimar in 1919 , and Andy Warhol 's New York @-@ based Factory of artists and assistants . She stated : " It started as a desire to have more control . There 's a group of writers , photographers , directors and editors that I 've met along the way in my career who I want to take with me everywhere I go . I want to incorporate them into my little factory of ideas . I also come in contact with a lot of young talent that I feel entrepreneurial about . " The first two projects from the venture were her fifth studio album , Erotica , and a coffee table book of photographs featuring Madonna , entitled Sex . 
 Madonna primarily collaborated with Shep Pettibone for the album . Pettibone first began working with Madonna during the 1980s , providing remixes for several of her singles . He later co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced the lead single from the soundtrack album I 'm Breathless , " Vogue " , which topped the Billboard Hot 100 in 1990 . The same year , Pettibone worked with Madonna on her greatest hits album The Immaculate Collection , co @-@ producing new song " Rescue Me " and remixing her earlier songs for the compilation using audio technology QSound . In 1992 , Madonna collaborated with Pettibone on the soundtrack to the film A League of Their Own , " This Used to Be My Playground " , which was produced while recording Erotica . Alongside Pettibone , Madonna enlisted help from producer André Betts , who previously co @-@ produced " Justify My Love " for The Immaculate Collection . Madonna said that she was interested to work with Pettibone and Betts due to their ability to remain plugged into the dance underground , " They come from opposite ends of the spectrum in terms of their music style and approach to music , but they 're both connected to the street and they 're still young and hungry . " 
 = = Development = = 
 According to Pettibone in an article " Erotica Diaries " published on Madonna 's Icon magazine , he produced a tape with three songs for Madonna to listen to , before he traveled to Chicago , where she was filming A League of Their Own . She listened to the songs and liked all of them . After filming was complete , Madonna met Pettibone in New York City to start working together in November 1991 . Their schedule was sporadic in the beginning . Madonna and Pettibone were in the studio for a week and then she would work with Steven Meisel on Sex , for two weeks . Occasionally , Madonna also would meet André Betts . At first , Madonna did not like the first group of songs she had recorded . She wanted Erotica to have a raw edge to it , as if it were recorded in an alley in Harlem , and not a light glossy production to permeate her sound , according to Pettibone . " Deeper and Deeper " was not working for Madonna . Pettibone said they tried different bridges and changes , but in the end , Madonna wanted the middle of the song to have a flamenco guitar . 
 They had problems during sequencing and had to repair the songs , taking some time . Pettibone had to keep things moving as fast as possible as he did not want Madonna to lose interest in the music . At this point , as far as the music went , it was getting a little melancholy . However , as Pettibone explained , Madonna 's stories directed the creative direction of the songs into deeply personal territory as they were more serious and intense . Madonna left the album 's production to work on her next film Body of Evidence in Oregon . Shortly after , Pettibone started on a song called " Goodbye to Innocence " , which was not working . He further commented that he made a new bass line for the track . When Madonna went to record her vocals for " Goodbye to Innocence " , she started singing Little Willie John 's song " Fever " instead of singing the original words . They decided to record it , as they felt it sounded good . As they did not know the words , Madonna called Seymour Stein from Sire Records , and within an hour , they had the Peggy Lee version , and the original version of the song . This song was the last to be recorded for the album , in August 1992 , and it was finished within a month later . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Erotica is a concept album about sex and romance . It is a pop and dance record which incorporates elements from classic disco , modern house , techno and new jack swing . Madonna incorporated an alter @-@ ego named Mistress Dita , heavily inspired by actress Dita Parlo . " Erotica " is the first single and also the opening track from the album . Starting with Madonna saying " My name is Dita " , she invites her lover to be passive , while she tells him to " do as I say " and leads him to explore boundaries between pain and pleasure . It deals with sex hang @-@ ups , and has been described as " an ode to S & M " . Her cover version of " Fever " follows the title track . It is described as a " sassy , house @-@ style remake " of the pop standard . The third track , " Bye Bye Baby , " starts with the declaration , " This is not a love song , " and goes on to ask questions of a lover she is about to abandon . At one point , Madonna asks angrily : " Does it make you feel good to see me cry ? " The fourth track and second single from Erotica , " Deeper and Deeper , " is described as one of the " pure disco " moments of the album . Its bridge features a flamenco guitar , and its lyrics talk about sexual obsession . In the following track , " Where Life Begins " , Madonna promises to teach " a different kind of kiss " to the listener . In the song , Madonna talks about the pleasures of oral sex and also references safe @-@ sex . The sixth track is " Bad Girl " . It talks about a woman who would rather get drunk than end a relationship she is too neurotic to handle . The seventh song , " Waiting " , has been described as a " yearning ballad . " Featuring spoken words , it addresses rejection and unrequited love . The song has also been described as a sequel to " Justify My Love " ( 1990 ) . 
 " Thief of Hearts " , the song that follows " Waiting " , is a dark and rumbling song . It uses tough hip @-@ hop language to ward off a rival for her lover 's attention . It opens with the smashing of a glass , and Madonna shouting , " Bitch ! / Which leg do you want me to break ? " and later , she sneers , " Little miss thinks she can have his child / Well anybody can do it . " " Words " was compared to the previous track " Thief of Hearts , " with music critics finding similarity in scope , each with sharp lyrics and catchy beats . The song features clattering programs and icy synth block @-@ chords . " Rain " is the tenth track and fifth single from the album . Its lyrics talk about waiting and hoping for love . The song features a crescendo towards the end . The subsequent track , " Why 's It So Hard , " is considered the album 's plea for solidarity with her audience , as Madonna sings : " Why 's it so hard to love one another ? " The following song , " In This Life , " was written in memory of friends who Madonna had lost to the AIDS epidemic . The drums were compared to a doomsday clock and the keyboard intervals were also compared to George Gershwin 's blues lullaby " Prelude No. 2 , " creating a sense of dis @-@ ease . The thirteenth track , " Did You Do It ? " features rappers Mark Goodman and Dave Murphy . The song was omitted in the clean edition of Erotica . Producer André Betts claimed that for fun , he just rapped over the track " Waiting , " while Madonna was gone , and she liked it after hearing later . The last track from the album , " Secret Garden , " is described as Erotica 's most personal song . In addition , " Secret Garden " is dedicated to the singer 's vagina , " the secret place where she could enjoy herself . " It features a jazz @-@ house beat . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Media appearance = = = 
 Due to the high scandal and controversy surrounding the book and the album , there was not any need for Madonna to promote it ; however , one of the few promotions for the book Madonna did was appearing on the cover of the October edition of Vogue , where she appeared dressed in " Hippie trip " fashion . These photographs were taken by Meisel . After the book was released , on October 22 , 1992 , MTV aired a special called The Day in Madonna , hosted by Kurt Loder ( the title of this special was a pun of the title of the channel 's daily show The Day in Rock ) , which profiled the release of Madonna 's Sex and Erotica , even taking the book to the streets to allow people , including a sex therapist and group of real @-@ life New York City <unk> , to view it . MTV also interviewed many people who had viewed the Sex book on the day of its release at the HMV music store in New York City . In celebration of the release of the book , the store held a Madonna look @-@ alike contest and set up a booth where people could view the book for one dollar a minute , with all of the proceeds going to <unk> , the music industry organization founded to help fund AIDS research . 
 Madonna additionally performed " Fever " and " Bad Girl " on Saturday Night Live in January 1993 . During the latter , she referenced Sinéad O 'Connor 's actions by ripping a photograph of Pope John Paul II and yelling " Fight the real enemy " . The photograph Madonna used was of Joey <unk> . During the 1000th The Arsenio Hall Show , Madonna performed the original version of " Fever " accompanied by a band , wearing a black classic dress and smoking a cigarette . Following this performance , Madonna sang " The Lady Is a Tramp " with Anthony Kiedis of the Red Hot Chili Peppers , dressed up in matching skirts , stockings , leather vests and cat @-@ ear caps . On September 2 , 1993 , Madonna opened the 1993 MTV Video Music Awards performing " Bye Bye Baby " cavorting with three scantily clad women in a brothel @-@ style setting , dressed in tuxedos and top hats , danced with women in corsets in a choreographed , highly sexual routine . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Erotica " was the lead single released from the album in October 1992 . It was described by music critics as " brilliant " , who also compared it to her single " Justify My Love " ( 1990 ) . It peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 . Internationally , it reached the top ten in Australia , Ireland , New Zealand , Norway and the United Kingdom . Following the release of the song , <unk> singer Fairuz claimed her vocals appear on the song without her consent , and said the lyrics " he crucified me today " , which was sung in Arabic , is taken from a religious song that is traditionally heard during Easter services . " Deeper and Deeper " was released as the second single in November 1992 . It received generally positive reviews from critics , with most of them praising its disco theme . " Deeper and Deeper " achieved top @-@ ten success in Belgium , Ireland , the United Kingdom and the United States . " Bad Girl " was released in February 1993 , receiving positive reviews , with music critics naming it " riveting " . The song had a modest success on the charts , peaking at number ten on the UK Singles Chart while reaching number 36 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 " Fever " was released as the fourth single of the album in March 1993 in Europe and Australia . It became a top @-@ ten hit in several European countries including Finland , Ireland , and the United Kingdom , while topping the Dance Club Songs chart without a North American release . The fifth single , " Rain " , was released in July 1993 . It was described by music critics as an extended metaphor for ejaculation , and noted it as one of Madonna 's best works . However , it was described as a slushy rewrite of " This Used to Be My Playground " ( 1992 ) , which is a slushy rewrite of " Promise to Try " from her album Like a Prayer ( 1989 ) . " Rain " peaked at number one in Italy and number two in Canada . " Bye Bye Baby " was released as the last single from the album in November 1993 . Critical response was positive , with music critics praising Madonna 's " honest " performance and noting her electronically altered voice in the song . It reached the top ten in Italy and peaked within the top twenty in Australia . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 The album was further promoted on her fourth concert tour , the Girlie Show World Tour , which visited Israel and Turkey , Latin America and Australia for the first time in 1993 . The tour required 1500 costumes for the cast , and a 24 @-@ hour set up time for the stage . Madonna opened the show dressed as a dominatrix , surrounded by topless dancers of both sexes . Lighter moments included Madonna descending from the ceiling on a giant disco ball , wearing an Afro wig for " Express Yourself " , as well as the singer singing " Like a Virgin " in the guise of actress Marlene Dietrich and singing the word ' virgin ' as ' <unk> ' . She caused uproar in Puerto Rico by rubbing their national flag between her legs on stage . Orthodox Jews protested to force the cancellation of the concert in Tel Aviv , Israel . However , the rallies were unsuccessful as the show went on as scheduled . The Girlie Show received positive reviews from critics , and was a commercial success , grossing around US $ 70 million . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Erotica received generally positive reviews from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic called it " ambitious " and noted that Erotica contains some of Madonna 's best and most accomplished music . Paul Verna from Billboard considered it her most varied and creatively challenging collection to date . Arion Berger of Rolling Stone praised the album 's " cold , remote sound " , and wrote that " Erotica is everything Madonna has been denounced for being — meticulous , calculated , domineering and artificial . It accepts those charges and answers with a brilliant record to prove them " . Yahoo ! Music editor John Myers stated that the album is musically some of Madonna 's best work and offers intelligent insight into the taboos people have been taught to be afraid to speak of , combined with equally clever musical arrangements . NME said : " When Erotica the album is good – i.e. when it 's funny , original , lively and , yes , sexy – it 's about as good as the modern media event gets . " J. D. Considine of The Baltimore Sun stated that the most surprising thing on the songs is that they find Madonna singing about love , not about sex . Phil Sutcliffe gave three stars in a review for Q , writing : " The biggest surprise is ' Deeper and Deeper ' , which could be mistaken for a <unk> tribute to Kylie . However , the substance of Erotica resides in a range of straight @-@ talking , almost intimate songs based , not on an idea about sex , but on experience of relationships . " A retrospective review in Blender concluded : " That female artists ( except Millie Jackson ) never come on this strongly makes Erotica shocking and , well , arousing . " 
 Charles Aaron from Spin noted that the album is a brave comment on the chilly , tragic detachment of sex under AIDS . Stylus Magazine commented that each song has its own energy . He also noted that " Erotica was too sophisticated for a mainstream besotted with The Bodyguard and a college @-@ radio claque eager to praise R.E.M. ' s opaque dirges for the wisdom that Madonna 's club fodder showed with less fuss and with a better rhythm section " . Robert Christgau commented that " The singer doesn 't have great pipes , but because she 's too hip to belt [ this time ] , she doesn 't need them . She 's in control , all understated presence and impersonal personality except when she 's flashing some pink . [ ... ] " Love your sister , love your brother " thing , the lyrics are not stupid . I love the rap where the boast turns out to be a lie . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine recognized that " Pettibone 's beats might be time @-@ stamped with the sound of a genre that ruled a decade of one @-@ hitters before being replaced by commercialized hip @-@ hop " and classified Madonna 's voice as " nasal and remote " . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly declared that Erotica may be the most joyless dance music of all time , while criticizing Madonna 's " soulless " voice . Stephen Holden from The New York Times wrote that the album is far from Madonna 's best album , as the hip @-@ hop songs lack the " musical breadth and confessional poignancy " of Like a Prayer , the record that established Madonna as a mature pop songwriter . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , Erotica debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 on November 11 , 1992 , with first week sales of 167 @,@ 000 copies . It was held off from reaching the top spot by Garth Brooks 's fourth studio album , The Chase , which that same week sold 4 @,@ 000 copies more than Erotica . The next week , the album dropped to number four on the chart . It was eventually certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of two million units . According to Nielsen SoundScan , Erotica has sold 1 @.@ 89 million copies in the United States by September 2009 . In Canada , the album debuted at number seven on the RPM Albums Chart on November 7 , 1992 . It reached a peak of number four on November 21 , 1992 . The album was present for a total of 38 weeks on the chart , and was certified two times platinum by Music Canada ( MC ) for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In Australia , the album debuted at number one on the ARIA albums chart , and was certified triple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 210 @,@ 000 copies . It also reached the top five on the New Zealand Albums Chart . Erotica reached a peak of number five on the Japan Oricon albums chart , and received a double platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipping 400 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In the United Kingdom , Erotica debuted at number two on the UK Albums Chart on October 24 , 1992 . It remained at its peak at number two for three weeks , and a total of 38 weeks on the chart . The album was certified two times platinum on June 1 , 1993 , by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipments of 600 @,@ 000 copies . In France , the album debuted at number one on the French Albums Chart on October 28 , 1992 , staying there for two weeks , then descending down the chart , selling a total of 250 @,@ 000 copies . In Germany , the album reached the top five on the Media Control Charts and was certified gold for shipments of 250 @,@ 000 copies . In Sweden , the album debuted in its peak of number six and spent only seven weeks on the chart . Similarly in Switzerland , Erotica peaked number five and was certified gold by IFPI Switzerland . It also received a platinum certification in Spain and gold in Brazil . To date , Erotica has sold more than six million copies worldwide . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Slant Magazine listed Erotica at number 24 on " The 100 Best Albums of the 1990s " , calling it a " dark masterpiece " . Miles Raymer of Entertainment Weekly said that " in retrospect it 's her strongest album — produced at the peak of her power and provocativeness ... and helped elevate her from mere pop star to an era @-@ defining icon . " According to J. Randy Taraborrelli , the author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography , " At the time of Erotica 's release in October 1992 , much of society seemed to reexamining its sexuality . Gay rights issues were at the forefront of social discussions globally , as was an ever @-@ increasing awareness of AIDS . A generation seemed increasingly curious to explore , without guilt , shame or apology , a different slice of life , something more provocative , maybe darker . " Music critic Sal Cinquemani commented about the album 's impact : 
 By 1992 , Madonna was an icon — untouchable , literally and figuratively — and Erotica was the first time the artist 's music took on a decidedly combative , even threatening tone , and most people didn 't want to hear it . Erotica 's irrefutable <unk> probably says more about the sex = death mentality of the early ' 90s than any other musical document of its time . This is not Madonna at her creative zenith . This is Madonna at her most important , at her most relevant . No one else in the mainstream at that time dared to talk about sex , love , and death with such frankness and fearlessness . 
 Eric Henderson from Slant Magazine recalled that Erotica was met with a louder backlash and was more rampantly misrepresented than any of Madonna 's other albums . Madonna was banned from entering the Vatican and her music was banned there as well . The accompanying music video for " Erotica " also suffered mainstream condemnation due to its explicit sexual imagery . MTV put the video into heavy rotation , but only after midnight . It was completely banned from broadcast on NBC and Times Square because its bondage imagery was deemed too racy . The first album of her career to bear Parental Advisory label , Erotica was also banned in several Asian countries , such as China and Lebanon . In Singapore , after Erotica 's worldwide release , the album was on hold for its release , because their government censors thought the track " Did You Do It " was too explicit . 
 Taraborrelli commented that it is unfortunate that Erotica has to be historically linked to other less memorable ventures in Madonna 's career at this time . However , he quipped that the album should be considered on its own merits , not only as one linked to the other two adult @-@ oriented projects , because it has true value . When asked to name her biggest professional disappointment , Madonna answered , " The fact that my Erotica album was overlooked because of the whole thing with the Sex book . It just got lost in all that . I think there 's some brilliant songs on it and people didn 't give it a chance . That disappointed me , but I 'm not disappointed in the record itself ... Every review of the movie or the album was really a review of the book . It was transparent : they weren 't even talking about the songs or the music . OK , I thought , I get what 's happening here . It was a shame , but I understand it . " PopMatters ranked the album at number three on a list of " 15 Overlooked and Underrated Albums of the 1990s " . 
 Musician Doug Wimbish noted that Erotica was a record ahead of its time . In the early 1990s , Seattle grunge had kicked in , the bass @-@ driven beats of jungle were emerging on the dance floor , and hip @-@ hop hit a new level with the funky , conscious rap of acts such as De La Soul . " Madonna 's enough of an artist to take the hues and shades of what 's happening and put a concept together , It 's not just bash out a record " , he said . " She had Maverick , she 'd done the book , the film Dick Tracy , she dated a big @-@ ass Hollywood actor [ Warren Beatty ] , This was her first record with her concept . She just freaked everybody out . She turned the system upside down for a moment , and they had to deal with the shock and awe of it all " . Wimbish believes that Madonna forged a path for the next generation of female pop artists : " She was <unk> ' it from her point of view as a woman , bringing it to the forefront for real . That set the template now for your Christina <unk> , <unk> , Beyoncés . She paved the road for a lot of that . You can be nice and clean and then a freak . And there 'll be a lot of money for you in it at the end ! " 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 Additional notes 
 " Erotica " contains a sample of " Jungle Boogie " performed by Kool and the Gang . Another sample " El Yom ' <unk> ' Ala <unk> " by Lebanese singer Fairuz was used which led to a lawsuit ; this was settled out of court . 
 Anthony Shimkin has been officially added by ASCAP as a co @-@ writer to " Erotica " , " Bye Bye Baby " , " Bad Girl " , " Thief of Hearts " , " Words " and " Why 's It So Hard " . <unk> notes to the album do not include this . Shimkin was only allowed to add his credit to one composition on the album ; he originally chose " Deeper and Deeper " . 
 " Fever " contains lyrics written and rearranged by singer Peggy Lee , who remains uncredited for her contribution . 
 = = = Formats = = = 
 CD – 13 track version , omits the track " Did You Do It ? " 
 CD – Explicit version with 14 tracks including the track " Did You Do It ? " This version comes with Parental Advisory label . 
 CD Collector 's Edition – Australian collector 's digipak edition released in 1993 to celebrate The Girlie Show World Tour in that country . Explicit version with 14 tracks including the track " Did You Do It ? " 
 Vinyl – 13 track version , omits the track " Did You Do It ? " 
 Vinyl – Explicit version with 14 tracks including the track " Did You Do It ? " This version comes with Parental Advisory label . The vinyl was reissued in 2012 by Warner Bros. Records with a different catalog number . 
 Cassette – 13 track version , omits the track " Did You Do It ? " 
 Digital Compact Cassette – European explicit version with 14 tracks including the track " Did You Do It ? " This version comes with Parental Advisory label . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = Douglas Park ( Chicago ) = 
 Douglas Park is a large Chicago Park District park that also serves as a cultural and community center on the West Side of Chicago , Illinois . It is named after the U.S. Senator Stephen A. Douglas , who died in 1861 . Originally named South Park , its 173 acres ( 0 @.@ 70 km2 ) are in the North Lawndale community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States with an official address of 1401 S. Sacramento Drive . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1869 , the Illinois state legislature established the West Park Commission , which was responsible for three large parks and interlinking boulevards . Later that year , on November 4 , 1869 the commissioners named the southernmost park in honor of Stephen A. Douglas ( 1813 – 1861 ) . Best remembered for his pre @-@ Civil War presidential defeat by Abraham Lincoln despite superb oratorical skills , Douglas was a United States Senator who helped bring the Illinois Central Railroad to Chicago . In 1871 , designer William Le Baron Jenney completed plans for the entire West Park System which included Douglas , Garfield , and Humboldt parks . Jenney 's engineering expertise was especially helpful for transforming Douglas Park 's poor natural site into parkland . He had manure from the Union Stock Yards and sand added to the marshy site . This process brought the 173 acres ( 0 @.@ 70 km2 ) of land to grade level . In the center of the landscape , Jenney created a picturesque lake , and a small section of the park was formally opened in 1879 . <unk> construction costs and post Great Chicago Fire tax collection difficulties resulted in phased projects . The first improvements were made to the park by Oscar <unk> in the 1880s . Between 1886 and 1888 Douglas Park , like the other West Park System parks , replaced its greenhouse with a conservatory . In 1895 , members of several German turners ' clubs petitioned for an outdoor gymnasium , and the following year one of Chicago 's first public facilities was constructed with an outdoor gymnasium ( pictured right ) , swimming pool , and natatorium . 
 = = = 20th @-@ century redevelopment = = = 
 By the turn of the century , the West Park Commission was riddled with political graft , and the three parks became dilapidated . As part of a reform effort in 1905 , Jens Jensen was appointed as General Superintendent and Chief Landscape Architect for the entire West Park System . Jensen , now recognized as dean of the prairie style of landscape architecture , improved deteriorating sections of the parks and added new features . Among Jensen 's improvements were a semi @-@ circular entryway at Marshall Boulevard , and a formal garden at the corner of Ogden Avenue and Sacramento Drive . By the time Jensen designed the garden , Ogden Avenue , a diagonal roadway with a major streetcar thoroughfare that would later become part of Route 66 , had already been constructed . The road divided the park into two separate landscapes , creating a busy intersection at the junction of Ogden and Sacramento Avenues . Jensen 's solution was a long axial garden on the southeast side of the intersection , providing a buffer between Ogden Avenue and playing fields to the south . Jensen demolished the conservatories in each of the West Park System parks in favor of one grand conservatory at Garfield Park . 
 At the entrance to the garden , the area closest to the busy roadway intersection , Jensen placed a monumental garden shelter , known as Flower Hall , and a formal reflecting pool . The designer of the structure is unknown , however , it was possibly Jensen himself , or his friend , prairie school architect Hugh Garden . East of the building , the garden becomes more naturalistic . Jensen included perennial beds , a lily pool , and unique prairie @-@ style benches . In 1928 , the West Park Commission constructed a fieldhouse in Douglas Park . The structure was designed by architects Michaelsen and Rognstad , who were also responsible for other notable buildings including the Garfield Park Gold Dome Building , the Humboldt and <unk> Park <unk> , and the On Leong Merchants Association Building in Chinatown . In 1934 , Douglas Park became part of the Chicago Park District , when the city 's 22 independent park commissions merged into a single citywide agency . 
 = = Today = = 
 The park has served as a central location for recreation since it was first built . It currently houses a miniature golf course , five playgrounds , an outdoor swimming pool , soccer fields , basketball courts , and an oval running track . The park also retains its original lagoon , a wide variety of trees and the original Jenney designed stone bridge . The greenhouse that attracted visitors from throughout the city was torn down in 1905 . The statue of Czech patriot , Karel Havlíček <unk> , by Joseph <unk> was moved to Solidarity Drive on today 's Museum Campus in the vicinity of the Adler Planetarium in 1981 . Chicago 's 2016 Olympic bid included plans to host the Olympic cycling competitions in this park , including a velodrome and a BMX course . Beginning in 2015 , the park is the new home of the Riot Fest . 
 = Five Mile Point Light = 
 Five Mile Point Light , also known as Five Mile Point Lighthouse or Old New Haven Harbor Lighthouse , is a lighthouse in New Haven , Connecticut , United States , on the harbor entrance to Long Island Sound , five miles ( 8 km ) from Downtown New Haven . Originally in 1805 , a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) octagonal wooden tower was built by Abisha Woodward . In 1847 , a new 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) octagonal tower was constructed by Marcus Bassett with East Haven brownstone from Jabez Potter 's quarry . The light was powered by 12 lamps with reflectors and was located 97 feet ( 30 m ) above sea level . Also constructed was a two @-@ and @-@ one @-@ half story brick house to replace an existing structure in a " very bad state of repair " . In 1855 , a fourth @-@ order Fresnel lens replaced the lamps , and a fog bell was added in the 1860s . The light was discontinued in 1877 and replaced by the Southwest Ledge Light . The lighthouse is located in Lighthouse Point Park and the light and its keeper 's house were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1990 . 
 = = History = = 
 During the American Revolutionary War in July 1779 , a battle took place on the site of the future lighthouse when British troops anchored offshore and staged an invasion of New Haven . Patriot forces launched a defense of the beachfront as the attackers landed their boats . Ensign and Adjutant Watkins of the King 's American regiment was the first of the British soldiers killed in the skirmish , shot while attempting to disembark on the shoreline . He was buried close to where the lighthouse at Five Mile Point would eventually be erected a few decades later . Although the British went on to burn the nearby house of Amos Morris and several other residences in the area , they suffered heavy losses and ultimately abandoned their advance on New Haven . 
 = = Original tower = = 
 In 1804 , the United States Congress passed a statute requiring the secretary of the treasury to build a lighthouse at Five Mile Point if land could be obtained for a reasonable price . That same year , Amos Morris , Jr . , son of the man whose home was the first to be razed during the 1779 British invasion , sold a suitable one @-@ acre plot of his father 's coastal estate to the federal government for $ 100 . On March 16 , 1805 , an appropriation for $ 2500 was issued for the construction of the lighthouse . Late that year , a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) octagonal wooden tower was built by Abisha Woodward on the southwest edge of the harbor and to mark the path around the Southwest Ledge . The fixed white light was made by eight oil lamps with 13 inches ( 33 cm ) parabolic reflectors , but it was criticized for being too dim . The lighthouse also had a keeper 's quarters constructed in 1805 . The first keeper of the light was Amos Morris Jr . , for a period of just three weeks . An 1832 report noted that the light was 50 feet ( 15 m ) above the water and that its visibility had been improved with the removal of some trees . In 1838 , Lieutenant George M. Bache reported that the wooden tower and keeper 's house was in a poor state . Congress would appropriate $ 10 @,@ 000 to construct a new stone lighthouse on March 3 , 1847 . 
