 Several years later , Simba grants a young adult Kiara 's request to embark on her first hunt , but has Timon and Pumbaa follow her in secret . Realizing this , Kiara rebels and pursue her hunt outside of the Pride Lands , where she nearly falls victim to a wildfire . Kiara is rescued by Kovu , who returns her to the Pride Lands , which is actually part of Zira 's plan to overthrow Simba . Saying that he has left the Outsiders , Kovu asks Simba to let him join his pride . Simba reluctantly accepts , but distrusts Kovu because of his similarities to Scar , and continues to treat him ruthlessly . That night , Simba has a nightmare about attempting to save his father Mufasa from falling into the stampede but is stopped by Scar who turns into Kovu and throws Simba off the cliff into the stampede . 
 While Kiara and Kovu 's friendship continues to grow , Simba , encouraged by Nala , attempts to show Kovu kindness by spending a day with him . Realizing that Kovu is beginning to side with Simba because of his love for Kiara , Zira ambushes and attacks Simba . Convinced by Zira that Kovu is responsible for the ambush , Simba exiles him and forbids Kiara to see him , but she makes her father realize that he is acting irrationally and finds Kovu . When a battle ensues between the Pride Landers and the Outsiders , Kiara and Kovu arrive and stops them . When a furious Zira attacks Simba , she is intercepted by Kiara , causing the two to fall over the edge of a cliff . Having landed safely on a ledge , Kira offers to help Zira , who is struggling to hang on . However , Zira , consumed by her resentment towards Simba , declines her assistance and falls into the raging water below . Simba finally approves of Kiara 's love for Kovu and reconciles with his daughter , and accepts the two lions as future king and queen . 
 = = = The Lion King 1 ½ = = = 
 In The Lion King 1 ½ , a direct @-@ to @-@ video followup released in 2004 , Simba appears as a less prominent character because the film 's primary focus is on Timon and Pumbaa 's behind @-@ the @-@ scenes role and involvement in The Lion King , in which they appear as supporting characters . Although the two films technically share the same story and timeline , the plot of The Lion King 1 ½ focuses more on Timon and Pumbaa . The meerkat and warthog unknowingly coexist alongside Simba , and the story fills in the two characters ' backstories and events that lead up to their long @-@ lasting friendship , coinciding with and often initiating the events that affect Simba 's life during the first film . These events include the commemorative bow that occurs during the opening " Circle of Life " musical number and the collapsing of the animal tower that takes place during " I Just Can 't Wait to Be King . " The film also explores , in further detail , the relationship among the three characters as Timon and Pumbaa struggle to raise Simba as adoptive " parents " and disapprove of his relationship with Nala , portraying Simba as he grows from an energetic young lion cub , into an incorrigible teenager and , finally , an independent young lion . 
 = = = Timon & Pumbaa and television = = = 
 The success of The Lion King and popularity of its characters led to the production of Timon & Pumbaa , an animated television series starring Timon and Pumbaa . Simba makes several appearances , including one episode in which Timon drags him out to try to revive Pumbaa 's lost memory . 
 In the episode " Congo On Like This , " Timon and Pumbaa ( especially Timon ) suspect that Simba has reverted to his carnivorous nature . The episode " Shake Your Djibouti " again features Simba , when Timon and Pumbaa are forced to train him to protect them from a laboratory monster . Another episode , entitled " Rome Alone , " shows Simba being captured by Romans and forced into gladiatorial battle with another lion named Claudius . Simba makes brief appearances in " Once Upon a Timon " , " Zazu 's Off @-@ By @-@ One Day " , and " Beethoven 's <unk> " . He also appears in a music video of " The Lion Sleeps Tonight " . 
 Simba was featured as a guest in the animated series House of Mouse , in which he alternates between cub and adult . 
 = = = The Lion Guard = = = 
 In November 2015 , a new series called The Lion Guard was released . Set in the middle of the timeline of The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride , it features Kion who is the son and youngest child of Simba and Nala . 
 = = = Broadway musical = = = 
 The success of The Lion King led to the production of a Broadway musical based on the film . Directed by Julie Taymor , with a book by Irene Mecchi and Roger Allers , The Lion King premiered at the New Amsterdam Theatre on November 13 , 1997 , where it ran for nine years until being moved to the Minskoff Theatre on June 13 , 2006 . The role of Simba was originated by Scott Irby @-@ Ranniar and Jason Raize , with Irby @-@ Ranniar portraying Young Simba and Raize portraying Adult Simba . 
 Raize auditioned for the role of Adult Simba after hearing that Taymor was looking to cast an actor who was of " unidentifiable ethnicity . " Raize revealed in an interview that there was a lot of competition for the role because the musical required " triple @-@ threat work -- singing , dancing and acting -- that you don 't get to such an extent in other shows . It was more the sense of who can take the challenge and not be daunted by the task . " Raize , who instantly felt that he " had a connection with Simba , " eventually won the role with the approval of Taymor and choreographer Garth Fagan , with Fagan admiring the fact that Raize was " willing to try , to fail , and then to try again . " Once cast , Raize found it difficult to maintain Taymor 's " sense of duality " because Simba is " both man and beast . " He said , " The tendency is to sacrifice one for the other , but you can 't . " Although hundreds of children auditioned for the role of Young Simba , the casting process was far less grueling for Irby @-@ Ranniar who , according to Taymor , simply " walked in and he had the part . " 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 In 1994 , a six @-@ volume book set titled The Lion King : Six New Adventures were released . Set after the events of the first film , they featured a cub named Kopa , who was the son of Simba and Nala . 
 = = = = Merchandising and video games = = = = 
 As part of the franchise 's merchandising , Simba has appeared in various The Lion King @-@ related products . The character 's likeness has been used in and adapted into a variety of items , including plush toys and figurines , clothing , bedding , household decor and appliances . The success of the Broadway musical has also lead to its own line of merchandising , including the Simba beanbag doll , based on the character 's appearance and costume in the Broadway show . 
 Since the film 's 1994 debut , Simba has appeared as a playable character in a variety of video game releases , both directly and indirectly associated with the franchise . The character 's first appearance as a video game character was in The Lion King , which was released by Virgin Interactive on November 1 , 1994 , for the video game platforms Super Nintendo Entertainment System , Sega Game Gear , Nintendo Entertainment System and PC . The game follows the plot of the original film and features Simba as both a cub and an adult . 
 On December 28 , 2000 , Activision released The Lion King : Simba 's Mighty Adventure for Game Boy Color and PlayStation . The game encompasses 10 levels and incorporates the plot of both The Lion King and The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride as " Simba ... matures from a precocious cub to an adult lion . " Simba also appears as a playable character in Disney Interactive Studios ' Disney 's Extreme Skate Adventure , released on September 3 , 2003 , for Game Boy Advance , PlayStation 2 , GameCube and Xbox , and Disney Friends , released for Nintendo DS on February 26 , 2008 . Additionally , Simba appears in the Square Enix Kingdom Hearts video game franchise as a friend and ally of the series ' main character , Sora . 
 = = = = Walt Disney Parks and Resorts = = = = 
 Live versions of Simba appear in the Lion King musical and in the parades and shows at the Walt Disney Parks and Resorts . 
 Simba was also the main character in " Legend of the Lion King , " a former Fantasyland attraction in Walt Disney World 's Magic Kingdom , which retold the story of the film using fully articulated puppets . Other Disney attractions that have featured Simba include the Mickey 's PhilharMagic 3D show and the Hong Kong Disneyland version of It 's a Small World . 
 He appears as one of the main characters at Epcot 's Land Pavilion 12 @-@ minute edutainment film Circle of Life : An Environmental Fable . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Although The Lion King itself has garnered Universal acclaim from film critics , reception towards Simba has been generally mixed . The Christian Science Monitor 's David Sterritt hailed Simba as " a superbly realized character , " specifically praising the scene in which the character " faces discipline by his dad after his adventure with the hyenas . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Simba " has been given a marvelously expressive face " to the point of which " He seems more human than the Ken and Barbie types featured in Aladdin and The Little Mermaid . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described " the father @-@ son relationship " shared by Simba and Mufasa as " movingly rendered , " while About.com 's David Nusair wrote , " it ’ s the touching father / son stuff that lies at the heart of the movie that cements The Lion King 's place as an utterly timeless piece of work . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews enjoyed the fact that the film focuses more on the story of Simba himself as opposed to the romantic relationship developing between the character and Nala . However , Berardinelli criticized Matthew Broderick 's vocal performance , describing it as " nondescript . " Rob <unk> of Slant Magazine hailed the fact that " it 's never laid on [ Simba ] that his time as king will directly correspond with the eventual passing of his father " as one of the film 's " most important facets . " However , he criticized The Lion King 's characters , describing them as well @-@ designed but " lazy and troublesome . " The Austin Chronicle 's Robert <unk> felt that Simba and the other Lion King characters , though " true " , were simply unoriginal retreads of preceding animated characters who were " swiped from other Disney cartoons . " 
 Hal Hinson of The Washington Post gave the character a negative review . Labeling Timon and Pumbaa the only interesting characters in The Lion King , Hinson questioned Simba 's role as the film 's hero . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times agreed , " A movie 's heroes may have their names above the title , but often as not it 's the sidekicks who get the real work done . " Turan went on to pan Simba , describing him as " irritatingly callow . " Chris Hick of the Deseret News complained about the fact that Simba and the other " characters in The Lion King are not as warm and fuzzy as other Disney animated features , " crediting this with making " the film a bit tougher to warm [ up ] to . " ComingSoon.net strongly panned Simba as a lead character , writing , " typically for Disney animated fare , it 's the hero who is the weak link being both blandly designed and blandly performed . " Acknowledging the character 's Shakespearean origins , The Baltimore Sun 's Stephen Hunter gave Simba a negative review , writing , " Alas ... Simba stands in for Hamlet , but he 's a lot less complicated ; in fact , he 's less complicated than Morris the Cat or Sylvester . " Hunter continued , " Simba the Exile is even less interesting than Simba the Prince . " Christopher Null of Contactmusic.com was critical of Weaver 's performance as the singing voice of Young Simba , writing , " If there 's anything annoying about the film , it 's the singing . Young Simba sounds like a young Michael Jackson ... You almost don 't want him to succeed . " However , Null reacted more positively towards Broderick 's performance . 
 Despite the character 's mixed reception , several critics have awarded specific praise to Broderick for his portrayal of Simba , including the San Francisco Chronicle 's Peter Stack and The Washington Post 's Desson Howe . Annette Basile of Filmink described Broderick 's performance as " excellent , " while Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian called it " sumptuous . " Digital Spy 's Mayer Nissim described Broderick 's portrayal of Simba as " wonderful . " 
 = = = Impact and popularity = = = 
 During the film 's opening number , " Circle of Life " , Rafiki introduces a newborn Simba to the crowd of animals gathered at the foot of Pride Rock by holding him high above their heads while parents Mufasa and Sarabi look on . Since the film 's 1994 release , this scene has grown to iconic status . In November 2002 , singer Michael Jackson sparked controversy by holding his son over the protective railing of a hotel balcony in Berlin . The event was witnessed by a large crowd of spectators who were watching from below . Some sources have claimed that Jackson was harmlessly attempting to emulate the scene from The Lion King . 
 When Kate Middleton , Duchess of Cambridge went into labor with hers and Prince William 's baby in July 2013 , the idea that the couple should reenact the famous scene from The Lion King became quite popular among Twitter users . Radio journalist Darren Simpson reportedly tweeted , " when your baby arrives please re @-@ enact the scene from the Lion King " . Shortly after Middleton gave birth to a boy , England native Tommy Peto initiated a petition asking the couple to welcome their baby by having the Archbishop of Canterbury emulate the scene by holding him over the balcony of Buckingham Palace . Ultimately , the idea was deemed " outside the responsibility of the government " and was declined . 
 The scene has found itself the subject of both reference and parody in various forms of media , such as in the film George of the Jungle ( 1997 ) . In what is almost an exact replica of the scene , George , portrayed by actor Brendan Fraser , takes the place of both Rafiki and Mufasa by standing at the tip of Pride Rock and presenting his young son to a crowd of onlooking animals , accompanied by wife Ursula , portrayed by Leslie Mann . 
 During the season 3 finale of Once upon a Time the main character Emma Swan asked her parents Snow White and Prince charming ) that they aren 't going to hold up her yet unnamed baby brother like in the Lion King Since the release of The Lion King in 1994 , the name " Simba " has increased in use and popularity among dog and cat owners . According to Comcast in 2010 , the use of Simba as a dog name reemerged in popularity in 2009 after experiencing a noticeable decline in 2001 , ranking the name ninth out of 10 on its list of " Top 10 <unk> Dog Names of the Year . " In May 2013 , Yahoo ! Lifestyle included the name on its list of " <unk> Dog Names . " According to <unk> , Simba is the 17th most popular cat name out of 100 candidates . <unk> included Simba in its article " All @-@ around Cool Cat Names , " while <unk> reported that Simba ranks among the country 's most popular cat names as of July 2013 . In its list of " Top Popular Pet Names , " <unk> placed Simba at number 64 on its list of most popular dog names out of the 100 that were considered . 
 = Altrincham = 
 Altrincham ( / <unk> / OL @-@ <unk> @-@ əm ) is a market town in Trafford , Greater Manchester , England , south of the River Mersey about 8 miles ( 13 km ) southwest of Manchester city centre , 3 miles ( 5 km ) south @-@ southwest of Sale and 10 miles ( 16 km ) east of Warrington . At the 2001 UK census , it had a population of 41 @,@ 000 increasing to 52 @,@ 419 at the 2011 census . 
 Historically part of Cheshire , Altrincham was established as a market town in 1290 , a time when the economy of most communities was based on agriculture rather than trade , and there is still a market in the town today . Further socioeconomic development came with the extension of the Bridgewater Canal to Altrincham in 1765 and the arrival of the railway in 1849 , stimulating industrial activity in the town . Outlying villages were absorbed by Altrincham 's subsequent growth , along with the grounds of Dunham Massey Hall , formerly the home of the Earl of Stamford , and now a tourist attraction with three Grade I Listed Buildings and a deer park . 
 Altrincham today is an affluent commuter town , partly because of its transport links . The town has a strong middle class presence ; there has been a steady increase in Altrincham 's middle classes since the 19th century . It is also home to Altrincham F.C. and three ice hockey clubs , Manchester Storm , Altrincham Aces and Trafford Tornados . Altrincham 's population increased to 45 @,@ 809 in 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 Local evidence of prehistoric human activity exists in the form of two Neolithic arrowheads found in Altrincham , and further afield , a concentration of artefacts around Dunham . The remains of a Roman road , part of one of the major Roman roads in North West England connecting the legionary fortresses of Chester ( Deva Victrix ) and York ( Eboracum ) , run through the Broadheath area . As it shows signs of having been repaired , the road was in use for a considerable period of time . The name Altrincham first appears as " <unk> " , probably meaning " homestead of <unk> 's people " . As recently as the 19th century it was spelt both Altrincham and <unk> . 
 Until the Normans invaded England , the manors surrounding Altrincham were owned by the Saxon thegn <unk> ; after the invasion they became the property of Hamon de Massey , though Altrincham is not mentioned in the Domesday Book . The earliest documented reference to the town is from 1290 , when it was granted its charter as a Free Borough by Baron Hamon de Massey V. The charter allowed a weekly market to be held , and it is possible that de Massey established the town to generate income through taxes on trade and tolls . This suggests that Altrincham may have been a planned market town , unusual during the Middle Ages , when most communities were agricultural . Altrincham was probably chosen as the site of the planned town rather than Dunham – which would have been protected by Dunham Castle – because its good access to roads was important for trade . 
 Altrincham Fair became St James 's Fair or <unk> in 1319 and continued until 1895 . Fair days had their own court of Pye Powder ( a corruption of the French for " dusty feet " ) , presided over by the mayor and held to settle disputes arising from the day 's dealings . By 1348 the town had 120 burgage plots – ownership of land used as a measure of status and importance in an area – putting it on a par with the Cheshire town of Macclesfield and above Stockport and Knutsford . The earliest known residence in Altrincham was The Knoll , on Stamford Street near the centre of the medieval town . An 1983 excavation on the demolished building , made by South Trafford Archaeological Group , discovered evidence that the house dated from the 13th or 14th century , and that it may have contained a drying kiln or malting floor . During the English Civil War , men from Altrincham fought for the Parliamentarian Sir George Booth . During the war , armies camped on nearby Bowdon Downs on several occasions . 
 In 1754 , a stretch of road south of Altrincham , along the Manchester to Chester route , was turnpiked . Turnpikes were toll roads which taxed passengers for the maintenance of the road . Further sections were turnpiked in 1765 from Timperley to Sale , and 1821 from Altrincham to Stockport . The maintenance of roads passed to local authorities in 1888 , although by then most turnpike trusts had already declined . The connection of the Bridgewater Canal to Altrincham in 1765 stimulated the development of market gardening , and for many years Altrincham was noted for its vegetables . By 1767 , warehouses had been built alongside the canal at Broadheath , the first step in the development of Broadheath as an industrial area and the beginning of Altrincham 's industrialisation . The canal was connected in 1776 to the River Mersey , providing the town not only with a water route to Manchester , but also to the Irish Sea . 
 Moves to connect the town to the UK 's railway network gained pace in 1845 , when the Act of Parliament for the construction of the Manchester South Junction and Altrincham Railway ( MSJAR ) was passed . The first train left Altrincham early on 20 July 1849 , carrying 65 passengers . The MSJAR had two stations in the town : Altrincham , on Stockport Road , and Bowdon – though not actually in Bowdon – on Lloyd Street / Railway Street . Both were replaced in 1881 by Altrincham & Bowdon station on Stamford New Road . The London and North Western Railway 's station at Broadheath , on the town 's northern edge , was opened in 1854 , while a further connection was created on 12 May 1862 by the Cheshire Midland Railway ( later the Cheshire Lines Committee ) , who opened their line from Altrincham to Knutsford . 
 With its new railway links , Altrincham and the surrounding areas became desirable places for the middle classes and commuters to live . Professionals and industrialists moved to the town , commuting into Manchester . While some travelled daily by coach , the less well – to – do commuted by express or " flyer " barges from Broadheath . Between 1851 and 1881 the population increased from 4 @,@ 488 to 11 @,@ 250 . Broadheath 's industrial area , covering about 250 acres ( 1 @.@ 0 km2 ) , was founded in 1885 by Harry Grey , 8th Earl of Stamford , to attract businesses . By 1900 Broadheath had its own docks , warehouses and electricity generating station . The site 's proximity to rail , canal and road links proved attractive to companies making machine tools , cameras and grinding machines . The presence of companies like <unk> Sand Blast , and the Linotype and Machinery Company , established Broadheath as an industrial area of national standing . By 1914 , 14 companies operated in Broadheath , employing thousands of workers . One of those was the <unk> Gauge Company . Linotype also created 172 workers ' homes near its factory , helping cater for the population boom created by Broadheath 's industrialisation . Between 1891 and 1901 the population of Altrincham increased by 35 per cent , from 12 @,@ 440 to 16 @,@ 831 . 
 From the turn of the 20th century to the start of the Second World War , there were few changes in Altrincham . Although the town was witness to some of the Luftwaffe 's raids on the Manchester area , it emerged from the war relatively unscathed , and as with the rest of Britain , experienced an economic boom . This manifested itself in the construction of new housing and the 1960s rebuilding of the town centre . However , during the 1970s employment at Broadheath declined by nearly 40 per cent . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Altrincham became a Free Borough , a self @-@ governing township , when it was granted a charter in June 1290 by the Lord of the Manor , Hamon de Massey V. The charter allowed for the creation of a merchants ' guild , run by the town 's burgesses to tax people passing through the borough . Burgesses were free men who lived in the town . The borough was ruled by a Court Leet and elected a mayor since at least 1452 . Amongst the court 's responsibilities were keeping the public peace and regulating the markets and fairs . 
 The borough was not one of those reformed by the Municipal Corporations Act of 1835 , and continued to exist under the control of the Lord of the Manor and the Court Leet until its final abolition in 1886 . The Public Health Act of 1848 led to the creation of Altrincham 's Local Board of Health in 1851 to address the unsanitary conditions created by the town 's growing population – the first such board in Trafford . 
 The local board was reconstituted as an urban district council in the administrative county of Cheshire under the Local Government Act 1894 . Altrincham Urban District was expanded in 1920 when parts of Carrington and Dunham Massey Civil Parishes were added . A further expansion took place in 1936 ; Timperley Civil Parish was abolished and most of its area incorporated into Altrincham UD . At the same time , there was a minor exchange of areas with Hale Urban District ; a minor addition from Bowdon Urban District ; and a further substantial portion of Dunham Massey Civil Parish was added . In 1937 the urban district was granted a charter of incorporation and became a municipal borough . The new borough was granted armorial bearings which featured heraldic references to the Masseys and Earls of Stamford . With the passage of the Local Government Act 1972 , the administrative counties and municipal boroughs were abolished and Altrincham became part of the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford in Greater Manchester on 1 April 1974 . 
 Trafford Council is responsible for the administration of local services , such as education , social services , town planning , waste collection and council housing . The area is divided into seven electoral wards : Altrincham , Bowdon , Broadheath , Hale Barns , Hale Central , Timperley , and Village . These wards have 21 out of the 63 seats on the Trafford Council ; as of the 2014 local elections fifteen of these seats were held by the Conservative Party , three by the Labour Party , and three by the Liberal Democrats . Altrincham was in the eponymous parliamentary constituency which was created in 1885 . This lasted until 1945 when it was replaced by Altrincham and Sale . In 1997 , this in turn became part of the newly created constituency of Altrincham and Sale West . Since its formation , Altrincham and Sale West has been represented in the House of Commons by the Conservative MP , Graham Brady . This is one of only two Conservative seats in Greater Manchester . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 53 ° 23 ′ 2 ″ N 2 ° 21 ′ 17 ″ W ( 53 @.@ 3838 , − 2 @.@ <unk> ) , Altrincham is on the southwestern edge of the Greater Manchester Urban Area , immediately south of the town of Sale , and 8 miles ( 13 km ) southwest of Manchester city centre . It lies in the northwest corner of the Cheshire Plain , just south of the River Mersey . The Bridgewater Canal passes through the Broadheath area of the town . Altrincham 's drinking water is supplied by United Utilities . The local bedrock consists mainly of Keuper Waterstone , a type of sandstone , and water retrieved from those rocks is very hard and often saline , making it undrinkable . The town 's climate is generally temperate , with few extremes of temperature or weather . The mean temperature is slightly above average for the United Kingdom ; whereas both annual rainfall and average hours of sunshine are slightly below the average for the UK . 
 Along with Sale , Stretford and Urmston , Altrincham is one of the four major urban areas in Trafford . The Altrincham area , as defined by Trafford Council , comprises the south of Trafford . In addition to the town of Altrincham , it includes the villages of Timperley , Bowdon , Hale and Hale Barns . The Broadheath area of the town was a light industrial centre until the 1970s and is now a retail park . The most densely populated part of the town is around the town centre , with the less populated areas and more green space further from the centre of town in villages such as Bowdon and Hale . The Oldfield Brow area lies on the outskirts of the town beside the Bridgewater Canal and close to Dunham Massey . 
 = = Demography = = 
 As of the 2001 UK census , the town of Altrincham had a total population of 40 @,@ 695 . Of its 27 @,@ 900 households , 38 @.@ 7 per cent were married couples living together . 30 @.@ 4 per cent contained one person , 8 @.@ 2 per cent co @-@ habiting couples and 9 @.@ 0 per cent lone parents . 
 The town 's population density is 10 @,@ 272 inhabitants per square mile ( 3 @,@ 966 / km2 ) , with 94 @.@ 8 males for every 100 females . Of those aged 16 to 74 , 21 @.@ 7 per cent had no academic qualifications , similar to the 21 @.@ 3 per cent in all of Trafford , but lower than the 28 @.@ 9 per cent in England . At 4 @.@ 6 per cent , Altrincham has a low proportion of non @-@ white people . Asians are the area 's largest ethnic minority , at 1 @.@ 3 per cent of the population . 
 In 1931 , 14 @.@ 6 per cent of Altrincham 's population was middle class , slightly higher than the figure for England and Wales , which was 14 per cent . By 1971 this gap had increased to 28 @.@ 8 per cent compared to 24 per cent nationally , while the town 's working class population had declined , from 30 @.@ 3 per cent in 1931 ( 36 per cent in England and Wales ) to 18 @.@ 6 per cent ( 26 per cent nationwide ) . The remainder comprised clerical and skilled manual workers . This change in social structure was similar to that seen across the nation – although biased towards the middle classes – making Altrincham the middle @-@ class town it is today . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 According to the hearth tax returns from 1664 , the township of Altrincham had a population of about 636 , making it the largest of the local settlements ; this had increased to 1 @,@ 692 in 1801 . In the first half of the 19th century , the town 's population increase by 165 per cent , higher than 89 per cent across England and 98 per cent in the Trafford area . The growth of the settlement was a result of the Industrial Revolution , and although Altrincham was one of the fastest growing townships in the Trafford area , but paled in comparison to new industrial areas such as Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Hyde , and Manchester . In the second half of the 19th century , Altrincham 's population grew by 275 per cent , higher than the 235 per cent for Trafford and 69 per cent nationally in the same period . This was due to the late industrialisation of the area and the introduction of the Manchester South Junction and Altrincham Railway in 1849 . The table below details the population change since 1801 , including the percentage change since the last census . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Historically , Altrincham was a market town and the two main areas of employment were agriculture and market trade . Although the town went into decline in the 15th century , it recovered and the annual fairs lasted until the mid @-@ 19th century and the market still continues . During the Industrial Revolution , Altrincham grew as an industrial town , particularly the Broadheath area , which was developed into an industrial estate . In 1801 there were four cotton mills in Altrincham , part of its textile industry , although they had closed by the 1851 census . The decline of the textile industry in Altrincham mirrored the decline of the industry in the Trafford area as a result of a lack of investment and the development of more established industrial areas such as Manchester , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , and Oldham . During the late 19th and early 20th centuries , heavier industries moved into Broadheath , providing local employment . The area steadily declined during the second half of the 20th century , with employment at Broadheath falling from 8 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 between 1960 and 1970 . Despite the presence of retailers such as Tesco , Sainsbury 's and Marks & Spencer in the town , a new Asda superstore in Broadheath , and redevelopment schemes costing over £ 100 million , Altrincham 's 15 @.@ 5 per cent level of employment in retail is below the national average of 16 @.@ 9 per cent . Altrincham , with its neighbours Bowdon and Hale , is said to constitute a " stockbroker belt " , with well @-@ appointed dwellings in an area of sylvan opulence . 
 The historic market town developed as a residential area in the 19th century although it retains its retail heritage in the Old Market Place ( a conservation area ) and a new pedestrianised shopping centre . The retail districts of the town have more recently fallen victim to decline due to competition from the nearby Trafford Centre and a regenerated Manchester city centre . In 2006 Trafford Metropolitan Borough Council unveiled plans for a £ 1 @.@ 5 million redevelopment for the town centre . The renovation will create 146 @,@ 000 square feet ( 13 @,@ 600 m2 ) of new retail space and 203 @,@ 000 square feet ( 18 @,@ 900 m2 ) of refurbished space , providing 349 @,@ 000 square feet ( 32 @,@ 400 m2 ) in total . 
 Construction on Altair , a £ 100 million development on Oakfield Road , is expected to begin in 2013 . The scheme includes a hotel , offices , shops and eating places , and is expected to create 2 @,@ 000 permanent jobs . A further £ 20 million is earmarked for a refurbishment of the nearby Altrincham Interchange . A 2010 survey found that despite being in one of the country 's most affluent areas , nearly a third of the shops in Altrincham were vacant ; Trafford council attributed the high number ( 78 ) to the effects of the recession and plans to refurbish Stamford House , which left most of its shops unused . 
 According to the 2001 UK census , the industry of employment of residents in Altrincham was 18 @.@ 4 per cent property and business services , 16 @.@ 0 per cent retail and wholesale , 12 @.@ 1 per cent manufacturing , 10 @.@ 7 per cent health and social work , 8 @.@ 3 per cent education , 8 @.@ 3 per cent transport and communications , 5 @.@ 8 per cent finance , 5 @.@ 7 per cent construction , 4 @.@ 2 per cent hotels and restaurants , 4 @.@ 2 per cent public administration and defence , 0 @.@ 8 per cent agriculture , 0 @.@ 8 per cent energy and water supply , 0 @.@ 2 per cent mining , and 4 @.@ 6 per cent other . This was roughly in line with national figures , except for the town 's relatively high percentage of workers in property and business services . The census recorded the economic activity of residents aged 16 – 74 , 5 @.@ 3 per cent looking after home or family , 4 @.@ 3 per cent permanently sick or disabled , 3 @.@ 2 per cent students without jobs , 2 @.@ 2 per cent students were with jobs , and 2 @.@ 4 per cent economically inactive for other reasons . The 2 @.@ 2 per cent unemployment rate of Altrincham was low compared with the national rate of 3 @.@ 3 per cent . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Landmarks and attractions = = = 
 The Old Market Place is thought to stand on the site of the original town settlement . Now a registered conservation area it consists of a series of part timber @-@ framed buildings echoing the wattle and daub constructions of the original houses and burgage plots . The cobblestone paving was replaced in 1896 . The <unk> which stood in the area near the Old Market Place from the 17th century until the late 19th century was also the site for dispensing early local justice . A courtroom , stocks and whipping post saw public floggings take place there until the early 19th century . The whipping post and stocks were restored as a tourist attraction by local traders in the 1990s . However the <unk> area was also a site of religious importance , since prospective brides and grooms are thought to have declared their intentions here . In 1814 Thomas de Quincey described the Old Market Place in his Confessions of an English Opium Eater while travelling from Manchester to Chester . He noted how little the place had changed since his visit 14 years earlier at the age of three , and that " fruits , such as can be had in July , and flowers were scattered about in profusion : even the stalls of the butchers , from their brilliant cleanliness , appeared attractive : and bonny young women of Altrincham were all tripping about in caps and aprons <unk> disposed " . Another of Altrincham 's attractions is the historic market , set up over 700 years ago when the town was first established . 
 Of the 21 conservation areas in Trafford , ten are in Altrincham : The Downs , The <unk> , Bowdon , Ashley Heath , Goose Green , Old Market Place , Sandiway , George Street , the Linotype Housing Estate and Stamford New Road . On the town 's outskirts is the 18th @-@ century Dunham Massey Hall , surrounded by its 250 @-@ acre ( 1 km2 ) deer park , both now owned by the National Trust . The hall is early Georgian in style , and along with its stables and carriage house , is a Grade I listed building . 
 <unk> House was built between 1914 and 1916 , by local architect Edgar Wood , as his own residence . It has a flat concrete roof , a concave façade , and is faced in Portland red stone and Lancashire brick . It is regarded as one of the most advanced examples of early 20th @-@ century domestic architecture , and is referenced in architectural digests . It has been a Grade I listed building since 1975 , one of six such buildings in Trafford . The Grade II listed clock outside the main transport interchange was built in 1880 . 
 The 16 @-@ acre ( 6 @.@ 5 ha ) Stamford Park was designed by landscape gardener John Shaw . It opened to the public in 1880 , as a sports park with areas for cricket and football . The land was donated by George Grey , the 7th Earl of Stamford , and is now owned and run by Trafford Council . The park is listed as Grade II on the Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England , and has won a bronze award from the Greenspace award scheme . 
 = = = Events and venues = = = 
 Altrincham has two theatres , the Altrincham Garrick Playhouse and the Club Theatre . The Altrincham Garrick group was formed in 1913 . The Garrick held the world stage premier of Psycho in 1982 . In 1998 , it received a grant of £ 675 @,@ 000 from the National Lottery as part of a £ 900 @,@ 000 redevelopment of the theatre , which was completed in 1999 . The Club Theatre group began in 1896 , as the St Margaret 's Church Institute Amateur Dramatics Society . It provides a venue for the Trafford Youth Theatre production each year , and it runs the Hale One Act Festival , an annual week @-@ long event started in 1972 . The club has received awards from both the Greater Manchester Drama Federation and the Cheshire Theatre Guild . Altrincham also had Greater Manchester 's only Michelin starred restaurant , the Juniper . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Altrincham F.C. , nicknamed " The Robins " , were founded in 1903 and play home matches at Moss Lane . The club plays in the <unk> Conference , the fifth tier of English football . In the 1970s and 1980s Altrincham F.C. built a reputation for " giant @-@ killing " acts against Football League teams in FA Cup matches . The club has knocked out Football League opposition on a record 16 occasions , including a 1986 victory against top @-@ flight Birmingham City . Altrincham won the forerunner of the Football Conference in its first two seasons , but was denied election to the Football League on both occasions , falling a single vote short in 1980 . Altrincham have since had mixed fortunes . Relegated to the Northern Premier League in 1997 , the club earned promotion two years later , but suffered a second relegation after a single season in the Conference . In the 2010 – 11 season Altrincham were relegated to Conference North . 
 Altrincham is one of the few towns in North West England with an ice rink , and has had an ice hockey team since 1961 , when Altrincham Ice Rink was built in Broadheath . The Altrincham Aces ( later renamed the Trafford Metros ) played from 1961 until 2003 , when Altrincham Ice Rink closed . The town then had a three @-@ year period without a rink or ice hockey team , until construction of the 2 @,@ 500 capacity Altrincham Ice Dome was completed . Manchester Phoenix , a club having a professional presence in the English Premier Ice Hockey League and an extensive junior development aspect , relocated to the Ice Dome during the 2006 – 07 season , having withdrawn from competition two years earlier due to the high cost of playing matches at Manchester 's MEN Arena . In 2009 the Manchester Phoenix English National Ice Hockey League team was renamed Trafford Metros , bringing the old Altrincham team 's name back into use . When not being used by Phoenix the Altrincham Ice Dome is open to the public for ice skating . 
 Founded in 1897 , Altrincham Kersal RUFC plays rugby union in North One , the competition below the National Leagues , and is amongst the top 80 clubs in England . Altrincham has been promoted five times in the past ten seasons . The club has produced England and Sale Sharks players Mark Cueto and Chris Jones and continues to produce players for the Sale Jets . Altrincham and District Athletics Club was founded in 1961 , and provides training facilities for track and field , road running , cross @-@ country running and fell running . <unk> Cycling Club was formed in 1948 in the area of Altrincham known locally as <unk> Moss . 
 = = Education = = 
 As Altrincham was part of the Bowdon parish , children from the township may have gone to the 16th @-@ century school established at Bowdon ; before that point , the town had no formal education system . A salt merchant from Dunham Woodhouses founded a school at Oldfield House intended for 40 boys aged 8 – 11 from the surrounding area . Sunday schools were set up in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . Altrincham 's increasing population prompted the founding of more schools during the early 19th century and by 1856 the town had 9 schools , 1 college , and 23 teachers . The introduction of compulsory education during the second half of the 19th century increased the demand for schools , and by 1886 Altrincham had 12 church schools and 8 private schools . 
 Responsibility for local education fell to Cheshire County Council in 1903 . Loreto Convent , the County High School for Girls , and Altrincham County High School for Boys , were founded in 1909 , 1910 , and 1912 respectively . Although still open these schools have since changed their names to Altrincham Grammar School for Girls , Altrincham Grammar School for Boys , and Loreto Grammar School . Altrincham received evacuees during the Second World War , and it was in this period that St. Ambrose College was founded . 
 Altrincham now has eighteen primary schools , one special school and eight secondary schools , including five grammar schools ; the Trafford district maintains a selective education system assessed by the Eleven Plus exam . Several of Altrincham 's secondary schools have specialist status : Altrincham College of Arts ( arts ) ; Altrincham Grammar School for Boys ( language ) ; Altrincham Grammar School for Girls ( language ) ; Blessed Thomas Holford Catholic College ( maths and computing ) ; Loreto Grammar School ( science and maths ) ; and St. Ambrose College ( maths and computing ) . Altrincham College of Arts , Altrincham Grammar School for Boys , Altrincham Grammar School for Girls , Blessed Thomas Holford Catholic College , Loreto Grammar School , and St. Ambrose College were all rated as outstanding in their most recent Ofsted reports . Brentwood Special School is a mixed school for 11- to 19 @-@ year @-@ olds who have special needs or learning difficulties . 
 = = Religion = = 
 During the medieval and post @-@ medieval periods the township of Altrincham was part of Bowdon parish . Low population density meant that the town did not have a church until the Anglican church established a chapel of ease in 1799 . Nonconformists were also present in Altrincham ; Methodists set up a chapel in 1790 , and Baptists built one in the 1870s . Irish immigrants in the 1830s and 1840s also returned Roman Catholicism to the area , the first Roman Catholic church built in Altrincham being St Vincent 's , in 1860 . 
 Several churches in Altrincham are deemed architecturally important enough to be designated Grade II listed buildings . These are Christ Church , the Church of St Alban , the Church of St George , the Church of St John the Evangelist and Trinity United Reformed Church . Of the nine Grade II * listed buildings in Trafford , three are in Altrincham : the Church of St Margaret , the Church of St John the Divine and Hale Chapel in Hale Barns . As of the 2001 UK census , 78 @.@ 8 per cent of Altrincham 's residents reported themselves as being Christian , 1 @.@ 1 per cent Jewish , 1 @.@ 1 per cent Muslim , 0 @.@ 4 per cent Hindu , 0 @.@ 2 per cent Buddhist and 0 @.@ 1 per cent Sikh . The census recorded 12 @.@ 1 per cent as having no religion , 0 @.@ 2 per cent with an alternative religion , while 6 @.@ 1 per cent did not state a religion . Altrincham is in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Shrewsbury , and the Church of England Diocese of Chester . The nearest synagogue , belonging to Hale and District Hebrew Congregation , is on Shay Lane in Hale Barns . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Construction of the Manchester South Junction and Altrincham Railway began in 1845 . The line was opened in October 1849 , with services from Manchester London Road via Sale to Altrincham . In 1931 it became one of Great Britain 's first electrified railway lines , with a <unk> DC overhead line . At the same time a new Altrincham station was opened on the same line , at Navigation Road , serving housing developments in the area . By 1937 , 130 train services ran daily between Manchester and Altrincham . The line was renovated in the early 1990s to form part of the Manchester Metrolink light rail system . Broadheath railway station served the northern part of Altrincham between 1853 and 1962 , on the line from Manchester , via Lymm to Warrington . 
 Altrincham Interchange is one of the Metrolink 's termini . The interchange has been refurbished , and now includes a brand new footbridge , with 3 lifts to cope with increased passenger demands , including a larger scale ticket office , and modern bus interchange . The redeveloped interchange is now going through finishing touches , with just the lifts to be completed . The new Interchange is a modern design building that looks fantastic and is helping to regenerate Altrincham city centre as the new building has helped to transform the surrounding area . The Interchange connects the town to several locations in Greater Manchester , such as Sale and Bury . The service also includes Navigation Road station . Metrolink services leave around every six minutes , between 07 : 15 and 19 : 30 on weekdays , and less frequently at other times . National Rail services link the Altrincham and Navigation Road stations with Chester via Northwich , and with Manchester via Stockport . Altrincham Interchange , next to the railway station , is a hub for local bus routes . Manchester Airport , the largest in the UK outside London , is 5 miles ( 8 km ) to the southeast of the town , and is connected via the Manchester <unk> – Crewe line . There are plans in the future to create a new link between Manchester Airport and the Mid Cheshire Line , which Altrincham Interchange is a station on . Recently the Metrolink completed connections to this airport and opened the line 12 months early , but this is not a direct connection from the Metrolink line at Altrincham Interchange 
 = = Notable people = = 
 The artist Helen Allingham , born in 1848 , lived in Altrincham and then Bowdon during her childhood years . Alison Uttley wrote the Little Grey Rabbit books while living in Bowdon . Dramatist Ronald Gow lived there in his youth and later taught at the local grammar school . The town was also the birthplace of the film and television actress Angela Cartwright . Ian Brown and John Squire of The Stone Roses both attended Altrincham Grammar School for Boys , and Paul Young of Sad Café and Mike and the Mechanics lived in Altrincham until his death in 2000 . 
 Hewlett Johnson , later known as the " Red Dean " of Canterbury , was curate , and later vicar of St Margaret 's in the town from 1904 to 1924 . 
 The Lancashire and England Test cricketer Paul Allott was born in Altrincham . 
 Edward Kinder Bradbury was born ( 16 August 1881 ) in the town , he was awarded the Victoria Cross for gallantry and ability in organising the defence of ' L ' Battery against heavy odds at Nery on 1 September 1914 . Altrincham born Bill Speakman received the Victoria Cross for valour in 1951 in the Korean War . Sir Michael Pollock , an officer in the Royal Navy who rose to the position of First Sea Lord , was born in Altrincham . 
 = Towson United Methodist Church = 
 Towson United Methodist Church is a large United Methodist Church in the historic Baltimore County , Maryland suburb of Towson . Its past , rooted in 19th century America , and subsequent growth in the two centuries since then , have closely paralleled the nation 's political and sociological trends . It was a congregation split asunder in 1861 on the eve of the American Civil War in a border state of divided loyalties , which eventually reunited and built a church in the post @-@ World War II era of the 1950s , a time of reconciliation and rapid growth by mainline Protestant denominations , especially in the more affluent suburbs . 
 The 1 @,@ 000 @-@ member church , currently pastored by Rev. Roderick Miller , has a number of community outreach programs , including an accredited child care center and a Boy Scout troop , and actively supports a home for unwed mothers , overseas missions , and Habitat for Humanity projects . The congregation worships in a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ seat sanctuary built in 1958 . The large building 's prominent 235 @-@ foot ( 72 m ) spire and cupola , a landmark visible for miles from the nearby Baltimore Beltway ( Interstate 695 ) , has been called " the beacon of Towson " . 
 Towson United Methodist Church is located on Hampton Lane at interchange # <unk> of the Baltimore Beltway and Dulaney Valley Road ( Md . Route 146 ) , one @-@ half mile ( one km ) west of Hampton National Historic Site . The church 's land was originally part of the vast 18th century Hampton estate . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The beginning ; 1750s – 1850s = = = 
 First settled by brothers William and Thomas Towson in 1752 , the hamlet now bearing their name remained mostly farmland until the 1830s , with no churches and little more than a roadside inn / tavern for travelers on York Road ( now Md . Route 45 ) . In the 1790s , Rebecca Dorsey Ridgely , the wife of Charles Ridgely III and described as an ardent Methodist , began holding prayer meetings at the Ridgelys ' grandiose Hampton Mansion , located one @-@ half mi ( one km ) east of the present church site . By 1825 , the first Sunday School was started in a private home near a blacksmith 's shop on York Road . In 1839 , the citizenry of sparsely populated <unk> , as the village was called by then , built the tiny community 's first church in a wooded location north of Joppa Road and east of Dulaney Valley Road . The site was previously used for a powder magazine built by Gen. Nathan Towson prior to the British attack on Baltimore in September 1814 , during the War of 1812 . Called Epsom Chapel , the 1 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 93 m2 ) structure was built of stones salvaged from the arsenal . Led by Methodist Episcopal minister Daniel <unk> , Epsom Chapel was dedicated and opened for <unk> 's first public church service on Sunday , November 10 , 1839 . In line with Methodist practice of the time in rural areas , circuit rider ministers would travel on horseback to preach to the villagers at Epsom Chapel . With the designation of Towson as the county seat in 1854 , the town began to grow more rapidly . The small chapel was shared with other denominations until the 1870s , when Towson 's increasing population spurred the construction of larger churches . 
 = = = Division and separate churches ; 1860s – 1950s = = = 
 The Methodist movement was growing rapidly in pre @-@ Civil War America , but was beset by disputes about slave @-@ holding and the rule over the church by bishops , resulting in a formal split into two groups in 1844 . The faction in favor of giving church authority to a hierarchy of bishops called themselves the Methodist Episcopal Church and took an anti @-@ slavery stance in the north . Those in opposition formed the Methodist Protestant Church in the United States . As the impending Civil War loomed over the nation in the 1850s , local Towson Methodists continued to worship together at Epsom Chapel . 
 This ended in 1861 , when a reed organ was purchased for Epsom Chapel , sparking a disagreement over the use of musical instruments in worship . A minority opposed to the idea joined the southern @-@ leaning Methodist Protestant Church , withdrawing from Epsom Chapel to worship at Towson 's Odd Fellows Hall during the Civil War . In 1867 , the Methodist Protestants returned to Epsom Chapel , but met separately on Sunday afternoons . 
 = = = = Towson Methodist Episcopal Church ( First Methodist Church ) = = = = 
 The northern @-@ leaning Methodist Episcopal congregation , which continued worshiping at Epsom Chapel during the Civil War , began building their own church nearby , with the laying of a cornerstone on August 14 , 1869 . The Towson Methodist Episcopal ( M.E. ) Church , a neo @-@ Gothic brick structure , was located on York Road next to the present Prospect Hill Cemetery , one block north of the intersection with Joppa and Dulaney Valley Roads . Designed by Edmund George Lind and built at a cost of $ 29 @,@ 000 , the 350 @-@ seat church was completed and dedicated on October 26 , 1871 . 
 The M.E. Church 's eighty @-@ seven members soon found themselves in financial difficulties , however , having gone heavily in debt to build their new sanctuary . The chairman of the church 's building committee had advanced his personal funds to complete the construction , thereafter becoming embroiled in years of litigation with the church . By 1874 , the church was drawing larger crowds under then @-@ pastor Joseph Stitt , who was described as an " excellent leader of singing " . An afternoon Sunday school session was particularly popular , " principally devoted to learning new hymns , which attracted many of the young people of the town , especially the young men " , noted one account . When the ME church held its twenty @-@ fifth anniversary celebration in 1896 , it opened with prayer and a piano concert , " favored with a beautiful selection sung by Mrs. Randolph Murphy " , said a contemporary report . 
 Although the two Methodist congregations had remained estranged since the split in 1861 , both groups did come together in 1895 for a " Great Revival " in Towson . The joint services were attended by throngs and the " preaching was with power " , newspapers commented . At the beginning of the 20th century , the increasingly large and prosperous congregation added eleven stained glass windows to the M.E. church , including Christ the Good Shepherd by Heinrich Hofmann . In 1921 , a new pipe organ was installed by M. P. Möller . 
 = = = = Towson Methodist Protestant Church ( Second Methodist Church ) = = = = 
 The Methodist Protestant group continued to use Epsom Chapel until 1908 , when they built a $ 6 @,@ 000 church seating 150 persons at the corner of Allegheny and Bosley Avenues . Located in the heart of Towson near the County Circuit Courthouse , the Towson Methodist Protestant Church was constructed of stone with a slate roof and a bell tower . 
 With the merger in 1939 of the Methodist Episcopal ( M.E. ) and Methodist Protestant ( M.P. ) denominations in the U.S. , Towson 's Methodist Episcopal and Methodist Protestant churches were known thereafter as First Methodist Church and Second Methodist Church , respectively . 
 = = = The reunited church ; 1950s – present = = = 
 Following the reunification of the two branches of Methodism in 1939 , First Methodist Church and Second Methodist Church of Towson continued as separate entities for another thirteen years . After the end of World War II in 1945 , mainline Protestant church attendance increased significantly in the U.S. By early 1952 , faced with facilities fast becoming inadequate for the burgeoning population of suburbia in the postwar period and with a boom in modern commercial development of Towson 's core area starting to displace older buildings , the two churches formed a joint committee to evaluate a merger . The committee recommended that the two churches become one , concluding : 
 " The properties of the First and Second Churches are located in close proximity to each other ... the identical objectives , program and methods of work of the two churches , will continue to make competition and overlapping inevitable ... by pooling their resources and unifying ... they can better serve the community and the Kingdom of God " . — Joint Committee Report , 1952 
 In April 1952 , more than ninety years after the two churches split , the congregations of both finally voted to reunite , merging on June 1 , 1952 , and adopting the name Towson Methodist Church . The members of both Methodist churches then began worshiping together at the First Methodist Church . Plans to construct a much larger building with ample parking were announced when the two churches merged and 16 acres ( 65 @,@ 000 m2 ) of undeveloped land , originally part of the Ridgelys ' Hampton estate and north of the planned alignment of the Baltimore Beltway ( I @-@ 695 ) , were purchased soon thereafter from Goucher College . 
 A groundbreaking ceremony was held on October 7 , 1956 , and construction of the new church was completed by the John K. Ruff Company in May 1958 , with a service of dedication held on May 11 , 1958 . A crowd of 1 @,@ 250 attended the ceremonies in the new sanctuary , with an overflow of 550 persons watching by closed @-@ circuit television in the lower level Fellowship Hall . 
 The old First M.E. Church structure adjacent to Prospect Hill Park Cemetery on McCurdy Avenue ( now Investment Place ) and York Road was abandoned and eventually demolished in 1965 . An illuminated display of the stained glass windows in the former church is located in the foyer of the current building . The Second M.P. Church structure was sold in 1954 to the Women 's Club of Towson and still stands today — in 2005 , the building was resold to an office development firm and is now used by an insurance agency . The erstwhile Epsom Chapel eventually became a meeting hall for Boy Scout troops in the 1920s – 1930s . It was subsequently abandoned and finally demolished in 1952 to make way for construction of a parking lot for the old Hutzler 's department store , now a Barnes & Noble store near the present Macy 's department store and Towson Town Center mall . No trace of Epsom Chapel exists today , except for an historical marker placed near the site by the Baltimore County Historical Society , designating it as the " cradle of Methodism in Towson " . 
 The current name , Towson United Methodist Church , was adopted in 1968 to reflect the merger in that year of the Methodist and Evangelical United Brethren denominations in the U.S. On Pentecost Sunday , May 11 , 2008 , the fiftieth anniversary of the present sanctuary 's completion was celebrated by a reenactment of the original May 11 , 1958 , dedication service . 
 = = Current building and facilities = = 
 Towson United Methodist Church is an L @-@ shaped structure , with the main sanctuary on a north @-@ south axis . Designed by architect J. Alfred Hamme and completed in 1958 , the church is built of red brick in the Georgian architectural style , with a prominent , <unk> spire surmounted by a 9 @-@ foot ( 3 m ) porcelain enamel gold cross visible at 3 – 5 mi ( 5 – 8 km ) distance on the Beltway . The imposing front facade is of cut stone from Pennsylvania , with the 18 @-@ foot ( 5 m ) high main entranceway capped by a curved stone pediment . Inside , the sanctuary has three aisles with a rear balcony and can accommodate up to one thousand persons . Rows of Corinthian columns standing on 4 @-@ foot ( 122 cm ) bases flank the pews along both side aisles . The pulpit and doors are made of mahogany . 
 The 3 @-@ story east @-@ west wing has classrooms , offices , a chapel , and the John D. Hoffman library featuring an exhibit of memorabilia and historical artifacts along with archival records . Construction of the church cost $ 950 @,@ 000 in 1958 ( equivalent to almost $ 7 million in 2008 ) , not including the expense of land acquisition . 
 = = = Organ and carillon = = = 
 Towson United Methodist Church has a 3 @-@ manual , 49 @-@ rank <unk> pipe organ of 2 @,@ 516 pipes , including seven ranks of 16 ft. pipes and tubular chimes . It was dedicated in memory of S. Clayton Seitz by then @-@ organist John <unk> Hoffman on May 11 , 1958 . Hoffman , the church 's esteemed virtuoso organist and Minister of Music between 1957 – 1988 , was a graduate of Union Theological Seminary 's renowned Master of Sacred Music degree program , after having earned Bachelor of Music and Master of Music degrees at the University of Denver . At Union , Hoffman studied the organ with Clarence Dickinson and Vernon De Tar . In addition to serving as the church 's organist and choral director , Hoffman was professor of organ at Towson State University . He died unexpectedly on July 4 , 1988 of complications following heart bypass surgery . The church library is named in his memory . Hoffman was succeeded by Kathie Metz , a graduate of Marshall University , as Director of Music and Organist 1988 – 2012 . The current Director of Music and Organist since July , 2013 , is Douglas <unk> . An ordained minister , Rev. <unk> studied music at Shepherd University , graduating with a Bachelor of Arts degree , and then earned a Master of Divinity degree from Trinity Episcopal School for Ministry . World @-@ famous concert organists who have performed at the church 's organ include Pierre <unk> , Flor Peeters , and Marilyn Mason . 
 A 2 @-@ octave Schulmerich electronic carillon of twenty @-@ five bells was installed in the tower in June 1958 . It was played from the organ console by a <unk> on Sunday mornings before and after services , as well as on special occasions , such as Christmas Eve and as part of the traditional noontime nationwide peal of church bells on the Fourth of July . Hymns were also played daily on the carillon by a music roll until it was discontinued in the 1990s . 
 = = = Renovation and expansion project = = = 
 Towson United Methodist Church is in the midst of a $ 3 million phased renovation and expansion project started in 2006 . In the first phase , completed in 2007 , an elevator and additional facilities were installed for improved disabled accessibility , along with a new fire sprinkler system and replacement of the building 's climate control system ( HVAC ) . Additional classrooms in an expanded education wing are planned in future phases of a multiyear master plan adopted by the church in 2005 . 
 To help fund the future works , the church announced plans in January 2008 to sell 3 @.@ 5 acres ( 14 @,@ 000 m2 ) of undeveloped , wooded property it owns on Hampton Lane to Shelter Development Corp. for construction of a senior citizen housing complex . A zoning change application was submitted to Baltimore County officials to allow sixteen residential units per acre ( current zoning limits density to two residential units per acre ) for a total of 80 – 100 beds . The Hampton Improvement Association , representing neighboring Hampton , Maryland residents , said they " ... oppose [ d ] zoning changes that would allow higher density residential development and require trees to be knocked down " . Then @-@ pastor David Cooney told the Baltimore Sun , " We entered into this with Shelter , believing this is a good use for the land — that this is a good company and a needed service " . In the face of community objections , however , Shelter and the church subsequently announced on March 3 , 2008 , that the development plans had been dropped . A Shelter official said that his company and Towson United Methodist Church had jointly come to the conclusion that " this is not something we are going to pursue " . Pastor Cooney said , " It had become clear that we weren 't going to be able to reach a compromise and we certainly don 't want to be at war with our neighbors " . In the wake of the plan 's shelving , the president of the Hampton Improvement Association told the Towson Times that his group wishes to work with Towson United Methodist Church to find an alternative use for the land besides commercial development , as they " don 't want to preclude the church from trying to get some money out of it . " In April 2008 , Dr. Cooney said that the church " did not set out to sell this land ; the proposal came to us , and we have no other plans to sell or develop the land " . 
 = = Ministry = = 
 Roderick J. Miller is Lead Pastor of Towson United Methodist Church , succeeding David S. Cooney in July , 2011 . Miller grew up in Pennsylvania , where he graduated from Allegheny College in 1976 , receiving a B.A. in Religion . He then studied at Wesley Theological Seminary in Washington , D.C. , earning a Master of Divinity degree in 1982 . While ministering at Union Chapel United Methodist Church in Joppa , Maryland , Miller continued his postgraduate studies , receiving a Doctor of Ministry degree in Church Revitalization from Chicago 's McCormick Theological Seminary in 1992 . He was later Lead Pastor at Bethany UMC church in Ellicott City , Maryland ( 1994 – 2005 ) , after which he was named Director of <unk> Ministries for the denomination 's Baltimore @-@ Washington Conference , serving in that role 2005 – 2011 . 
 The mission statement of Towson United Methodist Church is : " To proclaim the Word of God and to make disciples of Jesus Christ " . The church 's staff of twelve includes assistant ministers , directors of music and education , and building and administrative personnel . It is a part of the denomination 's Baltimore @-@ Washington Conference ( district ) . In addition to Sunday morning worship services , the 1 @,@ 200 member congregation participates in graded Sunday school classes , various adult Bible study classes , youth activities , and a midweek " Praise , Prayer & Healing " service . The music program includes both adult and youth choirs , as well as handbell ringers . The church 's Alleluia Singers , a 50 – voice ensemble of high school @-@ age young people , sings frequently for weekly worship services and tours the eastern U.S. each summer . 
 = = = Previous ministers = = = 
 David Cooney was Senior Pastor of Towson United Methodist Church between September 1 , 2001 – June 30 , 2011 . He earned a Master of Divinity degree from Wesley Theological Seminary and a Ph.D. from Iliff School of Theology in Denver , Colorado . He is the son of Rev. C. Douglas Cooney ( 1928 – 2003 ) , who was also a Methodist minister at various churches , including the First Methodist Church of Hyattsville , Maryland , as well as an official of the Methodist denomination . 
 Other former senior ministers of Towson Methodist Church and its predecessor First Methodist Church , with their years of appointment , are : 
 = = = Community outreach = = = 
 Towson United Methodist Church sponsors a Boy Scout troop , overseas missions , the Susanna Wesley House for unwed mothers , and actively participates in Habitat for Humanity projects . Over the years , members of the Towson Methodist Men 's group and Women 's Society of Christian Service ( now United Methodist Women ) have supported Meals on Wheels , the League of Women Voters , and Head Start , as well as serving as volunteers at local hospitals and the Maryland School for the Blind . For more than thirty years , the church has hosted a weekly meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous . 
 The large size of the sanctuary and its convenient location make it well @-@ suited for community gatherings attracting sizable crowds , such as concerts by the Handel Choir of Baltimore . The church hosts an annual memorial service for fallen Baltimore County firefighters and rescue personnel . Senior Baltimore County officials , including the County Executive and Fire Chief , participate in the service 's memorial wreath laying and the tolling of a bell , as part of the commemoration . Nationally @-@ known guest speakers , such as Tony <unk> and Millie <unk> , have also spoken there . 
 Towson United Methodist Church started the Hampton Lane Child Development Center in 1978 . An accredited child care center , it now serves approximately fifty children ages 2 – 5 years old . 
 = Lovejoy Columns = 
 The Lovejoy Columns , located in Portland , Oregon , United States , supported the Lovejoy Ramp , a viaduct that from 1927 to 1999 carried the western approach to the Broadway Bridge over the freight tracks in what is now the Pearl District . The columns were painted by Greek immigrant Tom Stefopoulos between 1948 and 1952 . In 1999 , the viaduct was demolished but the columns were spared due to the efforts of the architectural group Rigga . For the next five years , attempts to restore the columns were unsuccessful and they remained in storage beneath the Fremont Bridge . 
 In 2005 , two of the original columns were resited at Northwest 10th Avenue between Everett and Flanders Streets . The Regional Arts & Culture Council was searching for photographs showing the murals in their original location for an ongoing restoration project . In 2006 , Randy Shelton reconstructed the artworks on the columns using the photographs for reference . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 The Lovejoy Columns supported the Lovejoy Ramp , a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 610 m ) viaduct that stretched from Northwest 14th Avenue and Lovejoy Street to the Broadway Bridge . It was constructed in 1927 – 1928 . Between 1948 and 1952 , Athanasios <unk> " Tom " Stefopoulos ( died 1971 ) , a Spokane , Portland and Seattle Railway night watchman , artist and master calligrapher in the copperplate style , drew upon the columns in chalk and later painted them . His work was spontaneous and not commissioned . Stefopoulos painted Greek mythology and Americana imagery in a calligraphic style ; the designs depicted " fanciful " owls , landscapes " bedecked with homespun aphorisms " , and ancient Greek philosopher Diogenes of Sinope navigating the streets of Athens with a lantern . He painted around a dozen murals , though photographic evidence does not exist for each of them . The paintings became a local landmark and quickly gained Stefopoulos notoriety and media coverage . 
 In the late 1990s , developer Homer Williams persuaded the city to demolish the viaduct to open up dozens of blocks in the redeveloping Pearl District . Preservation efforts began immediately . In 1998 , Georgiana <unk> completed a painting of the columns called Guardians : Under the Lovejoy Ramp to " catch a small flavor of these ' guardians , ' while they were still in place in their surprising location — before they were lost in the name of progress " . In 1999 , James Henderson took a series of photographs of the remaining pigments of the original paintings ; he recorded the murals using cross @-@ polarized lighting and used digital enhancement to restore the colors . The Regional Arts & Culture Council administers at least six of Henderson 's photographs , which were printed in 2002 and each called Lovejoy Column . 
 = = = Demolition = = = 
 The viaduct was removed in 1999 , but the architectural group Rigga persuaded the city to preserve the paintings and the columns . Rigga said that if the murals had been removed from the columns , " much of their magic would be lost " . The City of Portland 's Office of Transportation earmarked funds to remove ten columns ; an ad hoc committee called Friends of the Columns was formed to raise money for their storage , restoration and public display , which was estimated to cost $ 460 @,@ 000 . City Commissioner Charlie Hales said , " Saving the Lovejoy columns and the artwork provides a real bridge between the rich history of this industrial area and its future as a residential neighborhood . I am pleased that we are able to save these columns and look forward to them being placed on some of the park spaces in the River District . " According to the James M. Harrison Art and Design Studio , " Extracting the columns both captured the space created by Tom and preserved a ruin that would continue to tell a story . The fragile paintings preserved the mighty concrete . " During the next five years , attempts by the city , and non @-@ profit and entrepreneurial groups to restore the columns were unsuccessful . <unk> Architects ' Northwest Marshall Street Pedestrian Bridge Feasibility Study ( 2001 ) , funded by the Portland Development Commission , proposed installing the columns at the intersection of Northwest 9th Avenue and Naito Parkway . 
 The columns were featured in a 2003 article by the Getty Conservation Institute called " The Conservation of Outdoor Contemporary Murals " , which described best practices for preserving murals and included photographs of the columns during the demolition phase , with conservator J. Claire Dean assessing one of them . From August 10 to September 4 , 2004 , Portland @-@ based artist and filmmaker Vanessa Renwick exhibited a paper and video installation called Lovejoy Lost , featuring camera work by her and Gus Van Sant , for the PDX Window Project . 
 In November 2004 , Willamette Week reported that the columns were being held at a storage yard at Northwest 14th Avenue and <unk> Street , beneath the Fremont Bridge . The paper said , " [ h ] <unk> @-@ covered in blue tarps , their rusted steel girders sticking out of concrete like veins from a freshly amputated arm , they await the political momentum to rescue them from rot " . Real estate developer John Carroll hoped to site the columns at the Elizabeth Lofts , but former Rigga member James Harrison said he was reluctant to believe it would happen , given their history . Harrison told Willamette Week , " [ t ] hese things can turn on a dime " . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Carroll 's and Harrison 's efforts were realized in 2005 when two of the ten original columns were resited at Northwest 10th Avenue between Everett and Flanders streets . The 29 @,@ 000 lb ( 13 @,@ 000 kg ) columns featured a majority of Stefopoulos ' paintings . Harrison reportedly watched with " something like fatherly joy " during the installation and said , " [ w ] e 're installing a ruin " . Carroll said displaying the columns as public art " will preserve an element of the city ’ s past for current and future generations " and acknowledged support from the neighborhood , Friends of the Columns and the Portland Development Commission . The Regional Arts & Culture Council was searching for photographs showing the murals in their original location for a restoration project , which would be completed the following summer . In 2006 , the columns were reconstructed from the photographs by Randy Shelton . The City of Portland 's Bureau of Planning said the resited columns " [ celebrate ] a period in the district ’ s history , showcasing the art for a broader audience " . 
 An event called " Public Space Invasion " was held in the plaza containing the columns in 2011 , inviting guests to " explore the legal limits of Portland 's more peculiar public spaces " . It advertised " crafts among the condos " and the opportunity to " picnic beside a freeway " . In 2013 , a bicycle tour called " Lovejoy Columns and Tom " focused on the conservation of the columns , the " almost forgotten history " of Stefopoulos and the rise of the Pearl District . The tour was narrated by Harrison on behalf of Friends of the Columns and guided by " Portland 's Museum Lady " <unk> Bye ; it raised money for a gravestone for Stefopoulos ' unmarked grave at Rose City Cemetery . It included a guided tour at the Hellenic @-@ American Cultural Center and Museum , which was exhibiting Master <unk> of Tom Stefopoulos to view pen @-@ and @-@ ink art by Stefopoulos . It also included a viewing of Renwick ’ s unfinished film Lovejoy and an optional visit to Stefopoulos ' grave . In her documentary , Renwick chronicled the effort to save the columns and restore the paintings . 
 = = Depictions and reception = = 
 The Daily Journal of Commerce called the columns a Portland " urban legend " . According to Richard Speer of Willamette Week , " generations of Portlanders grew up counting the Lovejoy columns as one of the city 's most unique attractions " . Speer also said the columns were once " postcard favorites and seemed as much a part of the city 's landscape as the Hawthorne Bridge " and have an " endearing , <unk> style " . The murals appeared in Van Sant 's film Drugstore Cowboy ( 1989 ) , Foxfire ( 1996 ) and a music video by Elliott Smith . 
 The resited columns have been included in published walking tours of Portland . In her 2006 book Walking Portland : 30 Tours of Stumptown 's Funky Neighborhoods , Historic Landmarks , Park Trails , Farmers Markets , and <unk> , Becky <unk> said , " Whatever you make of the artwork , the inspired effort that went into preserving it — not to mention the awesome spectacle of those massive columns ripped free , their rebar guts exposed to the air — is damned impressive " . 
 = The Boat Race 1870 = 
 The 27th Boat Race between crews from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge took place on the River Thames on the 6 April 1870 . Cambridge won by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 22 minutes 4 seconds , their first victory since the 1860 race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Cambridge by three lengths in the previous year 's race and led overall with sixteen wins to Cambridge 's ten . 
 Cambridge were coached by George Morrison who had also coached them in 1869 . He had rowed in the 1859 , 1860 and 1861 races and had also acted as a non @-@ rowing president for the 1862 race , yet the previous year 's decision to engage a member of the opposing university was greeted with consternation and considered by many Cantabrigians as " a disgrace to the Club " . Morrison had also coached Oxford six times previously . Oxford 's coach was Frank Willan , who had rowed in four victories for the Dark Blues between the 1866 and the 1869 race . He also rowed for Oxford against Harvard University in 1869 . The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The two sets of rowers averaged the same weight , at 11 st 13 @.@ 25 lb ( 75 @.@ 7 kg ) each . Oxford 's crew contained four Blues , two of whom ( S. D. Darbishire and W. D. Benson ) were rowing in their third consecutive race . Similarly , Cambridge saw four of the 1869 crew return including the Cambridge University Boat Club president John Goldie and John Dale . 
 = = Race = = 
 According to Drinkwater , despite Oxford being " manifestly the weaker crew " , they were pre @-@ race favourites based on their " prestige " . A report in The Graphic noted that only two steamers were present , following the race , one carrying the umpire , the other to transport the Edward , Prince of Wales ( who later became King Edward VII ) and the Francis , Prince of Teck amongst others . 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Cambridge took an early lead even though their stroke rate was lower than that of the Dark Blues , and led by three @-@ quarters of a length by the time the crews shot Hammersmith Bridge . Oxford stayed in touch for the next 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) but following a spurt , they almost levelled the race by Chiswick Eyot . Cambridge 's stroke John Goldie led a surge to pull back ahead of Oxford , and despite their best efforts , Oxford could not recover . Cambridge won by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 22 minutes 4 seconds . The victory was Cambridge 's first since the 1860 race , and brought the overall record to 16 – 11 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Marco Kartodikromo = 
 Marco Kartodikromo ( 1890 – 18 March 1932 ) , also known by his pen name Mas Marco , was an Indonesian journalist and writer . 
 Born to a low @-@ ranking priyayi ( noble ) family in Blora , Dutch East Indies , Kartodikromo 's first employment was with the national railway . Disgusted by the racism shown there , in 1911 he moved to Bandung and found work as a journalist for Medan <unk> . The following year he moved to Surakarta and worked with two publications , Saro Tomo and Doenia Bergerak ; he soon began to write pieces critical against the Dutch colonial government , which led to his arrest . After a period as a correspondent in the Netherlands , Kartodikromo continued his journalism and critique of the government ; he also wrote several pieces of fiction . Involved with the Communist Party of Indonesia , after a 1926 communist @-@ led revolt Kartodikromo was exiled to Boven @-@ Digoel prison camp in Papua . He died in the camp of malaria in 1932 . 
 Kartodikromo , who preferred writing in Malay , experimented with new <unk> at a time when the state @-@ owned publisher Balai Pustaka was attempting to standardise the language . According to literary critic Bakri Siregar , he was the first Indonesian writer to openly criticise the Dutch colonial government and the traditional form of feudalism practised in the country . For this vocal criticism , the Dutch government decried him as a " crazy " man who could spark unrest among the native populations . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Kartodikromo was born in Blora , Central Java , Dutch East Indies , in 1890 to a low @-@ ranking priyayi ( noble ) family . At the age of fifteen , he took up a job at the Nederlandsch @-@ Indische <unk> , the national railway company of the Indies , in Semarang . In 1911 he chose to leave the company as he was disgusted by its racist policies , including the use of race as a basis for the amount paid in wages . 
 Kartodikromo made his way to Bandung , West Java , where he found employment at Medan <unk> , a newspaper run by <unk> <unk> <unk> . When the paper was closed by the Dutch , in 1912 Kartodikromo went to Surakarta . There , he joined Sarekat Islam , an organisation of Muslim merchants , and found employment at the Sarekat Islam @-@ backed weekly Saro Tomo . In 1914 he took lead of the magazine Doenia Bergerak . The paper was the mouthpiece of the Native Indonesian Journalists ' Group ( <unk> Journalisten Bond ) , which Kartodikromo led and had helped establish with <unk> <unk> and <unk> . That same year , he published the three @-@ volume work Mata <unk> ( Dark Eyes ) ; this led to a long polemic between Doenia Bergerak and the Chinese @-@ owned Tjoen <unk> in Surabaya due to perceived racism . 
 While with Doenia Bergerak , Kartodikromo wrote an attack on the Dutch Advisor on Native Affairs R.A. <unk> ; in his editorial , he wrote that the Dutch loved themselves far more than the natives they were subjugating . On 26 January 1915 , Kartodikromo came under investigation by the Justice Office of the Dutch East Indies for publishing several further anti @-@ Dutch editorials . The journalist unsuccessfully attempted to raise money to protest this at the Dutch parliament in The Hague . He was convicted of revolutionary activity and sentenced to nine months at <unk> Prison ; however , due to public outcry he was released after 100 days . When Doenia Bergerak went bankrupt , <unk> then headed the Saro Tomo . 
 = = = Further career , exile , and death = = = 
 Kartodikromo was soon chosen by Goenawan , chief editor of the daily <unk> Warta , to go to the Netherlands as a correspondent . In his five months there at the end of 1916 and beginning of 1917 , the journalist published <unk> <unk> Jang Pertama ( The First Publication Book ) . After his return to Indonesia , he became an editor for <unk> Warta and based himself in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) . Within a month he was imprisoned again for his writing . 
 On 21 February 1918 Kartodikromo was released from prison . He moved to Semarang and became a commissioner of the Sarekat Islam with <unk> ; he also joined the newspaper Sinar <unk> ( later Sinar Hindia ) . In a conference that year , Kartodikromo stated that there were two kinds of press in Indonesia : the " black press " ( pers item ) , which struggled against the imperialistic Dutch ; and the " white press " ( pers <unk> ) , which worked to subjugate the Indonesian people . 
 In 1918 he published Student Hidjo ( Student Green ) , which told of a young Indonesian student who falls in love while studying in the Netherlands despite already having a fiancée in Indonesia . The work , originally published as a serial , was novelised in 1919 . Also in 1918 he published a collection of poems , Sair @-@ sair <unk> ( Poems on Spices ) . 
 Kartodikromo published another novel , <unk> , in 1919 . It was based on the life of the Dutch spy Mata Hari . On 15 December 1919 , Kartodikromo left Sinar Hindia and took a position as head of <unk> <unk> , published by the Forestry Union Staff Union <unk> <unk> . He was imprisoned for six months for one of his writings , <unk> <unk> ( <unk> 's Poem ) , with the paper . In 1921 Kartodikromo moved to Salatiga and became involved with the press there . He was sentenced to two years in a Batavian prison for another of his writings . 
 In 1924 , Kartodikromo published Rasa Merdika ( A Sense of Independence ) , which dealt with a young man who goes against his priyayi father , a tool of the Dutch colonial government , and tries to find personal independence . Another novel , <unk> Buah <unk> ( Mirror of the Fruit of Royalty ) , and stage play , Kromo Bergerak ( Kromo is Moving ) , were published not long after . 
 Kartodikromo was exiled to Boven @-@ Digoel , Papua , in 1926 for his writings and involvement in the 1926 revolt led by the Communist Party of Indonesia . He died there of malaria on 18 March 1932 . 
 = = Themes and styles = = 
 Most of Kartodikromo 's fictional works took place in Bandung or Surabaya . He was an early Indonesian example of the social realist movement . Like most nationalist writers at the time , Kartodikromo preferred writing in Malay ( the predecessor of modern Indonesian ) rather than his native Javanese ; however , he did write several pieces in Javanese . While the state @-@ owned publisher Balai Pustaka was attempting to standardise Malay , Kartodikromo experimented with the language , using words , phrases , and scenes which had never before been used . 
 Socialist literary critic Bakri Siregar writes that Kartodikromo drew on his experiences while visiting the Netherlands in writing <unk> Hidjo . He also writes that , unlike writers published by Balai Pustaka , Kartodikromo was heavily against the " white superiority " which the Dutch impressed upon native Indonesians ; this was achieved through showcasing the " depravity of bourgeois morals and the Dutch colonials . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Due to his vocal criticism of the Dutch , the East Indies government banned Kartodikromo 's books several times . In response to his critiques in Doenia Bergerak , they described him as a " crazy " man who could spark unrest among the native populations . Kartodikromo himself enjoyed baiting the colonial government , reportedly inviting his readers to work together and criticise the Dutch for their " mismanagement and caprice " . 
 Siregar described Kartodikromo as the first Indonesian writer to openly criticise the Dutch colonial government and the traditional form of feudalism practised in the country ; he also notes that the writer was the first Indonesian to consciously depict class struggles in his works . As Siregar considered Indonesian literature to have been born from a nationalist understanding , he considered Marco one of the first truly Indonesian writers . 
 Hendrik Maier , a lecturer at Leiden University , writes that Kartodikromo was " primarily inspired by dreams and ideals " , noting that the writer intended to create a community of politically aware Indonesians to work against the colonial government in solidarity and equality . Kartodikromo described his ideal political state as having " sama rata sama rasa " ( " the same standards , the same feelings " ) . 
 = = Works = = 
 Mata <unk> ( Dark Eyes ; 1914 ; novel in three volumes ) 
 Sair @-@ sair <unk> ( Poems on Spices ; 1918 ; poetry anthology ) 
 Student Hidjo ( Student Green ; 1918 ; novel ) 
 Rasa Merdika ( A Sense of Independence ; 1924 ; novel ) 
 <unk> Buah <unk> ( Mirror of the Fruit of Royalty ; 1924 ; novel ) 
 Kromo Bergerak ( Kromo is Moving ; 1924 ; stage play ) 
 = Sharptooth houndshark = 
 The sharptooth houndshark , or spotted gully shark ( Triakis <unk> ) , is a species of houndshark , belonging to the family Triakidae , found in shallow inshore waters from southern Angola to South Africa . Favoring sandy areas near rocky reefs and gullies , it is an active @-@ swimming species that usually stays close to the bottom . This robust shark reaches 1 @.@ 7 m ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) in length and has characteristically large , rounded fins ; the pectoral fins in particular are broad and sickle @-@ shaped in adults . It also has a short , blunt snout and long furrows around its mouth . This species is gray or bronze in color above , with variable amounts of black spotting . 
 Mainly active at night , the sharptooth houndshark feeds mostly on crustaceans , bony fishes , and cephalopods . It has been observed gathering in groups in shallow water during summertime , possibly for reproductive purposes . This species is aplacental viviparous , meaning that the unborn young are sustained mainly by yolk . Females give birth to 6 – 12 pups between late May and August , on a two- or three @-@ year cycle . The sharptooth houndshark is often hooked by recreational anglers , and some are also captured on commercial bottom longlines . Because of its small range , its low growth and reproductive rates , it is very vulnerable to overfishing . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has therefore listed this species as Near Threatened . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Scottish zoologist Andrew Smith originally described the sharptooth houndshark as a species of Mustelus in 1839 , as part of his work Illustrations of the Zoology of South Africa . His account was based on two specimens caught off the Cape of Good Hope , South Africa . Smith named the shark <unk> , from the Greek mega ( " large " ) and pteron ( " wing " ) , referring to its large fins . Another common name for this shark is " sweet William " . 
 Later authors have reassigned the sharptooth houndshark to the genus Triakis , more specifically to the subgenus Cazon alongside the <unk> houndshark ( T. <unk> ) and the spotted houndshark ( T. maculata ) . A 2006 phylogenetic study by J. Andrés López and colleagues , based on four protein @-@ coding gene sequences , found that this species did not group with the leopard shark ( T. semifasciata ) . Instead , it and the <unk> houndshark ( <unk> <unk> ) formed a clade within the Mustelus lineage . This result suggests that the two subgenera of Triakis — Cazon and Triakis — may not be closely related , which would warrant a redefinition of the genus . 
 = = Description = = 
 The sharptooth houndshark is a stout @-@ bodied species with a short , thick , and blunt snout . The nostrils are widely spaced and preceded by lobe @-@ like flaps of skin that do not reach the mouth . The horizontally oval eyes have ridges underneath and are equipped with nictitating membranes . The large mouth bears long , deep furrows at the corners , with those on the lower jaw almost meeting in the middle . The teeth are small and tightly packed to form pavement @-@ like surfaces . Each tooth has a rounded , molar @-@ like base that rises to a sharp , upright central cusp ; rarely , a pair of barely developed lateral cusplets may also be present . There are five pairs of gill slits . 
 The fins are distinctively large and rounded at the tips . The pectoral fins of adults are broad and falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) . The dorsal fins have nearly vertical trailing margins , with the first originating over the pectoral fin rear tips . The second dorsal fin is about three @-@ quarters as high as the first . The anal fin is much smaller than the second dorsal fin and originates well behind it . The short , thick caudal peduncle lacks notches at the caudal fin origins . The caudal fin has a small but well @-@ defined lower lobe and a longer upper lobe with a ventral notch near the tip . The skin is often loose . This species is dark gray to bronze above and white below . Young sharks are mostly unmarked , while adults vary from plain to densely covered with irregular black spots . It may reach 1 @.@ 7 m ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) in length and 40 kg ( 88 lb ) in weight . Females grow larger than males . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The range of the sharptooth houndshark is limited to the coastal waters of southern Africa , from southern Angola to the Eastern Cape ( or rarely KwaZulu @-@ Natal ) in South Africa . This locally common species inhabits sandy habitats such as bays ; it can be found from the surf zone to a depth of 50 m ( 160 ft ) , but the majority are found no deeper than 10 m ( 33 ft ) . It generally swims just barely above the bottom , favoring flat areas near rocky reefs or gullies , and seldom rises into open water . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The sharptooth houndshark is a highly active species , though it can sometimes be found resting inside rocky crevices . It mainly hunts at night and has been known to pursue prey almost onto the shore . The pointed cusps of its teeth allow it to grasp slippery prey , while their broad bases allow it to crush hard @-@ shelled prey . This shark feeds on a variety of crustaceans ( crabs , slipper lobsters , and spiny lobsters ) , bony fishes ( including <unk> , sea catfishes , drums , and porgies ) , and cephalopods ( in particular Octopus vulgaris ) . Sharks and rays ( including catsharks and guitarfishes ) and their egg capsules are a minor food source for larger individuals . Off South Africa , the most important prey species is the crab <unk> <unk> . Its dietary composition changes with age : young sharks under 1 @.@ 0 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long subsist almost completely on crabs , while larger sharks consume more bony fishes and cephalopods , as well as a greater variety of prey overall . This shark has been observed deviating from its nocturnal habits to feed on chokka squid ( Loligo <unk> ) during their mass spawnings . The broadnose sevengill shark ( Notorynchus cepedianus ) is known to prey on this species . 
 During the summer , the sharptooth houndshark forms groups in shallow water . These aggregations are particularly well @-@ documented in False Bay and may be related to reproduction , given the presence of many pregnant females . It is aplacental viviparous , with the developing embryos nourished mainly by yolk . Mature females have a single functional ovary and two functional uteruses . Litters of 6 – 12 pups are birthed between late May and August , following a gestation period of some 20 months . Larger females tend to produce larger litters . The length at birth has been variously estimated as 30 – 32 cm ( 12 – 13 in ) and 42 – 44 cm ( 17 – 17 in ) by different sources ; pups within a single litter may vary in size by up to 30 % . Females apparently reproduce either every two years or every three years , depending on whether she has ovarian eggs developing during the pregnancy that would allow her to mate again within a few months of giving birth . The sharptooth houndshark is a slow @-@ growing species , with both sexes following a similar growth pattern . Males mature sexually at 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 4 m ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 6 ft ) long and 11 – 13 years of age , while females mature sexually at 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 3 – 4 @.@ 9 ft ) long and 15 – 16 years of age . The maximum lifespan is at least 25 years . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless to humans , the sharptooth houndshark adapts well to captivity and has been displayed in public aquariums . It is frequently caught by recreational anglers from shore or ski @-@ boats ; it is edible but rarely eaten . Small numbers are also caught incidentally by a commercial demersal longline fishery targeting the school shark ( <unk> galeus ) in the Gansbaai and False Bay region . The meat from sharks caught in the fishery is either made into biltong or jerky and sold locally , or exported fresh or frozen to Italy and Taiwan . Although in South Africa the sharptooth houndshark is listed as a noncommercial species and thus cannot be harvested commercially , it is often mistaken for the common smooth @-@ hound ( Mustelus <unk> ) by fishers . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the sharptooth houndshark as Near Threatened . This species is highly susceptible to even moderate levels of fishing pressure , due to its restricted range , slow growth rate , and low fecundity . The fact that most sharks caught by fishers are immature is an additional source of concern . 
 = 1933 Cuba – Brownsville hurricane = 
 The 1933 Cuba – Brownsville hurricane was one of two storms in the 1933 Atlantic hurricane season to reach the intensity of a Category 5 strength on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . It formed on August 22 off the west coast of Africa , and for much of its duration it maintained a west @-@ northwest track . The system intensified into a tropical storm on August 26 and into a hurricane on August 28 . Passing north of the Lesser Antilles , the hurricane rapidly intensified as it approached the Turks and Caicos islands . It reached Category 5 status and its peak winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) on August 31 . Subsequently , it weakened before striking northern Cuba on September 1 with winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . In the country , the hurricane left about 100 @,@ 000 people homeless and killed over 70 people . Damage was heaviest near the storm 's path , and the strong winds destroyed houses and left areas without power . Damage was estimated at $ 11 million . 
 After exiting from Cuba , the hurricane entered the Gulf of Mexico and restrengthened . On September 2 , it re @-@ attained winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) . Initially the hurricane posed a threat to the area around Corpus Christi , Texas , and the local United States Weather Bureau forecaster advised people to stay away from the Texas coastline during the busy Labor Day Weekend . Officials declared martial law in the city and mandated evacuations . However , the hurricane turned more to the west and struck near Brownsville early on September 5 with winds estimated at 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . It quickly dissipated after causing heavy damage in the Rio Grande Valley . High winds caused heavy damage to the citrus crop . The hurricane left $ 16 @.@ 9 million in damage and 40 deaths in southern Texas . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of the hurricane were from a tropical disturbance near the west coast of Africa on August 20 . Two days later , the system organized enough to be classified a tropical depression just southwest of Cape Verde . For the next few days , the system moved west @-@ northwestward with little change in intensity . It is estimated the depression strengthened into a tropical storm on August 26 , about halfway between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde . Initially , the storm was elongated , although beginning on August 28 it began to intensify more quickly . That night , the storm attained hurricane status , and many nearby ships reported gale force winds . 
 On August 29 , the hurricane passed north of the Lesser Antilles as it approached the southeastern Bahamas . It underwent rapid deepening : in a 24 ‑ hour period beginning late on August 29 , the winds increased from 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) to 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) . It also became a small storm , as Grand Turk Island reported winds of 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) while the hurricane passed slightly to the north on August 30 . At 0130 UTC the next day , a ship near Mayaguana reported a barometric pressure of 930 mbar ( 27 inHg ) and hurricane @-@ force winds . The pressure would ordinarily suggest winds of 152 mph ( 245 km / h ) , but because it was not reported in the eye and the storm was smaller than normal , the winds were estimated at 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) . The hurricane 's winds rank as a Category 5 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , one of two such storms in the 1933 season . 
 After maintaining peak winds for about 12 hours , the hurricane began weakening as it passed through the southern Bahamas . At around 1200 UTC on September 1 , the hurricane made landfall on northern Cuba near Sagua La Grande , with winds of about 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . The eye moved along the northern coast of Cuba , crossing over Matanzas . Shortly thereafter the storm exited into the Straits of Florida , and late on September 1 the hurricane passed about 16 mi ( 26 km ) north of Havana . After entering the Gulf of Mexico , the hurricane restrengthened , and a ship reported a pressure of 948 mbar ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) late on September 2 ; this suggested winds of about 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) . The hurricane turned more to the west on September 3 , and as it approached southern Texas it weakened slightly as it decelerated . At 0400 UTC on September 5 , the hurricane made its final landfall on South Padre Island in southern Texas , with winds estimated at 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . It quickly weakened over land as it crossed into northeastern Mexico , and the storm dissipated late on September 5 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Throughout its path , the hurricane killed at least 179 people collectively in the Turks and Caicos Islands , Cuba , and south Texas . It first affected the Turks and Caicos , producing winds of 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) on Grand Turk . 
 Before the hurricane struck Cuba , officials warned of the impending storm , and military workers warned people to remain indoors . About 4 @,@ 000 people evacuated the coastal town of Isabela on three trains specifically run for the residents . In Havana , business owners secured their properties in anticipation of the storm . Most of the deaths from the hurricane occurred in northern Cuba . Winds of over 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) affected the coastline , and Havana reported maximum winds of 94 mph ( 151 km / h ) . There , the winds downed power lines and uprooted trees . High waves flooded six blocks of the city with up to 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water , entering the cellars of some homes . East of Havana in Cárdenas , high waves destroyed the aqueduct , while high winds severely damaged the local sugar industry . A nearby coastal town 20 mi ( 32 km ) east of Cárdenas was described as being " virtually leveled by the storm " in news reports . In Cienfuegos along the southern coast , the hurricane destroyed many ships and piers . High waves washed four ships ashore , one of which damaged another ship . High winds destroyed hundreds of houses and damaged many others along the storm 's path . About 100 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , many of whom lacking food or medical supplies . In the interior of the country , the hurricane dropped rainfall that flooded rivers and towns . Damage was estimated at $ 11 million , and a report published in 2003 indicated that there were about 70 deaths in the country ; however , newspaper accounts from shortly after the hurricane indicated there were around 100 deaths . After the storm , police officers were deployed to maintain order . Officers shot and killed five people caught looting in Havana , although the deaths were not included in the overall death toll . Officials deployed trucks to pick up wounded citizens . 
 While the hurricane was over the Bahamas late on August 30 , the United States Weather Bureau issued storm warnings for southern Florida . Two days later , the storm struck Cuba and passed south of the state , producing peak winds of 42 mph ( 68 km / h ) in Key West . The winds caused little damage ; however , high waves destroyed a sea wall and washed onto a coastal roadway . High waves also sank a boat , killing three people . 
 Three days before the hurricane made its final landfall , officials at the Weather Bureau in Brownsville issued a warning to all stations along the Texas coast , declaring that it was " uncertain where tropical storm in Gulf will reach coast line , but all persons should be warned to remain away from inaccessible places on Texas coast over week end . " The early warning was to prevent travelers from being on the Texas beaches on Labor Day Weekend . As a result , an official at the Corpus Christi Weather Bureau office estimated that the warning " probably saved thousands of lives . " Early on September 4 about a day before landfall , the Weather Bureau issued a hurricane warning from Corpus Christi to Freeport and storm warnings for other locations along the Texas coast . When the storm 's westward motion became more apparent , the hurricane warning was dropped north of Corpus Christi and extended southward to Brownsville . Officials in Corpus Christi declared martial law before the storm struck and ordered mandatory evacuations of low @-@ lying areas . Shelters opened in the city , and many businesses closed . 
 When the storm moved across the area , winds were estimated at 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) in Brownsville , with gusts to 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) . High tides were reported along the coast , and the storm surge reached 13 ft ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) near Brownsville . The tides flooded portions of Corpus Christi about 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) deep , sinking boats and damaging piers . Storm @-@ generated waves destroyed 20 buildings in one settlement . The storm destroyed the causeway from Padre Island to Flour Bluff , and there were over 40 breaches in the island , some up to a mile wide . The storm dropped heavy rainfall from southern Texas through northeastern Mexico , peaking at over 15 @.@ 0 in ( 380 mm ) at a station near Mercedes ; the total was one of four 24 ‑ hour precipitation records set by the storm . The rains from the storm and two previous hurricanes led to a large increase in tropical butterfly species across the area . Throughout the Rio Grande Valley , the strong winds destroyed about 90 % of the citrus crop . Overall , the hurricane left $ 16 @.@ 9 million in damage and 40 deaths , mostly in Cameron County . However , none of the deaths were in Brownsville or Corpus Christi , which was credited to the advance warning . Damage was less than expected in Corpus Christi , and many business owners who lost revenue sent letters of outcry to the Weather Bureau Headquarters ; however , the Bureau determined that the evacuations and warnings were warranted given the storm 's threat . 
 = Tom Swift = 
 Tom Swift is the main character of five series of American juvenile science fiction and adventure novels that emphasize science , invention and technology . First published in 1910 , the series total more than 100 volumes . The character was created by Edward Stratemeyer , the founder of the Stratemeyer Syndicate , a book @-@ packaging firm . Tom 's adventures have been written by various ghostwriters , beginning with Howard Garis . Most of the books are credited to the collective pseudonym " Victor Appleton " . The 33 volumes of the second series use the pseudonym Victor Appleton II for the author . For this series , and some of the later series , the main character is " Tom Swift , Jr . " New titles have been published as recently as 2007 . Most of the various series emphasized Tom 's inventions . The books generally describe the effects of science and technology as wholly beneficial , and the role of the inventor in society as admirable and heroic . 
 Translated into many languages , the books have sold more than 30 million copies worldwide . Tom Swift has also been the subject of a board game and a television series . 
 Several famous people , including Steve Wozniak and Isaac Asimov , have cited " Tom Swift " as an inspiration . Several inventions , including the Taser , have been inspired allegedly by Swift 's fictional inventions . " <unk> " is said to be an acronym for " Thomas A. Swift 's Electric Rifle . " 
 = = Inventions = = 
 In his various incarnations , Tom Swift , usually a teenager , is inventive and science @-@ minded , " Swift by name and swift by nature . " Tom is portrayed as a natural genius . In the earlier series , he is said to have had little formal education , the character modeled originally after such inventors as Henry Ford , Thomas Edison , and aviation pioneer Glenn Curtiss . For most of the five series , each book concerns Tom 's latest invention , and its role either in solving a problem or mystery , or in assisting Tom in feats of exploration or rescue . Often Tom must protect his new invention from villains " intent on stealing Tom 's thunder or preventing his success , " but Tom is always successful in the end . 
 Many of Tom Swift 's fictional inventions described actual technological developments . Tom Swift Among the Diamond Makers ( 1911 ) was based on Charles Parsons 's attempts to synthesize diamonds using electric current . Tom Swift and His Photo Telephone was published in 1912 . One source claims the process for sending photographs by telephone was not developed until 1925 . However , the first commercial wired <unk> service was established in 1865 , more than a decade before the invention of the telephone . Tom Swift and His Wizard Camera ( 1912 ) features a portable movie camera , not invented until 1923 according to one source . However , many early movie cameras were portable by one man , and a hand @-@ held home movie camera for semi @-@ professional work was designed in 1921 by Emanuel Goldberg . One source mentions Tom Swift and His Electric Locomotive ( 1922 ) was published two years before the Central Railroad of New Jersey began using the first diesel electric locomotive ; however , the book refers to a purely electrical locomotive powered from overhead lines , of the sort that began regular service during the late 19th century . The house on wheels that Tom invents for 1929 's Tom Swift and His House on Wheels pre @-@ dated the first house trailer by a year , but post @-@ dates the widespread use of Romany caravans for living by about a century . Tom Swift and His Diving Seacopter ( 1952 ) features a flying submarine similar to one planned by the United States Department of Defense four years later in 1956 , but this book was published more than a decade after the Soviet flying submarine project began and nearly 50 years after Jules Verne 's 1904 novel Master of the World featured a flying submarine . Other inventions of Tom 's have not happened , such as the device for silencing airplane engines that he invents in Tom Swift and His Magnetic Silencer ( 1941 ) . In any case , technical ideas are often described speculatively by newspapers and magazines for many years prior to commercial realization . 
 = = Authorship = = 
 The character of Tom Swift was conceived about 1910 by Edward Stratemeyer , founder of the Stratemeyer Syndicate , a book @-@ packaging business , although the name " Tom Swift " was first used in 1903 by Stratemeyer in <unk> Tom the Reporter ; Or , the Exploits of a Bright Boy . Stratemeyer invented the series to capitalize on the market for children 's science adventure . The Syndicate 's authors created the Tom Swift stories by first preparing an outline with the plot elements , followed by drafting and editing the detailed manuscript . The books were published using the house pseudonym " Victor Appleton " . Edward Stratemeyer and Howard Garis wrote most of the volumes of the original series ; Stratemeyer 's daughter , Harriet Stratemeyer Adams , wrote the last three volumes . The first Tom Swift series ended 1941 . 
 In 1954 , Harriet Adams created the Tom Swift , Jr. series , which was published using the pseudonym " Victor Appleton II " as author . The main character Tom Swift , Junior , was described as the son of the original Tom Swift . Most of the stories were outlined and plotted by Adams . The texts were written by various writers , among them William Dougherty , John <unk> , Richard Sklar , James Duncan Lawrence , Tom Mulvey and Richard McKenna . The Tom Swift , Jr . , series ended in 1971 . 
 A third series was begun in 1981 and lasted until 1984 . The rights to the Tom Swift character , along with the Stratemeyer Syndicate , were sold in 1984 to publishers Simon & Schuster . They hired New York City book packaging business Mega @-@ Books to produce further series . Simon & Schuster produced two other Tom Swift series : one , published from 1991 to 1993 , and the Tom Swift , Young Inventor series , begun in 2006 . 
 = = Series = = 
 The longest @-@ running series of books to feature Tom Swift is the first , which consists of forty volumes . Tom Swift ( technically Tom Swift , Jr . ) was also the name of the protagonist of the 33 volumes of the Tom Swift , Jr . Adventures , the 11 volumes of the third Tom Swift series , the 13 volumes of the fourth , and a half @-@ dozen more for the most recent series , Tom Swift , Young Inventor , for a total of 103 volumes for all the series . In addition to publication in the United States , Tom Swift books have been published extensively in England , and translated into Norwegian , French , Icelandic , and Finnish . 
 = = = Original series ( 1910 – 1941 ) = = = 
 In the original series , Tom Swift lives in fictional Shopton , New York . He is the son of Barton Swift , the founder of the Swift Construction Company . Tom 's mother is deceased , but the housekeeper , Mrs. <unk> , functions as a surrogate mother . Tom usually shares his adventures with close friend Ned Newton , who eventually becomes the Swift Construction Company 's financial manager . For most of the series , Tom dates Mary Nestor . It has been suggested that his eventual marriage to Mary led to the series ' demise , as young boys found a married man harder to identify with than a young , single one ; however , after the 1929 marriage the series continued for 12 more years and eight further volumes . Regularly appearing characters include Wakefield Damon , an older man , whose dialogue is characterized by frequent use of such whimsical expressions as " Bless my <unk> ! " and " Bless my vest buttons ! " 
 The original Tom Swift has been claimed to represent the early 20th @-@ century conception of inventors . Tom has no formal education after high school ; according to critic Robert Von der Osten , Tom 's ability to invent is presented as " somehow innate " . Tom is not a theorist but a tinkerer and , later , an experimenter who , with his research team , finds practical applications for others ' research ; Tom does not so much methodically develop and perfect inventions as find them by trial and error . 
 Tom 's inventions are not at first innovative . In the first two books of the series , he fixes a motorcycle and a boat , and in the third book he develops an airship , but only with the help of a balloonist . Tom is also at times unsure of himself , asking his elders for help ; as Von der Osten puts it , " the early Tom Swift is more dependent on his father and other adults at first and is much more hesitant in his actions . When his airship bangs into a tower , Tom is uncharacteristically nonplussed and needs support . " However , as the series progresses , Tom 's inventions " show an increasingly independent genius as he develops devices , such as an electric rifle and a photo telephone , further removed from the scientific norm " . Some of Tom 's inventions are improvements of then @-@ current technologies , while other inventions were not in development at the time the books were published , but have since been developed . 
 = = = Second series ( 1954 – 1971 ) = = = 
 In this series , presented as an extension and continuation of the first , the Tom Swift of the original series is now the CEO of Swift Enterprises , a four @-@ mile @-@ square enclosed facility where inventions are conceived and manufactured . Tom 's son , Tom Swift , Jr . , is now the primary inventive genius of the family . Stratemeyer Syndicate employee Andrew Svenson described the new series as based " on scientific fact and probability , whereas the old Toms were in the main adventure stories mixed with pseudo @-@ science " . Three Ph.D.s in science were hired as consultants to the series to ensure scientific accuracy . The younger Tom does not tinker with motorcycles ; his inventions and adventures extend from deep within the Earth ( in Tom Swift and His Atomic Earth Blaster [ 1954 ] ) to the bottom of the ocean ( in Tom Swift and His Diving Seacopter [ 1956 ] ) to the moon ( in Tom Swift and the Race to Moon [ 1958 ] ) and , eventually , the outer solar system ( in Tom Swift and His Cosmotron Express [ 1970 ] ) . Later volumes of the series increasingly emphasized the extraterrestrial " space friends " , as they are termed throughout the series . The beings appear as early as the first volume of the series , Tom Swift and His Flying Lab ( 1954 ) . The Tom Swift , Jr . , Adventures were less commercially successful than the first series , selling 6 million copies total , compared with sales of 14 million copies for the first series . 
 In contrast to the earlier series , many of Tom Jr . ' s inventions are designed to operate in space , and his " genius is unequivocally original as he constructs nuclear @-@ powered flying labs , establishes outposts in space , or designs ways to sail in space on cosmic rays " . Unlike his father , Tom Jr. is not just a tinkerer ; he relies on scientific and mathematical theories , and , according to critic Robert Von der Osten , " science [ in the books ] is , in fact , understood to be a set of theories that are developed based on experimentation and scientific discussion . Rather than being opposed to technological advances , such a theoretical understanding becomes essential to invention . " 
 Tom Swift , Jr . ' s Cold War @-@ era adventures and inventions are often motivated by patriotism , as Tom repeatedly defeats the evil agents of the fictional nations " <unk> " and " <unk> " , the latter a place that critic Francis Molson describes as " a vaguely Eastern European country , which is strongly opposed to the Swifts and the U.S. Hence , the Swifts ' opposition to and competition with the <unk> is both personal and patriotic . " 
 = = = Third series ( 1981 – 1984 ) = = = 
 The third Tom Swift series differs from the first two in that the setting is primarily outer space , although Swift Enterprises ( located now in New Mexico ) is occasionally mentioned . Tom Swift explores the universe in the starship <unk> , using a faster @-@ than @-@ light drive he has reverse @-@ engineered from an alien space probe . He is aided by Benjamin Franklin Walking Eagle , a Native American who is Tom 's co @-@ pilot , best friend , and an expert computer technician , and Anita Thorwald , a former rival of Tom 's who now works with him as a technician and whose right leg has been rebuilt to contain a miniature computer . 
 This series maintains only an occasional and vague continuity with the two previous series . Tom is called the son of " the great Tom Swift " and said to be " already an important and active contributor to the family business , the giant multimillion @-@ dollar scientific @-@ industrial complex known as Swift Enterprises " . However , as critic Francis Molson indicates , it is not explained whether this Tom Swift is the grandson of the famous Tom Swift of the first series or still the Tom Swift , Jr . , of the second . 
 The Tom Swift of this third series is less of an inventor than his predecessors , and his inventions are rarely the main feature of the plot . Still , according to Molson , " Tom the inventor is not ignored . Perhaps the most impressive of his inventions and the one essential to the series as a whole is the robot he designs and builds , Aristotle , which becomes a winning and likeable character in its own right . " The books are slower @-@ paced than the Tom Swift , Jr. adventures of the second series , and include realistic , colloquial dialogue . Each volume begins where the last one ended , and the technology is plausible and accurate . 
 = = = Fourth series ( 1991 – 1993 ) = = = 
 The fourth series featuring Tom Swift ( again a " Jr . " ) is set mostly on Earth ( with occasional voyages to the Moon ) ; Swift Enterprises is now located in California . In the first book , The Black Dragon , it 's mentioned that Tom is the son of Tom Swift Sr. and Mary Nestor . The books deal with what Richard Pyle describes as " modern and futuristic concepts " and , as in the third series , feature an ethnically diverse cast of characters . 
 Like the Tom Swift , Jr. series , the series portrays Tom as a scientist as well as an inventor whose inventions depend on a knowledge of theory . The series differs from previous versions of the character , however , in that Tom 's inventive genius is portrayed as problematic and sometimes dangerous . As Robert Von der Osten argues , Tom 's inventions for this series often have unexpected and negative repercussions . 
 a device to create a miniature black hole which casts him into an alternative universe ; a device that trains muscles but also distorts the mind of the user ; and a genetic process which , combined with the effect of his black hole , results in a terrifying devolution . Genius here begins to recapitulate earlier myths of the mad scientist whose technological and scientific ambitions are so out of harmony with nature and contemporary science that the results are usually unfortunate . 
 The series features more violence than previous series ; in The Negative Zone , Tom blows up a motel room to escape the authorities . 
 There was a derivative of this series featuring Tom Swift and the Hardy Boys called A Hardy Boys & Tom Swift Ultra Thriller that was published from 1992 to 1993 , and only had 2 volumes released . Both books dealt with science fictional topics ( time travel and aliens landing on earth ) . 
 = = = Fifth series ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 The fifth series , " Tom Swift , Young Inventor " , returns Tom Swift to Shopton , New York , with Tom as the son of Tom Swift and Mary Nestor , the names of characters of the original Tom Swift series . The series features inventions that are close to current technology " rather than ultra @-@ futuristic " . " Tom Swift , Young Inventor " , goes to the sea to test his new invention . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Parker Brothers produced a Tom Swift board game in 1966 , although it was never widely distributed , and the character has appeared in one television show . Various Tom Swift radio programs , television series , and movies were planned and even written , but were either never produced or not released . 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 As early as 1914 , Edward Stratemeyer proposed making a Tom Swift movie , but no such movie was made . A Tom Swift radio series was proposed in 1946 . Two scripts were written , but , for unknown reasons , the series was never produced . A television pilot show for a series to be called The Adventures of Tom Swift was filmed in 1958 , featuring Gary Vinson . However , legal problems prevented the pilot 's distribution , and it was never broadcast ; no copies of the pilot are known to exist , though the pilot script is available . Twentieth Century Fox planned a Tom Swift feature movie in 1968 , to be directed by Gene Kelly . A script was written and approved , and filming was to have begun during 1969 . However , the project was canceled owing to the poor reception of the movies Doctor Dolittle and Star ! ; a $ 500 @,@ 000 airship that had been built as a prop was sold to an amusement park . Yet another movie was planned in 1974 , but , again , was cancelled . Scripts were also written for a proposed television series involving both Tom Swift Jr. and his father , the hero of the original book series . Glen A. Larson wrote an unproduced television pilot show entitled " TS , I Love You : The Further Adventures of Tom Swift " in 1977 , as well . This series was to be combined with a Nancy Drew series , a Hardy Boys series , and a Dana Girls series . Nancy Drew and the Hardy Boys were eventually combined into a one @-@ hour program with alternating episodes . 
 A Tom Swift media project finally came to fruition in 1983 when Willie <unk> appeared as Tom Swift along with Lori Loughlin as Linda Craig in a television special , The Tom Swift and Linda Craig Mystery Hour , which was broadcast on July 3 . It was a ratings failure . In 2007 , digital studio Worldwide Biggies acquired movie rights to Tom <unk> and announced plans to release a feature film and video game , followed by a television series . As of 2015 , these plans had not come to fruition . 
 = = Claims of racism = = 
 It has been suggested that the book Tom Swift and His Electric Rifle contains heavy racism , depicting Africans as brutish , uncivilized animals , and the white protagonist as their paternal savior . 
 In the book , as in America today , the black people are rendered as either passive , simple and childlike , or animalistic and capable of unimaginable violence . They are described in the book at various points as " hideous in their savagery , wearing only the loin cloth , and with their kinky hair stuck full of sticks " , and as " wild , savage and ferocious ... like little red apes " . " 
 = = Cultural Influence = = 
 The Tom Swift books have been credited with assisting the success of American science fiction and with establishing the <unk> ( stories focusing on brilliant scientists and inventors ) as a basic cultural myth . Tom Swift 's adventures have been popular since the character 's inception in 1910 : by 1914 , 150 @,@ 000 copies a year were being sold and a 1929 study found the series to be second in popularity only to the Bible for boys in their early teens . By 2009 , Tom Swift books had sold more than 30 million copies worldwide . 
 The series ' writing style , which was sometimes adverb heavy , suggested a name for a type of adverbial pun promulgated during the 1950s and 1960s , a type of <unk> known as " Tom <unk> " . Originally this kind of pun was called a " Tom Swiftly " in reference to the adverbial usage , but over time has come to be called a " Tom <unk> . " Some examples are : " ' I lost my crutches , ' said Tom lamely " ; and " ' I 'll take the prisoner downstairs ' , said Tom condescendingly . " 
 Tom Swift 's fictional inventions have apparently inspired several actual inventions , among them Lee Felsenstein 's " Tom Swift Terminal " , which " drove the creation of an early personal computer known as the Sol " , and the taser . The name " taser " was originally " <unk> " , for " Tom Swift Electric Rifle " . The invention was named for the central device in the story Tom Swift and His Electric Rifle ( 1911 ) ; according to inventor Jack Cover , " an ' A ' was added because we got tired of answering the phone ' <unk> . ' " 
 A number of scientists , inventors , and science fiction writers have also credited Tom Swift with inspiring them , including Ray Kurzweil , Robert A. Heinlein , and Isaac Asimov . The Tom Swift , Jr. adventures were Steve Wozniak 's favorite reading as a boy and inspired him to become a scientist . According to Wozniak , reading the Tom Swift books made him feel " that engineers can save the world from all sorts of conflict and evil " . 
 Gone with the Wind author Margaret Mitchell said she read the series as a child . 
 = Nannygate = 
 " Nannygate " is a popular term for the 1993 revelations that caused two of President Bill Clinton 's choices for United States Attorney General to become derailed . 
 In January 1993 , Clinton 's nomination of corporate lawyer Zoë Baird for the position came under attack after it became known that she and her husband had broken the law by employing two illegal aliens from Peru as a nanny and chauffeur for their young child . They had also failed to pay Social Security taxes for the workers until shortly before the disclosures . While the Clinton administration thought the matter was relatively unimportant , the news elicited a firestorm of public opinion , most of it against Baird . Within eight days , her nomination lost political support in the U.S. Congress and was withdrawn . 
 The following month , Clinton 's choice of federal judge Kimba Wood for the job was leaked to the press , but within a day it became known that she too had employed an undocumented immigrants to look after her child . Although Wood had done so at a time when this was legal , and had paid Social Security taxes for the worker , the disclosures were enough to cause the immediate withdrawal of Wood from consideration . The Clinton administration then said that the hiring practices for household help would be examined for all of the more than thousand presidential appointments under consideration , causing the whole process to slow down significantly . Determined to choose a woman for the Attorney General post , Clinton finally selected state prosecutor Janet Reno , who was confirmed and served through all eight years of the administration . 
 The Nannygate matter caused wealthy Americans to ask each other if they too had a " Zoë Baird problem " , as the hiring of undocumented workers and the paying of household help off the books were both commonplace . Two fault lines , gender and class , were exposed in the discussion over Nannygate : in the former , a double standard was seen wherein female appointees faced a greater risk of being questioned and disqualified based upon their childcare arrangements , while in the latter , affluent professional women who could afford live @-@ in childcare arrangements were seen as trying to get away with an illegal act . Nannygate @-@ type controversies have subsequently affected other political appointees both in the U.S. and in other countries . 
 = = The Baird nomination = = 
 President @-@ elect Bill Clinton had vowed to assemble an administration that " looked like America " , and it was widely assumed that one of the major cabinet posts would go to a woman . In particular , he wanted to nominate one for the position of United States Attorney General , something women 's political action groups were also requesting . No woman had previously served in this post . His choice , whose nomination was announced on December 24 , 1992 , was Zoë Baird , a 40 @-@ year @-@ old senior vice president and general counsel at Aetna Life and Casualty Company who had previously worked in the Justice Department during the Carter administration . 
 Little known before the nomination ( Clinton had not met her until their interview ) , Baird was a skilled <unk> who had been the protégé of several powerful Washington insiders , including Clinton transition team leader Warren Christopher and once @-@ and @-@ future White House Counsel Lloyd Cutler . Picking Baird gave Clinton the ability to satisfy the women 's groups ' desires while still showing independence by not choosing one of their preferred selections . Despite the lack of familiarity and getting a lukewarm response from some Clinton backers – those in the legal public interest community said " Zoë who ? " and her corporate sympathies discouraged liberals – Baird was expected to gain confirmation in the U.S. Senate . Baird and her husband , Yale Law School professor Paul Gewirtz , had a three @-@ year @-@ old son . 
 On January 14 , 1993 , a page @-@ one story in The New York Times broke the news that Baird had hired a married pair of illegal aliens from Peru , Lillian and Victor Cordero , between 1990 and 1992 . The Peruvian woman served as the nanny for Baird 's son and the Peruvian man as a part @-@ time driver . Furthermore , Baird had not paid Social Security taxes for the couple , until making a lump @-@ sum payment earlier in January 1993 . Baird had brought forward this information willingly to transition officials and authorities performing background checks ; she said that she had thought that the fact that they were sponsoring the couple for citizenship made the hiring acceptable , and that they could not pay the taxes for people who were not yet in the country legally . ( Baird 's immigration lawyer would dispute some aspects of exactly when the sponsorship request took place . ) 
 This was the first time a presidential cabinet nominee had faced such an issue . While the Clinton transition team had found out about the matter during their vetting of Baird , they had underestimated the seriousness of its impact . Their attitude about Baird 's infraction was that it was a technical violation and that ' Everybody does it ' . Clinton operatives initially thought the Baird revelation was no big deal and would quickly lose the attention of the media and public . 
 Employment of illegal aliens was not uncommon at the time , but in Baird 's case it was especially bad public relations , since the Attorney General was in charge of the Immigration and Naturalization Service ( INS ) . Baird 's wealth – she made $ 500 @,@ 000 a year in her job and together with her husband had a combined income of $ 600 @,@ 000 – made her , in the context of the early 1990s recession , an unsympathetic figure to not be paying taxes . Moreover , Baird and Gewirtz had been wealthy enough to afford legal child care , but instead had paid the <unk> $ 250 a week plus board , well below minimum wage . The news brought about an immediate and large @-@ scale negative reaction . As Guardian U.S. correspondent Martin Walker later wrote , " [ Baird and Gewirtz ] were the overpaid yuppies and ubiquitous lawyers whom American voters had come to resent . " 
 On January 16 , Baird paid $ 2 @,@ 900 in fines for the infractions to the INS . This was on top of the $ 8 @,@ 000 in back Social Security taxes she had paid earlier . George Stephanopoulos , the transition communications director , said that " President @-@ elect Clinton has complete confidence in Zoë Baird . " 
 Some in the Clinton inner circle persisted in believing that Baird 's offense was akin to a traffic ticket in seriousness , but Democratic senators told them otherwise ; Senate Judiciary Committee chair Joe Biden of Delaware likened it more to a " freeway crash . " 
 Baird met with Biden twice , both times leaving his office in tears , although Biden publicly stated that he did not think the matter would prevent her nomination . Baird actually had more immediate support from ranking member Orrin Hatch , who called it " no big deal . " This reflected a considerable degree of Republican support for Baird , as they decided she was more in tune with their stance on some issues than a replacement would likely be . 
 Appearing before the Judiciary Committee on January 19 , Baird apologized for having knowingly broken the law : " In my hope to find appropriate child care for my son , I gave too little emphasis to what was described to me as a technical violation of law . " She added that , " People are fairly questioning if there are classes of individuals who hold themselves above the law . I do not . " Baird 's statement that her husband had handled many of the legal issues surrounding the <unk> ' employment drew little support for her . Overall , the questioning of Baird was tougher from Democrats on the committee than Republicans , again reflecting the latter 's support for Baird . At the close of the initial testimony , Baird 's confirmation still seemed quite possible . 
 As the inauguration of Bill Clinton took place on January 20 , the nomination crisis was reaching its final phase , with Biden telling Clinton at a luncheon following the ceremony that the next day or two would be crucial . But political and public opposition continued to mount . Calls opposing the nomination flooded the switchboards of members of Congress . Senator David Boren of Oklahoma reported getting a thousand calls to his office , with 80 percent of them against the nomination . Senator Paul Simon of Illinois also received a thousand calls . Senator Patrick Leahy of Vermont said , " In 18 years in the Senate , I had never seen so many telephone calls , spontaneously , in such a short period . " 
 Television crews staked out the New Haven home of Baird . As one top Senate official later stated , " There were phone calls to offices , local editorials . The people were just way ahead of us . " The issue created a firestorm on conservative talk radio , then emerging as a potent force in American politics . <unk> Rush Limbaugh was especially involved in the issue , for instance weighing in to say that Baird 's " blame @-@ it @-@ on @-@ the @-@ husband " defense was a " <unk> " ploy . A USA Today / CNN / Gallup poll showed that 63 percent of the American public did not think Baird should be confirmed ; the reaction was broad , with majorities of Republicans and Democrats , men and women , and young and old all opposing it . 
 Clinton faced a choice of either quickly jettisoning her , and risk appearing weak , or defiantly continuing to back her , and opposing a popular groundswell ; he opted to wait and see a little more . There was also much confusion about when exactly Clinton had learned of the Baird problem , with Christopher saying he had informed Clinton of it in some manner during the transition and Clinton saying he had not . This led to a " What did the President know and when did he know it " grilling of Stephanopoulos on January 21 during his first news conference as White House Communications Director . The treatment of Stephanopoulos got rough and his evasive answers bordered on nonsense . 
 A second round of Judiciary Committee hearings were also taking place on January 21 , and by then , Baird was politically isolated , with no major groups coming to her defense . A growing number of senators came out in opposition to Baird during the day , including two Republican members of the Judiciary Committee and influential centrist Democrats John Breaux of Louisiana and David Boren of Oklahoma . Baird gamely continued to smile and testify well into the evening , but as Stephanopoulos later wrote , " She didn 't know it yet , but she was toast . " Biden called Clinton and told him the nomination was lost . 
 On January 22 , 1993 , two days after Clinton had assumed the presidency , the White House announced in the middle of the night the withdrawal of Baird 's nomination . 
 Clinton now publicly stated that he had been informed of Baird 's hiring of the illegal aliens after discussing the position with her but before actually nominating her . He had not halted the process to gain all information but rather had erred by going through with the nomination in order to meet a self @-@ imposed Christmas deadline for naming his cabinet . On January 23 , Anna Quindlen used the term " Nannygate " in her syndicated column and it soon gained wide @-@ scale use . 
 While Lillian and Victor Cordero had done their jobs well ( before hiring them , Baird had made several attempts to employ U.S. citizens , but none had worked out ) , on January 22 the INS said it sought to question them and very likely deport them . The couple had previously separated and were about to be divorced . Lillian Cordero agreed to leave the country and return to Peru , under a 30 @-@ day " voluntary departure " program . Victor Cordero first went into hiding , hoping to stay in the country ; his lawyer said he had been in the wrong place at the wrong time and that , " He doesn 't understand why he 's being singled out . " But by January 29 , he too had voluntarily left the U.S. for Peru . Neither of them ever appeared in the media . Although illegal domestics were rarely deported unless they had been involved in crimes , the INS maintained that the couple were treated no differently than any other illegal aliens who were brought to their attention . 
 = = The Wood near @-@ nomination = = 
 On February 4 , 1993 , the Clinton White House made it known via deliberate background statements to several major newspapers that 49 @-@ year @-@ old United States federal judge Kimba Wood of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York would be his new choice for Attorney General . However , no official announcement or nomination was being made , pending the completion of background checks and to gauge reaction to the pick . White House officials indicated that First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton had insisted that the position still be filled by a woman . Wood , who was prominent in New York social circles , was married to Time magazine writer Michael Kramer and the couple had a six @-@ year @-@ old son . 
 However , later that day , investigations by the office of the White House Counsel and the FBI background check were completed , and Clinton and the White House learned that she had employed an illegal immigrant to look after her son , even though she had done it when it was still legal to do so . The immigrant , from Trinidad , had been hired in March 1986 , several months before enactment of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 made hiring of illegal aliens unlawful . The nanny obtained legal status in December 1987 , and overall worked for Wood for seven years . 
 Clinton decided the nomination could not go forward , and the next day , February 5 , Wood publicly withdrew herself from consideration . 
 The case was different from the Baird one in that Wood had not broken immigration law and had paid Social Security taxes for the person . Nevertheless , the White House feared reaction from Congress and the public , as well as that from radio and television talk shows , in the apparent , if not actual , repetition of the Baird controversy , and asked Wood to withdraw . A further burden was the disclosure that while she was a student in London , Wood had trained for five days as a Playboy bunny . The White House was annoyed with Wood , because they said that when they had initially asked her if she had a " Zoë Baird problem , " she had responded in the <unk> . Allies of Wood gave a starkly different account and said that she had been fully forthcoming about the details of her dealings with the immigrant . According to a Gallup Poll , 65 percent of the American public did not think Wood should have been forced down . 
 = = Other Clinton appointees = = 
 One of the few men to make the short list for the Attorney General selection , Washington lawyer Charles Ruff , was ruled out of consideration by the White House on February 6 , because he had not paid Social Security taxes for years for a woman who cleaned his house . 
 On February 8 , Stephanopoulos broadened the scope of the affair by announcing that the past hiring of an illegal alien would " probably be disqualifying " for applicants to any of the 1 @,@ 100 presidential appointments that were subject to confirmation by the Senate . As one White House official said , " If you ever knowingly hired an illegal alien , that 's a killer . If you hired someone who was legal but didn 't pay Social Security taxes , you 're probably O.K. , but only if you come clean and pay the back taxes . " 
 Several Clinton appointees then came forward . Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown said he had failed to pay the taxes for a maid . The Brown case attracted a fair amount of attention , with 40 percent of Americans thinking he should step down as a result ( he did not ) . Secretary of Transportation Federico Peña said he would pay back taxes owed for a part @-@ time babysitter . Other appointees said they had examined their records and were clean . Stephanopoulos himself came under attention , but said the cleaner he had hired was from a cleaning company . The matter resulted in a slowdown of hiring for all positions , in what Secretary of Defense Les Aspin called a " chilling effect " . One @-@ third of the nominations for the U.S. State Department were held up while being examined for the question . 
 Some other female Clinton cabinet @-@ level appointees escaped Nannygate by virtue of their personal circumstances . Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna Shalala was unmarried with no children , while Secretary of Energy Hazel O 'Leary and Ambassador to the United Nations Madeleine Albright had children that were grown . Carol Browner , Clinton 's pick for Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and someone who did have a young child , avoided Nannygate problems by simply never having used a nanny . 
 = = The Reno nomination = = 
 On February 11 , 1993 , Janet Reno was nominated for the post . Clinton had known of her since her days with the groundbreaking Miami Drug Court , where as state attorney she had worked with public defender and Clinton brother @-@ in @-@ law Hugh Rodham , but otherwise although qualified for the job had no federal experience and was relatively obscure . Reno was 54 years old , had never married and had no children , and , as Clinton later wrote , " Public service was her life . " Without the chance of a nanny problem , and with her mowing her own lawn reducing the chances for an immigrant problem , Reno was the perfect choice after the Baird and Wood failures . In addition , Reno 's down @-@ to @-@ earth image contrasted with the wealthy corporate lawyer Baird and the socially prominent Wood . ( Reno would instead face something often experienced by unmarried woman of her age , speculation about her sexual orientation . ) 
 In making the announcement , Clinton said that he had considered men for the post and that " I never felt hamstrung by any commitment , even though I did want to name a woman Attorney General . " When asked how he would have handled the selection were he to do it all over again , Clinton responded , " I would have called Janet Reno on November 5th . " 
 Reno was unanimously confirmed by the Senate on March 11 , 1993 , and thus became the first female Attorney General . 
 Reno remained Attorney General through both of Clinton 's terms as president . Wood remained a federal judge . While the ramifications of Nannygate persisted , Baird herself quickly returned to public obscurity . Clinton subsequently appointed Baird to the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board , and in his 2004 memoir reiterated that the fault for the failed nomination had been his , not hers . Baird hired an American citizen to be her next nanny . 
 = = Political and cultural impact = = 
 The Nannygate matter did some damage to the Clinton administration politically . A cover of Time magazine , featuring a half @-@ portrait of Baird , was titled " Clinton 's First Blunder " and subtitled " How a popular outcry caught the Washington elite by surprise " . The Baird nomination was emblematic of other difficulties Clinton had during the transition period and his early days in office , including most prominently the dropping of a promised middle @-@ class tax cut and resistance to his proposal to allow gays in the military . Stephanopoulos later wrote that " We should have never let the Baird nomination get as far as it did , but our systems failed us at every crucial step . " And the timing of the announcement of the Wood withdrawal detracted attention from the signing of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 , the first legislative achievement of the Clinton administration . While a Gallup Poll showed that only 22 percent of the public said that Clinton 's difficulties in naming someone for Attorney General decreased their confidence in his ability to lead the country , overall , Clinton experienced the highest disapproval ratings at the start of any presidency since such polling began . His " presidential honeymoon " period was thus extremely brief . 
 Clinton 's desire to appoint a woman to the post engendered some criticism for devaluing the position to an affirmative action post , and Stephanopoulos later conceded that " we put ourselves in a box " . The failure of the Baird and Wood picks , along with Lani <unk> 's failed nomination ( for unrelated reasons ) to Assistant Attorney General for Department of Justice Civil Rights Division a few months later , made Congressional Democrats cautious in endorsing future Clinton personnel choices . When federal judge Stephen Breyer was first considered for a U.S. Supreme Court vacancy in mid @-@ 1993 , he was not selected , in part because he too had a ' Zoë Baird problem ' ( he would be nominated and confirmed the following year , following another vacancy ) . 
 The Baird case became the first national scandal over child @-@ care arrangements , but the situation that these nominees faced was in part at least a common one to Americans . Two @-@ thirds of American women with school @-@ age children were in the workforce and three @-@ fifths of married men with children had working wives . They all needed some form of day care , and with there being no organized or subsidized day care system in the U.S. , many families turned to arrangements within the underground economy . That this administration ran into this problem was considered ironic , given that Bill and Hillary Clinton were the first dual @-@ career couple to occupy the White House . 
 Once the Nannygate matter broke into the news , the question " Do you have a Zoë Baird problem ? " became frequently asked by Americans of each other in casual conversation , with many answers being in the affirmative . U.S. Census Bureau and Internal Revenue Service data indicated that only one @-@ quarter of people who employed household help paid Social Security taxes to the workers , and that even figure may have been higher than the real one due to people not responding to surveys honestly . Most of those doing the hiring did not think about breaking the law or getting caught . 
 Meanwhile , Baird had graduated within a matter of hours from anonymity to dubious icon . One employment agency head who only hired legal household workers said , " You have no idea , the frustration , sitting here , knocking your head against the wall , trying to do what 's right . And then you have a Zoë Baird who exposes the fact that everybody else is breaking the law . " The phrase " to have a Zoë Baird problem " became rooted in the vocabulary of the American professional and political classes . 
 The matter exposed the practices of the barely underground economy of wealthy households and largely illegal immigrant suppliers . The owner of one Manhattan nanny agency stated , " It 's just a reality of life that without the illegal girls , there wouldn 't be any nannies , and the <unk> would have to stay home and mind their own kids . " The practice had grown as both married women with children and single working mothers entered the workforce in large numbers during the 1980s , with the extended hours and long commutes of many professional positions further exacerbating it . The Irish and Central and South American immigrant population of domestic workers was augmented by those from the Philippines , China , Ireland , or Poland . People hiring nannies often preferred illegal aliens , who were thought to be easier to find , considerably less expensive , and more loyal if they worked out and easier to fire if they did not . As one Floral Park , Queens , woman said , " I want someone who cannot leave the country , who doesn 't know anyone in New York , who basically does not have a life . I want someone who is completely dependent on me and loyal to my family . " Americans themselves were largely unwilling to do the jobs . 
 While some men were affected by Nannygate , most of the public commentary revolved around its effect on women . The February 10 , 1993 , op @-@ ed page of The New York Times , which carried considerable Nannygate coverage in general , was exclusively devoted towards discussing it as a women 's issue . The press themselves came in for some criticism in this respect , with the group Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting complaining that the Times and other media outlets focused on the effect of Nannygate on white , upper @-@ middle @-@ class women , and excluded the perspective of the actual immigrant childcare workers . Stuart Taylor , Jr . , in his March 1993 piece " Inside the Whirlwind : How Zoë Baird Was <unk> <unk> for the Smallest of Sins , <unk> by Press and Popular Righteousness , and Crucified by Prejudice and Hypocrisy " for The American Lawyer , concluded that Baird was done in by a political @-@ media culture bent on populism and symbolic blood sport and that she was penalized for being honest . He also said Baird had fallen victim to " the cold , capricious cruelty of fate " . 
 Two fault lines , gender and class , were exposed in the debate over Nannygate : in the former , a double standard was seen wherein female appointees faced a greater risk of being questioned and disqualified based upon their childcare arrangements , while in the latter , wealthy or upper middle @-@ class professional women who could afford live @-@ in childcare arrangements were seen as trying to get away a white @-@ collar criminal act . In particular , the competing gendered narratives revolved around whether the affluent Baird was considered " one of us " by women . Baird failed to gain support from some feminists , who believed that as a protégé of powerful Washington insiders , she had not paid her feminist dues . University of Michigan scholar Diane Sampson , publishing in a collection entitled " Bad " Mothers : The politics of blame in twentieth @-@ century America , saw Baird as trying to establish motherhood as a ' site ' in elaborating her qualifications for Attorney General during her confirmation hearings , an effort that was subverted by her affluence and her earning far more than her husband did . Sampson concluded that " The dissonance between Baird 's rhetorical stance and her lived life was jarring " and that her case presented " culturally accepted signifiers of a bad mother " . 
 A modified and fictionalized account of the Baird nomination formed the core of Wendy Wasserstein 's 1996 play An American Daughter , which was later made into a 2000 television film . Wasserstein saw the episode , as well as what happened to Wood , as an example of double standards and sexism , and used it as a vehicle to explore the nature and status of American feminism as of the 1990s . She said of its role in illustrating feminist issues , " I mean , if Nannygate hadn 't existed , what a great thing to make up as a way of talking about it . " An American Daughter became one of Wasserstein 's most ambitious works , and also her most political . 
 Mary Romero , Professor of Justice Studies at Arizona State University , discussed the class aspect in a new 2002 edition of her classic work Maid in the U.S.A .. She saw Nannygate as a follow @-@ on to the long @-@ running " servant problem " , and illustrated how labor and immigration laws were still structured so as to benefit employers rather than employees . <unk> Lovell Banks , Professor of Equality Jurisprudence at University of Maryland School of Law , saw Nannygate as also having a racial dimension , in that it illustrated how the professional class exploited domestic workers of color . 
 In the wake of Nannygate , effective 1995 Congress changed the way taxes for household help are filed , creating a Form 1040 Schedule H that shifting the federal reporting burden from separate documents onto the main return for income taxes . ( The new regulations still were more focused on employers than domestic employees . ) The full procedure for handling payments of Social Security and Medicare taxes , as well as state and federal unemployment insurance premiums , for household and child @-@ care help remained quite complex , however , and over the following two decades , self @-@ help articles were published with titles such as " How to Avoid Your Very Own Nannygate " and " Time to Come Clean " and with admonitions like " we all know what happened to Kimba Wood and Zoë Baird . " 
 = = Later instances = = 
 Later instances of political problems caused by the hiring of nannies that were in some way illegal have also been dubbed " Nannygate " , both in the U.S. and outside it . 
 In 2001 , President George W. Bush nominated Linda Chavez for Secretary of Labor . She was the first Hispanic woman nominated to a United States cabinet position . However , she withdrew from consideration after it was revealed that she had given money to a one @-@ time illegal immigrant from Guatemala who lived in her home more than a decade earlier . Chavez 's claims that she had been engaged in an act of charity and compassion rather than employment , and that she was now the victim of the " politics of personal destruction " , were not enough to save her nomination . The Chavez case did further illustrate the question of the status of female illegal aliens in households across the nation . 
 In December 2004 , Bernard <unk> was nominated by President Bush to succeed Tom Ridge as United States Secretary of Homeland Security . After a week of press scrutiny , <unk> withdrew his nomination , saying that he had unknowingly hired an undocumented worker and had not paid her taxes . The Times wrote that " the curse of Nannygate " had returned to claim a fourth high @-@ level victim . As Jim Gibbons was campaigning for Governor of Nevada in 2006 , it was brought to light that more than ten years earlier , he and his wife Dawn Gibbons had employed an illegal immigrant as a housekeeper and babysitter . Gibbons went on to win the election anyway . By 2009 and the stepping down of Nancy Killefer as nominee for Chief Performance Officer of the United States at the beginning of the Obama administration , at least ten top @-@ level cabinet or other federal appointees had run into trouble over failure to pay the " Nanny Tax " . Despite the possible peril it brought , most Americans were still paying their nannies off the books . The problem recurred in the 2010 California gubernatorial election , where candidate Meg Whitman lost despite spending over $ 140 million of her own money . Her campaign was seriously damaged during its final two months by the revelation that she had employed an illegal immigrant as a nanny and housekeeper , and by the alleged manner in which she treated ( and fired ) the housekeeper . 
 David Blunkett , a British politician , ran into political trouble for fast tracking a visa application for his family 's nanny in 2004 . In 2006 , the Minister affair at the announcement of the Reinfeldt cabinet in Sweden included the quick resignations of Maria <unk> , a Swedish trade minister who had hired a live @-@ in nanny without paying taxes , and Cecilia <unk> <unk> , the Swedish culture minister , who also hired a live @-@ in nanny without paying taxes . The matter was widely reported by the international press , with the Financial Times dubbing it " Nannygate " . In 2009 , Canadian member of parliament Ruby <unk> was accused of having employed nannies without proper work permits as required of anyone hiring foreign nationals under the federal caregiver program , and some newspaper headline writers dubbed the resulting controversy as " Nannygate " . The 2013 arrest of <unk> <unk> , Deputy Consul General of the Consulate General of India in New York City , charged with committing visa fraud and providing false statements in order to gain entry to the United States for her nanny , was referred by some in the American press as " Nannygate " . 
 = Royal Gold Cup = 
 The Royal Gold Cup or Saint Agnes Cup is a solid gold covered cup lavishly decorated with enamel and pearls . It was made for the French royal family at the end of the 14th century , and later belonged to several English monarchs before spending nearly 300 years in Spain . It has been in the British Museum since 1892 , where it is normally on display in Room 40 , and is generally agreed to be the outstanding surviving example of late medieval French plate . It has been described as " the one surviving royal magnificence of the International Gothic age " ; and according to Thomas Hoving , former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York , " of all the princely jewels and gold that have come down to us , this is the most spectacular — and that includes the great royal treasures . " 
 The cup is made of solid gold , stands 23 @.@ 6 cm ( 9 @.@ 25 inches ) high with a diameter of 17 @.@ 8 cm ( 6 @.@ 94 inches ) at its widest point , and weighs 1 @.@ 935 kg ( 4 @.@ 26 lb ) . It has a cover that lifts off , but the triangular stand on which it once stood is now lost . The stem of the cup has twice been extended by the addition of cylindrical bands , so that it was originally much shorter , giving the overall shape " a typically robust and stocky elegance . " The original decorated <unk> or finial on the cover has been lost , and a moulding decorated with 36 pearls has been removed from the outer edge of the cover ; a strip of gold with jagged edges can be seen where it was attached . Presumably it matched the one still in place round the foot of the cup . 
 The gold surfaces are decorated with scenes in basse @-@ taille enamel with translucent colours that reflect light from the gold beneath ; many areas of gold both underneath the enamel and in the background have engraved and pointillé decoration worked in the gold . In particular the decoration features large areas of translucent red , which have survived in excellent condition . This colour , known as rouge clair , was the most difficult to achieve technically , and highly prized for this and the brilliance of the colour when it was done successfully . Scenes from the life of Saint Agnes run round the top of the cover and the sloping underside of the main body . The symbols of the Four Evangelists run round the foot of the cup , and there are enamel medallions at the centre of the inside of both the cup and the cover . The lower of the two added bands contains enamel Tudor roses on a diapered pointillé background ; this was apparently added under Henry VIII . The upper band has an engraved inscription filled in with black enamel , with a barrier of laurel branches in green to mark off the end of the inscription from its beginning . 
 The cup came to the British Museum with a custom @-@ made hexagonal case of leather on a wood frame , with iron lock , handles and mounts . This was either made at the same time or soon after the cup , and has incised and stamped foliate decoration and a blackletter inscription : <unk> <unk> SUS . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 There is no firm evidence as to the date and circumstances of the creation of the cup . It is first clearly documented in an inventory from 1391 of the valuables belonging to Charles VI of France ( reigned 1380 – 1422 ) , surviving in two copies in the Bibliothèque nationale de France . This lists : 
 A hanap of gold , all its cover well and richly enamelled on the outside with the life of Madame St Agnes ; and the cresting of the foot is garnished with 26 pearls , and the crown around the cover with 36 pearls ; and the finial of the said cover ( is ) garnished with four sapphires , three <unk> rubies and fifteen pearls . And it weighs 9 marcs 3 ounces of <unk> and the said hanap rests on a stand of gold in the form of a tripod , and in the middle of the tripod is represented Our Lady in a sun on a ground of clear red , and the three feet of the tripod are formed by three winged dragons . The said hanap and cover were given to the king by <unk> the duc de Berry on his journey into Touraine in the year 91 . 
 John , Duke of Berry ( 1340 – 1416 ) was Charles VI 's uncle and a powerful figure in the kingdom , as well as the most famous and extravagant collector and commissioner of art of his day . He is still best known for commissioning the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry , the famous International Gothic illuminated manuscript , and also commissioned the Holy Thorn Reliquary , now in the British Museum . The young king Charles had been forced to remove his uncle from governorships after the latter 's rapacious conduct had led to unrest , and the meeting in 1391 marked their reconciliation after a period of bad relations . Lavish gifts among the Valois court circle were routine , and on this occasion Berry had special reason to be generous . 
 The cup appears in another inventory of Charles V in 1400 , and then is not recorded until it appears as the property of another royal uncle , and collector , John of Lancaster , 1st Duke of Bedford ( 1389 – 1435 ) , son of Henry IV , who was briefly Regent of both France and England for his infant nephew Henry VI . How he acquired the cup is not known , but he would have received many gifts from Charles VI , and had both lent the king money and bought from him things such as the library of the Palais du Louvre , in the uneasy period when Charles had made peace with the English and made Henry V his heir . After the death of his brother Henry V , Bedford struggled to stem the resurgent French resistance , which was energised by Joan of Arc . He died in Normandy in 1435 , leaving Henry VI as his heir . The cup is more briefly described as the first item in a list of valuables received from Bedford 's estate prepared for Henry VI 's minister Cardinal Henry Beaufort , but the tripod is not mentioned , some of the jewels are missing , and the subject is misidentified as the life of Saint Suzanna not Saint Agnes . For some reason it does not appear in a royal inventory of 1441 ; Jenny Stratford suggests that this was because Beaufort still had it at this point . Another possibility is that it had been pawned , as it was in 1449 and again in 1451 , on both occasions to finance England 's increasingly unsuccessful efforts to hold on to French territory ; 
 The cup first appears in the records of the new Tudor dynasty under Henry VIII in 1521 . By now the cover had lost the finial " garnished with four sapphires , three <unk> rubies and fifteen pearls " described in Charles VI 's inventory and had a new one of gold in the form of a closed , or " imperial " crown . This matches a propaganda drive at this time by Henry to assert England as an " empire " , a contemporary sense meaning a state recognising no superior , though the Great Seal of England had already used a closed crown since 1471 . Other uses had probably been found for the jewels of the old finial ; it is assumed that the lower band with the Tudor roses was added in Henry 's reign , as part of a programme of adding Tudor badges to possessions inherited from earlier dynasties , which covered tapestries , illuminated manuscripts and buildings such as King 's College Chapel in Cambridge . The cup is described in inventories in 1532 and after Henry 's death in 1547 , and then under Elizabeth I it was inventoried in 1574 and 1596 . 
 When James I succeeded to the English throne in 1603 , one of his first priorities was to end the Anglo @-@ Spanish War , which had been dragging on since 1585 . A Spanish delegation arrived for the Somerset House Conference , which concluded with a treaty signed in 1604 . The leader of the Habsburg diplomats was Juan Fernández de Velasco , 5th Duke of Frías and Constable of Castile . The upper extension to the stem of the cup has a Latin inscription that translates as : 
 This cup of solid gold , a relic of the sacred treasure of England and a memorial to the peace made between the kings , the Constable Juan de Velasco , returning thence after successfully accomplishing his mission , presented as an offering to Christ the Peacemaker . 
 The gift of " some 70 items of silver and gold plate " by James to the Constable , of which the cup was the most notable item , is documented on both the English and Spanish sides ; the Constable wrote an account of his mission on his return , which mentions the gift from James . The Constable had previously presented both James and the queen with elaborate cups , among other valuable gifts . According to Pauline Croft , " With his usual over @-@ generosity the king gave the departing envoys around half the large gold vessels from the royal possessions he had inherited from Elizabeth . The Constable himself received a stupendous gift of plate , including possibly the most venerable item in the collection , known as " the Royal Gold Cup of the Kings of France and England . " In 1610 the Constable gave the cup to a convent in Medina de Pomar , near Burgos , as the inscription describes . His deed of gift survives , and records that the gift was on condition that the cup was never alienated by the convent . A marginal note on the deed , in the Constable 's own handwriting , records that he had obtained the permission of the Archbishop of Toledo , Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas , for the cup to be used as a ciborium , or container for consecrated hosts . By this period a rule of the church normally forbade the use of vessels decorated on their inner surface as <unk> . 
 The cup stayed in the convent until 1882 when the nuns were short of funds and wanted to sell it . It was at some point during this period that the pearl border to the cover and the Tudor finial were removed . The nuns decided they would get a better price in Paris than in Spain , and the cup was entrusted to Simon Campo , a priest , who took it to Paris and approached several leading dealers and collectors . There had been a spate of forgeries of medieval objects , and the Parisians were suspicious , until one , Baron Jerome Pichon , researched the second added cylinder and was sufficiently convinced that this was the cup documented in 1604 to make a rather low offer , which was accepted . In the course of his researches the baron had contacted the current Duke of Frías , who had supplied useful information , and then initially congratulated the buyer on his purchase . However , on looking further into the matter the duke realized that the sale was contrary to the 1610 deed of gift he had discovered in the family archives , and sued in the French courts to recover the cup . 
 The duke eventually lost his case in 1891 , enabling a further sale that had been set up by Baron Pichon to proceed . This was to the leading firm of Messrs. Wertheimer of Bond Street in London , where the cup was seen by Augustus Wollaston Franks , who had been Keeper of British and Mediaeval Antiquities and Ethnography at the British Museum since 1866 , and was president of the Society of Antiquaries . Samson Wertheimer agreed " with much public spirit " to sell the cup to the British Museum for the £ 8 @,@ 000 ( £ 790 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) it had cost the firm . Franks was worried by the new American collectors such as J. P. Morgan , and in 1891 wrote to Sir Henry Tate , of Tate Gallery fame : " A very wonderful gold cup has appeared returned to this country after an absence of 287 years , and I am anxious to see it placed in the National Museum and not removed to America . " He tried to get wealthy individuals to subscribe £ 500 ( £ 49 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) each , but even with a grant of £ 2 @,@ 000 from HM Treasury could not raise the price . He was forced to put up £ 5 @,@ 000 of his own money temporarily while he continued to try to get smaller amounts from others , and succeeded in 1892 when the Treasury agreed to contribute the final £ 830 ; " to Franks this was his greatest acquisition , and the one of which he was most proud . " Apart from the Treasury , the £ 500 contributors were Franks and Wertheimer , the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths , Charles Drury Edward Fortnum , the Duke of Northumberland , Lord Savile , Lord Iveagh and the Earl of Crawford . In 1901 Morgan succeeded in buying the Lindau Gospels in London , which the museum had also wanted . 
 = = Creation , context and survival = = 
 Much the most prominent decoration on the cup is the cycle of scenes from the life of Saint Agnes , which is rarely depicted in such detail in art . However , there was one outstanding devotee of the saint in the period : King Charles V of France , Berry 's older brother and Charles VI 's father . Charles V was born in 1338 on Saint Agnes ' feast day , January 21 , and is recorded as owning at least 13 works of art featuring her , including a different gold cup enamelled with scenes from her life ( both are recorded in the 1391 inventory ) . Until recent decades the generally accepted hypothesis was that Berry ordered the cup as a present for his brother in 1380 , to be ready for his birthday in January 1381 . When the king died in September 1380 , Berry had retained it for a decade before presenting it to Charles VI . 
 However , in 1978 Ronald Lightbown , Keeper of Metalwork at the V & A Museum , rejected this theory on stylistic grounds , considering that the cup must have been created only shortly before it appeared in Charles VI 's inventory in 1391 . He says that " in 1380 figure @-@ style was a softly undulating , flowing style , with slender elongated figures and much use of serpentine or curving folds in the drapery , and with trailing dresses ending in sinuous Gothic hem @-@ lines " — a style that can be seen in the miniature of the coronation of Charles VI in 1380 illustrated above . In contrast , Lightbown says " the figures on the cup are broad , some might even be called stocky , with soft drapery of cylindrical form , or of smooth , tight outlines . The folds are tubular and the hems of the robes are straight with no waving , trailing outlines . The style in fact is the ' Italianate ' manner which developed in France as a result of contact with ' <unk> ' art , and not the purely Northern Gothic International manner . " This view was rejected in 1981 by Neil Stratford , former Keeper of Medieval and Later Antiquities at the British Museum , who pointed to a number of manuscript illuminations in a similar style that date from earlier than 1390 . John Cherry , another former Keeper of the medieval collections at the British Museum , still presents the older dating in a work of 2010 , and the British Museum website dates the cup to " about 1370 – 1380 " . 
 Another traditional assumption , based on the language of the inventories and shared by almost all writers , was that the cup was a piece of secular plate , for use at table , or display on a buffet beside it . The buffet of the period was more like a modern Welsh dresser or shop display unit , with receding shelves for displaying on important occasions all the plate of the household that was not in use . Neil Stratford suggests that the cup was only used to drink from on special occasions , including St Agnes ' feast day , while Lightbown remarks that at over four pounds in weight the cup is much too heavy to drink from conveniently . However John Cherry , noting the exclusively religious subjects depicted ( including that on the lost tripod stand ) considers that the cup may have been intended as a ciborium from the start . It might have been used either to accompany in its carrying case the duke on his tours of his many castles and palaces , or perhaps for his foundation of the Saint Chapelle at his capital of Bourges , intended to rival the king 's Sainte @-@ Chapelle in Paris and his brother 's foundation at <unk> in Dijon . 
 The four sons of King John II of France — Charles V , Louis I , Duke of Anjou ( 1339 – 1384 ) , Berry and Philip the Bold , Duke of Burgundy ( 1342 – 1404 ) — all spent huge sums on works in gold and silver , as well as on other works of art . Although it is Berry who is especially remembered as a patron , partly because he specialized in illuminated manuscripts which have little value in their materials , it was his brother Louis of Anjou who was the " most passionately interested in the goldsmith 's art " ; he had over 3 @,@ 000 pieces of plate at one point . These included wholly secular pieces with sculptures in enamel that can only be imagined by comparison : in terms of technique to the handful of reliquaries , like the British Museum 's Holy Thorn Reliquary , that have survived from the period , and in terms of subject matter to tapestries and illuminations . However , in 1381 Anjou melted down almost all his plate to finance a war to pursue his claim to the Kingdom of Naples . According to the sculptor and goldsmith Lorenzo Ghiberti , writing seventy years later , one of Anjou 's goldsmiths , called <unk> and " a most skillful sculptor , of great talent " , was so affected by the destruction of his life 's work that he joined an <unk> monastic order and lived out his days in silence . The Royal Gold Cup was " probably not exceptional as to size or decoration " in this milieu ; once " but one member of a class , it now stands alone " . An inventory of Charles V records 25 gold cups weighing between five and fifteen marcs ; this is slightly over nine without its stand . Smaller gold cups are recorded in sets of a dozen , of which Charles V had three . The largest items were the great table ornaments , in the shape of ships , called <unk> , of which Charles V had five , the heaviest weighing over 53 marcs . 
 Berry died in 1416 with no male heir , and deeply in debt . Those of his works in precious metal and jewels that had not already gone to his creditors were mostly seized by the English when they took Paris in July 1417 . This was the first of a number of periods that saw the large @-@ scale destruction of goldsmiths ' work that the cup escaped , but thousands of other pieces did not , a survival that Brigitte Buettner finds " almost miraculous " . In particular , the move to Spain in 1604 enabled it to avoid the dispersal and destruction of the English Crown Jewels and royal collection of plate under the English Commonwealth . 
 As a secular piece the cup would be an almost unique survival at this level of quality , " the one representative left to us of medieval secular plate in its most sumptuous development " . Although French plate in silver and gold was made in great quantities , and at a high level of quality , " French silver made prior to the early 19th century is probably scarcer than that of any other European country . " The cost of even very skilled labour was low compared to that of the materials , and in the absence of any reliable way of either depositing or investing money , it was turned into lavish objects , in the knowledge that it might well need to be sold or melted down to finance some future project . If it survived long enough to become old @-@ fashioned it was likely to be melted down and remodelled in a new style . 
 There are only four other known survivals , secular or religious , of basse taille enamel on gold , one the small Salting Reliquary , also in the British Museum , and none as fine as the cup . The " King John Cup " in King 's Lynn , of ca . 1340 , silver @-@ gilt with transparent enamel , is the best example of basse @-@ taille work probably made in England ; the metalwork expert Herbert <unk> describes this and the Royal Gold Cup as the " two examples of outstanding merit , unsurpassed in any collection . " However it is unclear if most of the enamel at King 's Lynn is original . The closest comparison to the Royal Gold Cup is perhaps the silver @-@ gilt Mérode Cup of about 1400 , which is the only surviving medieval example of <unk> á jour enamel , a difficult technique which creates a see @-@ through effect like stained glass . A silver @-@ gilt cup in the Rijksmuseum , Amsterdam of before 1376 has no enamels or gems , and a different shape , but offers an interesting comparison as it has a tripod stand with winged grotesques as legs , a short stem , and the cover has both an elaborate finial and a raised decorated strip around the rim , so that all the altered aspects of the Royal Gold Cup are present . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 The cycle of scenes from the life of Saint Agnes , and that of her foster @-@ sister Saint Emerentiana , follows the traditional story of Golden Legend of Jacobus de <unk> ; the most popular compilation of hagiographies of the age , whose wording corresponds to some of the inscriptions in banderoles or scrolls that explain the scenes . Other texts are quotations from the Latin Vulgate Bible , mostly derived from the liturgy for St Agnes ' feast day , and it has been suggested that the two rings of pearls also reflect the language of the chants for these services . It seems likely that clerical advice was taken , at least over the texts used in the inscriptions . It is tempting to relate the depiction of the story , with its " distinct and vivid tableaux , well suited to adaptation for performance " to medieval drama , often a source for iconography , but the fragmentary records mention no dramas on the life of St Agnes that are close in time or place to the origin of the cup . 
 Agnes and her sister were virgins of Rome in the time of the Emperor Constantine , though all figures are shown in contemporary 14th @-@ century dress . The story begins on the inside of the bowl , which has a round medallion showing St Agnes kneeling before a bearded figure , representing her teacher , wearing a chaperon . She holds a book inscribed Miserere mei Deus sancte ( " Have pity on me , Holy God " ) , while a banderole says In <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> tua ut non <unk> tibi ( " Thy words have I hid in my heart that I might not sin against thee " . Psalms 119 : 11 ) . The top of the cover continues the story up to Agnes ' martyrdom in five scenes , shown with a continuous <unk> from which small rocks rise up to demarcate the scenes ; on the base trees perform this function . <unk> radiate from the centre of the cover above all the scenes ; the red enamel which once filled these is nearly all lost . 
 In the first scene the two girls are returning from school , Agnes accompanied by her punning attribute , a lamb with a cruciform halo , and carrying a martyr 's palm . They are accosted by Procopius , the young son of the Prefect of Rome , who has fallen in love with Agnes and shows her an open casket of jewels to persuade her to marry him . The inside of the casket is white , the only colour of opaque enamel in the original work , used only for a few highlights like the tiny area of the host held by Christ on the inside of the cover . Agnes rejects him , with the words <unk> sum <unk> cui angeli <unk> ( " I am betrothed to him who the angels serve " ) in a banderole above . In the Caxton her rejection is unequivocal and not polite , and she points out that her heavenly fiancé has promised her much better jewels . The Prefect stands behind his son , and in the next scene has sentenced her to serve in a brothel for being a Christian who refuses to sacrifice to the goddess Vesta . Caxton 's Legend fills in the intervening action : 
 Then made she of the <unk> her oratory , ... All they that entered made honour and reverence to the great clearness that they saw about St. Agnes , and came out more devout and more clean than they entered . At last came the son of the provost with a great company for to accomplish his foul desires and lusts . And when he saw his fellows come out and issue all <unk> , he mocked them and called them cowards . And then he , all <unk> , entered for to accomplish his evil will . And when he came to the clearness , he advanced him for to take the virgin , and anon the devil took him by the throat and strangled him that he fell down dead . 
 In the next scene on the cup , Agnes stands outside the sentry box @-@ like brothel , looking down at the Prefect 's son who has been strangled to death by the devil crouched over him ; a banderole reads Quo modo <unk> qui mane <unk> ( " How has thou fallen that <unk> in the morning " , Isaiah 14 : 12 ) , and the Prefect looks on sadly . 
 In the following scene Agnes has been moved by the Prefect 's grief , and prayed for the son to be restored to life , which an angel has done . The repentant Procopius kneels before her , while she leans down to tell him Vade <unk> noli <unk> ( " Go forth and sin no more " ; from John 8 : 11 ) . However the result of the miracle was that ( in William Caxton 's translation ) " the bishops of the idols made a great discord among the people , so that all they cried : Take away this sorceress and witch that turned men 's minds and <unk> their wits " . The Prefect is now sympathetic to Agnes but fears he will lose his position if he does nothing , so leaves the matter in the hands of another official ; the two are seen talking together , with words from Luke 23 : 4 Nihil <unk> cause in <unk> ( " I find no cause against her " ) above . The last scene shows her martyrdom ; she was sentenced to be burned but the flames part away from her so that finally the magistrate orders her killed by a spear . Her last words , from Luke 23 : 46 , are In manus <unk> domine <unk> <unk> meam ( " Into your hands , O Lord , I commend my spirit " ) . 
 The scenes continue on the underside of the bowl , starting with Agnes ' burial . A pall is being laid over her sarcophagus , whose red enamel has significant losses , which reveal clearly the engraved lines beneath . A tonsured priest with an <unk> for sprinkling holy water and an acolyte with a cross attend , with Emerentiana with halo to the left , and Agnes ' mother to the right . The banderole above says Ecce quod <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Behold what I have desired I now possess " ) . In the next scene pagans have arrived to disrupt the burial , and only Emerentiana has stayed , kneeling in prayer as she is pelted with rocks . The inscription reads Veni soror mea mecum in <unk> ( " Come with me my sister into glory " ) . She dies , and the following scene shows the two martyrs , accompanied by two other unnamed female martyrs ( in the source " a great multitude of virgins clad in vestments of gold and silver " ) , as they appear in a vision to Agnes ' friends eight days after her death , as they gather round her sarcophagus , into which Emerentiana 's body has also been placed . 
 The next scene shows the sarcophagus with Constantina , the daughter of the Emperor Constantine , asleep on top of it , wearing a crown . She has been afflicted with leprosy , and heard of the vision at Agnes ' tomb , and come to pray there . The presence at left of a young man on crutches , not in the source , suggests that others are doing the same . The sleeping woman beside the tomb is either another such , or an attendant on the princess . As Constantina sleeps , Agnes , holding her lamb , appears to her , saying Si in <unk> ( Christum ) <unk> <unk> ( " If you believe in Christ you will be healed " , an adaptation of the text in the source ) . In the final scene , the cured , and baptized , Constantina tells her crowned father the story , with the inscription Hec est virgo sapiens una de numero <unk> ( " This is a wise virgin , one of the number of the prudent " ) . 
 The inside of the cover has a circular enamel medallion with worked gold borders , showing a half @-@ length Christ making a blessing gesture and holding a chalice with a host inside . Around him is a sun @-@ like aureole in red . Below the two added cylinders on the stem , the four traditional symbols of the Evangelists run round the sloping foot of the cup , in pairs facing each other , above a green ground area . Lightbown notes this as " another sign of care for naturalistic effect " . 
 = = Construction and techniques = = 
 Each of the cover , main body , and foot of the cup is made of an inner and outer plate , and the enamelled medallions inside the cover and bowl were made separately before attachment . The enamel areas may have been designed by the goldsmith , or an artist more used to painting on panels or in manuscripts may have produced drawings . A number of names of goldsmiths appear in records of the period , but in contrast to many contemporary manuscripts , the few surviving goldsmith 's pieces are not signed or marked and cannot be matched to any names . Not a single maker 's name is recorded for the more than 3 @,@ 000 items in precious metal in the inventory mentioned above of the possessions of Berry 's brother Anjou . High quality courtly work like the cup is conventionally assigned to Paris in the absence of other stylistic evidence ; this is where other documentary sources locate the main concentration of goldsmiths . 
 The process for creating the basse @-@ taille enamel areas began by marking the outline of the design and the main internal outlines on the gold with a tool called a " tracer " . Then the interior area was worked with chasing tools , hammering and punching rather than cutting , to form a shallow recess to hold the enamel . The more important parts of the design were modelled by varying the depth of the surface to produce different intensities of colour when the translucent enamel was added ; the gold under folds of drapery often rises near the surface to create a paler highlight . In many of the recessed areas decoration was added by either engraving or punching which would show through the translucent enamel , or to facet the background so the reflections change as the viewing angle changes slightly . In these last @-@ mentioned areas cutting tools were used . Most of the background outside the enamelled areas was decorated in the same way . After the enamel was added and fired the surfaces were cleaned up , made good and polished , including removing by scraping any bumps showing through on the reverse of the metal . 
 The enamel lies flush with the gold surfaces ; it was a preparation of finely ground glass paste applied with great care to the prepared recessed areas , and then fired . Different colours of enamel meet each other with a neat boundary , which was achieved by firing one colour with a retaining border of gum <unk> before adding the next . The difficulty was increased by the application of tints of a different colour to a base shade of enamel before firing , so that the added colour blends gradually into the background colour around the edges of the tinted area . This is especially used on " flux " , or colourless enamel , as in the ground areas , rocks and trees . Flux was also used for flesh areas as on a gold background it darkens slightly when fired to a suitable colour for skin . The rouge clair or " ruby glass " red , used so effectively here , was made by adding tiny particles of copper , silver and gold to the glass ; here scientific tests have shown that copper was used . After firing the enamel was polished flush with the surrounding metal . The technique had been known to the Ancient Romans ( see the Lycurgus Cup , also in the British Museum ) , but was lost at the end of the Middle Ages until the 17th century . The added cylinders use opaque enamel , except for the red on the Tudor roses , which is translucent rouge clair , of a similar composition to the original reds . Translucent enamel is more fragile than opaque , and medieval survivals in good condition are very rare . 
 = Giant freshwater stingray = 
 The giant freshwater stingray ( Himantura polylepis , also widely known by the junior synonym H. chaophraya ) is a species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae . It is found in large rivers and estuaries in Indochina and Borneo , though historically it may have been more widely distributed in South and Southeast Asia . One of the largest freshwater fish in the world , this species grows upwards of 1 @.@ 9 m ( 6 @.@ 2 ft ) across and may reach 600 kg ( 1 @,@ 300 lb ) in weight . It has a relatively thin , oval pectoral fin disc that is widest anteriorly , and a sharply pointed snout with a protruding tip . Its tail is thin and whip @-@ like , and lacks fin folds . This species is uniformly grayish brown above and white below ; the underside of the pectoral and pelvic fins bear distinctive wide , dark bands on their posterior margins . 
 Bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , the giant freshwater stingray inhabits sandy or muddy areas and preys on small fishes and invertebrates . Females give live birth to litters of one to four pups , which are sustained to term by maternally produced histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) . This species faces heavy fishing pressure for meat , recreation , and aquarium display , as well as extensive habitat degradation and fragmentation . These forces have resulted in substantial population declines in at least central Thailand and Cambodia . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the giant freshwater stingray as Endangered . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The first scientific description of the giant freshwater stingray was authored by Dutch ichthyologist Pieter Bleeker in an 1852 volume of the journal <unk> van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en <unk> . His account was based on a juvenile specimen 30 cm ( 12 in ) across , collected from Jakarta , Indonesia . Bleeker named the new species polylepis , from the Greek poly ( " many " ) and lepis ( " scales " ) , and assigned it to the genus Trygon ( now a synonym of Dasyatis ) . However , in subsequent years Bleeker 's description was largely overlooked , and in 1990 the giant freshwater stingray was described again by <unk> <unk> and Tyson Roberts in an issue of the Japanese Journal of Ichthyology . They gave it the name Himantura chaophraya , which came into widespread usage . In 2008 , Peter Last and B. Mabel Manjaji @-@ Matsumoto confirmed that T. polylepis and H. chaophraya refer to the same species , and since Bleeker 's name was published earlier , the scientific name of the giant freshwater stingray became Himantura polylepis . This species may also be called the giant freshwater whipray , giant stingray , or freshwater whipray . 
 There is a complex of similar freshwater and estuarine Himantura in South Asia , Southeast Asia , and Australasia that are or were tentatively identified with H. polylepis . The Australian freshwater Himantura were described as a separate species , H. dalyensis , in 2008 . The freshwater Himantura in New Guinea are probably H. dalyensis rather than H. polylepis , though confirmation awaits further study . Trygon fluviatilis from India , as described by Nelson Annandale in 1909 , closely resembles and may be conspecific with H. polylepis . On the other hand , comparison of freshwater whipray DNA and amino acid sequences between India and Thailand has revealed significant differences . Finally , additional research is needed to assess the degree of divergence amongst populations of H. polylepis inhabiting various drainage basins across its distribution , so as to determine whether further taxonomic differentiation is warranted . 
 In terms of the broader evolutionary relationships between the giant freshwater whipray and the rest of the family Dasyatidae , a 2012 phylogenetic analysis based on mitochondrial DNA reported that it was most closely related to the porcupine ray ( Urogymnus asperrimus ) , and that they in turn formed a clade with the mangrove whipray ( H. granulata ) and the <unk> whipray ( H. <unk> ) . This finding adds to a growing consensus that the genus Himantura is paraphyletic . 
 = = Description = = 
 The giant freshwater stingray has a thin , oval pectoral fin disc slightly longer than wide and broadest towards the front . The elongated snout has a wide base and a sharply pointed tip that projects beyond the disc . The eyes are minute and widely spaced ; behind them are large spiracles . Between the nostrils is a short curtain of skin with a finely fringed posterior margin . The small mouth forms a gentle arch and contains four to seven papillae ( two to four large at the center and one to four small to the sides ) on the floor . The small and rounded teeth are arranged into pavement @-@ like bands . There are five pairs of gill slits on the ventral side of the disc . The pelvic fins are small and thin ; mature males have relatively large claspers . 
 The thin , cylindrical tail measures 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 5 times as long as the disc and lacks fin folds . A single serrated stinging spine is positioned on the upper surface of the tail near the base . At up to 38 cm ( 15 in ) long , the spine is the largest of any stingray species . There is band of heart @-@ shaped tubercles on the upper surface of the disc extending from before the eyes to the base of the sting ; there is also a midline row of four to six enlarged tubercles at the center of the disc . The remainder of the disc upper surface is covered by tiny granular denticles , and the tail is covered with sharp prickles past the sting . This species is plain grayish brown above , often with a yellowish or pinkish tint towards the fin margins ; in life the skin is coated with a layer of dark brown mucus . The underside is white with broad dark bands , edged with small spots , on the trailing margins of the pectoral and pelvic fins . The tail is black behind the spine . The giant freshwater stingray reaches at least 1 @.@ 9 m ( 6 @.@ 2 ft ) in width and 5 @.@ 0 m ( 16 @.@ 4 ft ) in length , and can likely grow larger . With reports from the Mekong and Chao Phraya Rivers of individuals weighing 500 – 600 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 – 1 @,@ 300 lb ) , it ranks among the largest freshwater fishes in the world . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The giant freshwater stingray is known to inhabit several large rivers and associated estuaries in Indochina and Borneo . In Indochina , it occurs in the Mekong River to potentially as far upstream as Chiang Khong in Thailand , as well as in the Chao Phraya , Nan , Mae Klong , Bang <unk> , <unk> Buri and Tapi Rivers . In Borneo , this species is found in the Mahakam River in Kalimantan and the Kinabatangan and <unk> Rivers in Sabah ; it is reportedly common in the Kinabatangan River but infrequently caught . Though it has been reported from Sarawak as well , surveys within the past 25 years have not found it there . Elsewhere in the region , recent river surveys in Java have not recorded its presence , despite the island being the locality of the species holotype . Historical records from Myanmar , the Ganges River in India , and the Bay of Bengal ( the latter two as Trygon fluviatilis ) have similarly not been corroborated by any recent accounts . 
 <unk> populations of the giant freshwater stingray in separate river drainages are probably isolated from one another ; though the species occurs in brackish environments , there is no evidence that it crosses marine waters . This is a bottom @-@ dwelling species that favors a sandy or muddy habitat . Unexpectedly , it can sometimes be found near heavily populated urban areas . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The diet of the giant freshwater stingray consists of small fishes and invertebrates such as crustaceans and molluscs , which it can detect using its electroreceptive ampullae of Lorenzini . Individuals can often be seen at the edge of the river , possibly feeding on earthworms . Parasites documented from this species include the tapeworms Acanthobothrium <unk> , A. <unk> , A. <unk> , A. <unk> , A. <unk> , Rhinebothrium <unk> , R. <unk> , and R. <unk> . The giant freshwater stingray is viviparous , with the developing embryos nourished initially by yolk and later by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) provided by the mother . This species does not appear to be <unk> ( migrating between fresh and salt water to complete its life cycle ) . Observed litter sizes range from one to four pups ; newborns measure around 30 cm ( 12 in ) across . Pregnant females are frequently found in estuaries , which may serve as nursery areas . Males mature sexually at approximately 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) across ; female maturation size and other life history details are unknown . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The giant freshwater stingray is not aggressive , but it merits caution as its sting is sheathed in toxic mucus and is capable of piercing bone . Across its range , this species is caught incidentally by artisanal fishers using longlines , and to a lesser extent gillnets and fish traps . It is reputedly difficult and time @-@ consuming to catch ; a hooked ray may bury itself under large quantities of mud , becoming almost impossible to lift , or drag boats over substantial distances or underwater . The meat and perhaps the cartilage are used ; large specimens are cut into kilogram pieces for sale . Adults that are not used for food are often killed or maimed by fishers regardless . In the Mae Klong and Bang <unk> Rivers , the giant freshwater stingray is also increasingly targeted by sport fishers and for display in public aquariums . These trends pose conservation concerns ; the former because catch and release is not universally practiced and the post @-@ release survival rate is unknown , the latter because this species does not survive well in captivity . 
 The major threats to the giant freshwater stingray are overfishing and habitat degradation resulting from deforestation , land development , and damming . The construction of dams also fragments the population , reducing genetic diversity and increasing the susceptibility of the resulting subpopulations to extinction . Due to its low reproductive rate , the giant freshwater stingray is not resilient to anthropogenic pressures . In central Thailand and Cambodia , the population is estimated to have been reduced by 30 – 50 % over the past 20 – 30 years , with declines as severe as 95 % in some locations . The size of rays caught has decreased significantly as well ; for example , in Cambodia the average weight of a landed ray has dropped from 23 @.@ 2 kg ( 51 lb ) in 1980 to 6 @.@ 9 kg ( 15 lb ) in 2006 . The status of populations in other areas , such as Borneo , is largely unknown . As a result of documented declines , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Endangered overall , and as Critically Endangered in Thailand . In the 1990s , the Thai government initiated a captive breeding program at Chai Nat to bolster the population of this and other freshwater stingray species until the issue of habitat degradation can be remedied . However , by 1996 the program had been put on hold . 
 = Live action role @-@ playing game = 
 A live action role @-@ playing game ( LARP ) is a form of role @-@ playing game where the participants physically act out their characters ' actions . The players pursue goals within a fictional setting represented by the real world while interacting with each other in character . The outcome of player actions may be mediated by game rules or determined by consensus among players . Event arrangers called gamemasters decide the setting and rules to be used and facilitate play . 
 The first LARPs were run in the late 1970s , inspired by tabletop role @-@ playing games and genre fiction . The activity spread internationally during the 1980s and has diversified into a wide variety of styles . Play may be very game @-@ like or may be more concerned with dramatic or artistic expression . Events can also be designed to achieve educational or political goals . The fictional genres used vary greatly , from realistic modern or historical settings to fantastic or futuristic eras . Production values are sometimes minimal , but can involve elaborate venues and costumes . LARPs range in size from small private events lasting a few hours to large public events with thousands of players lasting for days . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 LARP has also been referred to as live role @-@ playing ( LRP ) , interactive literature , and free form role @-@ playing . Some of these terms are still in common use ; however , LARP has become the most commonly accepted term . It is sometimes written in lowercase , as <unk> . The live action in LARP is analogous to the term live action used in film and video to differentiate works with human actors from animation . Playing a LARP is often called <unk> , and one who does it is a <unk> . 
 = = Play overview = = 
 The participants in a LARP physically portray characters in a fictional setting , improvising their characters ' speech and movements somewhat like actors in improvisational theatre . This is distinct from tabletop role @-@ playing games , where character actions are described verbally . LARPs may be played in a public or private area and may last for hours or days . There is usually no audience . Players may dress as their character and carry appropriate equipment , and the environment is sometimes decorated to resemble the setting . LARPs can be one @-@ off events or a series of events in the same setting , and events can vary in size from a handful of players to several thousand . 
 Events are put on for the benefit of the players , who take on roles called player characters ( PCs ) that the players may create themselves or be given by the gamemasters . Players sometimes play the same character repeatedly at separate events , progressively developing the character and its relations with other characters and the setting . 
 Arrangers called gamemasters ( GMs ) determine the rules and setting of a LARP , and may also influence an event and act as referees while it is taking place . The GMs may also do the logistical work , or there may be other arrangers who handle details such as advertising the event , booking a venue , and financial management . Unlike the GM in a tabletop role @-@ playing game , a LARP GM seldom has an overview of everything that is happening during play because numerous participants may be interacting at once . For this reason , a LARP GM 's role is often less concerned with tightly maintaining a narrative or directly entertaining the players , and more with arranging the structure of the LARP before play begins and facilitating the players and crew to maintain the fictional environment during play . 
 Participants sometimes known as the crew may help the GMs to set up and maintain the environment of the LARP during play by acting as stagehands or playing non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) who fill out the setting . Crew typically receive more information about the setting and more direction from the GMs than players do . In a tabletop role @-@ playing game , a GM usually plays all the NPCs , whereas in a LARP , each NPC is typically played by a separate crew member . Sometimes players are asked to play NPCs for periods of an event . 
 Much of play consists of interactions between characters . Some LARP scenarios primarily feature interaction between PCs . Other scenarios focus on interaction between PCs and aspects of the setting , including NPCs , that are under the direction of the GMs . 
 = = History = = 
 LARP does not have a single point of origin , but was invented independently by groups in North America , Europe , and Australia . These groups shared an experience with genre fiction or tabletop role @-@ playing games , and a desire to physically experience such settings . In addition to tabletop role @-@ playing , LARP is rooted in childhood games of make believe , play fighting , costume parties , roleplay simulations , Commedia dell 'arte , improvisational theatre , psychodrama , military simulations , and historical reenactment groups such as the Society for Creative <unk> . 
 The earliest recorded LARP group is <unk> , which was founded in 1977 in the United States and focuses on fantasy battles . Soon after the release of the movie Logan 's Run in 1976 , rudimentary live role @-@ playing games based on the movie were run at US science fiction conventions . In 1981 , the International Fantasy Gaming Society ( <unk> ) started , with rules influenced by Dungeons & Dragons . <unk> was named after a fictional group in the 1981 novel Dream Park , which described futuristic LARPs . In 1982 , the Society for Interactive Literature , a predecessor of the Live Action <unk> Association ( <unk> ) , formed as the first recorded theatre @-@ style LARP group in the US . 
 Treasure Trap , formed in 1982 at Peckforton Castle , was the first recorded LARP game in the UK and influenced the fantasy LARPs that followed there . The first recorded LARP in Australia was run in 1983 , using the science fiction Traveller setting . In 1993 , White Wolf Publishing released Mind 's Eye Theatre , which is still played internationally and is probably the most commercially successful published LARP . The first German events were in about 1994 ( other sources claim 1992 or 1991 ) , with fantasy LARP in particular growing quickly there , so that since 2001 , two major German events have been run annually that have between 3000 and 7000 players each and attract players from around Europe . 
 Today , LARP is a widespread activity internationally . Games with thousands of participants are run by for @-@ profit companies , and a small industry exists to sell costume , armour and foam weapons intended primarily for LARP . 
 = = Purpose = = 
 Most LARPs are intended as games for entertainment . Enjoyable aspects can include the collaborative creation of a story , the attempt to overcome challenges in pursuit of a character 's objectives , and a sense of immersion in a fictional setting . LARPs may also include other game @-@ like aspects such as intellectual puzzles , and sport @-@ like aspects such as fighting with simulated weapons . 
 Some LARPs stress artistic considerations such as dramatic interaction or challenging subject matter . Avant @-@ garde or <unk> events have especially experimental approaches and high culture aspirations and are occasionally held in fine art contexts such as festivals or art museums . The themes of avant @-@ garde events often include politics , culture , religion , sexuality and the human condition . Such LARPs are common in the Nordic countries but also present elsewhere . 
 In addition to entertainment and artistic merit , LARP events may be designed for educational or political purposes . For example , the Danish secondary school <unk> <unk> uses LARP to teach most of its classes . Language classes can be taught by immersing students in a role @-@ playing scenario in which they are forced to improvise speech or writing in the language they are learning . Politically themed LARP events may attempt to awaken or shape political thinking within a culture . 
 Because LARP involves a controlled artificial environment within which people interact , it has sometimes been used as a research tool to test theories in social fields such as economics or law . For example , LARP has been used to study the application of game theory to the development of criminal law . 
 = = Fiction and reality = = 
 During a LARP , player actions in the real world represent character actions in an imaginary setting . Game rules , physical symbols and theatrical improvisation are used to bridge differences between the real world and the setting . For example , a rope could signify an imaginary wall . Realistic @-@ looking weapon props and risky physical activity are sometimes discouraged or forbidden for safety reasons . While the fictional timeline in a tabletop RPG often progresses in game @-@ time , which may be much faster or slower than the time passing for players , LARPs are different in that they usually run in real @-@ time , with game @-@ time only being used in special circumstances . 
 There is a distinction between when a player is in character , meaning they are actively representing their character , and when the player is out @-@ of @-@ character , meaning they are being themselves . Some LARPs encourage players to stay consistently in character except in emergencies , while others accept players being out @-@ of @-@ character at times . In a LARP , it is usually assumed that players are speaking and acting in character unless otherwise noted , which is the opposite of normal practice in tabletop role @-@ playing games . Character knowledge is usually considered to be separate from player knowledge , and acting upon information a character would not know may be viewed as cheating . 
 While most LARPs maintain a clear distinction between the real world and the fictional setting , pervasive LARPs mingle fiction with modern reality in a fashion similar to alternate reality games . Bystanders who are unaware that a game is taking place may be treated as part of the fictional setting , and in @-@ character materials may be incorporated into the real world . 
 = = Rules = = 
 Many LARPs have game rules that determine how characters can affect each other and the setting . The rules may be defined in a publication or created by the gamemasters . These rules may define characters ' capabilities , what can be done with various objects that exist in the setting , and what characters can do during the downtime between LARP events . Because referees are often not available to mediate all character actions , players are relied upon to be honest in their application of the rules . 
 Some LARP rules call for the use of simulated weapons such as foam weapons or airsoft guns to determine whether characters succeed in hitting one another in combat situations . In Russian LARP events , weapons made of hard plastic , metal or wood are used . The alternative to using simulated weapons is to pause role @-@ play and determine the outcome of an action symbolically , for example by rolling dice , playing rock @-@ paper @-@ scissors or comparing character attributes . 
 There are also LARPs that do without rules , instead relying on players to use their common sense or feel for dramatic appropriateness to cooperatively decide what the outcome of their actions will be . 
 = = Genres = = 
 LARPs can have any genre , although many use themes and settings derived from genre fiction . Some LARPs borrow a setting from an established work in another medium ( e.g. , The Lord of the Rings or the World of Darkness ) , while others use settings based on the real world or designed specifically for the LARP . Proprietary campaign settings , together with rulesets , are often the principal creative asset of LARP groups and LARP publishers . 
 LARPs set in the modern day may explore everyday concerns , or special interests such as espionage or military activity . Such LARPs sometimes resemble an Alternate Reality Game , an Assassin game , or a military simulation using live combat with airsoft , laser tag , or paintball markers . LARPs can also be set in historical eras or have semi @-@ historical settings with mythological or fantastical aspects incorporated . 
 Fantasy is one of the most common LARP genres internationally and is the genre that the largest events use . Fantasy LARPs are set in pseudo @-@ historical worlds inspired by fantasy literature and fantasy role @-@ playing games such as Dungeons & Dragons . These settings typically have magic , fantasy races , and limited technology . Many fantasy LARPs focus on adventure or on competition between character factions . In contrast , science fiction LARPs take place in futuristic settings with high technology and sometimes with extraterrestrial life . This describes a broad array of LARPs , including politically themed LARPs depicting dystopian or utopian societies and settings inspired by cyberpunk , space opera and post @-@ apocalyptic fiction . 
 Horror LARPs are inspired by horror fiction . Popular subgenres include zombie apocalypse and Cthulhu Mythos , sometimes using the published Cthulhu Live rules . The World of Darkness , published by White Wolf Publishing , is a widely used goth – punk horror setting in which players usually portray secretive supernatural creatures such as vampires and werewolves . This setting can be played using Mind 's Eye Theatre , which is a set of LARP rules also published by White Wolf . World of Darkness LARPs are usually played in a chronicle , a series of short events held at regular intervals , and are also popular at conventions . An international chronicle is run by White Wolf 's official fan club , the Camarilla . 
 = = Styles = = 
 LARP events have a wide variety of styles that often overlap . Simple distinctions can be made regarding the genre used , the presence of simulated weapons or abstract rules , and whether players create their own characters or have them assigned by gamemasters . There is also a distinction between scenarios that are only run once and those that are designed to be repeatable . A number of other common classifications follow . 
 Theatre @-@ style , or freeform , LARP is characterised by a focus on interaction between characters that are written by the gamemasters , not using simulated weapons for combat , and an eclectic approach to genre and setting . Events in this style typically only last a few hours and require relatively little preparation by players and are sometimes played at gaming conventions . Some murder mystery games where players are assigned characters and encouraged to roleplay freely also resemble theatre @-@ style LARP . 
 Some very large events known as fests ( short for festival ) have hundreds or thousands of participants who are usually split into competing character factions camped separately around a large venue . There are relatively few fests in the world , all based in Europe and Canada ; however , their size means that they have a significant influence on local LARP culture and design . At the other end of the size scale , some small events known as linear or line @-@ course LARPs feature a small group of PCs facing a series of challenges from NPCs and are often more tightly planned and controlled by GMs than other styles of LARP . 
 While some LARPs are open to participants of all ages , others have a minimum age requirement . There are also youth LARPs , specifically intended for children and young people . Some are run through institutions such as schools , churches , or the Scouts . Denmark has an especially high number of youth LARPs . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 Roleplaying may be seen as part of a movement in Western culture towards participatory arts , as opposed to traditional spectator arts . Participants in a LARP cast off the role of passive observer and take on new roles that are often outside of their daily life and contrary to their culture . The arrangers of a LARP and the other participants act as co @-@ creators of the game . This collaborative process of creating shared fictional worlds may be associated with a broader burgeoning " geek " culture in developed societies that is in turn associated with prolonged education , high uptake of information technology and increased leisure time . In comparison to the mainstream video @-@ game industry , which is highly commercialized and often marketed towards a male audience , LARP is less <unk> , and women actively contribute as authors and participants . 
 LARP is not well known in most countries and is sometimes confused with other role @-@ playing , reenactment , costuming , or dramatic activities . While fan and gamer culture in general has become increasingly mainstream in developed countries , LARP has often not achieved the same degree of cultural acceptability . This may be due to intolerance of the resemblance to childhood games of pretend , a perceived risk of over @-@ identification with the characters , and the absence of mass marketing . In US films such as the 2006 documentary <unk> , the 2007 documentary Monster Camp , and the 2008 comedy Role Models , fantasy LARP is depicted as somewhat ridiculous and escapist , but also treated affectionately as a " constructive social outlet " . In the Nordic countries , LARP has achieved a high level of public recognition and popularity . It is often shown in a positive light in mainstream media , with an emphasis on the dramatic and creative aspects . However , even in Norway , where LARP has greater recognition than in most other countries , it has still not achieved full recognition as a cultural activity by government bodies . 
 Communities have formed around the creation , play and discussion of LARP . These communities have developed a subculture that crosses over with role @-@ playing , fan , reenactment , and drama subcultures . Early LARP subculture focused on Tolkien @-@ like fantasy , but it later broadened to include appreciation of other genres , especially the horror genre with the rapid uptake of the World of Darkness setting in the 1990s . Like many subcultures , LARP groups often have a common context of shared experience , language , humour , and clothing that can be regarded by some as a lifestyle . 
 LARP has been a subject of academic research and theory . Much of this research originates from role @-@ players , especially from the publications of the Nordic <unk> role @-@ playing conventions . The broader academic community has recently begun to study LARP as well , both to compare it to other media and other varieties of interactive gaming , and also to evaluate it in its own right . 
 It has been speculated that LARP may one day evolve into a major industry in the form of location @-@ based games using ubiquitous computing . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Films 
 Dream Park ( 1981 ) 
 Mazes and Monsters ( 1982 ) 
 Role Models ( 2008 ) 
 The Wild Hunt ( 2009 ) 
 Lloyd the Conqueror ( 2011 ) 
 Knights of <unk> ( 2014 ) 
 Documentaries 
 <unk> ( 2006 ) 
 Monster Camp ( 2007 ) 
 Television 
 LARPing was featured in an episode of the animated American TV series American Dad ! titled " The Nova <unk> @-@ burgh Board of Tourism Presents : American Dad " , which was originally broadcast by TBS on May 2 , 2016 . In it Steve and his friends pretend they are a colony of " moisture farmers " , and his mother , Francine , joins in their game . 
 LARPing is parodied as <unk> ( short for Foam and Cardboard Legitimate Outdoor Role @-@ Playing ) in the Gravity Falls episode " Dungeons , Dungeons and More Dungeons " . 
 = Friday ( Rebecca Black song ) = 
 " Friday " is a song by American singer Rebecca Black , written and produced by Los Angeles record producers Clarence Jey and Patrice Wilson . It was released on March 14 , 2011 , by ARK Music Factory as Black 's debut single . The song features a rap verse from Wilson , which was uncredited on the single . Its music video caught a sudden surge of hits after Mystery Science Theater 3000 and <unk> comedian Michael J. Nelson called it " the worst video ever made " on Twitter and the song was featured on the Tosh.0 blog . The song 's reception was highly negative , mainly because of its songwriting and Black 's singing performance . 
 The original video was removed from YouTube on June 16 , 2011 due to legal disputes between ARK Music and Black herself . By then , it had already amassed more than 166 million views , with over 3 @.@ 2 million " dislikes " ( 88 % of total ratings ) from YouTube users . The video was uploaded to YouTube again on September 16 , 2011 . ( The video currently has 2 @.@ 08 million " dislikes " — 79 % of total ratings — on YouTube . ) Since the growth in popularity of the song and video , there have been numerous parody videos and remixes . Forbes stated that the notoriety of the song is another sign of the power of social media — specifically Twitter , Facebook , and Tumblr , in this instance — in the ability to create " overnight sensations . " 
 = = Background and production = = 
 " Friday " co @-@ writer Patrice Wilson , a worker at Ark Music Factory , explained that he wrote the lyrics " on a Thursday night going into a Friday . I was writing different songs all night and was like , ' Wow , I 've been up a long time and it 's Friday . ' And I was like , wow , it is Friday ! " 
 An Ark Music Factory client told Black 's mother about the company 's production services in late 2010 ; Black was 13 at the time , and living in Anaheim Hills , California . Black 's mother , Georgina Kelly , paid Ark Music $ 4 @,@ 000 for a song and accompanying video that included a choice of two pre @-@ written songs . According to Kelly , the payment covered one half or less of the production costs of the music video , and Black 's family could have paid nothing in exchange for giving up all rights to the song . Black chose " Friday " , as " the other song was about adult love – I haven 't experienced that yet . I felt like it was my personality in that song . " Ark Music extensively used the pitch @-@ correcting software Auto @-@ Tune . Although Kelly had some doubts over the quality of the lyrics , Black assured her that " I sang it as they wrote it , Mom . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Friday " uses the 50s progression , an I @-@ vi @-@ IV @-@ V chord progression that many popular songs have used such as " Heart and Soul " and " Unchained Melody " . It is performed in the key of B major at a tempo of 112 beats per minute . According to Randy Lewis of Los Angeles Times , the familiar structure contributes to the song 's catchiness , making it what others have called an earworm . The song also sees Black on a harmony track . In a review for Rolling Stone , writer Matthew Perpetua described the vocals as having " a peculiar tonality that inadvertently highlights the absurdity of boilerplate pop lyrics , " adding that the tone in the refrain " sounds unlike anything else in pop music . " He noted the sound as being not entirely agreeable to listen to , but stated that Black ultimately ends up " sounding like a distinct singer with an alluring sort of anti @-@ charisma . " The lyrics of the song speak about " hanging out with friends and having fun . " Paul Asay of Plugged In noted that lyrics reflect the happenings of a day , in the life of a teenager like Black , like eating breakfast and going to school . " She 's excited ' cause it 's Friday . Which means a weekend full of possibility awaits , " he concluded . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song has received almost universally negative reviews from music critics , mainly because of its poorly @-@ written lyrics , instrumentation , and Black 's singing voice . It was rumored to be hated because of the gimmick Black pulled on YouTube during the YouTube Rewind 2011 , where her song was " Number One " . Lyndsey Parker of Yahoo ! Music asked if it could be " the worst song ever . " On March 29 , 2011 , it surpassed Justin Bieber 's " Baby " as the most disliked YouTube video , with 1 @.@ 16 million negative votes , and once had over 3 million " dislikes " , accounting for 88 % of the total ratings of the video . The video was later removed , though it has since been officially re @-@ uploaded . The co @-@ writer and producer of " Friday " , Clarence Jey said about the song that " the concept we feel seems to have crossed a lot of boundaries , for the better or worse . " Observers have called it " bizarre , " " inept , " and " hilariously dreadful . " The song and Black herself were " savaged " on social networks across the Internet , while being seen as a " YouTube laughing stock . " On YouTube , the video was met with negative comments and video responses , including comments interpreted as " violent " . Kevin Rutherford , a columnist for Billboard magazine , wrote , " Black 's video for ' Friday ' is one of those rare occurrences where even the most seasoned critics of Internet culture don 't know where to begin . From the singing straight out of Auto @-@ Tuned hell to lyrics such as ' Tomorrow is Saturday / And Sunday comes afterwards / I don 't want this weekend to end ' and a hilariously bad rap about passing school buses , ' Friday ' is something that simply must be seen and heard to be fully appreciated . " Many other reviewers also singled out the lyrics in particular for criticism , which were described as " overly simple and repetitive " by TNT Magazine . Jim Edwards of BNET and Doug Gross of CNN both noted that the rap break from the considerably older rapper was " creepy . " Time ranked it number two on a list of " Top 10 Songs with Silly Lyrics . " 
 Despite the overwhelmingly negative reviews , a few reviewers had positive things to say about the song and video . Entertainment Weekly writer Joseph Lynch noted that there was " something sickeningly catchy about this tune that keeps you coming back for more . " Rolling Stone 's Perpetua stated , " When you see this video , you immediately notice everything that it does ' wrong ' , but it actually gets a lot of things about pop music right , if just by accident . " OK ! Magazine also noted that " some are calling the 13 @-@ year @-@ old signed singer the next Justin Bieber . " After watching the video , singer Chris Brown said : " Honest opinion ? It was great . I 'll be jammin ' to it on Friday , Friday . " Fellow teenage singer Miley Cyrus denied that she had criticized Black , saying " I am a fan " and that she sang " Friday " while driving . Simon Cowell praised Black , saying " I love her [ and ] the fact that she 's gotten so much publicity . People are so upset about the song , but I think it 's hysterical . [ ... ] Anyone who can create this much controversy within a week , I want to meet . I love people like that . " He observed that " any song to do with the weekend annoys you . It reminds me of ' Saturday Night ' ... It 's what we call a ' hair @-@ dryer song , ' a song girls sing into their hair dryers as they 're getting ready to go out . But the fact that it 's making people so angry is brilliant . " Cowell advised Black not to " listen to anyone over the age of 18 . I 'm being deadly serious . Whatever she 's done has worked . Whether you like her or not , she 's the most talked @-@ about artist in America right now . Nobody over the age of 18 should understand her or like her . So she should just do it her way . " 
 On May 6 , 2012 , Patrice Wilson released his sequel to the song " Friday " , titled " Happy " , focusing on Saturdays . In December 2013 , Rebecca Black released her own sequel , entitled " Saturday " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 By March 21 , 2011 , the " Friday " music video had been viewed more than 30 million times on YouTube . Forbes estimated that as of that date , Black and ARK Music had earned $ 20 @,@ 000 from YouTube 's revenue @-@ sharing program , and Billboard estimated iTunes sales of approximately 43 @,@ 000 copies , roughly equivalent to $ 26 @,@ 700 in royalties . Within a week after being released on iTunes , it had jumped to 19 on their sales chart , on March 19 , 2011 . " Friday " debuted on the US Hot Digital Songs chart at number 57 and went on to peak at number 38 . " Friday " debuted on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 33 on March 21 , 2011 . The song entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 72 and rose to 58 the next week . It sold 87 @,@ 000 copies in the United States over its first two weeks and has gone on to sell 442 @,@ 000 copies , as of December 2013 . The song also received airplay in Sweden . In the United States , it was played 12 times from March 16 to 22 , considered low for a Hot 100 song . Despite the song 's strong performance elsewhere , Georgina Kelly claimed in late March 2011 that her daughter had not received any money from the song 's sales to that point in time , saying " We haven 't received a dime from anywhere . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and summary = = = 
 The concept for the music video is based on the lyrics and presented as a typical Friday for Black . She wakes up and goes to school , meeting her friends on the way . In the evening , after debating whether to sit in the front or back of a convertible , Black and her friends ride the car to a party at 7 : 45 pm . Patrice Wilson appears near the end of the song to deliver a short rap . The video was shot on January 6 , 2011 at Black 's father 's house with friends and family as extras , and requiring multiple takes over 12 hours . Some of those extras became stars in their own right ; her friends Benni <unk> , Amanda Cooper and Hayley <unk> . Ark Music , according to Black 's parents , cautioned them and her that they should not expect her to become famous . Black hoped that her friends and family would enjoy watching the video on YouTube and that it would perhaps help her to later begin a singing career . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video was posted on February 10 , 2011 and received 4 @,@ 000 views , enough to please Black , before comedian Michael J. Nelson 's Twitter account and a Tosh.0 blog post , " Songwriting Isn ’ t for Everyone " , drew attention to it on March 11 , 2011 , turning the video into a viral hit . Criticism of the song 's lyrics , the use of Auto @-@ Tune on Black 's vocals , as well as the content of the video also caused it to become viral . On May 9 , 2011 , comments became subject to prior approval for posting . Two days later , commenting was disabled altogether and archives removed . By June 15 , 2011 , the video had more than 166 million views , and 3 @.@ 2 million " dislikes " from YouTube users against just 454 @,@ 000 " likes " . It also peaked in the top 20 most watched YouTube videos of all time . After Ark Music attempted to begin charging $ 2 @.@ 99 to watch the video a limited number of times on YouTube in June , Black asked YouTube to take the video down . 
 After reading the harsh reviews of " Friday " , Black said that " those hurtful comments really shocked me . " Ark Music offered to take the video down from YouTube , but Black refused the offer , saying that she did not wish " to give the haters the satisfaction that they got me so bad I gave up . " Black 's father has accompanied her in public to guard against potential <unk> . In response to criticism over the song 's significant use of Auto @-@ Tune , Black performed an acoustic version during an interview with ABC News , which earned over 180 @,@ 000 dislikes on YouTube ( 84 % of total ratings ) by November 2011 . Later in the interview Black 's mother , Kelly , stated that she was " angry and upset " after Black was brought to tears by comments , such as " I hope you go cut yourself and die " and " ' I hope you cut yourself and get an eating disorder so you 'll look pretty . " Black said , however , that soon she was able to ignore such comments , and asked Justin Bieber , her idol , to perform a duet with her . Although Bieber has not released an official announcement regarding the offer , he posted on Twitter " sunday comes after <unk> ? weird . " Bieber later sang part of the chorus at one of his concerts . Rolling Stone 's Perpetua again praised Black after the interview and said , " She is actually a pretty decent singer . [ ... ] She is a total sweetheart . [ ... ] Black comes off as a well @-@ adjusted , happy and grateful kid . " He also pointed out Black 's intention to donate part of the profits from the song to school arts programs and relief efforts in Japan following the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami . Benni <unk> , who became known as " that girl in pink " and appears during the second verse of the video , released her own song entitled " Can You See Me Now " and created an anti @-@ bullying organization ( That Girl In Pink Foundation ) due to the negative response she got from " Friday " . 
 The video for " Friday " was later placed at number one in the NME list of " 50 Worst Music Videos " . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Not long after the " Friday " video went viral on YouTube , Black and her mother , Georgina Kelly , got into legal issues with Ark Music over rights to the song . In a March 29 , 2011 letter from Kelly 's lawyer to Ark Music , it was alleged that Ark Music failed to fulfill the terms of their November 2010 agreement by not giving her the song and video 's master recordings , by claiming Black as exclusively signed to the label , and by exploiting the song without permission – for example , selling a " Friday " ringtone . While Wilson stated that Kelly " will get the masters and the song ... [ t ] hey can have it all " , and agreed that Black was not exclusive to Ark , his attorney claimed that Ark owns the copyright for the song and the November agreement is invalid . In June 2011 , Ark Music Factory started charging $ 2 @.@ 99 to watch the music video on YouTube . Black 's initial response was through a message through her Twitter account saying : " Thanks for all the messages regarding the $ 2 @.@ 99 fee added to Friday video , I have nothing to do with this ! ! " 
 On June 16 , 2011 , YouTube took down the official video for " Friday " . Instead a message in place of the video read : " This video is no longer available due to a copyright claim by Rebecca Black . Sorry about that . " A spokesman for Rebecca Black said her legal team had asked YouTube to take the video down because of an ongoing legal dispute with the song 's producers Ark Music Factory . Ark Music Factory responded by saying it was disappointed that Black decided to have the video pulled from YouTube despite the two parties being in " good faith negotiations " . It added : " There 's been an ongoing , open dialogue with our company . So we were blindsided to get a ' Take Down Notice ' alleging copyright infringement instead of a call or e @-@ mail from Rebecca 's representatives . Our use of the video has fully been authorized ( as evidenced by four uninterrupted months and 160 million @-@ plus viewings without objection ) by both Ms. Black and the copyright holder . Regardless , we are going to continue to take the high road and work out the complaint as soon as possible , so that the million @-@ plus people who watch Friday for free each day can continue to enjoy the video . " On September 16 , 2011 , the video was restored to YouTube , on Black 's official channel . 
 = = Cover versions and popular culture = = 
 = = = Glee Cast cover = = = 
 A cover version was released by the cast of season two of the television series Glee . The cast performed it on the show as well . The official release features cast members Puck ( Mark Salling ) , Artie ( Kevin McHale ) and Sam ( Chord Overstreet ) on vocals , as part of the prom festivities on the " Prom Queen " episode that aired on May 10 , 2011 . Series co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy explained to The Hollywood Reporter the use of the viral hit as a tribute to popular culture . He said : " There ’ s a rule for it that 's explained in the show . The Glee Club is hired to perform songs for the prom and they were told by the principal to please do popular songs that the kids know . " Murphy noted that Glee 's " Friday " cover offers a different take since it 's sung by males for other 17 @-@ year olds . The show pays tribute to pop culture and , love it or hate it , that song is pop culture . " 
 Charts 
 = = = Other versions and performances = = = 
 On April 1 , 2011 , " Friday " was performed by Stephen Colbert , Jimmy Fallon , Taylor Hicks and The Roots on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon . The New York Knicks City Dancers joined in . Jimmy Fallon released " Friday " as part of his 2012 Warner Records album , Blow Your Pants Off , which featured high profile acts such as Paul McCartney and Bruce Springsteen . The album won Best Comedy Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards . 
 The song has also been covered in a recording by Richard Cheese , and live in concerts by Todd Rundgren , Nick Jonas , Katy Perry , and Justin Bieber . Singer Katy Perry performed the song on selected dates during her California Dreams Tour , including at the Rod Laver Arena , Newcastle Entertainment Centre , TD Garden , Air Canada Centre and the <unk> Center . During the August 5 concert at the Nokia Theatre L.A. Live , Rebecca Black joined Perry onstage , performing the song as a duet . 
 Numerous parodies of " Friday " have been uploaded to YouTube and become viral in their own right . Conan O 'Brien and Andy Richter also made a joint parody entitled " Thursday " on the Conan show on TBS . The YouTube phenomenon Bad Lip Reading was launched when an anonymous music and video producer replaced the audio to the " Friday " video with new music and lyrics about gang fighting . " Gang Fight " , released in March 2011 , earned Bad Lip Reading a million hits and thousands of subscribers , with many spoofs soon following . 
 Black appears as herself in the music video of Katy Perry 's single " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " . She appears as the host of a party in the house next door to that of " Kathy Beth Terry " . At the end of the video , " Terry " attempts to blame the excesses of the party ( which had subsequently moved to her own house ) on Black , only for her parents ( Corey Feldman and Debbie Gibson ) to disbelieve her . 
 ARK Music Factory launched its " Ark 's <unk> Friday Covers " project , showcasing cover versions of " Friday " by well @-@ known artists alongside other user @-@ submitted tributes , re @-@ works , and parodies of the song / video and inviting users to submit their versions for relaying through Ark Music Factory 's site . In November 2012 , multiple outlets suggested that Nicole Westbrook was " the new Rebecca Black " , on release of Patrice Wilson 's " It 's Thanksgiving " . Kohl 's Department Stores used a modified version of the song as its 2011 Black Friday advertising jingle . The hook " It 's Friday , Friday , gotta get down on Friday " was changed to " It 's Black Friday , Black Friday , Gotta go to Kohl 's on Black Friday " . 
 Black made her national television debut by performing a mash @-@ up of the song along with her second single , " My Moment " , during America 's Got Talent 's result night for the YouTube Special round on August 10 , 2011 . The round featured various acts who have auditioned via YouTube . Rebecca Black sang an acoustic version of the song on Good Morning America . Rebecca performed Friday along with " My Moment " , live in Suncorp Place , Sydney as a part of Telstra 's 4G LTE network launch . She also sang " Friday " live on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Homeless ( Leona Lewis song ) = 
 " Homeless " is a song by British singer @-@ songwriter Leona Lewis from her debut studio album , Spirit ( 2007 ) . The song was written by Swedish songwriter Jörgen Elofsson and produced by Steve Mac . Musically , it is an R & B Power ballad , with instrumentation consisting of a piano and a guitar . The song 's lyrics revolve around Lewis singing about waiting for her boyfriend to come home to where she is waiting for him , but feels homeless without him . The song garnered mixed reviews from music critics , some of whom praised Lewis 's vocal performance but criticized its composition . Upon the release of Spirit , the song debuted at number 173 on the UK Singles Chart on the strength of digital download sales . Lewis performed " Homeless " at the annual WXKS @-@ FM Boston KISS Concert in 2008 , along with " Bleeding Love " and " Better in Time " . It was also included on the set list of The Labyrinth tour in 2010 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Homeless " was written by Swedish songwriter Jörgen Elofsson , and produced by Steve Mac . It is an R & B power ballad , which lasts for a duration of three minutes and 50 seconds . The song was composed on common time in the key of B minor at 68 beats per minute . Instrumentation is provided by a piano and a guitar . Lewis 's vocal range spans nearly two octaves from low note of A3 to the high note of B5 . The song 's lyrics revolve around Lewis singing about waiting for her boyfriend to come home to where she is waiting for him , but feels homeless without his presence . The opening lyrics are " Wait here for you to call me / For you to tell me that ev <unk> 's a big mistake . " Nick Levine for Digital Spy described Lewis 's vocals in the lyric " In this cold I 'm walking aimless , feeling helpless " as " a tour de force of despair and misery " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song garnered mixed reviews from music critics . Matt O 'Leary for Virgin Media complimented " Homeless " as well as " I Will Be " , and wrote that when the emphasis is laid purely on the singer 's vocals without too much " glossy production trappings " , her " uniqueness is allowed to shine . " Levine was critical of " Homeless " in general , but praised some of its compositional elements . Although he thought that the song was " almost unbearably bleak " , Levine praised the long note which Lewis sustains during the bridge , and wrote that " the 12 @-@ second ' <unk> ' that jump @-@ starts the crescendo of ' Homeless ' is one of the most dazzling pop moments of the year . " Kitty Empire for The Guardian wrote , " Lewis ' voice is impressively elastic throughout but lacks any grit or style . It is too perfect , jumping up ladders of notes on ' Homeless ' , never catching , never breaking . " A reviewer for The Sun described " Homeless " a " string @-@ drenched , tear @-@ jerker . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Lewis performed " Homeless " for the first time at the annual WXKS @-@ FM Boston KISS Concert in 2008 , along with " Bleeding Love " and " Better in Time " . It was also included on the set list of her The Labyrinth tour in 2010 , and performed as the fifteenth song . The song was later included on the The Labyrinth Tour Live from The O2 DVD . The set was decorated in the style of a forest ; acrobats performed as they were hanging from the ceiling on large pieces of fabric while Lewis wore a light pink sequined dress and barefoot . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Standard version ( 2007 ) 
 " Homeless " – 3 : 50 
 Deluxe edition ( 2008 ) 
 " Homeless ( 2008 version ) " – 3 : 50 
 The Labyrinth Tour : Live from the O2 
 " Homeless " ( Live from the 02 ) – 4 : 09 
 = = Credits = = 
 Songwriting – Jörgen Elofsson 
 Production – Steve Mac 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Spirit , Sony BMG , J Records , Syco . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Spirit , " Homeless " debuted at number 173 on the strength of digital download sales in the chart issue released on 24 November 2007 . 
 = Until the Quiet Comes = 
 Until the Quiet Comes is the fourth studio album by American electronic producer Flying Lotus , released on September 26 , 2012 , by Warp Records . After releasing his 2010 album Cosmogramma , Flying Lotus continued his creative partnership with bassist Thundercat and worked with him on music that led to the album . For Until the Quiet Comes , he drew on African percussion and psychedelic musical influences , human @-@ subconscious and dream world concepts , and different mixing techniques and dynamics . He recorded for two years at his home in Los Angeles primarily using an Ableton Live sequencer along with other instruments and software , and recorded with guest vocalists including Erykah Badu , Thom Yorke , Laura Darlington , and Niki Randa . 
 An electronic jazz album , Until the Quiet Comes features free jazz elements , varying musical tones , contracting scale , and shifts in feel . Its songs are sequenced together and characterized by ghostly vocal production , irregular drum beats , pulsating percussive textures , trembling basslines , trilled synthesizers , and fluctuating samples . The album has a journey @-@ like concept and dreamy musical narrative , which Flying Lotus conceived through astral projection and felt could be interpreted uniquely by listeners . Music writers interpret it as a musical accompaniment to dreams , as well as emotional introspection by Flying Lotus . 
 Until the Quiet Comes was promoted with two singles and a short film featuring music from the album . Flying Lotus also embarked on a supporting international tour during October to November 2012 , performing at venues in North America and abroad . The album debuted at number 34 on the US Billboard 200 and sold 13 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Until the Quiet Comes received rave reviews from music critics , who praised its complex music and Flying Lotus ' sound engineering . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2010 , Flying Lotus released his third album Cosmogramma to critical acclaim and mainstream exposure . He recorded the album while grieving his mother 's death , and titled it as a reference to his late great @-@ aunt Alice Coltrane . The album showcased his dense , loose mix of electronic and live instrumentation with avant @-@ garde jazz , dance , and hip hop influences . During its recording , he developed a creative relationship with contributing bassist Thundercat , a member of his Brainfeeder record label . They continued working together on Flying Lotus ' 2010 EP Pattern + Grid World , which continued the dense electronic style of Cosmogramma . They developed more musical ideas together , from which Flying Lotus culled and produced for Thundercat 's debut album The Golden Age of Apocalypse in 2011 . 
 For Until the Quiet Comes , Flying Lotus was inspired by African percussion music and psychedelic bands such as Silver Apples , Can , Stereolab , Portishead , and Gentle Giant . He also returned to listening to the music of his relatives Alice and John Coltrane after listening excessively to austere electronica while recording Cosmogramma . Musically , he wanted to avoid repeating himself and chose a more minimal direction for the album , seeking to eschew the " strange sense of urgency " of Cosmogramma 's music for " tension and release " . He elaborated on his direction for the album in an interview for The National , saying that " I think I 'd have been in a bad position if I tried to recreate the same energy as I did on Cosmogramma – like , go in further . How about we pull back , try to do something that gets to the core of the emotional sentiment . Not so grand , more intimate . But still have the core of what it is . " 
 Conceptually , Flying Lotus pursued human @-@ subconscious and dream world themes . He sought to tone down Cosmogramma 's grandiose , universal concept and create a timeless , journey @-@ like work with Until the Quiet Comes , from which he felt listeners could interpret their own stories . He imagined himself astral projecting when conceiving the album and tried to translate ideas from fiction he had read into music , including holographic universes , metaphysics , New Age philosophy , and <unk> . In conceiving a narrative for the album , he drew on Joseph Campbell 's hero 's journey literary theory to introduce a world , characters , and situations musically . He characterized the album as both " a collage of mystical states , dreams , sleep and lullabies " , and " a children 's record , a record for kids to dream to " . He clarified the idea in an interview for Spin as " that whole experience of being innocent in this new world that you don 't really understand . I imagined Little Nemo on a flying bed floating over the city , and this is the soundtrack to it . " Flying Lotus felt more confident in his ideas and as a recording artist after striving to distinguish himself from his contemporaries on previous albums . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Flying Lotus started working on Until the Quiet Comes at his home in Mount Washington , Los Angeles , which featured more acoustic space than his previous house in Echo Park . He recorded the album for two years , using a spacious room there as a recording studio . He revisited scrapped ideas from the sessions for Thundercat 's debut album and revised their direction for Until the Quiet Comes . The song " Hunger " developed from a demo he had recorded for the soundtrack to one of the Twilight films , and " Sultan 's Request " was performed live by Flying Lotus for three years before the album . For " Electric Candyman " , he used a beat he had prepared for sessions that ultimately fell through with Burial , and he used a five @-@ year @-@ old recording with <unk> for the second half of " The Nightcaller " . 
 Flying Lotus recorded Until the Quiet Comes in a three @-@ part process — first composing <unk> drafts for songs , then refining them for several months with additional instrumentation to make them substantial , and finally mixing the songs for a cohesive album . Unlike with his previous work , he concentrated on his music 's dynamics rather than just its production when working on the album . Interested in music theory and arrangements , he started taking piano lessons at the beginning of the album 's recording to learn more chords and progressions . Rather than emphasize conventional song structure elements such as hooks and choruses , Flying Lotus composed instrumentals that he found to be more intellectual and less danceable than Cosmogramma and treated them as the basis of tracks when recording the album . He also recorded melodic refrains to evoke feelings of childlike innocence on songs . 
 Flying Lotus worked primarily with an Ableton Live music sequencer through his MacBook Pro laptop . At his home studio , he had upgraded monitors acquired from after his move there , and various digital and analog instruments , including a drum kit , a Fender Rhodes piano , Wurlitzer electric pianos , Access Virus and Minimoog Voyager synthesizers , a drum machine , three Mac <unk> , and a DSP unit . He played drums without quantizing them and referred to the personal library of samples he had amassed over his career while producing the album . He recorded the song " Dream to Me " the day after purchasing a <unk> synthesizer . He ultimately recorded over 60 songs for the album before editing them down . 
 To attain certain dynamics on songs , Flying Lotus studied different mixing techniques and switched software midway through the album 's recording . He later cited the switch as the reason for the album 's completion being overdue , although he felt that it was productive to challenge himself as a student of music . Flying Lotus employed a trial and error approach to mixing and applied his new knowledge of compression to attain a more satisfactory result before the album 's master . He also sought to limit distracting frequencies and segues in favor of more important sounds throughout the album . To make certain sounds more affecting , he used the side @-@ chain compression technique to trigger compression of different organ , strings , and bass sounds upon a drum kick on a song . He said of his production and the music 's dynamic range in an interview for Electronic Musician , " I 've been learning to bring things down before I even start . I 'll start composing a track at like – <unk> , then I have all this headroom to play with afterward . I 've learned how to tuck and limit things , learned to EQ before you limit . " 
 As with his previous releases , Until the Quiet Comes was mastered by engineer Daddy Kev at his Echo Chamber Studio in Eagle Rock . He used a Pro Tools 9 workstation and various EQ plug @-@ ins on his Mac Pro , while working at a 24 @-@ bit , 96 kHz audio quality to comply with iTunes ' " Mastered for iTunes " regulations . To preserve the tracks ' original dynamics , Daddy Kev used a signal chain that processed both digital and analog signals . He found the mastering process to be " very intimate " and likened it to " giving birth " for Flying Lotus , saying in an interview , " We may go through multiple mixes so a certain 808 can sit right in the pocket for him , and while he 's finishing his edits its my job to boost just the right things by a decibel or two , and keep things sonically correct . " He used both professional and club @-@ oriented amplifiers and monitors to minimize harmonic distortion and maintain Flying Lotus ' minimalist aesthetic , which , along with his need to find a quiet mental space , inspired the album 's title : " I wanted to set people up to this idea , before they even heard it , that the quiet was a key word in the whole thing ... [ A ] part of pulling it back is some kind of growing up . " 
 = = = Collaborations = = = 
 Flying Lotus collaborated with other musicians for additional elements on songs . He worked with instrumentalist and musical director Miguel Atwood Ferguson to incorporate strings arrangements to songs . Thundercat played live bass on nine of the album 's songs . To develop basslines for songs , Flying Lotus had Thundercat 's bass plugged into a DI unit of a FireWire interface as he improvised riffs to Flying Lotus ' suggestions . Flying Lotus captured flat @-@ levelled bass ideas into the interface , which allowed him to manipulate their tone and integrate them with digital instruments and samples on songs . He attributes the continuity of the album 's music to Thundercat 's bass playing . For certain tracks on the album , Flying Lotus wanted to use vocalists that would " see their sound as texture as opposed to the song " , and said of this preference in an interview for Vibe , " Sometimes singers overdo it so that you only focus on the voice , which is cool sometimes , but it 's my record – I 'm producing it – so the songs should be about the track as a whole . The people that are my favorites are ones who have such a respect for what 's already there . They don 't try to approach it thinking they 're going to turn it into a song , but rather going to add to it . " 
 Flying Lotus enlisted other vocalists , including Thom Yorke on " Electric Candyman " , Laura Darlington on " Phantasm " , Erykah Badu on " See Thru to U " , and Thundercat on " DMT Song " . Yorke wanted to be involved with the album after collaborating on " ... And the World Laughs with You " for Cosmogramma , and exchanged his vocals via email . Flying Lotus admired him for knowing " when things work and [ when ] they don 't . He doesn 't bullshit in that way . He spends his time wisely . I wish I could say that about a lot more people . " He met Badu through Thundercat , who had played in her backing band and collaborated with her on The Golden Age of Apocalypse , and started working on her own upcoming album while recording Until the Quiet Comes . Flying Lotus also planned to work with Jonny Greenwood , but the collaboration fell through . Instead , he appropriated music from one of Greenwood 's film soundtracks for the song " Hunger " , for which Greenwood is credited as composer . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Until the Quiet Comes is characterized by varying musical tones , contracting scale , both consonant and dissonant sounds , counterpoint , and shifts in feel . Its complex , diverse soundscapes deviate from popular music song forms and employ contrast and improvisational adjustments in mood , structure , and time signature . Darryl Kirchner of The Huffington Post notes an emphasis on timbre throughout the album . Mark Richardson of Pitchfork observes Flying Lotus " putting a smaller frame around each individual part " throughout the album 's shifts and finds the " energy " to be " just as strong " as on his previous albums , but " concentrated into a smaller space . " Although he finds it less " imposing " than its predecessor , Thomas May of musicOMH comments that " Until the Quiet Comes is like a chamber concerto to Cosmogramma 's symphony " , noting " an increased sense of space and separation " on the former . 
 Songs on the album incorporate ghostly vocal production , winding basslines , uptempo drum @-@ and @-@ bass fills , broad orchestral elements , pulsating percussive textures , bright keyboards , trilled synthesizers , and fluctuating samples . They are sequenced together and exhibit a diminishing pace from the end of one track to the start of another . Joe <unk> of Rolling Stone views that the album 's guest vocalists " float into [ Flying Lotus 's ] realm like visitors , just as fragile and malleable as the other elements he employs . This reiterates the album 's feel as one complete story , instead of disparate songs . " Vincent Pollard of Exclaim ! comments that most of the vocals are " used as subtle textures " and observes Flying Lotus " employing more organic tropes in his digital mix " . He incorporates horn arrangements and live drum patterns , while his programmed beats evoke the " in the pocket " drumming of percussionists such as Rashied Ali . The songs also exhibits Flying Lotus ' characteristic mix of skittering , muffled percussion atop slightly irregular drum beats , accompanied by Thundercat 's trembling basslines . 
 Stylistically , the album eschews Flying Lotus ' hip hop roots for jazz influences , including free form jazz tonality and undertones , and jazz @-@ based time signatures and patterns . Gabrielle Ahern of CMJ calls it " a moody , electronic version of experimental jazz . " Jonny <unk> of Time Out views the album as " a digital jazz record which pushes hip hop beats and R & B melodies into bold , new syncopated and atonal territory . " Tony Ware of Electronic Musician attributes " certain chord choices and the interest in astral mystical states that permeates Until the Quiet Comes " to Flying Lotus ' " family lineage " of jazz musicians . Uncut finds it " often reminiscent of his auntie 's work " , while Consequence of Sound 's Derek Staples perceives a " free jazz aesthetic " similar to " his great @-@ uncle John Coltrane 's Ascension " , viewing both albums as " exercise [ s ] in dense rhythmic layers and melodic dissonance . " The album also repurposes elements of pop , soul , fusion , and psychedelia in a modern classical fashion . Q describes the album as " a lush , almost psychedelic mood piece . " Lucy Jones of NME attributes the album 's " meander [ ing ] and experiment [ ing ] " to a progressive rock influence . 
 = = = Concept and interpretations = = = 
 Until the Quiet Comes has been described as having a dreamy musical narrative by Uncut , and Mojo , who called it " quite literally , a dream album " . Andy Beta from Spin likened it to the " dreams within dreams within dreams " concept from the 2010 film Inception . Karen Lawler of State said " if the limbo between awake and sleeping , dreams and nightmares could be expressed through music , this album might well be it . " Jeff Weiss , writing in LA Weekly , felt the record had a loose concept that " surrounds the nocturnal visions of a child lost in <unk> dreams " and likens it to a narcotic film in the vein of Little Nemo and Michel Gondry , writing that " swirling voices seem like clouds <unk> . Snare crashes mimic obscene villains . Hard beats propel chase scenes . <unk> gurgle like goofy dancing sidekicks . Erykah Badu plays the all @-@ powerful good witch . Thom Yorke guests as the <unk> sorcerer with the seraphic yawp . " 
 In the opinion of Will Ryan from Beats Per Minute , Until the Quiet Comes was another " journey " concept work by Flying Lotus , but distinguished it as an introspective , " subconscious " journey following the " temporal " journey idea of his 2006 debut 1983 , the " geographical " 2008 album Los Angeles , and the " cosmic " , " out @-@ and @-@ out musical " Cosmogramma . Rory Gibb from The Quietus wrote that the narrative on this album veered into " the corridors " of Flying Lotus ' " own mind " , interpreting his guest vocalists as " disembodied phantoms , reanimated figments of his imagination stripped of agency and directed to their roles by [ his ] subconscious . " Gibb argued that Until the Quiet Comes was " an important and significant album " partly for engaging with " grand narratives " such as " the shifting identities of both humans and electronic music forms in a digital age " , and " the internet 's erosion of memory processes " . 
 Reef Younis of Clash perceived an emotional context to the album , writing that , " where [ Flying Lotus ] grieved on Cosmogramma , he believes on Until The Quiet Comes and there 's a burgeoning sense of hope and coherence and optimism " . Arnold Pan of PopMatters calls Until the Quiet Comes " a subliminal soundtrack to the postmodern experience of everyday life " and views that Flying Lotus ' subtle , " sentient and sensual " details throughout the album 's music represent " an undertone of yearning emotion and even soulfulness that separates [ his ] aesthetic on Quiet from that of other producer @-@ types who may be just as proficient , technically speaking . " 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The opening track " All In " incorporates bells , kick and snare drums , shakers , harps , guitar , and electric bass . It features a reverberating , high @-@ pitched note , whose discordant sound is subsequently offset by keyboard flourishes and cursory snare drums . Lilting background vocals during the song 's melodic section lead to a bass kick and aggressive drum patterns . The wistful " Getting There " expands on the previous track with a basic drum kick , emotional vocals by Niki Randa , Sonar blip sounds , chimes , and a walking bassline . It has heavy emphasis on the first and third beat of every measure . " Until the Colours Come " contains modulated synthesizers . " Heave ( n ) " features bright , round keyboards , jazz and electronica elements , and tonal shading . Mark Richardson of Pitchfork views that the music from " All In " to " Heave ( n ) " comprise an opening section on the album that " functions as a sort of miniature suite of downtempo jazz . " 
 " Tiny Tortures " features echoing , <unk> guitar , minimal glitch sounds , and post @-@ rock melodies . The song begins with a skeletal , irregular rhythm , comprising a digital wood block , snare drum , and hissing cymbals , that is subsequently contrasted by Thundercat 's harmonic bass runs . " All the Secrets " has a new @-@ age sound and features Casiotone breakdowns , deftly timed vocal samples , restless drumming , poignant piano , and post @-@ dub elements . " Sultan 's Request " has a square wave bassline , tense synthesizers , and transitioning pitches and textures , spanning from a low @-@ end drop to an upper register of high @-@ pitched samples and steady hand claps . " Putty Boy Strut " features an alien critter voice , complex drum programming , and acousmatic jazz guitars . It concludes with a brief violin section . 
 " See Thru to U " incorporates jazz fusion and funk styles . It features a loose arrangement , tom @-@ tom drums , hi @-@ hats , double bass , and tribal rhythms . Erykah Badu 's vocals on the song are distorted and layered into loose , overlapping patterns , scat arrangements , and high @-@ pitched vocal runs . " DMT Song " and " Nightcaller " serve as the album 's centerpiece . The former song , titled after the natural psychedelic compound dimethyltryptamine , incorporates jazz @-@ funk and light tenor to chorused falsetto vocals by Thundercat . It transitions into " The Nightcaller " , which has analog 4 / 4 percussion , piercing synthesizers , and interplay between Thundercat 's bass and virtuosic cello . The song 's smooth , muffled beat climaxes as a euphoric crescendo . The densely textured title track features expressive bass playing by Thundercat , continuous gong and handclaps , and J Dilla @-@ like keyboard . " Only If You Wanna " is a futuristic jazz trio piece with both digital and analog sounds . Allmusic 's Andy Kellman delineates the songs from " See Thru to U " to " Only If You Wanna " as the album 's most musically connected and " least divisible " section . 
 " Electric Candyman " has a dreamy R & B style and features distant , cooing vocals by Thom Yorke , a rattling drum sample , ghostly drones , and anthropoid shrieks . Yorke chants on the song , " look into my mirror and say my name " , a reference to the titular character in the 1992 film Candyman . Flying Lotus said of his vocals on the song , " I like it when he gets into that spooky pocket . People are like , that doesn 't sound like Thom , make it sound more like Thom – but I 'm like , it 's my album . " The electro @-@ acoustic " Phantasm " contains slinky vocals by Laura Darlington , metronome clicks , oscillating string arrangements , and agitated downtempo sounds . " me Yesterday / / Corded " features bright arpeggios , twisted bass grooves , and a subsuming vocal chorus . Flying Lotus characterizes the song as a reflection of his past emotions . " Dream to Me " has overlapping synthesizers and serves as an exodus in the album 's conceptual arc . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 First released in Japan on September 26 , 2012 , as a CD , Until the Quiet Comes was made available on all formats — CD , vinyl , and digital — on October 2 by Warp Records . It was also made available for streaming online from September 26 to October 2 , the date of its release in North America . Until the Quiet Comes was sent as a single 47 @-@ minute digital track to music critics who would be reviewing it . Flying Lotus intended for the album to be listened as a whole instead of skimmed through by listeners . During October , he appeared at several release events , including in @-@ store appearances , signings , DJ sets , and interview sessions at music venues and retailers . In its first week of release , Until the Quiet Comes debuted at number 34 on the Billboard 200 , selling 13 @,@ 000 copies . By October 7 , 2012 , it had sold 14 @,@ 000 copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . The album also debuted at number 34 on the UK Albums Chart , and became Flying Lotus ' highest @-@ charting record in the United Kingdom . In Belgium , it charted for four weeks , peaking at number 26 . 
 Two singles were released in promotion of Until the Quiet Comes . Lead single " See Thru to U " was released on August 16 , 2012 , as a digital download on iTunes . It was accompanied by the release of an abstract music video online . On September 17 , Flying Lotus released a teaser video called Small Moments , in which previews of the album 's songs were accompanied by mysterious , botanical imagery . " Putty Boy Strut " was released on September 19 with an accompanying animated , robot @-@ themed video by <unk> . A music video for " Tiny Tortures " was released on November 29 and featured Elijah Wood playing a depressed man without a right arm who envisions objects in his room recreating his arm , but is revealed to be torturing himself . 
 Flying Lotus released a short film on September 6 to promote Until the Quiet Comes . It was titled after the record and directed by Kahlil Joseph , who shot it in 35 mm film at the Nickerson Gardens housing project in Watts , Los Angeles and incorporated three songs from the album — " See Thru to U " , " Hunger " , and " Getting There " . The film was intended to be a tragic depiction of urban life featuring Joseph 's interpretations of innocence , violence , and death . It begins with an African @-@ American youth 's death , segues into a scene of affection shared among other African @-@ American males , and concludes with the shooting of another , whose death is reversed to the effect of a dance . A scene in the film also features an inner city youth wearing a shirt bearing the words " J Dilla Changed My Life " , an allusion to the influence of J Dilla on Flying Lotus . The film received praise from critics , and its viral success led to Warp Records ' decision to pitch it to a music video network ; it was ultimately accepted and aired by MTV2 . Hilton Als of The New Yorker called the film " an amalgamation of horrifying beauty " and wrote of Joseph 's use of rewind , " the character ’ s fall becomes a kind of dance — for life . " 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 On September 23 , Flying Lotus performed at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles . He then embarked on an international tour for the album during October to November 2012 , playing 11 concert dates in North America and eight dates abroad , including Europe and Japan . He performed strictly with his laptop , and excluded takes of songs he had recorded with Miguel Atwood Ferguson 's string quartet , feeling that the strings would not translate live . Along with his own material , Flying Lotus included remixes of other artists ' songs in his live sets , including Jay @-@ Z , Alicia Keys , and Kanye West . 
 Flying Lotus felt that his grasp on new mixing techniques helped make his live shows more " evolved and changed a little bit " , saying in an interview for Exclaim ! , " It 's more dynamic . But still a party ! Not like my albums , [ which ] are more like personal exchange ; [ live ] it 's nice to have that social experience . " Reviewing his performance at Danforth Music Hall , Now magazine observed a " resoundingly maximal aesthetic and sound " that was " way more bombastic EDM " than the album 's " IDM abstraction " , citing as an example his mixing of " the recognizable with the weird , like when Kanye West 's Mercy gave way to the hand @-@ claps of Quiet cut Putty Boy Strut . " Flying Lotus also worked with longtime collaborator Dr. <unk> to create collage @-@ like imagery during the shows , including geometric visuals synched to the performed music . Joshua P. Ferguson of Time Out wrote of the visual effects in Flying Lotus ' performance at Metro Chicago , " all manner of Tron @-@ like halos , expanding and contracting orbs , <unk> and unidentifiable amorphous globs of color raced , shot and oozed their way across screens placed both in front of and behind Flying Lotus . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Until the Quiet Comes received rave reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 83 , which indicates " universal acclaim " , based on 36 reviews . It was dubbed " the sound of the future " by NME magazine 's Lucy Jones , and a " masterpiece of sound engineering " by Scott Kara of The New Zealand Herald . Allmusic 's Andy Kellman commented that Flying Lotus " not only peels away layers from his sound but organizes his tracks into a gracefully flowing sequence " on what is " his most accessible and creative release yet . " Filter magazine 's Kyle Lemmon found his musicianship deft and the songs invariably " vaporous and angelic or menacing and silhouetted . " Thomas May of musicOMH praised both the difficult concept and its execution : " With an unprecedented melodic disposition and busy yet rarely cluttered arrangements , this album possesses remarkable poise and balance in the face of its fearsome complexity . " Drowned in Sound 's Jazz Monroe said that it may ultimately be Flying Lotus ' best album because of his ability to " close the schism between the true avant @-@ garde and the leftfield mainstream " . Arnold Pan of PopMatters said that his amalgamated music is achieved with admirable ease and lucidity , as Flying Lotus " conducts a master class on both how to create flow as well as how to maintain it through an entire album . " 
 In a mixed review , Alex Macpherson from The Guardian found the record to be " packed full of ideas " on tracks that " feel less like fully fleshed @-@ out compositions than lightly drawn sketches started , but not always finished " . State magazine 's Karen Lawler said that its songs are " too short for any single musical concept to fully develop . " Will Hermes of Rolling Stone complimented Flying Lotus ' " taste for 21st @-@ century soul jazz with swarming high @-@ end displays " and stated , " It all adds up to something so captivating that vocal guests ... can get a little lost . Although maybe that 's the point " . Although he found its " complicated brilliance " less " boisterous " than Cosmogramma , Jonah Bromwich of The A.V. Club felt that the album " does a better job than its predecessor of weaving together the tangled strands of " disparate styles and concluded , " after multiple listens , the album reveals itself to be as nuanced , as subtle , and a lot more digestible " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ( add . ) denotes additional production . 
 " Hunger " incorporates elements from " Guitar 12 " by Jonny Greenwood . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 Sam Baker – composer 
 Brandon Coleman – keyboards 
 Gene <unk> – drums 
 Daddy Kev – mastering 
 Laura Darlington – composer , vocals 
 Dorian Concept – keyboards 
 Erykah Badu – composer , vocals 
 Miguel Atwood Ferguson – strings 
 Flying Lotus – composer , producer 
 Jonny Greenwood – composer 
 The Integration Players – strings 
 Dan Kitchens – photography 
 Austin Peralta – composer , keyboards 
 Niki Randa – composer , vocals 
 Stephen <unk> – art direction , design 
 Thundercat – bass guitar , composer , vocals 
 Thom Yorke – composer , vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = George Eyre = 
 Sir George Eyre KCB KCMG ( d . 15 February 1839 ) was an officer of the Royal Navy who saw service during the American War of Independence and the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars , eventually rising to the rank of Vice @-@ Admiral of the Red . 
 Eyre served with James King in the Caribbean during the American War of Independence , seeing action in a number of engagements . With the conclusion of the war , he was based at times at Halifax , and later off the South American coast and in the Mediterranean . With the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars , Eyre served in the Mediterranean and was involved in the Siege of Toulon , before being given his first command , the 14 @-@ gun brig @-@ sloop HMS Speedy . The command was short @-@ lived , and Speedy was chased down and captured by a large French fleet . Taken into captivity , Eyre and his men endured harsh conditions until being exchanged back to Britain . Acquitted for the loss of his ship and given a new command , Eyre went out to the West Indies , but returned to Britain in 1799 and saw little further employment until 1806 , when he joined the Mediterranean fleet and was active off the coast of Spain , supporting Spanish resistance to the French . 
 In 1809 he went to the Adriatic and took part in the campaign there , helping to capture several islands . He launched an assault on Santa Maura and was wounded during the operations . After participating in the blockade of Corfu he returned to the Spanish coast and resumed operations there in support of the Spanish partisans . Returning to England again in 1811 , he went ashore and was not actively employed for the rest of the Napoleonic Wars , though he received a knighthood and was later appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath . He returned to service in 1823 , commanding the South American station during a time of particular diplomatic difficulties , and on returning home in 1826 retired ashore owing to illness . He died in 1839 . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 George Eyre was born the fourth and youngest son of politician Anthony Eyre , who had represented the constituency of Boroughbridge in a number of parliaments , and his wife , Judith Letitia . George 's elder brother , Anthony <unk> Eyre , also entered politics and represented Nottinghamshire during the 1800s . George attended Harrow School and after spending several months at an academy in Chelsea , entered the navy in 1782 . His first ship was the 44 @-@ gun HMS Resistance , under the command of Captain James King . They went out to Jamaica escorting a convoy , and remained in the area for the rest of the American War of Independence . 
 On 2 March 1783 , while sailing in company with HMS Duguay Trouin , two ships were discovered anchored in Turks Island passage . On being spotted the two ships cut their cables and stood to the southwest , upon which Resistance promptly gave chase . The rearmost ship , carrying 20 guns , sprang her main topmast , and surrendered after Resistance came up and fired a broadside . She then gave chase to the other , carrying 28 guns , and after enduring fire from her stern chasers , came alongside and the Frenchman promptly surrendered . The ships were discovered to be two transports that had taken troops to Turks Island , garrisoning it with 530 men . One of the ships , the 28 @-@ gun Coquette was commanded by the Marquis de Grasse , nephew of the Comte de Grasse . One or two days later Resistance fell in with a small squadron under Captain Horatio Nelson , consisting of HMS Albemarle , HMS Tartar , HMS Drake and the armed ship Barrington . Nelson decided to attack the recently garrisoned Turks Island , and 250 men were landed under the cover of supporting fire from the ships . The French were found to be heavily entrenched , and the British withdrew after being unable to dislodge them . 
 With the end of the war Eyre returned to England with King aboard HMS Diamond , but soon rejoined the Resistance and went out to Halifax to join Sir Charles Douglas . As Douglas ' flagship spent most of her time in port , Eyre was sent out to cruise on other ships , including HMS Mercury under Captain Stanhope , and HMS Atalanta under Captain Thomas Foley . Eyre returned to Britain with Resistance in 1786 , and the following year joined the 44 @-@ gun HMS Adventure under Captain Francis Parry . Parry went out as commodore to Guinea , but ill @-@ health obliged him to resign his command , and Eyre went to Newfoundland aboard Captain <unk> 's HMS Nautilus . Eyre joined Admiral Lord Howe 's flagship HMS Queen Charlotte during the Spanish Armament , and in November 1790 was promoted to lieutenant . He then joined HMS Scipio under Captain Edward Thornbrough , and after Scipio was paid off , HMS Aquilon under Captain Robert Stopford , in which he sailed to the Mediterranean . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 On the outbreak of war with France in 1793 Eyre was appointed to HMS St George , the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral John Gell , a relation of Eyre 's . He was present at the capture of a French privateer and her Spanish registered prize St Jago . St George went on to join Admiral Lord Hood 's fleet at Gibraltar , and went with him to Toulon . Eyre took an active part in the Siege of Toulon , volunteering to command the detachment of marines landed from St George and sent to defend Fort La Malgue . He went from there to command the battery at Fort <unk> , and after some time attracted Hood 's attention with his good service . Hood appointed him to his flagship HMS Victory . After the fall of Toulon and the British evacuation he was advanced to commander and appointed to command the sloop HMS Speedy , succeeding Commander George Cockburn , who had been appointed to command HMS Inconstant . He assisted in the capture of Bastia , and was then ordered to join HMS Diadem off Nice . 
 = = = Capture = = = 
 While making his way there he ran into the French fleet on 9 June , the French having sailed from Toulon some days earlier and headed east along the coast . Despite pressing on sail Speedy was overrun and captured . Eyre was taken aboard one of the French ships , and later transferred to the flagship of the fleet 's commander , Rear @-@ Admiral Pierre Martin . Martin asked him if he had heard of the decree from the National Convention which declared that ' no quarter should be given to either the English or the Hanoverians ' . Eyre replied that they had not , on which he was told by Martin that " ... I must tell you that it is now un guerre à mort [ a war to the death ] ; and if I had been the first to come alongside of you , I should have instantly sent you to the bottom . " At this point the main British fleet was seen approaching , and Eyre was hurried back to the first ship he had been brought onto , and the French hurried into <unk> roads , taking Speedy and the captured British crew with them . 
 Eyre and the crew were landed and marched to Antibes , where they were imprisoned with the crew of a Sardinian frigate that had been captured the day before Speedy . The crew had been imprisoned on Martin 's flagship Sans <unk> and had been severely treated , with their captain , Ross , not being allowed to wash or shave . The British were placed in a dungeon at Antibes , with only straw to lie on , awaiting the decision of the authorities . After three weeks in this state , they were marched to Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence and were confined in the prison there . After a month imprisoned in Aix , Maximilien Robespierre fell and the Reign of Terror came to an end . The British were paroled . Eyre and the officers were taken to Romans , in Dauphiné where Eyre remained until May 1795 when he was released in exchange for a French officer . He faced a court @-@ martial for the loss of Speedy , but was honourably acquitted . 
 = = = West Indies = = = 
 Eyre was next appointed to command the sloop HMS Albacore , before being made post @-@ captain on 6 June 1796 and given command of the 20 @-@ gun HMS <unk> . He went out with Sir Hugh Cloberry Christian to the West Indies and took part in the reduction of Saint Lucia . While there he was appointed by Sir Hyde Parker to command the 44 @-@ gun HMS Regulus and carried out a number of cruises , capturing several prizes and winning himself riches and recognition . While cruising off Puerto Rico on 11 July 1798 Eyre located five merchant ships at anchor under a shore battery at Aguada , and decided to attempt to capture or destroy them . The ship 's boats were sent in under Lieutenants Good and Holman while Regulus and a prize schooner stood close by to support them . The wind failed however , and neither ship could get near enough to support them , but Lieutenant Good pressed on , and boarded the ships . With no wind he was unable to bring them all out , and so destroyed the two he was unable to sail out . British casualties , despite being under fire for the whole operation , amounted to one man wounded . Eyre returned to Britain in September 1799 , transporting Vice @-@ Admiral Richard Rodney Bligh . 
 = = Napoleonic Wars = = 
 = = = Spanish coast = = = 
 Eyre was then unemployed for a while , with the exception of a brief period in temporary command of HMS San Josef from 11 February to 18 March 1801 , succeeding Thomas Hardy and in turn being succeeded by William Wolseley . He finally received a posting in July 1806 when he was appointed to the 64 @-@ gun HMS Ardent , but was soon moved to command the newly built 74 @-@ gun HMS Magnificent . Magnificent initially served with the Channel Fleet , which was then under Admiral Lord St Vincent , before going out to the Bay of Biscay with Sir Eliab Harvey 's squadron . Eyre moved to the Mediterranean in June 1807 , coming under Lord Collingwood 's orders while based off Cadiz . With the Spanish rising on 2 May 1808 and the surrender of the French squadron in Cadiz on 14 June , Collingwood sent Eyre to patrol off Toulon . Shortly afterwards he was sent to Rosas to support the Spanish there , and several days later evacuated Lord Cochrane and his garrison from Fort Trinidad . 
 = = = Adriatic = = = 
 Eyre was next appointed by Lord Collingwood to take command of the squadron in the Adriatic in April 1809 , a command that then consisted of three ships of the line and seven or eight frigates . In October 1810 he was sent with Magnificent , HMS Belle Poule and HMS Kingfisher to join Captain John William Spranger 's squadron and assist in the capture of Cephalonia , Zante and Cerigo , part of a long running campaign in the Adriatic . Santa Maura initially remained in French hands , and became a base for small cruisers which were an annoyance to the British forces . Eyre resolved to attack and capture it and together with General John Oswald and troops of the 35th Regiment of Foot made a landing on 22 March 1810 . The French withdrew to a citadel , protected by three redoubts , which the British attacked . During the heavy fighting Eyre was hit in the head by a musket ball and knocked to the ground , narrowly avoiding death as three other balls passed through his clothing . Eyre handed over command of the expedition to Captain James Brisbane of HMS Belle Poule while he recovered , and was well enough to resume command on 25 March . The British forced the French to surrender on 16 April , the British casualties being seven dead and 39 wounded . Eyre was personally thanked by Admirals Sir George Martin and Sir Charles Cotton , and the Lords of the Admiralty . 
 With the islands secure Eyre enforced the blockade of Corfu . On 6 February 1811 he encountered an enemy relief convoy bound from Otranto to Corfu , consisting of 25 ships . Eyre captured 22 of them , carrying grain , ordnance and 500 troops . Eyre also stationed several frigates in the northern part of the Adriatic under the command of Captain William Hoste . Hoste went on to win a significant victory over a French squadron under Bernard Dubourdieu at the Battle of Lissa . Eyre spent a total of two years commanding the station , the time spent almost constantly at sea , only briefly putting into port to refit and replenish supplies . He was succeeded in the post by Captain Charles Rowley and went to join the fleet of Toulon . On the occasion of his departure his subordinate , James Brisbane wrote 
 = = = Return to Spain = = = 
 The Mediterranean fleet was by now under Sir Edward Pellew , and Eyre was sent to the Spanish coast to support the Spanish forces fighting the French . Eyre was particularly active off the coast of Valencia and evacuated the garrison of Oropesa del Mar , earning the thanks of General Joaquín Blake y <unk> . On being ordered back to England in 1811 Pellew also wrote a private letter of thanks , following on from his earlier declaration that ' I have to express my complete approbation of Captain Eyre 's methods , and have much satisfaction of employing the services of that most excellent officer in the aid of the Valencia patriots . ' Eyre arrived in England in 1812 , his health having been affected by his five years on a foreign station , and requested and received permission to go ashore . As a mark of his services in the Adriatic and off Spain he was knighted by King George III . Eyre was appointed a Colonel of Marines on 4 June 1814 and was nominated as a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath following the expansion of the order on 12 January 1815 . 
 = = Flag rank and South America = = 
 Eyre was promoted to rear @-@ admiral on 12 August 1819 and shortly afterwards received an offer from Lord Melville to take command of the Cape and St Helena stations , but was unable to accept owing to matters of a personal nature . In 1823 he was able to accept the offer of the command of the South American station , at a time when several of the former Spanish colonies were declaring independence . Eyre was able to successfully manage delicate diplomatic and military duties , and was able to protect British rights and possessions in the area during periods of upheaval . His actions in the region included signing treaties with Spain and Portugal involving the prevention of illegal slave trafficking . He stepped down after the expiration of his posting and was succeeded by Admiral Sir Robert Otway . 
 = = Family and later life = = 
 Eyre returned to Britain , arriving at Spithead on 10 December 1826 , and was almost immediately offered command of a squadron fitting out for Lisbon . The changes in climate had brought on an attack of gout , and on being informed that as Sir Thomas Hardy 's squadron was already on the spot , he was at liberty to refuse the offer . Eyre did so , and retired ashore . He appears to have had no further commands , and was advanced to vice @-@ admiral in 1830 . He had married Georgiana Cooke , the daughter of Sir George Cooke , 7th Baronet , at Doncaster on 1 November 1800 , with whom he had a family of eight children , including two sons named George @-@ <unk> and William . Sir George Eyre died on 15 February 1839 at the rectory , Carlton , Derbyshire . 
 = Queer Eye = 
 Queer Eye is an American reality television series that premiered on the cable television network Bravo during July 2003 . The program 's name was changed from Queer Eye for the Straight Guy after the third season to generalize the scope of its content . The series was created by executive producers David Collins and Michael Williams along with their producing partner David Metzler ; it was produced by their production company , Scout Productions . 
 The series is premised on and uses the stereotypes that homosexual ( " queer " ) men are superior in matters of fashion , style , personal grooming , interior design and culture . In each episode , the team of five homosexual men known collectively as the " Fab Five " perform a " makeover " ( in the parlance of the show , a " make @-@ better " ) on a person , usually a heterosexual ( " straight " ) man , revamping his wardrobe , redecorating his home and offering advice on grooming , lifestyle and food . 
 Queer Eye for the Straight Guy debuted during 2003 , and quickly became a surprise success . The success of the series resulted in merchandising , franchising of the concept internationally , and a woman @-@ oriented spin @-@ off , Queer Eye for the Straight Girl . Queer Eye won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Reality Program during 2004 . The series ' name was abbreviated to Queer Eye at the beginning of its third season to represent the show 's change from making over only heterosexual men to including women and homosexual men . Queer Eye ended production during 2006 June and the final ten episodes were broadcast during October 2007 . The series ended October 30 . During September 2008 , the Fine Living Network briefly aired Queer Eye in syndication . 
 = = The " Fab Five " = = 
 Ted Allen : " Food and Wine Connoisseur " , expert on alcohol , beverages , food preparation and presentation . 
 Kyan Douglas : " Grooming Guru " , expert on hair , grooming , personal hygiene , and makeup . 
 Thom Filicia : " Design Doctor " , expert on interior design and home organization . 
 Carson Kressley : " Fashion Savant " , expert on clothing , fashion and personal styling . 
 Jai Rodriguez : " Culture Vulture " , expert on popular culture , relationships and social interaction . 
 = = Production = = 
 Producers Collins and Metzler were given approval by Bravo to develop Queer Eye after the ratings success the network experienced when it <unk> a marathon of its 2002 series Gay Weddings at the same time as Super Bowl XXXVII during 2003 January . The pilot episode was filmed in Boston , Massachusetts during June 2002 . Of the eventual Fab Five , only Kressley and Allen appeared . The culture , design and grooming roles were filled by James Hannaham , Charles <unk> , Jr. and Sam Spector , respectively . 
 The pilot was delivered to Bravo during September 2002 , and was well received in audience testing . Soon thereafter NBC purchased Bravo and ordered 12 episodes of the series . NBC promoted the show extensively , including billboard campaigns and print advertisements in national magazines . 
 Kyan Douglas and Thom Filicia joined the show for these episodes , along with Blair Boone in the role of " culture guy . " Boone filmed two episodes ( which were broadcast as the second and third episodes and for which he was credited as a " guest culture expert " ) but was replaced by Rodriguez beginning with production of the third episode . Each episode was shot over a span of four days and edited to create the perception that the events of the episode took place in a single day . 
 = = Format = = 
 The majority of Queer Eye episodes use the same basic format . The episode begins with the Fab Five in an SUV ( usually in New York City , where the series was based ) discussing their heterosexual subject . The Five review details of the subject 's personal life and note problems in their various areas of expertise . The Five usually have a specific event for which they plan to prepare the subject . These included everything from throwing a backyard barbecue for friends to preparing to ask for a salary increase to proposing marriage . 
 Upon arriving at the subject 's home , the Fab Five go through his belongings , performing a running commentary of catty remarks about the state of his wardrobe , home decor , cleanliness and grooming . They also speak with the subject and family members to get an idea of the sort of style they like and their goals for the experience and to discuss the planned event . 
 The remainder of the first half of the episode follows the Fab Five as they escort the subject to various locales to select new furniture and clothes . Often , Ted demonstrates how to select and prepare food for a particular dish that the subject will prepare for the special event , Kyan takes him for spa treatments and a new haircut . Each such segment includes a style tip superimposed on the screen , summarizing in a sentence or two the style issues addressed in the segment . Interspersed with this are interview segments in which friends and family members of the subject discuss his style issues . 
 In the next section , the subject returns to a completely redecorated home and models articles of his new wardrobe for the Fab Five . Each of the Five offer final words of advice and encouragement , accompanied by supplies of grooming products , food and kitchenware and in some cases expensive electronics items such as entertainment centers and computers . 
 The final section follows the subject as he prepares for the special event , with the Fab Five watching edited footage of his preparations and critiquing how well or how poorly he followed their advice . Finally , the subject is followed through the event itself , with the Five again performing a running commentary and the subject often expressing his deep gratitude to the Fab Five for their counsel . A final tip from each of the Fab Five , usually relating to one of the topics covered in the episode , plays just before the credits . 
 Special episodes of Queer Eye that deviated from this formula included episodes in which the Fab Five journeyed outside the greater New York area , including shows filmed in England , Texas , and Las Vegas . In two episodes , the Fab Five made over homosexual men ( both of which aired during June , Gay Pride Month , during 2004 and 2006 ) and in one episode made over a female @-@ to @-@ male transgender person . The show also featured makeovers of members of the Boston Red Sox after their 2004 World Series victory , several holiday specials and in the final season , a " Mister Straight Guy " pageant featuring subjects from the series ' history . 
 = = Popular and critical response = = 
 Queer Eye for the Straight Guy debuted on July 15 , 2003 and the series quickly attained high ratings , maximizing during September of that year with 3 @.@ 34 million viewers per episode . The popularity of the series established the Fab Five as media celebrities , with high @-@ profile appearances at the Emmys and a " make @-@ better " of Jay Leno and his The Tonight Show set in August of that year . Fab Five members parlayed their celebrity into endorsement deals , notably Thom Filicia 's becoming the spokesperson for Pier 1 Imports . 
 The American press almost universally complimented the series and the Fab Five . Out magazine listed the Fab Five in its " OUT 100 " , the " greatest gay success stories " of 2003 . Instinct magazine declared Kressley one of the " Leading Men " of 2004 . 
 The series attracted criticism for making generalizations about sexual identity , namely that homosexual men are inherently more fashionable and stylish than heterosexuals . Among those making this critique were Tom Shales in the Washington Post ( " stereotypes on parade " ) , Richard Goldstein in Village Voice ( " Haven 't fags always been consigned to the role of body servant ? " ) and United States Congressman Barney Frank speaking to the New York Post ( " The notion that gay men have a superior fashion sense is not true and it 's damaging . It 's perfectly possible to enjoy that show and say , look at those clever homosexuals . What they do with hair ! And not support gays at all . " ) . Anthropologist Lionel Tiger described the program as typical of a widespread acceptance of insulting heterosexual men : " <unk> are the last group it is acceptable to bash as a class . The homosexual fellows on Queer Eye seem to provide riveting hilarity to especially female viewers . What if there were 5 Swedes telling Kenyans how to live elegantly and fashionably ? What if 5 Catholics told Jews how to dress , decorate , and court ? The program is degraded and degrading , Cheap Shots for A Humiliated Guy . " 
 With the success of the first season , original " culture guy " Blair Boone sued the show for breach of contract , claiming he should be paid not just for two episodes but for the season that he had been contracted to film . 
 The popularity of the series inspired a number of parodies . Comedy Central hosted a satirical television series named Straight Plan for the Gay Man , which featured four heterosexual men teaching homosexual men how to be more ( stereotypically ) straight , redecorating their homes with neon beer signs and teaching them about sports . South Park spoofed the show and its hosts in the episode " South Park Is Gay ! " , in which the protagonists learn that the Fab Five are actually evil Crab People trying to control the world by converting heterosexual men into <unk> . 
 Queer Eye won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Reality Program during 2004 and was nominated for another Emmy in the same category during 2005 . The series also received GLAAD Media Awards for Outstanding Reality Program during 2004 and 2005 , and was nominated for a third during 2006 . 
 In the second season , ratings decreased , averaging about 1 @.@ 8 million viewers per episode with an average 804 @,@ 000 viewers in the important 18 @-@ 40 demographic . New episodes continued to be broadcast for two more seasons . Bravo confirmed during early 2007 that Queer Eye had been cancelled . The remaining fifth season episodes were billed as Queer Eye : The Final Season and aired twice weekly beginning October 2 , 2007 . 
 = = Spin @-@ off series = = 
 During January 2005 , Scout Productions premiered a spin @-@ off series titled Queer Eye for the Straight Girl , set in Los Angeles . It featured a cast of four lifestyle experts ( three men and a woman known as the " Gal Pals " ) who performed makeovers for women . The show was cancelled after one season . 
 = = International adaptations = = 
 Queer Eye 's American success caused television networks in several countries to syndicate the American episodes , with a number of countries creating their own local versions of Queer Eye for broadcast in their countries . However , few of these homegrown versions have proven as successful as the original and most did not last long before cancellation . Licensing of the format is managed by NBCUniversal . 
 <unk> licensed television producer David Hedges and his UK production house <unk> to produce local versions for Europe , with <unk> 's Living channel doing the same to produce the United Kingdom 's version after a first attempt at a UK production by Making Time was abandoned . 
 The first episode of the Finnish version , <unk> <unk> created controversy , not for the homosexual content but for the blatant product placement considered to be a transgression of a Finnish law against " hidden advertising " . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The soundtrack for Queer Eye for the Straight Guy was released February 10 , 2004 , in the USA . It reached number one on the electronic music chart , number two on the soundtrack charts and the top 40 in the Billboard 200 album chart . In Australia , the soundtrack was released for the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras and the popularity of the series in Australia resulted in the soundtrack scoring the top 10 of the Australian album chart on March 8 , 2004 . It was certified gold in Australia during March 2004 . The song " Superstar " by Jamelia from the soundtrack also went to number one on the Australian singles charts in the same week , and the theme song of the show , " All Things ( Just Keep Getting Better ) " by Widelife , went to the top 20 that same month . " All Things " would score a 2005 Juno Award for " Dance Recording of the Year " for Widelife ( Rachid Wehbi & Ian Nieman ) . Rob Eric was the executive producer for the album . 
 = = = = Track listing = = = = 
 " All Things ( Just Keep Getting Better ) " – Widelife with Simone Denny 
 " Good Luck " – Basement Jaxx featuring Lisa <unk> 
 " Slow " ( Chemical Brothers Mix ) – Kylie Minogue 
 " Move Your Feet " – Junior Senior 
 " You Promised Me ( Tu Es <unk> ) " – In @-@ Grid 
 " Superstar " – Jamelia 
 " Everybody Wants You to <unk> " – Fischerspooner / Billy Squier 
 " Sunrise " ( Jason Nevins Remix ) – Duran Duran 
 " Never Coming Home " ( Gonna Live My Life Remix ) – Sting 
 " An Area Big Enough to Do It In " – Prophet Omega 
 " You 're So Damn Hot " – OK Go 
 " Extraordinary " – Liz Phair 
 " Are You Ready for Love " – Elton John 
 " Five Gay Men in One House " – Jai Rodriguez and Ted Allen 
 " All Things ( Just Keep Getting Better ) " ( music video ) 
 = = = Books = = = 
 A tie @-@ in book titled Queer Eye for the Straight Guy : The Fab 5 's Guide to Looking Better , Cooking Better , Dressing Better , Behaving Better and Living Better was published during 2004 by Clarkson Potter / Publishers , an imprint of Random House . 
 = = = DVD releases = = = 
 Several DVDs were released in conjunction with the series . Kressley , Filicia and Allen each had individual releases emphasizing their topics of expertise . Douglas and Rodriguez were featured together in a single DVD focused on grooming . Additional DVD releases include Queer Eye for the Red Sox ( featuring the team makeover episode ) and a multi @-@ disc box set . 
 = Nothhelm = 
 Nothhelm ( sometimes Nothelm ; died 739 ) was a medieval Anglo @-@ Saxon Archbishop of Canterbury . A correspondent of both Bede and Boniface , it was Nothhelm who gathered materials from Canterbury for Bede 's historical works . After his appointment to the archbishopric in 735 , he attended to ecclesiastical matters , including holding church councils . Although later antiquaries felt that Nothhelm was the author of a number of works , later research has shown them to be authored by others . After his death he was considered a saint . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nothhelm was a contemporary of Boniface and Bede , whom he supplied with correspondence from the papal library following a trip to Rome . He also researched the history of Kent and the surrounding area for Bede , supplying the information through the abbot of St Augustine 's Abbey in Canterbury . Before his appointment to the archbishopric , he was the archpriest of the Saxon @-@ built St Paul 's Cathedral , London . 
 = = Archbishop = = 
 Named to the see of Canterbury in 735 , Nothhelm was consecrated the same year . Pope Gregory III sent him a pallium in 736 . He may have been appointed by Æthelbald , King of Mercia , whose councilor he was . Whether or not he owed his appointment to Æthelbald , Nothhelm was one of a number of Mercians who became Archbishop of Canterbury during the 730s and 740s , during a time of expanding Mercian influence . He held a synod in 736 or 737 , which drew nine bishops ; the meeting adjudicated a dispute over the ownership of a monastery located at Withington . A significant feature of this synod was the fact that no king attended , but yet the synod still rendered judgement in the ownership even without secular oversight , which was more usual . 
 Nothhelm oversaw the reorganisation of the Mercian dioceses which took place in 737 . The archbishop consecrated <unk> as Bishop of Lichfield and <unk> as Bishop of Leicester . The diocese of Leicester was firmly established by this action , although earlier attempts had been made to establish a bishopric there . In 738 , Nothhelm was a witness on the charter of Eadberht I , the King of Kent . 
