 In April 1930 , Crowley moved to Berlin , where he took Hanni <unk> as his magical partner ; the relationship was troubled . In September he went to Lisbon in Portugal to meet the poet Fernando Pessoa . There , he decided to fake his own death , doing so with Pessoa 's help at the Boca do Inferno rock formation . He then returned to Berlin , where he reappeared three weeks later at the opening of his art exhibition at the Gallery Neumann @-@ Nierendorf . Crowley 's paintings fitted with the fashion for German Expressionism ; few of them sold , but the press reports were largely favourable . In August 1931 , he took Bertha Busch as his new lover ; they had a violent relationship , and often physically assaulted one another . He continued to have affairs with both men and women while in the city , and met with famous people like Aldous Huxley and Alfred Adler . After befriending him , in January 1932 he took the communist Gerald Hamilton as a lodger , through whom he was introduced to many figures within the Berlin far left ; it is possible that he was operating as a spy for British intelligence at this time , monitoring the communist movement . 
 Crowley left Busch and returned to London , where he took Pearl <unk> as his new Scarlet Woman . Undergoing further nasal surgery , it was here in 1932 that he was invited to be guest of honour at Foyles ' Literary Luncheon , also being invited by Harry Price to speak at the National Laboratory of Psychical Research . In need of money , he launched a series of court cases against people whom he believed had libelled him , some of which proved successful . He gained much publicity for his lawsuit against Constable and Co for publishing Nina Hamnett 's Laughing Torso ( 1932 ) – a book he thought libelled him – but lost the case . The court case added to Crowley 's financial problems , and in February 1935 he was declared bankrupt . During the hearing , it was revealed that Crowley had been spending three times his income for several years . 
 Crowley developed a platonic friendship with Deidre Patricia O 'Doherty ; she offered to bear his child , who was born in May 1937 . Named Randall Gair , Crowley nicknamed him Aleister Atatürk . Crowley continued to socialise with friends , holding curry parties in which he cooked particularly spicy food for them . In 1936 , he published his first book in six years , The Equinox of the Gods , which contained a facsimile of The Book of the Law and was considered to be volume III , number 3 , of The Equinox periodical . The work sold well , resulting in a second print run . In 1937 he gave a series of public lectures on yoga in Soho . Crowley was now living largely off contributions supplied by the O.T.O. ' s Agape Lodge in California , led by rocket scientist John Whiteside " Jack " Parsons . Crowley was intrigued by the rise of Nazism in Germany , and influenced by his friend Martha <unk> believed that Adolf Hitler might convert to Thelema ; when the Nazis abolished the German O.T.O. and imprisoned Germer , who fled to the US , Crowley then lambasted Hitler as a black magician . 
 = = = Second World War and death : 1939 – 47 = = = 
 When the Second World War broke out , Crowley wrote to the Naval Intelligence Division offering his services , but they declined . He associated with a variety of figures in Britain 's intelligence community at the time , including Dennis Wheatley , Roald Dahl , Ian Fleming , and Maxwell Knight , and claimed to have been behind the " V for Victory " sign first used by the BBC ; this has never been proven . In 1940 , his asthma worsened , and with his German @-@ produced medication unavailable , he returned to using heroin , once again becoming addicted . As the Blitz hit London , Crowley relocated to Torquay , where he was briefly hospitalised with asthma , and entertained himself with visits to the local chess club . Tiring of Torquay , he returned to London , where he was visited by American Thelemite Grady McMurtry , to whom Crowley awarded the title of " <unk> Alpha " . He stipulated that though Germer would be his immediate successor , <unk> should succeed Germer as head of the O.T.O. after the latter 's death . With O.T.O. initiate Lady Frieda Harris , Crowley developed plans to produce a tarot card set , designed by him and painted by Harris . Accompanying this was a book , published in a limited edition as The Book of Thoth by Chiswick Press in 1944 . To aid the war effort , he wrote a proclamation on the rights of humanity , Liber Oz , and a poem for the liberation of France , Le Gauloise . Crowley 's final publication during his lifetime was a book of poetry , Olla : An Anthology of Sixty Years of Song . Another of his projects , Aleister Explains Everything , was posthumously published as Magick Without Tears . 
 In April 1944 Crowley briefly moved to Aston Clinton in Buckinghamshire , where he was visited by the poet Nancy Cunard , before relocating to Hastings in Sussex , where he took up residence at the Netherwood boarding house . He took a young man named Kenneth Grant as his secretary , paying him in magical teaching rather than wages . He was also introduced to John Symonds , whom he appointed to be his literary executor ; Symonds thought little of Crowley , later publishing negative biographies of him . Corresponding with the illusionist Arnold Crowther , it was through him that Crowley was introduced to Gerald Gardner , the future founder of Gardnerian Wicca . They became friends , with Crowley authorising Gardner to revive Britain 's ailing O.T.O. Another visitor was Eliza Marian Butler , who interviewed Crowley for her book The Myth of the Magus . Other friends and family also spent time with him , among them Doherty and Crowley 's son Aleister Atatürk . On 1 December 1947 , Crowley died at Netherwood of chronic bronchitis aggravated by pleurisy and myocardial degeneration , aged 72 . His funeral was held at a Brighton crematorium on 5 December ; about a dozen people attended , and Louis Wilkinson read excerpts from the Gnostic Mass , The Book of the Law , and " Hymn to Pan " . The funeral generated press controversy , and was labelled a Black Mass by the tabloids . Crowley 's ashes were sent to Germer in the US , who buried them in his garden in Hampton , New Jersey . 
 = = Beliefs and thought = = 
 Crowley 's thought was not always cohesive , and was influenced by a variety of sources , ranging from eastern religious movements and practices like Hindu yoga and Buddhism , scientific naturalism , and various currents within Western esotericism , among them ceremonial magic , alchemy , astrology , Rosicrucianism , Kabbalah , and the Tarot . Philosopher John Moore opined that Crowley 's thought was rooted in Romanticism and the Decadent movement , an assessment shared by historian Alex Owen , who noted that Crowley adhered to the " modus operandi " of the decadent movement throughout his life . 
 Crowley believed that the twentieth century marked humanity 's entry to the Aeon of Horus , a new era in which humans would take increasing control of their destiny . He believed that this Aeon follows on from the Aeon of Osiris , in which paternalistic religions like Christianity , Islam , and Buddhism dominated the world , and that this in turn had followed the Aeon of Isis , which had been <unk> and dominated by goddess worship . Thelema revolves around the idea that human beings each have their own True Will that they should discover and pursue , and that this exists in harmony with the Cosmic Will that pervades the universe . The moral code of " Do What Thou Wilt " is believed by Thelemites to be the faith 's ethical law , although academic Marco Pasi noted that this was not anarchistic or libertarian in structure , as Crowley saw individuals as part of a wider societal organism . 
 Crowley believed in the objective existence of magic , which he chose to spell " Magick " . In his book Magick in Theory and Practice , Crowley defined Magick as " the Science and Art of causing change to occur in conformity with Will " . He also told his disciple Karl Germer that " Magick is getting into communication with individuals who exist on a higher plane than ours . Mysticism is the raising of oneself to their level . " Crowley saw Magick as a third way between religion and science , giving The Equinox the subtitle of " The Method of Science ; the Aim of Religion " . 
 Both during his life and after it , Crowley has been widely described as a Satanist , usually by detractors . Crowley stated he did not consider himself a Satanist , nor did he worship Satan , as he did not accept the Christian world view in which Satan was believed to exist . He was also accused of advocating human sacrifice , largely because of a passage in Book 4 in which he stated that " A male child of perfect innocence and high intelligence is the most satisfactory victim " . This was intended as a veiled reference to male masturbation . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Crowley biographer Martin Booth asserted that Crowley was " self @-@ confident , brash , eccentric , egotistic , highly intelligent , arrogant , witty , wealthy , and , when it suited him , cruel " . Similarly , Richard Spence noted that Crowley was " capable of immense physical and emotional cruelty " . Biographer Lawrence Sutin noted that Crowley exhibited " courage , skill , dauntless energy , and remarkable focus of will " while at the same time showing a " blind arrogance , petty fits of bile , [ and ] contempt for the abilities of his fellow men " . The Thelemite Lon Milo DuQuette noted that Crowley " was by no means perfect " and " often alienated those who loved him dearest . " 
 Crowley enjoyed being outrageous and flouting conventional morality , with John Symonds noting that he " was in revolt against the moral and religious values of his time " . Crowley 's political thought was subjected to an in @-@ depth study by academic Marco Pasi , who noted that for Crowley , socio @-@ political concerns were subordinate to metaphysical and spiritual ones . Pasi argued that it was difficult to classify Crowley as being either on the political left or right , but he was perhaps best categorised as a " conservative revolutionary " despite not being affiliated with the German @-@ based conservative revolutionary movement . Pasi noted that Crowley sympathised with extreme ideologies like Nazism and Marxism @-@ Leninism , in that they wished to violently overturn society , and hoped that both Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union might adopt Thelema . Crowley described democracy as an " imbecile and nauseating cult of weakness " , and commented that The Book of the Law proclaimed that " there is the master and there is the slave ; the noble and the serf ; the ' lone wolf ' and the herd " . In this attitude he was influenced by the work of Friedrich Nietzsche and by Social Darwinism . Crowley also saw himself as an aristocrat , describing himself as Laird Boleskine ; he had contempt for most of the British aristocracy , and once described his ideology as " aristocratic communism " . 
 Crowley was bisexual , and exhibited a sexual preference for women . In particular he had an attraction toward " exotic women " , and claimed to have fallen in love on multiple occasions ; Kaczynski stated that " when he loved , he did so with his whole being , but the passion was typically short @-@ lived " . Even in later life , he was able to attract young bohemian women to be his lovers , largely due to his charisma . During same @-@ sex anal intercourse , he usually played the passive role , which Booth believed " appealed to his masochistic side " . Crowley argued that gay and bisexual people should not suppress their sexual orientation , commenting that a person " must not be ashamed or afraid of being homosexual if he happens to be so at heart ; he must not attempt to violate his own true nature because of public opinion , or medieval morality , or religious prejudice which would wish he were otherwise . " On other issues he adopted a more conservative attitude ; he opposed abortion on moral grounds , believing that no woman following her True Will would ever desire one . 
 = = = Views on race and gender = = = 
 Biographer Lawrence Sutin stated that " blatant bigotry is a persistent minor element in Crowley 's writings " . Sutin thought Crowley " a spoiled scion of a wealthy Victorian family who embodied many of the worst John Bull racial and social prejudices of his upper @-@ class contemporaries " , noting that he " embodied the contradiction that writhed within many Western intellectuals of the time : deeply held racist viewpoints courtesy of their culture , coupled with a fascination with people of colour " . Crowley insulted his close Jewish friend Victor Neuburg using anti @-@ Semitic slurs , and he had mixed opinions about Jews as a group . Although he praised their " sublime " poetry and stated that they exhibited " imagination , romance , loyalty , probity and humanity " , he also thought that centuries of persecution had led some Jews to exhibit " avarice , servility , falseness , cunning and the rest " . He was also known to praise various ethnic and cultural groups , for instance he thought that the Chinese people exhibited a " spiritual superiority " to the English , and praised Muslims for exhibiting " manliness , straightforwardness , subtlety , and self @-@ respect " . 
 Crowley also exhibited a " general misogyny " that Booth believed arose from his bad relationship with his mother . Sutin noted that Crowley " largely accepted the notion , implicitly embodied in Victorian sexology , of women as secondary social beings in terms of intellect and sensibility " . Crowley described women as " moral inferiors " who had to be treated with " firmness , kindness and justice " . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Crowley has remained an influential figure , both amongst occultists and in popular culture , particularly that of Britain , but also of other parts of the world . In 2002 , a BBC poll placed Crowley seventy @-@ third in a list of the 100 Greatest Britons . Richard Cavendish has written of him that " In native talent , penetrating intelligence and determination , Aleister Crowley was the best @-@ equipped magician to emerge since the seventeenth century . " Wouter Hanegraaff asserted that Crowley was an extreme representation of " the dark side of the occult " , while philosopher John Moore opined that Crowley stood out as a " Modern Master " when compared with other prominent occult figures like George Gurdjieff , P.D. Ouspensky , Rudolf Steiner , or Helena Blavatsky , also describing him as a " living embodiment " of Oswald Spengler 's " Faustian Man " . Biographer Tobias Churton considered Crowley " a pioneer of consciousness research " , and Sutin thought that he had made " distinctly original contributions " to the study of yoga in the West . 
 Thelema continued to develop and spread following Crowley 's death . In 1969 , the O.T.O. was reactivated in California under the leadership of Grady Louis McMurtry ; in 1985 its right to the title was unsuccessfully challenged in court by a rival group , the Society Ordo Templi Orientis , led by Brazilian Thelemite Marcelo Ramos Motta . Another American Thelemite was the filmmaker Kenneth Anger , who had been influenced by Crowley 's writings from a young age . In the United Kingdom , Kenneth Grant propagated a tradition known as Typhonian Thelema through his organisation , the Typhonian O.T.O. , later renamed the Typhonian Order . Also in Britain , an occultist known as Amado Crowley claimed to be Crowley 's son ; this has been refuted by academic investigation . Amado argued that Thelema was a false religion created by Crowley to hide his true esoteric teachings , which Amado claimed to be propagating . 
 Several Western esoteric traditions other than Thelema were also influenced by Crowley . Gerald Gardner , founder of Gardnerian Wicca , made use of much of Crowley 's published material when composing the Gardnerian ritual liturgy , and the Australian witch Rosaleen Norton was also heavily influenced by Crowley 's ideas . L. Ron Hubbard , the American founder of Scientology , was involved in Thelema in the early 1940s ( with Jack Parsons ) , and it has been argued that Crowley 's ideas influenced some of Hubbard 's work . Two prominent figures in religious Satanism , Anton LaVey and Michael Aquino , were also influenced by Crowley 's work . 
 Crowley also had a wider influence in British popular culture . He was included as one of the figures on the cover art of The Beatles ' album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ( 1967 ) , and his motto of " Do What Thou Wilt " was inscribed on the vinyl of Led Zeppelin 's album Led Zeppelin III ( 1970 ) . Led Zeppelin co @-@ founder Jimmy Page bought Boleskine in 1971 , and part of the band 's film The Song Remains the Same was filmed in the grounds . He sold it in 1992 . David Bowie made reference to Crowley in the lyrics of his song " Quicksand " ( 1971 ) , while Ozzy Osbourne and his lyricist Bob Daisley wrote a song titled " Mr Crowley " ( 1980 ) . 
 = So Beautiful or So What = 
 So Beautiful or So What is the twelfth studio album by American folk rock singer @-@ songwriter Paul Simon . For the album , he reunited with former collaborator and record producer Phil Ramone . Having experimented with rhythm @-@ based textures for much of the previous two decades , Simon returned to composing songs rather traditionally using only his acoustic guitar . These songs were further augmented by experimental recording practices in the studio . The album was largely recorded in a small cottage at Simon 's home in New Canaan , Connecticut . 
 The music of So Beautiful or So What features West African blues @-@ inspired guitar playing , Indian @-@ style percussion , and experimentation with samples , which ranged from an excerpt from a 1941 sermon to nighttime ambience in Kenya . The songs were recorded with little bass but with a very large presence of bells . Much of Simon 's lyrics touch on themes of spirituality and mortality , which Simon said was unintentional and resulted naturally in his songwriting process for the album . 
 When So Beautiful or So What was released by Hear Music on April 8 , 2011 , it received widespread acclaim from critics , many of whom considered it Simon 's best work in two decades . It appeared on many year @-@ end critics ' lists as one of the year 's best records . The album also became his highest US chart debut , reaching number four on the <unk> 200 , and charted within the top ten in nine other countries . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 For So Beautiful or So What , Simon reunited with record producer and former collaborator Phil Ramone , who previously worked with him on Simon & Garfunkel 's 1982 live album The Concert in Central Park . According to Simon , the reunion came casually ; he told Ramone when they met each other that he was beginning to work on a new album and , as Ramone lived in the next town , they decided it would be easy to work together again . Simon recorded the album at his small cottage in New Canaan , Connecticut . The recording sessions often consisted solely of Simon , Ramone , and engineer Andy Smith . Throughout the production of the record , the album ’ s engineers would gradually make upgrades to the space during months off . As it was not acoustically designed or soundproofed , Smith often employed <unk> RX software to rid the recordings of extra noise , such as an oak tree above the home from which acorns fell , interrupting recordings . Keeping in line with his experimental attitude , Simon decided to record the acorns , remarking , " All sounds are musical once you start to listen . " Occasionally , Simon would record in the control room instead . Like all of Simon ’ s output from his 1997 effort Songs from The <unk> onward , the album was recorded digitally using Pro Tools . 
 Much time was spent on getting guitars to sound as Simon preferred . A bit of experimentation among the additional session players occurred , from which Simon would edit himself , compiling them together or often deleting them altogether . Many songs were recorded with a hand @-@ built cigar @-@ box guitar , which Simon bought from Mississippi blues musician Super <unk> . Analogue effects were applied before recording digitally to keep mixes simple ; this method also inspired Simon while arranging the songs . Smith would burn Simon a compact disc each evening of the day ’ s session , and he would return the next day with notes on the recordings . This resulted in mixes being created as the album developed , rather than at the end of the process . Simon and Ramone often listened to their recordings while driving around , noting what would need changes . 
 The process lasted over a year . Additional recording took place at Simon ’ s summer home in Montauk , New York on Long Island , but less so than his previous efforts . Home recording , as Ramone told Sound on Sound shortly after the album ’ s release , required a certain discipline . Simon would often arrive in the morning and recording until nightfall . Percussion and vocals were overdubbed at Germano Studios . The Indian ensemble on " Dazzling Blue " was recorded at Clinton Studios in New York City , while a bluegrass ensemble was cut at Tony Bennett ’ s New Jersey studio . Simon ’ s wife , Edie Brickell , and his teenage daughter Lulu contributed harmonies , while Chris Bear of indie rock band Grizzly Bear contributed electronic drum parts to the album . 
 Simon financed the recording of So Beautiful or So What himself after being released from his 30 @-@ year record contract with Warner Bros. Records . After the recording sessions were finished , he signed a deal with Concord Music Group to distribute the album . Simon said , " It 's the best work I 've done in 20 years . " The cover art , titled " DNA Mutation " , was designed by visual artist and NASA systems engineer Sven Geier . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 So Beautiful or So What finds Simon returning to more harmonic @-@ based compositions than rhythm @-@ based . This was spurred from when he realized his favorite song on his 2006 effort Surprise , " Everything About It Is a Love Song " , contained a chord progression he found particularly interesting . After coming to this realization , he focused on the album ’ s three ballads , " Questions for the Angels " , " Amulet " , and " Love and Hard Times " . Unlike his previous rhythm @-@ based albums , in which he would gain inspiration for his guitar parts from pre @-@ recorded backing tracks , Simon took a more traditional approach to building the songs on So Beautiful or So What . He wrote songs at home before developing them further in the studio with the help of a natural click track , such as " a percussion instrument , or even just tapping out a rhythm on his guitar . " He overdubbed additional elements afterwards , including additional guitar parts and percussion . Simon began envisioning the album ’ s sequencing when he only had a few songs written , letting it inform his songwriting . 
 The music for So Beautiful or So What was inspired by West African blues , which Simon combined with " Indian drumming , Old Hollywood strings and bluegrass harmony singing . " The songs employ a wide variety of samples , including from older blues and gospel recordings . " Love Is Eternal Sacred Light " contains a harmonica sample from Sonny Terry , and " Love and Blessings " lifts from The Golden Gate Jubilee Quartet . Simon did not want to record an ordinary studio album and instead , according to Ramone , wanted " lots of space with lots of atmosphere and feeling ... Rather than go for hugely orchestrated ideas he was going , for example , for overtones in bells and gongs . Or if a sax or a <unk> comes in , they 're there to do something specific , and not to fill in the space . " The album 's music is also largely devoid of heavy bass ( some tracks actually using a baritone guitar instead ) , and drums are very quiet and reserved . Smith said percussion instruments , including exotic bells , ancient hand bells , and glockenspiels , were Simon 's favorite to record with for the album . In using bells to augment the sound , Simon put them behind certain guitar notes to “ highlight ” the sound , as he wanted the recordings to be devoid of echo ; he found that using bells created only a slight echo , with an odd , atmospheric tone that he preferred . Drummer Jim <unk> placed towels over each drums to emphasize the higher @-@ frequency percussive instruments . 
 The songs on So Beautiful or So What touch on subjects such as love , mortality , and faith . In terms of songwriting , Simon did not approach each new song with a theme ; instead , he let them evolve naturally from the first line he would compose . Simon had no plans to pursue religious writing , but it ended up particularly strong in the album ’ s lyrics . He noted that " five of the first six " songs he wrote touched on themes of God : " I wondered whether there was a subconscious theme that I was tapping into . I have used Christian symbols and imagery before in songs . It ’ s very strongly evocative , so it may just be coincidence — but it may not be . " The A.V. Club suggested that the album 's gospel influence inspired the touch of humor when discussing dark subjects such as death . 
 " Getting Ready for Christmas Day " was one of the album ’ s earliest completed songs , and it contains a sample from a 1941 sermon by the Reverend J.M. Gates . The sermon inspired the song ’ s creation , with a certain rhythmic tone to his oration that interested him . Simon heard the sermon on a box set titled Goodbye Babylon , which consists early 20th century Americana . It came together quicker than other songs , with Simon recording his guitar live . The track also references his nephew , who served multiple tours in the Iraq War . " The Afterlife " concerns a man dying and getting to heaven , where he waits in line to meet with God , where everyone is " filling out forms and waiting in line to catch ' a glimpse of the divine . ' " While in line , he unsuccessfully hits on a woman . When he finally meets God , he is taken aback , and can only spout gibberish . The point of the song is that having questions for God would cease to be relevant if one were to confront God face @-@ to @-@ face due the enormity of such a theoretical situation . 
 " Dazzling Blue " is based on his relationship with wife Edie Brickell , and the title references her favorite color . " The CAT scan 's eye sees what the heart 's concealing " , sang Simon over African cadences and Indian tablas , before <unk> at how his wife and he " were born beneath a star of dazzling blue " . He said the song reminded him of his work as a part of Simon & Garfunkel . " Rewrite " features segments of recordings made on a small digital recorder by Brickell on a 2009 family trip together in Kenya . Simon was frustrated over the guitar tone in his song and attached the sound of a wildebeest to a certain guitar note each time it occurred , in an effort to create an interesting sound . The song contains nighttime ambience recorded during the trip . It was written about a burned out Vietnam veteran imagining that he could rewrite his life , in order to give it a happy ending . " Love and Hard Times " is an affirmation of love for Brickell . The beginning of the song references “ God and his only son ” visiting Earth . Simon noted that the song ’ s thesis is being thankful at the highest level . The track contains orchestral arrangement from Gil Goldstein , which was recorded at Avatar Studios , as Ramone wanted a larger room to record in . 
 " Questions for the Angels " includes a reference to American rapper Jay @-@ Z , which was inspired by a billboard featuring him that was present over the Brooklyn Bridge for a time . Simon mentioned that he would pass it on his way to the Brooklyn Academy of Music when they were holding a month @-@ long celebration of his music in April 2008 . Simon included the line to create a sharp transition from angels in Heaven to a downtown Brooklyn street . " So Beautiful or So What " contains what Simon once admitted is " one of [ his ] favorite Bo Diddley rhythms , " and the song ’ s title references Miles Davis 's " So What " . The title is a question Simon envisioned when facing the enormity of the infinite . The song almost became a collaboration with Bob Dylan ; Simon felt two verses might be nice for him and sent him a message through their mutual manager . Although Dylan said that he liked the song , Simon did not hear back in sufficient time , as the album was on a deadline . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Many songs from So Beautiful or So What were made available in various forms before their release on the album . " Rewrite " and " Love and Hard Times " appeared in Simon 's 2008 book Lyrics ; 1964 @-@ 2008 , " Questions for the Angels " was included on the 2009 Starbucks compilation This Better Be Good , and the lead single " Getting Ready for Christmas Day " premiered on National Public Radio on November 16 , 2010 . On April 5 , 2011 , So Beautiful or So What was available for streaming on the album 's website of the same name for the week preceding its official release . It was released on formats including digital download , vinyl LP , and a CD deluxe edition with a DVD featuring footage of Simon 's live performances at Webster Hall . Rolling Stone held a sweepstakes for fans to win a collector 's edition box set , which was released in a limited amount of 1 @,@ 000 copies and included the CD / DVD deluxe edition , a vinyl copy , and a 12 ' x 12 ' lithograph and replica notebook . 
 When So Beautiful or So What was released in the United States , it debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 and sold 68 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It was Simon 's highest chart debut on the Billboard 200 , and by October 2011 , it had sold 254 @,@ 000 copies in the US . In the United Kingdom , the album debuted at number six on the British albums chart , selling 21 @,@ 993 copies in its first week . It was Simon 's ninth top @-@ ten solo album in the UK . 
 So Beautiful or So What received widespread acclaim from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 85 , based on 27 reviews . Many critics compared its diverse influences to Simon 's style on his 1986 album Graceland . In a review for AllMusic , senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine said the music is not only focused but " vivid , vibrant , and current in a way none of [ Simon 's ] peers have managed to achieve " . Los Angeles Times writer Margaret Wappler praised its " multiethnic landscape " of American folk and <unk> influences on an album that is his best since 1990 's Rhythm of the Saints . In The New York Times , Jon Pareles took note of Simon 's lyrics : " Sketches of individuals and moments are intertwined with grander pronouncements ; unforced humor tempers gloomier reflections " . Will Hodgkinson from The Times believed his meditations on the afterlife are informed by both youthful enthusiasm and the wisdom of old age , while The Guardian 's Maddy Costa said Simon " finds an answer to the ineffable in song " . 
 Many reviewers took note of the rather overt religious symbolism in Simon 's lyrics ; one Irish blogger facetiously called So Beautiful or So What the year 's best Christian music album , while American evangelical journalist Cathleen <unk> said it was the most significant record of spiritually reflective music in recent years . Writing for MSN Music , Robert Christgau found Simon 's usual folk rock " graced with global colors that sound as natural " as his guitar and said his lyrics are imbued with gratitude for his wife 's love and God , although he disagreed with Simon 's view of God 's benevolent nature . Andy Gill from The Independent was more critical and found Simon 's ruminations on love , age , and mortality trivial , while Pitchfork Media critic Stephen M. Deusner said the record " can be stodgy in its emotions and a bit too devoted to its motifs " . At the end of 2011 , So Beautiful or So What was voted the 14th best album of the year in The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics nationwide . Christgau , the poll 's creator , ranked it 3rd on his year @-@ end list for The Barnes & Noble Review . Rolling Stone also named it the year 's 3rd best record , while Mojo ranked it 15th . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Paul Simon . 
 " Getting Ready for Christmas Day " – 4 : 06 
 " The Afterlife " – 3 : 40 
 " Dazzling Blue " – 4 : 32 
 " Rewrite " – 3 : 49 
 " Love and Hard Times " – 4 : 09 
 " Love Is Eternal Sacred Light " – 4 : 02 
 " Amulet " – 1 : 36 
 " Questions for the Angels " – 3 : 49 
 " Love and Blessings " – 4 : 18 
 " So Beautiful or So What " – 4 : 07 
 Sample credits 
 " Getting Ready for Christmas Day " contains excerpts from the 1941 sermon of the same name by Reverend J. M. Gates with congregation . 
 " Love Is Eternal Sacred Light " contains excerpts from " Train Whistle Blues " . 
 " Love and Blessings " contains excerpts from " Golden Gate Gospel Train " , recorded by The Golden Gate Jubilee Quartet in 1938 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Ben Linus = 
 Benjamin " Ben " Linus is a fictional character portrayed by Michael Emerson on the ABC television series Lost . Ben was the leader of a group of island natives called the Others and was initially known as Henry Gale to the survivors of Oceanic Flight 815 . He began as the main antagonist during the second and third seasons , but in subsequent seasons , becomes a morally ambiguous ally to the main characters . Other characters frequently describe him as loyal only to himself , though it is also often hinted that he may be driven by some higher purpose . 
 As with most characters on Lost , Ben 's history is revealed through flashbacks and episodes set in other time periods which are revealed slowly as the series progresses . Sterling <unk> first portrayed a young Ben late in season three , in the character 's first centric episode , " The Man Behind the Curtain " . Ben 's childhood is further explored in the fifth season of the series , partially set in 1977 . Fifth season episode " Dead Is Dead " explores Ben 's fragile state following the events of the fourth season , in which his loyalty to the island led to the death of his adoptive daughter Alex Rousseau ( Tania Raymonde ) , and flashbacks show the audience Ben 's original acquisition of Alex and his rise to leadership of the Others , after exiling his rival Charles Widmore ( Alan Dale ) . Originally cast for three guest appearances in the second season , Emerson 's role was expanded . As leader of the Others , Ben became a regular cast member from the third season onward . Reviews of the show would often focus on Ben 's mysterious motives . Emerson 's portrayal garnered many positive reviews , resulting in nominations for the Emmy for Outstanding Supporting Actor year @-@ on @-@ year from 2007 to 2010 , winning in 2009 . 
 In 2010 , Ben Linus was ranked # 24 on the TV Guide Network special 25 Greatest TV Characters of All Time . In 2016 , Rolling Stone ranked him # 1 of their " 40 Greatest TV Villains of All Time " . 
 = = Arc = = 
 = = = Prior to the crash = = = 
 Flashbacks during " The Man Behind the Curtain " show Benjamin Linus being born in the woods outside of Portland , Oregon , to Roger ( Jon Gries ) and Emily Linus ( Carrie Preston ) . Emily dies after giving birth to Ben . When Ben is young , he and his father move to the Island , after his dad is offered a job working for the Dharma Initiative . On the Island , Ben begins to see visions of his mother , while Roger starts drinking heavily and verbally abusing him . Ben develops a hatred for the Dharma Initiative and one day runs away from the Barracks . He comes across Richard Alpert ( Nestor Carbonell ) , one of the Island natives known to the Initiative as the " <unk> " , in the jungle , who grants Ben 's request to join his group but tells him he needs to be very patient . 
 Season five 's " Namaste " shows a young Ben coming into contact with a captured Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) , who along with several other Oceanic Flight 815 survivors has been brought back in time from 2007 . In the following episode , " He 's Our You " , he helps free Sayid under the impression Sayid was sent by the Others to bring him to Richard . Sayid instead shoots Ben and leaves him for dead . Fellow crash survivor Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) refuses to help the boy , so Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) and James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) take Ben to Richard , who informs them Ben will henceforth lose his innocence and always be one of the Others . In 1988 , Charles Widmore , leader of the Others , sends Ben to kill French scientist Danielle Rousseau ( Melissa Farman ) , who was marooned on the island . However , when Ben learns Rousseau has a child , he kidnaps the baby Alex Rousseau , warning Rousseau to never come looking for the baby if she wants either of them to live . Four years after this , it is revealed in flashbacks Ben kills his father with poison gas , then discovers every Dharma Initiative member dead , also from poison gas . He banishes Charles Widmore from the island and assumes his leadership role , as he is the only one who can allegedly interact with their real leader , Jacob , and communicate his will to the group . 
 Two days before the crash of Oceanic Flight 815 , Ben discovers he has a spinal tumor . After witnessing the crash , he sends Ethan Rom ( William Mapother ) and Goodwin Stanhope ( Brett Cullen ) to investigate . He chooses Goodwin in order to remove Ben 's competition for the affections of Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) , a woman recruited to the island three years previously in order to help the Others with their fertility problems . 
 = = = After the crash = = = 
 = = = = Seasons two to four = = = = 
 In the season 3 episode " Exposé " , Ben and Juliet enter a Dharma station , the Pearl , and watch Jack on a monitor . Ben tells Juliet he will convince Jack to perform surgery on him . After Goodwin dies , Ben shows Juliet the corpse , so she knows she is Ben 's and will be on the Island forever . Ben makes his first appearance in the season two episode " One of Them " , where he is caught in a trap set by Danielle Rousseau ( Mira Furlan ) . He pretends to be Henry Gale , a man from Minnesota who crashed on the island while traveling via hot air balloon . Rousseau turns him over to Sayid , who takes him to the Swan Station , where he is held captive and interrogated . Ben is exposed as a fraud when the body of the real Henry Gale is found , but he is set free by Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) , a crash survivor whose son has been kidnapped by the Others . When Michael successfully brings Jack , Kate , and Sawyer to the pier , Ben gives him a boat so he can leave the Island with his son . Ben then takes Jack , Kate , and Sawyer to a smaller island nearby . 
 In the beginning of season three , Ben gives Juliet the task of interrogating Jack , while Kate and Sawyer are kept in cages . He admits to Jack about having a tumor on his spine , and asks him to remove it in order for him to leave the Island . During the surgery he wakes up , where Jack refuses to finish until Kate and Sawyer are safely away from the Others . After they escape , Ben 's operation is finished . He returns to the Barracks with the rest of the Others , and Jack in tow . When John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) comes to rescue Jack , he and Ben have a confrontation . Ben tells Locke of a " magic box " which can produce whatever someone wishes for and shows him his father , Anthony Cooper ( Kevin Tighe ) , who they are holding captive and was brought to the Island because of the box . Ben offers Locke the opportunity to join the Others , but only if he kills Cooper ; Ben knows he won 't kill in cold blood , and so makes the offer as a way to humiliate Locke . Locke returns a few days later with Cooper 's corpse , having used Sawyer to do the deed for him , so Ben takes him to meet Jacob . When Ben discovers Locke can hear Jacob , he shoots Locke and leaves him for dead . He returns to the Others ' camp , and tells Richard , now his second @-@ in @-@ command , to lead the remaining Others to the Temple . Ben takes Alex with him as he attempts to prevent Jack from sending a radio message to a nearby freighter . He reunites Alex with her mother , and claims if Jack contacts the freighter , every single person on the Island will die . Ben is beaten and taken hostage , and forced to watch as the freighter is contacted . 
 In the first episode of season four , " The Beginning of the End " , the survivors divide into two groups . Those who believe the people from the freighter to be dangerous , Ben among them , join Locke and head to the Barracks . After Ben confesses the freighter crew has come to capture him , Miles Straume ( Ken Leung ) , a medium from the freighter , makes a deal with Ben , asking for $ 3 @.@ 2 million in exchange for reporting Ben as dead to Charles Widmore ( Alan Dale ) , the man who sent the freighter . Ben agrees after Miles rebuffs his claims such a small fortune is beyond him . Ben eventually gets his freedom when he tells Locke who sent the freighter . Once free , Ben urges Alex , and her boyfriend and mother , to travel to the Temple , for protection from the people on the freighter . However , they are ambushed en route by mercenaries from the freighter and all but Alex are killed . Alex is taken hostage after revealing herself to be Ben 's daughter . In " The Shape of Things to Come " , Martin Keamy ( Kevin Durand ) , the leader of the mercenaries , threatens to shoot Alex if Ben does not come forward ; Ben staunchly denies any attachment to her , which results in her execution . Ben claims Widmore has " changed the rules " , then summons the smoke monster to attack the mercenaries . He then leaves with Locke and Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) to communicate with Jacob . Locke enters Jacob 's cabin alone , and returns stating they need to move the Island . They go to the Orchid , a Dharma station which allows them to do this . Ben sends Locke to become the new leader of the Others , then enters a secret level of the Orchid . He turns a large frozen wheel in the wall , which teleports the Island to a new location . Ben himself is transported to the Sahara Desert , specifically , Tunisia , which was formerly the ancient country of Carthage . 
 The flashforwards in " The Shape of Things to Come " show Ben arrives in the Sahara Desert ten months ahead of when he left the Island . Ben finds Sayid at the funeral of his wife Nadia ( Andrea Gabriel ) , and recruits Sayid as his personal assassin , telling him Widmore ordered the assassination of his wife . Ben provides Sayid with a list of targets , all of which he successfully kills over the next three years . At one point , Ben infiltrates Widmore 's penthouse apartment in London to inform him of his intention to kill his daughter , Penelope ( Sonya Walger ) , as retribution for the death of Alex . 
 = = = = Seasons five and six = = = = 
 When Locke leaves the island to bring the survivors back to the island , Ben tracks him down . He gets Locke to reveal what he knows about returning to the island , then kills him and stages it as a suicide . Ben visits Jack in the funeral home housing Locke 's body , telling Jack he will help him return to the island , but the only way to get back is to bring everyone who had left it , including Locke 's corpse . Ben boards Ajira Airways Flight 316 with the rest of survivors , which then crashes on the island . Jack , Kate , Hurley , and Sayid are transported to 1977 , while Sun and Ben remain in the 2007 with a resurrected Locke . The plane crash lands on the Hydra Island , so Ben attempts to take a boat to the main island . Sun strikes him in the back of the head and takes the boat with Frank , so Ben is left in the care of the other survivors , including Locke . After Ben regains consciousness and finds Locke to be alive , he convinces Locke he knew bringing him to the island would resurrect him , and he stopped Locke 's suicide attempt merely to gain information . Locke travels with Ben , who is to be judged by the Monster . After they fail to find the Monster at the Barracks , they head to the Temple . As Ben and Locke travel through a series of tunnels beneath the Temple , Ben falls through the floor , so Locke leaves to get something that he can pull him up with . The Monster flows out of a grate below and surrounds Ben , showing flashes of decisions he made in his life involving Alex . The Monster takes the form of Alex and pushes Ben against a wall . She says she knows Ben is planning to kill Locke again , and if he does she will hunt him down and destroy him . She orders him to follow Locke and do whatever he asks , then disappears . They return to the Others ' camp , where Locke gathers the group together and announces he is taking them to see Jacob . As they are walking , Ben relates his experience with the Monster and his promise to do whatever Locke asks , so Locke convinces Ben to kill Jacob . Richard leads them to the base of the statue , where Jacob lives . Within , they are met by Jacob ( Mark Pellegrino ) . Jacob greets Locke and observes Locke has found a loophole . It is revealed that Locke was not resurrected , and is instead the Monster taking the form of Locke . Ben confronts Jacob about why he never revealed himself at any time during Ben 's tenure as leader , but when Jacob is dismissive towards him , he stabs Jacob twice , killing him - and in doing so , binds his destiny to the island , sealing his own fate . 
 After Jacob 's death , the Monster tells Ben to fetch Richard , as he wants to speak to him . However , when Ben exits the statue , Richard throws him down beside the corpse of the real John Locke , which has been brought to the statue by survivors of the Ajira flight , led by Ilana <unk> ( Zuleikha Robinson ) . Ben is forced by Ilana 's group to bring them to the imposter Locke . They start shooting at the Monster , but he disappears , then returns in its black smoke form , killing Ilana 's group . The Monster returns to Locke 's form and mockingly informs Ben of the real Locke 's last thoughts , while being strangled by Ben . Afterwards , Ben comforts Ilana when he finds her crying in Jacob 's chamber and sets off with her , Sun , and Frank Lapidus ( Jeff Fahey ) to bury Locke before going to the Temple , where they believe they will be safe from the Monster . At Locke 's funeral , Ben provides the eulogy , and expresses his sincere apologies for killing Locke . When they arrive at the Temple , the Monster is destroying the place . They return to the beach as a temporary shelter , and Ben attempts to make amends with everyone for killing Jacob . Ilana then forces him to dig a grave and explains she will kill Ben for murdering her father figure . Later , the Monster visits Ben , telling him to join him and then magically frees Ben . After Ben escapes , Ilana chases after him , and the two come face @-@ to @-@ face at the jungle when Ben points a rifle at her . Ben explains to her why he really killed Jacob , particularly grieving his daughter . Ilana understands and allows him to rejoin their group , which he does . Hurley , Jack , and Richard show up and join their group , then have a meeting , deciding what to do next . Richard suggests they should stop the Monster escaping by blowing up the Ajira plane . After Hurley destroys the available dynamite from the shipwrecked Black Rock , Richard insists he will find other explosives . Ben and Miles join Richard , while the rest decide to go talk to the Monster . When Ben , Richard and Miles arrive at the Barracks , Widmore is there , and is soon joined by the Monster . Ben murders Widmore before he is able to make a deal with the Monster to spare his daughter . The Monster and Ben find Desmond and the Monster forces him to go destroy the Island . They run into Jack 's group and they both go to the heart of the Island , where Desmond removes the cork of the Island , causing the Island to begin collapsing . After Jack kills the Monster , Ben and Hurley volunteer to stay behind on the Island with Jack to assist him relighting the Island . Jack tells them he will die doing this and Jack gives Hurley the new position of being protector of the Island . Ben advises him to approach his Island duties with his kindness and helpful attitude . Hurley asks Ben to become his advisor , to which he is honored . After an undisclosed period of time , Ben , on orders from Hurley , arrives at the Dharma Logistics Warehouse in Guam . He speaks to the two workers there and instructs them that the facility is being shut down . Afterward , Ben arrives at the Santa Rosa Mental Hospital and visits Walt . Ben tells him that he is still special and that he can help his father , Michael , even though he is dead , and offers Walt a job to return to the island . 
 The afterlife experienced by the survivors is shown during season six . In " The Substitute " , Ben Linus is shown as a teacher of European History . In " Dr. Linus " , Ben laments his life in general , particularly because his principal , Reynolds , does not care for the school . He is living with his father , Roger ( Jon Gries ) , who is on life support . At school , he is shown to have a close relationship with his star pupil , Alex , and befriends a substitute teacher , John Locke . While studying together , Alex tells Ben that Principal Reynolds is having a sexual affair with one of the school nurses on campus . Ben attempts to blackmail Reynolds , threatening to reveal his affair and citing his position as principal as the demand . However , Reynolds swiftly retaliates by saying if he makes good on his threats , Alex 's chances of going to Yale University will decrease substantially , as he is requested to write her a recommendation letter . Wanting to save Alex 's educational future , Ben backs down . Days later , Ben notices Desmond Hume waiting outside the school in his car for an extended amount of time . Desmond runs over Locke , and swiftly drives off . As soon as the ambulance arrives , Ben gets in and sits next to the critically injured Locke , assuring him everything will be all right . When Locke returns to the school , Desmond does as well , and Ben catches him . Desmond beats Ben severely saying he was only trying to help Locke let go . Ben has a vision from his previous life during Desmond 's beating . Ben believes him and relays Locke this information . When Alex sees how badly Ben was beaten , she invites him to her house where her mother , Danielle , fixes him supper . Danielle tells Ben that Alex views him as a father , and Ben begins to cry . Ben waits outside the chapel where the Oceanic survivors plan to move on together , and he sees Locke for the last time . Ben sincerely apologizes to Locke for killing him , and Locke forgives him . Hurley later comes out of the chapel and invites Ben in , but Ben politely declines saying he is not ready to move on , saying he " has a few things to work out " . Hurley accepts this , and tells Ben that he was a " real good number two " , thanking him for his help in protecting the island . Ben , touched by this , responds " And you were a great number one , Hugo . " 
 = = Personality = = 
 Ben , although extremely well @-@ mannered , has an impeccable ability to lie and manipulate the people around him , even when he is at a physical disadvantage . He often speaks in a low , emotionless monotone when at his most unreadable , frequently sprinkling his speech with sarcasm or dry , humorless jokes . He can also be petty and vindictive , even to the point of murder , when he does not get what he wants . He claims to have been born on the Island , leading to him being thought of as a miracle by the Others , as pregnant women die on the island ; but later confesses to Locke that he was lying . He unsuccessfully tries to convince the survivors he is Henry Gale , although succeeds in manipulating Locke to turn against Jack while held prisoner under this guise . While he claims he will not sacrifice innocent lives in order to accomplish his goals , he has been shown to do quite the opposite . In the third season finale , Ben is informed by Tom Friendly ( M. C. Gainey ) , an Other , that they have captured three of the crash survivors : Sayid Jarrah , Bernard Nadler ( Sam Anderson ) , and Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) . When Tom tells Ben they are unwilling to reveal any information about the rest of the survivors , Ben quickly replies " Shoot Kwon ... You want them to answer questions , kill Kwon - do it now " . Conversely , Ben refuses to allow his spy on the freighter to destroy it long before it reaches the Island , as he would not kill anyone who " did not deserve to die " . Furthermore , when Locke confronts Ben about causing the freighter to explode , Ben coldly replies , " So ? " 
 Ben 's unclear motives have led to speculation about his possible status as a villain . Ben Rawson @-@ Jones from Digital Spy describes Ben as a " supposed villain " , pondering " Could he really have been the good guy all along " following the fourth season episode " The Shape of Things to Come " . Actor Michael Emerson suspects where Ben 's loyalties lie will always be ambiguous , making this a " wonderful role " . He is rarely shown losing control of his emotions , but when he does , it is done in a big and childish way . Emerson explains " He 's cold because any trace of warmth makes him vulnerable to his enemies " . Ben is also known for his commitment to the island and doing whatever is necessary to protect it . He has no qualms with Locke attempting to kill Naomi ( Marsha Thomason ) and even Jack after the survivors begin to call the freighter . He undertakes the risky and unpredictable step of moving the Island to prevent the freighter crew , and thus Charles Widmore , from finding it . He always has a plan and is described by Kevin Thompson from The Palm Beach Post as a " know @-@ it @-@ all " , which another reviewer thinks is because " [ Ben ] talks quietly , in a menacingly measured drawl ... with lots of pauses and emphases " . 
 Ben also appears to know Turkish , as he asks the bedouins on horseback " <unk> <unk> <unk> ? " late in season 4 . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 2001 , Michael Emerson won a Primetime Emmy Award for his guest appearance as serial killer William Hinks on The Practice . The Lost producers liked his work on The Practice , so they were keen to cast Emerson in the role of Ben , then known as " Henry Gale " , as they thought he would fit the character well . He was originally contracted to appear in just three episodes of Lost , making his first appearance midway through the second season , in episode " One of Them " . The producers were so impressed by him that they contracted him for a further five episodes , citing the scene at the end of " The Whole Truth " where Ben asks for milk as the moment they knew he was a " keeper " . He was then made a part of the regular cast from the third season . Had Emerson not worked out during his initial appearances a different actor would have been cast for the leader of the Others , but it was always intended the survivors would have the leader right under their noses and not realize it . During one episode of the Official Lost Podcast , the producers state they always knew Ben would be the " Big Bad " . Emerson had no idea of his character 's importance during his second season recurring role . He was told nothing about Ben 's backstory and would only receive scripts at the last minute . He enjoyed how the ambiguity of Ben 's motives allowed him to " paint it the way [ he ] please [ s ] " . Sterling <unk> was cast to play Ben in the flashbacks of episode " The Man Behind the Curtain " . Emerson 's wife Carrie Preston was cast as Ben 's mother following Emerson telling people at parties she was desperate for a part on the show . 
 Referring to the scene in the third season where Ben seemingly fits Sawyer with a lethal pacemaker , Emerson comments " Sadistic may be the word , but he doesn 't seem to take much relish in it . He 's just sort of detached , he looks at it coldly . I sometimes feel like everything to him is a sort of scientific experiment and he is interested in a dispassionate way in how the experiment runs its course . I think some day if we ever find out what his parentage is , that his parents were people of science " . Elizabeth Mitchell , who plays Juliet , did not think it was a " huge surprise for Juliet that Ben had feelings for [ Juliet ] , but I still think it was ... it was horrifying under the circumstances " . She also thought " [ Juliet has ] this kind of wonderful mind , and I think that Ben probably has a tremendous respect for that . It 's not because Juliet is so enticing , it 's just the fact that she 's got this amazing mind , she has this amazing , you know , intelligence , and I think that 's what intrigues him , that 's what draws him into her " . During season four the producers deliberately left it ambiguous as to whether Ben was a part of the Oceanic 6 ( six survivors of the plane crash that make it off the Island ) after he appeared in one of Sayid 's flashforwards . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 During the beginning of season three , Chris Carabott from IGN described Ben as " one of the best ' villains on television ' , due to his ' eerie manner ' and ' methodical delivery ' " . Later in the season Carabott had a problem with Ben being so deceptive , as " anything he imparts must be taken with a grain of salt " . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly also noted this , saying " I don 't trust Ben . I have no idea when he 's lying and when he 's telling the truth . The only thing I 'm reasonably sure of is that everything he says is for the purpose of impacting a character — and the audience " . Ben 's father issues revealed towards the end of season three are described as " not the most original Lost character trait by any means but it is the thrust behind Ben 's development into the genocidal maniac he eventually becomes " . Following the penultimate episode of the season , Carabott stated " Even with his limited screen time , Michael Emerson 's performance shines through and we hope that he survives the events of the finale because we love seeing his character every week . " Erin Martell from TV Squad picked the Others as one of her season three highlights , partly due to the development of Ben , adding " I cannot even picture the final three seasons without Ben " . Martell also gave six reasons to look forward to season four , one of which was Ben Linus . 
 Aubry D 'Arminio of Entertainment Weekly describes " savvy Ben " as a " captivating minor character " . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly praised Emerson 's acting in the beginning of season four , calling him " a genius in [ the ] role " . Alan Sepinwall from The Star @-@ Ledger worried " the actor is so good and the character so popular that he 's kept alive even though it makes all the heroes look like idiots " . Following " Confirmed Dead " , Entertainment Weekly 's Jeff Jensen felt " Isn 't the whole business of Ben manipulating Locke with the promise of Island secrets getting just a little bit old ? " SyFy Portal 's Dan Compora said that " The more I hate Ben , the more I realize that Michael Emerson is just a very fine actor doing his job " . Don Williams of BuddyTV said " consider my mind blown again " , referring to the flashforward in " The Economist " where it is revealed that Sayid is working for Ben . Oscar Dahl of BuddyTV called Emerson an acting " god " . Chris Carabott from IGN found one of the best moments of " Eggtown " , was the power struggle between Locke and Ben , because " Their scenes together are amongst the best in the series and the one that opens " Eggtown " is a perfect display of how well Michael Emerson and Terry O 'Quinn work together . O 'Quinn captures Locke 's uncertainty perfectly in the opening scene and it 's always fun to watch Ben prey on any weakness of character . " Kevin Thompson of The Palm Beach Post wrote " with those big ol ' eyes of his , [ Emerson ] could always say more with a lengthy stare than he could with twenty pages of dialogue .... [ He has ] , once again , proved why he has become Lost 's star as well as its heart and soul .... an Emmy should belong to [ him ] . " Jennifer Godwin of E ! wrote that " no one has ever done better work humanizing a supervillain . " Matt Roush of TV Guide puts Ben in " The Shape of Things to Come " in the top 20 moments of the week , stating " Michael Emerson on Lost . It doesn 't get better than that " . Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy describes Emerson 's performance as " fantastic " , with " many layers of intrigue and humanity " . John Kubicek of BuddyTV also found his performance " fantastic " , adding " he nailed it " . Critic Kelly Woo , from TV Squad , placed him on second on her list of " Seven new characters that worked " , ranking just below Desmond Hume , also from Lost . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In 2006 , Michael Emerson was nominated for the Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor – Series , Miniseries , or Television Film , but lost out to Tony Plana from Ugly Betty . 
 In 2007 , following the third season , Emerson was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor on Television , losing to Masi Oka from Heroes . Later in the year , Emerson was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards , but lost to fellow Lost cast member Terry O 'Quinn . Emerson was nominated again for the Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor - Series , Miniseries , or Television Film , this time losing to David Zayas from Dexter , but eventually won the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor on Television , beating out fellow Lost actors Terry O 'Quinn and Josh Holloway . Emerson was also nominated for the Teen Choice Award for Best Villain . 
 In 2008 , Emerson was nominated again for the Primetime Emmy Award at the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards , but lost to Željko Ivanek from Damages . 
 On September 20 , 2009 , Emerson finally won the Primetime Emmy Award for his portrayal of Ben Linus at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 In 2010 , Emerson was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Series , Miniseries , or Television Film , but lost to John Lithgow from Dexter . For his final nomination for his portrayal of Ben Linus , Emerson was nominated again for the Primetime Emmy Award at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards , this time losing to Aaron Paul from Breaking Bad . 
 = 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( film ) = 
 2001 : A Space Odyssey is a 1968 epic science fiction film produced and directed by Stanley Kubrick . The screenplay , written by Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke , was partially inspired by Clarke 's short story " The Sentinel " . Clarke concurrently wrote the novel 2001 : A Space Odyssey , published soon after the film was released . The film follows a voyage to Jupiter with the sentient computer Hal after the discovery of a mysterious black monolith affecting human evolution . The film deals with the themes of existentialism , human evolution , technology , artificial intelligence , and extraterrestrial life . It is noted for its scientifically accurate depiction of space flight , pioneering special effects , and ambiguous imagery . It uses sound and minimal dialogue in place of traditional narrative techniques ; the soundtrack consists of classical music such as The Blue Danube and Also sprach Zarathustra . 
 Financed and distributed by American studio Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer , 2001 : A Space Odyssey was filmed and edited almost entirely in England , using the studio facilities of the MGM @-@ British Studios and those of Shepperton Studios , mostly because of the availability of much larger sound stages than in the United States . Production was subcontracted to Kubrick 's production company and care was taken that the film would be sufficiently British to qualify for subsidy from the Eady Levy . Having already shot his previous two films in England , Kubrick decided to settle there permanently during filming . 
 Despite initially receiving mixed reactions from critics and audiences , 2001 : A Space Odyssey garnered a cult following and slowly became the highest @-@ grossing North American film of 1968 . It was nominated for four Academy Awards , and received one for its visual effects . A sequel directed by Peter Hyams was released in 1984 . 
 Today , 2001 : A Space Odyssey is widely regarded as one of the greatest and most influential films ever made . In 1991 , it was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry . The critics ' polls in the 2002 and 2012 editions of Sight & Sound magazine ranked 2001 : A Space Odyssey sixth in the top ten films of all time ; it also tied for second place in the directors ' poll of the same magazine . In 2010 , it was named the greatest film of all time by The Moving Arts Film Journal . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In an African desert millions of years ago , a tribe of man @-@ apes faces starvation and competition for a water hole by a rival tribe . They awaken to find a featureless black monolith has appeared before them . Guided in some fashion by the Black Monolith , one man @-@ ape realizes how to use a bone as a tool and weapon ; the tribe learns to hunt for food , and kills the leader of their rivals , reclaiming the water hole . 
 Millions of years later , a Pan Am space plane carries Dr. Heywood R. Floyd to a space station orbiting Earth for a layover on his trip to Clavius Base , a United States outpost on the moon . After a videophone call with his daughter , Floyd 's Soviet scientist friend and her colleague ask about rumors of a mysterious epidemic at Clavius . Floyd declines to answer . At Clavius , Floyd heads a meeting of base personnel , apologizing for the epidemic cover story but stressing secrecy . His mission is to investigate a recently found artifact buried four million years ago . Floyd and others ride in a <unk> to the artifact , which is a monolith identical to the one encountered by the man @-@ apes . Sunlight strikes the monolith and a loud high @-@ pitched radio signal is heard . 
 Eighteen months later , the U.S. spacecraft Discovery One is bound for Jupiter . On board are mission pilots and scientists Dr. David Bowman and Dr. Frank Poole with three other scientists in cryogenic hibernation . Most of Discovery 's operations are controlled by the ship 's computer , HAL 9000 , referred to by the crew as " Hal " . Bowman and Poole watch Hal and themselves being interviewed on a BBC show about the mission , in which the computer states that he is " foolproof and incapable of error . " When asked by the host if Hal has genuine emotions , Bowman replies that he appears to , but that the truth is unknown . Later , Hal questions Dave on the mysterious purpose of the mission , then reports the imminent failure of an antenna control device . The astronauts retrieve the component making use of an EVA Pod but find nothing wrong with it . Hal suggests reinstalling the part and letting it fail so the problem can be found . Mission Control advises the astronauts that results from their twin HAL 9000 backups indicate that Hal is in error . Hal insists that the problem , like previous issues ascribed to HAL series units , is due to human error . Concerned about Hal 's behavior , Bowman and Poole enter an EVA pod to talk without Hal overhearing , and agree to disconnect Hal if he is proven wrong . Hal secretly follows their conversation by lip reading . 
 While Poole attempts to replace the unit during a space walk , his EVA pod , controlled by Hal , rams him , severing his oxygen hose and setting him adrift . Bowman takes another pod to attempt rescue , leaving his helmet behind in haste . Meanwhile , Hal turns off the life support functions of the crewmen in suspended animation . When Bowman returns to the ship with Poole 's body , Hal refuses to let him in , stating that the astronauts ' plan to deactivate him jeopardizes the mission . Bowman opens the ship 's emergency airlock manually , enters the ship , and proceeds to Hal 's processor core . Hal tries to reassure Bowman , then pleads with him to stop , and finally expresses fear . As Bowman deactivates the circuits controlling HAL 's higher intellectual functions , HAL regresses to his earliest programmed memory , the song " Daisy Bell " , which he sings for Bowman . 
 When Hal is finally disconnected , a prerecorded video message from Floyd reveals the existence of the monolith on the moon , its purpose and origin unknown . With the exception of one short but extremely powerful radio emission aimed at Jupiter , the object has been inert . At Jupiter , Bowman leaves Discovery One in an EVA pod to investigate another monolith discovered in orbit around the planet . The pod is pulled into a vortex of colored light , and Bowman races across vast distances of space , viewing bizarre cosmological phenomena and strange landscapes of unusual colors . 
 He finds himself , still in the pod , in a bedroom appointed in the neoclassical style . He sees older versions of himself , his point of view switching each time , first standing in the bedroom , middle @-@ aged , and still in his spacesuit , then dressed in leisure attire and eating dinner , and finally as an old man lying in the bed . A black monolith appears at the foot of the bed , and as Bowman reaches for it , he is transformed into a fetus enclosed in a transparent orb of light . The film ends as the new being floats in space beside the Earth , gazing at it . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 = = = = Meeting of Kubrick and Clarke = = = = 
 After completing Dr. Strangelove ( 1964 ) , director Stanley Kubrick became fascinated by the possibility of extraterrestrial life , and resolved to make " the proverbial good science fiction movie " . Searching for a collaborator in the science fiction community , Kubrick was advised by a mutual acquaintance , Columbia Pictures staffer Roger Caras , to talk to writer Arthur C. Clarke . Although convinced that Clarke was " a recluse , a nut who lives in a tree " , Kubrick allowed Caras to cable the film proposal to Clarke , who lived in Ceylon . Clarke 's cabled response stated that he was " frightfully interested in working with enfant terrible " , and added " what makes Kubrick think I 'm a recluse ? " Meeting for the first time at Trader Vic 's in New York on April 22 , 1964 , the two began discussing the project that would take up the next four years of their lives . Clarke kept a diary throughout his involvement with 2001 , excerpts of which were published in 1972 as The Lost Worlds of 2001 . 
 = = = = Search for source material = = = = 
 Kubrick told Clarke he wanted to make a film about " Man 's relationship to the universe " , and was , in Clarke 's words , " determined to create a work of art which would arouse the emotions of wonder , awe ... even , if appropriate , terror " . Clarke offered Kubrick six of his short stories , and by May 1964 , Kubrick had chosen " The Sentinel " as the source material for the film . In search of more material to expand the film 's plot , the two spent the rest of 1964 reading books on science and anthropology , screening science fiction films , and brainstorming ideas . They spent two years transforming " The Sentinel " into a novel , and then into a script for 2001 . Clarke said that his short story " Encounter in the Dawn " inspired the film 's " Dawn Of Man " sequence . 
 Kubrick and Clarke privately referred to the project as How the Solar System Was Won as a reference to MGM 's 1962 Cinerama epic , How the West Was Won . On February 23 , 1965 , Kubrick issued a press release announcing the title Journey Beyond The Stars . Other titles considered include Universe , Tunnel to the Stars , and <unk> . In April 1965 , eleven months after they began working on the project , Kubrick selected 2001 : A Space Odyssey ; Clarke said the title was " entirely " Kubrick 's idea . Intending to set the film apart from the " monsters and sex " type of science fiction films of the time , Kubrick used Homer 's The Odyssey as inspiration for the title . Kubrick said , " [ i ] t occurred to us that for the Greeks the vast stretches of the sea must have had the same sort of mystery and remoteness that space has for our generation . " 
 = = = = Parallel development of film and novel = = = = 
 Kubrick and Clarke planned to develop the 2001 novel first , free of the constraints of film , and then write the screenplay . They planned the writing credits to be " Screenplay by Stanley Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke , based on a novel by Arthur C. Clarke and Stanley Kubrick " to reflect their preeminence in their respective fields . In practice , the screenplay developed in parallel to the novel , and elements were shared between both . In a 1970 interview , Kubrick said : 
 There are a number of differences between the book and the movie . The novel , for example , attempts to explain things much more explicitly than the film does , which is inevitable in a verbal medium . The novel came about after we did a 130 @-@ page prose treatment of the film at the very outset . This initial treatment was subsequently changed in the screenplay , and the screenplay in turn was altered during the making of the film . But Arthur took all the existing material , plus an impression of some of the rushes , and wrote the novel . As a result , there 's a difference between the novel and the film ... I think that the divergences between the two works are interesting . 
 The screenplay credits were shared whereas the 2001 novel , released shortly after the film , was attributed to Clarke alone . Clarke wrote later that " the nearest approximation to the complicated truth " is that the screenplay should be credited to " Kubrick and Clarke " and the novel to " Clarke and Kubrick " . 
 Clarke and Kubrick wrote the novel and screenplay simultaneously . Clarke opted for clearer explanations of the mysterious monolith and Star Gate in the novel ; Kubrick made the film more cryptic by minimising dialogue and explanation . Kubrick said the film is " basically a visual , nonverbal experience " that " hits the viewer at an inner level of consciousness , just as music does , or painting " . 
 = = = = Depiction of alien life = = = = 
 Astronomer Carl Sagan wrote in his book The Cosmic Connection that Clarke and Kubrick asked his opinion on how to best depict extraterrestrial intelligence . Sagan , while acknowledging Kubrick 's desire to use actors to portray humanoid aliens for convenience 's sake , argued that alien life forms were unlikely to bear any resemblance to terrestrial life , and that to do so would introduce " at least an element of falseness " to the film . Sagan proposed that the film suggest , rather than depict , extraterrestrial <unk> . He attended the premiere and was " pleased to see that I had been of some help . " Kubrick hinted at the nature of the mysterious unseen alien race in 2001 by suggesting , in a 1968 interview , that given millions of years of evolution , they progressed from biological beings to " immortal machine entities " , and then into " beings of pure energy and spirit " ; beings with " limitless capabilities and <unk> intelligence " . 
 = = = = Stages of script and novel development = = = = 
 The script went through many stages . In early 1965 , when backing was secured for the film , Clarke and Kubrick still had no firm idea of what would happen to Bowman after the Star Gate sequence . Initially all of Discovery 's astronauts were to survive the journey ; by October 3 , Clarke and Kubrick had decided to leave Bowman the sole survivor and have him regress to infancy . By October 17 , Kubrick had come up with what Clarke called a " wild idea of slightly fag robots who create a Victorian environment to put our heroes at their ease . " HAL 9000 was originally named Athena after the Greek goddess of wisdom and had a feminine voice and persona . 
 Early drafts included a prologue containing interviews with scientists about extraterrestrial life , voice @-@ over narration ( a feature in all of Kubrick 's previous films ) , a stronger emphasis on the prevailing Cold War balance of terror , and a different and more explicitly explained breakdown for HAL . Other changes include a different monolith for the " Dawn of Man " sequence , discarded when early prototypes did not photograph well ; the use of Saturn as the final destination of the Discovery mission rather than Jupiter , discarded when the special effects team could not develop a convincing rendition of Saturn 's rings ; and the finale of the Star Child exploding nuclear weapons carried by Earth @-@ orbiting satellites , which Kubrick discarded for its similarity to his previous film , Dr. Strangelove . The finale and many of the other discarded screenplay ideas survived into Clarke 's novel . 
 Kubrick made further changes due to his desire to make the film more non @-@ verbal , communicating at a visual and visceral level rather than through conventional narrative . Vincent <unk> writes that Clarke 's novel has " strong narrative structure " , while the film is a mainly visual experience where much remains symbolic . 
 = = = = Remnants of early drafts in final film = = = = 
 While many ideas were discarded in totality , at least two remnants of previous plot ideas remain in the final film . 
 = = = = = HAL 's breakdown = = = = = 
 Although the film leaves it mysterious , early script drafts made clear that HAL 's breakdown is triggered by authorities on Earth who order him to withhold information from the astronauts about the purpose of the mission ( this is also explained in the film 's sequel 2010 ) . Frederick Ordway , Kubrick 's science advisor and technical consultant , stated that in an earlier script Poole tells HAL there is " ... something about this mission that we weren 't told . Something the rest of the crew knows and that you know . We would like to know whether this is true " , to which HAL responds : " I 'm sorry , Frank , but I don 't think I can answer that question without knowing everything that all of you know . " HAL then falsely predicts a failure of the hardware maintaining radio contact with Earth ( the source of HAL 's difficult orders ) during the broadcast of Frank Poole 's birthday greetings from his parents . 
 The final script removed this explanation , but it is hinted at when HAL asks David Bowman if Bowman is bothered by the " oddities " and " tight security " surrounding the mission . After Bowman concludes that HAL is dutifully drawing up the " crew psychology report " , the computer makes his false prediction of hardware failure . Another hint occurs at the moment of HAL 's deactivation when a video reveals the purpose of the mission . 
 In an interview with Joseph Gelmis in 1969 , Kubrick stated that HAL " had an acute emotional crisis because he could not accept evidence of his own fallibility " . 
 = = = = = Military nature of orbiting satellites = = = = = 
 Kubrick originally planned a voice @-@ over to reveal that the satellites following a match cut from a bone @-@ weapon are nuclear weapons , and that the Star Child would detonate the weapons at the end of the film . However , he decided this would create associations with his previous film Dr. Strangelove , and decided not to make it so obvious that they were " war machines " . A few weeks before the release of the film , the U.S. and Soviet governments had agreed not to put any nuclear weapons into outer space . 
 In a book he wrote with Kubrick 's assistance , Alexander Walker states that Kubrick eventually decided that as nuclear weapons the bombs had " no place at all in the film 's thematic development " , now being an " orbiting red herring " which would " merely have raised irrelevant questions to suggest this as a reality of the twenty @-@ first century " . 
 Kubrick scholar Michel Ciment , discussing Kubrick 's attitude toward human aggression and instinct , observes : " The bone cast into the air by the ape ( now become a man ) is transformed at the other extreme of civilization , by one of those abrupt ellipses characteristic of the director , into a spacecraft on its way to the moon . " In contrast to Ciment 's reading of a cut to a serene " other extreme of civilization " , science fiction novelist Robert Sawyer , speaking in the Canadian documentary 2001 and Beyond , saw it as a cut from a bone to a nuclear weapons platform , explaining that " what we see is not how far we 've leaped ahead , what we see is that today , ' 2001 ' , and four million years ago on the African <unk> , it 's exactly the same — the power of mankind is the power of its weapons . It 's a continuation , not a discontinuity in that jump . " 
 = = = = Dialogue = = = = 
 The film contains no dialogue for the first and last 20 minutes or so . By the time shooting began , Kubrick had removed much of the dialogue and narration ; what remains is notable for its banality ( making the computer Hal seem to have more emotion than the humans ) juxtaposed with epic space scenes . 
 The first scenes of dialogue are Floyd 's encounters on the space station : chit @-@ chat with the colleague who greets him , his telephone call to his daughter , and the friendly but strained encounter with Soviet scientists . Later , en route to the monolith , Floyd engages in trite exchanges with his staff while a spectacular journey by Earth @-@ light across the Lunar surface is shown . Hal is the only character who expresses anxiety , as well as feelings of pride and bewilderment . 
 = = = = Influence of Universe = = = = 
 According to biographer Vincent <unk> , one of Kubrick 's visual — and aural — inspirations was the 1960 National Film Board of Canada animated short documentary Universe . The 29 minute film , which had also proved popular at NASA for its realistic portrayal of outer space , achieved " the standard of dynamic visionary realism that he was looking for . " Wally Gentleman , one of the special effects artists on Universe , worked briefly on 2001 . The short film 's most notable influence may have been Kubrick 's decision to cast the narrator of Universe , actor Douglas Rain , relatively unknown outside Canada , as the voice of HAL . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began December 29 , 1965 , in Stage H at Shepperton Studios , Shepperton , England . The studio was chosen because it could house the 60 @-@ by @-@ 120 @-@ by @-@ 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m × 37 m × 18 m ) pit for the Tycho crater excavation scene , the first to be shot . The production moved in January 1966 to the smaller MGM @-@ British Studios in Borehamwood , where the live action and special effects filming was done , starting with the scenes involving Floyd on the Orion spaceplane ; it was described as a " huge throbbing nerve center ... with much the same frenetic atmosphere as a Cape Kennedy blockhouse during the final stages of Countdown . " The only scene not filmed in a studio — and the last live @-@ action scene shot for the film — was the skull @-@ smashing sequence , in which <unk> ( Richter ) wields his new @-@ found bone " weapon @-@ tool " against a pile of nearby animal bones . A small elevated platform was built in a field near the studio so that the camera could shoot upward with the sky as background , avoiding cars and trucks passing by in the distance . 
 Filming of actors was completed in September 1967 , and from June 1966 until March 1968 Kubrick spent most of his time working on the 205 special effects shots in the film . The director ordered the special effects technicians on 2001 to use the painstaking process of creating all visual effects seen in the film " in camera " , avoiding degraded picture quality from the use of blue screen and traveling matte techniques . Although this technique , known as " held takes " , resulted in a much better image , it meant exposed film would be stored for long periods of time between shots , sometimes as long as a year . In March 1968 , Kubrick finished the ' pre @-@ premiere ' editing of the film , making his final cuts just days before the film 's general release in April 1968 . 
 The film was initially planned to be photographed in 3 @-@ film @-@ strip Cinerama ( like How the West Was Won ) , because it was a part of a production / distribution deal between MGM and Cinerama Releasing Corporation , but that was changed to Super Panavision 70 ( which uses a single @-@ strip 65 mm negative ) on the advice of special photographic effects supervisor Douglas Trumbull , due to distortion problems with the 3 @-@ strip system . Color processing and 35 mm release prints were done using Technicolor 's dye transfer process . The 70 mm prints were made by MGM Laboratories , Inc. on <unk> . The production was $ 4 @.@ 5 million over the initial $ 6 @.@ 0 million budget , and sixteen months behind schedule . 
 Russian documentarian Pavel <unk> 's 1957 film Road to the Stars is believed to have significantly influenced Kubrick 's technique in 2001 : A Space Odyssey , particularly in its accurate depiction of weightlessness and a rotating space station . Encyclopedia <unk> describes some scenes from 2001 as a " shot @-@ for @-@ shot duplication of Road to the Stars " . Specific comparisons of shots from the two films have been analyzed by the filmmaker Alessandro Cima . A 1994 article in American Cinematographer says , " When Stanley Kubrick made 2001 : a Space Odyssey in 1968 , he claimed to have been first to fly actor / astronauts on wires with the camera on the ground , shooting vertically while the actor 's body covered the wires " but observes that <unk> had preceded him in this . 
 For the opening sequence involving tribes of apes , professional mime Daniel Richter in addition to playing the lead ape was also responsible for choreographing the movements of the other man @-@ apes , who were mostly portrayed by his standing mime troupe . 
 = = = Set design and furnishings = = = 
 Kubrick involved himself in every aspect of production , even choosing the fabric for his actors ' costumes , and selecting notable pieces of contemporary furniture for use in the film . When Floyd exits the Space Station V elevator , he is greeted by an attendant seated behind a slightly modified George Nelson Action Office desk from Herman Miller 's 1964 " Action Office " series . First introduced in 1968 , the Action Office @-@ style " cubicle " would eventually occupy 70 percent of office space by the mid @-@ 2000s . Danish designer Arne Jacobsen designed the cutlery used by the Discovery astronauts in the film . 
 Other examples of modern furniture in the film are the bright red Djinn chairs seen prominently throughout the space station and Eero Saarinen 's 1956 pedestal tables . Olivier Mourgue , designer of the Djinn chair , has used the connection to 2001 in his advertising ; a frame from the film 's space station sequence and three production stills appear on the homepage of Mourgue 's website . Shortly before Kubrick 's death , film critic Alexander Walker informed Kubrick of Mourgue 's use of the film , joking to him " You 're keeping the price up " . Commenting on their use in the film , Walker writes : 
 Everyone recalls one early sequence in the film , the space hotel , primarily because the custom @-@ made Olivier Mourgue furnishings , those foam @-@ filled sofas , <unk> and serpentine , are covered in scarlet fabric and are the first stabs of color one sees . They resemble Rorschach " blots " against the pristine purity of the rest of the lobby . 
 Detailed instructions in relatively small print for various technological devices appear at several points in the film , the most visible of which are the lengthy instructions for the zero @-@ gravity toilet on the Aries Moon shuttle . Similar detailed instructions for replacing the explosive bolts also appear on the hatches of the <unk> pods , most visibly in closeup just before Bowman 's pod leaves the ship to rescue Frank Poole . 
 The film features an extensive use of <unk> Bold Extended , Futura and other sans serif typefaces as design elements of the 2001 world . Computer displays show high resolution fonts , color and graphics — far in advance of computers in the 1960s when the film was made . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 = = = = Front projection = = = = 
 2001 pioneered the use of front projection with <unk> matting . Kubrick used the technique to produce the backdrops in the Africa scenes and the scene when astronauts walk on the moon . 
 The technique consisted of a separate scenery projector set at a right @-@ angle to the camera , and a half @-@ silvered mirror placed at an angle in front that reflected the projected image forward in line with the camera lens onto a backdrop made of <unk> material . The reflective directional screen behind the actors could reflect light from the projected image a hundred times more efficiently than the foreground subject did . The lighting of the foreground subject had to be balanced with the image from the screen , making the image from the scenery projector on the subject too faint to record . The exception was the eyes of the leopard in the " Dawn of Man " sequence , which glowed orange from the projector illumination . Kubrick described this as " a happy accident " . 
 Front projection had been used in smaller settings before 2001 , mostly for still photography or television production , using small still images and projectors . The expansive backdrops for the African scenes required a screen 40 feet ( 12 m ) tall and 110 feet ( 34 m ) wide , far larger than had been used before . When the reflective material was applied to the backdrop in 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) strips , variations at the seams of the strips led to visual artifacts ; to solve this , the crew tore the material into smaller chunks and applied them in a random " camouflage " pattern on the backdrop . The existing projectors using 4- × -5 @-@ inch ( 10 × 13 cm ) transparencies resulted in grainy images when projected that large , so the crew worked with MGM 's special effects supervisor Tom Howard to build a custom projector using 8- × -10 @-@ inch ( 20 × 25 cm ) transparencies , which required the largest water @-@ cooled arc lamp available . The technique was used widely in the film industry afterwards until it was replaced by blue / green screen systems in the 1990s . 
 = = = = Models = = = = 
 To heighten the reality of the film very intricate models of the various spacecraft and locations were built . Their sizes ranged from about two foot long models of satellites and the Aries translunar shuttle up to a 55 foot long Discovery One spacecraft . " In @-@ camera " techniques were again used as much as possible to combine models and background shots together to prevent degradation of the image through continual duplicating . 
 In shots where there was no perspective change , still shots of the models were photographed and positive paper prints were made . The image of the model was cut out of the photographic print and mounted on glass and filmed on an animation stand . The undeveloped film was re @-@ wound to film the star background with the silhouette of the model photograph acting as a matte to block out where the spaceship image was . 
 Shots where the spacecraft had parts in motion or the perspective changed were shot by directly filming the model . For most shots the model was stationary and camera was driven along a track on a special mount , the motor of which was mechanically linked to the camera motor — making it possible to repeat camera moves and match speeds exactly . Elements of the scene were recorded on same piece of film in separate passes to combine the lit model , stars , planets , or other spacecraft in the same shot . In moving shots of the long Discovery One spacecraft , in order to keep the entire model in focus , multiple passes had to be made with the lighting on it blocked out section by section . In each pass the camera would be focused on the one lit section . Many matting techniques were tried to block out the stars behind the models , with film makers sometimes resorting to hand tracing frame by frame around the image of the spacecraft ( rotoscoping ) to create the matte . 
 Some shots required exposing the film again to record previously filmed live action shots of the people appearing in the windows the spacecraft or structures , achieved by mounting projection devices inside the model or , when two dimensional photographs were used , projecting from the backside through a hole cut in the photograph . 
 All of the shots required multiple takes so that some film could be developed and printed to check exposure , density , alignment of elements , and to supply footage used in further elements such as matting . 
 = = = = Rotating sets = = = = 
 For spacecraft interior shots , ostensibly containing a giant centrifuge that produces artificial gravity , Kubrick had a 30 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 27 t ) rotating " <unk> wheel " built by Vickers @-@ Armstrong Engineering Group at a cost of $ 750 @,@ 000 . The set was 38 feet ( 12 m ) in diameter and 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) wide . Various scenes in the Discovery centrifuge were shot by securing set pieces within the wheel , then rotating it while the actor walked or ran in sync with its motion , keeping him at the bottom of the wheel as it turned . The camera could be fixed to the inside of the rotating wheel to show the actor walking completely " around " the set , or mounted in such a way that the wheel rotated independently of the stationary camera , as in the jogging scene where the camera appears to alternately precede and follow the running actor . The shots where the actors appear on opposite sides of the wheel required one of the actors to be strapped securely into place at the " top " of the wheel as it moved to allow the other actor to walk to the " bottom " of the wheel to join him . The most notable case is when Bowman enters the centrifuge from the central hub on a ladder , and joins Poole , who is eating on the other side of the centrifuge . This required Gary Lockwood to be strapped into a seat while Keir Dullea walked toward him from the opposite side of the wheel as it turned with him . 
 Another rotating set appeared in an earlier sequence on board the Aries translunar shuttle . A stewardess is shown preparing in @-@ flight meals , then carrying them into a circular walkway . Attached to the set as it rotates 180 degrees , the camera 's point of view remains constant , and she appears to walk up the " side " of the circular walkway , and steps , now in an " upside @-@ down " orientation , into a connecting hallway . 
 = = = = Zero gravity effects = = = = 
 The realistic @-@ looking effects of the astronauts floating weightless in space and inside the spacecraft were accomplished by suspending the actors from wires attached to the top of the set , and placing the camera underneath them . The actors ' bodies blocked the camera 's view of the suspension wires , creating a very believable appearance of floating . For the shot of Poole floating into the pod 's arms during Bowman 's rescue attempt , a stuntman replaced a dummy on the wire to realistically portray the movements of an unconscious human , and was shot in slow motion to enhance the illusion of drifting through space . The scene showing Bowman entering the emergency airlock from the <unk> pod was done in a similar way : an off @-@ camera stagehand , standing on a platform , held the wire suspending Dullea above the camera positioned at the bottom of the vertically configured airlock . At the proper moment , the stagehand first loosened his grip on the wire , causing Dullea to fall toward the camera , then , while holding the wire firmly , he jumped off the platform , causing Dullea to ascend back up toward the hatch . 
 = = = = Star Gate sequence = = = = 
 The colored lights in the Star Gate sequence were accomplished by slit @-@ scan photography of thousands of high @-@ contrast images on film , including Op art paintings , architectural drawings , <unk> patterns , printed circuits , and crystal structures . Known to staff as " Manhattan Project " , the shots of various nebula @-@ like phenomena , including the expanding star field , were colored paints and chemicals swirling in a pool @-@ like device known as a cloud tank , shot in slow @-@ motion in a dark room . The live @-@ action landscape shots in the ' Star Gate ' sequence were filmed in the Hebridean islands , the mountains of northern Scotland , and Monument Valley . The coloring and negative @-@ image effects were achieved by the use of different color filters in the process of making duplicate negatives . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Main article : 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( soundtrack ) . See also : 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( score ) . 
 Music plays a crucial part in 2001 , and not only because of the relatively sparse dialogue . From very early on in production , Kubrick decided that he wanted the film to be a primarily nonverbal experience , one that did not rely on the traditional techniques of narrative cinema , and in which music would play a vital role in evoking particular moods . About half the music in the film appears either before the first line of dialogue or after the final line . Almost no music is heard during any scenes with dialogue . 
 The film is notable for its innovative use of classical music taken from existing commercial recordings . Most feature films then and now are typically accompanied by elaborate film scores or songs written specially for them by professional composers . In the early stages of production , Kubrick had actually commissioned a score for 2001 from Hollywood composer Alex North , who had written the score for Spartacus and also worked on Dr. Strangelove . However , during postproduction , Kubrick chose to abandon North 's music in favor of the now @-@ familiar classical pieces he had earlier chosen as " guide pieces " for the soundtrack . North did not know of the abandonment of the score until after he saw the film 's premiere screening . 
 Also engaged to score the film was composer Frank Cordell . Cordell stated in interviews that the score would primarily consist of arrangements of Gustav Mahler works . This score remains unreleased . Like North 's score , Cordell 's work was recorded at the now demolished Anvil , Denham studios . 
 2001 is particularly remembered for using pieces of Johann Strauss II 's best @-@ known waltz , The Blue Danube , during the extended space @-@ station docking and Lunar landing sequences . This is the result of the association that Kubrick made between the spinning motion of the satellites and the dancers of waltzes . It also makes use of the opening from the Richard Strauss tone poem Also sprach Zarathustra performed by the Vienna Philharmonic conducted by Herbert von Karajan . The use of Strauss 's Zarathustra may be a reference to the theme of mankind 's eventual replacement by supermen ( Übermensch ) in Nietzsche 's work Thus Spoke Zarathustra . Gayane 's Adagio from Aram Khachaturian 's Gayane ballet suite is heard during the sections that introduce Bowman and Poole aboard the Discovery , conveying a somewhat lonely and mournful quality . 
 In addition to the majestic yet fairly traditional compositions by the two <unk> and Khachaturian , Kubrick used four highly modernistic compositions by György Ligeti that employ <unk> , the use of sustained dissonant chords that shift slowly . This technique was pioneered in Atmosphères , the only Ligeti piece heard in its entirety in the film . Ligeti admired Kubrick 's film but , in addition to being irritated by Kubrick 's failure to obtain permission directly from him , he was offended that his music was used in a film soundtrack shared by composers Johann and Richard Strauss . Other music used is Ligeti 's Lux Aeterna , the second movement of his Requiem and an electronically altered form of his Aventures , the last of which was also used without Ligeti 's permission and is not listed in the film 's credits . 
 Hal 's version of the popular song " Daisy Bell " ( referred to by Hal as " Daisy " in the film ) was inspired by a computer @-@ synthesized arrangement by Max Mathews , which Arthur C. Clarke had heard in 1962 at the Bell Laboratories Murray Hill facility when he was , coincidentally , visiting friend and colleague John R. Pierce . At that time , a speech synthesis demonstration was being performed by physicist John Larry Kelly , Jr . , by using an IBM 704 computer to synthesize speech . Kelly 's voice recorder synthesizer vocoder recreated the song " Daisy Bell " ( " Bicycle Built For Two " ) ; Max Mathews provided the musical accompaniment . Arthur C. Clarke was so impressed that he later used it in the screenplay and novel . 
 Many non @-@ English language versions of the film do not use the song " Daisy " . In the French soundtrack , Hal sings the French folk song " Au Clair de la Lune " while being disconnected . In the German version , Hal sings the children 's song " <unk> <unk> " ( " Little Johnny " ) , and in the Italian version Hal sings " Giro <unk> tondo " ( Ring a Ring o ' Roses ) . 
 A recording of British light music composer Sidney Torch 's " Off Beat Moods Part 1 " was chosen by Kubrick as the theme for the fictitious BBC news programme " The World Tonight " seen aboard the Discovery . 
 On June 25 , 2010 , a version of the film specially remastered by Warner Bros , without the music soundtrack , opened the three hundred and fiftieth anniversary celebrations of the Royal Society at Southbank Centre in cooperation with the British Film Institute . The score was played live by the Philharmonia Orchestra and Choir . 
 On June 14 , 2013 , a repeat presentation of the film accompanied by live orchestra and choir was performed at Symphony Hall in Birmingham , again accompanied by the Philharmonia Orchestra conducted by Benjamin Wallfisch together with the choir Ex Cathedra . 
 A presentation of the film accompanied by live orchestra and choir premiered in the United States on August 18 , 2015 at The Hollywood Bowl in Hollywood , California , accompanied by the Los Angeles Philharmonic conducted by Brad Lubman together with the choir Los Angeles Master Chorale . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 Kubrick filmed several scenes that were deleted from the final film . These fall into two categories : scenes cut before any public screenings of the film , and scenes cut a few days after the world premiere on April 2 , 1968 . 
 The first ( ' pre @-@ premiere ' ) set of cuts included a school @-@ room on the Lunar base — a painting class around a decorative fountain that included Kubrick 's daughters , additional scenes of life on the base , and Floyd buying a bush baby from a department store via videophone for his daughter . Additionally , a ten @-@ minute black @-@ and @-@ white opening sequence featuring interviews with actual scientists , including Freeman Dyson discussing off @-@ Earth life , were removed after an early screening for MGM executives . The actual text survives in the book The Making of Kubrick 's 2001 by Jerome <unk> . 
 The second ( ' post @-@ premiere ' ) set of cuts included details about the daily life on Discovery : additional space @-@ walks , astronaut Bowman retrieving a spare part from an octagonal corridor , elements from the Poole murder sequence including the entire space @-@ walk preparation and shots of Hal turning off radio contact with Poole , and a close @-@ up of Bowman picking up a slipper during his walk in the alien room . <unk> describes the 19 minutes of post @-@ premiere cuts , made on April 5 – 6 , as coming from " Dawn of Man , Orion , Poole exercising in the centrifuge , and Poole 's pod exiting from Discovery . " 
 Kubrick 's rationale for editing the film was to tighten the narrative . Reviews suggested the film suffered too much by the radical departure from traditional cinematic story @-@ telling conventions . Regarding the cuts , Kubrick stated , " I didn 't believe that the trims made a critical difference . ... The people who like it , like it no matter what its length , and the same holds true for the people who hate it " . As was typical of most films of that era released both as a " road @-@ show " ( in Cinerama format in the case of Space Odyssey ) and subsequently put into general release ( in seventy @-@ millimetre in the case of Odyssey ) , the entrance music , intermission music ( and intermission altogether ) , and <unk> exit music were cut from most prints of the latter version , although these have been restored to most DVD releases . 
 According to Kubrick 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Jan Harlan , the director was adamant the trims were never to be seen , and that he " even burned the negatives " — which he had kept in his garage — shortly before his death . This is confirmed by former Kubrick assistant Leon Vitali : " I 'll tell you right now , okay , on Clockwork Orange , The Shining , Barry Lyndon , some little parts of 2001 , we had thousands of cans of negative outtakes and print , which we had stored in an area at his house where we worked out of , which he personally supervised the loading of it to a truck and then I went down to a big industrial waste lot and burned it . That 's what he wanted . " 
 = = = Missing cuts rediscovered = = = 
 In December 2010 , Douglas Trumbull announced that Warner Bros. had located seventeen minutes of lost footage , " perfectly preserved " , in a Kansas salt mine vault that originated from the post @-@ premiere cuts . No immediate plans have been announced for the footage . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The initial MGM soundtrack album release contained none of the material from the altered and uncredited rendition of Ligeti 's " Aventures " , used a different recording of " Also sprach Zarathustra " from that heard in the film , this time performed by the Berlin Philharmonic conducted by Herbert von Karajan , and a longer excerpt of " Lux aeterna " than that in the film . 
 In 1996 , Turner Entertainment / Rhino Records released a new soundtrack on CD which included the material from " Aventures " and restored the version of " Zarathustra " used in the film , and used the shorter version of " Lux aeterna " from the film . As additional " bonus tracks " at the end , this CD includes the versions of " Zarathustra " and " Lux aeterna " on the old MGM soundtrack , an unaltered performance of " Aventures " , and a nine @-@ minute compilation of all of Hal 's dialogue from the film . 
 North 's unused music had its first public appearance in Telarc 's issue of the main theme on Hollywood 's Greatest Hits , Vol . 2 , a compilation album by Erich Kunzel and the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra . All the music North originally wrote was recorded commercially by North 's friend and colleague Jerry Goldsmith with the National Philharmonic Orchestra and was released on Varèse Sarabande CDs shortly after Telarc 's first theme release but before North 's death . Eventually , a mono mix @-@ down of North 's original recordings , which had survived in the interim , would be released as a limited @-@ edition CD by Intrada Records . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 The film 's world premiere was on April 2 , 1968 , at the Uptown Theater in Washington , D.C. It opened two days later at the Warner Cinerama Theatre in Hollywood and the Loew 's Capitol in New York . Kubrick then deleted nineteen minutes of footage from the film before its general release in five other U.S. cities on April 10 , 1968 , and internationally in five cities the following day , where it was shown in 70mm format , used a six @-@ track stereo magnetic soundtrack , and projected in the 2 @.@ 21 : 1 aspect ratio . The general release of the film in its 35mm anamorphic format took place in autumn 1968 and used either a four @-@ track magnetic stereo soundtrack or an optical monaural soundtrack . 
 The original seventy @-@ millimetre release , like many Super Panavision 70 films of the era such as Grand Prix , was advertised as being in " Cinerama " in cinemas equipped with special projection optics and a deeply curved screen . In standard cinemas , the film was identified as a seventy @-@ millimetre production . The original release of 2001 : A Space Odyssey in seventy @-@ millimetre Cinerama with six @-@ track sound played continually for more than a year in several venues , and for one hundred and three weeks in Los Angeles . 
 The following year , 2001 was appointed by a United States Department of State committee to be the American entry at the 6th Moscow International Film Festival . The film was re @-@ released in 1974 , 1977 , and again in 1980 . Once 2001 , the film 's <unk> , arrived , a restoration of the seventy @-@ millimetre version was screened at the Ebert 's Overlooked Film Festival , and the production was also reissued to selected film houses in North America , Europe and Asia . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 The film has been released in several forms : 
 In 1980 , MGM / CBS Home Video released the film on VHS and Betamax home video . 
 In 1983 , it was released on LaserDisc by MGM in full screen . 
 In 1987 , it was released on VHS by MGM / UA Home Video . 
 In 1989 , The Criterion Collection released a 3 @-@ disc special LaserDisc edition with a transfer monitored by Kubrick himself . 
 In 1997 , MGM released the film on DVD . 
 In 1999 , it was re @-@ released on VHS , and as part of the " Stanley Kubrick Collection " in both VHS format ( 1999 ) and DVD ( 2000 ) with remastered sound and picture . In some video releases , three title cards were added to the three " blank screen " moments ; " <unk> " at the beginning , " <unk> <unk> " during the intermission , and " EXIT MUSIC " after the closing credits . 
 Additionally , the film has been released in high definition on both HD DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc . 
 The film 's distribution rights were transferred to Warner Bros. in 1999 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box @-@ office = = = 
 The film earned $ 8 @.@ 5 million in theatrical gross rental from roadshow engagements throughout 1968 , contributing to North American rentals of $ 15 million during its original release . Reissues have brought its cumulative exhibition gross to $ 56 @.@ 9 million in North America , and over $ 190 million worldwide . 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Upon release , 2001 polarized critical opinion , receiving both ecstatic praise and vehement derision . Some critics viewed the original 161 @-@ minute cut shown at premieres in Washington D.C. , New York , and Los Angeles , while others saw the nineteen @-@ minute @-@ shorter general release version that was in theatres from April 10 , 1968 onwards . 
 In The New Yorker , Penelope Gilliatt said it was " some kind of great film , and an unforgettable endeavor ... The film is hypnotically entertaining , and it is funny without once being <unk> , but it is also rather harrowing . " Charles Champlin of the Los Angeles Times opined that it was " the picture that science fiction fans of every age and in every corner of the world have prayed ( sometimes forlornly ) that the industry might some day give them . It is an ultimate statement of the science fiction film , an awesome realization of the spatial future ... it is a milestone , a landmark for a <unk> , in the art of film . " Louise Sweeney of The Christian Science Monitor felt that 2001 was " a brilliant intergalactic satire on modern technology . It 's also a dazzling 160 @-@ minute tour on the Kubrick <unk> through the universe out there beyond our earth . " Philip French wrote that the film was " perhaps the first multi @-@ million @-@ dollar <unk> movie since D.W. Griffith 's Intolerance fifty years ago which can be regarded as the work of one man ... Space Odyssey is important as the high @-@ water mark of science @-@ fiction movie making , or at least of the genre 's futuristic branch . " The Boston Globe 's review indicated that it was " the world 's most extraordinary film . Nothing like it has ever been shown in Boston before or , for that matter , anywhere ... The film is as exciting as the discovery of a new dimension in life . " Roger Ebert gave the film four stars in his original review , believing the film " succeeds magnificently on a cosmic scale . " He later put it on his Top 10 list for Sight & Sound . Time provided at least seven different mini @-@ reviews of the film in various issues in 1968 , each one slightly more positive than the preceding one ; in the final review dated December 27 , 1968 , the magazine called 2001 " an epic film about the history and future of mankind , brilliantly directed by Stanley Kubrick . The special effects are mindblowing . " Director Martin Scorsese has also listed it as one of his favourite films of all time . Critic David Denby later compared Kubrick to the monolith from 2001 : A Space Odyssey , calling him " a force of supernatural intelligence , appearing at great intervals amid high @-@ pitched shrieks , who gives the world a violent kick up the next rung of the evolutionary ladder " . 
 Pauline Kael said it was " a monumentally unimaginative movie " , and Stanley Kauffmann of The New Republic called it " a film that is so dull , it even dulls our interest in the technical ingenuity for the sake of which Kubrick has allowed it to become dull . " Renata Adler of The New York Times wrote that it was " somewhere between hypnotic and immensely boring . " Variety 's ' Robe ' believed the film was a " [ b ] ig , beautiful , but plodding sci @-@ fi epic ... A major achievement in cinematography and special effects , 2001 lacks dramatic appeal to a large degree and only conveys suspense after the halfway mark . " Andrew Sarris called it " one of the grimmest films I have ever seen in my life ... 2001 is a disaster because it is much too abstract to make its abstract points . " ( Sarris reversed his opinion upon a second viewing of the film , and declared , " 2001 is indeed a major work by a major artist . " ) John Simon felt it was " a regrettable failure , although not a total one . This film is fascinating when it concentrates on apes or machines ... and dreadful when it deals with the in @-@ betweens : humans ... 2001 , for all its lively visual and mechanical spectacle , is a kind of space @-@ Spartacus and , more pretentious still , a shaggy God story . " Eminent historian Arthur M. Schlesinger , Jr. deemed the film " morally pretentious , intellectually obscure and inordinately long ... a film out of control " . The BBC said that its slow pacing often alienates modern audiences more than it did upon its initial release . 
 = = = Science fiction writers = = = 
 Science fiction writers had a range of reactions to the film . Ray Bradbury praised the film 's photography , but disliked the banality of most of the dialogue , and believed that the audience does not care when Poole dies . Both he and Lester del Rey were put off by the film 's feeling of sterility and blandness in all the human encounters amidst all the technological wonders , while both praised the pictorial element of the film . Del Rey was especially harsh , describing the film as dull , confusing , and boring , predicting " [ i ] t will probably be a box @-@ office disaster , too , and thus set major science @-@ fiction movie making back another ten years . " However , the film was praised by science @-@ fiction novelist Samuel R. Delany who was impressed by how the film undercuts the audience 's normal sense of space and orientation in several ways . Like Bradbury , Delany picked up on the banality of the dialogue ( in Delany 's phrasing the characters are saying nothing meaningful ) , but Delany regards this as a dramatic strength , a prelude to the rebirth at the conclusion of the film . Without analyzing the film in detail , Isaac Asimov spoke well of Space Odyssey in his autobiography , and other essays . The film won the Hugo Award for best dramatic presentation , an award heavily voted on by science fiction fans and published science @-@ fiction writers . James P. Hogan liked the film but complained about the ending that didn 't make any sense to him , leading to a bet about whether he could write something better or not ; " I stole Arthur 's plot idea shamelessly and produced Inherit the Stars . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 = = = Influence on film = = = 
 The influence of 2001 on subsequent filmmakers is considerable . Steven Spielberg , George Lucas and others , including many special effects technicians , discuss the impact the film has had on them in a featurette titled Standing on the Shoulders of Kubrick : The Legacy of 2001 , included in the 2007 DVD release of the film . Spielberg calls it his film generation 's " big bang " , while Lucas says it was " hugely inspirational " , labeling Kubrick as " the filmmaker 's filmmaker " . Sydney Pollack refers to it as " groundbreaking " , and William Friedkin states 2001 is " the grandfather of all such films " . At the 2007 Venice film festival , director Ridley Scott stated he believed 2001 was the unbeatable film that in a sense killed the science fiction genre . Similarly , film critic Michel Ciment in his essay " Odyssey of Stanley Kubrick " stated , " Kubrick has conceived a film which in one stroke has made the whole science fiction cinema obsolete . " However , others credit 2001 with opening up a market for films such as Close Encounters of the Third Kind , Alien , Blade Runner and Contact ; proving that big @-@ budget " serious " science @-@ fiction films can be commercially successful , and establishing the " sci @-@ fi blockbuster " as a Hollywood staple . Science magazine Discover 's blogger Stephen Cass , discussing the considerable impact of the film on subsequent science @-@ fiction , writes that " the balletic spacecraft scenes set to sweeping classical music , the tarantula @-@ soft tones of HAL 9000 , and the ultimate alien artifact , the Monolith , have all become enduring cultural icons in their own right . " 
 = = = Influence on media = = = 
 One commentator has suggested that the image of the Star Child and Earth has contributed to the rise of the " whole earth " icon as a symbol of the unity of humanity . Writing in The Asia Pacific Journal Robert Jacobs traces the history of this icon from early cartoons and drawings of Earth to photographs of Earth from early space missions , to its historic appearance on the cover of The Whole Earth Catalog . Noting that images of the entire planet recur several times in A Space Odyssey , Jacobs writes 
 the most dramatic use of the icon was in the film 's conclusion . In this scene ... Bowman is reborn as the Star Child ... depicted as a fetus floating in space in an amniotic sac . The Star Child turns to consider the Whole Earth floating in front of it , both glowing a bright blue @-@ white . The two appear as newborn versions of Man and Earth , face @-@ to @-@ face , ready to be born into a future of unthinkable possibilities . 
 = = = Influence on technology = = = 
 In August 2011 , in response to Apple Inc . ' s patent infringement lawsuit against Samsung , the latter argued that Apple 's iPad was effectively modeled on the visual tablets that appear aboard spaceship Discovery in the Space Odyssey film , which constitute prior art . 
 " Siri " , Apple 's natural language voice control system for the iPhone 4S , features a reference to the film : it responds " I 'm sorry I can 't do that " when asked to " open the pod bay doors " . When asked repeatedly , it may say , " Without your space helmet , you 're going to find this rather ... breathtaking . " 
 Inspired by Clarke 's visual tablet device , in 1994 a European Commission @-@ funded R & D project code named " <unk> " developed and pilot tested a portable ' multimedia viewer ' aiming for the realisation of an electronic multimedia ' newspaper ' pointing the way to a future fully interactive and highly personalised information source . Involved partners were Acorn RISC Technologies UK , Archimedes GR , Carat FR , Ediciones Primera Plana ES , Institut Català de <unk> ES , and <unk> UK . 
 = = Accolades and honors = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 2001 earned Stanley Kubrick an Academy Award for Best Visual Effects , as well as nominations for Best Director and Original Screenplay ( shared with Arthur C. Clarke ) . Anthony Masters was also nominated for Best Art Direction . An honorary award was made to John Chambers in that year for his make @-@ up work on Planet of the Apes , and Clarke reports that he " wondered , as loudly as possible , whether the judges had passed over 2001 because they thought we had used real ape @-@ men " . The film won four <unk> , for Art Direction , Cinematography , Sound Track and as Best Road Show , and was a nominee in the Best Film category . 
 The National Board of Review listed 2001 among the Top Ten Films of 1968 , and Kansas City Film Critics gave it both the Best Film and Best Director awards . Kubrick earned the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , and was nominated for both the Directors Guild of America Award , and the Laurel Award ( on which 2001 was named the Best Road Show of 1968 ) . Both the Cinema Writers Circle of Spain and the David di Donatello Awards in Italy named 2001 the best foreign production of 1968 . 
 = = = Top film lists = = = 
 2001 was No. 15 on AFI 's 2007 100 Years ... 100 Movies , was named No. 40 on its 100 Years , 100 Thrills , was included on its 100 Years , 100 Quotes ( " Open the pod bay doors , Hal . " ) , and Hal 9000 is the No. 13 villain in the AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains . 2001 is the only science fiction film to make the Sight & Sound poll for ten best films , and tops the Online Film Critics Society list of " greatest science fiction films of all time . " In 1991 , this film was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry . Other lists that include the film are 50 Films to See Before You Die ( # 6 ) , The Village Voice 100 Best Films of the 20th century ( # 11 ) , the Sight & Sound Top Ten poll ( # 6 ) , and Roger Ebert 's Top Ten ( 1968 ) ( # 2 ) . In 1995 , the Vatican named it as one of the 45 best films ever made ( and included it in a sub @-@ list of the " Top Ten Art Movies " of all time . ) 
 In 2011 , the film was the third most screened film in secondary schools in the United Kingdom . 
 American Film Institute recognition 
 1998 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies – # 22 
 2001 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills – # 40 
 2003 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes & Villains : 
 HAL 9000 – # 13 Villain 
 2005 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " Open the pod bay doors , HAL . " – # 78 
 " Dave , stop . Stop , will you ? Stop , Dave . Will you stop , Dave ? Stop , Dave . I 'm afraid . " – Nominated 
 2006 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Cheers – # 47 
 2007 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) – # 15 
 2008 : AFI 's 10 Top 10 – # 1 Science Fiction Film 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 Since its premiere , 2001 : A Space Odyssey has been analyzed and interpreted by professional film critics , amateur writers and science fiction fans , virtually all of whom have mentioned its deliberate ambiguity . Questions about 2001 range from uncertainty about its deeper philosophical implications about humanity 's origins and final destiny in the universe , to interpreting elements of the film 's more enigmatic scenes such as the meaning of the monolith , or the final fate of astronaut David Bowman . There are also simpler and more mundane questions about what drives the plot , in particular the causes of Hal 's breakdown ( explained in earlier drafts but kept mysterious in the film ) . 
 Stanley Kubrick encouraged people to explore their own interpretations of the film and refused to offer an explanation of " what really happened " in the film , preferring instead to let audiences embrace their own ideas and theories . In a 1968 interview with Playboy magazine , Kubrick stated : 
 You 're free to speculate as you wish about the philosophical and allegorical meaning of the film — and such speculation is one indication that it has succeeded in gripping the audience at a deep level — but I don 't want to spell out a verbal road map for 2001 that every viewer will feel obligated to pursue or else fear he 's missed the point . 
 In a subsequent discussion of the film with Joseph Gelmis , Kubrick said his main aim was to avoid " intellectual verbalization " and reach " the viewer 's subconscious . " However , he said he did not deliberately strive for ambiguity — it was simply an inevitable outcome of making the film nonverbal , though he acknowledged this ambiguity was an invaluable asset to the film . He was willing then to give a fairly straightforward explanation of the plot on what he called the " simplest level , " but unwilling to discuss the metaphysical interpretation of the film which he felt should be left up to the individual viewer . 
 For some readers , Arthur C. Clarke 's more straightforward novelization of the script is key to interpreting the film . Clarke 's novel explicitly identifies the monolith as a tool created by an alien race that has been through many stages of evolution , moving from organic form to biomechanical , and finally achieving a state of pure energy . These aliens travel the cosmos assisting lesser species to take evolutionary steps . Conversely , film critic Penelope Houston wrote in 1971 that because the novel differs in many key respects from the film , it perhaps should not be regarded as the skeleton key to unlock it . 
 Multiple allegorical interpretations of 2001 have been proposed , including seeing it as a commentary on Friedrich Nietzsche 's philosophical tract Thus Spoke Zarathustra , or as an allegory of human conception , birth and death . The latter can be seen through the final moments of the film , which are defined by the image of the " star child , " an in utero fetus that draws on the work of Lennart Nilsson . The star child signifies a " great new beginning , " and is depicted naked and <unk> , but with its eyes wide open . Leonard F. Wheat sees Space Odyssey as a multi @-@ layered allegory , commenting simultaneously on Nietzsche , Homer , and the relationship of man to machine . 
 The reasons for Hal 's malfunction and subsequent malignant behavior have also elicited much discussion . He has been compared to Frankenstein 's monster . In Clarke 's novel , Hal malfunctions because of being ordered to lie to the crew of Discovery and withhold confidential information from them , despite being constructed for " the accurate processing of information without distortion or concealment " . Film critic Roger Ebert wrote that Hal , as the supposedly perfect computer , actually behaves in the most human fashion of all of the characters . 
 Rolling Stone reviewer Bob McClay sees the film as like a four @-@ movement symphony , its story told with " deliberate realism . " Carolyn Geduld believes that what " structurally unites all four episodes of the film " is the monolith , the film 's largest and most unresolvable enigma . Vincent LoBrutto 's biography of Kubrick says that for many , Clarke 's novel is the key to understanding the monolith . Similarly , Geduld observes that " the monolith ... has a very simple explanation in Clarke 's novel , " though she later asserts that even the novel doesn 't fully explain the ending . 
 McClay 's Rolling Stone review describes a parallelism between the monolith 's first appearance in which tool usage is imparted to the apes ( thus ' beginning ' mankind ) and the completion of " another evolution " in the fourth and final encounter with the monolith . In a similar vein , Tim Dirks ends his synopsis saying " [ t ] he cyclical evolution from ape to man to spaceman to angel @-@ <unk> @-@ superman is complete . " 
 The first and second encounters of humanity with the monolith have visual elements in common ; both apes , and later astronauts , touch the monolith gingerly with their hands , and both sequences conclude with near @-@ identical images of the Sun appearing directly over the monolith ( the first with a crescent moon adjacent to it in the sky , the second with a near @-@ identical crescent Earth in the same position ) , both echoing the Sun – Earth – Moon alignment seen at the very beginning of the film . The second encounter also suggests the triggering of the monolith 's radio signal to Jupiter by the presence of humans , echoing the premise of Clarke 's source story " The Sentinel " . 
 The monolith is the subject of the film 's final line of dialogue ( spoken at the end of the " Jupiter Mission " segment ) : " Its origin and purpose still a total mystery . " Reviewers McClay and Roger Ebert wrote that the monolith is the main element of mystery in the film ; Ebert described " the shock of the monolith 's straight edges and square corners among the weathered rocks , " and the apes warily circling it as prefiguring man reaching " for the stars . " Patrick Webster suggests the final line relates to how the film should be approached as a whole , noting " The line appends not merely to the discovery of the monolith on the Moon , but to our understanding of the film in the light of the ultimate questions it raises about the mystery of the universe . " 
 The film conveys what some viewers have described as a sense of the sublime and numinous . Roger Ebert writes in his essay on 2001 in The Great Movies : 
 North 's [ rejected ] score , which is available on a recording , is a good job of film composition , but would have been wrong for 2001 because , like all scores , it attempts to underline the action — to give us emotional cues . The classical music chosen by Kubrick exists outside the action . It uplifts . It wants to be sublime ; it brings a seriousness and transcendence to the visuals . 
 In a book on architecture , Gregory <unk> writes that Space Odyssey illustrates how our quest for space is motivated by two contradictory desires , a " desire for the sublime " characterized by a need to encounter something totally other than ourselves — " something numinous " — and the conflicting desire for a beauty that makes us feel no longer " lost in space , " but at home . Similarly , an article in The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy , titled " Sense of Wonder , " describes how 2001 creates a " numinous sense of wonder " by portraying a universe that inspires a sense of awe , which at the same time we feel we can understand . Christopher Palmer wrote that there exists in the film a coexistence of " the sublime and the banal , " as the film implies that to get into space , mankind had to suspend the " sense of wonder " that motivated him to explore space to begin with . 
 = = Sequels and adaptations = = 
 Kubrick did not envision a sequel to 2001 . Fearing the later exploitation and recycling of his material in other productions ( as was done with the props from MGM 's Forbidden Planet ) , he ordered all sets , props , miniatures , production blueprints , and prints of unused scenes destroyed . Most of these materials were lost , with some exceptions : a 2001 spacesuit backpack appeared in the " Close Up " episode of the Gerry Anderson series UFO , and one of Hal 's <unk> is in the possession of the author of Hal 's Legacy , David G. Stork . In 2012 Lockheed engineer Adam Johnson , working with Frederick I. Ordway III , science adviser to Kubrick , wrote the book 2001 : The Lost Science , which for the first time featured many of the blueprints of the spacecraft and film sets that previously had been thought destroyed . 
 Clarke wrote three sequel novels : 2010 : Odyssey Two ( 1982 ) , 2061 : Odyssey Three ( 1987 ) , and 3001 : The Final Odyssey ( 1997 ) . The only filmed sequel , 2010 , was based on Clarke 's 1982 novel and was released in 1984 . Kubrick was not involved in the production of this film , which was directed by Peter Hyams in a more conventional style with more dialogue . Clarke saw it as a fitting adaptation of his novel , and had a brief cameo appearance in the film . As Kubrick had ordered all models and blueprints from 2001 destroyed , Hyams was forced to recreate these models from scratch for 2010 . Hyams also claimed that he would not have made the film had he not received both Kubrick 's and Clarke 's blessings : 
 I had a long conversation with Stanley and told him what was going on . If it met with his approval , I would do the film ; and if it didn 't , I wouldn 't . I certainly would not have thought of doing the film if I had not gotten the blessing of Kubrick . He 's one of my idols ; simply one of the greatest talents that 's ever walked the Earth . He more or less said , " Sure . Go do it . I don 't care . " And another time he said , " Don 't be afraid . Just go do your own movie . " 
 The other two novels have not been adapted for the screen , although actor Tom Hanks has expressed interest in possible adaptations . 
 In 2012 , two screenplay adaptations of both 2061 and 3001 were posted on the 2001 : Exhibit website , in the hopes of generating interest in both MGM and Warner Bros. to adapt the last two novels into films . 
 Beginning in 1976 , Marvel Comics published a comic adaptation of the film written and drawn by Jack Kirby , and a 10 @-@ issue monthly series expanding on the ideas of the film and novel , also created by Kirby . 
 = = Parodies and homages = = 
 2001 has been the frequent subject of both parody and homage , sometimes extensively and other times briefly , employing both its distinctive music and iconic imagery . 
 = = = In advertising and print = = = 
 Mad magazine # 125 ( March 1969 ) featured a spoof called 201 Minutes of a Space Idiocy written by Dick DeBartolo and illustrated by Mort Drucker . In the final panels it is revealed that the monolith is a film script titled " ' How to Make an <unk> Science Fiction Movie ' by Stanley Kubrick " . It was reprinted in various special issues , in the MAD About the Sixties book , and partially in the book " The Making of Kubrick 's 2001 " . 
 The August 1971 album Who 's Next by The Who featured as its cover artwork a photograph of a concrete slab at Easington Colliery with the band apparently doing up their trouser zips . The decision to photograph this " monolith " image while on their way to a concert followed discussion between John Entwistle and Keith Moon about Kubrick 's film . 
 Thought to be the first time Kubrick gave permission for his work to be re @-@ used , Apple Inc . ' s 1999 website advertisement " It was a bug , Dave " was made using footage from the film . Launched during the era of concerns over Y2K bugs , the ad implied that Hal 's weird behavior was caused by a Y2K bug , before driving home the point that " only Macintosh was designed to function perfectly " . 
 = = = In film and television = = = 
 Mel Brooks ' satirical film History of the World , Part I opens with a parody of Kubrick 's " Dawn of Man " sequence , followed by the parody of One Million Years BC , narrated by Orson Welles . <unk> describes this parody as " spot on " . A similar spoof of the " Dawn of Man " sequence also opened Ken Shapiro 's 1974 comedy The Groove Tube in which the monolith was replaced by a television set . ( The film is mostly a parody of television . Film and Filming held that after this wonderful opening , the film slid downhill . ) 
 Woody Allen cast actor Douglas Rain ( Hal in Kubrick 's film ) in an uncredited part as the voice of the controlling computer in the closing sequences of his science @-@ fiction comedy Sleeper . 
 Matt Groening 's animated series The Simpsons , of which Kubrick was a fan , and Futurama frequently reference 2001 , along with other Kubrick films . The Simpsons had in the episode " Deep Space Homer " Bart throwing a felt @-@ tip marker into the air ; in slow motion it rotates , before a match cut replaces it with a cylindrical satellite . In 2004 Empire magazine listed this as the third best film parody of the entire run of the show . In the Futurama episode " Love and Rocket " a sentient spaceship revolts in a manner similar to Hal . Games Radar listed this as number 17 in its list of 20 Funniest Futurama parodies , while noting that Futurama has referenced Space Odyssey on several other occasions . 
 In the 2000 South Park episode " Trapper Keeper " , an interaction between Eric Cartman and Kyle Broflovski parodies the conversation between Hal and Bowman within the inner core . 
 Peter Sellers starred in Hal Ashby 's comedy @-@ drama Being There about a simple @-@ minded middle @-@ aged gardener who has lived his entire life in the townhouse of his wealthy employer . In the scene where he first leaves the house and ventures into the wide world for the first time , the soundtrack plays a jazzy version of Strauss ' Also Sprach Zarathustra arranged by <unk> Deodato . Film critic James A. Davidson writing for the film journal Images suggests " When Chance emerges from his home into the world , Ashby suggests his childlike nature by using Richard Strauss ' Thus <unk> Zarathustra as ironic background music , linking his hero with Kubrick 's star baby in his masterpiece 2001 : A Space Odyssey . " 
 Tim Burton 's Charlie and the Chocolate Factory has a scene ( using actual footage from A Space Odyssey ) in which the monolith morphs into a chocolate bar . Catholic News wrote that the film " had subtle and obvious riffs on everything from the saccharine Disney " Small World " exhibit to Munchkinland to , most brilliantly , a hilarious takeoff on Kubrick 's 2001 : A Space Odyssey . " 
 Andrew Stanton , the director of WALL @-@ E , revealed in an interview with Wired magazine that his film was in many ways his homage to Space Odyssey , Alien , Blade Runner , Close Encounters and several other science @-@ fiction films . The reviewer for USA Today described the resemblance of the spaceship 's computer , Auto , to Hal . The same year saw the release of the much less successful film Eagle Eye , about which The Charlotte Observer said that , like 2001 , it featured a " red @-@ eyed , calm @-@ voiced supercomputer that took human life to protect what it felt were higher objectives " 
 Commenting on the broader use of Ligeti 's music beyond that by Kubrick , London Magazine in 2006 mentioned Monty Python 's use of Ligeti in a 60 @-@ second spoof of Space Odyssey in the Flying Circus episode commonly labeled " A Book at Bedtime " . 
 The poorly reviewed Canadian spoof 2001 : A Space Travesty has been occasionally alluded to as a full parody of Kubrick 's film , both because of its title and star Leslie Nielsen 's many previous films which were full parodies of other films . However , Space Travesty only makes occasional references to Kubrick 's material , its " celebrities are really aliens " jokes resembling those in Men in Black . Canadian reviewer Jim <unk> said , " It 's not really a spoof of 2001 , or anything in particular . There 's a brief homage at the start , and one scene in a shuttle en route to the Moon that uses The Blue Danube ... The rest is a patched together plot . " Among many complaints about the film , reviewer Berge Garabedian derided the lack of much substantive connection to the Kubrick film ( the latter of which he said was " funnier " ) . 
 Among spoof references to several science @-@ fiction films and shows , Airplane II features a computer called ROK 9000 in control of a Moon shuttle which malfunctions and kills crew members , which several reviewers found reminiscent of Hal . 
 Mystery Science Theater 3000 had the design of its main setting , the starship Satellite of Love , based on the bone @-@ shaped satellite featured in the match cut from <unk> to the future . The one @-@ eyed design of the robot Gypsy led the show to do various scenes comparing it to HAL 9000 , including a scene the 1996 feature film , where the opening featuring Mike Nelson jogging along the walls of the Satellite of Love parodies the scene where Frank Poole does the same in the Discovery . 
 = = = In software and video games = = = 
 2001 : A Space Odyssey has also been referenced in multiple video games ( especially Metal Gear ) , usually with reference to either the monolith or Hal . 
 Several black monoliths can be found in EVE Online , marked by a beacon with name " Black monolith " . Their purpose in game is unknown . The objects are described in @-@ game as " It 's full of stars " , which is reference to the film 's sequel , 2010 : The Year We Make Contact . 
 Video game director Hideo Kojima has also cited 2001 : A Space Odyssey as his favorite movie of all time and is frequently referenced in the Metal Gear series ; Otacon is named after Hal and Solid Snake 's real name is Dave . 
 = Hermann Graf = 
 Hermann Graf ( 24 October 1912 – 4 November 1988 ) was a German Luftwaffe World War II fighter ace . A flying ace or fighter ace is a military aviator credited with shooting down five or more enemy aircraft during aerial combat . He served on both the Eastern and Western Fronts . He became the first pilot in aviation history to claim 200 aerial victories — that is , 200 aerial combat encounters resulting in the destruction of the enemy aircraft . He claimed 212 aerial victories in over 830 combat missions , 202 of which were on the Eastern Front . 
 Graf , a pre @-@ war football player and glider pilot , joined the Luftwaffe in 1935 . He was initially selected for transport aviation and was posted to Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 — 51st Fighter Wing ) in May 1939 . At the outbreak of war he was stationed on the German – Franco border flying uneventful patrols . Serving as a flight instructor , he was stationed in Romania as part of a German military mission training Romanian pilots . Graf flew a few ground support missions in the closing days of the German invasion of Crete . 
 Following the start of Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union , Graf claimed his first aerial victory on 4 August 1941 . He was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( German : Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) after 45 Eastern Front victories on 24 January 1942 . By 16 September 1942 his number of victories had increased to 172 for which he was honored with the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub , Schwertern und Brillanten ) . At the time of its presentation to Graf it was Germany 's highest military decoration . On 26 September 1942 he became the first fighter pilot in aviation history to claim 200 enemy aircraft shot down . 
 By then a national hero , Graf was taken off combat operations and posted to a fighter pilot training school in France before being tasked with leadership of a high flying de Havilland Mosquito intercept unit called Jagdgeschwader 50 ( JG 50 — Fighter Wing 50 ) . In November 1943 Graf returned to combat operations . He was appointed Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) of Jagdgeschwader 11 ( JG 11 — 11th Fighter Wing ) and claimed his last aerial victory on 29 March 1944 . He was severely injured during this encounter and , after a period of convalescence , became Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 52 ( JG 52 — 52nd Fighter Wing ) . He and the remainder of JG 52 surrendered to units of the United States Army on 8 May 1945 , and were turned over to the Red Army . Graf was held in Soviet captivity until 1949 . After the war he worked as an electronic sales manager and died of Parkinson 's disease in his home town of Engen on 4 November 1988 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hermann Anton Graf was born on 24 October 1912 in Engen in the Grand Duchy of Baden not far from the Swiss border , the son of Wilhelm Graf ( 1878 – 1937 ) , a farmer , and his wife Maria , née Sailer ( 1877 – 1953 ) . He was the third of three children , with two older brothers , Wilhelm Wilhelm ( 1904 – 1981 ) and Josef Wilhelm ( 1909 – 1981 ) . His father had fought in World War I as an artillery soldier and was awarded the Iron Cross ( Eisernes Kreuz ) . He did not return home until Hermann was six years old . The young Hermann 's main reference point in his life was his mother , and the bond he formed with her lasted the remainder of her life . Inflation in the Weimar Republic in 1923 wiped out all the family savings , as a result , from a very early age , Hermann learned to work hard to make a living . 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 As a young boy , Graf was fascinated by football . He started with the football club DJK Engen ( Deutsche <unk> — Literally " German Youthful Strength " , a Catholic sports organization dating back to 1920 ) and later became a goalkeeper in FC Höhen . In his teens , he had been selected to join a group of talented young football players who were trained by Sepp Herberger , a former forward ( 1921 – 1925 ) of the German national football team and later head coach of the German team winning the 1954 FIFA World Cup . A broken thumb ended all of Graf 's early hopes for a career on the national football team . 
 Graf graduated from the Volksschule ( primary school ) in 1926 at the age of thirteen . Since the savings for Graf 's higher education had been lost in the 1923 inflation crisis , he had no option but to apply for a vocational education . For the next three years , Graf worked as a locksmith apprentice at a local factory . A locksmith had a low income and when he received an offer to work as an apprentice clerk , he gladly accepted a change in careers . In this position , Graf helped Jewish families escape to Switzerland at a time when the " J " stamp in German Jews ' passport had been demanded by Germany 's neighboring countries . He took a great personal risk and came close to getting caught . Graf was assisted by Gruppenführer ( Group Leader ) Albert Keller of the Nazi Glider Club <unk> in Engen , who later erased all the bureaucratic traces that Graf had left . 
 = = = Amateur pilot and joining the Luftwaffe = = = 
 Graf saw his first aircraft when he was twelve years old and this sight caused an emotional conflict between his old passion for football and a new obsession with aviation . He worked at the Engen town hall in 1930 , saving all his money to buy a glider . Before his 20th birthday he contributed a homemade glider to the newly founded Engen Glider Club . Every Sunday he would go out to the nearby <unk> mountain until an almost fatal crash destroyed his glider in the fall of 1932 . In 1935 when Adolf Hitler nullified the Treaty of Versailles , Hermann Graf applied for flight training in the newly created Luftwaffe . 
 Graf was accepted for the Luftwaffe 's A @-@ level pilot training school in Karlsruhe on 2 June 1936 . Following basic training , flight training progressed through the levels A1 , A2 and B1 , B2 , referred to as A / B flight training . Graf 's A training included theoretical and practical training in aerobatics , navigation , long @-@ distance flights and deadstick landings , graduating from A2 on 25 September 1936 . Graf joined the B1 school in Ulm @-@ <unk> on 4 October 1937 . The B courses included high @-@ altitude flights , instrument flights , night landings and training to handle the aircraft in difficult situations . He completed his B1 training on 23 December 1937 and progressed to B2 training in Karlsruhe on 19 January 1938 , completing on 31 May 1938 . 
 After the B2 course the pilots were either selected for fighter pilot training and transferred to a Jagdfliegerschule ( fighter pilot school ) or chosen for bomber or transport pilot training at a C flight school . Graf , at the age of 26 , was initially thought to be too old for fighter pilot training and selected for the transport pilot C school . Largely due to the fact that the fighter force was in dire need for new officers , Unteroffizier ( non @-@ commissioned officer ) Graf , without training on modern fighter aircraft , was transferred to 2 . Staffel ( 2nd squadron ) of I. / Jagdgeschwader 51 ( I. / JG 51 — 1st group of the 51st fighter wing ) at Bad <unk> on 31 May 1939 after he had completed his officers candidate training at <unk> . I. / JG 51 was equipped with the most modern German fighter aircraft at the time , the Messerschmitt Bf 109 E1 . Graf , who had never flown a modern fighter aircraft before , ended his first flight on the Bf 109 with a crash . In July 1939 , I. / JG 51 was briefly reequipped with the Czechoslovakian built Avia B @-@ 534 biplane , giving Graf an opportunity to show his flying skills as well as to reestablish his self @-@ confidence . 
 = = World War II = = 
 World War II in Europe began on 1 September 1939 when German forces invaded Poland . On this day , I. / JG 51 was stationed at the French border at Speyer and Graf was promoted to Feldwebel ( staff sergeant ) . I. / JG 51 exchanged the Avia B @-@ 534 biplanes for the Bf 109 and was charged with protection of Germany 's Western border during the Phoney War — the phase in the months following Britain and France 's declaration of war on Germany in September 1939 and preceding the Battle of France in May 1940 . During the Phoney War , Graf flew 21 combat sorties without firing his guns and was still considered an unreliable pilot . On 20 January 1940 , his Gruppenkommandeur ( Group Commander ) Hans @-@ Heinrich <unk> had Graf transferred to Ergänzungs @-@ Jagdgruppe Merseburg ( a supplementary training unit stationed at Merseburg ) where newly trained fighter pilots received instruction from pilots with combat experience . Graf 's completion of the program resulted in his promotion to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) on 1 May 1940 . At Merseburg Graf met and befriended two other fighter pilot trainees , Alfred Grislawski and Heinrich Füllgrabe . Ergänzungs @-@ Jagdgruppe Merseburg at the time was under the command of Major ( Major ) Gotthard Handrick , the 1936 Olympic gold medalist and former commander of Jagdgruppe 88 of the " Condor Legion " during the Spanish Civil War . On 6 October 1940 , Major Handrick was appointed Gruppenkommandeur of III . / Jagdgeschwader 52 ( III . / JG 52 — 3rd group of the 52nd fighter wing ) . Handrick had some influence on the personnel rotation within the Luftwaffe and had Graf , Füllgrabe and Grislawski transferred to 9 . / JG 52 ( 9th Squadron of the 52nd Fighter Wing ) on 6 October 1940 as well . 
 = = = Service in Romania and invasion of Greece = = = 
 Romania , isolated and threatened following the non @-@ aggression pact signed by Germany and the Soviet Union , sought to uphold its neutrality . The Soviet occupation of Romania 's regions , Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina , consented to by the King Carol II of Romania , caused Carol 's popularity to fall . This gave Ion Antonescu an opportunity to rise to power and he soon established a dictatorship in Romania . 
 Under Antonescu , Romania 's armed forces were reorganized , supported by a military mission from Germany called <unk> <unk> ( Luftwaffe Mission Romania ) under the command of Generalleutnant ( Lieutenant General ) Wilhelm Speidel . Stationed in Bucharest , III . / JG 52 was temporarily renamed I. / Jagdgeschwader 28 ( I. / JG 28 — 1st group of the 28th fighter wing ) until 27 December 1940 . Its primary task was to train Romanian Air Force personnel . Here the trio of Füllgrabe , Graf and Grislawski was joined by Ernst Süß , and later by Leopold Steinbatz and Edmund Roßmann . 
 The German airmen of 9 . / JG 52 spent a number of very relaxing days in Bucharest . Graf even managed to play football when a team of the Deutsche Luftwaffe played against <unk> Bucharest at the Bucharest Sport 's Arena before thirty thousand spectators . The relaxed life continued until late 1940 when the Romanian internal political situation deteriorated . Ion Antonescu , mainly a nationalist and the Iron Guard , led by Horia Sima , formed a tense alliance climaxing in the brief but bloody civil war from 21 – 24 January 1941 . The three @-@ day civil war was eventually won by Antonescu with support from the German Army . In May 1941 III . / JG 52 was transferred to Greece to support Operation Merkur , the invasion of Crete . The unit flew mostly ground attack missions during this time . 
 = = = War against the Soviet Union = = = 
 In early June the unit transferred back to Romania , and from 22 June the unit supported Army Group South in Operation Barbarossa from bases in the country . On 1 August JG 52 transferred to forward airfields in Ukraine , and on 4 August Graf claimed his first aerial victory against a Polikarpov I @-@ 16 while escorting a Junkers Ju 87 strike . Graf recorded the victory at 06 : 20 . His second victory fell the next day . Graf became an official ace upon achieving his fifth victory on 6 September 1941 . The victory was achieved at night , 18 : 23 local time , in the vicinity of <unk> . 
 JG 52 moved forward into the Soviet Union as the German advance quickened in the late summer and autumn . Flying air superiority missions during the First Battle of Kharkov in September and October 1941 he accounted for 12 victories ( nos . 8 – 20 ) which included five Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 3s . Graf was finding his stride and accounted for 10 enemy aircraft in November and 12 in December 1941 , increasing his personal success to 42 aerial victories by the end of 1941 . 
 This period had witnessed some bitter aerial combat as Graf experienced the Battle of Rostov and opening phases of the Siege of Sevastopol . Graf remained with his unit as operations ground to a halt , and stalemate . On 24 January , with his tally now 45 victories , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( German : Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) . On 3 February 1942 he accounted for his 47th victim , a Sukhoi Su @-@ 2 ground attack aircraft . It was to be his last victory for several weeks . After seven months of ceaseless combat operations he was withdrawn from the frontline and sent on leave to Germany . 
 On 23 March Graf was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of 9 . / JG 52 . That same day , Graf accounted for four enemy aircraft and by the end of March 1942 had reached 58 aerial victories . 9 . / JG 52 moved to the Crimea in April to support Erich von Manstein 's 11th Army . The Battle of the Kerch Peninsula ( Unternehmen <unk> ) was designed to eject Red Army forces that had conducted an amphibious landing in the region on 26 December 1941 . Tasked with clearing the skies above Manstein 's limited forces , Graf achieved substantial success . On 30 April 1942 he became an " ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day " after shooting down six enemy aircraft in the region followed by seven on 2 May and again seven on 8 May . By 11 May the Kerch campaign was reaching its climax ; it ended in complete victory for the Germans and their allies eight days later . On this day Hermann Graf reached a tally of 89 aerial victories . Graf was ordered north immediately to assist German air forces near Kharkov . The Soviets had launched a surprise offensive beginning the Second Battle of Kharkov . Graf recorded 19 air victories in the heavy air fighting . On 14 May 1942 , Graf was credited with his 100th aerial victory . He was the 7th Luftwaffe pilot to achieve the century mark . He was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 17 May 1942 for 100 air victories . Only two days later , his score had increased to 105 , he also received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) on 19 May 1942 . The 39 claims submitted in May 1942 brought his personal tally to 108 by the time the battle was over . On 24 May 1942 , Graf , together with Leutnant Adolf <unk> , flew to the Wolf 's Lair , Hitler 's headquarters in Rastenburg , present @-@ day Kętrzyn in Poland , for the official Oak Leaves and Swords presentation the next day . Following the presentation , he was sent on home leave , where he made a number of public appearances . 
 = = = Towards Stalingrad = = = 
 Upon return to his post , Graf claimed his next victory on 30 June 1942 . From August onwards , JG 52 supported Army Group South advances towards Stalingrad . Graf had volunteered for service in the Gefechtsverband Stalingrad ( Combat Detachment Stalingrad ) , which was under the leadership of Hauptmann Wolf @-@ Dietrich Wilcke ; Graf increased his number of aerial victories to 140 by the end of August . In September alone he shot down 62 enemy aircraft , including 5 on 2 September and 10 on 23 September . The aerial fighting was fierce . On 4 September 1942 , he claimed his 150th victory , a Yakovlev Yak @-@ 1 ; he was the second pilot , after Gordon Gollob , to achieve this mark . Graf 's aircraft suffered over 100 hits during the engagement with the Yak @-@ 1 . He barely escaped being killed on several occasions . On 15 September his aircraft cabin was hit by a cannon shell . On 16 September his plane was again hit , this time suffering 30 bullet holes and on 19 September the anti @-@ aircraft artillery shot away half the rudder . His Gruppe was then relocated to the Pitomnik Airfield in Stalingrad . 
 Flying from Pitomnik Airfield , Graf achieved his 172nd aerial victory on 9 September 1942 for which he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit <unk> Eichenlaub , Schwertern und Brillanten ) on 16 September , the fifth member of the Wehrmacht to receive this distinction . Within a time @-@ frame of 235 days he had received every grade of the Knight 's Cross available at the time . The next day , on 17 September , he claimed three more victories and on 23 September , victories 188 to 197 . On 26 September , he became the first pilot in aviation history to claim 200 enemy aircraft shot down . He claimed three victories that day taking his total to an unprecedented 202 . Following this he received a promotion to Major on 1 October 1942 . Some time after this Graf was ordered not to fly operationally anymore , as the High Command was concerned about the potential morale loss if he was to be shot down . 
 = = = Fighter pilot instructor — Jagdgruppe Ost = = = 
 On 28 January 1943 Graf , now a Major , was sent to southern France to command Ergänzungs @-@ Jagdgruppe Ost ( <unk> Fighter Group East ) , a fighter pilot school . Here newly trained fighter pilots destined for the Eastern Front received their final training from experienced Eastern Front pilots . The main base was at St. Jean d <unk> 70 miles ( 110 kilometers ) north of Bordeaux on the Atlantic coast . However , he spent most of his time at the Toulouse @-@ Blagnac Airport , where he nursed his passion for football . Peter <unk> , whom Graf would later send to JG 52 , was one of the pilots at the time at Jagdgruppe Ost . Graf selected a Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 A @-@ 5 aircraft for his personal use . 
 On 11 March Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring was summoned to the Wolf 's Lair by Hitler . Following the Allied aerial bombings of Nuremberg and Paderborn , Hitler blamed Göring for the Luftwaffe 's inability to protect the German cities against the intensified Allied bomber offensive . In particular , German cities were vulnerable to the speedy , multi @-@ use de Havilland Mosquito fighter @-@ bombers , which had all returned home without having been intercepted by German defenses . Two days after the attack on Paderborn , Göring met with Germany 's leading aircraft manufacturers , Willy Messerschmitt , Ernst Heinkel and Claude Dornier on 18 March 1943 . Göring berated them for their inability to produce a German aircraft capable of competing with the Mosquito . He then withdrew to <unk> , where he came up with the idea to create a Mosquito @-@ intercept task force led by Graf and Herbert Ihlefeld . Graf was ordered to <unk> , where he received his instructions from Göring personally . In the project , Graf was directly subordinated to Göring and , when asked what he required , responded that he wanted to appoint his own team . Göring approved this request and subsequently Graf was able to call upon his old friends Grislawski , Süß and Füllgrabe , as well as a number of good football players , who had served as administrators , drivers and mechanics in southern France . 
 Following the meeting with Göring at <unk> , Graf traveled to Berlin to organize the necessary personnel authorizations at the <unk> ( Luftwaffe personnel office ) . In Berlin , he took the opportunity to watch a football match at the Olympic Stadium . Here Graf was introduced to the young film actress Jola Jobst . Graf flew back to Toulouse from Berlin , where he learned that his Mosquito assignment had been delayed . Hitler , who had assisted Francisco Franco during the Spanish Civil War , made repeated efforts to convince Franco to join the war on Germany 's side . Since 1941 Spanish fighter squadrons had operated together with the Luftwaffe in the East and German propaganda had employed images of Graf interacting with the Spaniards . In this role , under Graf 's supervision , the <unk> <unk> Azul ( 4th Blue Squadron ) , one of five Spanish voluntary fighter squadrons , received three weeks of specialized fighter pilot training for the Eastern Front from 18 May to 6 June 1943 . 
 = = = Defense of the Reich = = = 
 On 11 June 1943 , Graf arrived at the Wiesbaden airfield , where he began the creation of the high @-@ altitude fighter unit . Organizationally , it was based on Jagdgruppe Süd . The unit was to be equipped with the Messerschmitt Bf 109 G @-@ 5 , a high @-@ altitude variant of the Bf 109 equipped with a pressurized cockpit , but arrival of the aircraft was delayed and , in the meantime , Graf 's focus was on football . He invited Sepp Herberger to Wiesbaden to train Graf 's team for one day . During this visit , Herberger encouraged Graf to use his influence to save Germany 's best football players from frontline duty . Subsequently , Graf brought to his unit players like Hermann <unk> , Hermann Koch , Alfons Moog , Franz <unk> and Walter <unk> . Graf also requested Fritz Walter , who later captained the West German World Cup team of 1954 , to be transferred to his unit . Walter 's transfer was more difficult to achieve . Graf had to submit his request directly to Generaloberst ( Colonel General ) Friedrich Fromm , the commander of the Ersatzheer ( Reserve Army ) . Along with playing football , recruiting his pilots and staff , Graf again encountered the actress Jobst . 
 His unit received the first 12 Bf 109 G @-@ 5 in July 1943 . With one of these aircraft he managed to reach an altitude of 14 @,@ 300 meters ( 46 @,@ 900 feet ) . Military success came quickly when the unit achieved its first aerial victory over an intruding Mosquito . However , aircraft shortage still prevented him to declare full operational status . In parallel to these events the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) based in England escalated its daylight offensive over Europe . The heavy four @-@ engined Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress and Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator bombers they had first appeared over northern Germany on 27 January 1943 in daytime attacks against the port of Wilhelmshaven . The number of heavy bombers of the USAAF Eighth Air Force surpassed the 800 mark and tight flying combat box formations struck deeply into German airspace by July 1943 . Graf ordered all his available Bf 109s to intercept the American bombers targeted for Kassel on 28 and 30 July 1943 . He was credited with the destruction of his first B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress during one of these attacks . 
 The unit , consisting of 19 aircraft , was declared combat ready on 31 July 1943 . Graf 's football team , the Rote Jäger ( Red Hunters ) , was also ready and played its first game on 4 August 1943 , with Graf as goalkeeper . This football team followed Graf in his assignments for the remainder of the war . On 15 August 1943 Graf 's unit was renamed to Jagdgeschwader 50 ( JG 50 — 50th Fighter Wing ) . It was expected that JG 50 would be equipped with the Messerschmitt Me 163 rocket fighter . The Me 163 was being tested by Major Wolfgang Späte 's test unit <unk> 16 ( 16th Test Commando ) at Peenemünde and Rechlin in the summer of 1943 . Following a visit of this test unit , Graf also learned about the Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighter , and he returned to JG 50 full of optimism . During this assignment Graf shot down three enemy aircraft , including two B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bombers and a Mosquito in June 1943 . 
 = = = Wing commander of JG 1 and JG 11 = = = 
 Oberstleutnant ( Lieutenant Colonel ) Hans Philipp , Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) of Jagdgeschwader 1 ( JG 1 — 1st Fighter Wing ) , was killed in action on 8 October 1943 . The next day , Graf , officially remaining in command of JG 50 , was appointed acting Geschwaderkommodore of JG 1 and transferred to Jever . Graf subsequently appointed Grislawski as acting @-@ commander of JG 50 . The Eighth Air Force flew their Second Raid on Schweinfurt on 14 October 1943 . Although costly to the attackers — 77 heavy bombers were destroyed by either German fighters or by the anti @-@ aircraft fire at the price of 46 German fighters lost — Göring was not satisfied . On 23 October , Graf and Major Anton Mader , Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 11 ( JG 11 — 11th Fighter Wing ) were summoned to a meeting with Göring at Deelen Air Base near Arnhem . Graf , Mader and Unteroffizier Karl Blaha as a rear observer , made the journey from Jever in a Messerschmitt Bf 108 Taifun . During this flight they were nearly shot down by a flight of two Mosquitos over the North Sea Coast . 
 Despite their successes , after the October meeting , Göring disbanded the unit , and it was absorbed into I. / Jagdgeschwader 301 ; Graf was promoted to Oberst ( Colonel ) and appointed Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) of JG 11 on 11 November . JG 11 was tasked with Reichsverteidigung ( Defense of the Reich ) , and despite officially being banned from flying operational missions Graf managed to down six more aircraft over the next four months . On 29 March 1944 Graf shot down one P @-@ 51 Mustang and in the confusion of the dog fight collided with another . He managed to bail out , but was injured and had to spend some time in a hospital . While on convalescence leave Graf married the German actress Jobst on 24 June 1944 . 
 = = = Wing commander of JG 52 = = = 
 Following his convalescence , Graf was appointed Geschwaderkommodore of his old unit JG 52 by the General der Jagdflieger ( General of Fighters ) , Generalleutnant Adolf Galland . The Geschwaderstab and I. / JG 52 were based at Kraków in southern Poland at the time and the men of JG 52 gave Graf a welcome celebration on 20 September 1944 . With German forces in retreat by this time , Graf did not have any opportunity for further air combat . Graf disobeyed an order from General Hans Seidemann , who had ordered him and Erich Hartmann to fly to the British sector to avoid capture by the Russians when the rest of the wing surrendered to the Soviets . Together with his fellow pilots and ground personnel he marched through Bohemia toward Bavaria , where he surrendered his unit to the 90th US Infantry Division near <unk> on 8 May 1945 and became a prisoner of war ( POW ) . 
 = = Prisoner of war = = 
 Along with most of the JG 52 personnel , Graf was handed over by the Americans to the Soviets shortly after his surrender on 15 May 1945 . Having become famous via the Nazi propaganda machine and as the Commander of JG 52 , Graf was singled out for attention by the Soviets . On 8 December 1945 he was moved from the prisoner of war camp Nr. 150 in Gryazovets to the prisoner of war camp Nr. 27 in <unk> . He was then moved to the war camp Nr. 69 ( <unk> <unk> ) near Frankfurt ( Oder ) in East Germany . There he was released from captivity on 25 December 1949 . 
 This relatively early release was perceived by many to be caused by co @-@ operation with his Soviet captors , something for which his fellow pilots criticized him , especially following a 1950s book by fellow fighter ace and Soviet POW Hans " Assi " Hahn entitled " I Speak the Truth " ( Ich <unk> die Wahrheit ) . This led to Graf 's exclusion from post @-@ war Luftwaffe comrade associations . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Initially , Graf had a hard time obtaining work , but his relationships in the football community helped him . Sepp Herberger introduced Graf to Roland Endler , an electronics manufacturer ( " Elektro @-@ <unk> @-@ Industrie GmbH " ) from Neuss , who also was president of the FC Bayern Munich football club between 1958 and 1962 . Endler employed Graf as a salesman in his company , and Graf eventually advanced to branch leader in Baden @-@ Württemberg and Chief of Sales . 
 Graf 's marriage with Jobst collapsed and they divorced . He remarried twice thereafter . His third marriage in May 1959 with Helga <unk> resulted in the birth of his son , Hermann @-@ Ulrich , in 1959 , and his daughter Birgit , in 1961 . In 1965 , Graf was diagnosed with Parkinson 's disease , a condition that affected many of the high @-@ altitude flyers , which had a slow deteriorating effect on his health . Graf died in his hometown Engen on 4 November 1988 . 
 = = Aerial victory credits = = 
 Graf was credited with 212 aerial victories , claimed in over 830 combat missions , 10 on the Western Front which included six four @-@ engined @-@ bombers and one Mosquito , and 212 on the Eastern Front . 
 This and the ♠ ( Ace of spades ) indicates those aerial victories which made Graf an " ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day " , a term which designates a fighter pilot who has shot down five or more airplanes in a single day . This along with the * ( asterisk ) indicates an Herausschuss ( separation shot ) — a severely damaged heavy bomber forced to separate from his combat box which was counted as an aerial victory . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Wound Badge in Silver 
 Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe ( 9 December 1941 ) 
 Combined Pilots @-@ Observation Badge in Gold with Diamonds 
 Romanian Pilots Badge 
 Crimea Shield 
 Romanian Knight of Order of the Crown ( 23 May 1941 ) 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 9 August 1941 ) 
 1st Class ( 31 August 1941 ) 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Fighter Pilots in Gold 
 in Bronze ( 15 May 1941 ) 
 in Silver ( 25 August 1941 ) 
 in Gold ( 10 November 1941 ) 
 German Cross in Gold in April 1942 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds 
 Knight 's Cross on 24 January 1942 as Leutnant of the Reserves and pilot in the 9 . / Jagdgeschwader 52 
 93rd Oak Leaves on 17 May 1942 as Leutnant of the Reserves and Staffelführer of the 9 . / Jagdgeschwader 52 
 11th Swords on 19 May 1942 as Leutnant of the Reserves and Staffelkapitän of the 9 . / Jagdgeschwader 52 
 5th Diamonds on 16 September 1942 as Oberleutnant of the Reserves and Staffelkapitän of the 9 . / Jagdgeschwader 52 
 Mentioned five times in the Wehrmachtbericht 
 = = = Dates of rank = = = 
 = = = Biography = = = 
 = Leonard 's Bakery = 
 Leonard 's Bakery is a Portuguese bakery in Honolulu , Hawaii , known for popularizing the malasada . The fried pastry , slightly crispier and chewier than a doughnut and with no hole , is known as a cuisine of Hawaii . Though Portuguese immigrants brought the malasada to Hawaii at the turn of the 20th century , Leonard 's opened in 1952 and brought it to a wider audience . They offer filled and sugar @-@ coated malasadas as well as coffee cakes , sweet bread , and pão doce meat wraps . Leonard 's is a household name in Hawaii and is well known in the continental United States and internationally . A franchise location opened in Japan in 2008 . 
 = = Background and history = = 
 Margaret and Frank Leonard Rego Sr. opened Leonard 's Bakery in 1952 . Rego 's mother had encouraged him to sell malasadas , a <unk> Portuguese doughnut with a " crispier " outside and a " chewier " inside . Portuguese plantation workers brought the dessert to the Hawaiian islands when they immigrated at the turn of the 20th century , though Leonard 's is known for popularizing it . The plain malasadas are coated with white sugar , but the bakery sells variations garnished with cinnamon or filled with <unk> , custard , or chocolate pudding . The bakery sells anthropomorphized malasada stuffed animals and other malasada @-@ related items . Leonard 's is otherwise an " old @-@ fashioned , plain @-@ Jane bakery " that sells coffee cakes , sweet bread , and pão doce meat wraps . As of 2011 , the bakery remains a family business owned by Leonard Rego Jr. whose own children participate in its operation just as he once did . 
 Andrew McCarthy of the National Geographic Traveler wrote that the bakery is an institution that " anchored " its neighborhood . In Hawaii , Leonard 's is a " household name " . Residents from the other Hawaiian islands often bring home Leonard 's malasadas as an <unk> ( souvenir gift ) . The fried doughnut @-@ like item may be unique to Hawaii , but are well known both in the continental United States and internationally . The Honolulu bakery is a point of interest on at least one island tour . In 2012 , the Honolulu Star @-@ Advertiser reported that the bakery sold over 15 @,@ 000 malasadas daily , or over 160 million since its opening . 
 Rego Jr. opened a franchise location in Japan 's Yokohama World Quarter Shopping Center in December 2008 . The location only sold cinnamon and sugar malasadas at first , but later added malasadas with fillings . Japanese investors Forest Inc. first asked Rego Jr. about licensing the brand in March 2008 , and Rego Jr. felt that the timing with the Great Recession " couldn 't have been more perfect " . The deal was completed three months prior to the opening , and the owner flew in to train the staff for a week and a half . Rego Jr. plans to open more franchised locations in Japan and on the other islands of Hawaii . In 2009 , the company employed 60 people between three stores ( two in Oahu and one in Yokohama ) and two Oahu food trucks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The bakery 's malasadas were <unk> 's top " Hawaii food find " , and USA Today described the doughnuts as having become " a Hawaiian icon " . Sunset recognized Leonard 's for making the sweet a " Hawaiian classic " that is now served at Honolulu restaurants from drive @-@ ins to Chef Mavro , " the city 's classiest restaurant " . <unk> Tong of The New York Sun wrote that Leonard 's was " a required stop for foodies and ... dessert addicts " . 
 Frommer 's calls it a " Honolulu landmark " , and The Huffington Post lists Leonard 's malasadas alongside poke , Spam <unk> and shave ice as " must try " Hawaiian cuisine experiences . It is also profiled in Mimi Sheraton 's critical food book 1 @,@ 000 Foods to Eat Before You Die , and John T. Edge 's Donuts : An American Passion . 
 = Battle of Kupres ( 1994 ) = 
 The Battle of Kupres ( Bosnian , Croatian , Serbian : Bitka za Kupres ) was a battle of the Bosnian War , fought between the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) and the Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) on one side and the Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) on the other from 20 October to 3 November 1994 . It marks the first tangible evidence of the Bosniak – Croat alliance set out in the Washington Agreement of March 1994 , brokered by the United States to end the Croat – Bosniak War fought between the ARBiH and the HVO in Bosnia and Herzegovina . The ARBiH and the HVO were not coordinated at first , rather they launched separate operations aimed at capture of Kupres . 
 The ARBiH offensive , codenamed Autumn @-@ 94 ( <unk> @-@ 94 ) , started on 20 October , with the primary aim of advancing from Bugojno towards VRS @-@ held Donji Vakuf , supported by a secondary attack towards Kupres aimed at disruption of the VRS defences and threatening a supply route to Donji Vakuf . The primary attacking force soon ground to a halt , shifting the focus of the operation to Kupres , where substantial reinforcements were deployed to ensure a gradual advance of the ARBiH . On 29 October , the HVO decided to attack , as it considered the ARBiH had directly threatened the strategic Kupres plateau . The HVO launched its offensive , codenamed Operation Cincar ( Operacija Cincar ) , on 1 November . Following a brief lull in the ARBiH advance , thought to be brought on by a variety of causes and a direct request by the President of Bosnia and Herzegovina Alija Izetbegović to the ARBiH to cooperate with the HVO , commanding officers of the two forces met to coordinate their operations for the first time since the Washington Agreement . Kupres itself was captured by the HVO on 3 November 1994 . 
 Besides the political significance of the battle for future developments of the war in Bosnia , the battle was militarily significant for planning and execution of Operation Winter ' 94 by the Croatian Army ( HV ) and the HVO aimed at relieving the siege of Bihać in late November and December 1994 . Territorial gains made by the HVO and the ARBiH in the Battle of Kupres safeguarded the right flank of Operation Winter ' 94 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The 1990 revolt of the Croatian Serbs was centered on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around the city of Knin , parts of Lika , Kordun , Banovina regions and in eastern Croatian settlements with significant Serb populations . These areas were subsequently named the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) . The RSK declared its intention of political integration with Serbia and was viewed by the Government of Croatia as a rebellion . By March 1991 , the conflict escalated to war — the Croatian War of Independence . In June 1991 , Croatia declared its independence as Yugoslavia disintegrated , followed by a three @-@ month moratorium on the decision , thus the decision came into effect on 8 October . A campaign of ethnic cleansing was then initiated by the RSK against Croatian civilians and most non @-@ Serbs were expelled by early 1993 . By November 1993 , less than 400 and 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 000 ethnic Croats remained in UN protected areas Sector South and Sector North respectively . 
 As the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) increasingly supported the RSK and the Croatian police was unable to cope with the situation , the Croatian National Guard ( ZNG ) was formed in May 1991 . The ZNG was renamed the Croatian Army ( HV ) in November . The establishment of the military of Croatia was hampered by a United Nations ( UN ) arms embargo introduced in September . The final months of 1991 saw the fiercest fighting of the war , culminating in the Battle of the barracks , the Siege of Dubrovnik , and the Battle of Vukovar . 
 In January 1992 , the Sarajevo Agreement was signed by representatives of Croatia , the JNA and the UN , and fighting between the two sides paused . Ending the series of unsuccessful ceasefires , United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) was deployed to Croatia to supervise and maintain the agreement . The conflict largely passed on to entrenched positions , and the JNA soon retreated from Croatia into Bosnia and Herzegovina , where a new conflict was anticipated , but Serbia continued to support the RSK . HV advances restored small areas to Croatian control — as the siege of Dubrovnik was lifted , and in Operation Maslenica . Croatian towns and villages were intermittently attacked by artillery , or missiles . 
 As the JNA disengaged in Croatia , its personnel prepared to set up a new Bosnian Serb army , as Bosnian Serbs declared the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992 , ahead of the 29 February – 1 March 1992 referendum on independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina — which would later be cited as a pretext for the Bosnian War . Bosnian Serbs set up barricades in the capital , Sarajevo and elsewhere on 1 March , and the next day the first fatalities of the war were recorded in Sarajevo and Doboj . In the final days of March , the Bosnian Serb army started artillery attacks on Bosanski Brod , and the HV 108th Brigade crossed the border adjacent to the town in reply . On 4 April , Serb artillery began shelling Sarajevo . Even though the war originally pitted Bosnian Serbs against non @-@ Serbs in the country , it evolved into a three @-@ sided conflict by the end of the year , as the Croat – Bosniak War started . By that time , the Bosnian Serb army — renamed Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) after the Republika Srpska state proclaimed in the Bosnian Serb @-@ held territory — controlled about 70 % of Bosnia and Herzegovina . That proportion would not change significantly over the next two years . Republika Srpska was involved in the Croatian War of Independence in a limited capacity , through military and other aid to the RSK , occasional air raids launched from Banja Luka , and most significantly through artillery attacks against urban centres . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Following a new military strategy of the United States endorsed by Bill Clinton since February 1993 , the Washington Agreement was signed by Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina in March 1994 . The agreement ended the Croat – Bosniak War and established the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The political settlement allowed the ARBiH and the HVO to deploy additional troops against the VRS in a series of small @-@ scale attacks designed to wear down the Bosnian Serb military , but the attacks claimed no territorial gains before October . The ARBiH adopted an attrition warfare strategy relying on its numerical superiority compared to the VRS , which suffered from manpower shortages . This strategy aimed for limited advances , without support of heavy weapons and means of transport — unavailable to the ARBiH at the time . 
 In March – November 1994 , the ARBiH conducted a series of attacks with relatively limited objectives , attacking the VRS at the Vlašić Mountain , the Stolice Peak of the Majevica Mountain and Donji Vakuf , as well as in the area between <unk> and Teslić , near Brčko , Kladanj , Sarajevo , on the <unk> and the <unk> Mountain , Gračanica , Vareš , Konjic and Doboj . Further efforts were made , together with the HVO , against the VRS near Nevesinje in September – November , but most of the offensives made little or no gains . At the same time , VRS attacks north of Sarajevo were successfully repulsed . It was hoped by the ARBiH General Staff that the VRS could not muster sufficient reserves to hold off the simultaneous , relatively limited attacks . Little territory changed hands as a result of the ARBiH offensive by the end of October , but the VRS shortage of troops worsened . 
 Kupres was of interest to the ARBiH and the HVO , albeit for different reasons . The HVO wanted to reverse April 1992 loss of the town , home to a significant Croat community before the war , and to control the Tomislavgrad – Bugojno – Šipovo road . The ARBiH advance towards Kupres was planned as a secondary axis of its offensive towards Donji Vakuf , 20 kilometres ( 12 miles ) to the northwest , codenamed Autumn @-@ 94 . The ARBiH wanted to deny the VRS a supply route passing through Kupres in order to weaken VRS defence around Donji Vakuf . 
 It is not clear how the ARBiH and the HVO coordinated before their advance to Kupres . Most probably , the two forces ' commands agreed on a simultaneous offensive against Kupres , without revealing actual battle plans to their counterparts . The HVO 's contribution in the offensive , codenamed Operation Cincar , was planned jointly by the HVO and the HV . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Initially , the ARBiH committed 3 @,@ 130 troops to its secondary axis — the thrust towards Kupres . They were organized with the 370th Mountain Infantry Brigade on the right flank of the 14 @-@ kilometre ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) front manned by the ARBiH 7th Corps southwest of Bugojno , and the 307th Mountain Infantry Brigade on the left flank of the ARBiH effort . In the primary attack axis zone , the ARBiH grouped about 5 @,@ 600 additional troops , facing an estimated 4 @,@ 800 VRS soldiers around Donji Vakuf . Kupres itself and the surrounding plateau were defended by approximately 2 @,@ 700 VRS troops , assigned to the 7th Motorized Infantry Brigade of the 2nd Krajina Corps , supported by corps @-@ level artillery and armour . The bulk of the HVO force consisted of troops contributed by the 1st , the 2nd and the 3rd Guards Brigades , supported by the Bosnian Croat special police and the 60th Guards Airborne Battalion " Ludvig Pavlović " . Although participation of the HV in the battle was denied by Croatia , it is thought to have likely occurred . Specifically , the 1st Croatian Guards Brigade is thought to have taken part in the battle , and Bosnian Croat reports pertaining to the battle specify the Zrinski Battalion of the brigade as taking part in the operation . The ARBiH 7th Corps was commanded by Brigadier General Mehmed Alagić , while the HVO Tomislavgrad Corps , formally in control of Operation Cincar , was commanded by Colonel Josip Černi . The VRS 2nd Krajina Corps was under command of Colonel Radivoje Tomanić . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = October = = = 
 The ARBiH launched the secondary axis of Operation Autumn @-@ 94 — drive towards Kupres — at 2 am on 20 October , hours after the primary attacking force started moving against Donji Vakuf . As the primary effort of the ARBiH offensive bogged down the same day , Kupres became the main objective . The 317th Mountain Infantry Brigade was added to augment the ARBiH force that made initial advances towards Kupres . The next day , as the ARBiH gradually advanced , elements of the 305th Mountain Brigade were also sent as reinforcements to the attacking force . By 23 October , the ARBiH moved close enough to Kupres to direct heavy mortar fire against the town . On 25 October , the ARBiH 7th Corps requested a meeting with the HVO Tomislavgrad Corps representatives to coordinate further advances in the area , however the HVO postponed the meeting until after 28 October due to replacement of the Tomislavgrad Corps commanding officer . On 27 October , the ARBiH 37th Light Infantry Brigade was added to the attack , slowly progressing from one mountain ridge to the next . In addition , elements of the 27th Mountain Infantry Brigade and a battalion of the 7th Conscripted Mountain Infantry Brigade joined the ARBiH push . On 28 November , the ARBiH General Staff committed a guards brigade attached to the General Staff to the battle . 
 Since the beginning of the ARBiH offensive , the HVO had been assembling three of its four guards brigades under command of General Ante Roso , as well as other supporting units , including the 60th Guards Airborne Battalion . On 29 October , the Ministry of Defence of the Croatian Republic of Herzeg @-@ Bosnia and the HVO General Staff met and decided to launch Operation Cincar to capture the town of Kupres . The decision was reportedly motivated by a desire to consolidate territory controlled by the HVO around Kupres and by the strategic importance of the Kupres plateau , which commanded the northern approaches to the HVO @-@ held Livanjsko field . The operation was originally scheduled for 31 October at 4 : 30 am , only to be postponed by 24 hours , as the HVO needed more time to prepare . Delayed arrival of reconnaissance teams further postponed the HVO offensive until 8 am on 1 November 1994 . 
 = = = November = = = 
 The HVO advanced north along two main axes of attack . The western axis advanced from Šuica along the main road towards Kupres , capturing the village of Donji Malovan on 1 November . The eastern axis of the HVO offensive moved from Ravno towards Rilić . Just as the HVO began to move north , the ARBiH suspended its westward advance . Various explanations for the pause were put forward , including fog , rain , need to secure territorial gains , wear of equipment and fatigue of personnel . Regardless , that day the President of Bosnia and Herzegovina Alija Izetbegović telephoned Alagić requesting an adequate level of cooperation and avoidance of any conflicts with the HVO . Finally , Alagić made a public call to the HVO to participate in the offensive against the VRS in Kupres . The same day , the VRS targeted Bugojno using two 9K52 Luna @-@ M missiles . 
 On 2 November , the HVO captured Gornji Malovan and Rilić , while the Serb civilian population started to evacuate from Kupres . Alagić visited the HVO Tomislavgrad Corps headquarters to discuss cooperation , but refused to discuss the matter , citing inadequate officers present there , and proposed a new meeting at 11 pm that day at the ARBiH 317th Brigade headquarters in Gornji Vakuf . The Chief of the HVO General Staff , Major General Tihomir Blaškić made a written apology on behalf of the HVO claiming the HVO officers had to be elsewhere at the time . A new meeting took place as proposed by Alagić . The meeting concluded at 3 am , with an agreement between Alagić and Černi to withdraw some of the ARBiH troops on the right flank of the HVO thrust to allow the HVO to strike Kupres from that direction , and coordinate their further advances beyond Kupres . Although cooperation was established , there was no joint command of the ARBiH and the HVO . 
 The ARBiH pullback was completed by 11 am on 3 November , while the right flank of the ARBiH force pressed forward to capture the Kupreška Vrata Pass , 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 miles ) away from Kupres . The Bosnian Croat special police and the 60th Guards Airborne Battalion entered Kupres shortly after noon , and the HVO completed capture of the town by 1 : 30 pm . The HVO proceeded to capture nearly the entire Kupres plateau , bringing the 1st , the 79th and the 80th Home Guards Regiments of the HVO to hold defensive positions on the plateau . The VRS was unable to counter @-@ attack in a timely manner , because it had no reserves in place for the task . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The ARBiH significantly shortened its positions held opposite the VRS and captured 130 square kilometres ( 50 square miles ) of territory , while the HVO captured nearly 400 square kilometres ( 150 square miles ) of the area around Kupres . Battle losses of the ARBiH amounted to 41 killed in action and 162 wounded troops . By 3 November , 4 HVO troops were killed and 15 wounded , and further 3 soldiers died and 5 were wounded in a VRS counter @-@ attack near Zlosela at 11 am on 4 November . 
 The Battle of Kupres was the first concrete result of the renewed Bosniak – Croat alliance in the Bosnian War , and the advance to Kupres was the first military effort coordinated between the ARBiH and the HVO since the Washington Agreement . Following the victory , morale of the ARBiH and the HVO soared . Further advantages for them were the recapture of initiative from the VRS and full control of the Split – Livno – Kupres – Bugojno road , allowing improved logistics of the ARBiH and the HVO in the area , as well as greater volume of transport of arms and ammunition , especially after the United States unilaterally ended the arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina in November 1994 . The move in effect allowed the HV to supply itself as the arms shipments flowed through Croatia . Finally , the outcome of the Battle of Kupres secured the right flank of the Livanjsko field , which became especially significant later that month when Operation Winter ' 94 was launched by the HV and the HVO northwest of Livno in order to draw off a part of the force besieging Bihać and prevent capture of Bihać by the VRS . The battle is considered to be a significant contribution to subsequent success of the HV in the Croatian War of Independence and the Bosnian War . 
 = Kepler @-@ 4 = 
 Kepler @-@ 4 is a sunlike star located about 1631 light @-@ years away in the constellation Draco . It is in the field of view of the Kepler Mission , a NASA operation purposed with finding Earth @-@ like planets . Kepler @-@ 4b , a Neptune @-@ sized planet that orbits extremely close to its star , was discovered in its orbit and made public by the Kepler team on January 4 , 2010 . Kepler @-@ 4b was the first discovery by the Kepler satellite , and its confirmation helped to demonstrate the spacecraft 's effectiveness . 
 = = Nomenclature and history = = 
 Kepler @-@ 4 is named for the Kepler spacecraft , a NASA telescope tasked with finding Earth @-@ like planets that transit their stars as seen from Earth . As the previous three planets that Kepler confirmed had already been confirmed by other finds , Kepler @-@ 4 and its planet were the first to be discovered by the Kepler team . The star and its system were announced in Washington , D.C. at the 215th meeting of the American Astronomical Society on January 4 , 2010 , along with Kepler @-@ 5 , Kepler @-@ 6 , Kepler @-@ 7 , and Kepler @-@ 8 . Of the presented planets , Kepler @-@ 4b was the smallest , around the size of planet Neptune . The discovery of Kepler @-@ 4b and the other planets presented at the AAS meeting helped to confirm that the Kepler spacecraft was indeed functional . 
 The Harlan J. Smith Telescope at McDonald Observatory in Fort Davis , Texas was used by astronomers from the University of Texas at Austin to follow up on Kepler 's discoveries and confirm them . Telescopes in Hawaii , California , Arizona , and the Canary Islands were also used to confirm the findings . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 4 is a G0 @-@ type star , which is similar to the Sun , except slightly brighter . The star is 1 @.@ 092 Msun and 1 @.@ 533 Rsun , or 109 % the mass of and 153 % the radius of the Sun . With a metallicity of <unk> ( ± 0 @.@ 06 ) [ Fe / H ] , Kepler @-@ 4 is more metal @-@ rich than the Sun by 48 % , a figure that is important in that metal @-@ rich stars tend to have orbiting planets more often than metal @-@ poor stars . Kepler @-@ 4 is also 4 @.@ 5 ( ± 1 @.@ 5 ) billion years old . In comparison , the Sun is 4 @.@ 6 billion years old . In addition , Kepler @-@ 4 has an effective temperature of <unk> ( ± 76 ) K , which is almost identical , within the errors , to that of the Sun , which is 5778 K. 
 As seen from Earth , Kepler @-@ 4 has an apparent magnitude of 12 @.@ 7 . It is , as a result , not visible with the naked eye . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 Kepler @-@ 4b 's discovery was announced on January 4 , 2010 . It is the size of planet Neptune , at 0 @.@ 077 MJ ( 7 % the mass of Jupiter ) and 0 @.@ 357 RJ ( 36 % the radius of Jupiter ) . The planet orbits its star every 3 @.@ 214 days at 0 @.@ 045 AU from the star . This distance compares to planet Mercury , which is 0 @.@ 39 AU from the Sun . Kepler @-@ 4 's eccentricity was assumed to be 0 , however a subsequent independent reanalysis of the discovery data found a value of 0 @.@ 25 ± 0 @.@ 12 . Likewise , the temperature of the planet is assumed to be 1650 K , far hotter than Jupiter 's , which is assumed to be 124 K ( not considering its internal heat and atmosphere ) . 
 = Gary Suter = 
 Gary Lee Suter ( born June 24 , 1964 ) is an American former professional ice hockey defenseman who played over 1 @,@ 000 games in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) between 1985 and 2002 . He was a ninth round selection of the Calgary Flames , 180th overall , at the 1984 NHL Entry Draft and played with Calgary for nine years . He won the Calder Memorial Trophy as the NHL 's top rookie in 1986 , played in four All @-@ Star Games and was a member of Calgary 's Stanley Cup championship team in 1989 . He was traded to the Chicago Blackhawks in 1994 , then to the San Jose Sharks in 1998 , with whom he finished his career . 
 Suter played with the United States National Team on numerous occasions . He appeared in two World Championships and two Canada Cup tournaments . He was a member of the American team that won the inaugural World Cup of Hockey in 1996 and was a two @-@ time Olympian , winning a silver medal in 2002 . Suter is an honored member of the United States Hockey Hall of Fame , inducted in 2011 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Suter was born on June 24 , 1964 , in Madison , Wisconsin . He is the youngest of five children , all of whom were heavily involved in sports . Gary followed his three elder brothers , John , Bob and Steve into hockey , while his sister was a figure skater . Their father Marlow was a senior player in the 1950s , and helped found and coach the Madison Capitols minor hockey system that all four boys played with in their youth . Gary idolized his brother Bob , who was a member of the American " Miracle on Ice " team that won the gold medal at the 1980 Winter Olympics . 
 After playing his junior and senior seasons of high school hockey with the Culver Military Academy , Suter joined the Dubuque Fighting Saints program in the United States Hockey League ( USHL ) . He appeared in 18 games with the Fighting Saints in the 1981 – 82 season , recording 3 goals and 7 points . He was eligible for the 1982 NHL Entry Draft , but listed at five feet , nine inches tall by the Central Scouting Bureau , was considered too small for the NHL and went undrafted . Suter established himself as one of the first star players in the USHL 's junior era , improving to 39 points in 41 games in 1982 – 83 and leading Dubuque to the Clark Cup championship . The team 's captain , he also led Dubuque to a national junior championship . He was again passed over by the NHL in the 1983 Draft , but accepted a full scholarship to play at the University of Wisconsin – Madison . 
 Suter was the third member of his family to play defence for the Wisconsin Badgers , following brothers John and Bob . He appeared in 34 games in 1983 – 84 , scoring 22 points . Ian McKenzie , coordinator of scouting for the Calgary Flames , noticed Suter 's play at Wisconsin and that he had added over two inches of height , which Central Scouting had failed to update in its record on him . The Flames picked Suter with their ninth round selection , 180th overall , in the 1984 Draft . Suter , who had been working in a beer factory , was initially disappointed at his selection . He was in his last year of draft eligibility and was hoping to follow other college players who signed lucrative contracts as free agents after going unselected . Following his sophomore season of 1984 – 85 , in which he recorded 51 points in 39 games for Wisconsin , Suter left Wisconsin to turn professional . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 The departure of Kari <unk> prior to the 1985 – 86 NHL season created an opening on the Flames ' defense . Suter excelled in training camp and not only earned a spot on the team , he was quickly recognized by head coach Bob Johnson as the team 's best overall defenseman . He scored his first two goals in his second NHL game , a 9 – 2 victory over the Los Angeles Kings , and by mid @-@ season was among the league 's rookie scoring leaders . He was one of two first @-@ year players ( along with Wendel Clark ) to play in the 1986 All @-@ Star Game , while his offensive production and ability to play in all situations made him a top contender for the Calder Memorial Trophy . Suter finished the season with 18 goals , and his 68 points tied Al MacInnis for the team lead for scoring among defensemen . He added ten points in ten playoff games , but was knocked out of the postseason in the Smythe Division Final against the Edmonton Oilers after suffering stretched knee ligaments following a hit by Mark Messier . Suter watched as the Flames reached , and ultimately lost , the 1986 Stanley Cup Final to the Montreal Canadiens . Following the season , he was named to the All @-@ Rookie Team on defense and was voted the winner of the Calder Trophy . Suter was the third American @-@ born player to win the award , given to the NHL 's top rookie . 
 The knee injury hampered Suter throughout much of the 1986 – 87 season ; he attempted to play through it , but ultimately missed 12 games . Nonetheless , he still scored 49 points in 68 games played . Healthy for 1987 – 88 , Suter had the finest season of his career . His 70 assists and 91 points were the highest single season totals he would record in his career . He played in his second All @-@ Star Game , was named a Second Team All @-@ Star and was a finalist for the James Norris Memorial Trophy as the NHL 's top defenseman . Suter appeared in his third All @-@ Star Game in 1988 – 89 , but missed 16 games after undergoing an emergency appendectomy . He had 62 points in 63 games . As had happened in 1986 , Suter was injured in the early stages of a deep post @-@ season run by the Flames . He missed most of the 1989 Stanley Cup Playoffs after suffering a broken jaw in Calgary 's opening round series against the Vancouver Canucks . He watched as the team won the Stanley Cup in six games over Montreal . 
 Suter reached the 70 point mark in the next two seasons , finishing with 76 in 1989 – 90 and 70 in 1990 – 91 . His latter campaign earned him his fourth All @-@ Star Game appearance . Suter also played much of the season while awaiting trial after he was arrested following a June 1990 scuffle with police as they tried to arrest fellow NHL player Chris Chelios . The issue was resolved in February 1991 when he agreed to a plea bargain on reduced charges and paid an $ 8 @,@ 250 fine . A knee injury caused Suter to miss ten games in 1991 – 92 , but he reached two milestones during the season . He scored his 100th career goal on February 25 , 1992 , against the Buffalo Sabres , and played in his 500th game on March 12 against the Philadelphia Flyers . 
 A career @-@ high 23 goals led Suter 's 81 @-@ point campaign in 1992 – 93 , but he again struggled with a pair of knee injuries that caused him to miss three months of the 1993 – 94 season and limited him to 25 games for the Flames . His tenure with Calgary ended on March 10 , 1994 , when the team included him in a six @-@ player trade . The Flames sent Suter , along with Paul Ranheim and Ted Drury , to the Hartford Whalers in exchange for James Patrick , Zarley Zalapski and Michael Nylander . The move surprised Suter : " Calgary 's meant a great deal to me . You always hear how trades are part of the game and that you don 't have any control over them . When it happens , it 's a shock . It just blows me away . " 
 = = = Chicago Blackhawks = = = 
 Suter 's tenure with the Whalers lasted only one day , as Hartford immediately dealt him to the Chicago Blackhawks along with Randy <unk> and a draft pick for Frantisek Kucera and Jocelyn Lemieux . Suter appeared in 16 regular season games with the Blackhawks , finishing the season with 41 games played and 18 points combined between Calgary and Chicago . He quickly established a place alongside Chris Chelios as the team 's top defensive pair . In his first full season in Chicago , Suter was looked upon to serve as a team leader and played a key role with the team 's power play . He appeared in all 48 games of the lockout @-@ shortened 1994 – 95 season , scoring 37 points , but missed several playoff games after suffering a broken hand against the Vancouver Canucks . 
 With 67 points in 1995 – 96 , Suter was named to an All @-@ Star Team for the fifth time , but a knee injury prevented him from participating in the contest . The 1996 – 97 season was one of frustration for Suter , as he battled a season @-@ long slump that saw him go 26 games without scoring goal at one point early in the season , then 21 games without a point late . He finished with 28 points , compared to an average of 69 in his previous nine campaigns . 
 In the final year of his contract with Chicago , Suter improved to 42 points in 1997 – 98 . When attempts to negotiate a new deal during the season failed , the team publicly shopped his playing rights around the league late in the season but failed to complete a trade . Chicago 's best contract offer was a two @-@ year proposal that would have paid Suter $ 1 @.@ 85 million per season . Unable to reach terms following the season , the Blackhawks quietly traded his negotiating rights to the San Jose Sharks for a ninth round pick a few days before he would have become an unrestricted free agent . He signed a three @-@ year contract worth $ 10 million with San Jose . 
 = = = San Jose Sharks = = = 
 Suter played only one game for the Sharks in the 1998 – 99 season , missing virtually the entire campaign after a microbe in his triceps caused an infection that required three surgeries to alleviate . During treatment , doctors also discovered a hole in his heart that required another surgery to correct . At 35 years old , Suter said he never contemplated retirement due to the ailments as he wanted to repay the Sharks for their support of him . He agreed to defer a portion of his salary that year to allow San Jose to sign a replacement player . Suter returned for the 1999 – 2000 season healthy and played over 20 minutes per game as San Jose 's most experienced defenseman . 
 Reaching a career milestone , Suter played in his 1,000th NHL game on October 25 , 2000 , scoring a goal in a 3 – 1 victory over the Columbus Blue Jackets . He said the achievement meant a lot to him given both the ailments he overcame and that he was dismissed by critics as unlikely to play in the NHL when he was drafted in 1984 . Suter finished the regular season with 34 points , but missed nearly the entire playoffs after suffering a concussion in the Sharks ' first post @-@ season game . 
 Signing a new one @-@ year contract , Suter returned to San Jose for a final season in 2001 – 02 in which he scored 33 points , including his 200th career goal , against the Philadelphia Flyers on January 2 , 2002 . He announced his retirement as a player following the season . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Suter made his international debut with the American national junior team at the 1984 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships where he recorded a goal and an assist in seven games . He was playing college hockey with Wisconsin when he made his debut with the senior team at the 1985 World Championship . One of his team 's top players in the tournament , he was named co @-@ MVP of Team USA . Suter played in a second World Championship in 1992 . 
 His international career was marred by three controversial incidents . Suter was the target of international criticism following a vicious incident during the 1987 Canada Cup in a game against the Soviet Union . Following a physical battle with Andrei <unk> , Suter was speared in the neck by the Soviet player . He retaliated with a " baseball swing " that broke his stick across <unk> 's face , causing a gash that required 20 stitches to close . Suter was given a six @-@ game suspension from international competition by the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) , while the NHL assessed a four @-@ game ban of its own . Suter was again vilified in the 1991 Canada Cup tournament after he knocked Canada 's Wayne Gretzky out of the tournament with a check @-@ from @-@ behind in the first game of the best @-@ of @-@ three final . Gretzky forgave Suter for the hit , noting that he was usually a clean player . In the second game , he was responsible for two turnovers that led to goals , including what proved to be the championship @-@ winning marker in a 4 – 2 victory for Canada . Suter was a member of the American team that won the inaugural World Cup of Hockey in 1996 . 
 The third incident occurred during an NHL game shortly before the 1998 Winter Olympic tournament while Suter was a member of the Chicago Blackhawks . In a game against the Anaheim Ducks , he cross @-@ checked Paul Kariya in the head as the latter player celebrated a goal . The hit knocked Kariya , who was expected to represent Canada , out of the Olympic tournament . Suter was given a four @-@ game suspension by the NHL that carried through the Olympic tournament . However , the IIHF allowed him to play in a decision that incensed Canadian officials and resulted in Suter receiving a death threat from an angry Canadian fan . 
 At the age of 38 and in the final season of his playing career , Suter appeared in his second Olympics , playing in the 2002 tournament at Salt Lake City . He recorded one assist in six games for the silver @-@ medal @-@ winning American team . The medal came 22 years after his brother Bob 's gold in 1980 . In recognition of his career and achievements , Suter was inducted into the United States Hockey Hall of Fame in 2011 . 
 = = Off the ice = = 
 Suter returned to Wisconsin following his playing career , settling in the rural community of <unk> where he and his wife Cathy raised their family . They have two sons , Jake and Jared , both of whom also play hockey . Jake is currently a defenseman for the UMass Lowell River Hawks . In addition to his sons , several of Suter 's nephews are also defensemen . Among them is Bob 's son Ryan , who also plays in the NHL and is an Olympian , and whom Gary considered <unk> to play with when the younger Suter was drafted by the Nashville Predators in 2003 . Instead , he turned to coaching , working with the Madison Capitols program , as well as assisting with the Lakeland Union High School T @-@ Birds in <unk> . Gary is one of several members of the Suter family who operate a youth hockey camp in Madison that was held for the 17th year in 2012 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 = Un @-@ Break My Heart = 
 " Un @-@ Break My Heart " is the second single performed by American recording artist Toni Braxton , from her second studio album , Secrets ( 1996 ) . The ballad was written by Diane Warren . Braxton expressed a dislike for the song ; however , L.A. Reid was able to convince the singer to record it and include on her album . It was released as the second single from the album in October 1996 , through LaFace Records . Lyrically , the song alludes to a " blistering heartbreak " in which Braxton begs a former lover to return and undo the pain he has caused . It won a Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance in 1997 . 
 " Un @-@ Break My Heart " attained commercial success worldwide . In the United States , the song reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , where it stayed a total of eleven weeks , while reaching the same position on the Hot Dance Club Songs and Adult Contemporary component charts . When Billboard celebrated their 40 years charting from 1958 to 1998 , the song was declared as the most successful song by a solo artist in the Billboard Hot 100 history . In Europe , the song reached the top five in more than ten countries while peaking at number one in Austria , Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Sweden , and Switzerland . 
 Bille Woodruff directed the accompanying video for the single . It portrays Braxton mourning the death of her lover , while remembering the good times they had together . Braxton performed the song on the opening ceremony of the 1996 Billboard Music Awards . " Un @-@ Break My Heart " has been covered by several artists , including American alternative rock band Weezer on the album Death to False Metal . 
 = = Background = = 
 Diane Warren wrote " Un @-@ Break My Heart " in 1995 . When asked about her songwriting process , she said that songs usually come to her from a title , a chorus , or a drum beat . " Un @-@ Break My Heart " was conceived from its title , and , according to Warren , " it popped into my head , and I thought , ' I don 't think I 've heard that before , that 's kind of interesting . ' I started playing around on the piano with these chords and did a key change , and then I knew , ' OK , this is magic . ' " Warren further explained that she wrote " Un @-@ Break My Heart " as a ballad and dance song , because that was the way she heard it . She said : " some people only know it as a – gay – dance song ! " 
 When Warren played the finished song to Arista Records ' president L.A. Reid , he thought it would fit Braxton 's then upcoming album . When " Un @-@ Break My Heart " was sent to Braxton , she expressed dislike for the song . According to Warren , " Toni hated the song . She didn 't want to do it . " Reid was able to convince Braxton to record it , and later it became her signature song . Following the recording sessions of the song , Braxton approached Warren and explained why she was skeptical about recording it , further explaining that she didn 't want another " heartbreak track " . 
 Recording sessions occurred at The Record Plant and <unk> Studios in Los Angeles , California in the same year . " Un @-@ Break My Heart " was released as the second single from Secrets on November 11 , 1996 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Produced by David Foster , " Un @-@ Break My Heart " is a four minute @-@ 25 second pop and R & B power ballad . The song 's theme alludes to a " blistering heartbreak " in which Braxton begs a former lover to return and undo the pain he has caused . According to sheet music published by <unk> at Musicnotes.com , the verses of " Un @-@ Break My Heart " are composed in the key of B minor , and the piece modulates to D minor for the chorus and G @-@ sharp minor for the bridge ; the song is set in a time signature of common time with a moderately slow tempo of 55 beats per minute . Braxton 's vocal range spans from the low @-@ key of B2 to the high @-@ note of E ♭ 5 . David Willoughby , author of The World of Music ( 2009 ) , said a few phrases such as " Don 't leave me in all this pain " are sufficient to reveal the " sadness and the longing " in the song . 
 The song was remixed by several DJs such as Hex Hector and Soul Solution . As noted by Jose F. Promis of Allmusic , the song " in its original form , was a massive adult contemporary and pop hit , and , with its larger @-@ than @-@ life chorus , worked equally well as an unstoppable dance number , even if the vocals were never re @-@ recorded . " The " Soul @-@ Hex Vocal Anthem " remix , with a length over nine minutes , was influenced by tribal house music ; while the " Classic Radio Mix " is a piano @-@ driven house music edit . A Spanish version of " Un @-@ Break My Heart " , titled " <unk> a Mi " , was included as a bonus track on Secrets . MusicOMH contributor Uma <unk> considered it " an easy listen " version " that encapsulates the passion and meaning of the original but opens it up to a wider audience . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Spin journalist Charles Aaron positively reviewed the song and joked : " this exquisitely crafted , heart @-@ pumping l @-@ u @-@ v song has been droning in the produce department of my grocery store for about a year now , but I 'd just like to go on record as saying that if it ever stops , I 'll really be heartbroken . " Bob McCann , author of Encyclopedia of African American actresses in film and television ( 2010 ) , considered it " simply one of the most haunting R & B records ever made " , while Robert Christgau named it " miraculous " and explained " the miracle being that it 's by Diane Warren and you want to hear it again . " About.com reviewer Mark Edward Nero named it one of the best R & B break @-@ up songs and considered it Braxton 's " finest moment " . He further commented , " damn , this song is so sad it can make people cry for hours at a time . " In 1997 , " Un @-@ Break My Heart " won a Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance . 
 While reviewing the album , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said the songs produced by David Foster are too predictable due to their " slick commercial appeal " . However , Erlewine noted that Braxton " manages to infuse the songs with life and passion that elevates them beyond their generic confines " due to her vocal ability . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly considered the track " a tearjerker so grandiose and yet so intrinsically , assuredly hit @-@ bound , it 's the kind of mass @-@ appeal grabber that 's probably already sent a jealous Diana Ross diving for a comfort gallon of Häagen @-@ Dazs . " Tucker also named it the worst track on Secrets , and further stated : " Un @-@ Break My Heart " is " one of those the @-@ verses @-@ exist @-@ only @-@ for @-@ the @-@ swelling @-@ chorus showstoppers that allude to emotions without ever actually embodying them . Braxton does her <unk> to plug some life into the song , to no avail " . J.D. Considine of The Baltimore Sun described " Un @-@ Break My Heart " as " overblown " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United States , " Un @-@ Break My Heart " managed to peak at number one on Billboard Hot 100 for eleven weeks , from the week of December 7 , 1996 to the week of February 15 @,@ 1997 , and stayed in the same position on the Adult Contemporary chart for fourteen weeks . It sold 2 @.@ 4 million copies domestically and was certified platinum by the RIAA . " Un @-@ Break My Heart " also achieved commercial success worldwide , reaching number one in Austria , Belgium ( Wallonia ) , the European Hot 100 Singles , Sweden , and Switzerland , while reaching the top five in several European countries . 
 In the week of November 4 , 1996 , the song debuted at number four in the UK Singles Chart , reaching a peak at number two after seven weeks on the chart . According to the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , it has shipped over 600 @,@ 000 copies there , being certified Platinum . In Australia , the song peaked at number six , and was later certified Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , for shipments of more than 70 @,@ 000 units of the single . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 LaFace Records commissioned a music video to be directed by Bille Woodruff . The concept evolves around the ending of Braxton 's relationship with her lover , played by model Tyson Beckford . As the video begins , Beckford is seen leaving their home , with Braxton giving him a goodbye kiss , then going to check the mailbox . After he leaves the garage , a fast car suddenly appears and causes an accident , leaving him lying on the street while Braxton cries over his body . She then walks around the house , remembering the good moments she had with him , such as swimming in the pool and playing Twister . During the bridge and final chorus , Braxton is seen singing the song during a live concert , an allusion to the film " A Star is Born " . As applause rises , the video fades to black . The music video premiered on September 10 , 1996 on MTV . 
 = = = Live performances and covers = = = 
 " Un @-@ Break My Heart " was performed during the opening of the 1996 Billboard Music Awards . During the up @-@ tempo rendition of the track , Braxton sported an outfit similar to the ones of theatrical productions Ziegfeld Follies . She also performed it as the closing number of the Libra Tour ( 2006 ) . 
 Saxophonist Marion Meadows covered the song for his album Pleasure in 1997 , while Filipino singer Nina recorded her own version of it for her 2008 album Nina Sings the Hits of Diane Warren . Italian group Il Divo cover of the Spanish version of the track received positive appreciation from critics , who said the cover " has the potential to be a hit and to open doors for many of opera 's most acclaimed stars . " American alternative rock band Weezer also covered " Un @-@ Break My Heart " in 2005 . Their version was released on the album Death to False Metal in 2010 . Lead vocalist Rivers Cuomo explained why the band covered the track : 
 " I loved that song . It was actually Rick Rubin 's suggestion . We both loved that song and we both thought it would be great for Weezer , and for my voice , and it ’ d be great to do like a rock version of it with more of an alternative aesthetic . And you know , just the way I would sing it versus in the way Toni Braxton would sing it . And I love the way it came out , and I think probably the rest of the band really does not like it , and that ’ s probably why it didn ’ t make our fifth record , in 2005 when we were recording it . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = One by One ( Foo Fighters album ) = 
 One by One is the fourth studio album by alternative rock band Foo Fighters , released on October 22 , 2002 by RCA . The album is the first to feature guitarist Chris Shiflett . Production on the album was troubled , with initial recording sessions considered unsatisfying and raising tensions between the band members . They eventually decided to redo the album from scratch during a two @-@ week period at frontman Dave Grohl 's home studio in Alexandria , Virginia . The songs on the album , which include the successful singles " All My Life " and " Times Like These " , have been noted for their introspective lyrics and a heavier and more aggressive sound compared to the band 's earlier work , which Grohl said was intended to translate the energy of the Foo Fighters ' live performances into a recording . 
 The album was a commercial success , topping the charts in Australia , Ireland and the United Kingdom and sold over one million copies in the United States . One by One was positively received by critics , winning a Grammy Award for Best Rock Album in 2004 — the second Grammy Award for Best Rock Album won by the band — and praised for its sound and production . However , some considered the work inferior to the band 's previous albums , and the musicians themselves eventually grew distasteful of the record as a whole . 
 = = Production = = 
 Following the extended tour promoting There Is Nothing Left to Lose , which kept the Foo Fighters mostly on the road between 1999 and 2001 , the band started to compose songs for their next album in early 2001 . After demo work in drummer Taylor Hawkins ' home studio in Topanga , the band used the second quarter of 2001 to perform in European festivals . In August , after performing in Chelmsford 's V Festival , Hawkins suffered a heroin overdose that left him in a coma for two days . After taking time off to recover , during which frontman Dave Grohl accepted an offer to play drums for the Queens of the Stone Age on their album Songs for the Deaf , the band got together in October 2001 to continue composition . During November and December , they had been recording at Grohl 's Studio 606 in Alexandria , Virginia , working with both the producer for their previous album , Adam Kasper , and recording engineer Nick Raskulinecz , whom they met after he had engineered " A320 " for Godzilla : The Album . Raskulinecz had just left his job at Sound City Studios , and speculated that Grohl , having found difficulty in ' finding a guy who would commit to sitting in his basement for four months ' , picked him for his energetic and enthusiastic nature . 
 The progress of the Virginia sessions started to become stale , so with six tracks finished , in January 2002 the band moved to Los Angeles ' Conway Studios for a " change of scenery " . 29 songs were recorded , including " The One " — featured in the film Orange County and released as a standalone single — and ten finished tracks that were considered for the upcoming album . The sessions took four months and were at the cost of over US $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . It was the first Foo Fighters album to use Pro @-@ Tools and have each instrument recorded separately . 
 The recording sessions were considered unsatisfying ; Hawkins said that " nobody had their studio chops together " , and Grohl considered that the band was lacking enthusiasm and were too focused on production , adding that he felt the rough mixes " sucked a lot of the life out of the songs " and " sound [ e ] d like another band playing our songs . Tensions were escalating , as arguments broke out at the studio , and Hawkins said he " didn 't feel we were much of a band " as there was much animosity among the bandmembers . Bassist Nate Mendel said that he was in a bad attitude during the sessions due to disagreements with Grohl , and guitarist Chris Shiflett added that he felt he would at times spend whole days in the studio without playing anything . 
 The band also showed disappointment with the ten songs that emerged from the sessions , as Hawkins described the finished tracks as " million @-@ dollar demos " , and Grohl considered the recordings " far too clean , too tame and boring " . The band only liked five of the ten songs , and thought that listeners would enjoy the other five anyway . Grohl was afraid to promote the album because of his lack of confidence in it . After manager John Silva listened to the recordings , he agreed that it was not a work that represented the band well , and that " we can release it now , but I don 't know if anyone would want to buy it " . 
 In April 2002 , the band discarded the recordings and took a break . The members then each started individual projects : Grohl became the full @-@ time Queens of the Stone Age drummer for a tour , Shiflett started the Viva Death and Jackson projects with his brother Scott and rejoined his former band Me First and the Gimme Gimmes , Hawkins played with Jane 's Addiction bassist Eric Avery , and Mendel both played with Juno and reunited with his former bandmate William Goldsmith in The Fire Theft . Later on April , they reunited for the Foo Fighters ' scheduled concert at the 2002 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , which Grohl felt could be the last the band would perform . During the rehearsals , the tensions broke out in huge fights , specially between Grohl and Hawkins . The musicians decided to at least perform in Coachella before deciding whether to continue playing together or end the band . After enjoying their performance , the bandmembers decided to remain united and returned to re @-@ recording the album . 
 Grohl decided to take a two @-@ week period before the QOTSA went on tour to work on the Foo Fighters record , and after consulting Raskulinecz decided to promote him to producer . First , Grohl visited Hawkins in Topanga to rework the songs that had already been done and show new compositions , such as " Times Like These " , " Low " , and " Disenchanted Lullaby " . Then Grohl and Hawkins went to Virginia to redo the drum , vocal and guitar tracks across a twelve @-@ day period , and Mendel and Shiflett were later called to record their parts in Los Angeles ' The Hook Studios , which were mostly done with the supervision of Raskulinecz , as Grohl had to go back to QOTSA . The only remaining track from the original sessions was " Tired of You " , which features a guest appearance by Queen guitarist Brian May . Two of the demos would leak online in 2012 , with the other five unreleased demos being leaked on Reddit in 2015 . 
 The title One by One — taken from a lyric on " All My Life " , and for which the spelling 1 X 1 was also considered — was chosen according to Grohl because " it somehow made sense " , and even worked as a reference to relationships — " one person by another person , or one after another " . The singer added that the word one is frequently used in the album 's lyrics , meaning either loneliness or continuation . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Upon its release , One by One was considered the band 's heaviest album , as Grohl described the sound as a darker and more aggressive approach as opposed to the band 's usual work . Grohl said that the album mainly focused on the energy of live performances , which he attributed to both the extensive touring preceding the compositions , and the short period during which the re @-@ recordings were done . The frontman added that although the previous albums had songs which were never played live , the track listing on One by One was compared to a set list where he would play all songs every night . As the results of the early recording sessions had manager John Silva complimenting the songs that did not sound like the band 's previous work , and suggesting Grohl to " stop trying to write hit singles and go back to being weird " , the band decided to be more experimental in addition to writing music meant to be played in full arenas . The variety included moody songs such as " Have It All " and " Tired of You " , the seven @-@ minute " epic opus " album closer " Come Back " , and the alternating dynamics of " Halo " , which drew inspiration from Tom Petty , Cheap Trick and Guided by Voices . Grohl added that the sonority tried to blend dissonance and melody : " We figured we 're gonna get mean , we 're gonna get ugly . And then I end up putting this four @-@ part harmony on it , and all of sudden it 's beautiful . Like ' wait a second , it was supposed to be gross , and now it 's gorgeous ' . " 
 While in previous records Grohl tried to not get introspective in his lyrics , for One by One he found himself writing lyrics that matched the " emotional level we were hinting with the music " , such as " Come Back " , with words " revealing all these dark , shitty sides of myself " . The lyrics to a song were usually done after finishing the vocal track for another . Grohl described the track listing as " 11 tortured love songs " , with a major theme of " surrendering to yourself " , and a sequencing that described the difficult beginnings of falling in love , and then the relief of feeling comfortable in love . A major inspiration was Grohl 's new girlfriend Jordyn Blum , as well as the troubled times with the band , demonstrated in " Times Like These " , which laments the absence of the Foo Fighters and ponders about their future . 
 = = Packaging and versions = = 
 The album artwork was done by Raymond Pettibon , who has worked with punk bands such as Black Flag and The Minutemen . Grohl was introduced to Pettibon by ex @-@ Minutemen bassist Mike Watt and , after visiting his house , decided to hire him for the artwork because " we had to somehow pay tribute to Pettibon as a hero , because his stuff , those images just stuck with me my whole life . " Grohl came up with the heart theme used in the booklet and related singles . The album was issued with two different covers , black and white . The first 575 @,@ 000 units comprised a limited edition with a bonus DVD . 
 A limited international edition features seven bonus tracks : the outtake " Walking a Line " , three live songs , and three covers , The Psychedelic Furs ' " Sister Europe " , the Ramones ' " Danny Says " - with Shiflett on the vocals — and Joe Walsh 's " Life of Illusion " - sung by Hawkins . A Norwegian version had an extra album with tracks recorded at the Oslo Spektrum on December 4 , 2002 . One by One was also issued as a double vinyl LP record , and a DVD @-@ Audio with 5 @.@ 1 surround sound mixes . 
 An Enhanced CD edition was released with <unk> to their official website and where to download free music . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 One by One was released on October 22 , 2002 . That same day the band started the One by One Tour with a concert at the Los Angeles Wiltern Theatre . The lead single " All My Life " had been released on September 7 , and the band issued three more songs as singles in 2003 : " Times Like These " , " Low " , and " Have It All " . BMG became partners with telecom firm O2 and music provider <unk> to promote the album in Europe with a special campaign focused on cellphones . 
 The album debuted at third place on the Billboard 200 , with 122 @,@ 000 copies sold in one week , and spent 50 overall weeks on the chart . By 2011 , One by One had sold 1 @.@ 333 million units in North America , being certified Platinum by the RIAA . The international release was also successful , with RCA announcing One by One had surpassed 2 million copies worldwide in January 2003 . The album debuted at number one in the United Kingdom , Ireland , and Australia , and outsold predecessor There Is Nothing Left to Lose in Australia , Japan and various Asian markets . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 One by One received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics . At Metacritic , a website that assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 75 , based on 19 reviews . Reviewer Jon Pareles of Rolling Stone praised the " potent guitar riffs " and the introspective themes , which he called " stronger and broader than autobiography " . NME 's April Long felt that " even the quieter moments bristle " and considered the album an affirmation of the band 's quality . Michael Paoletta of Billboard considered the album " among the band 's best work " and that the themes gave the record " an emotional intimacy that makes it all more satisfying " . Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker rated the album A- , calling it full of " unexpected exhilaration " and liking the " exploration of various relationships " on the lyrics . The Austin Chronicle reviewer praised the heavy sound of the album , saying it drifted from the light @-@ hearted tone of songs such as " Big Me " while " retaining their melodic instincts " . 
 However , many reviewers felt that the album was not up to the standards of the Foo Fighters ' previous work . Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine said that although One by One was well @-@ produced and played , it was too polished to " hit at a gut @-@ level " and that the songs were " not as immediate or memorable " as the band 's earlier compositions . Writing for PopMatters , Margaret Schwartz considered the album " ultimately unsatisfying " despite its quality writing and production , particularly for not drifting much from the band 's typical style . Stephen Thompson of The A.V. Club described One by One as " mostly middling , sticking to slick , pounding , functional rock that doesn 't dig much deeper than the usual spleen @-@ venting and loud @-@ quiet brooding @-@ to @-@ bluster formula " . BBC 's Nick Reynolds found the record inconsistent , praising the first four tracks but saying the following songs did not maintain the same quality , and concluding that although One By One is a good record , it may frustrate a listener . Eric Carr of Pitchfork Media was very critical of the album , saying it was overproduced and the songs are " weightless , antiseptic cuts " with " skillful composition " but " lacking strength and character " . 
 In 2004 , One by One won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album , while one year earlier at the 45th Grammy Awards " All My Life " was chosen as Best Hard Rock Performance . While the band had a positive opinion about the record following release , as Grohl said the songs were " the best we 've ever written " , he and the rest of the Foo Fighters eventually grew distasteful about the results . Grohl stated that he was frustrated at himself for rushing on the album : " four of the songs were good , and the other seven I never played again in my life . " Hawkins said that " if you think about things too much , they kinda get sterile , as we found out there " , and Shiflett declared that " there are great songs [ in One by One ] , and then there are ... parts of great songs " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Grohl , Taylor Hawkins , Nate Mendel and Chris Shiflett , except where noted . 
 = = = Special edition DVD = = = 
 The album was also originally released with a limited edition bonus DVD which contains : 
 " All My Life " video / 5 @.@ 1 audio / stereo audio versions 
 " Walking a Line " video / 5 @.@ 1 audio / stereo audio versions 
 " The One " 5 @.@ 1 audio / stereo audio versions 
 Extras — making of video + other clips 
 DVD @-@ ROM — screensavers , buddy icons & <unk> 
 Photo gallery 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Foo Fighters 
 Dave Grohl – lead vocals , backing vocals , rhythm guitar , lead guitar , piano on " Come Back " 
 Nate Mendel – bass 
 Taylor Hawkins – drums , percussion , lead vocals on " Life of Illusion " 
 Chris Shiflett – lead guitar , rhythm guitar , lead vocals on " Danny Says " 
 Additional musicians 
 Brian May – guitar on " Tired of You " 
 Krist Novoselic - backing vocals on " Walking a Line " 
 Gregg Bissonette - drums on " Danny Says " 
 Production 
 Producers : Foo Fighters , Nick Raskulinecz ; Adam Kasper on " Tired of You " 
 Engineer : Nick Raskulinecz 
 Mixing : Bob Ludwig , Jim Scott 
 Mastering : A.J. Lara , Bob Ludwig , Bob Michaels 
 Production coordination : Melinda Pepler 
 Digital editing : A.J. Lara 
 Authoring : Eddie Escalante 
 Quality control : <unk> Davis 
 Graphic design : <unk> <unk> 
 Photography : Anton Corbijn , Joshua White 
 Artwork : Raymond Pettibon 
 Illustrations : Raymond Pettibon , Joshua White 
 Liner notes : Hiro <unk> 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Album charts = = = 
 = = = Singles charts = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 Grammy Awards 
 = Fairchild Republic A @-@ 10 Thunderbolt II = 
 The Fairchild Republic A @-@ 10 Thunderbolt II is a single seat , twin turbofan engine , straight wing jet aircraft developed by Fairchild @-@ Republic for the United States Air Force . Commonly referred to by its nicknames " Warthog " or " Hog " , its official name comes from the Republic P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt , a fighter particularly effective at close air support . The A @-@ 10 was designed for close @-@ in support of ground troops , close air support ( CAS ) , providing quick @-@ action support for troops against helicopters , vehicles , and ground troops . It entered service in 1976 and is the only production @-@ built aircraft that has served in the USAF that was designed solely for CAS . Its secondary mission is to provide forward air controller - airborne ( FAC @-@ A ) support , by directing other aircraft in attacks on ground targets . Aircraft used primarily in this role are designated OA @-@ 10 . 
 The A @-@ 10 was intended to improve on the performance of the A @-@ 1 Skyraider and its poor firepower . The A @-@ 10 was designed around the 30 mm GAU @-@ 8 Avenger rotary cannon . Its airframe was designed for durability , with measures such as 1 @,@ 200 pounds ( 540 kg ) of titanium armor to protect the cockpit and aircraft systems , enabling it to absorb a significant amount of damage and continue flying . Its short takeoff and landing capability permits operation from airstrips close to the front lines , and its simple design enables maintenance with minimal facilities . The A @-@ 10 served in Operation Desert Shield , and Operation Desert Storm , the American intervention against Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait , where the A @-@ 10 distinguished itself . The A @-@ 10 also participated in other conflicts such as Operation Urgent Fury in Grenada , the Balkans , Afghanistan , Iraq , and against ISIL in the Middle East . 
 The A @-@ 10A single @-@ seat variant was the only version produced , though one pre @-@ production airframe was modified to become the YA @-@ 10B twin @-@ seat prototype to test an all @-@ weather night capable version . In 2005 , a program was started to upgrade remaining A @-@ 10A aircraft to the A @-@ 10C configuration with modern avionics for use of precision weaponry . With a variety of upgrades and wing replacements , the A @-@ 10 's service life may be extended to 2028 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Air Force entered the 1960s after a long period of introducing ever @-@ faster attack aircraft intended primarily for the nuclear strike role . This led to high speed designs like the F @-@ 101 Voodoo and F @-@ 105 Thunderchief , optimized for penetrating enemy airspace at high speeds to deliver a nuclear payload . Designs concentrating on conventional weapons were largely ignored , leaving their entry into the Vietnam War led by the Korean War @-@ era A @-@ 1 Skyraider . While a capable aircraft for its era , with a relatively large payload and long loiter times , the propeller driven Skyraider was also fairly slow and vulnerable to ground fire . The Air Force and Marine Corps lost 266 A @-@ 1s in action , the vast majority of these to small arms fire . 
 The lack of modern conventional attack capability led a few service members to call for a specialized attack aircraft . On 7 June 1961 , Secretary of Defense McNamara ordered the air force to develop two tactical aircraft , one for the long @-@ range strike and interdictor role , and the other focussing on the fighter @-@ bomber mission . The former became the Tactical Fighter Experimental , or TFX , which emerged as the F @-@ 111 , while the second was filled by a modified version of the US Navy 's F @-@ 4 Phantom II . While the Phantom would go on to be one of the most successful fighter designs of the 1960s , and proved as capable fighter @-@ bomber , it was clearly lacking in the pure CAS role . The lack of loiter time was a major problem , and to a lesser extent , its poor low @-@ speed performance . It was also an expensive aircraft both to purchase and operate , with a flyaway cost around $ 2 million in <unk> , and operational costs over $ 900 / hour . 
 The Air Force undertook a broad review of its tactical force structures and concluded that it should adopt a cheap aircraft to supplement the F @-@ 4 and F @-@ 111 . The Air Force first focused on the Northrop F @-@ 5 because of its air @-@ to @-@ air performance . A 1965 cost effectiveness study shifted the focus from new F @-@ 5s to cheaper LTV A @-@ <unk> , and a contract was awarded . However , this platform was soon the subject of a " gold plating " exercise that led to demands for an upgraded engine and new avionics which doubled its cost . 
 = = = Helicopter competition = = = 
 Through this period , the US Army had been introducing the UH @-@ 1 Iroquois into service . First used in its intended role as a transport , it was soon modified in the field to carry more machine guns in what became known as the helicopter gunship role . This proved so effective against the lightly armed enemy that new gun and rocket pods were quickly added to arsenal . These were all further improved with the AH @-@ 1 Cobra , dedicated to the attack role and armed with the long @-@ range TOW missile , able to destroy any tank from well outside the range of defensive fire . The platform was so effective that it led to a revolution in military thought about ways to confront the Warsaw Pact in Europe , blunting their advance using a force of anti @-@ tank helicopters instead of a large number of tactical nuclear weapons that had been the basis for NATO 's battle plans since the 1950s . 
 As the helicopter improved , Air Force planners became worried that more advanced designs like the Lockheed AH @-@ 56 Cheyenne would pose a threat to Air Force funding . A 1966 Air Force study on existing CAS capabilities revealed gaps in the escort and fire suppression roles , which the Cheyenne could fill . The study concluded that the Air Force should acquire a simple , cheap , dedicated CAS aircraft at least as capable as the A @-@ 1 , and that it should develop doctrine , tactics , and procedures for CAS aircraft to accomplish the missions for which the armed helicopters were provided . 
 = = = A @-@ X program = = = 
 In 1966 , the USAF formed the Attack Experimental ( A @-@ X ) program office . On 8 September 1966 , General McConnell ordered that a specialized CAS aircraft be designed , developed , and obtained , on 22 December a Requirements Action Directive ( RAD ) was issued for the A @-@ X CAS airplane . On 6 March 1967 , the Air Force released a request for information to 21 defense contractors for the A @-@ X. The objective was to create a design study for a low @-@ cost attack aircraft . In 1969 , the Secretary of the Air Force asked Pierre Sprey to write the detailed specifications for the proposed A @-@ X project ; Sprey 's initial involvement was kept secret due to his earlier controversial involvement in the F @-@ X project . Sprey 's discussions with Skyraider pilots operating in Vietnam and analysis of aircraft used in the role indicated the ideal aircraft should have long loiter time , low @-@ speed maneuverability , massive cannon firepower , and extreme survivability ; possessing the best elements of the Ilyushin Il @-@ 2 , Henschel Hs 129 , and Skyraider . The specifications also demanded that each aircraft cost less than $ 3 million . Sprey required that the biography of World War II Luftwaffe attack pilot Hans @-@ Ulrich Rudel be read by people on the A @-@ X program . 
 In May 1970 , the USAF issued a modified , more detailed request for proposals ( RFP ) for the aircraft . The threat of Soviet armored forces and all @-@ weather attack operations had become more serious . The requirements now included that the aircraft would be designed specifically for the 30 mm rotary cannon . The RFP also specified a maximum speed of 460 mph ( 400 kn ; 740 km / h ) , takeoff distance of 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) , external load of 16 @,@ 000 pounds ( 7 @,@ 300 kg ) , 285 @-@ mile ( 460 km ) mission radius , and a unit cost of US $ 1 @.@ 4 million . The A @-@ X would be the first USAF aircraft designed exclusively for close air support . During this time , a separate RFP was released for A @-@ X 's 30 mm cannon with requirements for a high rate of fire ( 4 @,@ 000 round / minute ) and a high muzzle velocity . Six companies submitted aircraft proposals , with Northrop and Fairchild Republic selected to build prototypes : the YA @-@ 9A and YA @-@ 10A , respectively . General Electric and Philco @-@ Ford were selected to build and test GAU @-@ 8 cannon prototypes . 
 Two YA @-@ 10 prototypes were built in the Republic factory in Farmingdale , New York and first flew on 10 May 1972 by pilot Howard " Sam " Nelson . Production A @-@ 10 's were built at Fairchild in Hagerstown , Maryland . After trials and a fly @-@ off against the YA @-@ 9 , on 18 January 1973 , the USAF announced the YA @-@ 10 's selection for production . General Electric was selected to build the GAU @-@ 8 cannon in June 1973 . The YA @-@ 10 had an additional fly @-@ off in 1974 against the Ling @-@ Temco @-@ Vought A @-@ 7D Corsair II , the principal USAF attack aircraft at the time , in order to prove the need for a new attack aircraft . The first production A @-@ 10 flew in October 1975 , and deliveries commenced in March 1976 . In total , 715 airplanes were produced , the last delivered in 1984 . 
 One experimental two @-@ seat A @-@ 10 Night Adverse Weather ( N / AW ) version was built by converting an A @-@ 10A . The N / AW was developed by Fairchild from the first Demonstration Testing and Evaluation ( DT & E ) A @-@ 10 for consideration by the USAF . It included a second seat for a weapons system officer responsible for electronic countermeasures ( ECM ) , navigation and target acquisition . The N / AW version did not interest the USAF or export customers . The two @-@ seat trainer version was ordered by the Air Force in 1981 , but funding was canceled by U.S. Congress and the jet was not produced . The only two @-@ seat A @-@ 10 built now resides at Edwards Air Force Base 's Flight Test Center Museum . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 On 10 February 1976 , Deputy Secretary of Defense Clements authorized full @-@ rate production , with the first A @-@ 10 being accepted by the Air Force Tactical Air Command on 30 March 1976 . Production continued at a rate of 15 aircraft per month , which was believed to be the best rate Fairchild could deliver . A total ( including the two prototypes ) 715 airplanes was delivered in 1984 . When A @-@ 10 full rate production was first authorized the planned service life was 6 @,@ 000 hours . A small reinforcement to the design was quickly adopted when the A @-@ 10 failed initial fatigue testing at 80 % of testing , with the fix , the A @-@ 10 passed the fatigue tests . 
 8 @,@ 000 flight hour service lives were becoming common at the time , so fatigue testing of the A @-@ 10 continued with a new 8 @,@ 000 flight hour target . Fatigue testing for the new target quickly discovered serious cracks at WS . 23 where the outboard portions of the wings are joined to the fuselage . The first production change was to add cold working at WS . 23 to address this problem . Soon after that , the Air Force determined that the real world A @-@ 10 fleet fatigue was more harsh than estimated forcing them to change their fatigue testing , introducing " spectrum 3 " equivalent flight hour testing . 
 Spectrum 3 fatigue testing started in 1979 . This round of testing quickly determined that more drastic reinforcement would be needed . The second change in production , starting with aircraft # 442 was to increase the thickness of the lower skin on the outer wing panels . A tech order was issued to retrofit the " thick skin " to the whole fleet , but the tech order was rescinded after roughly 242 planes leaving roughly 200 planes with the original " thin skin " . Starting with aircraft # 530 cold working at <unk> was performed , and this retrofit was performed on earlier aircraft . A fourth , even more drastic change was initiated with aircraft # 582 , again to address the problems discovered with spectrum 3 testing . This change increased the thickness on the lower skin on the center wing panel but it required modifications to the lower spar caps to accommodate the thicker skin . The Air Force determined that it was not economically feasible to retrofit earlier planes with this modification . 
 = = = Upgrades = = = 
 The A @-@ 10 has received many upgrades over the years . Beginning in 1978 , the Pave Penny laser receiver pod was adopted , which receives reflected laser radiation from laser designators for faster and more accurate target identification . The A @-@ 10 began receiving an inertial navigation system in 1980 . The Low @-@ Altitude Safety and Targeting Enhancement ( LASTE ) upgrade provided computerized weapon @-@ aiming equipment , an autopilot , and a ground @-@ collision warning system . The A @-@ 10 is compatible with night vision goggles for low @-@ light operation . In 1999 , aircraft began receiving Global Positioning System navigation systems and a multi @-@ function display . The LASTE system was upgraded with Integrated Flight & Fire Control Computers ( <unk> ) . 
 Proposed further upgrades included integrated combat search and rescue locator systems and improved early warning and anti @-@ jam self @-@ protection systems , and the Air Force recognized that the A @-@ 10 's engine power was sub @-@ optimal and had been planning to replace them with more powerful engines since at least 2001 at an estimated cost of $ 2 billion . 
 = = = = Hog @-@ Up Service Life Extension and Wing Replacement Program = = = = 
 In 1987 , Grumman Aerospace took over the A @-@ 10 program . Following from the 1992 decision to keep the A @-@ 10 , Grumman developed a Force Structural Maintenance Plan and Damage Threat Assessment by 1993 . On the military side , the A @-@ 10 Program Office did not incorporate the updated procedures into the maintenance tech orders . Critically , the Analytical Condition Inspection implemented by the program office did not inspect every plane as specified in the <unk> , but , instead , employed statistical sampling , inspecting only a fraction of the fleet . A @-@ 10 maintenance suffered from budget constraints , and inspections were performed in the field rather than centralized with programmed depot maintenance . The A @-@ 10 program would see a large amount of upheaval on both the military and corporate side , with numerous changes in contractor along with large upheavals on the military side resulting from changes brought about by the base re @-@ alignment and closure commission . 
 The first sign of trouble were two " near @-@ critical " sized cracks found . Initially these were classified as minor , they would be reclassified as critical in 2001 . Northrop Grumman was tasked with creating a plan to double the service life of the fleet in 1998 , this would be used as the foundation for attempted service life extension programs . Unfortunately the Grumman plan was based on the assumption that the <unk> had been implemented and that subsequent testing had been uneventful , both these assumptions were wrong . The SPO began a repair program to implement Grumman 's planned wing replacement program in 1999 as the " HOG UP " program . <unk> it as a repair program bypassed the acquisition process , and allowed the SPO to use maintenance funding for the program . This also bypassed the Configuration Control Board , as well as strict evaluation of the proposed upgrade . 
 The SPO added center wing fuel bladder replacement , rework of the flight control system , nacelle fitting inspections , and other areas at the request of Air Combat Command . During this period the two near critical cracks previously uncovered received more scrutiny . The cracks previously classified as minor were classified as critical . This disrupted the HOG UP program , greatly increasing its scope and more than quadrupling its cost . An independent review of the HOG UP program at this point concluded that the data the wing upgrade relied on could no longer be trusted . This independent review was presented in September 2003 . Shortly after that , fatigue testing on a test wing failed . There were also mounting problems with wings in service that were failing inspections at an increasing rate . The Air Force estimated that they would run out of wings by 2011 . Three plans were explored , replacing all the wings with new ones was the cheapest , costing $ 741 million to implement , and $ 1 @.@ 72 billion over the life of the program . 
 In 2007 , the A @-@ 10 was subject to a service life extension program ( SLEP ) ; Boeing was awarded a contract to build as many as 242 A @-@ 10 wing sets in June 2007 . In November 2011 , two A @-@ 10s flew with the new wings fitted . In September 2013 , the USAF awarded Boeing a $ 212 million follow @-@ on contract for 56 new wings , increasing the total ordered to 173 . Re @-@ winging improves mission readiness , decreases maintenance costs , and allows the A @-@ 10 to be operated up to 2035 . In plans to retire the A @-@ 10 , the USAF considered halting the wing replacement program , saving an additional $ 500 million on top of the total savings of retiring the fleet , for a total of $ 4 @.@ 2 billion . By May 2015 , the re @-@ winging program was too far into the contract to be financially efficient to cancel . The A @-@ 10 fleet with the new TUSK wings could fly past 2040 according to the contractor , Boeing . 
 = = = = A @-@ 10C = = = = 
 In 2005 , the entire A @-@ 10 fleet began receiving the Precision Engagement upgrades that include an improved fire control system ( FCS ) , electronic countermeasures ( ECM ) , and smart bomb targeting . Aircraft which received this upgrade are redesignated A @-@ 10C ; work was to be completed in 2011 . The Government Accounting Office in 2007 estimated the cost of upgrading , refurbishing , and service life extension plans for the A @-@ 10 force to total $ 2 @.@ 25 billion through 2013 . In September 2007 the A @-@ 10C reached initial operating capability . The Air Force Material Command 's Ogden Air Logistics Center at Hill AFB , Utah completed work on its 100th A @-@ 10 precision engagement upgrade in January 2008 . The PE upgrade will also add all @-@ weather combat capability to the A @-@ 10 . The upgrade will also upgrade the A @-@ 10 with a Hand on Throttle and Stick configuration mixing the F @-@ 16 's flight stick with the F @-@ 15 's throttle . The A @-@ 10 will also receive a modern communications suite including Link @-@ 16 radio and SATCOM . 
 The Precision Engagement upgrades " backbone is the central interface control unit , which replaces most of the old armament control system and also interfaces with other mission subsystems to provide an integrated solution for the pilot and maintenance technician . The CICU takes various sources of information from the aircraft 's <unk> as targeting pods , radios , processors and <unk> integrates and displays the information in a manner that is meant to reduce pilot workload . " The A @-@ 10 's low @-@ altitude safety and targeting enhancement ( LASTE ) system is replaced by the integrated flight and fire control computer ( <unk> ) included in the PE upgrade . 
 The central interface control unit ( CICU ) " provides digital stores management and overall avionics systems integration , upgraded processors , Up front controller ( UFC ) , a new instrument panel , upgraded power systems , and the interfaces necessary to accommodate the new <unk> guided smart weapons . " The upgrade also includes " the situational awareness data link ( <unk> ) which will provide both air @-@ to @-@ air and ground @-@ to @-@ air digital communications of target data . " " <unk> uses the enhanced position location reporting system ( <unk> ) waveform , which will provide secure , jam @-@ resistant data communications , such as friendly force data from Army units , in near real time . " 
 Two multifunction displays replace analog switching displays and controls . Information from the data link and other sources are automatically oriented and scaled providing the pilot an accurate view of forces from both sides on the ground . " Pilots thumb through the menus on the displays , using the surrounding bezel keys or the HOTAS ( hands on throttle and stick ) . The PE kit will add the up front controller , which is positioned just below the HUD , so that Warthog pilots can keep eyes up while inputting data . The UFC has the same keyboard as on the CDU and typically would be used to input menu items , navigational information and weapons delivery data . " 
 " The mission planning system ( MPS ) will allow the pilot to plan his route , the weapons employed and drop sequences , and target information on the ground . He then uses a cartridge to load the mission plan onto the aircraft . " An MPS upgrade is part of the PE upgrade . Pilots will be able to check the status of , and target weapons in @-@ flight . " For the maintenance technician , the A / OA @-@ 10 's CICU and an existing control display unit ( CDU ) have been fitted with upgraded software to improve the detection and isolation of avionics subsystem failures . " The diagnostic system provided by the new operational test system included in the upgrade will improve the system 's maintainability and , thus , its availability . 
 In July 2010 , the USAF issued Raytheon a contract to integrate a Helmet Mounted Integrated Targeting ( <unk> ) system onto A @-@ <unk> . The <unk> Corporation Scorpion Helmet Mounted Cueing System ( HMCS ) was also evaluated . In February 2014 , Secretary of the Air Force Deborah Lee James ordered that development of Suite 8 software upgrade continue , in response to Congressional pressure . Software upgrades were originally to be ceased due to plans to retire the A @-@ 10 . Suite 8 software includes IFF Mode 5 , which <unk> the ability of friendly units to identify the A @-@ 10 as a friendly aircraft . 
 In 2012 , Air Combat Command requested the testing of a 600 @-@ gallon external fuel tank which would extend the A @-@ 10 's loitering time by 45 – 60 minutes ; flight testing of such a tank had been conducted in 1997 , but did not involve combat evaluation . Over 30 flight tests were conducted by the 40th Flight Test Squadron to gather data on the aircraft 's handling characteristics and performance across different load configurations . The tank slightly reduced stability in the yaw axis , however there is no decrease in aircraft tracking performance . 
 Sometime prior to 2012 , the Air Force began removing the Pave Penny pods from their pylons , as the receive @-@ only capability had become redundant with the installation of the AN / AAQ @-@ 28 ( V ) 4 LITENING AT targeting pods ( typically on station 9 or 10 ) , or the Sniper XR targeting pod ( typically on station 2 ) , which have both a laser designator and laser rangefinder ( along with other sensors ) . The pylons for the Pave Penny have been left in place initially , but are being removed to avoid possible repairs . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 On 25 March 2010 , an A @-@ 10 conducted the first flight of an aircraft with all engines powered by a biofuel blend . The flight , performed at Eglin Air Force Base , used a 1 : 1 blend of JP @-@ 8 and <unk> @-@ based fuel . On 28 June 2012 , the A @-@ 10 became the first aircraft to fly using a new fuel blend derived from alcohol ; known as <unk> ( Alcohol @-@ to @-@ Jet ) , the fuel is <unk> @-@ based that can be derived using wood , paper , grass , or any cellulose based material , and are fermented into alcohols before being hydro @-@ processed into aviation fuel . <unk> is the third alternative fuel to be evaluated by the Air Force as a replacement for petroleum @-@ derived JP @-@ 8 fuel . Previous types were a synthetic <unk> kerosene derived from coal and natural gas and a bio @-@ mass fuel derived from plant @-@ oils and animal fats known as <unk> Renewable Jet . 
 In 2011 , the National Science Foundation granted $ 11 million to modify an A @-@ 10 for weather research for <unk> at the U.S. Naval Postgraduate School , replacing a retired North American T @-@ 28 Trojan . The A @-@ 10 's armor is expected to allow it to survive the extreme meteorological conditions , such as 200 mph hailstorms , found in inclement high @-@ altitude weather events . 
 In 2015 , Boeing revealed that it was holding initial discussions on the prospects of selling retired or stored A @-@ 10s in near @-@ flyaway condition to international customers . However , the Air Force subsequently stated that it will not permit the aircraft to be sold . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 " The A @-@ 10 Thunderbolt 2 is a cantilever low @-@ wing monoplane with wide chord , deep airfoil section . One @-@ piece constant chord center wing section , tapered outer panels , cambered wing tips . Two @-@ segment , three @-@ position , trailing @-@ edge slotted flaps , interchangeable right and left . Wide span ailerons , made up of upper and lower surfaces that separate to serve as airbrakes . Small leading @-@ edge slat inboard each <unk> fairing . Redundant , armor shielded flight control system . Semi @-@ monocoque aluminum alloy fuselage with four main longerons , multiple frames , and lap @-@ jointed , and riveted skin . " It has " cantilever aluminum structure with twin fins and interchangeable rudders mounted at tips of constant chord tailplane . Interchangeable elevators , each with an electrically operated trim tab . " 
 The A @-@ 10 has superior maneuverability at low speeds and altitude because of its large wing area , high wing aspect ratio , and large ailerons . The wing also allows short takeoffs and landings , permitting operations from primitive forward airfields near front lines . The aircraft can loiter for extended periods and operate under 1 @,@ 000 ft ( 300 m ) ceilings with 1 @.@ 5 mi ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) visibility . It typically flies at a relatively low speed of 300 knots ( 350 mph ; 560 km / h ) , which makes it a better platform for the ground @-@ attack role than fast fighter @-@ bombers , which often have difficulty targeting small , slow @-@ moving targets . 
 The leading edge of the wing has a honeycomb structure panel construction , providing strength with minimal weight ; similar panels cover the flap shrouds , elevators , rudders and sections of the fins . The skin panels are integral with the stringers and are fabricated using computer @-@ controlled machining , reducing production time and cost . Combat experience has shown that this type of panel is more resistant to damage . The skin is not load @-@ bearing , so damaged skin sections can be easily replaced in the field , with makeshift materials if necessary . The ailerons are at the far ends of the wings for greater rolling moment and have two distinguishing features : The ailerons are larger than is typical , almost 50 percent of the wingspan , providing improved control even at slow speeds ; the aileron is also split , making it a <unk> . 
 The A @-@ 10 is designed to be refueled , rearmed , and serviced with minimal equipment . Its simple design enables maintenance at forward bases with limited facilities . Also , most repairs can be done in the field . An unusual feature is that many of the aircraft 's parts are interchangeable between the left and right sides , including the engines , main landing gear , and vertical stabilizers . The sturdy landing gear , low @-@ pressure tires and large , straight wings allow operation from short rough strips even with a heavy aircraft ordnance load , allowing the aircraft to operate from damaged airbases , flying from taxiways or even straight roadway sections . 
 The front landing gear is offset to the aircraft 's right to allow placement of the 30 mm cannon with its firing barrel along the centerline of the aircraft . During ground taxi , the offset front landing gear causes the A @-@ 10 to have dissimilar turning radii . Turning to the right on the ground takes less distance than turning left . The wheels of the main landing gear partially protrude from their nacelles when retracted , making gear @-@ up belly landings easier to control and less damaging . All landing gears are hinged toward the aircraft 's rear ; if hydraulic power is lost , a combination of gravity and wind resistance can open and lock the gear in place . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The A @-@ 10 is exceptionally tough , being able to survive direct hits from armor @-@ piercing and high @-@ explosive projectiles up to 23 mm . It has double @-@ redundant hydraulic flight systems , and a mechanical system as a back up if hydraulics are lost . Flight without hydraulic power uses the manual reversion control system ; pitch and yaw control engages automatically , roll control is pilot @-@ selected . In manual reversion mode , the A @-@ 10 is sufficiently controllable under favorable conditions to return to base , though control forces are greater than normal . The aircraft is designed to fly with one engine , one half of tail , one elevator , and half of a wing missing . 
 The cockpit and parts of the flight @-@ control system are protected by 1 @,@ 200 lb ( 540 kg ) of titanium aircraft armor , referred to as a " bathtub " . The armor has been tested to withstand strikes from 23 mm cannon fire and some strikes from 57 mm rounds . It is made up of titanium plates with thicknesses from 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 13 to 38 mm ) determined by a study of likely trajectories and deflection angles . The armor makes up almost 6 percent of the aircraft 's empty weight . Any interior surface of the tub directly exposed to the pilot is covered by a multi @-@ layer nylon <unk> shield to protect against shell fragmentation . The front windscreen and canopy are resistant to small arms fire . 
 The A @-@ 10 's durability was shown on 7 April 2003 when Captain Kim Campbell , while flying over Baghdad during the 2003 invasion of Iraq , suffered extensive flak damage . Iraqi fire damaged an engine and crippled the hydraulic system , requiring the aircraft 's stabilizer and flight controls to be operated via the ' manual reversion mode ' . Despite this damage , Campbell flew the aircraft for nearly an hour and landed safely . 
 The A @-@ 10 was envisioned to fly from forward air bases and semi @-@ prepared runways with high risk of foreign object damage to the engines . The unusual location of the General Electric <unk> @-@ GE @-@ 100 turbofan engines decreases ingestion risk , and allows the engines to run while the aircraft is serviced and rearmed by ground crews , reducing turn @-@ around time . The wings are also mounted closer to the ground , simplifying servicing and rearming operations . The heavy engines require strong supports , four bolts connect the engine pylons to the airframe . The engines ' high 6 : 1 bypass ratio have a relatively small infrared signature , and their position directs exhaust over the tailplanes further shielding it from detection by infrared homing surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles . The engines and their exhausts are angled upward by nine degrees to cancel out the nose @-@ down pitching moment they would otherwise generate due to being mounted above the aircraft 's center of gravity , avoiding the need to trim the control surfaces against the force . 
 To reduce the likelihood of damage to the A @-@ 10 's fuel system , all four fuel tanks are located near the aircraft 's center and are separated from the fuselage ; projectiles would need to penetrate the aircraft 's skin before reaching a tank 's outer skin . Compromised fuel transfer lines self @-@ seal ; if damage exceeds a tank 's self @-@ sealing capabilities , check valves prevent fuel flowing into a compromised tank . Most fuel system components are inside the tanks so that fuel will not be lost due to component failure . The refueling system is also purged after use . Reticulated polyurethane foam lines both the inner and outer sides of the fuel tanks , retaining debris and restricting fuel spillage in the event of damage . The engines are shielded from the rest of the airframe by firewalls and fire extinguishing equipment . In the event of all four main tanks being lost , two self @-@ sealing sump tanks contain fuel for 230 miles ( 370 km ) of flight . 
 = = = Weapons = = = 
 Although the A @-@ 10 can carry considerable disposable stores , its primary built @-@ in weapon is the 30 mm GAU @-@ 8 / A Avenger Gatling @-@ type cannon . One of the most powerful aircraft cannon ever flown , it fires large depleted uranium armor @-@ piercing shells . In the original design , the pilot could switch between two rates of fire : 2 @,@ 100 or 4 @,@ 200 rounds per minute ; this was changed to a fixed rate of 3 @,@ 900 rounds per minute . The cannon takes about half a second to come up to speed , so 50 rounds are fired during the first second , 65 or 70 rounds per second thereafter . The gun is accurate enough to place 80 percent of its shots within a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 @.@ 4 m ) diameter circle from 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 220 m ) while in flight . The GAU @-@ 8 is optimized for a slant range of 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 220 m ) with the A @-@ 10 in a 30 @-@ degree dive . 
 The fuselage of the aircraft is built around the cannon . The GAU @-@ 8 / A is mounted slightly to the port side ; the barrel in the firing location is on the starboard side at the 9 o 'clock position so it is aligned with the aircraft 's centerline . The gun 's 5 @-@ foot , 11 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 816 m ) ammunition drum can hold up to 1 @,@ 350 rounds of 30 mm ammunition , but generally holds 1 @,@ 174 rounds . To prevent enemy fire from causing the GAU @-@ 8 / A rounds to fire prematurely , armor plates of differing thicknesses between the aircraft skin and the drum are designed to detonate incoming shells . A final armor layer around the drum protects it from fragmentation damage . The gun is loaded by Syn @-@ Tech 's linked tube carrier <unk> @-@ 7 / E 30 mm ammunition loading assembly cart . 
 The AGM @-@ 65 Maverick air @-@ to @-@ surface missile is a commonly used munition , targeted via electro @-@ optical ( TV @-@ guided ) or infrared . The Maverick allows target engagement at much greater ranges than the cannon , and thus less risk from anti @-@ aircraft systems . During Desert Storm , in the absence of dedicated forward @-@ looking infrared ( FLIR ) cameras for night vision , the Maverick 's infrared camera was used for night missions as a " poor man 's FLIR " . Other weapons include cluster bombs and Hydra rocket pods . The A @-@ 10 is equipped to carry laser @-@ guided bombs . A @-@ 10s usually fly with an ALQ @-@ 131 ECM pod under one wing and two AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder air @-@ to @-@ air missiles under the other wing for self @-@ defense . 
 = = = Modernization = = = 
 The A @-@ 10 Precision Engagement Modification Program will update 356 A @-@ 10 / OA @-@ 10s to the A @-@ 10C variant with a new flight computer , new glass cockpit displays and controls , two new 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 140 mm ) color displays with moving map function and an integrated digital stores management system . 
 Other funded improvements to the A @-@ 10 fleet include a new data link , the ability to employ smart weapons such as the Joint Direct Attack Munition ( JDAM ) and Wind Corrected Munitions Dispenser , and the ability to carry an integrated targeting pod such as the Northrop Grumman LITENING or the Lockheed Martin Sniper Advanced Targeting Pod ( ATP ) . Also included is the Remotely Operated Video Enhanced Receiver ( <unk> ) to provide sensor data to personnel on the ground . 
 In 2016 the USAF announced a thick @-@ skin urgent spares <unk> ( TUSK ) wing assemblies program to extend the lifespan of the aircraft past 2040 . 
 = = = Colors and markings = = = 
 Since the A @-@ 10 flies low to the ground and at subsonic speed , aircraft camouflage is important to make the aircraft more difficult to see . Many different types of paint schemes have been tried . These have included a " peanut scheme " of sand , yellow and field drab ; black and white colors for winter operations and a tan , green and brown mixed pattern . Many A @-@ 10s also featured a false canopy painted in dark gray on the underside of the aircraft , just behind the gun . This form of automimicry is an attempt to confuse the enemy as to aircraft attitude and maneuver direction . Many A @-@ 10s feature nose art , such as shark mouth or warthog head features . 
 The two most common markings applied to the A @-@ 10 have been the European I woodland camouflage scheme and a two @-@ tone gray scheme . The European woodland scheme was designed to minimize visibility from above , as the threat from hostile fighter aircraft was felt to outweigh that from ground @-@ fire . It uses dark green , medium green and dark gray in order to blend in with the typical European forest terrain and was used from the 1980s to the early 1990s . Following the end of the Cold War , and based on experience during the 1991 Gulf War , the air @-@ to @-@ air threat was no longer seen to be as important as that from ground fire , and a new color scheme known as " Compass Ghost " was chosen to minimize visibility from below . This two @-@ tone gray scheme has darker gray color on top , with the lighter gray on the underside of the aircraft , and started to be applied from the early 1990s . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Entering service = = = 
 The first unit to receive the A @-@ 10 Thunderbolt II was the 355th Tactical Training Wing , based at Davis @-@ Monthan Air Force Base , Arizona , in March 1976 . The first unit to achieve full combat @-@ readiness was the 354th Tactical Fighter Wing at Myrtle Beach AFB , South Carolina , in 1978 . Deployments of A @-@ 10As followed at bases both at home and abroad , including England AFB , Louisiana ; Eielson AFB , Alaska ; Osan Air Base , South Korea ; and RAF Bentwaters / RAF Woodbridge , England . The 81st TFW of RAF Bentwaters / RAF Woodbridge operated rotating detachments of A @-@ 10s at four bases in Germany known as Forward Operating Locations ( <unk> ) : <unk> , Sembach Air Base , Nörvenich , and <unk> . 
 A @-@ 10s were initially an unwelcome addition to many in the Air Force . Most pilots switching to the A @-@ 10 did not want to because fighter pilots traditionally favored speed and appearance . In 1987 , many A @-@ 10s were shifted to the forward air control ( FAC ) role and redesignated OA @-@ 10 . In the FAC role the OA @-@ 10 is typically equipped with up to six pods of 2 @.@ 75 inch ( 70 mm ) Hydra rockets , usually with smoke or white phosphorus warheads used for target marking . OA @-@ 10s are physically unchanged and remain fully combat capable despite the redesignation . 
 A @-@ 10s of the 23rd TFW were deployed to Bridgetown , Barbados during Operation Urgent Fury , the American Invasion of Grenada . They provided air cover for the U.S. Marine Corps landings on the island of Carriacou in late October 1983 , but did not fire weapons as Marines met no resistance . 
 = = = Gulf War and Balkans = = = 
 The A @-@ 10 was used in combat for the first time during the Gulf War in 1991 , destroying more than 900 Iraqi tanks , 2 @,@ 000 other military vehicles and 1 @,@ 200 artillery pieces . A @-@ 10s also shot down two Iraqi helicopters with the GAU @-@ 8 cannon . The first of these was shot down by Captain Robert Swain over Kuwait on 6 February 1991 for the A @-@ 10 's first air @-@ to @-@ air victory . Four A @-@ 10s were shot down during the war , all by surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles . Another three battle @-@ damaged A @-@ 10s and OA @-@ 10As returned to base but were written off , some sustaining additional damage in crash landings . The A @-@ 10 had a mission capable rate of 95 @.@ 7 percent , flew 8 @,@ 100 sorties , and launched 90 percent of the AGM @-@ 65 Maverick missiles fired in the conflict . Shortly after the Gulf War , the Air Force abandoned the idea of replacing the A @-@ 10 with a close air support version of the F @-@ 16 . 
 U.S. Air Force A @-@ 10 aircraft fired approximately 10 @,@ 000 30 mm rounds in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1994 – 95 . Following the seizure of some heavy weapons by Bosnian Serbs from a warehouse in Ilidža , a series of sorties were launched to locate and destroy the captured equipment . On 5 August 1994 , two A @-@ 10s located and strafed an anti @-@ tank vehicle . Afterward , the Serbs agreed to return remaining heavy weapons . In August 1995 , NATO launched an offensive called Operation Deliberate Force . A @-@ 10s flew close air support missions , attacking Bosnian Serb artillery and positions . In late September , A @-@ 10s began flying patrols again . 
 A @-@ 10s returned to the Balkan region as part of Operation Allied Force in Kosovo beginning in March 1999 . In March 1999 , A @-@ 10s escorted and supported search and rescue helicopters in finding a downed F @-@ 117 pilot . The A @-@ 10s were deployed to support search and rescue missions , but over time the <unk> began to receive more ground attack missions . The A @-@ 10 's first successful attack in Operation Allied Force happened on 6 April 1999 ; A @-@ 10s remained in action until combat ended in late June 1999 . 
 = = = Afghanistan , Iraq , Libya , and recent deployments = = = 
 During the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan , A @-@ 10s did not take part in the initial stages . For the campaign against Taliban and Al Qaeda , A @-@ 10 squadrons were deployed to Pakistan and Bagram Air Base , Afghanistan , beginning in March 2002 . These A @-@ 10s participated in Operation Anaconda . Afterwards , A @-@ 10s remained in @-@ country , fighting Taliban and Al Qaeda remnants . 
 Operation Iraqi Freedom began on 20 March 2003 . Sixty OA @-@ 10 / A @-@ 10 aircraft took part in early combat there . United States Air Forces Central Command issued Operation Iraqi Freedom : By the Numbers , a declassified report about the aerial campaign in the conflict on 30 April 2003 . During that initial invasion of Iraq , A @-@ 10s had a mission capable rate of 85 percent in the war and fired 311 @,@ 597 rounds of 30 mm ammunition . A single A @-@ 10 was shot down near Baghdad International Airport by Iraqi fire late in the campaign . The A @-@ 10 also flew 32 missions in which the aircraft dropped propaganda leaflets over Iraq . 
 The A @-@ 10C first deployed to Iraq in 2007 with the 104th Fighter Squadron of the Maryland Air National Guard . The jets include the Precision Engagement Upgrade . The A @-@ 10C 's digital avionics and communications systems have greatly reduced the time to acquire a close air support target and attack it . 
 A @-@ 10s flew 32 percent of combat sorties in Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom . The sorties ranged from 27 @,@ 800 to 34 @,@ 500 annually between 2009 and 2012 . In the first half of 2013 , they flew 11 @,@ 189 sorties in Afghanistan . From the beginning of 2006 to October 2013 , A @-@ 10s flew 19 percent of CAS operations in Iraq and Afghanistan , more than the F @-@ 15E Strike Eagle or B @-@ 1B Lancer , but less than the 33 percent of CAS missions flown by F @-@ 16s during that time period . 
 In March 2011 , six A @-@ 10s were deployed as part of Operation Odyssey Dawn , the coalition intervention in Libya . They participated in attacks on Libyan ground forces there . 
 In September 2014 , the USAF 122nd Fighter Wing revealed it would be deploying to the Middle East in the next month , which includes 12 of the unit 's 21 A @-@ 10 aircraft . Although the deployment had been planned a year in advance in a support role , the timing coincided with the ongoing Operation Inherent Resolve against Islamic State militants . Since mid @-@ November , U.S. commanders began sending A @-@ 10s to hit IS targets in central and northwestern Iraq on an almost daily basis . In about two months time , A @-@ 10s flew 11 percent of all USAF sorties since the start of operations in August 2014 . On 15 November 2015 , two days after the ISIL attacks in Paris , A @-@ 10s and AC @-@ 130s destroyed a convoy of over 100 ISIL @-@ operated oil tanker trucks in Syria . The attacks were part of an intensification of the U.S.-led intervention against ISIL called Operation Tidal Wave II ( named after the original Operation Tidal Wave during World War II , a failed attempt to raid German oil fields that resulted in heavy aircraft and aircrew loss ) in an attempt to cut off oil smuggling as a source of funding for the group . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 In 2007 , the A @-@ 10 was expected to be in USAF service until 2028 and possibly later , when it may be replaced by the Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II . Critics have said that replacing the A @-@ 10 with the F @-@ 35 would be a " giant leap backwards " given the A @-@ 10 's performance and the F @-@ 35 's rising costs . In 2012 , the Air Force considered the F @-@ 35B STOVL variant as a replacement CAS aircraft , but concluded that the aircraft could not generate sufficient sorties . In August 2013 , Congress and the Air Force examined various proposals , including the F @-@ 35 and the MQ @-@ 9 Reaper unmanned aerial vehicle filling the A @-@ 10 's role . Proponents state that the A @-@ 10 's armor and cannon are superior to aircraft such as the F @-@ 35 for ground attack , that guided munitions other planes rely upon could be jammed , and that ground commanders frequently request A @-@ 10 support . 
 In the USAF 's FY 2015 budget , the service considered retiring the A @-@ 10 and other single @-@ mission aircraft , prioritizing multi @-@ mission aircraft ; cutting a whole fleet and its infrastructure was seen as the only method for major savings . The U.S. Army had expressed interest in obtaining some A @-@ 10s should the Air Force retire them , but later stated there was " no chance " of that happening . The U.S. Air Force stated that retirement would save $ 3 @.@ 7 billion from 2015 to 2019 . Guided munitions allow more aircraft to perform the CAS mission , reducing the requirement for a specialized aircraft ; since 2001 , multirole aircraft and bombers performed 80 percent of CAS missions . The Air Force stated the A @-@ 10 is also more vulnerable to advanced anti @-@ aircraft defenses . The Army stated that the A @-@ 10 is invaluable for its versatile weapons loads , psychological impact , and reduced logistics needs on ground support systems . 
 In January 2015 , USAF officials told lawmakers that it would take 15 years to fully develop a new attack aircraft to replace the A @-@ 10 ; that year General Herbert J. Carlisle , the head of Air Combat Command stated that a follow @-@ on weapon system for the A @-@ 10 may need to be developed . It planned for F @-@ 16s and F @-@ <unk> to initially take up CAS sorties , and later by the F @-@ 35A once sufficient numbers become operationally available over the next decade . The service is considering purchasing a relatively inexpensive replacement to perform CAS against enemies that lack sophisticated air defenses . As of 2015 , the US Air Combat Command is considering developing a replacement aircraft . In January 2016 , the USAF revealed it was " indefinitely freezing " plans to retire the A @-@ 10 for at least several years . In addition to Congressional opposition , its use in anti @-@ ISIL operations , deployments to Eastern Europe as a response to Russia 's military intervention in Ukraine , and reevaluation of F @-@ 35 numbers necessitated its retention . Retirement has been deferred until 2022 when F @-@ 35s will begin replacing it on a squadron @-@ by @-@ squadron basis . In March 2016 , the Air Force revealed it had begun studying future CAS aircraft to succeed the A @-@ 10 in low @-@ intensity “ permissive conflicts ” like counterterrorism and regional stability operations , admitting that the F @-@ 35 is too expensive to operate in day @-@ to @-@ day roles ; everything from low @-@ end AT @-@ 6 Wolverine and A @-@ 29 Super <unk> turboprops and the Textron <unk> Scorpion as more basic off @-@ the @-@ shelf options to more sophisticated clean @-@ sheet attack aircraft or " AT @-@ X " derivatives of the T @-@ X next @-@ generation trainer as entirely new attack platforms are being considered . 
 = = Variants = = 
 YA @-@ 10A 
 Pre @-@ production variant . 12 were built . 
 A @-@ 10A 
 Single @-@ seat close air support , ground @-@ attack version . ( All updated to A @-@ 10C ) 
 OA @-@ 10A 
 A @-@ 10As used for airborne forward air control . ( All updated to A @-@ 10C ) 
 YA @-@ 10B Night / Adverse Weather 
 Two @-@ seat experimental prototype , for work at night and in bad weather . The one YA @-@ 10B prototype was converted from an A @-@ 10A . 
 A @-@ 10C 
 A @-@ 10As updated under the incremental Precision Engagement ( PE ) program . 
 A @-@ <unk> 
 Proposed unmanned version developed by Raytheon and Aurora Flight Sciences as part of DARPA 's Persistent Close Air Support program . The <unk> program eventually dropped the idea of using an optionally manned A @-@ 10 . 
 Civilian A @-@ 10 
 Proposed by the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology to replace its North American T @-@ 28 Trojan thunderstorm penetration aircraft . The A @-@ 10 would have its military engines , avionics , and oxygen system replaced by civilian versions . The engines and airframe would receive protection from hail , and the GAU @-@ 8 Avenger would be replaced with ballast or scientific instruments . 
 = = Operators = = 
 The A @-@ 10 has been flown exclusively by the United States Air Force and its Air Reserve components , the Air Force Reserve Command ( AFRC ) and the Air National Guard ( ANG ) . The USAF operates 283 A @-@ 10C aircraft , as of FY 2015 . 
 United States 
 United States Air Force 
 25th Fighter Squadron ( Osan Air Force Base , South Korea ) 
 66th Weapons Squadron ( Nellis Air Force Base , Nevada ) 
 74th Fighter Squadron ( Moody Air Force Base , Georgia ) 
 75th Fighter Squadron ( Moody Air Force Base , Georgia ) 
 354th Fighter Squadron ( Davis @-@ Monthan Air Force Base , Arizona ) 
 357th Fighter Squadron ( Davis @-@ Monthan Air Force Base , Arizona ) 
 <unk> Test and Evaluation Squadron ( Nellis Air Force Base , Nevada ) 
 Air National Guard 
 104th Fighter Squadron ( Warfield Air National Guard Base , Maryland ) 
 107th Fighter Squadron ( Selfridge Air National Guard Base , Michigan ) 
