 Low @-@ income individuals and families whose incomes are between 100 % and 400 % of the federal poverty level will receive federal subsidies on a sliding scale if they purchase insurance via an exchange . Section 1401 ( 36B ) of PPACA explains that each subsidy will be provided as an <unk> , refundable tax credit and gives a formula for its calculation . The formula was changed in the amendments ( HR <unk> ) passed March 23 , 2010 , in section 1001 . In 2015 , the subsidy would apply for incomes up to $ 46 @,@ 680 for an individual or $ 95 @,@ 400 for a family of four ; consumers can choose to receive their tax credits in advance , and the exchange will send the money directly to the insurer every month . Small businesses will be eligible for subsidies . 
 Medicaid eligibility expanded to include individuals and families with incomes up to 133 % of the federal poverty level , including adults without disabilities and without dependent children . The law also provides for a 5 % " income disregard " , making the effective income eligibility limit for Medicaid 138 % of the poverty level . Furthermore , the State Children 's Health Insurance Program ( CHIP ) enrollment process is simplified . However , in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius , the Supreme Court ruled that states may opt out of the Medicaid expansion , and several have done so . 
 Dependents , mostly children , will be permitted to remain on their parents ' insurance plan until their 26th birthday , and regulations implemented under the ACA include dependents that no longer live with their parents , are not a dependent on a parent 's tax return , are no longer a student , or are married . 
 Insurers are prohibited from imposing lifetime dollar limits on essential benefits , like hospital stays , in new policies issued . 
 Insurers are prohibited from dropping policyholders when they get sick . 
 All new insurance plans must cover preventive care and medical screenings rated Level A or B by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force . Insurers are prohibited from charging co @-@ payments , co @-@ insurance , or deductibles for these services . 
 Reforms to the Medicare payment system are meant to promote greater efficiency in the healthcare delivery system by restructuring Medicare reimbursements from fee @-@ for @-@ service to bundled payments . Under the new payment system , a single payment is paid to a hospital and a physician group for a defined episode of care ( such as a hip replacement ) rather than individual payments to individual service providers . In addition , the Medicare Part D coverage gap ( commonly called the " donut hole " ) will shrink incrementally , closing completely by January 1 , 2020 . 
 The Hospital <unk> Reduction Program ( <unk> ) was established as an addition to the Social Security Act , in an effort to reduce hospital <unk> and the cost they incur to Medicare . This program penalizes hospitals with higher than expected readmission rates by decreasing their Medicare reimbursement rate . 
 Businesses that employ 50 or more people but do not offer health insurance to their full @-@ time employees will pay a tax penalty if the government has subsidized a full @-@ time employee 's healthcare through tax deductions or other means . This is commonly known as the employer mandate . In July 2013 , the Internal Revenue Service delayed enforcement of this provision for one year . 
 = = Legislative history = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act consists of a combination of measures to control healthcare costs , and an expansion of coverage through public and private insurance : broader Medicaid eligibility and Medicare coverage , and subsidized , regulated private insurance . An individual mandate coupled with subsidies for private insurance as a means for universal healthcare was considered the best way to win the support of the Senate because it had been included in prior bipartisan reform proposals . The concept goes back to at least 1989 , when the conservative Heritage Foundation proposed an individual mandate as an alternative to single @-@ payer health care . It was championed for a time by conservative economists and Republican senators as a market @-@ based approach to healthcare reform on the basis of individual responsibility and avoidance of free rider problems . Specifically , because the 1986 Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act ( <unk> ) requires any hospital participating in Medicare ( which nearly all do ) to provide emergency care to anyone who needs it , the government often indirectly bore the cost of those without the ability to pay . 
 When President Bill Clinton proposed a healthcare reform bill in 1993 that included a mandate for employers to provide health insurance to all employees through a regulated marketplace of health maintenance organizations , Republican Senators proposed an alternative that would have required individuals , but not employers , to buy insurance . Ultimately the Clinton plan failed amid an unprecedented barrage of negative advertising funded by politically conservative groups and the health insurance industry and due to concerns that it was overly complex . After failing to obtain a comprehensive reform of the healthcare system , Clinton negotiated a compromise with the 105th Congress to instead enact the State Children 's Health Insurance Program ( SCHIP ) in 1997 . 
 The 1993 Republican alternative , introduced by Senator John Chafee as the Health Equity and Access Reform Today Act , contained a " universal coverage " requirement with a penalty for noncompliance — an individual mandate — as well as subsidies to be used in state @-@ based ' purchasing groups ' . Advocates for the 1993 bill included prominent Republicans who , by the time of the Affordable Care Act , opposed a mandate , such as Senators Orrin Hatch , Chuck Grassley , Bob Bennett , and Kit Bond . Of the 43 Republicans Senators from 1993 , 20 supported the <unk> Act . Another Republican proposal , introduced in 1994 by Senator Don Nickles ( R @-@ OK ) , the Consumer Choice Health Security Act , contained an individual mandate with a penalty provision ; however , Nickles subsequently removed the mandate from the bill , stating he had decided " that government should not compel people to buy health insurance " . At the time of these proposals , Republicans did not raise constitutional issues with the mandate ; Mark Pauly , who helped develop a proposal that included an individual mandate for George H. W. Bush , remarked , " I don 't remember that being raised at all . The way it was viewed by the Congressional Budget Office in 1994 was , effectively , as a tax . " 
 In 2006 , an insurance expansion bill was enacted at the state level in Massachusetts . The bill contained both an individual health insurance mandate and an insurance exchange . Republican Governor Mitt Romney vetoed the mandate , but after Democrats overrode his veto , he signed it into law . Romney 's implementation of the ' Health Connector ' exchange and individual mandate in Massachusetts was at first lauded by Republicans . During Romney 's 2008 presidential campaign , Senator Jim DeMint praised Romney 's ability to " take some good conservative ideas , like private health insurance , and apply them to the need to have everyone insured " . Romney said of the individual mandate : " I 'm proud of what we 've done . If Massachusetts succeeds in implementing it , then that will be the model for the nation . " 
 In 2007 , a year after the Massachusetts reform , Republican Senator Bob Bennett and Democratic Senator Ron Wyden introduced the Healthy Americans Act , which also featured an individual mandate and state @-@ based regulated insurance markets called " State Health Help Agencies " . The bill initially attracted bipartisan support but died in committee . Many of the sponsors and co @-@ sponsors remained in Congress during the 2008 healthcare debate . 
 By 2008 many Democrats were considering using this approach as the basis for healthcare reform . Experts have said that the legislation that eventually emerged from Congress in 2009 and 2010 bears many similarities to the 2007 bill and that it was deliberately patterned after Romney 's state healthcare plan . Jonathan Gruber , a professor of economics at MIT and an architect of Massachusetts ' health care reform who advised the Clinton and Obama presidential campaigns on healthcare issues , served as a technical consultant to the Obama administration , and helped draft the ACA . 
 = = = Healthcare debate , 2008 – 10 = = = 
 Healthcare reform was a major topic of discussion during the 2008 Democratic presidential primaries . As the race narrowed , attention focused on the plans presented by the two leading candidates , Hillary Clinton and the eventual nominee , Barack Obama . Each candidate proposed a plan to cover the approximately 45 million Americans estimated to not have health insurance at some point each year . Clinton 's plan would have required all Americans to obtain coverage ( in effect , an individual mandate ) , while Obama 's provided a subsidy but rejected the use of an individual mandate . During the general election , Obama said that fixing healthcare would be one of his top four priorities if he won the presidency . 
 After his inauguration , Obama announced to a joint session of Congress in February 2009 his intent to work with Congress to construct a plan for healthcare reform . By July , a series of bills were approved by committees within the House of Representatives . On the Senate side , from June to September , the Senate Finance Committee held a series of 31 meetings to develop a healthcare reform bill . This group — in particular , Democrats Max Baucus , Jeff Bingaman , and Kent Conrad , and Republicans Mike Enzi , Chuck Grassley , and Olympia Snowe — met for more than 60 hours , and the principles that they discussed , in conjunction with the other committees , became the foundation of the Senate 's healthcare reform bill . 
 With universal healthcare as one of the stated goals of the Obama administration , congressional Democrats and health policy experts like Jonathan Gruber and David Cutler argued that guaranteed issue would require both community rating and an individual mandate to ensure that adverse selection and / or " free riding " would not result in an insurance " death spiral " ; they convinced Obama that this was necessary , and persuaded him to accept congressional proposals that included a mandate . This approach was taken because the president and congressional leaders had concluded that more progressive plans , such as the ( single @-@ payer ) Medicare for All act , could not obtain filibuster @-@ proof support in the Senate . By deliberately drawing on bipartisan ideas — the same basic outline was supported by former Senate majority leaders Howard Baker , Bob Dole , Tom Daschle and George J. Mitchell — the bill 's drafters hoped to increase the chances of garnering the necessary votes for passage . 
 However , following the adoption of an individual mandate as a central component of the proposed reforms by Democrats , Republicans began to oppose the mandate and threatened to filibuster any bills that contained it . Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell , who led the Republican congressional strategy in responding to the bill , calculated that Republicans should not support the bill , and worked to keep party discipline and prevent defections : 
 It was absolutely critical that everybody be together because if the proponents of the bill were able to say it was bipartisan , it tended to convey to the public that this is O.K. , they must have figured it out . 
 Republican Senators , including those who had supported previous bills with a similar mandate , began to describe the mandate as " unconstitutional " . Journalist Ezra Klein wrote in The New Yorker that " the end result was ... a policy that once enjoyed broad support within the Republican Party suddenly faced unified opposition . " Reporter Michael Cooper of The New York Times wrote that : " It can be difficult to remember now , given the ferocity with which many Republicans assail it as an attack on freedom , but the provision in President Obama 's healthcare law requiring all Americans to buy health insurance has its roots in conservative thinking . " 
 The reform negotiations also attracted a great deal of attention from lobbyists , including deals between certain lobby groups and the advocates of the law to win the support of groups that had opposed past reforms , as in 1993 . The Sunlight Foundation documented many of the reported ties between " the healthcare lobbyist complex " and politicians in both major parties . 
 During the August 2009 summer congressional recess , many members went back to their districts and entertained town hall meetings to solicit public opinion on the proposals . Over the recess , the Tea Party movement organized protests and many conservative groups and individuals targeted congressional town hall meetings to voice their opposition to the proposed reform bills . There were also many threats made against members of Congress over the course of the Congressional debate . 
 To maintain the progress of the legislative process , when Congress returned from recess , in September 2009 President Obama delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress supporting the ongoing Congressional negotiations , to re @-@ emphasize his commitment to reform and again outline his proposals . He acknowledged the polarization of the debate , and quoted a letter from the late Senator Edward " Ted " Kennedy urging on reform : " what we face is above all a moral issue ; that at stake are not just the details of policy , but fundamental principles of social justice and the character of our country . " On November 7 , the House of Representatives passed the Affordable Health Care for America Act on a 220 – 215 vote and forwarded it to the Senate for passage . 
 = = = = Senate = = = = 
 The Senate began work on its own proposals while the House was still working on the Affordable Health Care for America Act . Instead , the Senate took up H.R. <unk> , a bill regarding housing tax breaks for service members . As the United States Constitution requires all revenue @-@ related bills to originate in the House , the Senate took up this bill since it was first passed by the House as a revenue @-@ related modification to the Internal Revenue Code . The bill was then used as the Senate 's vehicle for their healthcare reform proposal , completely revising the content of the bill . The bill as amended would ultimately incorporate elements of proposals that were reported favorably by the Senate Health and Finance committees . With the Republican minority in the Senate vowing to filibuster any bill they did not support , requiring a cloture vote to end debate , 60 votes would be necessary to get passage in the Senate . At the start of the 111th Congress , Democrats had only 58 votes ; the Senate seat in Minnesota ultimately won by Al Franken was still undergoing a recount , and Arlen Specter was still a Republican . 
 To reach 60 votes , negotiations were undertaken to satisfy the demands of moderate Democrats , and to try to bring several Republican senators aboard ; particular attention was given to Bob Bennett , Mike Enzi , Chuck Grassley , and Olympia Snowe . Negotiations continued even after July 7 — when Franken was sworn into office , and by which time Specter had switched parties — due to disagreements over the substance of the bill , which was still being drafted in committee , and because moderate Democrats hoped to win bipartisan support . Then , on August 25 , before the bill could come up for a vote , Ted Kennedy — a longtime healthcare reform advocate — died , depriving Democrats of their 60th vote . Before Kennedy 's seat was filled , attention was drawn to Snowe because of her vote in favor of the draft bill in the Finance Committee on October 15 , but she explicitly stated that this did not mean she would support the final bill . Paul Kirk was appointed as Senator Kennedy 's temporary replacement on September 24 . 
 After the Finance Committee vote , negotiations turned to the demands of moderate Democrats , whose votes would be necessary to break the anticipated Republican filibuster . Majority leader Harry Reid focused on satisfying the Democratic caucus 's centrist members until the holdouts came down to Joe Lieberman of Connecticut , an independent who caucused with Democrats , and Ben Nelson , a conservative Democrat , representing Nebraska . Lieberman , despite intense negotiations with Reid in search of a compromise , refused to support a public option , agreeing to vote for the bill only if the provision were not included , although it had majority support in Congress . His demand was met . There was debate among the bill 's supporters over the importance of the public option , although the vast majority of supporters concluded it was a minor part of the reform overall , and Congressional Democrats ' fight for it won various concessions , including conditional waivers allowing states to set up state @-@ based public options such as Vermont 's Green Mountain Care . 
 With every other Democrat now in favor and every Republican now opposed , the White House and Reid moved on to addressing Nelson 's concerns in order to win filibuster @-@ proof support for the bill ; they had by this point concluded " it was a waste of time dealing with [ Snowe ] " because , after her vote for the draft bill in the Finance Committee , she had come under intense pressure from the Republican Senate leadership . After a final 13 @-@ hour negotiation , Nelson 's support for the bill was won with two concessions : a compromise on abortion , modifying the language of the bill " to give states the right to prohibit coverage of abortion within their own insurance exchanges " , which would require consumers to pay for the procedure out of pocket if the state so decided ; and an amendment to offer a higher rate of Medicaid reimbursement for Nebraska . The latter half of the compromise was derisively called the " Cornhusker <unk> " and was repealed in the subsequent reconciliation amendment bill . 
 On December 23 , the Senate voted 60 – 39 to end debate on the bill : a cloture vote to end the filibuster . The bill then passed , also 60 – 39 , on December 24 , 2009 , with all Democrats and two independents voting for it , and all Republicans against ( except Jim Bunning , who did not vote ) . The bill was endorsed by the AMA and AARP . 
 Several weeks later , on January 19 , 2010 , Massachusetts Republican Scott Brown was elected to the Senate in a special election to replace the late Ted Kennedy , having campaigned on giving the Republican minority the 41st vote needed to sustain Republican filibusters . The special election had become significant to the reform debate because of its effects on the legislative process . The first was psychological : the symbolic importance of losing Kennedy 's traditionally Democratic Massachusetts seat made many Congressional Democrats concerned about the political cost of passing a bill . The second effect was more practical : the loss of the Democratic supermajority complicated reform proponents ' legislative strategy . 
 = = = = House = = = = 
 Brown 's election meant Democrats could no longer break a filibuster in the Senate . In response , White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel argued that Democrats should scale back to a less ambitious bill ; House Speaker Nancy Pelosi pushed back , dismissing Emanuel 's scaled @-@ down approach as " Kiddie Care " . Obama also remained insistent on comprehensive reform , and the news that Anthem Blue Cross in California intended to raise premium rates for its patients by as much as 39 % gave him a new line of argument to reassure nervous Democrats after Scott Brown 's win . On February 22 , President Obama laid out a " Senate @-@ leaning " proposal to consolidate the bills . He held a meeting with both parties ' leaders on February 25 . With Democrats having lost a filibuster @-@ proof supermajority in the Senate but having already passed the Senate bill with 60 votes on December 24 , comprehensive reform proponents ' most workable option was for the House to abandon its bill , the Affordable Health Care for America Act , and pass the Senate 's bill , the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , instead . 
 Various health policy experts encouraged the House to pass the Senate version , but House Democrats were not happy with it and had expected to be able to negotiate changes in a House @-@ Senate conference before passing a final bill . With that option off the table , since any bill that emerged from conference that differed from the Senate bill would have to be passed in the Senate despite another Republican filibuster , most House Democrats agreed to pass the Senate bill on condition that it be amended by a subsequent bill . They drafted the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act , which could be passed by the reconciliation process . 
 Unlike rules under regular order , as per the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 , reconciliation cannot be subject to a filibuster . But reconciliation is limited to budget changes , which is why the procedure was not used to pass the ACA in the first place ; the bill had inherently non @-@ budgetary regulations . Still , although the already passed Senate bill could not have been passed by reconciliation , most of House Democrats ' demands were budgetary : " these changes — higher subsidy levels , different kinds of taxes to pay for them , <unk> the Nebraska Medicaid deal — mainly involve taxes and spending . In other words , they 're exactly the kinds of policies that are well @-@ suited for reconciliation . " 
 The remaining obstacle was a pivotal group of pro @-@ life Democrats led by Bart Stupak who were initially reluctant to support the bill . The group found the possibility of federal funding for abortion significant enough to warrant opposition . The Senate bill had not included language that satisfied their abortion concerns , but they could not include additional such language in the reconciliation bill as it would be non @-@ budgetary and thus outside the process 's domain . Instead , Obama issued Executive Order <unk> , reaffirming the principles in the Hyde Amendment . This won the support of Stupak and members of his group and assured the bill 's passage . The House passed the Senate bill with a 219 – 212 vote on March 21 , 2010 , with 34 Democrats and all 178 Republicans voting against it . The next day , Republicans introduced legislation to repeal the bill . Obama signed the ACA into law on March 23 , 2010 . The amendment bill , The Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act , was also passed by the House on March 21 ; the Senate passed it by reconciliation on March 25 , and Obama signed it on March 30 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Public policy = = = 
 The Affordable Care Act represents the most significant regulatory overhaul of the U.S. healthcare system since the passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965 . The New York Times summarized the overall impact of the Affordable Care Act on a variety of dimensions during October 2014 . The number of uninsured persons has been reduced significantly . About 7 @.@ 3 million people remain enrolled in private coverage through the online marketplaces ; 85 % of those qualified for federal subsidies to help pay premiums . For those who qualified for subsidies through the federal exchange , the subsidies lowered the cost by 76 % on average . Middle @-@ income persons who don 't qualify for subsidies are more likely to have challenges with premium costs . It is too early to tell whether the Act has affected health outcomes . While healthcare costs have grown slower in recent years , the effect of ACA on this trend is unclear . The healthcare industry has generally been helped by the law , due to the additional customers the law created for it . 
 = = = = Change in number of uninsured = = = = 
 The ACA has two primary mechanisms for increasing insurance coverage : expanding Medicaid eligibility to include individuals within 138 % of the federal poverty level , and creating state @-@ based insurance exchanges where individuals and small business can buy health insurance plans — those individuals with incomes between 100 % and 400 % of the federal poverty level will be eligible for subsidies to do so . The Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) originally estimated that the legislation will reduce the number of uninsured residents by 32 million , leaving 23 million uninsured residents in 2019 after the bill 's provisions have all taken effect . With the elderly covered by Medicare , the CBO estimate projected that the law would raise the proportion of insured non @-@ elderly citizens from 83 % to 94 % . A July 2012 CBO estimate raised the expected number of uninsured by 3 million , reflecting the successful legal challenge to the ACA 's expansion of Medicaid . 
 Among the people who will remain uninsured : 
 Illegal immigrants , estimated at around 8 million — or roughly a third of the 23 million projection — will be ineligible for insurance subsidies and Medicaid . They will also be exempt from the health insurance mandate but will remain eligible for emergency services under provisions in the 1986 Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act ( <unk> ) . 
 Citizens not enrolled in Medicaid despite being eligible . 
 Citizens not otherwise covered and opting to pay the annual penalty instead of purchasing insurance , mostly younger and single Americans . 
 Citizens whose insurance coverage would cost more than 8 % of household income and are exempt from paying the annual penalty . 
 Citizens who live in states that opt out of the Medicaid expansion and who qualify for neither existing Medicaid coverage nor subsidized coverage through the states ' new insurance exchanges . 
 ACA drafters believed that increasing insurance coverage would not only improve quality of life but also help reduce medical bankruptcies ( currently the leading cause of bankruptcy in America ) and job lock . In addition , many believed that expanding coverage would help ensure that the cost controls successfully function ; healthcare providers could more easily adapt to payment system reforms that incentivize value over quantity if their costs were partially offset — for example , hospitals having to do less charity care or insurers having larger and more stable risk pools to distribute costs over . 
 Due to the new regulations of guaranteed issue , and allowing children to be included on their parents ' plans until age 26 , several insurance companies announced that they would stop issuing new child @-@ only policies . However , because children would now be covered by their parents ' plans , the Census Bureau found that the number of uninsured 19- to 25 @-@ year @-@ olds had declined by 1 @.@ 6 % or 393 @,@ 000 people by 2011 . Starting January 1 , 2014 , state health insurance exchanges will be required to offer a child @-@ only coverage option , and Medicaid eligibility will be made available to 16 million individuals with incomes below 133 % of the federal poverty level . 
 Under the law , those workers whose employers offer " affordable coverage " will not be eligible for subsidies in the exchanges . To be eligible , per the law 's definition , the cost of employer @-@ based health insurance must exceed 9 @.@ 5 % of the worker 's household income . In January 2013 the Internal Revenue Service ruled that only the cost of covering the individual employee would be considered in determining whether the cost of coverage exceeded 9 @.@ 5 % of income . However , the cost of a family plan is often higher , but the ruling means that those higher costs will not be considered even if the extra premiums push the cost of coverage above the 9 @.@ 5 % income threshold . The New York Times said this could leave 2 – 4 million Americans unable to afford family coverage under their employers ’ plans and ineligible for subsidies to buy coverage elsewhere . 
 Multiple 2014 and 2015 studies and surveys indicated that the number of uninsured had fallen due to expanded Medicaid eligibility and health insurance exchanges established due to PPACA . These changes took effect January 1 , 2014 . 
 The Commonwealth Fund reported in July 2014 that an additional 9 @.@ 5 million people aged 19 – 64 had obtained health insurance , roughly 5 % of the working @-@ aged population . 
 Gallup reported in April 2015 that the uninsured rate among adults 18 and over fell from 18 @.@ 0 % in Q3 2013 to 11 @.@ 9 % by Q1 2015 . 
 The Rand Corporation reported that by March 2014 : " Enrollment in employer @-@ sponsored insurance plans increased by 8 @.@ 2 million and Medicaid enrollment increased by 5 @.@ 9 million , although some individuals did lose coverage during this period . The authors also found that 3 @.@ 9 million people are now covered through the state and federal marketplaces — the so called insurance exchanges — and less than 1 million people who previously had individual @-@ market insurance became uninsured during the period in question . While the survey cannot tell if this latter group lost their insurance due to cancellation or because they simply felt the cost was too high , the overall number is very small , representing less than 1 percent of people between the ages of 18 and 64 . " Thereafter , data from August 2014 showed that 7 @.@ 3 million people had enrolled through the marketplace and paid their premiums . 
 A 2015 study found that as a result of the dependent coverage provision of the ACA allowing young adults to stay on their parents ' plans until age 26 , young adults were more likely to have insurance , a primary care doctor , and report having excellent health . The same study found that this provision had also reduced body mass index among young adults . 
 In a 2016 scholarly review of ACA accomplishments , Barack Obama presented data showing that the ACA succeeded in sharply increasing insurance coverage . Since the ACA became law , he wrote , the uninsured rate has declined by 43 % , from 16 @.@ 0 % in 2010 to 9 @.@ 1 % in 2015 @,@ 7 with most of that decline occurring after the law 's main coverage provisions took effect in 2014 . 
 = = = = Insurance exchanges and the individual mandate = = = = 
 The Act establishes state @-@ based health insurance exchanges . The exchanges are regulated , online marketplaces , administered by either federal or state government , where individuals and small business can purchase private insurance plans starting October 1 , 2013 , with coverage beginning January 1 , 2014 . Individuals with incomes between 100 % and 400 % of the federal poverty level who purchase insurance plans via an exchange will be eligible to receive federal subsidies to help pay premium costs . 
 The exchanges will take the form of websites where the private plans allowed on sale within them will be regulated and comparable : Consumers will be able to visit these websites or ring a call center , compare the plans on offer , fill out a form to the government that will be used to determine their eligibility for subsidies , and then purchase the insurance of their choice from the options available during limited open enrollment periods . The first open enrollment period will last from October 1 , 2013 , to March 31 , 2014 , after which time uninsured individuals generally may not purchase insurance through an exchange until the following open enrollment period . In subsequent years , the open enrollment period will start on October 15 and end on December 7 . Despite some controversy , Members of Congress and their staff will participate in this system : they are required to obtain health insurance through the exchanges or plans otherwise approved by the bill ( such as Medicare ) instead of the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program that they currently use . 
 The insurance exchanges are a method designed to create a market for private insurance in a way that addresses market failures , such as the high number of uninsured , medical bankruptcies , coverage limits , <unk> , and inflation through regulation : Only approved plans that meet certain standards will be allowed to be sold on the exchanges , and insurers will be prohibited from denying insurance to consumers on the basis of pre @-@ existing conditions . Several methods will be employed to make these plans affordable : Subsidies will be provided to those eligible . Regulations intended to reduce prices through competition will make plans and prices more transparent and price comparisons more accessible for consumers with online information ; and federally approved , multi @-@ state plans will be phased @-@ into state exchanges to help guarantee enough options . And price regulations will be implemented , including a minimum medical loss ratio , and partial community rating that prevents price discrimination from pricing individuals out of the market through unaffordable plans or premium increases on the insured — namely poor and sick individuals who are more expensive to cover for insurers motivated either by profit maximization and / or the economics of insurance ; specifically , the risk of an insurance pool not providing enough net @-@ premiums to offset net @-@ pay @-@ outs . 
 These regulations are enabled to function due to the individual mandate — the requirement to buy insurance or pay a penalty — and the limits on open enrollment , without which healthy people might put @-@ off insuring themselves until they got sick . In such a situation , insurers would have to raise their premiums to afford the remaining ( relatively sicker and thus more expensive ) population , which could create a vicious cycle in which more and more people drop their coverage – a result known as an insurance death spiral . Alternatively , the process could settle at a stable equilibrium relying on relatively high premiums for the insured and less coverage ( and thus more illness and medical bankruptcy ) for the uninsured . The absence of the Mandate would have likely caused the exchanges as a whole to malfunction , and ultimately perform similarly to the current private insurance market , according to its supporters , based on studies by the CBO , Jonathan Gruber , and Rand Health have concluded . Conversely , the inclusion of the mandate increases the size and diversity of the insured population , broadening the risk pool to spread the cost of insurance in a sustainable manner . Policy experience in New Jersey on the one hand and Massachusetts on the other offers evidence of such divergent outcomes . In September 2012 , the Congressional Budget Office estimated that nearly six million will pay the penalty in 2016 . 
 Under the law , setting up an exchange gives a state partial discretion on standards and prices of insurance , aside from those specifics set @-@ out in the ACA . For example , those administering the exchange will be able to determine which plans are sold on or excluded from the exchanges , and adjust ( through limits on and negotiations with private insurers ) the prices on offer . They will also be able to impose higher or state @-@ specific coverage requirements — including whether plans offered in the state are prohibited from covering abortion ( making the procedure an out @-@ of @-@ pocket expense ) or mandated to cover abortions that a physician determines is medically necessary ; in either case , federal subsidies are prohibited from being used to fund the procedure . If a state does not set up an exchange itself , they lose that discretion , and the responsibility to set up exchanges for such states defaults to the federal government , whereby the Department of Health and Human Services assumes the authority and legal obligation to operate all functions in these federally facilitated exchanges . As of May 2013 , 23 states and the District of Columbia plan to operate state @-@ based exchanges themselves , seven of which will do so in partnership with the federal government — an arrangement where they retain discretionary management but the federal government executes various functions . The remaining 27 states default to federally facilitated exchanges . 
 The law is also designed to be flexible by allowing states , from 2017 onwards , to apply for a " waiver for state innovation " from the federal government that allows them to experiment with their own state @-@ based system , on condition that it meets certain criteria . To obtain a waiver , a state must pass legislation setting up an alternative health system that provides insurance at least as comprehensive and as affordable as that the ACA would , covers at least as many residents , and does not increase the federal deficit . Provided a state meets these conditions , receiving a waiver can exempt states from some of the central requirements of the ACA , including the individual mandate , the provision of an insurance exchange , and the employer mandate . The state would also receive compensation equal to the aggregate amount of any federal subsidies and tax credits for which its residents and employers would have been eligible under the ACA plan , if they cannot be paid out due to the structure of the state plan . 
 In May 2011 , Vermont , a state in which Republicans are but a small minority , had enacted Green Mountain Care , a state @-@ based single @-@ payer system for which they intended to pursue a waiver to implement . In December 2014 , Vermont decided not to pursue the single @-@ payer system . 
 = = = = = Implementation = = = = = 
 Early implementation efforts for the healthcare exchanges , especially the exchanges operated by the federal government , have received nearly universally negative reactions in the media and from politicians . HealthCare.gov , the website that allows people to apply for insurance through the exchanges operated by the federal government , crashed on opening and suffered from a rash of problems throughout the first month . Many users have also found the available plans to be unattractive . Ongoing problems with the website have prompted the development of <unk> , an independently produced alternative to HealthCare.gov , that contains consumer information . 
 Various committees in both chambers of Congress have conducted hearings where cyber security concerns related to HealthCare.gov have been discussed . Experts disagree over the extent HealthCare.gov is vulnerable to cyber attacks . 
 As of March 2013 , " radio ads providing information on the Affordable Care Act " have been broadcast in Ojibwe , Yupik , Inupiat , Lakota and Navajo , according to Indian Country Today Media Network . 
 The House Energy and Commerce Committee reported on April 30 , 2014 , that 67 % of individuals and families who had selected a health plan in the Federally Facilitated Marketplace had paid their first month 's premium ; and that 25 % of paid enrollees are ages 18 to 34 . On the same day , Committee ranking member Henry A. Waxman issued a statement saying the reporting was " ... inaccurate , irresponsible , and out @-@ of @-@ date " accompanied by a memorandum detailing the basis behind his statement . A week later , representatives for top health insurance companies told members of Congress that more than 80 percent of people who 've signed up under the new health care law have gone on to pay their premiums . 
 On July 30 , 2014 , the Government Accountability Office released a non @-@ partisan study that concluded the administration did not provide " effective planning or oversight practices " in developing the HealthCare.gov website . 
 = = = = Change in insurance standards = = = = 
 The ACA includes regulations that set standards for insurance , some specified in the law , others subsequently established by the Secretary of Health and Human Services . Among these new standards are a ban on the ability to drop policyholders if they become sick , a ban on price discrimination on the basis of pre @-@ existing conditions or sex through a partial community rating , and allowing children and dependents to remain on their parents ' insurance plan until their 26th birthday . 
 Under the law 's authorization , Secretary of Health Kathleen Sebelius issued a set of defined " essential health benefits " that all new insurance plans have to include . Insurers are prohibited from imposing annual or lifetime coverage caps on these essential benefits . These cover : " ambulatory patient services ; emergency services ; hospitalization ; maternity and newborn care ; mental health and substance use disorder services , including behavioral health treatment ; prescription drugs ; rehabilitative and <unk> services and devices ; laboratory services ; preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management ; and pediatric services , including oral and vision care " . In determining what would qualify as an essential benefit , the law requires that the scope of standard benefits should equal that of a " typical employer plan " . States have some discretion in determining what should be considered the benchmark plan within the requirements of the law , and may include services beyond those set out by the Secretary . 
 Among the essential health benefits , preventive care , childhood immunizations and adult vaccinations , and medical screenings are covered by an insurance plan 's premiums , and cannot be subject to any co @-@ payments , co @-@ insurance , or deductibles . Specific examples of such services covered include : <unk> and <unk> , wellness visits , gestational diabetes screening , HPV testing , STI counseling , HIV screening and counseling , FDA @-@ approved contraceptive methods , breastfeeding support and supplies , and domestic violence screening and counseling . 
 In addition , the law established four tiers of coverage : bronze plan , silver plan , gold plan , and platinum plan . All categories offer the same set of essential health benefits . What the categories specify is the division of premiums and out @-@ of @-@ pocket costs : bronze plans will have the lowest monthly premiums and highest out @-@ of @-@ pocket costs , and vice versa for platinum plans . The percentages of health care costs that plans are expected to cover through premiums ( as opposed to out @-@ of @-@ pocket costs ) are , on average : 60 % ( bronze ) , 70 % ( silver ) , 80 % ( gold ) , and 90 % ( platinum ) . 
 Insurers are also required to implement an appeals process for coverage determination and claims on all new plans . They are also required to spend at least 80 – 85 % of premium dollars on health costs and claims instead of administrative costs and profits ; rebates must be issued to policyholders if this is violated . 
 = = = = = Coverage for contraceptives = = = = = 
 One provision in the law mandates that health insurance cover " additional preventive care and screenings " for women , as specified in regulations to be issued by the Health Resources and Services Administration ( HRSA ) . The HRSA guidelines , issued August 1 , 2011 , included in this mandate " [ a ] ll Food and Drug Administration approved contraceptive methods , sterilization procedures , and patient education and counseling for all women with reproductive capacity " . This mandate applies to all employers and educational institutions except for religious organizations . These regulations were included on the recommendations of the Institute of Medicine , which concluded that access to contraception is medically necessary " to ensure women 's health and well @-@ being " . 
 The initial regulations proved controversial among certain religious groups , most notably evangelicals and Lutherans , and especially the Roman Catholic hierarchy , whose hospitals , charities and educational institutions of higher learning , as well as other enterprises , oppose contraception on doctrinal grounds . To accommodate those concerns while still guaranteeing access to contraception , the regulations were adjusted to " allow religious organizations to opt out of the requirement to include birth control coverage in their employee insurance plans . In those instances , the insurers themselves will offer contraception coverage to enrollees directly , at no additional cost " . 
 The contraception rule has also been challenged by corporations as a burden against their religious expression . The first challenge to reach the Supreme Court was Burwell v. Hobby Lobby . The Court ruled that closely held corporations , such as Hobby Lobby , would be exempt from the contraception rule under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act , which applies to regulations that govern the activities of closely held for @-@ profit corporations . In a follow up case to Burwell v. Hobby Lobby the U.S. Supreme Court issued an injunction pending appeal under which an evangelical college in Illinois and other religiously affiliated nonprofit groups will not have to fill out a form offered to religious nonprofits that would effectively transfer the cost of its employees ’ contraceptives to insurers . Wheaton College argued that filling out the form would " trigger " emergency contraceptive coverage and is therefore still against the institution 's religious beliefs . 
 = = = = Effects on insurance premiums = = = = 
 Several studies on insurance premiums expect that with the subsidies offered under the ACA , more people will pay less ( than they did prior to the reforms ) than those who will pay more , and that those premiums will be more stable ( even in changing health circumstances ) and transparent , due to the regulations on insurance . The Kaiser Family Foundation has calculated that about half the people who currently buy insurance on their own today will be eligible for subsidies . Among those receiving subsidies ( which excludes those with incomes above four times the poverty line — about $ 46 @,@ 000 for individuals or $ 94 @,@ 000 for a family of four ) , the subsidies are projected to be worth an average of $ 5 @,@ 548 per household , which would effectively discount the projected price of insurance by two @-@ thirds , on average . For individuals , NPR and the Kaiser Family Foundation collaborated to produce a quick online calculator for people to estimate their premiums and subsidy amount , based on where they live , income , and family size . 
 For the effect on health insurance premiums , the CBO forecast that by 2016 the individual market would comprise 17 % of the market , and that premiums per person would increase by 10 % to 13 % but that over half of these individuals would receive subsidies that would decrease the premium paid to " well below " premiums charged under current law . It also forecast that for the small group market , 13 % of the market , premiums would be impacted 1 % to -3 % , and -8 % to <unk> % for those receiving subsidies ; for the large group market comprising 70 % of the market , premiums would be impacted 0 % to -3 % , with those under high premium plans subject to excise taxes being charged 9 % to 12 % less . Factors taken into account by this analysis included increased benefits particularly for the individual market , more healthy policyholders due to the mandate , administrative efficiencies related to the health exchanges , and high @-@ premium insurance plans reducing some benefits in response to the tax . As of September 2013 , the final projections of the average monthly premium scheduled to be offered in the exchanges came in below CBO expectations , reducing expected costs not only for consumers but also for the government by reducing the overall cost of the subsidies . 
 Larry Levitt , a health policy analyst from the Kaiser Family Foundation , noted that the individual market compromises a relatively small share of those under 65 , and said , in contrast , " I don 't think anyone expects significant [ cost ] increases in the employer market , " where the majority of Americans get their health insurance . Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius also indicated that some cost increase in the individual market was expected because the standard of insurance allowed in the insurance exchanges would be higher quality than that generally available currently ( and thus more expensive ) , and that the government subsidies provided to make insurance affordable are intended to more than offset this effect . 
 In June 2013 , a study by the Kaiser Family Foundation focused on actual experience under the Act as it affected individual market consumers ( those buying insurance on their own ) . The study found that the Medical Loss Ratio provision of the Act had saved this group of consumers $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in 2011 and $ 2 @.@ 1 billion in 2012 , reducing their 2012 costs by 7 @.@ 5 % . The bulk of the savings were in reduced premiums for individual insurance , but some came from premium rebates paid to consumers by insurance companies that had failed to meet the requirements of the Act . The Associated Press reported that , as a result of ACA 's provisions closing the Medicare Part D coverage gap ( between the " initial coverage limit " and the " catastrophic coverage threshold " in the prescription drug program ) , individuals formerly falling in this " donut hole " would save about 40 percent . Almost all of the savings came reportedly because , with regard to brand @-@ name drugs , ACA secured a discount from pharmaceutical companies . The change benefited more than two million people , most of them in the middle class . 
 = = = = Healthcare cost inflation = = = = 
 In a May 2010 presentation on " Health Costs and the Federal Budget " , the CBO stated that " Rising health costs will put tremendous pressure on the federal budget during the next few decades and beyond . In CBO 's judgment , the health legislation enacted earlier this year does not substantially diminish that pressure . " 
 The CBO further observed that " Putting the federal budget on a sustainable path would almost certainly require a significant reduction in the growth of federal health spending relative to current law ( including this year 's health legislation ) . " and concluded , 
 ... there is considerable agreement that a substantial share of current spending on health care contributes little if anything to people 's health , and providers and health analysts are making significant efforts to make the health system more efficient ... [ though ] it is not clear what specific policies the federal government can adopt to generate fundamental changes in the health system ; that is , it is not clear what specific policies would translate the potential for significant cost savings into reality . 
 Jonathan Cohn , a health policy analyst , commented : 
 CBO doesn 't produce estimates of how reform will affect overall health care spending — that is , the amount of money our society , as a whole , will devote to health care . But the official actuary for Medicare does . The actuary determined that ... the long @-@ term trend is towards less spending : Inflation after ten years would be lower than it is now . And it 's the long @-@ term trend that matters most ... [ The Affordable Care Act ] will reduce the cost of care — not by a lot and not by as much as possible in theory , but as much as is possible in this political universe . 
 He and fellow The New Republic editor Noam <unk> claimed the CBO did not include in its estimate various cost @-@ saving provisions intended to reduce health inflation , also positing that the CBO has a history of consistently underestimating the impact of health legislation . 
 Jonathan Gruber , a consultant who helped develop both the Massachusetts healthcare reform under Mitt Romney and the ACA , has acknowledged that the ACA is not guaranteed to significantly " bend the curve " of rising healthcare costs : 
 The real question is how far the ACA will go in slowing cost growth . Here , there is great uncertainty — mostly because there is such uncertainty in general about how to control cost growth in health care . There is no shortage of good ideas for ways of doing so ... There is , however , a shortage of evidence regarding which approaches will actually work — and therefore no consensus on which path is best to follow . In the face of such uncertainty , the ACA pursued the path of considering a range of different approaches to controlling health care costs ... Whether these policies by themselves can fully solve the long run health care cost problem in the United States is doubtful . They may , however , provide a first step towards controlling costs — and understanding what does and does not work to do so more broadly . 
 The law created the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation and requires numerous pilot programs and demonstrations that may affect healthcare costs . These cost reductions were not factored into CBO cost estimates . 
 The Business Roundtable , an association of CEOs , commissioned a report from the consulting company Hewitt Associates , which found that the legislation " could potentially reduce that trend line by more than $ 3 @,@ 000 per employee , to $ 25 @,@ 435 " , with respect to insurance premiums . It also stated that the legislation " could potentially reduce the rate of future health care cost increases by 15 % to 20 % when fully phased in by 2019 " . The group cautioned that all of this would be dependent upon the success of the cost @-@ saving government pilot programs , which must then be wholly copied in the private market . 
 The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services reported in 2013 that , while costs per capita continue to rise , the rate of increase in annual healthcare costs has fallen since 2002 . Per capita cost increases have averaged 5 @.@ 4 % annually since 2000 . Costs relative to GDP , which had been rising , have stagnated since 2009 . Several studies have attempted to explain the reduction in the rate of annual increase . Reasons include , among others : 
 Higher unemployment due to the 2008 @-@ 2010 recession , which has limited the ability of consumers to purchase healthcare ; 
 Out @-@ of @-@ pocket payments , and deductibles , which constitute the amount an individual pays for their health costs before insurance begins to cover claims , have risen . These rising costs generally cause less consumption of healthcare services . The proportion of workers with employer @-@ sponsored health insurance requiring a deductible climbed to about three @-@ quarters in 2012 from about half in 2006 . 
 Structural changes in the healthcare system made by the ACA that aim to shift the healthcare system from paying @-@ for @-@ quantity to paying @-@ for @-@ quality . Examples include incentives to reduce hospital infections and to use electronic medical records , accountable care organizations , and bundled payments to coordinate care and prioritize quality over quantity . Some of these changes have occurred due to healthcare providers acting in anticipation of future implementation of reforms . 
 Uncertainty exists about the extent to which each factor is responsible for the recent reduction in health inflation , and about the durability of the overall trend , including the accompanying reduction in long @-@ term deficit projections due to reduced healthcare costs . However , several studies found that the temporary effects of the recession cannot account for the entirety of the slowdown and that structural changes likely share at least partial credit . 
 One study estimated that the changes to the health system are responsible for about a quarter of the recent reduction in inflation . Paul <unk> posits that even if cost controls succeed in reducing the amount spent on healthcare , such efforts on their own may be insufficient to outweigh the long @-@ term burden placed by demographic changes , particularly the growth of the population on Medicare . 
 In a 2016 review of the ACA , Barack Obama reported that from 2010 through 2014 mean annual growth in real per @-@ enrollee Medicare spending was negative , down from a mean of 4 @.@ 7 % per year from 2000 through 2005 and 2 @.@ 4 % per year from 2006 to 2010 ; similarly , mean real per @-@ enrollee growth in private insurance spending has been 1 @.@ 1 % per year since 2010 , compared with a mean of 6 @.@ 5 % from 2000 through 2005 and 3 @.@ 4 % from 2005 to 2010 . 
 = = = = Federal deficit = = = = 
 = = = = = CBO estimates of revenue and impact on deficit = = = = = 
 The 2011 comprehensive CBO estimate projected a net deficit reduction of more than $ 200 billion during the 2012 – 2021 period : it calculated the law would result in $ 604 billion in total outlays offset by $ 813 billion in total receipts , resulting in a $ 210 billion net reduction in the deficit . The CBO separately noted that while most of the spending provisions do not begin until 2014 , revenue will still exceed spending in those subsequent years . The CBO averred that the bill would " substantially reduce the growth of Medicare 's payment rates for most services ; impose an excise tax on insurance plans with relatively high premiums ; and make various other changes to the federal tax code , Medicare , Medicaid , and other programs " — ultimately extending the solvency of the Medicare trust fund by 8 years . 
 However , this estimate was made prior to the Supreme Court 's ruling that enabled states to opt out of the Medicaid expansion , thereby forgoing the federal funding . The CBO and JCT subsequently updated the budget projection , estimating the impact of the ruling would reduce the cost estimate of the insurance coverage provisions by $ 84 billion . 
 The CBO reported in June 2015 that repeal of the ACA would increase the deficit between $ 137 billion and $ 353 billion over the 2016 – 2025 period in total , depending on the impact of macroeconomic feedback effects . In other words , ACA is a deficit reducer , as its repeal would raise the deficit . CBO also reported that repeal of ACA would likely raise economic output , mainly by boosting the supply of labor as low @-@ income persons would have more incentive to work without healthcare coverage provided by ACA . 
 Major sources of deficit reduction include : higher Medicare taxes on the wealthy ; new annual fees on health insurance providers ; similar fees on the healthcare industry such as manufacturers and importers of brand @-@ name pharmaceutical drugs and certain medical devices ; limits on tax deductions of medical expenses and flexible spending accounts ; a new 40 % excise tax on " Cadillac " insurance policies - plans with annual insurance premiums in excess of $ 10 @,@ 200 for an individual or $ 27 @,@ 500 for a family ; revenue from mandate penalty payments ; a 10 % federal sales tax on indoor tanning services ; and spending offsets such as a reduction in Medicare reimbursements to insurers and drug companies for private Medicare Advantage policies that the Government Accountability Office and Medicare Payment Advisory Commission found to be overpaid ( relative to government Medicare ) ; and reductions in Medicare reimbursements to hospitals that do not meet standards of efficiency and care . 
 Although the CBO generally does not provide cost estimates beyond the 10 @-@ year budget projection period because of the degree of uncertainty involved in the projection , it decided to do so in this case at the request of lawmakers , and estimated a second decade deficit reduction of $ 1 @.@ 2 trillion . CBO predicted deficit reduction around a broad range of one @-@ half percent of GDP over the 2020s while cautioning that " a wide range of changes could occur " . 
 A commonly heard complaint regarding the CBO cost estimates is that CBO was required to exclude from its initial estimates the effects of likely " doc fix " legislation that would increase Medicare payments by more than $ 200 billion from 2010 to 2019 . However , the " doc fix " is a separate issue that would have existed whether or not the ACA became law - omitting its cost from the ACA is no different from omitting the cost of the Bush tax cuts . 
 = = = = = Opinions on CBO projections = = = = = 
 There was mixed opinion about the CBO estimates . Uwe Reinhardt , a health economist at Princeton , wrote that " The rigid , artificial rules under which the Congressional Budget Office must score proposed legislation unfortunately cannot produce the best unbiased forecasts of the likely fiscal impact of any legislation " , but went on to say " But even if the budget office errs significantly in its conclusion that the bill would actually help reduce the future federal deficit , I doubt that the financing of this bill will be anywhere near as fiscally irresponsible as was the financing of the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003 . " Douglas Holtz @-@ Eakin , CBO director during the George W. Bush administration , who later served as the chief economic policy adviser to U.S. Senator John McCain 's 2008 presidential campaign , alleged that the bill would increase the deficit by $ 562 billion because , he argued , it front @-@ loaded revenue and back @-@ loaded benefits . 
 The New Republic editors Noam <unk> and Jonathan Cohn , countered critical assessments of the law 's deficit impact , arguing that it is as likely , if not more so , for predictions to have underestimated deficit reduction than to have overestimated it . They noted that it is easier , for example , to account for the cost of definite levels of subsidies to specified numbers of people than account for savings from preventive healthcare , and that the CBO has a track record of consistently overestimating the costs of , and underestimating the savings of health legislation ; " innovations in the delivery of medical care , like greater use of electronic medical records and financial incentives for more coordination of care among doctors , would produce substantial savings while also slowing the relentless climb of medical expenses ... But the CBO would not consider such savings in its calculations , because the innovations hadn 't really been tried on such large scale or in concert with one another — and that meant there wasn 't much hard data to prove the savings would materialize . " 
 David Walker , former U.S. Comptroller General now working for The Peter G. Peterson Foundation , has stated that the CBO estimates are not likely to be accurate , because they are based on the assumption that Congress is going to do everything they say they 're going to do . The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities objected : in its analysis , Congress has a good record of implementing Medicare savings . According to their study , Congress followed through on the implementation of the vast majority of provisions enacted in the past 20 years to produce Medicare savings . 
 = = = = Employer mandate and part @-@ time working hours = = = = 
 Not to be confused with the individual mandate 
 The employer mandate is a penalty that will be incurred by employers with more than 50 employees that do not offer health insurance to their full @-@ time workers . This provision was included as a disincentive for employers considering dropping their current insurance plans once the insurance exchanges began operating as an alternative source of insurance . Proponents of the reform law wanted to address the parts of the healthcare system they believed to not be working well , while causing minimal disruption to those happy with the coverage they have . Lawmakers recognized that approximately 80 % of Americans already have insurance , of whom 54 % ( 44 % of the total population ) are covered directly or indirectly through an employer , and 29 % ( 23 % of the total population ) are covered by the government — mainly though Medicare and Medicaid . While 73 % of the total population reported themselves satisfied with their insurance situation , significant minorities , even among those that reported favorably , had medically @-@ related financial troubles and / or dissatisfaction with aspects of their insurance coverage , especially among the poor and sick . The intent of the employer mandate ( along with a grandfather clause in the ACA ) is to help ensure that existing employer @-@ sponsored insurance plans that people like will stay in place . 
 As no company with fewer than 50 full @-@ time employees will face this penalty , many are concerned that the employer mandate creates a perverse incentive for business to employ people part @-@ time instead of full @-@ time . This hypothetical phenomenon has sometimes been referred to by commentators on both sides of the political spectrum as " The Obamacare Effect " . 
 Despite concerns over a massive spike in part @-@ time workers driven by cost @-@ cutting efforts on the part of large employers , the number of part @-@ time jobs in the United States had , in fact , declined by 230 @,@ 000 , while the number of full @-@ time jobs has increased by 2 million during the period leading up to the start @-@ date of Obamacare as of early 2014 . Where full @-@ time jobs have turned into part @-@ time jobs seems to be in the public sector ( as a result of efforts to reduce state and federal deficits ) rather than as an effort to maintain or increase corporate profits in the private sectors ( the original fear of individuals who coined the term ' Obamacare Effect ' ) . Similarly , a 2016 study found only limited evidence that the ACA had increased part @-@ time employment . 
 Several businesses and the State of Virginia have clarified the contracts of their part @-@ time employees by adding a 29 @-@ hour @-@ a @-@ week cap , to reflect the 30 @-@ hour threshold for full @-@ time hours , as defined by the law . Some labor market experts claim such shifts are not clearly attributable to the implementation of the ACA : pre @-@ existing , long @-@ term trends in working hours , and the effects of the Great Recession correlate with part @-@ time working hour patterns . The impact of this provision on employers ' decision @-@ making is partially offset by other factors : offering healthcare helps attract and retain employees , while increasing productivity and reducing absenteeism ; and to trade a smaller full @-@ time workforce for a larger part @-@ time work force carries costs of training and administration for a business . The amount of employers with over 50 employees is relatively small , and more than 90 % of these already offer insurance , so changes in employer plans from this provision are expected to be small . Workers who do not receive insurance from an employer plan would be able to purchase insurance on the exchanges . 
 Regardless of the rationale for maintaining existing insurance arrangements for those happy with them , most policy analysts ( on both the right and left ) are critical of the employer mandate provision on the policy merits . They argue that the perverse incentives regarding part @-@ time hours , even if they do not change many existing insurance plans , are real and harmful ; that the raised marginal cost of the 50th worker for businesses could limit companies ' growth ; that the costs of reporting and administration — the paperwork for businesses and the state enforcement — are not worth the trade @-@ off of incentivizing the maintenance of current employer plans ; and note that the employer mandate , unlike the individual mandate , is a non @-@ essential part of the law . Some analysts have suggested that an alternate ' pay or play ' version of the employer mandate would partially avoid these problems , by instead taxing business that do not offer insurance by a percentage of their payroll rather than using the 50 @-@ employee and 30 @-@ hour cut @-@ offs . Furthermore , many healthcare policy analysts think it would be better to transition away from the employer @-@ based system to systems ( whether state- or market @-@ based ) where insurance is more portable and stable , and hence think that it is a bad idea to even try to maintain existing employer insurance systems . The effects of the provision have also generated vocal opposition from business interests and some unions not granted exemptions . 
 On July 2 , 2013 , the Obama Administration announced on the Treasury Department 's Proposed Regulations REG @-@ <unk> @-@ 12 would delay the implementation of the employer mandate for one year , until 2015 . 
 A 2013 / 4 survey by the National Association for Business Economics found that about 75 percent of those surveyed said the ACA hasn ’ t influenced their planning or expectations for 2014 , and 85 percent said the law wouldn ’ t prompt a change in their hiring practices . Some 21 percent of 64 businesses surveyed said that the act would have a harmful effect and 5 percent said it would be beneficial . 
 On February 10 , 2014 , the Treasury Department issued Treasury Decision <unk> , which are final regulation , that it would delay the employer mandate until 2015 . The Treasury Decision <unk> modifies Proposed Regulations REG @-@ <unk> @-@ 12 . 
 = = = = Changes in existing individual insurance plans = = = = 
 At various times during and after the debate surrounding the ACA , Obama stated that " if you like your health care plan , you 'll be able to keep your health care plan " . However , the law grandfathers only those insurance plans that were in effect before the law was enacted and have not been significantly changed since then . Plans that do not satisfy these criteria must be cancelled if they do not comply with the law 's new requirements for insurance standards . Furthermore , the law does not prohibit insurers from cancelling older plans for other reasons , such as a determination that a plan is too expensive to maintain . For these reasons , in fall 2013 millions of Americans with individual policies received notices that their insurance plans were being terminated , and several million more are in danger of seeing their current plans cancelled . 
 On November 7 , 2013 , President Obama stated : " I am sorry that [ people losing their plans ] are finding themselves in this situation based on assurances they got from me " , and he promised to work to help the affected Americans . Various acts have been introduced in Congress to allow people to keep their existing individual insurance plans . President Obama 's previous unambiguous assurance that consumers ' could keep their own plans has become a focal point for critics of the ACA and a political liability for the law 's proponents . Whether or not President Obama knew that his statements were incorrect at the time he made them has also become the focus of discussion . 
 = = = = <unk> controversy = = = = 
 The asset @-@ recovery provision of Medicaid , nicknamed the " <unk> " provision , was enacted in 1993 by Congress in response to rising Medicaid administrative costs . States were compelled to try to recover costs from the estates of the deceased who used the program for long @-@ term care , either via liens placed on an individual 's home or claims on their assets . There was also an option for states to recover other routine medical care expenses . The expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act made more residents eligible for Medicaid . The state and federal government as of February 2014 have not clarified <unk> guidelines , triggering complaints from consumers and advocacy groups from the uncertainty . 
 = = = = Hospitals = = = = 
 From the start of 2010 to November 2014 , 43 hospitals in rural areas closed , according to the North Carolina Rural Health Research Program . Critics of the Affordable Care Act have stated that the new law has caused these hospitals to close . Many of these rural hospitals were built using funds from the 1946 Hill – Burton Act , to increase access to medical care in rural areas . Some of these hospitals have re @-@ opened as other forms of medical facilities , but only a small number of those re @-@ opened facilities operate emergency rooms or urgent care centers . 
 Since January 2010 , a quarter of emergency room ( ER ) doctors say they have seen a major surge in ER patients , while nearly half have seen a less significant increase in the number of patients . Seven in ten ER doctors say they lack the resources to deal with large increases in the number of patients . The biggest factor in the increased number of patients at <unk> is an insufficient number of primary care providers to handle the larger number of insured patients . 
 = = = = Public opinion = = = = 
 Public opinion polls indicate that the United States public generally supports healthcare reform , but the public 's views became increasingly negative in reaction to specific plans discussed during the legislative debate over 2009 and 2010 . Polling statistics for the general population show a general negative opinion of the law in the first years ; with those in favor at approximately 40 % and those against at 51 % , as of October 2013 . About 29 % of whites approve of the law , compared with 61 % of Hispanics and 91 % of African Americans , according to a Pew Research Center and USA Today survey conducted on 4 – 8 September 2013 . USA Today found opinions were strongly divided by age of the person at the law 's inception , with a solid majority of seniors opposing the bill and a solid majority of those younger than forty years old in favor . 
 Specific elements are very popular across the political spectrum , with the notable exception of the mandate to purchase insurance . FiveThirtyEight , describing public opinion of the law , said , " while surveys have consistently found that a plurality of Americans have an overall negative view of the Affordable Care Act , they have just as consistently shown that large majorities of Americans favor individual elements of the law . " For example , a Reuters @-@ Ipsos poll during June 2012 indicated that 44 % of Americans supported the law , with 56 % against . By party affiliation , 75 % of Democrats , 27 % of Independents , and 14 % of Republicans favored the law overall . Individual provisions of the law received varying levels of support : 82 % favored banning insurance companies from denying coverage to people with pre @-@ existing conditions , 61 % favored allowing children to stay on their parents ' insurance until age 26 , 72 % supported requiring companies with more than 50 employees to provide insurance for their employees , and 39 % supported the individual mandate to own insurance or pay a penalty . By party affiliation , 19 % of Republicans , 27 % of Independents , and 59 % of Democrats favored the mandate . Other polls showed additional provisions receiving majority support include the creation of insurance exchanges , pooling small businesses and the uninsured with other consumers so that more people can take advantage of large group pricing benefits , and providing subsidies to individuals and families to make health insurance more affordable . Other specific ideas that were not enacted but which showed majority support included importing prescription drugs from Canada ( with its lower , government @-@ controlled prices ) , limiting malpractice awards , reducing the age to qualify for Medicare , and the Public health insurance option . 
 <unk> probed the reasons for opposition . In a CNN poll , 62 % of respondents said they thought the ACA would " increase the amount of money they personally spend on health care " , 56 % said the bill " gives the government too much involvement in health care " , and 19 % said they thought they and their families would be better off with the legislation . Other polls found that people were concerned that the law would cost more than projected , and would not do enough to control the cost of health care affecting their families . 
 However , part of the opposition to the law is because some Americans believe the reform did not go far enough : A Reuters @-@ Ipsos poll indicated that , for those opposed to the bill , 71 % of Republican opponents reject it overall while 29 % believed it did not go far enough ; independent opponents were divided 67 % to 33 % ; and among the relatively much smaller group of Democratic opponents , 49 % reject it overall , and 51 % wanted the measure to go further . 
 As of 2011 many Democrats believed that the ACA would grow more popular over time , like Medicare did after its implementation , as the benefits of the law take effect and close the information gap about the contents of the bill . 
 In June 2013 , a majority of the public ( 52 – 34 % ) indicated a desire for " Congress to implement or tinker with the law rather than repeal it " . Following the Supreme Court upholding the constitutionality of the individual mandate in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius , a poll released in July 2012 showed that " most Americans ( 56 % ) want to see critics of President Obama 's health care law drop efforts to block it and move on to other national issues . " The RAND Health Reform Opinion Study for May 1 , 2014 , showed that 48 @.@ 9 % of respondents had an unfavorable view of the ACA vs. 38 @.@ 3 % who had a favorable view ( of more than 5 @,@ 500 individuals ) . 
 Polling averages from RealClearPolitics showed public approval of the ACA as 52 @.@ 1 % against and 38 @.@ 6 % for ( poll averages from February 27 to March 25 , 2014 ) . 
 An Associated Press @-@ GfK poll released March 28 , 2014 showed that 26 % of Americans support the ACA . 
 A Wall Street Journal / NBC poll released April 30 , 2014 , indicated that 8 % of respondents say that the Affordable Care Act " is working well the way it is " . 
 By the end of 2014 , a Rasmussen 3 @-@ option poll showed Repeal : 30 % , Leave as is : 13 % , Improve : 52 % , i.e. , 65 % wanted to leave the ACA alone or improve upon it . 
 In June 2015 , a CBS News / New York Times poll showed that 47 % of Americans approved the health care law . This was the first time that a major poll indicated that the number of Americans who approved the ACA is bigger than the ones who disapprove it , though by a small margin . 
 = = = Political = = = 
 = = = = Term " Obamacare " = = = = 
 The term " Obamacare " was originally coined by opponents of the Affordable Care Act as a pejorative term for the law . The term was first put in print in March 2007 when healthcare lobbyist Jeanne Schulte Scott penned it in a health industry journal , writing " We will soon see a ' Giuliani @-@ care ' and ' Obama @-@ care ' to go along with ' McCain @-@ care ' , ' Edwards @-@ care ' , and a totally revamped and remodeled ' Hillary @-@ care ' from the 1990s " . According to research by Elspeth Reeve at The Atlantic magazine , the expression Obamacare first was used in early 2007 , generally by writers describing the candidate 's proposal for expanding coverage for the uninsured . The word was first uttered in a political campaign by Mitt Romney in May 2007 in Des Moines , Iowa . Romney said , " In my state , I worked on healthcare for some time . We had half a million people without insurance , and I said , ' How can we get those people insured without raising taxes and without having government take over healthcare ? ' And let me tell you , if we don 't do it , the Democrats will . If the Democrats do it , it will be socialized medicine ; it 'll be government @-@ managed care . It 'll be what 's known as Hillarycare or Barack Obamacare , or whatever you want to call it . " 
 By mid @-@ 2012 , Obamacare had become the most common colloquial term used to refer to the law by both supporters and opponents . In contrast , the use of " Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act " or " Affordable Care Act " became limited to more formal and official use . Use of the term in a positive sense was suggested by Democrat John Conyers . President Obama endorsed the nickname , saying , " I have no problem with people saying Obama cares . I do care . " Because of the number of " Obamacare " search engine queries , the Department of Health and Human Services purchased Google advertisements , triggered by the term , to direct people to the official HHS site . In March 2012 , the Obama reelection campaign embraced the term " Obamacare " , urging Obama 's supporters to post Twitter messages that begin , " I like # Obamacare because ... " . After its debut as a phrase on Capitol Hill , according to an analysis by the Sunlight Foundation , from July 2009 to June 2012 the term " Obamacare " was used nearly 3 @,@ 000 times in congressional speeches . 
 In October 2013 the Associated Press and NPR began cutting back on use of the term . Stuart Seidel , NPR 's managing editor , said that the term " seems to be straddling somewhere between being a politically @-@ charged term and an accepted part of the vernacular " . 
 = = = = Common misconceptions = = = = 
 = = = = = " Death panels " = = = = = 
 On August 7 , 2009 , Sarah Palin claimed the proposed legislation would create " death panels " that would decide if sick and elderly Americans were " worthy " of medical care . The allegation was named PolitiFact 's " Lie of the Year " , one of FactCheck.org 's " <unk> " , and the most outrageous term by the American Dialect Society . The AARP described such rumors as " rife with gross — and even cruel — distortions " . In 2010 , the Pew Research Center reported that 85 % of Americans were familiar with the claim , and 30 % believed it was true , with three contemporaneous polls finding similar results . A poll in August 2012 found that 39 % of Americans still believed the " death panels " claim . 
 The " death panel " misconception distorts separate issues initially related to two proposed provisions found in the early drafts of the ACA . One was a claim that under the law , seniors can be denied care due to their age and the other that the government will advise them to end their own lives instead of receiving due care — the former eventually morphing into alluding to the Independent Payment Advisory Board ( <unk> ) , which was established with the passage of the ACA , instead . The <unk> has the authority to determine then recommend additional cost @-@ saving changes to the Medicare program by facilitating the adoption of additional cost @-@ effective treatments and similar cost @-@ recovering measures when the statutory levels set for the administration of the Medicare program are exceeded within any given 3 @-@ year cycle scheduled . In fact , the Board is prohibited from recommending changes that would reduce payments to certain providers before 2020 , and is also prohibited from recommending changes in premiums , benefits , eligibility and taxes , or other changes that would result in rationing . 
 The other related issue concerns advance @-@ care planning consultation : a section of the House reform proposal would have reimbursed physicians for providing voluntary consultations of Medicare recipients on end @-@ of @-@ life health planning ( which is also covered by many private plans ) , enabling patients to specify , on request , the kind of care they wish to receive in their old age . As described by the site <unk> , " This provision would allow patients to prepare for the day when they might be seriously ill and unable to make medical decisions for themselves by engaging in consultations with doctors to discuss the full range of end @-@ of @-@ life care options available to them , and to have the cost of such consultations covered by Medicare ... [ including ] directives to accept or refuse extreme life @-@ saving measures , selection of hospice care programs , appointment of relatives " to act on the patient 's behalf , etc . The provision was not included in the final draft of the 2009 bill that was enacted into law . 
 = = = = = Members of Congress are not exempt = = = = = 
 The ACA requires members of Congress and their staffs to obtain health insurance either through an exchange or some other program approved by the law ( such as Medicare ) , instead of using the insurance offered to federal employees ( the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program ) . The federal government will continue to maintain its contributions to the new health insurance plans of federal employees . 
 = = = = = No benefits for illegal immigrants = = = = = 
 The ACA does not provide benefits to illegal immigrants , although a poll found that 42 % believed that it does . It explicitly denies insurance subsidies to " unauthorized ( illegal ) aliens " . 
 = = Opposition and resistance = = 
 Opposition and efforts to repeal the legislation have drawn support from a range of sources which includes labor unions , prominent conservative advocacy groups , Congressional and many state Republicans , certain small business organizations , and the Tea Party movement . These groups believe the law will lead to disruption of existing health plans , increased costs from new insurance standards , and that it will increase the deficit . Some are also against the idea of universal healthcare , viewing insurance as similar to other commodities to which people are not entitled . 
 As of 2013 unions that have expressed concerns about the negative impact the ACA will have on their members ' health care benefits , included the AFL @-@ CIO , which called the ACA " highly disruptive " to union health care plans and said it would drive up costs of union @-@ sponsored plans ; and International Brotherhood of Teamsters , United Food and Commercial Workers International Union , and UNITE @-@ HERE , leaders of which sent a letter to Harry Reid ( D @-@ NV ) and Nancy Pelosi ( D @-@ CA ) arguing that " the ACA will shatter not only our hard @-@ earned health benefits , but destroy the foundation of the 40 @-@ hour work week that is the backbone of the American middle class . " In January 2014 , Terry O <unk> , president of the Laborers ' International Union of North America ( <unk> ) and D. Taylor , president of Unite Here sent a letter to Harry Reid ( D @-@ NV ) and Nancy Pelosi ( D @-@ CA ) stating that , " The ACA , as implemented , undermines fair marketplace competition in the health care industry . " 
 = = = Legal challenges = = = 
 Opponents of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act turned to the federal courts to challenge the constitutionality of the legislation . In National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius , decided on June 28 , 2012 , the Supreme Court ruled on a 5 – 4 vote that the individual mandate is constitutional under Congress 's taxation powers , although the law could not have been upheld under Congress 's regulatory power under the Commerce Clause . The Court also determined that states could not be forced to participate in the Medicaid expansion , effectively allowing states to opt out of this provision . As written , the ACA withheld all Medicaid funding from states declining to participate in the expansion . The Supreme Court ruled that this withdrawal of funding was unconstitutionally coercive and that individual states had the right to opt out of the Medicaid expansion without losing preexisting Medicaid funding from the federal government . All provisions of ACA will continue in effect or will take effect as scheduled subject to the states ' determination on Medicaid expansion . 
 In March 2012 the Roman Catholic Church , while supportive of the ACA 's objectives , has voiced concern through the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops that aspects of the mandate covering artificial contraception and sterilization and HHS 's narrow definition of a religious organization were violations of the First Amendment right to free exercise of religion and conscience . Numerous lawsuits are pending addressing these concerns . 
 On June 25 , 2015 , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 6 – 3 that federal subsidies for health insurance premiums could be used in the 34 states that did not set up their own insurance exchanges . 
 = = = State rejections of Medicaid expansion = = = 
 Following the Supreme Court ruling in <unk> v. Sebelius , several states with legislatures or governorships controlled by Republicans opted to reject the expanded Medicaid coverage provided for by the Act . Over half of the national uninsured population lives in those states . As of January 2016 , 31 states and the District of Columbia have adopted the Medicaid expansion ; a few states have remained undecided . States that declined to expand Medicaid before 2014 may still choose to opt in at any time . 
 The drafters of the ACA had intended for Medicaid to cover individuals and families with incomes up to 133 % ( 138 % under effective definitions of income ) of the federal poverty level by expanding Medicaid eligibility and simplifying the CHIP enrollment process . Low @-@ income individuals and families above 100 % and up to 400 % of the federal poverty level were to receive federal subsidies on a sliding scale if they choose to purchase insurance via an exchange . For example , individuals with incomes between 133 % and 150 % of the poverty level would be subsidized such that their premium cost would be 3 % to 4 % of their income . The Supreme Court ruling created the potential for a coverage gap . States that chose to reject the Medicaid expansion could maintain the pre @-@ existing Medicaid eligibility thresholds they have set , which in many states are significantly below 133 % of the poverty line for most individuals . Furthermore , many states do not make Medicaid available to childless adults at any income level . Because subsidies on insurance plans purchased through exchanges are not available to those below the poverty line , this created a coverage gap in those states between the state Medicaid threshold and the subsidy eligibility threshold . For example , in Kansas , where only those able @-@ bodied adults with children and with an income below 32 % of the poverty line are eligible for Medicaid , those with incomes from 32 % to 100 % of the poverty level ( $ 6 @,@ 250 to $ 19 @,@ 530 for a family of three ) would be ineligible for both Medicaid and federal subsidies to buy insurance . If they have no children , able @-@ bodied adults are not eligible for Medicaid in Kansas . Studies of the impact of state decisions to reject the Medicaid expansion , as of July 2013 , calculate that up to 6 @.@ 4 million Americans could fall into this coverage gap . A 2013 Commonwealth Fund report found that if all states that had not expanded Medicaid did so , as many as 21 @.@ 3 million currently uninsured Americans could gain insurance by 2022 . 
 For states that do expand Medicaid , the federal government pays for 100 % of the expansion through 2016 , and the subsidy tapers to 90 % by 2020 . Several opposing states argue that their 10 % responsibility of funding the expansion will be too much for their states ' budgets . Studies suggest that rejecting the expansion will cost states more than expanding Medicaid due to increased spending on uncompensated emergency care that otherwise would have been partially paid for by Medicaid coverage , as well as deprive opting @-@ out states of federal funding that would benefit the states ' economies if they agreed to the expansion . Medicaid expansion has also been associated with increased tax revenue , job growth and significant reductions in the expansion states ' uninsured population . A 2015 study found that due to states not expanding Medicaid , 7 @.@ 74 million Americans will remain uninsured , and that this would lead to " between 7 @,@ 076 and 16 @,@ 945 more deaths " than if the states had agreed to expand Medicaid . 
 = = = Non @-@ cooperation = = = 
 Officials in Texas , Florida , Alabama , Wyoming , Arizona , Oklahoma and Missouri have decided to oppose those elements of the ACA over which they have discretion . For example , Missouri declined to expand Medicaid or establish a health insurance marketplace but is also engaged in an active program of non @-@ cooperation , having enacted a statute forbidding any state or local official to render any aid not specifically required by federal law to the functioning of the Affordable Care Act . Other Republican politicians have tried to discourage efforts to advertise the benefits of the law , and some conservative political groups have launched ad campaigns to discourage enrollment . 
 = = = Repeal efforts = = = 
 The ACA has been the subject of unsuccessful repeal efforts by Republicans in the 111th , 112th , and 113th Congresses : U.S. House Reps Steve King ( R @-@ IA ) and Michele Bachmann ( R @-@ MN ) introduced bills in the House to repeal the ACA the day after it was signed , as did Senator Jim DeMint ( R @-@ SC ) in the U.S. Senate . In 2011 , after Republicans gained control of the House of Representatives , one of the first votes held was on a bill titled " <unk> the Job @-@ Killing Health Care Law Act " ( H.R. 2 ) , which the House passed on a 245 – 189 vote . All Republicans and 3 Democrats voted for repeal . House Democrats proposed an amendment that repeal not take effect until a majority of the Senators and Representatives had opted out of the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program ; Republicans voted down the measure . In the Senate , the bill was offered as an amendment to an unrelated bill but was voted down . President Obama had stated that he would have vetoed the bill even if it had passed both chambers of Congress . 
 Following the 2012 Supreme Court ruling upholding the ACA as constitutional , Republicans held another vote to repeal the law on July 11 ; the House of Representatives voted with all 244 Republicans and 5 Democrats in favor of repeal , which marked the 33rd , partial or whole , repeal attempt . With President Obama 's reelection and the Democrats expanding their majority in the Senate following the 2012 elections , many Republicans conceded that repeal almost certainly will not occur . On February 3 , 2015 , the House of Representatives added its 67th repeal vote to the record with 239 to 186 and nine members abstaining , moving the action to the Senate , where Republican Senator Ted Cruz , ( R @-@ Texas ) , introduced legislation for full repeal with vote on September 2 , 2015 . 
 = = = = 2013 federal government shutdown = = = = 
 Strong partisan disagreement in Congress has prevented adjustments to the Act 's provisions . However , at least one change , a proposed repeal of a tax on medical devices , has received bipartisan support . Some Congressional Republicans argued against improvements to the law on the grounds they would weaken the arguments for repeal . 
 Republicans attempted to defund its implementation , and in October 2013 , House Republicans , supported by Senators Rand Paul , Ted Cruz , Mike Lee , and Marco Rubio , refused to fund the federal government unless accompanied with a delay in implementation of the ACA , after the President unilaterally pushed back the employer mandate by one year , which critics claim he had no legal right to do . The Republican @-@ held House of Representatives passed three versions of a bill funding all elements of the government while submitting various versions that would repeal or delay the ACA , with the last version delaying enforcement of the " individual mandate " . These bills were unable to muster enough votes in the Democrat @-@ held Senate , with Democratic leadership stating the Senate would only pass a " clean " funding bill without any restrictions on the ACA . After Congress failed to pass a continuing funding resolution by midnight on October 1 , a government shutdown ensued . Conservative groups such as Heritage Action provided lobbying support for the linkage between the ACA and the government shutdown . Senate Republicans threatened to block appointments to relevant agencies , such as the Independent Payment Advisory Board and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services . 
 = = = = Economic consequences = = = = 
 Until passage of the ACA , the majority of US citizens had a company sponsored insurance plan , and the U.S. was the only rich nation where this was the case . Companies began offering insurance policies during World War II to attract talent from the reduced supply of workers , a practice later cemented by tax policies that encouraged untaxed benefits ( such as health care ) rather than taxable ones such as cash . Offering insurance in lieu of cash compensation made corporations responsible for their employee 's health . Rising insurance costs coupled with rising salaries squeezed both benefits and salaries until aging workers found their salaries stagnating and their benefits cut . 
 As of 2014 large company policies were still the norm , since tax laws until 2018 make benefits cheaper than cash , but many employees have been losing their " paternalistic " corporate policies and must find their own insurance . With the insurance system introduced under the ACA , employers who stopped their company sponsored insurance plan eliminated one of their largest compensation benefits , and shifted more costs on to employees . These include insurance premiums rising to 28 % in 2013 , compared with 26 % in 2003 , according to the Kaiser Family Foundation , and more workers paying deductibles of $ 1 @,@ 000 reaching 38 % in 2013 , more than twice what it was in 2008 . According to one study , as of 2014 , only 25 % of firms saw themselves offering any insurance in 10 years . 
 The <unk> has found no evidence companies are reducing the hours of their workers to avoid the ACA requirements for employees working over 30 hours per week . 
 The House Republican leadership put forth the argument in favor of repeal that " this is a job @-@ killing law , period . " They contended that the ACA would lead to a loss of 650 @,@ 000 jobs , attributing the figure to a report by the Congressional Budget Office . However , FactCheck.org noted that the 650 @,@ 000 figure was not included in the CBO report referred to , saying that the Republican statement " badly misrepresents what the Congressional Budget Office has said about the law . In fact , CBO is among those saying the effect [ on employment ] ' will probably be small . ' " PolitiFact rated the Republican statement as false . 
 Jonathan Cohn , citing the projections of the CBO , summarized that the primary employment effect of the ACA is to alleviate job lock : " People who are only working because they desperately need employer @-@ sponsored health insurance will no longer do so . " He concluded that the " reform 's only significant employment impact was a reduction in the labor force , primarily because people holding onto jobs just to keep insurance could finally retire " because they have health insurance outside of their jobs . 
 = = = = Impact of repeal on federal budget projections = = = = 
 In May 2011 , the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) analyzed proposals to repeal the law . Mirroring its analysis of the law itself , the CBO estimated that repealing the entire law ( both its taxing and spending provisions ) would increase the net 2011 – 2021 federal deficit by $ 210 billion . Revised CBO accounting , following the July 11 , 2012 , House repeal vote ( H.R. <unk> ) , and taking into account the impact of Supreme Court ruling , was consistent with its previous estimate : that repeal would cause a net increase in federal budget deficits of $ 109 billion over the 2013 – 2022 period . 
 = Radish = 
 The radish ( Raphanus sativus ) is an edible root vegetable of the Brassicaceae family that was domesticated in Europe in pre @-@ Roman times . Radishes are grown and consumed throughout the world , being mostly eaten raw as a crunchy salad vegetable . They have numerous varieties , varying in size , flavor , color , and length of time they take to mature . Radishes owe their sharp flavor to the various chemical compounds produced by the plants , including <unk> , <unk> , and isothiocyanate . They are sometimes grown as companion plants and suffer from few pests and diseases . They germinate quickly and grow rapidly , smaller varieties being ready for consumption within a month , while larger daikon varieties take several months . Another use of radish is as cover or catch crop in winter or as a forage crop . Some radishes are grown for their seeds ; daikon , for instance , may be grown for oil production . Others are used for sprouting and both roots and leaves are sometimes served cooked or cold . 
 = = History = = 
 Varieties of radish are now broadly distributed around the world , but almost no archeological records are available to help determine their early history and domestication . However , scientists tentatively locate the origin of Raphanus sativus in southeast Asia , as this is the only region where truly wild forms have been discovered . India , central China , and central Asia appear to have been secondary centers where differing forms were developed . Radishes enter the historical record in third century BC . Greek and Roman agriculturalists of the first century AD gave details of small , large , round , long , mild , and sharp varieties . The radish seems to have been one of the first European crops introduced to the Americas . A German botanist reported radishes of 100 lb ( 45 kg ) and roughly 3 ft in length in 1544 , although the only variety of that size today is the Japanese Sakurajima radish . The large , mild , and white East Asian form was developed in China , but is mostly associated in the West with the Japanese daikon , owing to Japanese agricultural development and larger exports . 
 = = Description = = 
 Radishes are annual or biennial <unk> crops grown for their swollen tap roots which can be globular , tapering , or cylindrical . The root skin colour ranges from white through pink , red , purple , yellow , and green to black , but the flesh is usually white . Smaller types have a few leaves about 13 cm ( 5 in ) long with round roots up to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) in diameter or more slender , long roots up to 7 cm ( 3 in ) long . Both of these are normally eaten raw in salads . A longer root form , including oriental radishes , daikon or <unk> , and winter radishes , grows up to 60 cm ( 24 in ) long with foliage about 60 cm ( 24 in ) high with a spread of 45 cm ( 18 in ) . The flesh of radishes harvested timely is crisp and sweet , but becomes bitter and tough if the vegetable is left in the ground too long . Leaves are arranged in a rosette . They have a <unk> shape , meaning they are divided pinnately with an enlarged terminal lobe and smaller lateral lobes . The white flowers are borne on a racemose inflorescence . The fruits are small pods which can be eaten when young . 
 The radish is a diploid species , and has 18 chromosomes ( 2n = 18 ) . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Radishes are a fast @-@ growing , annual , cool @-@ season crop . The seed germinates in three to four days in moist conditions with soil temperatures between 65 and 85 ° F ( 18 and 29 ° C ) . Best quality roots are obtained under moderate day lengths with air temperatures in the range 50 to 65 ° F ( 10 to 18 ° C ) . Under average conditions , the crop matures in 3 – 4 weeks , but in colder weather , 6 – 7 weeks may be required . 
 Radishes grow best in full sun in light , sandy loams , with a soil pH 6 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 0 , but for late @-@ season crops , a clayey @-@ loam is ideal . Soils that bake dry and form a crust in dry weather are unsuitable and can impair germination . Harvesting periods can be extended by making repeat plantings , spaced a week or two apart . In warmer climates , radishes are normally planted in the autumn . The depth at which seeds are planted affects the size of the root , from 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) deep recommended for small radishes to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) for large radishes . During the growing period , the crop needs to be thinned and weeds controlled , and irrigation may be required . 
 Radishes are a common garden crop in the United States , and the fast harvest cycle makes them a popular choice for children 's gardens . After harvesting , radishes can be stored without loss of quality for two or three days at room temperature , and about two months at 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) with a relative humidity of 90 – 95 % . 
 = = = Companion plant = = = 
 Radishes can be useful as companion plants for many other crops , probably because their pungent odour deters such insect pests as aphids , cucumber beetles , tomato <unk> , squash bugs , and ants . They can function as a trap crop , luring insect pests away from the main crop . <unk> and radishes seem to thrive when grown in close association with each other , and radishes also grow well with chervil , lettuce , peas , and <unk> . However , they react adversely to growing in close association with hyssop . 
 = = = Pests = = = 
 As a fast @-@ growing plant , diseases are not generally a problem with radishes , but some insect pests can be a nuisance . The larvae of flea beetles ( Delia <unk> ) live in the soil , but the adult beetles cause damage to the crop , biting small " shot holes " in the leaves , especially of seedlings . The swede midge ( <unk> <unk> ) attacks the foliage and growing tip of the plant and causes distortion , multiple ( or no ) growing tips , and swollen or crinkled leaves and stems . The larvae of the cabbage root fly sometimes attack the roots . The foliage droops and becomes discoloured , and small , white maggots tunnel through the root , making it unattractive or inedible . 
 = = Varieties = = 
 Broadly speaking , radishes can be categorized into four main types according to the seasons when they are grown and a variety of shapes lengths , colors , and sizes , such as red , pink , white , gray @-@ black , or yellow radishes , with round or elongated roots that can grow longer than a parsnip . 
 It is not widely known that Beatrix Potter 's famous character " Peter Rabbit " is shown eating long scarlet radishes , not carrots , in Mr McGregor 's garden . 
 = = = Spring or summer radishes = = = 
 Sometimes referred to as European radishes or spring radishes if they are planted in cooler weather , summer radishes are generally small and have a relatively short three- to four @-@ week cultivation time . 
 The ' April Cross ' is a giant white radish hybrid that bolts very slowly . 
 <unk> Tail ' is an heirloom variety from Italy , where it is known as Rosso Tondo A Piccola Punta Bianca . It is slightly oblong , mostly red , with a white tip . 
 <unk> Belle ' is a bright red @-@ skinned round variety with a white interior . It is familiar in North American supermarkets . 
 <unk> ' is round and red @-@ skinned like the ' Cherry Belle ' , but with slightly larger roots , up to 5 cm ( 2 in ) , and a milder flavor . 
 'Red King ' has a mild flavor , with good resistance to club root , a problem that can arise from poor drainage . 
 <unk> Giant ' is a large heirloom variety from Sicily . It can reach up to 5 cm ( 2 in ) in diameter . 
 <unk> Belle ' is an all @-@ white variety of radish , similar in shape to the ' Cherry Belle ' . 
 <unk> Icicle ' or ' Icicle ' is a white carrot @-@ shaped variety , around 10 – 12 cm ( 4 – 5 in ) long , dating back to the 16th century . It slices easily , and has better than average resistance to <unk> . 
 <unk> Breakfast ' is an elongated , red @-@ skinned radish with a white splash at the root end . It is typically slightly milder than other summer varieties , but is among the quickest to turn pithy . 
 <unk> Purple ' , a purple @-@ fuchsia radish , tends to stay crisp longer than average . 
 <unk> ' and ' <unk> ' are two varieties popular in the Netherlands in a breakfast dish , thinly sliced on buttered bread . 
 <unk> Egg ' is not an actual variety , but a mix of varieties with different skin colors , typically including white , pink , red , and purple radishes . Sold in markets or seed packets under the name , the seed mixes can extend harvesting duration from a single planting , as different varieties may mature at different times . 
 = = = Winter varieties = = = 
 <unk> Spanish ' or ' Black Spanish Round ' occur in both round and elongated forms , and are sometimes simply called the black radish ( Raphanus sativus L. var. niger ( M. ) S.K. or L. ssp. niger ( M. ) . D.C. var. albus D.C ) or known by the French name Gros Noir d <unk> . It dates in Europe to 1548 , and was a common garden variety in England and France during the early 19th century . It has a rough , black skin with hot @-@ flavored , white flesh , is round or irregularly pear shaped , and grows to around 10 cm ( 4 in ) in diameter . 
 Daikon refers to a wide variety of winter oilseed radishes from Asia . While the Japanese name daikon has been adopted in English , it is also sometimes called the Japanese radish , Chinese radish , Oriental radish or <unk> ( in India and South Asia ) . Daikon commonly have elongated white roots , although many varieties of daikon exist . One well @-@ known variety is ' April Cross ' , with smooth white roots . The New York Times describes ' Masato Red ' and ' Masato Green ' varieties as extremely long , well @-@ suited for fall planting and winter storage . The Sakurajima radish is a hot @-@ flavored variety which is typically grown to around 10 kg ( 22 lb ) , but which can grow to 30 kg ( 66 lb ) when left in the ground . 
 = = = Seed pod varieties = = = 
 The seeds of radishes grow in <unk> ( widely referred to as " pods " ) , following flowering that happens when left to grow past their normal harvesting period . The seeds are edible , and are sometimes used as a crunchy , sharp addition to salads . Some varieties are grown specifically for their seeds or seed pods , rather than their roots . The rat @-@ tailed radish , an old European variety thought to have come from East Asia centuries ago , has long , thin , curly pods which can exceed 20 cm ( 8 in ) in length . In the 17th century , the pods were often pickled and served with meat . The ' München Bier ' variety supplies seed pods that are sometimes served raw as an accompaniment to beer in Germany . 
 = = Nutritional value = = 
 In a 100 gram serving , raw radishes provide 16 calories and have a moderate amount of vitamin C ( 18 % of Daily Value ) , with other essential nutrients in low content ( table ) . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Cooking = = = 
 The most commonly eaten portion is the <unk> taproot , although the entire plant is edible and the tops can be used as a leaf vegetable . The seed can also be sprouted and eaten raw in a similar way to a <unk> bean . 
 The bulb of the radish is usually eaten raw , although tougher specimens can be steamed . The raw flesh has a crisp texture and a pungent , peppery flavor , caused by glucosinolates and the enzyme <unk> , which combine when chewed to form allyl <unk> , also present in mustard , horseradish , and wasabi . 
 Radishes are mostly used in salads , but also appear in many European dishes . Radish leaves are sometimes used in recipes , like potato soup or as a sauteed side dish . They are also found blended with fruit juices in some recipes . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 The seeds of radishes can be pressed to extract radish seed oil . Wild radish seeds contain up to 48 % oil , and while not suitable for human consumption , this oil is a potential source of biofuel . The daikon grows well in cool climates and , apart from its industrial use , can be used as a cover crop , grown to increase soil fertility , to scavenge nutrients , suppress weeds , help alleviate soil compaction , and prevent winter erosion of the soil . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 The daikon varieties of radish are important parts of East , Southeast , and South Asian cuisine . In Japan and Korea , radish dolls are sometimes made as children 's toys . Daikon is also one of the plants that make up the Japanese Festival of Seven Herbs ( <unk> no <unk> ) on the seventh day after the new year . 
 Citizens of Oaxaca , Mexico , celebrate the Night of the Radishes ( Noche de los <unk> ) on December 23 as a part of Christmas celebrations . This folk art competition uses a large type of radish up to 50 cm ( 20 in ) long and weighing up to 3 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . Great skill and ingenuity are used to carve these into religious and popular figures , buildings , and other objects , and they are displayed in the town square . 
 = = Production trends = = 
 About seven million tons of radishes are produced yearly , representing roughly 2 % of global vegetable production . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 Dixon , Geoffrey R. ( 2007 ) . Vegetable <unk> and Related <unk> ( Print ) . Crop Production Science in Horticulture 14 . Wallingford : CAB International . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 138 @-@ 4 . 
 = 1893 – 94 Small Heath F.C. season = 
 The 1893 – 94 season was the 13th season of competitive association football and second season in the Football League played by Small Heath F.C. , an English football club based in Birmingham . In 1892 – 93 , the inaugural season of the Football League Second Division , Small Heath had won the divisional championship but failed to gain promotion via the test match system . This year , they finished as distant runners @-@ up in the League , eight points behind Liverpool , but were successful in the test match , defeating Darwen 3 – 1 to confirm their place in the First Division for the 1894 – 95 Football League season . The club struggled financially during the season , and there were suggestions that it might have disbanded had promotion not been secured . 
 Small Heath entered the 1893 – 94 FA Cup in the first round proper , and lost in that round for the second consecutive year , this time to the eventual losing finalists , Bolton Wanderers of the First Division . In local competitions , they were eliminated by Midland League club Loughborough in the first round of the Birmingham Senior Cup and by Wolverhampton Wanderers in the semi @-@ final of the Mayor of Birmingham 's Charity Cup . Small Heath played fewer friendly matches than in the previous season , instead competing in a regionally organised supplementary competition , the United Counties League , in which they finished third of four teams in the southern section . 
 Small Heath used 23 different players in nationally organised competitive matches during the season and had 12 different goalscorers . Four players , Ted Devey , Fred Wheldon , Tommy Hands and Billy Ollis , appeared in every League match , all but Devey for the second consecutive season . The top scorer was inside @-@ forward Frank Mobley with 25 goals – his total of 24 League goals made him the Second Division 's leading scorer – and all five first @-@ choice forwards reached double figures for the second season running . 
 = = Background = = 
 Small Heath were elected to the newly formed Second Division in 1892 , and went on to win the divisional championship . However , promotion to the First Division depended on the test match system , in which each of the lowest @-@ ranked three teams from the First Division played off against one of the highest @-@ ranked three from the Second Division . Small Heath lost to Newton Heath after a replay , so were not promoted . The League 's Annual General Meeting heard proposals that the First Division be expanded to either 20 or 18 teams . Both motions were , unsurprisingly , seconded by Small Heath , but both were defeated , thus confirming that the team would play in the Second Division for the 1893 – 94 season . The Second Division championship shield was presented to the club at a meeting of the Football League held at the Colonnade Hotel in New Street , Birmingham , in August . 
 Of the regular first @-@ team members from the previous season , goalkeeper Chris Charsley , a serving police officer , was unavailable and full back Tom Bayley had been released . Fred Speller , who had suffered a badly broken leg early in the season , had been playing in practice matches and was believed to be back to full fitness . Fringe players Harry Edwards and Fred Jones had left the club , and Harry Morris had retired to concentrate on his plumbing business . Goalkeeper George Hollis , backs Arthur Littleford , Bernard Pumfrey and George Short , half @-@ backs Ted Devey , Caesar Jenkyns , Teddy Jolley and Billy Ollis , and forwards Jack Hallam , Tommy Hands , Frank Mobley , Billy Walton and Fred Wheldon all remained with the club . Newcomers included forwards Jack Lee , Charles Izon and Walter Jackson , all signed from non @-@ league clubs in the West Midlands area . Alfred Jones continued as secretary @-@ manager , and Caesar Jenkyns retained the captaincy . The team adopted a new kit , keeping the white knickerbockers but replacing the royal blue shirt and stockings with shirts in a lighter shade of blue , with navy collar trim , cuffs and pocket and navy stockings . 
 = = Review = = 
 = = = September = = = 
 Small Heath opened their second season in the Football League with a visit to Walsall , who were playing at Wednesbury because their new ground was not yet ready . Former Small Heath full @-@ back Tom Bayley was one of several newcomers for the hosts , but their visitors had few changes in personnel . Teddy Jolley came in at full @-@ back , and replacing Billy Walton was Jack Lee , who " dribbles cleverly , and is a very dangerous forward round goal " . In the presence of 4 @,@ 000 spectators , Lee scored twice as Small Heath won 3 – 1 . Fred Wheldon opened the scoring for Small Heath in the first 30 seconds of their next match , at home to Rotherham Town ; 15 minutes later the visitors were 3 – 2 ahead , but by half @-@ time the home side had regained the lead . Unsurprisingly the tempo dropped in the second half , but a game played in a " friendly and sportsmanlike spirit " was marred towards the end by Rotherham forward Alf Pickering suffering a fracture of his right leg just below the knee in an accidental collision with Bernard Pumfrey , " the snap of the bone being heard all round the ground " . Initial reports suggested the break was such that he was " almost certain " never to play football again . This was followed by a comfortable 6 – 1 defeat of Burton Swifts , in which Jolley moved to inside right in Jack Hallam 's absence through illness , giving Gilbert Smith his debut at full back . 
 In the return fixture against Walsall , Charles Izon , a well @-@ built forward who " is quick on the ball , and shoots excellently " , scored a hat @-@ trick on his debut as Small Heath again won comfortably . A visit to Liverpool gave Caesar Jenkyns the honour of scoring the first Football League goal conceded by the home side , but the visitors " fell all to pieces " in the second half , and were decisively beaten . The young and inexperienced Smith made mistakes that cost two goals , but the forwards " were undoubtedly the weak spot " , and the Birmingham Daily Post 's reporter suggested they would " have to learn to shoot harder and play with far more spirit if they are to keep up the reputation they gained last season " . After Burslem Port Vale " beat Small Heath on Monday in more decided a fashion than did Liverpool " , by five goals to nil , the poor form shown in the previous two matches by the forwards , and by Wheldon in particular , was much improved at Ardwick . Although Small Heath scored only once , the resultant win was enough to take them into October in second place in the division , having already completed a quarter of the 28 @-@ game league programme . 
 = = = October = = = 
 Small Heath came back from a 2 – 1 half @-@ time deficit to beat Grimsby Town 5 – 2 , but the visit of Liverpool was eventful in a rather different manner . After the referee rejected the Liverpool players ' claim that Small Heath 's equaliser had entered the goal through a hole in the side netting , their play became rough , culminating in centre @-@ half Joe McQue , a " strapping fellow " , kicking Frank Mobley in the abdomen , apparently intentionally . While the referee was cautioning McQue , Small Heath captain Caesar Jenkyns rushed in , knocked McQue to the ground , and was sent off . With a man advantage , it still took Liverpool until the stroke of time to score the winning goal . The Post 's reporter suggested that , despite the provocation , Jenkyns should not have reacted the way he did , but " the knowledge that it cost his side the game " was sufficient punishment . Despite the referee in his report agreeing that " the punishment of being sent off would meet case " , and that Jenkyns had " played a perfectly fair game " and had expressed regret at his actions , both when dismissed and after the game , the Football Association imposed a four @-@ week suspension , to begin on 31 October . 
 In the meantime the play of Jenkyns and his fellow half @-@ backs was instrumental in a 4 – 1 defeat of Woolwich Arsenal . The first half hour was played " in a spiritless fashion " , but then Wheldon scored " a fine goal with one of his characteristic shots " , and the remainder of the game was one @-@ sided . The Small Heath team prepared for their match at Newcastle United by taking the train as far as York on the Friday evening , which left only another 70 miles ( 110 km ) for the day of the match . Contrary to expectation , Small Heath were successful in a " hard game " , with the half @-@ backs again influential despite Jenkyns receiving a " nasty blow in the mouth " . They ended October level on points with three other clubs , in third place on goal average . 
 = = = November = = = 
 While most of the Second Division clubs were involved in FA Cup qualifying ties , Small Heath , who had received a bye to the first round proper , lost a friendly match against Everton 's reserve team by five goals to nil . Everton 's near neighbours Liverpool complained to the League that the game adversely affected the attendance at their home fixture with Newcastle , but the League confirmed that Everton were within their rights to arrange the match . " Better forward play [ had ] rarely been witnessed at Lincoln than that shown by Small Heath " in a 5 – 2 defeat of Lincoln City , whose defence failed to cope with the industry and creativity of Teddy Jolley feeding the " light but nimble " forwards , Mobley in particular . The next weekend , numerous matches were postponed or abandoned because of the weather . Although the Small Heath and Crewe Alexandra players were changed and ready to play , the referee would not start the game because the " blinding snowstorm would prevent him from having a proper sight of the play " . 
 Advertised as a " Grand League Match " in the local paper – vying for attention with the forthcoming Sailors ' Bazaar , a Boys ' Brigade band concert and a clearance sale of squirrel @-@ tail fur boas – Small Heath 's visit to Middlesbrough Ironopolis failed to live up to the billing . A storm that cost hundreds of lives at sea had left the Paradise Ground with damaged railings and grandstand blown down , and only a few hundred spectators stood in the pouring rain to see the home side produce a surprise victory by three goals to nil on a sodden pitch . The Leicester Chronicle feared " that last year 's second division champions are far from being what they were " , having dropped as many points already as in the whole of the previous season . 
 = = = December = = = 
 Jenkyns returned from suspension against a Northwich Victoria side bottom of the division and playing with only ten men . Wheldon scored four and Mobley three in an 8 – 0 win , and the goalscoring continued in midweek in the fixture postponed because of the snowstorm , as Small Heath beat a Crewe Alexandra side without several first @-@ choice players by six goals to one . Burton Swifts proved more difficult opponents . On a heavy pitch , play was concentrated in the midfield area as the strength of both teams lay in their half backs , and Small Heath 's winning goal came with ten minutes of the match remaining . It was reported that the club had turned down a big offer from First Division club Aston Villa for the services of Fred Wheldon . Newcastle United travelled to Birmingham on the Friday , to be fresh for Saturday 's match , as Small Heath had done in the reverse fixture , and again , the tactic worked . Their forwards " displayed excellent combination " , were " splendidly supported by the half @-@ backs " , and " but for [ Jenkyns ' ] untiring efforts matters would have been worse " than the 4 – 1 defeat . 
 Changes were made for the visit of Middlesbrough Ironopolis , Arthur Littleford , Charles Izon and Bernard Pumfrey coming in for Smith , Mobley and Jack Hallam . The half @-@ backs were again the backbone of the team , and Wheldon , who produced " a brilliant exposition of dodging and shooting " , scored the winning goal five minutes from time in what the Standard 's reporter described as a " rattling good game " . Fred Speller was reported to have " not been seen in such form since his leg was broken last year " in a Boxing Day friendly with top amateur club Marlow , the club from which he signed for Small Heath . Their last League match of 1893 , a comfortable 6 – 0 victory against Lincoln City , took them into the new year in second place in the division , three points ahead of Notts County but two points behind Liverpool , who had played two fewer matches . Pumfrey strengthened the defence , George Hollis was as usual secure in goal , and the forwards , with the returning Mobley and the introduction of reserve @-@ team player Walter Jackson , " showed better combination and greater dash than they have recently done " . 
 = = = January = = = 
 On New Year 's Day , Small Heath made the short trip to Wellington Road for a friendly with Aston Villa . After a dull and goalless first half , Tommy Hands crossed the ball for Wheldon to open the scoring , from which point goals followed regularly until the match finished as a 4 – 3 home win . Wheldon was involved in two of his side 's three goals , but was " too closely watched by Reynolds to be as effective as usual " . On a day when the hard and slippery surface meant " those teams whose players have the least regard for the safety of their limbs usually gain the victory " , Small Heath , without Hallam , who was unwell , and William Reynolds , injured against Aston Villa , defeated a " very indifferent " Northwich Victoria 7 – 0 . In their next match , at Crewe Alexandra , the home players reportedly played " with supreme indifference to the safety of their opponents ' limbs " . Hands , who had been one of Small Heath 's better performers , was carried off after receiving a " nasty kick " to the leg , but despite having to play with ten men , the visitors won 5 – 3 . Of Crewe 's three goals , the first should have been disallowed for offside and the third was a Ted Devey own goal . 
 Midland League club Loughborough hosted Small Heath in the first round of the Birmingham Senior Cup . In heavy rain , the scores were level until ten minutes from time , when goalkeeper George Hollis was barged into the goal before he could get to a shot from distance . The ball followed him over the line , and despite the obstruction on the goalkeeper , the referee awarded Loughborough a goal . Small Heath threw men forward in search of an equaliser , which left them ill @-@ protected in defence , and they conceded twice more . In the FA Cup , Small Heath were drawn at home to Bolton Wanderers , who were so keen to have the match played on their own ground that they offered Small Heath the total gate receipts up to £ 150 and a half share of receipts above that figure , with a minimum guarantee of £ 60 , to agree to a change of venue . The offer was declined . Bolton were predicted to lose , but they did not . With the wind behind them , Small Heath took a two @-@ goal half @-@ time lead , but in the second half , Hollis , who had " not given a worse display in goal all season " , made numerous mistakes , gifted the visitors two goals , and the final score was 4 – 3 to the First Division side . 
 = = = February = = = 
 Third @-@ placed Notts County beat Small Heath 3 – 1 to narrow the gap between the clubs to just one point . Charles Partridge , making his Football League debut after Hollis was taken ill , played behind an experimental defensive pairing of half @-@ back Ted Devey and reserve @-@ team player George Short . Despite the scoreline , the Nottinghamshire Guardian described them as " a very useful pair of backs " , although not up to the home team 's standard , and the Daily Post rated Devey as " easily the best left @-@ back the club have played this season " . Two of Notts ' goals were fortunate : an attempted clearance by Devey ricocheted off Jenkyns ' head for their second goal , and for their third , the ball appeared to be heading safely over the crossbar until caught by a gust of wind . 
 Eight Midlands clubs formed a league to be played as a supplementary competition to fill vacant dates in the season without the trouble and expense of arranging friendly matches , later joined by Small Heath and Notts County . Small Heath 's first four matches in this United Counties League were played in February . After " a creditable draw " at home to Wolverhampton Wanderers of the First Division , they " thoroughly deserved " to win the return match 2 – 1 . West Bromwich Albion took a 5 – 1 lead in the first half at Coventry Road , yet in the second , the Small Heath forwards raised their level of performance , scored three times without reply , and were unfortunate not to secure a draw . Two days later , the First Division club won the return match at Stoney Lane rather more comfortably . 
 The committee organised a public meeting at which chairman Walter Hart bemoaned the poor attendances , which he felt would not improve unless the team were promoted to the First Division , mentioned that the club had rejected a " big offer from a neighbouring club for the release of a prominent player " , and called for £ 200 to be raised to bring in players to strengthen the team 's defence . A collection in the hall raised cash and pledges to the value of £ 42 10s , and supporters contributed generously to the public appeal . An attempt to sign full @-@ back Jack Oliver from Middlesbrough Ironopolis was unsuccessful , and the club offered the services of goalkeeper Chris Charsley to Aston Villa . 
 = = = March = = = 
 In front of a large crowd , Small Heath suffered what was described as an " unfortunate " one @-@ goal defeat at Grimsby Town . Hollis should have done better with Grimsby 's opener , Frank Mobley was injured around the eye in collision with the goalkeeper when scoring Small Heath 's only goal and showed some bravery in remaining on the field , and Wheldon had an apparently valid goal disallowed . Short , in a " trifle risky " style , and the solid Devey again did well in defence . Lost gate receipts because of Aston Villa 's withdrawal from the United Counties League was decidedly unpopular with the other members , and the Small Heath committee arranged a smoking concert to raise funds . Those clubs at the bottom of the First Division and top of the Second were all recruiting new players : " the test matches mean such a lot to the clubs concerned that there is no wonder at this anxiety to secure new blood . " Small Heath acquired the services of full @-@ backs Percy Watson and William Purves , from Rotherham Town and Irish club Glentoran respectively . 
 The Small Heath club staged a " double @-@ header " the following Saturday . After the reserves beat Brierley Hill Alliance 3 – 0 in the Birmingham & District League , Watson made a promising debut at back as the first team played a friendly against a below @-@ strength Nottingham Forest side . Charsley returned to first @-@ team duty in a 10 – 2 demolition of Ardwick , whose goalkeeper arrived with his team already one goal behind . Mobley 's fourth hat @-@ trick gave him ten goals from his last six matches , taking him past the 20 @-@ goal mark for the season . A close game at Rotherham produced a 3 – 2 win , and against Burslem Port Vale , the Small Heath forwards had " rarely been seen to greater advantage " as they scored six without reply . 
 The semi @-@ final of the Birmingham Charity Cup provided a break from League action . Mobley opened the scoring , but Wolverhampton Wanderers shot against the woodwork on several occasions and the visitors were " singularly fortunate " in restricting the home side to one goal , and that a penalty kick . With the scores level , a decision was made not to play extra time , and the replay was arranged for two weeks later at Coventry Road . In their penultimate match of the Football League season , Small Heath produced a good team performance to win 4 – 1 at Woolwich Arsenal and reach 100 League goals for the season . The forwards played a characteristic " beautifully combined " game , the half @-@ backs , particularly Jenkyns , were too strong for the home forwards , Purves looked set to be the full @-@ back the team had needed for some time , and Charsley " kept goal exceedingly well " . 
 = = = April = = = 
 Against Stoke in the United Counties League , Jack Hallam opened the scoring after a fine passing move as Small Heath won 3 – 0 . In the return fixture , Charles Partridge 's " magnificent performance " in goal kept the score down to a 2 – 1 defeat , as Small Heath finished third in the four @-@ team division . 
 Going into the last match of the Football League season , Small Heath were in second place in the division , one point ahead of opponents Notts County . Neither could challenge Liverpool for the title , but both were sure of their places in the promotion test matches . The likely opponent for the team finishing second would be Darwen , whereas the third @-@ placed team could expect the rather tougher prospect of Preston North End . Notts County had won the FA Cup the previous weekend , and the Daily Post took that as a good omen , " inasmuch as the winners of the English Cup rarely do themselves justice on the following Saturday " . 
 Nor did they , being " decidedly stale " , according to the Nottinghamshire Guardian , having " been indulged in all manner of festivities " , and without centre @-@ forward Jimmy Logan , who had scored a hat @-@ trick in the Cup Final . Small Heath were decisive victors by three goals to nil , Hallam 's wing play drawing particular praise , as did Jenkyns ' " admirable captaincy " . The attendance was something over 8 @,@ 000 , of whom 6 @,@ 800 paid on the day , generating gate receipts of £ 200 . Although the result was rather overshadowed by Aston Villa beating Burnley away from home to be confirmed as First Division champions , the Dart clearly appreciated how Small Heath " in a blaze of glory before the largest crowd ever seen at Coventry Road , gave the English Cup holders a licking " . 
 Handicapped early on by George Short suffering concussion and being unable to continue , Small Heath lost the replayed Charity Cup semi @-@ final to Wolverhampton Wanderers 2 – 0 . Fred Wheldon was the only Second Division player selected in the Football League representative team to play the Scottish League at Goodison Park , Liverpool . Expected to join Aston Villa should Small Heath not be promoted , and " thought by many to be the best inside left in England " , Wheldon " performed like the clever and finished player he is " as the match was drawn . 
 The Leicester Chronicle felt that Darwen would have to " play up " to stand much chance against Small Heath , who had " a smarter set of forwards than can be found amongst most of the first division teams " , and pointed out that Small Heath were the only team in either division to have scored 100 goals during the season . The players prepared for the test match at Droitwich Spa , where the saturated salt water of the Brine Baths provided relief for tired muscles . The match , played at Stoke 's Victoria Ground , was an exciting one . Darwen had much the best of the first half , but failed to take their chances . Small Heath were restricted to rare attacks , but were dangerous on the break , and opened the scoring through Jack Hallam . Darwen equalised before the interval , and continued their dominance until superior fitness told . With six minutes left , Small Heath took the lead , the goal variously attributed to Wheldon or an Orr own goal , after which Darwen lost heart and Tommy Hands scored again four minutes later . The Daily Post suggested that " one would scarcely believe that they were the same five forwards who have so often delighted the spectators with their play at Coventry Road " , but " to every man [ of the defence ] great praise is due for so ably checking the opposing forwards " . The Nottinghamshire Guardian was less critical of the forwards , but took the view that Small Heath were fortunate to catch Darwen " in a very crippled condition " , and that goalkeeper Chris Charsley had done the club a considerable service in making himself available for such a vital game . 
 The victorious team arrived back in Birmingham by train , the engine 's funnel draped in blue and white , to be greeted by 1 @,@ 000 supporters at New Street Station , and " were loudly cheered on their return to Small Heath " . The season ended with a friendly against newly crowned Football League champions Aston Villa , the visitors giving their services free for the benefit of the Small Heath club . Before a crowd of four or five thousand , both clubs fielded strong sides , and the match finished as a 3 – 3 draw . 
 = = Summary and aftermath = = 
 The Daily Post 's pleasure at Small Heath 's victory was heightened by their belief that " defeat would in all probability have meant the disbanding of the club " , ambitions of promotion having sustained the committee 's efforts throughout the season to raise enough funds to keep the club going . They pointed out that further expense was necessary both to strengthen the team , " for it cannot be expected that eleven or twelve men will stand the strain of a season 's work amongst the first division clubs " , and to improve facilities at the Coventry Road ground . The club held a celebratory dinner , at which the chairman congratulated the players , exhorted them to redouble their efforts to make a decent showing in the First Division , and appealed to their continuing loyalty . He attempted to dispel suggestions that the city could not support two teams in the top division , and expressed gratitude to the Aston Villa club for their sincere best wishes as demonstrated by their generous donation of the recent benefit match . The balance sheet showed expenditure of £ 2 @,@ 039 , of which players ' wages accounted for £ 1 @,@ 303 , which resulted in a net loss of £ 222 when set against income of £ 1 @,@ 816 , of which £ 1 @,@ 586 came from gate receipts and £ 104 from season tickets . Nevertheless , during the close season the club began work on a grandstand and " the furrows on the field of play [ were ] filled up " . 
 Small Heath went through the League season without drawing a match . They scored 103 goals , at a rate of 3 @.@ 6 goals per game , and became the first team to exceed 100 goals in a Football League season ( Sunderland scored exactly 100 the previous season ) . If test match goals are counted , all five first @-@ choice forwards reached double figures for the second consecutive season . The leading scorer was Frank Mobley with 24 League goals , a total which also made him the top scorer in the Second Division , closely followed by Fred Wheldon with 22 . Ted Devey , Tommy Hands , Billy Ollis and Wheldon were ever @-@ present in the League , all but Devey for the second season running , and Caesar Jenkyns missed only the two games for which he was suspended . 
 Fred Speller attempted a comeback , appearing twice for the first team early in the season , but the injury received against Darwen proved the end of his professional football career . Bernard Pumfrey left for Midland League club Gainsborough Trinity , and went on to captain that club in the Football League . Walter Jackson , William Reynolds and Gilbert Smith were all released to join Birmingham & District League club Berwick Rangers , and Percy Watson returned to his native Yorkshire . Chris Charsley played no more League football , concentrating instead on his police career : he reached the rank of Chief Inspector in the Birmingham force , and in 1899 was appointed Chief Constable of Coventry . Small Heath signed the former Sunderland full back Jack Oliver , whom they had failed to recruit earlier in the season , but despite the misgivings of the local press , they were to negotiate their debut First Division season with no other major signings . 
 = = Match details = = 
 For consistency , attendances and goalscorers ' names in the League , Test Match and FA Cup match details tables are sourced from Matthews ' Complete Record . Information in contemporary newspaper reports could , and often did , differ . League positions are sourced from Statto . 
 = = = Football League Second Division = = = 
 = = = = Test Match = = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 = = = United Counties League Southern Section = = = 
 = = = Birmingham Senior Cup = = = 
 = = = Mayor of Birmingham 's Charity Cup = = = 
 = = = Other matches = = = 
 = = Squad statistics = = 
 This table includes appearances and goals in nationally organised competitions – the Football League , including promotion test matches , and FA Cup – only . For a description of the playing positions , see Formation ( association football ) # 2 – 3 – 5 ( Pyramid ) . 
 = John Wilson Bengough = 
 John Wilson Bengough ( / <unk> / , 7 April 1851 – 2 October 1923 ) was one of Canada 's first cartoonists , as well as an editor , publisher , writer , poet , entertainer , and politician . Bengough is best remembered for his political cartoons in Grip , a satirical magazine he published and edited , and which he modelled after the British humour magazine Punch . He published some cartoons under the pen name L. Côté . 
 Born in Toronto in the Province of Canada to Scottish and Irish immigrants , Bengough grew up in Whitby , where after graduating from high school he began a career in newspapers as a typesetter . The political cartoons of the American Thomas Nast inspired Bengough to direct his drawing talents towards cartooning ; a lack of outlets for his work drove him to found Grip in 1873 . The Pacific Scandal gave Bengough ample material to lampoon , and soon Bengough 's image of prime minister John A. Macdonald achieved fame across Canada . After Grip folded in 1894 , Bengough published books , contributed cartoons to Canadian and foreign newspapers , and toured giving chalk talks internationally . 
 Bengough was deeply religious and devoted himself to promoting social reforms . He supported free trade , prohibition of alcohol and tobacco , women 's suffrage , and other liberal beliefs , but was opposed to Canadian bilingualism . Bengough had ambitions to run for office , though Liberal leader Wilfrid Laurier convinced him against running for Parliament ; he served as alderman on the Toronto City Council from 1907 to 1909 . The Canadian government listed Bengough as a Person of National Historic Significance in 1938 and he was inducted into the Canadian Cartoonist Hall of Fame in 2005 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life ( 1851 – 73 ) = = = 
 Bengough 's grandparents John ( d . 5 April 1867 ) , a ship 's carpenter , and Johanna ( née Jackson , d . 18 March 1859 ) were born in St Andrews in Scotland in the 1790s and immigrated with their children to Canada at an unknown date ; they are known to have been in Whitby on Lake Ontario in the Province of Canada by the 1850s . They brought with them at least three children , including Bengough 's father John ( 23 May 1819 in Scotland – 1899 ) who became a cabinetmaker . John Bengough was politically active : he advocated social reforms such as the Georgist single tax and had several Town Council appointments , though he never held political office . He used the title Captain , which suggests he may have sometime sailed ships out of Port Whitby . 
 Bengough 's father married Margaret Wilson , an Irish immigrant born in Bailieborough in County Cavan , and the couple had six children : five sons and a daughter . John Wilson Bengough was the second , born into the deeply Protestant family on 7 April 1851 in Toronto , where the elder Bengough had run a shop on Victoria Street in the 1840s . It is not known when they moved to Toronto , but it is known that by 1853 the family had moved back to Whitby . 
 Bengough attended Whitby Grammar School , where he was an average student ; he won a prize one year for general proficiency , for which he received a book titled Boyhood of Great Artists . He was an avid <unk> , a talent which caught the notice of his teacher , who presented Bengough with a set of paints one Christmas . Bengough credited this act with setting him on the path to a career as an artist . Whitby residents later reminisced of the young Bengough drawing chalk portraits of his neighbours on fences . He described himself as a " voracious reader " , particularly of the Whitby Gazette , a didactic weekly that stressed Christian values . 
 After graduation , Bengough tried his hand at a number of jobs , including photographer 's assistant , and he articled to a lawyer for some time before getting a typesetting job at the Whitby Gazette . The Gazette 's editor was George Ham , an extroverted journalist who later worked as public relations chief for the Canadian Pacific Railway . Bengough contributed short local @-@ interest articles . In mid @-@ 1870 , Ham issued a four @-@ page daily to capitalize on interest in the Franco @-@ Prussian War and commissioned Bengough to provide a serialized novel for it . The popular reception of The Murderer 's Scalp ( or The Shrieking Ghost of the <unk> Den ) encouraged Bengough to devote himself to a journalism career . The serial went unfinished because Ham cancelled the daily when the war died down . The papers and magazines that came into the Gazette offices , in particular Harper 's Weekly , introduced Bengough to the growing field of cartooning . Bengough reminisced , 
 I divided my time between mechanical duties for sordid wages and poetry for the good of humanity , and meanwhile I kept an eye on Thomas Nast the cartoonist . 
 Bengough considered the politically and socially aware Nast a " beau ideal " whose " moral crusade against abject wrong " — in particular his relentless Boss Tweed cartoons — inspired the young Bengough to " emulate Nast in the field of Canadian politics " . Bengough so admired the cartoonist that he sent a cartoon to Harper 's of Nast confronting the Tammany Hall political machine , rendered in Nast 's style , to which the editor returned a positive response and an acknowledgement from Nast . 
 At twenty , Bengough moved to Toronto and became a reporter on politician George Brown 's newspaper The Globe . The Liberal paper was the most influential in the country ; Bengough 's family had supported the Liberal Party since before Confederation , and these connections probably played a role in his getting the position at the paper . Editorial cartooning had no presence in Canadian newspapers at the time and was not to have one until Hugh Graham brought the practice to his Montreal Star in 1876 ; Bengough stated he did not consider the possibility of editorial cartooning at the time . The lack of cartooning opportunities disappointed him , and he enrolled briefly in the Ontario School of Art , which he found pedantic and stifling ; he quit after one term . 
 = = = Grip ( 1873 – 94 ) = = = 
 The legitimate forces of humor and caricature can and ought to serve the state in its highest interests , and that the comic journal which has no other aim than to amuse its readers for the moment , falls short of its highest mission . 
 Bengough told the following story of how he took up publishing : He had made a caricature of James Beaty , Sr. , editor of the conservative Toronto Leader , and Beaty 's nephew Sam found it so amusing that he made a lithographic copy for himself at the printer Rolph Bros. Impressed with his first exposure to lithography , and frustrated with the lack of opportunities to have his cartoons published , Bengough asked himself , " Why not start a weekly comic paper with lithographed cartoons ? " His brother Thomas remembered a somewhat different story in which Bengough first began distributing copies of his cartoons on the street . Of his printed cartoons , only one of Liberal member Edward Blake has survived . 
 In 1849 – 50 John Henry Walker 's short @-@ lived weekly Punch in Canada provided the first regular outlet for Canadian political cartooning ; others such as The <unk> ( 1858 – 69 ) , <unk> ( 1869 – 70 ) , and Diogenes ( 1868 – 70 ) did not last long , either . George @-@ Édouard Desbarats 's more conservative , Montreal @-@ based Canadian Illustrated News ( 1869 – 83 ) lasted much longer . Bengough was to found the first major humour magazine in English Canada . 
 A raven character in the Charles Dickens novel Barnaby Rudge inspired the name of the magazine Grip . Its pages carried political and social commentary along with satirical cartoons , and its debut issue of 24 May 1873 declared : " Grip will be entirely independent and impartial , always , and on all subjects . " Bengough set the editorial policy and was the lead cartoonist . 
 Grip 's initial financing came from Toronto publisher Andrew Scott Irving . Later in the year Bengough set up an office on 2 Toronto Street and with his four brothers formed the Bengough Brothers company . Bengough continued to work at the Globe until Grip established itself . He used pseudonyms until he left the newspaper later in the year . The editor 's name appeared as a " Charles P. Hall " until Thomas Phillips Thompson took over as editor on 26 July under the pseudonym " <unk> Briggs " ; he lasted until the 6 September issue , when he printed a pro @-@ alcohol article despite Bengough 's prohibitionist views . The Toronto Globe 's R. H. <unk> then took on co @-@ editing duties as " Demos Mudge " with Bengough as " Barnaby Rudge " . Regular contributors other than Bengough included R. W. Phipps , who produced the greatest amount of Grip 's poetry ; Tom Boylan , who Bengough considered Grip 's best humourist ; Edward Edwards , who wrote sombre topical articles in contrast to the humour of the rest of the magazine ; and William Alexander Foster who wrote scathing editorials about Oliver Mowat 's Ontario Liberal Party , which contrasted with Bengough 's position and lent credibility to the magazine 's assertions of non @-@ partisanship . Writers such as Peter McArthur got their start with Grip . 
 Grip 's early issues attracted little notice . The Hamilton Spectator declared it " dull ... When Grip dies , which will be soon , Toronto will be much more cheerful . ... Grip is what Punch would be with all the spirit left out " . Events arising from the Canadian federal election of 1872 shortly gave Bengough sufficient popular material to lampoon : accusations of bribery and other improprieties involving prime minister John A. Macdonald and business magnate Hugh Allan inflated into the Pacific Scandal , the most closely followed scandal in the young nation 's history . Macdonald 's features lent themselves to caricature and gave Bengough the chance to proselytize . Circulation rose to about 2 @,@ 000 copies per issue at the time ; Bengough 's brother Thomas reported that each new issue was eagerly awaited at the House of Commons . A 23 August 1873 cartoon entitled " The Beauties of a Royal Commission : When shall we three meet again ? " drew praise from newspapers across Canada , as well as from Liberal MP Lucius Seth Huntington in a speech to the House of Commons . 
 Despite their Liberal leanings , in 1878 Bengough and Grip took the side of the proposed Conservative National Policy of high tariffs on trade with the US , against the governing Liberal stance of free trade . The issue contributed to the loss of Alexander Mackenzie 's incumbent Liberals to Macdonald 's Conservatives in the election of 1878 , despite Grip 's prediction that Mackenzie would win again . The magazine supported no party officially in its early years , but made its support for the Liberals explicit in the elections of 1887 and of 1891 , after Wilfrid Laurier had become party leader . In the mid @-@ 1880s the Grip Printing and Publishing Company took on printing duties for the Ontario Liberal government . This support , however , resulted in no federal election wins . 
 Grip had considerable influence on the public perception of politicians . That it was slanted in favour of Liberals and against Conservatives drove Conservative supporters to launch rival publications . The first was Jester , begun in 1878 , which featured cartoons by Henri Julien that painted Macdonald in a benevolent light . Jester failed to find an audience to match Bengough 's and folded the following year . In 1886 , Bengough reported a weekly circulation for Grip of 50 @,@ 000 . 
 In March 1874 , in the music hall of the Toronto Mechanics ' Institute , Bengough began giving comic chalk talk performances , which he later toured across the country . He impressed audiences with his ability to capture the likeness of members of the audience in a single <unk> . He continued his chalk talks throughout his life and travelled with them to the US , Australia , New Zealand , and Britain . He published an autobiography titled Chalk Talks in 1922 , the year before his death . 
 Early Canadian feminist writer Sarah Anne Curzon made regular contributions to Grip . At Bengough 's request in 1882 , she wrote the closet drama The Sweet Girl Graduate for the book The Grip Sack . The drama tells of a woman who disguises herself as a man to attend university at a time when women were barred in Canada from post @-@ secondary education . 
 In 1883 , Frank Wilson took over management of the printing of Grip . Thomas Phillips Thompson became associate editor . He shared with Bengough a radical political outlook and a taste for satire , though was less open to new ideas than Bengough , who was quick to attach himself to new causes . Thompson was anti @-@ imperialist , anti @-@ capitalist , and anti @-@ militarist . In 1892 , the managers of Grip passed the editorship from Bengough to Thompson and Bengough 's cartoons stopped appearing after the 6 August 1892 issue . Years later , Bengough 's brother Thomas blamed the board of directors at Grip , Inc . , for the falling out over " general mismanagement " , which may have involved losses incurred in relation to a government contract . 
 Grip 's tone became increasingly strident : anti @-@ French , anti @-@ Catholic , pro @-@ socialist . This , and an increased use of racial caricature , seem to have alienated readers . Under the new editorship readership fell until Grip ceased publication in July 1893 . Grip , Inc . , sold off assets , such as its printing machines , to repay debts . 
 Bengough revived Grip in 1894 under a new company called Phoenix Publishing with a partner named Bell who had newspaper publishing experience in Belleville . They softened Grip 's tone , but the content appeared rushed and it lasted only from 4 January to 29 December 1894 . Macdonald had died in 1891 , and Bengough blamed the publication 's ill fortunes on the loss of such a target . 
 = = = Later life ( 1895 – 1923 ) = = = 
 After Grip ceased publication , Bengough worked for the next quarter @-@ century as a cartoonist for a variety of newspapers , including the The Globe , The Toronto Evening Telegram , the Montreal Star , Canadian Geographic , the American The Public and The Single Tax Review , The Morning Chronicle and Daily Express in England , and the Sydney Herald in Australia . 
 Bengough continued to devote himself to political causes . He supported the Liberals ' successful campaign in the federal election of 1896 with cartoons in the Toronto Globe and with a song he composed titled " Ontario , Ontario " . He belonged to numerous political and social clubs . He was a founding member of the Royal Society of Canada in 1880 , to which the Governor General appointed him an Associate . He was professor of elocution at Knox College from 1899 to 1901 . He served as director of the Toronto Exhibition , auditor for the Canadian Peace and Arbitration Society , member for three years of the board of directors of the Victoria Industrial School , and president of the Toronto Single Tax Association , and took part in the People 's Forum social activist group . 
 In 1907 , Bengough campaigned to join the Toronto City Council as an alderman for Ward 3 . Major newspapers such as the Toronto Star promoted him , and the Toronto Daily World ran a photograph of him on its front page when he won . He won again in 1908 and 1909 . He counted future Toronto mayor Horatio Clarence <unk> amongst his reformist allies on the Council and promoted issues such as public ownership of hydroelectric power , but found little support for his ideas . His successes included legislation restricting the issuing of liquor licenses , which found support when he made it an election issue in his 1909 campaign . 
 In March 1909 , Bengough took a leave of absence from the Toronto City Council to tour Australia and New Zealand and gave up his post when he returned . When the First World War broke out , he devoted his energies to promoting patriotism and the war effort , and supported conscription , a cause that was popular in English Canada but unpopular in Quebec and which ran counter to the Liberal Party position . Bengough nevertheless continued to support the party and used his cartoons to promote party leader William Lyon Mackenzie King in the federal election of 1921 . 
 Following a chalk @-@ talk performance in Moncton , New Brunswick in 1922 , Bengough suffered an attack of angina pectoris , attributed to overwork during a previous tour of Western Canada . He died of it on 2 October 1923 at his drawing board at his home on 58 St Mary Street in Toronto while working on a cartoon in support of an anti @-@ smoking campaign . At his memorial service on 22 November , the editor of the Hamilton Herald , Albert E. S. Smythe , declared him the " Canadian Dickens " and one of Walt Whitman 's " great companions " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bengough was of average height and had grey eyes and dark hair . He married twice ; neither marriage produced children . He married Helena " Nellie " Siddall in Toronto on 30 June 1880 ; she died in 1902 . He remarried to a friend from his school days , the widow Annie Robertson Matteson , in Chicago on 18 June 1908 . Neither appears to have written about Bengough . 
 = = Style = = 
 Bengough drew mainly political cartoons . His cartoons and writing tend towards the preachy and didactic ; he believed that humour should serve the interests of the state rather than merely to amuse . Bengough tended in his writing towards satirical humour and puns , which George Ramsay Cook called " sometimes sophomoric " . He read Dickens , Shakespeare , and Carlyle with particular devotion . 
 Bengough had little exposure to formal art education aside from one term at the Ontario School of Art . His sketchy cartoons derived from a mid @-@ 19th century engraving style ; while often drawn well , they were crowded in composition and sometimes borrowed from other sources . Bengough could draw in contrasting styles , as evidenced by cartoons he did under the pseudonym of L. Côté . As typical of political cartoonists of the time , Bengough aimed less at laughter than at social satire and depended more on readers ' understanding of densely packed allusions . 
 No other political figure came to life so vividly beneath Bengough 's pen ; no other cartoonists , even those who were far better draughtsmen were able to capture Macdonald 's style and mannerisms as effectively . 
 Bengough 's cartoons are best remembered for fixing his renditions of Macdonald in the public imagination . Bengough 's bulbous @-@ nosed politician often appeared baggy @-@ eyed with bottles of alcohol in his hands as a sombre symbol of corruption , in contrast to the work of John Henry Walker , another prolific caricaturist of Macdonald who depicted the prime minister 's drunkenness to make light of him . Bengough continued to hone his draftsmanship after Macdonald 's death , but the wit and inspiration of his Macdonald cartoons continue to draw the most attention . 
 Bengough 's chalk talks have left less of a mark on the public memory , though audience members have passed down Bengough 's renditions of them as heirlooms . Bengough delivered humorous anecdotes and made impressions as he caricatured audience members and well @-@ known locals in a flamboyant manner , adding the identifying details only at the end . 
 = = Politics = = 
 There was a premier named John A. 
 Who , wishing in office to stay , 
 To one Allen did barter a great railway charter — 
 And dated his ruin from that day . 
 Bengough 's reputation was as a supporter of the Liberal Party of Canada and its pro @-@ democratic platform . His family had been supporters since before Confederation ; his father had supported Oliver Mowat and both his brother Thomas and sister Mary worked in Mowat 's provincial government . Members of his family were to play roles in the Liberal Party into the twentieth century ; Bengough and his brother Thomas had ties close enough with Wilfrid Laurier to ask for favours , and both were also close to William Lyon Mackenzie King . Bengough had ambitions to run for Parliament , but Liberal leader Laurier convinced him against it ; Laurier also turned down a request of Bengough 's for a Senate appointment as reward for a lifetime of Liberal support . 
 Grip 's political stance was one of disinterest , but a large portion of Bengough 's income came from Liberal publications , and Macdonald and his Conservatives were favourite targets of Bengough 's cartoon attacks , notably during the Pacific Scandal . His association with the Liberals was so strong that Charles Tupper quipped in Parliament that Grip should change its name to Grit — a popular nickname for Liberal Party members . His best @-@ remembered cartoons were those aimed at Macdonald and the Conservatives , but his criticisms targeted Liberals as well — Edward Blake had his subscription cancelled when he was the victim of a particular cartoon . Macdonald 's Conservative Daily Mail , launched in 1872 , provided a rivalry with the Liberal Globe that provided fuel for Bengough 's satire , as did infighting in the Liberal Party over The Globe , which allowed Bengough to distance himself to a degree from criticism of Liberal partisanship . 
 Bengough was a proponent of such issues as proportional representation , prohibition of alcohol and of tobacco , the single tax espoused by Henry George , and worldwide free trade . He held progressive views on women 's suffrage ; in 1889 supported the Dominion Women 's Enfranchisement Association efforts to have a bill proposed by Liberal MP John Waters that would have granted suffrage to Canadian women . He expressed anti @-@ imperialist ideals until the mid @-@ 1890s , after which he supported imperialism . He supported Canada 's involvement in the Second Boer War and First World War . Bengough contributed to the ongoing debates concerning the development of a Canadian identity during the nation 's early years . He showed a marked ethnic nationalism in that he promoted English as the nation 's sole official language , and the separation of church and state , a view that was directed particularly at the Catholic , French @-@ speaking Québécois . He depicted the Québécois as backward and Quebec politicians as always demanding money . Bengough declared he looked forward to : 
 when the monstrosity of a double official language and dual schools will be done away with throughout the whole country . Our real national life will date from that day . 
 Bengough had liberal views on race relations , and painted a picture of Canada as being more open to integration than the US during the Reconstruction Era ; according to David R. Spencer , his views on race were not likely widely shared in Canada at the time . While Bengough sympathized with the plight of Canada 's native peoples , he condemned the 1885 North @-@ West Rebellion and called for the execution of Métis rebel leader Louis Riel , and celebrated Major @-@ General Frederick Dobson Middleton 's victory at the Battle of Batoche in Saskatchewan with a poem . His racial caricatures could , according to Carman Cumming , lead a modern reader to see him as " a racist chauvinist bigot " : they distort facial features and behaviour in ways typical of cartoons of the era and employ such derogatory terms as " coon " for blacks and " <unk> " for Jews . Bengough called for restrictions on Chinese and Irish immigration and his work shows a bias against immigrants who did not conform to Anglo @-@ Saxon Protestant ideals . 
 Bengough intended his didactic cartoons to impart moral instruction . He expressed a deep devotion to religion . He had a Presbyterian upbringing , though as an adult he subscribed to no denomination . He promoted Christian ideals as solutions to social issues and thus , for example , opposed streetcars running on Sundays . He proclaimed a Protestant work ethic widely expressed by Canadian artists and intellectuals of the late 19th century . In his writing he frequently made statements about the role of Man in God 's world , and insisted that politics should conform to the will of God . The editor of Canadian Methodist Magazine William Henry Withrow declared Bengough " an Artist of Righteousness " who was " always on the right side of every moral question " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As Nast had in the US , Bengough succeeded in establishing editorial cartooning as a force in journalism in the late 19th century . The church minister and Queen 's College principal George Monro Grant called Bengough " the most honest interpreter of current events [ Canada happens ] to have " and declared he had " no malice in him " but had " a merry heart , and that <unk> good like medicine " . The reformist English newspaper editor William Thomas Stead considered Bengough " one of the ablest cartoonists in the world " . 
 Outlets for political cartoons were mostly limited to illustrated magazines until they found a home in daily newspapers in the 20th century . Bengough 's busy , moralizing style began to fall out of favour by the 1890s in contrast to the cleaner style practised by such cartoonists as Henri Julien and Sam Hunter . His caricatures nevertheless left an impression on the public consciousness in Canada for generations to follow . 
 Bengough 's caricatures continue to illustrate Canadian texts — examples in which they are prominent include Creighton 's biography John A. Macdonald ( 1952 – 55 ) , Armstrong and Nelles ' The Revenge of the Methodist Bicycle Company : Sunday Streetcars and Municipal Reform in Toronto , 1888 – 1897 ( 1977 ) , and Waite 's <unk> Destiny : Canada 1874 – 1896 ( 1971 ) . Historians use the cartoons to demonstrate issues and attitudes of Bengough 's era , as well as for their artistic qualities , removed from their satirical contexts . Historian Peter Busby Waite considered Grip " one of the most interesting sources for the social history of Ontario in the latter nineteenth century " . 
 Bengough 's artistic legacy rests chiefly on his caricatures of Macdonald . To Peter Desbarats and Terry Mosher , Bengough 's bulbous @-@ nosed caricatures of Macdonald as " ungainly , boozy , and corrupt ... engraved itself on the public mind , particularly in the days before newspapers published photographs of politicians " . Macdonald nevertheless deflated much of the power his <unk> might have had as he often made light of his own alcoholism . Bengough met the prime minister in person only once . 
 Though his cartoons have continued to thrive , Bengough 's life and career as a writer has drawn far less attention . Bengough biographer Stanley Paul Kutcher considered his poetry " <unk> " . Historian George Ramsay Cook commended Bengough 's approach to have " nurtured the growth of social criticism in late Victorian Canada without much of that humourless self @-@ righteousness that so often characterizes reformers " . Historian Carman Cumming 's Sketches of a Young Country <unk> an in @-@ depth analysis of Grip 's politics . 
 The town of Bengough , Saskatchewan , incorporated 15 March 1912 , was named after the cartoonist . On 19 May 1938 , the Canadian government listed Bengough as a Person of National Historic Significance and dedicated a plaque to him at 66 Charles Street East in Toronto . Bengough was inducted into the Canadian Cartoonist Hall of Fame in 2005 . The McMaster University Library in Hamilton , Ontario , holds the J. W. Bengough papers in its Division of Archives and Research Collection . 
 = = Published works = = 
 1875 – The Grip Cartoons . Rogers and <unk> 
 1876 – The Decline and Fall of Keewatin . Grip Publishing Co . 
 1882 – Bengough 's Popular Readings : Original and Select . Bengough , Moore and Bengough 
 1882 – The Grip @-@ Sack : A Receptacle of Light Literature , Fun and Fancy . The Grip Printing and Publishing Co . 
 1882 – Grip 's Comic Almanac for 1882 . Bengough , Moore and Bengough 
 1886 – A Caricature History of Canadian Politics ( two volumes ) . The Grip Publishing and Printing Co . 
 1895 – Motley : Verse Grave and Gay . William Briggs 
 1896 – The Up @-@ to @-@ date Primer . Funk & Wagnalls 
 1897 – The Prohibition Aesop . Royal Templar Book and Publishing House 
 1898 – The Gin Mill Primer . William Briggs 
 1902 – In Many Keys . William Briggs 
 1908 – On True Political Economy ( The Whole Hog Book ) . American Free Trade League 
 1922 – Chalk Talks . The Musson Book Co . 
 No copies remain of the comic opera Hecuba ; or Hamlet 's Father 's Deceased Wife 's Sister , a comic opera with score by G. Barton Brown . Publisher F. F. Siddall registered it for copyright in 1885 . The opera may have been an earlier version of <unk> and Co . , or Hamlet , Prince of Dry Goods , for which an undated and possibly unpublished script exists , and for which Clarence Lucas had written a score that Bengough appears to have rejected . 
 = Yugoslav coup d 'état = 
 The Yugoslav coup d 'état occurred on 27 March 1941 in Belgrade , Kingdom of Yugoslavia . The coup was planned and conducted by a group of pro @-@ Western Serb @-@ nationalist Royal Yugoslav Air Force officers formally led by Air Force General Dušan Simović , who had been associated with a number of coup plots from 1938 onwards . For practical purposes Brigadier General of Military Aviation Borivoje Mirković , Major Živan Knežević of the Yugoslav Royal Guards , and his brother Radoje Knežević all performed leadership roles in the conduct of the coup . In addition to Radoje Knežević , some other civilian leaders were probably aware of the coup before it was launched and moved to support it once it occurred , but they were not among the organisers . 
 The Communist Party of Yugoslavia played no part in the coup , although it made a significant contribution to the mass street protests in many cities that signalled popular support for the coup after it occurred . The coup was successful and overthrew the three @-@ member regency : Prince Paul , Dr. Radenko Stanković and Dr. Ivo Perović , as well as the government of Prime Minister Dragiša Cvetković . Two days before the coup , the Cvetković government had signed the Vienna Protocol on the Accession of Yugoslavia to the Tripartite Pact ( Axis ) . The coup had been planned for several months , but the signing of the Tripartite Pact spurred the organisers to carry it out , encouraged by the British Special Operations Executive . 
 The military conspirators brought to power the 17 @-@ year @-@ old King Peter II Karađorđević , whom they declared to be of age to assume the throne , and a government of national unity was formed with Simović as prime minister and Vladko Maček and Slobodan Jovanović as his vice @-@ premiers . The coup led directly to the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to economics professor and historian Jozo Tomasevich , the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was politically weak from the moment of its creation and remained so during the interwar period mainly due to a " rigid system of centralism " , the strong association between each national group and its dominant religion , and uneven economic development . In particular , the religious primacy of the Serbian Orthodox Church in national affairs and discrimination against Roman Catholics and Muslims compounded the dissatisfaction of the non @-@ Serb population with the Serb @-@ dominated ruling groups that treated non @-@ Serbs as second @-@ class citizens . This centralised system arose from Serbian military strength and Croat intransigence , was sustained by Croat disengagement , Serb <unk> , corruption and a lack of discipline within political parties . Until 1929 , this state of affairs was maintained by subverting the democratic system of government . The domination of the rest of Yugoslavia by Serb ruling elites meant that the country was never consolidated in the political sense , and was therefore never able to address the social and economic challenges it faced . 
 Political scientist Professor Sabrina P. Ramet sees the dysfunctionality and lack of legitimacy of the regime as the reasons why the kingdom 's internal politics became ethnically polarised , a phenomenon that has been referred to as the " national question " in Yugoslavia . Failures to establish the rule of law , to protect individual rights , to build tolerance and equality , and to guarantee the neutrality of the state in matters relating to religion , language and culture contributed to this illegitimacy and the resulting instability . 
 In 1929 , democracy was abandoned and a royal dictatorship was established by King Alexander , who attempted to break down the ethnic divisions in the country through a number of means , including creating administrative divisions ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : <unk> ) based on rivers rather than traditional regions . There was significant opposition to this move , with Serb and Slovene opposition parties and figures advocating the division of Yugoslavia into six ethnically @-@ based administrative units . By 1933 , discontent in the largely Croat @-@ populated Sava Banovina had developed into full @-@ blown civil disorder , which the regime countered with a series of assassinations , attempted assassinations and arrests of key Croatian opposition figures including the leader of the Croatian Peasant Party ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Hrvatska seljačka stranka , HSS ) Vladko Maček . When Alexander was assassinated in Marseilles in 1934 , his cousin Prince Paul headed a triumvirate regency whose other members were the senator Dr. Radenko Stanković and the governor of the Sava Banovina , Dr. Ivo Perović . The regency ruled on behalf of Alexander 's 11 @-@ year @-@ old son , Prince Peter , but the important member of the regency was Prince Paul . Although Prince Paul was more liberal than his cousin , the dictatorship continued uninterrupted . The dictatorship had allowed the country to follow a consistent foreign policy , but Yugoslavia needed peace at home in order to assure peace with its neighbours , all of whom had irredentist designs on its territory . 
 = = Yugoslav foreign policy during the interwar period = = 
 From 1921 , the country had negotiated the Little Entente with Romania and Czechoslovakia in the face of Hungarian designs on its territory , and after a decade of bilateral treaties , had formalised the arrangements in 1933 . This had been followed the following year by the Balkan Entente of Yugoslavia , Greece , Romania and Turkey , aimed at thwarting Bulgarian aspirations . Throughout this period , the Yugoslav government had sought to remain good friends with France , seeing her as a guarantor of European peace treaties . This was formalised through a treaty of friendship signed in 1927 . With these arrangements in place , Italy posed the biggest problem for Yugoslavia , funding the anti @-@ Yugoslav Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organisation which promoted Bulgarian irredentism . Attempts by King Alexander to negotiate with Benito Mussolini fell on deaf ears , and after Alexander 's assassination , nothing of note happened on that front until 1937 . In the aftermath of Alexander 's assassination , Yugoslavia was isolated both militarily and diplomatically , and reached out to France to assist its bilateral relationship with Italy . 
 = = = Cvetković – Maček Agreement = = = 
 Prince Paul recognised the lack of national solidarity and political weakness of his country , and after he assumed power he made repeated attempts to negotiate a political settlement with Maček , the leader of the dominant Croat political party in Yugoslavia , the HSS . In January 1937 , Prime Minister Milan Stojadinović met with Maček at Prince Paul 's request , but Stojadinović was unwilling or unable to grapple with the issue of Croat dissatisfaction with a Yugoslavia dominated by the Serb ruling class . In 1938 , the Anschluss brought the Third Reich to the borders of Yugoslavia , and early elections were held in December . In this background , Simović had been involved in two coup plots in early 1938 driven by Serb opposition to the Concordat with the Vatican , and another coup plot following the December election . In the December 1938 elections , the United Opposition led by Maček had attracted 44 @.@ 9 per cent of the vote , but due to the electoral rules by which the government parties received 40 per cent of the seats in the National Assembly before votes were counted , the opposition vote only translated into 67 seats out of a total of 373 . On 3 February 1939 , the Minister of Education , Bogoljub <unk> , made a nationalist speech in the Assembly in which he stated that " Serb policies will always be the policies of this house and this government . " Head of the Yugoslav Muslim Organization ( JMO ) Mehmed <unk> asked Stojadinović to disavow the statement , but he did not . At the behest of the Senate leader , the Slovene Anton Korošec , that evening five ministers resigned from the government , including Korošec . The others were <unk> , another JMO politician <unk> Kulenović , the Slovene Franc <unk> , and the Serb Dragiša Cvetković . 
 Stojadinović sought authority from Prince Paul to form a new cabinet , however Korošec as head of the Senate advised the prince to form a new government around Cvetković . Prince Paul dismissed Stojadinović and appointed Cvetković in his place , with a direction that he reach an agreement with Maček . While these negotiations were ongoing , Italy invaded Albania . In August 1939 , the Cvetković – Maček Agreement was concluded to create the Banovina of Croatia , which was to be a relatively autonomous political unit within Yugoslavia . Separatist Croats considered the Agreement did not go far enough , and many Serbs believed it went too far in giving power to Croats . The Cvetković @-@ led cabinet formed in the wake of the Agreement was resolutely anti @-@ Axis , and included five members of the HSS , with Maček as deputy Prime Minister . General Milan Nedić was Minister of the Army and Navy . After the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , German pressure on the government resulted in the resignation in mid @-@ 1940 of the Minister of the Interior , Dr. <unk> <unk> , who had been organising covert anti @-@ Axis activities . In October 1940 , Simović was again approached by plotters planning a coup but he was non @-@ committal . From the outbreak of war British diplomacy focused on keeping Yugoslavia neutral , which the Ambassador Ronald Campbell apparently still believed possible . 
 = = = Pressure builds = = = 
 By the time of the German invasion of Poland and subsequent outbreak of war in September 1939 , the Yugoslav Intelligence Service was cooperating with British intelligence agencies on a large scale across the country . This cooperation , which had existed to a lesser extent during the early 1930s , intensified after the Anschluss in 1938 . These combined intelligence operations were aimed at strengthening Yugoslavia and keeping her neutral while encouraging covert activities . In mid to late 1940 , British intelligence became aware of coup plotting , but managed to side @-@ track the plans , preferring to continue working through Prince Paul . The SOE office in Belgrade went to significant lengths to support the opposition to the anti @-@ Axis Cvetković government , which undermined the hard @-@ won balance in Yugoslav politics that government represented . SOE Belgrade was entangled with pro @-@ Serb policies and interests , and disregarded or underestimated warnings from SOE and British diplomats in Zagreb , who better understood the situation in Yugoslavia as a whole . 
 Yugoslavia 's situation worsened in October 1940 when Italy invaded Greece from Albania , and the initial failure of the Italians to make headway only increased Yugoslav apprehension that Germany would be forced to help Italy . In September and November 1940 respectively , Germany forced the Kingdom of Hungary and Kingdom of Romania to accede to the Tripartite Pact . In early November 1940 , General Nedić , who believed that Germany would win the war , proposed to the government that it abandon its neutral stance and join the Axis as soon as possible in the hope that Germany would protect Yugoslavia against its " greedy neighbors " . A few days later Prince Paul , having realised the impossibility of following Nedić 's advice , replaced him with the ageing and compliant General Petar <unk> . On 12 December 1940 , at the initiative of the Prime Minister of Hungary , Count Pál Teleki , Hungary concluded a friendship and non @-@ aggression treaty with Yugoslavia . Although the concept had received support from both Germany and Italy , the actual signing of the treaty did not . Germany 's planned invasion of Greece would be simplified if Yugoslavia could be neutralised . Over the next few months , Prince Paul and his ministers laboured under overwhelming diplomatic pressure , a threat of an attack by the Germans from Bulgarian territory , and the unwillingness of the British to promise practical military support . Six months prior to the coup , British policy towards the government of Yugoslavia had shifted from acceptance of Yugoslav neutrality to pressuring the country for support in the war against Germany . 
 On 23 January 1941 , William Donovan , a special emissary of US President Franklin D. Roosevelt , visited Belgrade and issued an ultimatum , saying that if Yugoslavia permitted German troop passage then the US would not " interfere on her behalf " at peace talks . On 14 February , Adolf Hitler met with Cvetković and his foreign minister and requested Yugoslavia 's accession to the Tripartite Pact . He pushed for the demobilisation of the Royal Yugoslav Army — there had been a partial " reactivation " ( a euphemism for mobilisation ) in Macedonia and parts of Serbia , probably directed at the Italians — and the granting of permission to transport German supplies through Yugoslavia 's territory , along with greater economic cooperation . In exchange he offered a port near the Aegean Sea and territorial security . On 17 February , Bulgaria and Turkey signed an agreement of friendship and non @-@ aggression , which effectively destroyed attempts to create a neutral Balkan bloc . Prince Paul denounced the agreement and the Bulgarians , describing their actions as " perfidy " . On 18 and 23 February , Prince Paul told US Minister Arthur Lane that Yugoslavia would not engage the German military if they entered Bulgaria . He explained that to do so would be wrongful and that it would not be understood by the Slovenes and Croats . On 1 March , Yugoslavia was further isolated when Bulgaria signed the Pact and the German army arrived at the Bulgarian @-@ Yugoslav border . 
 On 4 March , Prince Paul secretly met with Hitler in Berchtesgaden and was again pressured to sign the Pact . Hitler did not request troop passage through Yugoslavia and offered the Greek city of Salonika . A time limit for Prince Paul , who was uncommitted and " wavering " , wasn 't set . Prince Paul , in the middle of a cabinet crisis , offered a nonaggression pact and a declaration of friendship , but Hitler insisted on his proposals . Prince Paul warned that " I fear that if I follow your advice and sign the Tripartite Pact I shall no longer be here in six months . " On 8 March , Franz Halder , the German Chief of the Army General Staff , expressed his expectation that the Yugoslavs would sign if German troops did not cross their border . 
 On 17 March , Prince Paul returned to Berchtesgaden and was told by Hitler that it was his last chance for Yugoslavia to join the Pact , renouncing this time the request for the use of Yugoslav railways in order to facilitate their accession . On 19 March , Prince Paul convened a Crown Council to discuss the terms of the Pact and whether Yugoslavia should sign it . The Council 's members were willing to agree , but only under the condition that Germany let its concessions be made public . Germany agreed and the Council approved the terms . Three cabinet ministers resigned on 20 March in protest of the impending signing of the Pact . The Germans reacted by imposing an ultimatum to accept by midnight 23 March or forfeit any further chances . Prince Paul and Cvetković obliged and accepted , despite believing German promises were " worthless " . On 23 March , Germany 's guarantee of Yugoslavia 's territorial security and its promise not to use its railroads were publicized . In the United Kingdom , Alexander Cadogan , the Permanent Under @-@ Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs , penned in his diary that the " Yugoslavs seem to have sold their souls to the Devil . All these Balkan peoples are trash . " 
 = = = Yugoslavia signs the Pact = = = 
 On 25 March , the pact was signed at the Belvedere palace in Vienna . An official banquet was held which Hitler complained felt like a funeral party . German radio later announced that " the Axis Powers would not demand the right of passage of troops or war materials , " while the official document mentioned only troops and omitted mention of war materials . Likewise the pledge to give Salonika to Yugoslavia does not appear on the document . On the following day , Serb demonstrators gathered on the streets of Belgrade shouting " Better the grave than a slave , better a war than the pact " ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : <unk> <unk> <unk> rob , <unk> rat <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Development of the coup = = 
 The coup was executed at 2 : 15 am on 27 March . It was planned by a group of Royal Yugoslav Air Force ( JKRM ) officers in Zemun , and Royal Guard officers in nearby Belgrade . The only senior officers involved were from the air force . Under the supervision of the JKRM deputy commander Borivoje Mirković , officers assumed control of critical buildings and locations in the early hours of 27 March , including : 
 the Zemun air force base ( Colonel Dragutin Savić ) 
 the bridges over the Sava between Zemun and Belgrade ( Colonel Dragutin <unk> ) 
 the City Administration , Police Directorate and the Belgrade radio station ( Colonel Stjepan <unk> ) 
 the ministries and headquarters of the General Staff ( Major Živan Knežević ) 
 the Royal Court ( Colonel Stojan <unk> ) 
 the main post office in Belgrade ( Lieutenant Colonel Miodrag <unk> ) 
 the barracks of the Royal Guards and Automotive Command 
 Despite British support for the plotters , according to former British diplomat and Emeritus Professor of History , Classics and Archaeology of the University of Edinburgh David A. T. Stafford , the " [ i ] <unk> came from the Yugoslavs , and only by a stretch of the imagination can the British be said to have planned or directed the coup d 'etat . " Ivo <unk> has criticised Stafford 's conclusion , pointing to evidence that the plotters were dependent on British intelligence , and that senior British officials met with both the JKRM commander , General Dušan Simović and Mirković immediately before the coup was carried out . The British air attaché Group Captain A.H.H. McDonald met with Simović on 26 March , and the British agent T.G. <unk> met with his close friend Mirković on the same day and ordered him to carry out the coup within 48 hours . Individuals that were probably aware of the coup included Slobodan Jovanović , president of the Serbian Cultural Club , and Ilija Trifunović @-@ Birčanin , president of Narodna Odbrana ( National Defence ) . 
 There are contradictory claims as to who was the leader of the coup and had managed its execution , coming from Simović , Mirković , and Major Živan Knežević . Mirković claimed sole credit immediately after the coup and stated on its tenth anniversary that : " Only after I had informed General [ Simović ] about my idea and he had accepted it did I make the decision to undertake the planned revolt . I made the decision myself , and I also carried out the whole organization . I made the decision as to when the revolt would take place . " It is likely that he had been a planning a coup since 1937 when an Italo @-@ Yugoslav pact was signed . King Peter later credited simply the " younger and middle ranks [ of officers ] of the Yugoslav army " for the coup in a speech on 17 December 1941 . Simović 's response was published posthumously , he claimed that he " stood in the center of the whole undertaking " and " personally engaged his assistant Brigadier General Bora Mirković for the action " . Tomasevich considers Mirković 's account to be the most credible of the two , and points out it is corroborated from several sources , both Allied and Axis . The matter would play a role in the factionalism that would divide the soon @-@ to @-@ be Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile during the war . 
 At the time of the coup , Prince Paul was in Zagreb en route to a planned holiday in Brdo . On the morning of 27 March , Deputy Prime Minister Maček was informed of the coup and met Prince Paul at Zagreb 's railway station to discuss the situation . Maček suggested that Paul stay in Zagreb , with the possibility of mobilizing army units in the Banovina of Croatia in his support . Prince Paul declined this offer , at least partially because his wife Princess Olga and children remained in Belgrade . He reached the capital by train that evening and was immediately ordered to sign papers abolishing the regency . He was subsequently exiled to Greece . 
 On the morning of 27 March , the royal palace was surrounded and the coup 's advocates issued a radio message that impersonated the voice of Peter with a " proclamation to the people " , calling on them to support the new king . Pamphlets with the proclamation of the coup were subsequently dropped into cities from aircraft . Demonstrations followed in Belgrade and other large Serbian cities that continued for the next few days . Demonstrators frequently used the slogan that was used by demonstrators the day before the coup , " Better the war than the pact , better the grave than a slave " . Winston Churchill , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , commented that " Yugoslavia has found its soul ” . 
 For other nations in Yugoslavia , the prospect of war and the government 's close ties to the Serbian Orthodox Church was not at all appealing . Archbishop Aloysius Stepinac , president of the Roman Catholic Conference of Bishops of Yugoslavia , bitterly wrote in his diary that , " All in all , Croats and Serbs are of two worlds ... that will never move closer to one another without an act of God " . He also wrote , " The Schism [ Orthodoxy ] is the greatest curse in Europe , almost greater than Protestantism . There is no morality , no principle , there is no truth , no justice , no honesty [ in Orthodoxy ] . " On the same day , he publicly called on the Catholic clergy to pray for King Peter and that Croatia and Yugoslavia would be spared a war . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = The new government = = = 
 In the wake of the coup , Simović 's new government refused to ratify Yugoslavia 's signing of the Tripartite Pact , but did not openly rule it out . Hitler , angered by the coup and anti @-@ German incidents in Belgrade , gathered his senior officers and ordered that Yugoslavia be crushed without delay . On the same day as the coup he issued Führer Directive 25 which called for Yugoslavia to be treated as a hostile state . Italy was to be included in the operations and the directive made specific mention that " [ e ] <unk> will be made to induce Hungary and Bulgaria to take part in operations by offering them the prospect of regaining Banat and Macedonia " . Furthermore , the directive stated that " [ i ] <unk> tensions in Yugoslavia will be encouraged by giving political assurances to the Croats " . 
 On 30 March , Foreign Minister Momčilo Ninčić summoned the German ambassador Viktor von Heeren and handed him a statement which declared that the new government would accept all its international obligations , including accession to the Tripartite Pact , as long as the national interests of the country were protected . Von Heeren returned to his office to discover a message from Berlin instructing that contact with Yugoslav officials was to be avoided , and he was recalled to Berlin . No reply was given to Ninčić . On 2 April orders were issued for the evacuation of the German embassy , and the German chargé d 'affaires advised the diplomats of friendly countries to leave the country . 
 On 3 April , Führer Directive 26 was issued , detailing the plan of attack and command structure for the invasion . Hungary and Bulgaria were promised the Banat and Yugoslav Macedonia respectively and the Romanian army was asked not to take part , holding its position at the countries ' border . Internal conflict in Hungary over the invasion plans between the army and Teleki led to the Prime Minister 's suicide that same evening . Also on 3 April , Edmund Veesenmayer , representing the <unk> Ribbentrop , arrived in Zagreb in preparation for a regime change . Croatian pilot Vladimir Kren , a captain in the Royal Yugoslav Air Force , defected to the Germans on 3 April taking with him valuable information about the country 's air defenses . 
 Simović named Maček as Deputy Prime Minister once again in the new government , but Maček was reluctant and remained in Zagreb while he decided what to do . While he considered the coup had been an entirely Serbian initiative aimed at both Prince Paul and the Cvetković – Maček Agreement , he decided that he needed to show HSS support for the new government and that joining it was necessary . On 4 April he travelled to Belgrade and accepted the post , on several conditions ; that the new government respect the Cvetković – Maček Agreement and expand the autonomy of the Banovina Croatia in some respects , that the new government respect the country 's accession to the Tripartite Pact , and that one Serb and one Croat temporarily assume the role of regents . That same day exiled Croatian politician and Ustaše leader Ante Pavelić called for Croats to start an uprising against the government over his Radio Velebit program based in Italy . 
 On 5 April the new cabinet met for the first time . While the first two conditions set by Maček were met , the appointment of regents was impracticable given Prince Peter had been declared to be of age . Involving representatives from across the political spectrum , Simović 's cabinet was " extremely disunited and weak " . It included members who fell into three groups ; those who were strongly opposed to the Axis and prepared to face war with Germany , those who advocated peace with Germany , and those that were uncommitted . These groups were as follows : 
 = = = Axis invasion = = = 
 The Axis invasion of Yugoslavia began on 6 April . The bombing of Belgrade forced the government to seek shelter outside the city . From here , King Peter and General Simović planned to leave for exile . Maček , refusing to leave the country , resigned on 7 April and designated Juraj <unk> as his successor . Maček returned to Zagreb . Three other ministers also refused to leave Yugoslavia : Ivan Andres and <unk> <unk> of the HSS and Kulenović of the JMO . The government met on Yugoslav soil for the last time on 13 April near Pale . From here they travelled to Nikšić where they were flown out of the country to Athens . 
 Another result of the coup was that the work that had been done by British intelligence with the anti @-@ Axis government of Cvetković and Maček was lost . By supporting the coup plotters , the SOE undermined the balance in Yugoslav politics that had been achieved by the Cvetković – Maček Agreement . Serb nationalists supported and welcomed the coup because it ended Croatian autonomy under the Agreement and freed them to pursue a Greater Serbia agenda . The coup and its immediate aftermath also contributed to the paralysis within the Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile during the rest of the war , due to ongoing disputes regarding the legitimacy of the Cvetković – Maček Agreement . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Prince Paul was found guilty of war crimes in September 1945 for his role in the Yugoslav accession to the Tripartite Pact . In 2011 , a High Court in Serbia found the sentence to be politically and ideologically motivated and Prince Paul was officially rehabilitated . A similar decision had been made in 2009 to rehabilitate Cvetković for war crimes charges relating to the signing of the pact . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Eurasian bittern = 
 The Eurasian bittern or great bittern ( Botaurus stellaris ) is a wading bird in the bittern subfamily ( <unk> ) of the heron family Ardeidae . There are two subspecies , the northern race ( B. s. stellaris ) breeding in parts of Europe and Asia , as well as on the northern coast of Africa , while the southern race ( B. s. capensis ) is endemic to parts of southern Africa . It is a secretive bird , seldom seen in the open as it prefers to skulk in reed beds and thick vegetation near water bodies . Its presence is apparent in the spring , when the booming call of the male during the breeding season can be heard . It feeds on fish , small mammals , fledgling birds , amphibians , crustaceans and insects . 
 The nest is usually built among reeds at the edge of bodies of water . The female incubates the clutch of eggs and feeds the young chicks , which leave the nest when about two weeks old . She continues to care for them until they are fully fledged some six weeks later . 
 With its specific habitat requirements and the general reduction in wetlands across its range , the population is thought to be in decline globally . However the decline is slow , and the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed its overall conservation status as being of " least concern " . Nevertheless , some local populations are at risk and the population of the southern race has declined more dramatically and is cause for concern . In the United Kingdom it is one of the most threatened of all bird species . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 This species was first described in 1758 as Ardea stellaris by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae . In 1819 , the English naturalist James Francis Stephens , coined the genus Botaurus for the bitterns to distinguish them from Ardea , the great herons . It is placed in the subfamily <unk> , and its closest relatives are the American bittern ( Botaurus lentiginosus ) , the <unk> bittern ( Botaurus pinnatus ) and the Australasian bittern ( Botaurus <unk> ) . Two races of Eurasian bittern are recognised ; the nominate subspecies B. s. stellaris has a palearctic distribution and occurs across a broad swathe of Europe , North Africa and Asia , while the other subspecies , B. s. capensis , occurs only in southern Africa . The name capensis was used for species found in the <unk> for which no exact range was known . 
 The generic name Botaurus was given by the English naturalist James Francis Stephens , and is derived from Medieval Latin <unk> , " bittern " , itself constructed from the Middle English name for the bird , <unk> . Pliny gave a fanciful derivation from Bos ( ox ) and taurus ( bull ) , because the bittern 's call resembles the bellowing of a bull . The species name stellaris is Latin for " starred " , from stella , " star " , and refers to the speckled plumage . 
 Its folk names , often local , include many variations on the themes of " barrel @-@ maker " , " bog @-@ bull " , " bog hen " , " bog @-@ trotter " , " bog @-@ bumper " , " mire drum [ ble ] " , " butter bump " , " bitter bum " , " bog <unk> " , " bog drum " , " boom bird " , " bottle @-@ bump " , " bull of the bog " , " bull of the mire " , " bumpy cors " , and " heather <unk> " . Most of these were onomatopoeic colloquial names for the bird ; the call was described as " bumping " or " booming " . Mire and bog denote the bird 's habitat . 
 = = Description = = 
 Bitterns are thickset herons with bright , pale , buffy @-@ brown plumage covered with dark streaks and bars As its alternate name suggests , this species is the largest of the bitterns , with males being rather larger than females . The Eurasian or great bittern is 69 – 81 cm ( 27 – 32 in ) in length , with a 100 – 130 cm ( 39 – 51 in ) wingspan and a body mass of 0 @.@ 87 – 1 @.@ 94 kg ( 1 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 3 lb ) . 
 The crown and nape are black , with the individual feathers rather long and loosely arranged , tipped with buff narrowly barred with black . The sides of the head and neck are a more uniform tawny @-@ buff , irregularly barred with black . The mantle , scapulars and back are of a similar colour but are more heavily barred , the individual feathers having black centres and barring . The head has a yellowish @-@ buff superciliary stripe and a brownish @-@ black <unk> stripe . The sides of the neck are a rusty @-@ brown with faint barring . The chin and throat are buff , the central feathers on the throat having longitudinal stripes of rusty @-@ brown . The breast and belly are yellowish @-@ buff , with broad stripes of brown at the side and narrow stripes in the centre . The tail is rusty @-@ buff with black streaks in the centre and black mottling near the edge . The wings are pale rusty @-@ brown irregularly barred , streaked and mottled with black . The plumage has a loose texture , and elongated feathers on the crown , neck and breast can be erected . The powerful bill is greenish @-@ yellow with a darker tip to the upper mandible . The eye has a yellow iris and is surrounded by a ring of greenish or bluish bare skin . The legs and feet are greenish , with some yellow on the tarsal joint and yellow soles to the feet . Juveniles have similar plumage to adults but are somewhat paler with less distinct markings . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The breeding range of B. s. stellaris extends across temperate parts of Europe and Asia from the British Isles , Sweden and Finland eastwards to Sakhalin Island in eastern Siberia and Hokkaido Island in Japan . The bird 's northern extent of occurrence is around 57 ° N in the Ural Mountains and 64 ° N in eastern Siberia . Its southern limit is the Mediterranean Sea , the Black Sea , Iran , Afghanistan , Kazakhstan , Mongolia and Hebei Province in northern China . Small resident populations also breed in Morocco , Algeria and Tunisia . It typically inhabits reed beds ( Phragmites ) and swamps , as well as lakes , lagoons and sluggish rivers fringed by rank vegetation . It sometimes nests by ponds in agricultural areas , and even quite near habitations where suitable habitat exists , but for preference , chooses large reed beds of at least 20 hectares ( 49 acres ) in which to breed . 
 Some populations are sedentary and stay in the same areas throughout the year . More northerly populations usually migrate to warmer regions but some birds often remain ; birds in northern Europe tend to move south and west to southern Europe , northern and central Africa , and northern Asian birds migrate to parts of the Arabian peninsula , the Indian sub @-@ continent , and the provinces of Heilongjiang , Jilin and Inner Mongolia in eastern China . Outside the breeding season it has less restrictive habitat requirements , and as well as living in reed beds , it visits rice fields , watercress beds , fish farms , gravel pits , sewage works , ditches , flooded areas and marshes . 
 The subspecies B. s. capensis is endemic to southern Africa , where it is found sparingly in marshes near the east coast , the Okavango Delta and the upland foothills of the Drakensberg Mountains . This population is sedentary . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Usually solitary , the Eurasian bittern forages in reed beds , walking stealthily or remaining still above a body of water where prey may occur . It is a shy bird , and if disturbed , often points its bill directly upwards and freezes in that position , causing its cryptic plumage to blend into the surrounding reeds , an action known as <unk> . While in this position , the shield of elongated feathers on throat and breast droop downwards and hide the neck , so that the outline of the head and body is obscured . Sometimes it resorts to applying powder down produced by patches of specialist down feathers at the side of its breast . This white dusty material seems to help it to rid its head and neck of slime after feeding on eels . It then removes the excess powder by scratching vigorously before applying preen oil from the gland at the base of its tail . 
 The bird has a secretive nature , keeping largely hidden in the reeds and coarse vegetation . Occasionally , especially in hard winter weather , it stands in the open beside the water 's edge , although usually close to cover to facilitate a hasty retreat . In flight , its wings can be seen to be broad and rounded , and its legs trail behind it in typical heron fashion . Its neck is extended when it takes off , but is retracted when it has picked up speed . It seldom flies however , except when feeding young , preferring to move through the vegetation stealthily on foot . Its gait is slow and deliberate and it can clamber over reeds by gripping several at a time with its toes . It is most active at dawn and dusk , but also sometimes forages by day . 
 Eurasian bitterns feed on fish , small mammals , amphibians and invertebrates , hunting along the reed margins in shallow water . British records include eels up to 35 cm ( 14 in ) and other fish , mice and voles , small birds and fledglings , frogs , newts , crabs , shrimps , molluscs , spiders and insects . In continental Europe , members of over twenty families of beetle are eaten , as well as dragonflies , bees , grasshoppers and earwigs . Some vegetable matter such as aquatic plants is also consumed . 
 Males are polygamous , mating with up to five females . The nest is built in the previous year 's standing reeds and consists of an untidy platform some 30 cm ( 12 in ) across . It may be on a tussock surrounded by water or on matted roots close to water and is built by the female using bits of reed , sedges and grass stalks , with a lining of finer fragments . The eggs average 52 by 38 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 by 1 @.@ 5 in ) and are non @-@ glossy , olive @-@ brown , with some darker speckling at the broader end . Four to six eggs are laid in late March and April and incubated by the female for about twenty @-@ six days . After hatching , the chicks spend about two weeks in the nest before leaving to swim amongst the reeds . The female rears them without help from the male , regurgitating food into the nest from her crop , the young seizing her bill and pulling it down . They become fully fledged at about eight weeks . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The mating call or contact call of the male is a deep , sighing fog @-@ horn or bull @-@ like boom with a quick rise and an only slightly longer fall , easily audible from a distance of 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) on a calm night . The call is mainly given between January and April during the mating season . Surveys of Eurasian bitterns are carried out by noting the number of distinct male booms in a given area . Prior to modern science , it was unknown how such a small bird produced a call so low @-@ pitched : common explanations included that the bird made its call into a straw or that it blew directly into the water . It is now known that the sound is produced by expelling air from the oesophagus with the aid of powerful muscles surrounding it . 
 = = Status = = 
 The Eurasian bittern has a very wide range and a large total population , estimated to be 110 @,@ 000 to 340 @,@ 000 individuals . The International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed its overall conservation status as being of " least concern because although the population trend is downward , the rate of decline is insufficient to justify rating it in a more threatened category . The chief threat the bird faces is destruction of reed beds and drainage and disturbance of its wetland habitats . It is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) applies . The southern race has suffered catastrophic decline during the 20th century due to wetland degradation and , unlike the northern race , is of high conservation concern . 
 In the United Kingdom , the main areas in which the Eurasian bittern breeds have been Lancashire and East Anglia with an estimated 44 breeding pairs in total in 2007 . However , the Lancashire population at Leighton Moss RSPB reserve has declined in recent decades , while bitterns have been attracted to new reed beds in the West Country . In Ireland , it died out as a breeding species in the mid @-@ 19th century , but in 2011 a single bird was spotted in County Wexford and there have been a number of subsequent sightings . In the 21st century , bitterns are regular winter visitors to the London Wetland Centre , enabling city dwellers to view these scarce birds . 
 = = In literature = = 
 Thomas Bewick records that the bittern " was formerly held in much estimation at the tables of the great " . 
 = = = Booming = = = 
 The Eurasian bittern is proposed as a rational explanation behind the <unk> , a creature of the graveyard and darkness originating in south Slavic mythology . It is mentioned in the short story " Brave Mita and <unk> from the Pond " by Branko Ćopić . 
 The 18th @-@ century Scottish poet James Thomson refers to the bittern 's " boom " in his poem " Spring " ( written 1728 ) , published as part of his The Seasons ( 1735 ) : 
 The Bittern knows the time , with bill <unk> 
 To shake the sounding marsh 
 The species is mentioned in George Crabbe 's 1810 narrative poem The Borough , to emphasise the ostracised , solitary life of the poem 's villain , Peter Grimes : 
 And the loud Bittern from the bull @-@ rush home 
 Gave from the Salt @-@ ditch side the bellowing boom : 
 The Irish poet Thomas MacDonagh translated the Gaelic poem " The Yellow Bittern " ( " An <unk> Buí " in the Irish ) by Cathal Buí Mac Giolla <unk> . His friend the poet Francis <unk> wrote a " Lament for Thomas MacDonagh " with the opening line " He shall not hear the bittern cry " . 
 In the Sherlock Holmes novel The Hound of the Baskervilles by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle , the villain Stapleton proposes the boom of a bittern as an explanation for the howl attributed to the mystical hound . 
 Because of its secretive and skulking nature , it was for long unclear exactly how the bittern produced its distinctive booming call . A Mediaeval theory held that the bittern thrust its beak into the boggy ground of the marsh in which it lived , making its vocalization which was amplified and deepened as it reverberated through the water . A reference to this theory appears in 1476 in Chaucer 's The Wife of Bath 's Tale , lines 972 @-@ 73 : 
 And , as a <unk> <unk> in the <unk> , 
 She <unk> hir mouth un @-@ to the water doun 
 The English 17th century physician Sir Thomas Browne disputed this claim , stating in his Pseudodoxia Epidemica , Book III , <unk> : " That a <unk> maketh that <unk> noise , or as we term it <unk> , by putting its bill into a reed as most believe , or as <unk> and <unk> conceive , by putting the same in water or mud , and after a while retaining the air by suddenly excluding it again , is not so easily made out . For my own part , though after diligent enquiry , I could never behold them in this motion " . Browne even kept a captive bittern to discover how its " boom " was produced . 
 = = = Invisibility = = = 
 The artist Abbott Handerson Thayer argued in his ill @-@ advised 1909 venture into zoology , Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom , that animals were concealed by a combination of countershading and disruptive coloration , which together " obliterated " their self @-@ shadowing and their shape . On the disruptive effect of bittern plumage , he wrote : 
 I was watching a standing [ American ] Bittern at a distance of about ten feet . The light stripes on the bill were repeated and continued by the light stripes on the sides of the head and neck , and together they imitated very closely the look of separate , bright reed @-@ stems ; while the dark stripes pictured reeds in shadow , or the shadowed interstices between the stems . 
 On the Eurasian bittern 's markings , he wrote : 
 Reed @-@ like patterns occur also ... on the necks of some of the true herons ... The beautiful European Bittern has kindred markings with a strong admixture of richly brindled grass @-@ pattern — a pattern at once bold and <unk> , whose obliterative effect is the bird 's normal environment must be consummate . 
 The zoologist Hugh Cott , in his classic 1940 study of camouflage , Adaptive Coloration in Animals , cites William Palmer 's account of seeing a bittern : 
 he once marked the place in a marsh where one of these birds had alighted : on reaching the spot he had the ' greatest difficulty in finding it clinging motionless , with bill almost erect , to a stem of wild oats ' . 
 = Rehab ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Rehab " is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for her third studio album , Good Girl Gone Bad ( 2007 ) . Def Jam Recordings serviced the song to contemporary hit radio in the United States on October 6 , 2008 , as the eighth and final single from the album . It was released in the United Kingdom as a CD single on December 8 , 2008 . Development of " Rehab " began while Rihanna was accompanying Timbaland on Justin Timberlake 's FutureSex / LoveShow tour in 2007 . Timberlake wrote the song in collaboration with his producers , Hannon Lane and Timbaland , and provided additional vocals . " Rehab " is a mid @-@ paced R & B song with an emotional , melancholy chorus ; the lyrics are about the protagonist 's painful memories of her former lover , who is portrayed metaphorically as a disease . 
 " Rehab " reached top @-@ ten positions on the singles charts in Austria , Germany , the Netherlands and Norway . It reached number 16 on the UK Singles Chart and number 18 on the US Billboard magazine 's Hot 100 . It was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Anthony Mandler directed the accompanying music video , which was shot in Vasquez Rocks Park , near Los Angeles . It won the Urban Music Award for Best Music Video . Rihanna performed " Rehab " on the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2007 – 09 ) , and occasionally on the Last Girl on Earth ( 2010 – 11 ) . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 " Rehab " is one of the three songs composed and produced by Timbaland for Rihanna 's third studio album , Good Girl Gone Bad . Timbaland was on tour with Justin Timberlake to promote Timberlake 's 2006 album FutureSex / LoveSounds , which Timbaland had also produced . After completing a show in Chicago , they joined Rihanna in the studio , where Timberlake experimented with beats and melodies . Weeks later , the three got together in New York City , where Timberlake had already conceptualized a song for Rihanna . Timbaland , who wanted to compose a song called " Rehab " for Rihanna , was producing a beat , when Timberlake came in and improvised the song over it . Hannon Lane co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced the song , and Demacio Castellon recorded and mixed it in 2007 at Roc The Mic Studios in New York City . Rihanna 's stint with Timbaland also resulted in " Sell Me Candy " and " Lemme Get That " , produced for Good Girl Gone Bad . 
 Timberlake told Entertainment Weekly that he believed " Rehab " to be " the bridge for [ Rihanna ] to be accepted as an adult in the music industry " . Rihanna told Robert Copsey of Digital Spy that she enjoyed working with Timberlake , and learned much from the sessions . She said , " Working with Justin in the studio is just great . He 's a fun guy and likes to make all the sessions enjoyable . He 's also such a genius when it comes to lyrics . " 
 " Rehab " was the eighth and final single to be released from Rihanna 's third studio album Good Girl Gone Bad ( 2007 ) . According to American music magazine Rap @-@ Up , both " Breakin ' Dishes " and " Rehab " were potential single releases , but " Rehab " was chosen . Def Jam Recordings released the song for airplay on contemporary hit radio in the United States on October 6 , 2008 . On November 3 , 2008 , it was released to rhythmic contemporary and urban contemporary radio stations . The single was released in the UK by Mercury Records on December 8 , 2008 , as a CD single containing both the album version and an instrumental version of " Rehab " . On the same date , it was released as a digital download in Ireland . A live performance of the song , recorded in Manchester during Rihanna 's Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2007 – 09 ) , was released for download on the UK and Ireland iTunes Stores . The performance was featured on Rihanna 's DVD Good Girl Gone Bad Live . 
 On December 12 , 2008 , the song and its instrumental version were released on iTunes and 7digital in ten countries , including Australia , Italy , New Zealand , Spain and Switzerland . In January 2009 , it was released as a CD single in Germany , with the same material as in the UK release . In early 2009 , Timbaland signed a contract with Verizon Communications , under which he would create music exclusively for BlackBerry Storm mobile phone owners . He was contracted to work with various artists and remix their songs , which would be available for Verizon costumers to download at no extra cost . " Rehab " was the first song remixed for the project , and this version was released in Canada and the US on May 19 , 2009 , via iTunes . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Rehab " is a mid @-@ tempo R & B ballad with a subtle backbeat . According to the digital sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , it is written in the key of G minor and set in common time , with a moderately slow groove . The vocal range spans nearly an octave and a half from F3 to B ♭ 4 . " Rehab " opens with a string section , played by Stevie <unk> , and a violin , cello , and tambourine instrumental groove with Hannon Lane 's keyboard melody . Rihanna then sings the opening lines , " Baby , baby , when we first met , I never felt something so strong " . 
 Critics noted similarities among the structures of " Rehab " and some of Timberlake 's songs , such as " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " and " Cry Me a River " . Spence D. of IGN wrote that the song has an " R & B swoon " , similar to Rihanna 's previous singles . In an interview with Margeaux Watson for Entertainment Weekly , Rihanna explained the meaning of the song 's lyrics : " ' Rehab ' is a metaphorical song . Rehab really just means we have to get over the guy . So we talk about checking ourselves into rehab , meaning we have to get over him . And we compare the guy to a disease or an addiction . " Watson further called the song a " lovesick ballad " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Rodney Dugue of The Village Voice called it one of the standout songs on Good Girl Gone Bad , and Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe said it was essential to the album . Quentin B. Huff of PopMatters called it a " little gem " and compared it to Babyface 's collaboration with Madonna on her 1994 single " Take a Bow " . Billboard magazine called the song a highlight of the album , with " slinky @-@ assisted Timberlake background vocals , tension @-@ filled production , and contrasting strings and guitars . " Vibe 's <unk> Odum , while reviewing Good Girl Gone Bad , noted that the album predominantly consists of up @-@ tempo songs , while the ballads are its weak part , eventually being " saved " by " Rehab " . Spence D. of IGN stated that Timberlake and Rihanna work well together , thanks to their similar vocal ranges . He wrote that the song " reverts to Rihanna 's old styled R & B swoon , the groove being built around tambourine shakes , acoustic guitar swirls , and a subtle backbeat . " Doug Rule of Metro Weekly wrote that " Rehab " " is its own distinctive song — and a fetching one at that — but the resemblance to one of Timberlake 's best is unmistakable . " Sylvia Patterson from The Guardian described the song as a " mournful tale of lost love feeling like a catastrophic rehab meltdown " . 
 Tom <unk> of Pitchfork Media wrote that Rihanna " comes closer than usual to depicting something resembling human emotion , but she still comes off sounding like a robot programmed to impersonate Alanis Morissette . " Neil Drumming of Entertainment Weekly wrote , " Rehab is a joyless overdose of mid @-@ tempo melodrama " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said that " Rehab " proves that Timberlake " is better off penning lyrics about sexy backs or dicks in boxes " — a reference to Timberlake 's 2006 singles " SexyBack " and " Dick in a Box " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Rehab " entered the US Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 91 on November 22 , 2008 , and peaked at number 18 , making it Rihanna 's twelfth US top @-@ twenty single . It also peaked at number 17 on Billboard 's Pop Songs chart and at number 52 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The song rose to number 19 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart , having started at number 56 on December 6 , 2008 . It entered the Australian ARIA Singles Chart at number 37 on November 17 , 2008 and eventually reached number 26 , thus becoming Rihanna 's twelfth consecutive top @-@ thirty single in Australia . In New Zealand , it first entered the singles chart at number 24 on October 27 , 2008 , and rose to number 12 . On January 11 , 2009 , it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , 12 weeks after it first charted . 
 " Rehab " first appeared in the UK Singles Chart at number 51 on November 22 , 2008 . After two weeks , it became the greatest gainer on the chart , climbing twenty @-@ seven places to number 24 , and in the week after that , it reached its peak of 16 . More than 160 @,@ 000 copies of the song have been sold in the UK . The single debuted at number 33 on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 and peaked at number nine . In Germany it reached number 4 and became Rihanna 's sixth top @-@ five single . " Rehab " started at number 18 in the Dutch Top 40 on January 17 , 2009 , and peaked at number 3 in its fourth week on the chart . In Norway it entered the singles chart at number 19 and climbed to number 4 , becoming Rihanna 's seventh top @-@ five single in that country . It peaked at number 8 on the Slovakian singles chart , becoming Rihanna 's fifth international top @-@ ten single , and her sixth top @-@ ten single in Slovakia . It has also peaked at # 1 in Israel , the only country in which it did . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Rihanna filmed the music video for " Rehab " with Justin Timberlake at Vasquez Rocks Park , near Los Angeles , on October 22 , 2008 . It was directed by Anthony Mandler , who directed the videos for Rihanna 's 2008 singles " Take a Bow " and " Disturbia " . Photographs of the production were leaked on the same day . Tim Nixon of The Sun wrote that the " red hot chemistry " between Rihanna and Timberlake must have been difficult for their partners to watch . Simon Reynolds of Digital Spy said that Timberlake 's partner Jessica Biel was " said to be ' sick to her stomach ' after seeing Rihanna wearing a revealing outfit while filming with Timberlake . " Timberlake told Access Hollywood , " I ’ m the guy in the video , so I had to give them all insecurities about that . But yeah we had a great time , we goofed around at the shoot most of the time . " The video premiered November 17 , 2008 , on MTV . 
 The video begins as Rihanna , scantily dressed and wearing fishnet stockings , stands against a convertible car in a desert . Timberlake , wearing a leather jacket and black jeans , arrives on a motorcycle . He <unk> his jacket to cool down and bathes in pink @-@ colored water before greeting Rihanna at her Airstream trailer . The pair then climb onto the hood of the vintage car . In the next scene , Timberlake plays a guitar while lying on a large rocket . Throughout the video , Timberlake and Rihanna vary their poses from sultry to defensive . David Balls of Digital Spy wrote , " The pop pair put in such a highly @-@ charged , effortlessly sexual display that it 's no surprise Justin 's lady was far from happy . " Tim Nixon of The Sun noted , " the sight of sexy Rihanna — clad in a series of tantalising costumes — writhing around with Justin is a real treat . " In his book Post Cinematic Affect ( 2010 ) , Steven <unk> wrote that , in the videos of " Rehab " , " Love Sex Magic " and " 4 Minutes " , Timberlake " radiates a smothering sexual heat " , and that these videos " can be contrasted with the videos from Timberlake 's own Future Sex / Love Sounds album which Joshua Clover convincingly describes as a ' homosocial ' exchange between Timberlake and his producer Timbaland " . The " Rehab " video won the Best Music Video award at the 2009 Urban Music Awards . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On April 28 , 2008 , Rihanna performed at the Pepsi Center with Kanye West , N.E.R.D , and Lupe Fiasco . She sang " Rehab " and other songs from Good Girl Gone Bad . John Wenzel of The Denver Post wrote that " Rehab " and other songs " would have benefited from more backing vocals , or perhaps a more focused performance approach " . To promote the single , Rihanna performed " Rehab " live on November 23 , 2008 , at the 2008 American Music Awards , where she won the awards for Favorite Pop / Rock Female Artist and Favorite Soul / R & B Female Artist . At the awards ceremony , she performed it wearing an eye patch , which she later removed after she was lowered to the main stage . 
 " Rehab " was the fourth song on the set list for Rihanna 's Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2007 – 09 ) . Her performance in Manchester was released in the UK through iTunes and is featured on the Good Girl Gone Bad Live DVD . Rihanna performed " Rehab " on February 7 , 2009 , at a pre @-@ Grammy party . She was scheduled to perform at the 51st Grammy Awards ceremony , but canceled her performance after an altercation with her then boyfriend , singer Chris Brown . 
 " Rehab " was the twelfth song on Rihanna 's set list for her 2010 Last Girl on Earth Tour , throughout which she performed it on a therapist 's couch adorned with metal casts of human heads and limbs . David Sprague of Variety called her performance of " Rehab " at Madison Square Garden <unk> leaden . Ben Ratliff from The New York Times wrote that " Rihanna 's lip curl during ' Rehab ' and her low hip @-@ grind during ' Rude Boy ' were the smash hits of her body language . " Deborah Linton of City Life wrote that Rihanna " even manages to make a psychiatric couch look sexy " . Linton called the show 's stage sets impressive and imaginative . Rick Massimo of The Providence Journal wrote that Rihanna " looked like a neon @-@ sign rendition of herself during ' Rehab ' , rarely addressed the audience , and didn 't rise above flat cliché in that until the very end of the show " . " Rehab " and Rihanna 's 2009 single " Russian Roulette " were excluded from the set list during the tour 's Australian leg . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the Good Girl Gone Bad liner notes . 
 Locations 
 Vocals recorded at Roc the Mic Studios , New York City , New York ; mixed at The Hit Factory Criteria in Miami , Florida 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Offa of Mercia = 
 Offa was King of Mercia , a kingdom of Anglo @-@ Saxon England , from 757 until his death in July 796 . The son of <unk> and a descendant of Eowa , Offa came to the throne after a period of civil war following the assassination of Æthelbald . Offa defeated the other claimant , Beornred . In the early years of Offa 's reign , it is likely that he consolidated his control of Midland peoples such as the Hwicce and the Magonsæte . Taking advantage of instability in the kingdom of Kent to establish himself as overlord , Offa also controlled Sussex by 771 , though his authority did not remain unchallenged in either territory . In the 780s he extended Mercian supremacy over most of southern England , allying with Beorhtric of Wessex , who married Offa 's daughter Eadburh , and regained complete control of the southeast . He also became the overlord of East Anglia and had King Æthelberht II of East Anglia beheaded in 794 , perhaps for rebelling against him . 
 Offa was a Christian king who came into conflict with the Church , particularly with Jaenberht , the Archbishop of Canterbury . Offa persuaded Pope Adrian I to divide the archdiocese of Canterbury in two , creating a new archdiocese of Lichfield . This reduction in the power of Canterbury may have been motivated by Offa 's desire to have an archbishop consecrate his son Ecgfrith as king , since it is possible Jaenberht refused to perform the ceremony , which took place in 787 . Offa had a dispute with the Bishop of Worcester , which was settled at the Council of Brentford in 781 . 
 Many surviving coins from Offa 's reign carry elegant depictions of him , and the artistic quality of these images exceeds that of the contemporary Frankish coinage . Some of his coins carry images of his wife , Cynethryth – the only Anglo @-@ Saxon queen ever depicted on a coin . Only three gold coins of Offa 's have survived : one is a copy of an Abbasid dinar of 774 and carries Arabic text on one side , with " Offa Rex " on the other . The gold coins are of uncertain use but may have been struck to be used as alms or for gifts to Rome . 
 Many historians regard Offa as the most powerful Anglo @-@ Saxon king before Alfred the Great . His dominance never extended to Northumbria , though he gave his daughter Ælfflæd in marriage to the Northumbrian king Æthelred I in 792 . Historians once saw his reign as part of a process leading to a unified England , but this is no longer the majority view . In the words of a recent historian : " Offa was driven by a lust for power , not a vision of English unity ; and what he left was a reputation , not a legacy . " Offa died in 796 ; his son , Ecgfrith , succeeded him , but reigned for less than five months before Coenwulf of Mercia became king . 
 = = Background and sources = = 
 In the first half of the 8th century , the dominant Anglo @-@ Saxon ruler was King Æthelbald of Mercia , who by 731 had become the overlord of all the provinces south of the River Humber . Æthelbald was one of a number of strong Mercian kings who ruled from the mid @-@ 7th century to the early 9th , and it was not until the reign of Egbert of Wessex in the 9th century that Mercian power began to wane . 
 The power and prestige that Offa attained made him one of the most significant rulers in Early Medieval Britain , though no contemporary biography of him survives . A key source for the period is the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , a collection of annals in Old English narrating the history of the Anglo @-@ Saxons . The Chronicle was a West Saxon production , however , and is sometimes thought to be biased in favour of Wessex ; hence it may not accurately convey the extent of power achieved by Offa , a Mercian . That power can be seen at work in charters dating from Offa 's reign . Charters were documents which granted land to followers or to churchmen and were witnessed by the kings who had the authority to grant the land . A charter might record the names of both a subject king and his overlord on the witness list appended to the grant . Such a witness list can be seen on the Ismere Diploma , for example , where Æthelric , son of king Oshere of the Hwicce , is described as a " subregulus " , or subking , of Æthelbald 's . The eighth @-@ century monk and chronicler the Venerable Bede wrote a history of the English church called Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis Anglorum ; the history only covers events up to 731 , but as one of the major sources for Anglo @-@ Saxon history it provides important background information for Offa 's reign . 
 Offa 's Dyke , most of which was probably built in his reign , is a testimony to the extensive resources Offa had at his command and his ability to organise them . Other surviving sources include a problematic document known as the Tribal Hidage , which may provide further evidence of Offa 's scope as a ruler , though its attribution to his reign is disputed . A significant corpus of letters dates from the period , especially from Alcuin , an English deacon and scholar who spent over a decade at Charlemagne 's court as one of his chief advisors , and corresponded with kings , nobles and ecclesiastics throughout England . These letters in particular reveal Offa 's relations with the continent , as does his coinage , which was based on Carolingian examples . 
 = = Ancestry and family = = 
 Offa 's ancestry is given in the Anglian collection , a set of genealogies that include lines of descent for four Mercian kings . All four lines descend from Pybba , who ruled Mercia early in the 7th century . Offa 's line descends through Pybba 's son Eowa and then through three more generations : <unk> , Eanwulf and Offa 's father , <unk> . Æthelbald , who ruled Mercia for most of the forty years before Offa , was also descended from Eowa according to the genealogies : Offa 's grandfather , Eanwulf , was Æthelbald 's first cousin . Æthelbald granted land to Eanwulf in the territory of the Hwicce , and it is possible that Offa and Æthelbald were from the same branch of the family . In one charter Offa refers to Æthelbald as his kinsman , and <unk> , Æthelbald 's brother , continued to witness charters after Offa rose to power . 
 Offa 's wife was Cynethryth , whose ancestry is unknown . The couple had a son , Ecgfrith , and four daughters : Ælfflæd , Eadburh , Æthelburh and Æthelswith . It has been speculated that Æthelburh was the abbess who was a kinswoman of King Ealdred of the Hwicce , but there are other prominent women named Æthelburh during that period . 
 = = Early reign , the midland territories and the Middle and East Saxons = = 
 Æthelbald , who had ruled Mercia since 716 , was assassinated in 757 . According to a later continuation of Bede 's Historia Ecclesiastica ( written anonymously after Bede 's death ) the king was " treacherously murdered at night by his own bodyguards , " though the reason why is unrecorded . Æthelbald was initially succeeded by Beornred , about whom little is known . The continuation of Bede comments that Beornred " ruled for a little while , and unhappily " , and adds that " the same year , Offa , having put Beornred to flight , sought to gain the kingdom of the Mercians by bloodshed . " It is possible that Offa did not gain the throne until 758 , however , since a charter of 789 describes Offa as being in the thirty @-@ first year of his reign . 
 The conflict over the succession suggests that Offa needed to re @-@ establish control over Mercia 's traditional dependencies , such as the Hwicce and the Magonsæte . Charters dating from the first two years of Offa 's reign show the <unk> kings as <unk> , or kinglets , under his authority ; and it is likely that he was also quick to gain control over the Magonsæte , for whom there is no record of an independent ruler after 740 . Offa was probably able to exert control over the kingdom of Lindsey at an early date , as it appears that the independent dynasty of Lindsey had disappeared by this time . 
 Little is known about the history of the East Saxons during the 8th century , but what evidence there is indicates that both London and Middlesex , which had been part of the kingdom of Essex , were finally brought under Mercian control during the reign of Æthelbald . Both Æthelbald and Offa granted land in Middlesex and London as they wished ; in 767 a charter of Offa 's disposed of land in Harrow without a local ruler as witness . It is likely that both London and Middlesex were quickly under Offa 's control at the start of his reign . The East Saxon royal house survived the 8th century , so it is probable that the kingdom of Essex retained its native rulers , but under strong Mercian influence , for most or all of the 8th century . 
 It is unlikely that Offa had significant influence in the early years of his reign outside the traditional Mercian heartland . The overlordship of the southern English which had been exerted by Æthelbald appears to have collapsed during the civil strife over the succession , and it is not until 764 , when evidence emerges of Offa 's influence in Kent , that Mercian power can be seen expanding again . 
 = = Kent and Sussex = = 
 Offa appears to have exploited an unstable situation in Kent after 762 . Kent had a long tradition of joint kingship , with east and west Kent under separate kings , though one king was typically dominant . Prior to 762 Kent was ruled by Æthelberht II and Eadberht I ; Eadberht 's son Eardwulf is also recorded as a king . Æthelberht died in 762 , and Eadberht and Eardwulf are last mentioned in that same year . Charters from the next two years mention other kings of Kent , including Sigered , <unk> and Heahberht . In 764 , Offa granted land at Rochester in his own name , with Heahberht on the witness list as king of Kent . Another king of Kent , Ecgberht , appears on a charter in 765 along with Heahberht ; the charter was subsequently confirmed by Offa . Offa 's influence in Kent at this time is clear , and it has been suggested that Heahberht was installed by Offa as his client . There is less agreement among historians on whether Offa had general overlordship of Kent thereafter . He is known to have revoked a charter of Ecgberht 's on the grounds that " it was wrong that his thegn should have presumed to give land allotted to him by his lord into the power of another without his witness " , but the date of Ecgberht 's original grant is unknown , as is the date of Offa 's revocation of it . It may be that Offa was the effective overlord of Kent from 764 until at least 776 . The limited evidence for Offa 's direct involvement in the kingdom between 765 and 776 includes two charters of 774 in which he grants land in Kent ; but there are doubts about their authenticity , so Offa 's intervention in Kent prior to 776 may have been limited to the years 764 – 65 . 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records that " the Mercians and the inhabitants of Kent fought at Otford " in 776 , but does not give the outcome of the battle . It has traditionally been interpreted as a Mercian victory , but there is no evidence for Offa 's authority over Kent until 785 : a charter from 784 mentions only a Kentish king named Ealhmund , which may indicate that the Mercians were in fact defeated at Otford . The cause of the conflict is also unknown : if Offa was ruling Kent before 776 , the battle of Otford was probably a rebellion against Mercian control . However , Ealhmund does not appear again in the historical record , and a sequence of charters by Offa from the years 785 – 89 makes his authority clear . During these years he treated Kent " as an ordinary province of the Mercian kingdom " , and his actions have been seen as going beyond the normal relation of overlordship and extending to the annexation of Kent and the elimination of a local royal line . After 785 , in the words of one historian , " Offa was the rival , not the overlord , of Kentish kings " . Mercian control lasted until 796 , the year of Offa 's death , when Eadberht Praen was temporarily successful in regaining Kentish independence . 
 Ealhmund was probably the father of Egbert of Wessex , and it is possible that Offa 's interventions in Kent in the mid @-@ 780s are connected to the subsequent exile of Egbert to Francia . The Chronicle claims that when Egbert invaded Kent in 825 , the men of the southeast turned to him " because earlier they were wrongly forced away from his relatives " . This is likely to be an allusion to Ealhmund , and may imply that Ealhmund had a local overlordship of the southeastern kingdoms . If so , Offa 's intervention was probably intended to gain control of this relationship and take over the dominance of the associated kingdoms . 
 The evidence for Offa 's involvement in the kingdom of Sussex comes from charters , and as with Kent there is no clear consensus among historians on the course of events . What little evidence survives that bears on Sussex 's kings indicates that several kings ruled at once , and it may never have formed a single kingdom . It has been argued that Offa 's authority was recognised early in his reign by local kings in western Sussex , but that eastern Sussex ( the area around Hastings ) submitted to him less readily . Simeon of Durham , a twelfth @-@ century chronicler , records that in 771 Offa defeated " the people of Hastings " , which may record the extension of Offa 's dominion over the entire kingdom . However , doubts have been expressed about the authenticity of the charters which support this version of events , and it is possible that Offa 's direct involvement in Sussex was limited to a short period around 770 – 71 . After 772 , there is no further evidence of Mercian involvement in Sussex until c . 790 , and it may be that Offa gained control of Sussex in the late 780s , as he did in Kent . 
 = = East Anglia , Wessex and Northumbria = = 
 In East Anglia , Beonna probably became king in about 758 . Beonna 's first coinage predates Offa 's own , and implies independence from Mercia . Subsequent East Anglian history is quite obscure , but in 779 Æthelberht II became king , and was independent long enough to issue coins of his own . In 794 , according to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , " King Offa ordered King Æthelberht 's head to be struck off " . Offa minted pennies in East Anglia in the early 790s , so it is likely that Æthelberht rebelled against Offa and was beheaded as a result . Accounts of the event have survived in which Aethelberht is killed through the machinations of Offa 's wife Cynethryth , but the earliest manuscripts in which these possibly legendary accounts are found date from the 11th and 12th centuries , and recent historians do not regard them with confidence . The legend also claims that Æthelberht was killed at Sutton St. Michael and buried four miles ( 6 km ) to the south at Hereford , where his cult flourished , becoming at one time second only to Canterbury as a pilgrimage destination . 
 To the south of Mercia , Cynewulf came to the throne of Wessex in 757 and recovered much of the border territory that Æthelbald had conquered from the West Saxons . Offa won an important victory over Cynewulf at the Battle of <unk> ( in Oxfordshire ) in 779 , reconquering some of the land along the Thames . No indisputably authentic charters from before this date show Cynewulf in Offa 's entourage , and there is no evidence that Offa ever became Cynewulf 's overlord . In 786 , after the murder of Cynewulf , Offa may have intervened to place Beorhtric on the West Saxon throne . Even if Offa did not assist Beorhtric 's claim , it seems likely that Beorhtric to some extent recognised Offa as his overlord shortly thereafter . Offa 's currency was used across the West Saxon kingdom , and Beorhtric had his own coins minted only after Offa 's death . In 789 , Beorhtric married Eadburh , a daughter of Offa ; the Chronicle records that the two kings combined to exile Egbert to Francia for " three years " , adding that " Beorhtric helped Offa because he had his daughter as his queen " . Some historians believe that the Chronicle 's " three years " is an error , and should read " thirteen years " , which would mean Egbert 's exile lasted from 789 to 802 , but this reading is disputed . Eadburh is mentioned by Asser , a 9th @-@ century monk who wrote a biography of Alfred the Great : Asser says that Eadburh had " power throughout almost the entire kingdom " , and that she " began to behave like a tyrant after the manner of her father " . Whatever power she had in Wessex was no doubt connected with her father 's overlordship . 
 If Offa did not gain the advantage in Wessex until defeating Cynewulf in 779 , it may be that his successes south of the river were a necessary prerequisite to his interventions in the southeast . In this view , Egbert of Kent 's death in about 784 and Cynewulf 's death in 786 were the events that allowed Offa to gain control of Kent and bring Beorhtric into his sphere of influence . This version of events also assumes that Offa did not have control of Kent after 764 – 65 , as some historians believe . 
 Offa 's marital alliances extended to Northumbria when his daughter Ælfflæd married Æthelred I of Northumbria at Catterick in 792 . However , there is no evidence that Northumbria was ever under Mercian control during Offa 's reign . 
 = = Wales and Offa 's Dyke = = 
 Offa was frequently in conflict with the various Welsh kingdoms . There was a battle between the Mercians and the Welsh at Hereford in 760 , and Offa is recorded as campaigning against the Welsh in 778 , 784 and 796 in the 10th century Annales Cambriae . 
 The best known relic associated with Offa 's time is Offa 's Dyke , a great earthen barrier that runs approximately along the border between England and Wales . It is mentioned by the monk Asser in his biography of Alfred the Great : " a certain vigorous king called Offa ... had a great dyke built between Wales and Mercia from sea to sea " . The dyke has not been dated by archaeological methods , but most historians find no reason to doubt Asser 's attribution . Early names for the dyke in both Welsh and English also support the attribution to Offa . Despite Asser 's comment that the dyke ran " from sea to sea " , it is now thought that the original structure only covered about two @-@ thirds of the length of the border : in the north it ends near <unk> , less than five miles ( 8 km ) from the coast , while in the south it stops at <unk> Hill , near Kington in Herefordshire , less than fifty miles ( 80 km ) from the Bristol Channel . The total length of this section is about 64 miles ( 103 km ) . Other earthworks exist along the Welsh border , of which Wat 's Dyke is one of the largest , but it is not possible to date them relative to each other and so it cannot be determined whether Offa 's Dyke was a copy of or the inspiration for Wat 's Dyke . 
 The construction of the dyke suggests that it was built to create an effective barrier and to command views into Wales . This implies that the Mercians who built it were free to choose the best location for the dyke . There are settlements to the west of the dyke that have names that imply they were English by the 8th century , so it may be that in choosing the location of the barrier the Mercians were consciously surrendering some territory to the native Britons . Alternatively it may be that these settlements had already been retaken by the Welsh , implying a defensive role for the barrier . The effort and expense that must have gone into building the dyke are impressive , and suggest that the king who had it built ( whether Offa or someone else ) had considerable resources at his disposal . Other substantial construction projects of a similar date do exist , however , such as Wat 's Dyke and Danevirke , in what is now Germany as well as such sites as Stonehenge from millennia earlier . The dyke can be regarded in the light of these counterparts as the largest and most recent great construction of the preliterate inhabitants of Britain . 
 = = Church = = 
 Offa ruled as a Christian king , but despite being praised by Charlemagne 's advisor , Alcuin , for his piety and efforts to " instruct [ his people ] in the precepts of God " , he came into conflict with Jaenberht , the Archbishop of Canterbury . Jaenberht had been a supporter of Ecgberht II of Kent , which may have led to conflict in the 760s when Offa is known to have intervened in Kent . Offa rescinded grants made to Canterbury by Egbert , and it is also known that Jaenberht claimed the monastery of Cookham , which was in Offa 's possession . 
 In 786 Pope Adrian I sent papal legates to England to assess the state of the church and provide canons ( ecclesiastical decrees ) for the guidance of the English kings , nobles and clergy . This was the first papal mission to England since Augustine had been sent by Pope Gregory the Great in 597 to convert the Anglo @-@ Saxons . The legates were George , the Bishop of Ostia , and Theophylact , the Bishop of Todi . They visited Canterbury first , and then were received by Offa at his court . Both Offa and Cynewulf , king of the West Saxons , attended a council where the goals of the mission were discussed . George then went to Northumbria , while Theophylact visited Mercia and " parts of Britain " . A report on the mission , sent by the legates to Pope Adrian , gives details of a council held by George in Northumbria , and the canons issued there , but little detail survives of Theophylact 's mission . After the northern council George returned to the south and another council was held , attended by both Offa and Jaenberht , at which further canons were issued . 
 In 787 , Offa succeeded in reducing the power of Canterbury through the establishment of a rival archdiocese at Lichfield . The issue must have been discussed with the papal legates in 786 , although it is not mentioned in the accounts that have survived . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle reports a " contentious synod " in 787 at Chelsea , which approved the creation of the new archbishopric . It has been suggested that this synod was the same gathering as the second council held by the legates , but historians are divided on this issue . Hygeberht , already Bishop of Lichfield , became the new archdiocese 's first and only archbishop , and by the end of 788 he received the pallium , a symbol of his authority , from Rome . The new archdiocese included the sees of Worcester , Hereford , Leicester , Lindsey , Dommoc and Elmham ; these were essentially the midland Anglian territories . Canterbury retained the sees in the south and southeast . 
 The few accounts of the creation of the new archbishopric date from after the end of Offa 's reign . Two versions of the events appear in the form of an exchange of letters between Coenwulf , who became king of Mercia shortly after Offa 's death , and Pope Leo III , in 798 . Coenwulf asserts in his letter that Offa wanted the new archdiocese created out of enmity for Jaenberht ; but Leo responds that the only reason the papacy agreed to the creation was because of the size of the kingdom of Mercia . Both Coenwulf and Leo had their own reasons for representing the situation as they did : Coenwulf was entreating Leo to make London the sole southern archdiocese , while Leo was concerned to avoid the appearance of complicity with the unworthy motives Coenwulf imputed to Offa . These are therefore partisan comments . However , both the size of Offa 's territory and his relationship with Jaenberht and Kent are indeed likely to have been factors in Offa 's request for the creation of the new archdiocese . Coenwulf 's version has independent support , with a letter from Alcuin to Archbishop Æthelheard giving his opinion that Canterbury 's archdiocese had been divided " not , as it seems , by reasonable consideration , but by a certain desire for power " . Æthelheard himself later said that the award of a pallium to Lichfield depended on " deception and misleading suggestion " . 
 Another possible reason for the creation of an archbishopric at Lichfield relates to Offa 's son , Ecgfrith of Mercia . After Hygeberht became archbishop , he consecrated Ecgfrith as king ; the ceremony took place within a year of Hygeberht 's elevation . It is possible that Jaenberht refused to perform the ceremony , and that Offa needed an alternative archbishop for that purpose . The ceremony itself is noteworthy for two reasons : it is the first recorded consecration of any English king , and it is unusual in that it asserted Ecgfrith 's royal status while his father was still alive . Offa would have been aware that Charlemagne 's sons , Pippin and Louis , had been consecrated as kings by Pope Adrian , and probably wished to emulate the impressive dignity of the Frankish court . Other precedents did exist : Æthelred of Mercia is said to have nominated his son Coenred as king during his lifetime , and Offa may have known of Byzantine examples of royal consecration . 
 Despite the creation of the new archdiocese , Jaenberht retained his position as the senior cleric in the land , with Hygeberht conceding his precedence . When Jaenberht died in 792 , he was replaced by Æthelheard , who was consecrated by Hygeberht , now senior in his turn . Subsequently Æthelheard appears as a witness on charters and presides at synods without Hygeberht , so it appears that Offa continued to respect Canterbury 's authority . 
 A letter from Pope Adrian to Charlemagne survives which makes reference to Offa , but the date is uncertain ; it may be as early as 784 or as late as 791 . In it Adrian recounts a rumour that had reached him : Offa had reportedly proposed to Charlemagne that Adrian should be deposed , and replaced by a Frankish pope . Adrian disclaims all belief in the rumour , but it is clear it had been a concern to him . The enemies of Offa and Charlemagne , described by Adrian as the source of the rumour , are not named . It is unclear whether this letter is related to the legatine mission of 786 ; if it predates it , then the mission might have been partly one of reconciliation , but the letter might well have been written after the mission . 
 Offa was a generous patron of the church , founding several churches and monasteries , often dedicated to St Peter . Among these was St Albans Abbey , which he probably founded in the early 790s . He also promised a yearly gift of 365 mancuses to Rome ; a mancus was a term of account equivalent to thirty silver pennies , derived from Abbasid gold coins that were circulating in Francia at the time . Control of religious houses was one way in which a ruler of the day could provide for his family , and to this end Offa ensured ( by acquiring papal privileges ) that many of them would remain the property of his wife or children after his death . This policy of treating religious houses as worldly possessions represents a change from the early 8th century , when many charters showed the foundation and endowment of small minsters , rather than the assignment of those lands to laypeople . In the 770s , an abbess named Æthelburh ( who may have been the same person as Offa 's daughter of that name ) held multiple leases on religious houses in the territory of the Hwicce ; her acquisitions have been described as looking " like a speculator assembling a portfolio " . Æthelburh 's possession of these lands foreshadows Cynethryth 's control of religious lands , and the pattern was continued in the early 9th century by Cwoenthryth , the daughter of King Coenwulf . 
 Either Offa or Ine of Wessex is traditionally supposed to have founded the Schola Saxonum in Rome , in what is today the Roman rione , or district , of Borgo . The Schola Saxonum took its name from the militias of Saxons who served in Rome , but it eventually developed into a hostelry for English visitors to the city . 
 = = European connections = = 
 Offa 's diplomatic relations with Europe are well documented , but appear to belong only to the last dozen years of his reign . In letters dating from the late 780s or early 790s , Alcuin congratulates Offa for encouraging education and greets Offa 's wife and son , Cynethryth and Ecgfrith . In about 789 , or shortly before , Charlemagne proposed that his son Charles marry one of Offa 's daughters , most likely Ælfflæd . Offa countered with a request that his son Ecgfrith should also marry Charlemagne 's daughter Bertha : Charlemagne was outraged by the request , and broke off contact with Britain , forbidding English ships from landing in his ports . Alcuin 's letters make it clear that by the end of 790 the dispute was still not resolved , and that Alcuin was hoping to be sent to help make peace . In the end diplomatic relations were restored , at least partly by the agency of <unk> , the abbot of St <unk> . 
 Charlemagne sought support from the English church at the council of Frankfurt in 794 , where the canons passed in 787 at the Second Council of Nicaea were repudiated , and the heresies of two Spanish bishops , Felix and <unk> , were condemned . In 796 Charlemagne wrote to Offa ; the letter survives and refers to a previous letter of Offa 's to Charlemagne . This correspondence between the two kings produced the first surviving documents in English diplomatic history . The letter is primarily concerned with the status of English pilgrims on the continent and with diplomatic gifts , but it reveals much about the relations between the English and the Franks . Charlemagne refers to Offa as his " brother " , and mentions trade in black stones , sent from the continent to England , and cloaks ( or possibly cloths ) , traded from England to the Franks . Charlemagne 's letter also refers to exiles from England , naming Odberht , who was almost certainly the same person as Eadberht Praen , among them . Egbert of Wessex was another refugee from Offa who took shelter at the Frankish court . It is clear that Charlemagne 's policy included support for elements opposed to Offa ; in addition to sheltering Egbert and Eadberht he also sent gifts to Æthelred I of Northumbria . 
 Events in southern Britain to 796 have sometimes been portrayed as a struggle between Offa and Charlemagne , but the disparity in their power was enormous . By 796 Charlemagne had become master of an empire which stretched from the Atlantic Ocean to the Great Hungarian Plain , and Offa and then Coenwulf were clearly minor figures by comparison . 
 = = Government = = 
 The nature of Mercian kingship is not clear from the limited surviving sources . There are two main theories regarding the ancestry of Mercian kings of this period . One is that descendants of different lines of the royal family competed for the throne . In the mid @-@ 7th century , for example , Penda had placed royal kinsmen in control of conquered provinces . Alternatively , it may be that a number of kin @-@ groups with local power @-@ bases may have competed for the succession . The sub @-@ kingdoms of the Hwicce , the Tomsæte and the unidentified Gaini are examples of such power @-@ bases . Marriage alliances could also have played a part . Competing magnates , those called in charters " dux " or " princeps " ( that is , leaders ) , may have brought the kings to power . In this model , the Mercian kings are little more than leading noblemen . Offa seems to have attempted to increase the stability of Mercian kingship , both by the elimination of dynastic rivals to his son Ecgfrith , and the reduction in status of his subject kings , sometimes to the rank of ealdorman . He was ultimately unsuccessful , however ; Ecgfrith only survived in power for a few months , and 9th century Mercia continued to draw its kings from multiple dynastic lines . 
 There is evidence that Offa constructed a series of defensive burhs , or fortified towns ; the locations are not generally agreed on but may include Bedford , Hereford , Northampton , Oxford and Stamford . In addition to their defensive uses , these burhs are thought to have been administrative centres , serving as regional markets and indicating a transformation of the Mercian economy away from its origins as a grouping of midland peoples . The burhs are forerunners of the defensive network successfully implemented by Alfred the Great a century later to deal with the Danish invasions . However , Offa did not necessarily understand the economic changes that came with the burhs , so it is not safe to assume he envisioned all their benefits . In 749 , Æthelbald of Mercia had issued a charter that freed ecclesiastical lands from all obligations except the requirement to build forts and bridges – obligations which lay upon everyone , as part of the <unk> necessitas . Offa 's Kentish charters show him laying these same burdens on the recipients of his grants there , and this may be a sign that the obligations were being spread outside Mercia . These burdens were part of Offa 's response to the threat of " the pagan seaman " . 
 Offa issued laws in his name , but no details of them have survived . They are known only from a mention by Alfred the Great , in the preface to Alfred 's own law code . Alfred says that he has included in his code those laws of Offa , Ine of Wessex and Æthelberht of Kent which he found " most just " . The laws may have been an independent <unk> , but it is also possible that Alfred is referring to the report of the legatine mission in 786 , which issued statutes that the Mercians undertook to obey . 
 = = Coinage = = 
 At the start of the 8th century , sceattas were the primary circulating coinage . These were small silver pennies , which often did not bear the name of either the moneyer or the king for whom they were produced . To contemporaries these were probably known as pennies , and are the coins referred to in the laws of Ine of Wessex . This light coinage ( in contrast to the heavier coins minted later in Offa 's reign ) can probably be dated to the late 760s and early 770s . A second , medium @-@ weight coinage can be identified before the early 790s . These new medium @-@ weight coins were heavier , broader and thinner than the pennies they replaced , and were prompted by the contemporary Carolingian currency reforms . The new pennies almost invariably carried both Offa 's name and the name of the moneyer from whose mint the coins came . The reform in the coinage appears to have extended beyond Offa 's own mints : the kings of East Anglia , Kent and Wessex all produced coins of the new heavier weight in this period . 
 Some coins from Offa 's reign bear the names of the archbishops of Canterbury , Jaenberht and , after 792 , Æthelheard . Jaenberht 's coins all belong to the light coinage , rather than the later medium coinage . There is also evidence that coins were issued by Eadberht , who was Bishop of London in the 780s and possibly before . Offa 's dispute with Jaenberht may have led him to allow Eadberht coining rights , which may then have been revoked when the see of Lichfield was elevated to an archbishopric . 
 The medium @-@ weight coins often carry designs of high artistic quality , exceeding that of the contemporary Frankish currency . Coin portraits of Offa have been described as " showing a delicacy of execution which is unique in the whole history of the Anglo @-@ Saxon coinage " . The depictions of Offa on the coins include a " striking and elegant " portrait showing him with his hair in voluminous curls , and another where he wears a fringe and tight curls . Some coins show him wearing a necklace with a pendant . The variety of these depictions implies that Offa 's die @-@ cutters were able to draw on varied artistic sources for their inspiration . 
 Offa 's wife Cynethryth was the only Anglo @-@ Saxon queen ever named or portrayed on coinage – in a remarkable series of pennies struck by the moneyer <unk> . These were probably derived from contemporary coins from the reign of the Byzantine emperor Constantine VI , who minted a series showing a portrait of his mother , the later Empress Irene , though the Byzantine coins show a frontal bust of Irene rather than a profile , and so cannot have been a direct model . 
 Around the time of Jaenberht 's death and replacement with Æthelheard in 792 @-@ 93 , the silver currency was reformed a second time : in this " heavy coinage " the weight of the pennies was increased again , and a standardised non @-@ portrait design was introduced at all mints . None of Jaenberht 's or Cynethryth 's coins occur in this coinage , whereas all of Æthelheard 's coins are of the new , heavier weight . 
 There are also surviving gold coins from Offa 's reign . One is a copy of an Abbasid dinar struck in 774 by Caliph Al @-@ Mansur , with " Offa Rex " centred on the reverse . It is clear that the moneyer had no understanding of Arabic as the Arabic text contains many errors . The coin may have been produced to trade with Islamic Spain ; or it may be part of the annual payment of 365 mancuses that Offa promised to Rome . There are other Western copies of Abbasid dinars of the period , but it is not known whether they are English or Frankish . Two other English gold coins of the period survive , from two moneyers , <unk> and <unk> : the former is thought to be from Offa 's reign but the latter may belong either to Offa 's reign or to that of Coenwulf , who came to the throne in 796 . Nothing definite is known about their use , but they may have been struck to be used as alms . 
 Although many of the coins bear the name of a moneyer , there is no indication of the mint where each coin was struck . As a result , the number and location of mints used by Offa is uncertain . Current opinion is that there were four mints , in Canterbury , Rochester , East Anglia and London . 
 = = Stature = = 
 The title Offa used on most of his charters was " rex <unk> " , or " king of the Mercians " , though this was occasionally extended to " king of the Mercians and surrounding nations " . Some of his charters use the title " Rex Anglorum , " or " King of the English , " and this has been seen as a sweeping statement of his power . There is debate on this point , however , as several of the charters in which Offa is named " Rex Anglorum " are of doubtful authenticity . They may represent later forgeries of the 10th century , when this title was standard for kings of England . The best evidence for Offa 's use of this title comes from coins , not charters : there are some pennies with " Of <unk> A " inscribed , but it is not regarded as definite that this stood for " Offa Rex Anglorum . " 
 In Anglo @-@ Saxon England , Stenton argued that Offa was perhaps the greatest king of the English kingdoms , commenting that " no other Anglo @-@ Saxon king ever regarded the world at large with so ... acute a political sense " . Many historians regard Offa 's achievements as second only to Alfred the Great among the Anglo @-@ Saxon kings . Offa 's reign has sometimes been regarded as a key stage in the transition to a unified England , but this is no longer the general view among historians in the field . In the words of Simon Keynes , " Offa was driven by a lust for power , not a vision of English unity ; and what he left was a reputation , not a legacy . " It is now believed that Offa thought of himself as " King of the Mercians , " and that his military successes were part of the transformation of Mercia from an overlordship of midland peoples into a powerful and aggressive kingdom . 
 = = Death and succession = = 
 Offa died on 29 July 796 , and may be buried in Bedford , though it is not clear that the " <unk> " named in that charter was actually Bedford . He was succeeded by his son , Ecgfrith , but according to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle Ecgfrith died after a reign of only 141 days . A letter written by Alcuin in 797 to a Mercian ealdorman named Osbert makes it apparent that Offa had gone to great lengths to ensure that his son Ecgfrith would succeed him . Alcuin 's opinion is that Ecgfrith " has not died for his own sins ; but the vengeance for the blood his father shed to secure the kingdom has reached the son . For you know very well how much blood his father shed to secure the kingdom on his son . " It is apparent that in addition to Ecgfrith 's consecration in 787 , Offa had eliminated dynastic rivals . This seems to have backfired , from the dynastic point of view , as no close male relatives of Offa or Ecgfrith are recorded , and Coenwulf , Ecgfrith 's successor , was only distantly related to Offa 's line . 
 = Goliath ( Six Flags Over Georgia ) = 
 Goliath is a steel Hyper Coaster located at the Six Flags Over Georgia amusement park in Cobb County , Georgia , United States . Designed by Bolliger & Mabillard it reaches a maximum height of 200 feet ( 61 m ) , a top speed of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , and has approximately 4 @,@ 480 feet ( 1 @,@ 370 m ) of track . Great Gasp and Looping Starship were both removed by the end of the 2005 season to make room for the roller coaster . Goliath was announced to the public on September 1 , 2005 and opened on April 1 , 2006 . In 2006 , Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards voted it the fourth @-@ best new steel roller coaster of that year and the 9th @-@ best steel roller coaster . It was voted the 7th @-@ best steel roller coaster in 2013 . 
 = = History = = 
 On September 1 , 2005 , the park officially announced Goliath , a $ 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 steel Hyper Coaster . By the end of the 2005 season , the rides Great Gasp and Looping Starship were closed and removed from the park to make room for the new roller coaster . Foundations for Goliath 's supports began to be poured in September 2005 . In early October , track began to arrive at the park ; erection of the supports and track began soon after . In November and December , construction on the lift hill was complete . In March 2006 , Goliath 's trains were delivered to the park . After construction on the track and testing was complete , the roller coaster opened to the public on April 1 , 2006 . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 After being dispatched from the station , the train makes a left hand turn towards the 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) chain lift hill . Once at the top , the train drops back down 170 feet ( 52 m ) reaching a maximum speed of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) . Following the drop , the train goes over the first of its camelback hills , where the train experiences the ride 's tallest drop at 175 feet ( 53 m ) . As the train exits the park boundaries , it enters a banked left turn then its second camelback hill with a 129 @-@ foot ( 39 m ) drop . Next , the train rises back up and enters a 540 @-@ degree downward helix before passing through a set of trim brakes and going over the third camelback hill , this time with a 118 @-@ foot ( 36 m ) drop . The train then enters a horseshoe leading back into the park , followed by the final three camelback hills with a drop height of 79 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) , 56 @-@ foot ( 17 m ) , and 48 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) , each lower than the previous one . Following a banked left turn , the train makes a quick drop before entering the final brake run leading back to the station . One cycle of the ride lasts about three and a half minutes . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track of Goliath is approximately 4 @,@ 480 feet ( 1 @,@ 370 m ) long and covers an area of about 8 @.@ 5 acres ( 3 @.@ 4 ha ; 0 @.@ <unk> sq mi ) . The height of the lift is 200 feet ( 61 m ) . The roller coaster has no inversions , though it does feature six camelback hills and a 540 degree helix . The track is painted orange while the supports are painted teal . Goliath was manufactured by Clermont Steel Fabricators located in Batavia , Ohio . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Goliath operates with two steel and fiberglass trains . Each train has nine cars which can seat four riders in a single row , for a total of 36 riders per train ; each seat has its own individual lap @-@ bar restraint . This configuration allows the ride to achieve a theoretical hourly capacity of 1 @,@ 220 riders per hour . The structure of the trains are painted orange and teal , with matching colored restraints and seats . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Joel Bullock from The Coaster Critic and Mike from NewsPlusNotes both praised the g @-@ forces experienced while going through the helix , and the amount of airtime Goliath has . Bullock described Goliath as , " not only the park ’ s best roller coaster , but arguably the best coaster in the South East ( south of Virginia ) . " Mike Collins from Coaster Radio particularly enjoyed the section of the roller coaster that takes riders outside of the park boundaries . He also said that , " [ Goliath is ] a fun and fast coaster . It ’ s all about the airtime ... and you get a lot of it . " 
 In Goliath 's opening year , it was voted the fourth best new ride for 2006 and the ninth best steel roller coaster in Amusement Today 's Golden Ticket Awards . The roller coaster peaked at position four in 2009 and 2011 . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's Best Steel Roller Coaster Poll , Goliath was voted as the tenth best steel roller coaster in the world in its first year ; it peaked at position seven in 2007 . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 On July 27 , 2006 , a 45 @-@ year @-@ old man was found unresponsive and not breathing on Goliath after losing consciousness during the ride . Park employees began to treat the man before he was taken to a local hospital and pronounced dead . After an inspection of the ride showed that the roller coaster was operating properly , it reopened to the public . 
 = Meteorological history of Cyclone Leon – Eline = 
 Cyclone Leon – Eline in February 2000 was the third @-@ longest tracked tropical cyclone in the South @-@ West Indian Ocean . On February 1 , a tropical low originated within the monsoon trough to the south of Indonesia , and would eventually become Tropical Cyclone Leon in the Australian basin . Moving westward , the storm fluctuated in strength due to changes in the atmosphere , mostly increasing and decreasing wind shear . After crossing 90 ° E , the Météo @-@ France office in Réunion ( MFR ) began tracking the system as Tropical Storm Eline on February 8 . The storm continued across the Indian Ocean and intensified greatly as it approached the east coast of Madagascar . Late on February 17 , Eline made landfall near Mahanoro , with 10 ‑ minute winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . The storm rapidly weakened over land , but restrengthened in the Mozambique Channel to reach peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . On February 22 , Eline made landfall about 80 km ( 50 mi ) south of Beira , Mozambique near peak intensity and quickly weakened over land . The well @-@ defined circulation moved across southern Africa , finally dissipating over eastern Namibia on February 29 . 
 Eline was unusual in its track after striking Madagascar . Most storms in the Mozambique Channel turn to the south , ultimately missing land ; however , upon landfall , Eline became one of 5 % of recorded cyclones to strike southern Africa . In addition , favorable conditions allowed the storm to maintain its identity over land . Overall , Cyclone Leon – Eline traveled over 11 @,@ 000 km ( 6 @,@ 800 mi ) during its 29 – day duration . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The origins of Leon – Eline were from a low pressure area that developed within the monsoon trough on February 1 in the eastern Indian Ocean , about 250 km ( 155 mi ) south of the Indonesian island of Bali . The low formed due to a surge of energy within the monsoon that had crossed the equator from the northwest . Associated convection , or thunderstorms , was initially sparse . Over the subsequent few days the system tracked west @-@ southwestward without much development , moving around a large ridge over northwestern Australia . There was initially moderate wind shear in the region . However , a developing anticyclone allowed the convection to persist over the center and develop outflow . At 22 : 00 UTC on February 3 , the Perth Tropical Cyclone Warning Center ( PTCWC ) upgraded the tropical low to a Category 1 on the Australian tropical cyclone scale , estimating 10 ‑ minute sustained winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . At 04 : 00 UTC the next day , the PTCWC named the storm Tropical Cyclone Leon . On the same day at 03 : 00 UTC , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began issuing advisories on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 11S . Around that time , the storm was located about 215 km ( 130 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Christmas Island . 
 After becoming a named storm , Leon turned more to the west @-@ southwest , due to a trough weakening the ridge to the south . The storm developed increased convective banding , aided by decreasing wind shear , and quickly intensified . Early on February 5 , the PTCWC upgraded Leon to a Category 3 on the Australian scale , estimating 10 ‑ minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . At 22 : 00 UTC that day , the agency estimated an initial peak of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . On February 6 , the cyclone developed an eye in the center of the convection that was only visible on Special sensor microwave / imager , not on satellite imagery . On the same day , the JTWC upgraded Leon to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , estimating 1 ‑ minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . A trough passing to the south increased wind shear , causing the storm to weaken . Around that time , Leon passed about 510 km ( 315 mi ) south of the Cocos Islands , while turning more to the west after the ridge strengthened to the south . By February 8 , the circulation was exposed from the rapidly dwindling thunderstorms . At 18 : 00 UTC that day , Leon crossed 90 ° E into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean , and as result was renamed Eline by the Mauritius Meteorological Service . By that time , Météo @-@ France ( MFR ) estimated 10 ‑ minute winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . 
 = = Strengthening and first landfall = = 
 Over the subsequent few days , wind shear caused the convection to wax and wane over Eline 's center , limiting the thunderstorms to the southern periphery . The track shifted more to the west @-@ northwest . On February 11 , Eline had weakened into a minimal tropical storm according to the MFR , about 1110 km ( 690 mi ) south of Diego Garcia , and the JTWC operationally downgraded it to a tropical depression . Later that day , however , a decrease in shear allowed thunderstorms to refire . On February 13 , a weakness in the ridge caused the storm to turn back to the west @-@ southwest . Moving back beneath an anticyclone , conditions became more favorable for strengthening , allowing outflow and a central dense overcast to form , with the beginnings of an eye feature . Eline quickly intensified into a severe tropical storm late on February 13 . At 00 : 00 UTC the next day , the JTWC upgraded Eline to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane with 1 ‑ minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The MFR held off upgrading the storm , due to a passing trough increasing wind shear again . On February 14 , Eline passed about 85 km ( 55 mi ) south of St. Brandon , and shortly thereafter resumed its strengthening after the shear dropped . Later that day , the storm bypassed Mauritius about 180 km ( 110 mi ) to the northwest , with the small structure sparing the island from the strongest winds . Early on February 16 , Eline attained tropical cyclone status , with 10 ‑ minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , while passing about 160 km ( 100 mi ) northwest of Réunion . This was nine days after it had weakened to tropical storm status the first time . 
 After becoming a tropical cyclone , Eline was still encountering wind shear and dry air . Despite these factors , the eye became better defined and the storm intensified , aided by favoring upper @-@ level conditions . The cyclone turned more to the west toward Madagascar , despite a weakness in the ridge to the south . While approaching the country , Eline quickly intensified , reaching 10 ‑ minute winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) by 18 : 00 UTC on February 17 . Around that time , the cyclone made landfall on eastern Madagascar near Mahanoro . Eline rapidly weakened over land while moving to the west @-@ southwest , and the JTWC downgraded the storm to tropical depression status within 18 hours of moving ashore . 
 = = Mozambique Channel and final landfall = = 
 After crossing Madagascar for 26 hours , Eline emerged into the Mozambique Channel near Belo , still maintaining good outflow . With warm waters and a favorable upper level environment , the depression quickly re @-@ intensified as convection increased . At 12 : 00 UTC on February 19 , Eline re @-@ attained moderate tropical storm status . While in the central Mozambique Channel , Eline passed about 35 km ( 20 mi ) north of Europa Island , which recorded a barometric pressure of 992 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) . Shortly thereafter , the storm turned more to the west @-@ northwest due to a strengthening ridge to the south . A brief increase in wind shear delayed the strengthening trend , but Eline resumed intensifying on February 21 while slowly approaching southeastern Africa . Over a 24 ‑ hour period , the pressure dropped by 45 mbar ( 1 @.@ 3 inHg ) , indicative of rapid deepening . During that time , the convection organized into an intense eyewall around a well @-@ defined 60 km ( 35 mi ) eye . Eline had re @-@ attained tropical cyclone at 12 : 00 UTC on February 21 , and by 18 hours later reached intense tropical cyclone status . The MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) ; in contrast , the JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) , the equivalent of a Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane scale . While at peak intensity , Eline made landfall about 80 km ( 50 mi ) south of Beira , Mozambique , where a pressure of 989 mbar ( 29 @.@ 2 inHg ) was recorded . Gusts at landfall were estimated at 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) . 
 Although the winds rapidly decreased after landfall , the storm maintained a well @-@ defined structure as it crossed from Mozambique into Zimbabwe late on February 22 . Weakening to tropical depression status , Eline crossed Zimbabwe and maintained its circulation , entering Botswana on February 24 . Three days later , the center drifted into eastern Namibia and turned to the south , dissipating on February 29 . After the circulation dissipated , the residual system merged with a heat low and an approaching cold front . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Throughout its duration , Leon @-@ Eline lasted 29 days , a record longevity for a storm in the southern Indian Ocean . The track was over 11 @,@ 000 km ( 6 @,@ 800 mi ) , or about 25 % of the Earth 's circumference . However , Eline was in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean for 21 days , which is the third most on record . It was behind Cyclone Alibera in 1989 and Cyclone Georgette in 1968 , the latter of which lasted 24 days in the basin . The MFR noted that Eline was the strongest cyclone to strike the nation in several decades . The storm was uncommon in its landfall on mainland Africa ; only 5 % of storms in the basin do so , and most that cross or form in the Mozambique Channel turn to the south . Eline was unusual in maintaining its identity so far inland , aided by increased moisture and enhanced upper @-@ level environmental conditions over southern Africa . The storm 's long track brought heavy rainfall across Madagascar and southern Africa , causing additional widespread flooding . 
 = The Simpsons = 
 The Simpsons is an American animated sitcom created by Matt Groening for the Fox Broadcasting Company . The series is a satirical depiction of a working class lifestyle epitomized by the Simpson family , which consists of Homer , Marge , Bart , Lisa , and Maggie . The show is set in the fictional town of Springfield and parodies American culture , society , television , and many aspects of the human condition . It 's the 20th Century Fox debut in animation . 
 The family was conceived by Groening shortly before a solicitation for a series of animated shorts with the producer James L. Brooks . Groening created a dysfunctional family and named the characters after members of his own family , substituting Bart for his own name . The shorts became a part of The Tracey Ullman Show on April 19 , 1987 . After a three @-@ season run , the sketch was developed into a half @-@ hour prime time show and was an early hit for Fox , becoming the network 's first series to land in the Top 30 ratings in a season ( 1989 – 90 ) . 
 Since its debut on December 17 , 1989 , the series has broadcast 596 episodes . It will begin airing its 28th season in September 2016 . The Simpsons is the longest @-@ running American sitcom , the longest @-@ running American animated program , and in 2009 it surpassed Gunsmoke as the longest @-@ running American scripted primetime television series . The Simpsons Movie , a feature @-@ length film , was released in theaters worldwide on July 27 , 2007 , and grossed over $ 527 million . On May 4 , 2015 , the series was officially renewed for seasons twenty @-@ seven ( 2015 – 16 ) and twenty @-@ eight ( 2016 – 17 ) , consisting of 22 episodes each . 
 The Simpsons has received widespread critical acclaim , especially for the " Golden Age " of approximately its first ten seasons . Time magazine named it the 20th century 's best television series , and The A.V. Club named it " television 's crowning achievement regardless of format " . On January 14 , 2000 , the Simpson family was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . It has won dozens of awards since it debuted as a series , including 31 Primetime Emmy Awards , 30 Annie Awards , and a Peabody Award . Homer 's exclamatory catchphrase " D 'oh ! " has been adopted into the English language , while The Simpsons has influenced many adult @-@ oriented animated sitcoms . Despite this , the show has also been criticized for what many perceive as a decline in quality over the years . 
 = = Premise = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The Simpsons are a family who live in a fictional " Middle American " town of Springfield . Homer , the father , works as a safety inspector at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , a position at odds with his careless , buffoonish personality . He is married to Marge Simpson , a stereotypical American housewife and mother . They have three children : Bart , a ten @-@ year @-@ old troublemaker ; Lisa , a precocious eight @-@ year @-@ old activist ; and Maggie , the baby of the family who rarely speaks , but communicates by sucking on a pacifier . Although the family is dysfunctional , many episodes examine their relationships and bonds with each other and they are often shown to care about one another . The family owns a dog , Santa 's Little Helper , and a cat , Snowball V , renamed Snowball II in " I , ( Annoyed Grunt ) -Bot " . Both pets have had starring roles in several episodes . 
 The show includes an array of quirky supporting characters : co @-@ workers , teachers , family friends , extended relatives , townspeople and local celebrities . The creators originally intended many of these characters as one @-@ time jokes or for fulfilling needed functions in the town . A number of them have gained expanded roles and subsequently starred in their own episodes . According to Matt Groening , the show adopted the concept of a large supporting cast from the comedy show SCTV . 
 Despite the depiction of yearly milestones such as holidays or birthdays passing , the characters do not age between episodes ( either physically or in stated age ) , and generally appear just as they did when the series began . The series uses a floating timeline in which episodes generally take place in the year the episode is produced even though the characters do not age . Flashbacks / forwards do occasionally depict the characters at other points in their lives , with the timeline of these depictions also generally floating relative to the year the episode is produced . In a nod to the non @-@ aging aspect of the show , when asked during the Family Guy crossover episode " The Simpsons Guy " how long Nelson Muntz has been bullying him , Bart replies " 24 years . " 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The Simpsons takes place in the fictional American town of Springfield in an unknown and impossible @-@ to @-@ determine U.S. state . The show is intentionally evasive in regard to Springfield 's location . Springfield 's geography , and that of its surroundings , contains coastlines , deserts , vast farmland , tall mountains , or whatever the story or joke requires . Groening has said that Springfield has much in common with Portland , Oregon , the city where he grew up . The name " Springfield " is a common one in America and appears in 22 states . Groening has said that he named it after Springfield , Oregon , and the fictitious Springfield which was the setting of the series Father Knows Best . He " figured out that Springfield was one of the most common names for a city in the U.S. In anticipation of the success of the show , I thought , ' This will be cool ; everyone will think it 's their Springfield . ' And they do . " An astronomer and fan of the show , Phil Plait , noticed that The Simpsons could be set in Australia , because the moon in Springfield faces the wrong way to be an American location . It is drawn facing the right , as it would in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 When producer James L. Brooks was working on the television variety show The Tracey Ullman Show , he decided to include small animated sketches before and after the commercial breaks . Having seen one of cartoonist Matt Groening 's Life in Hell comic strips , Brooks asked Groening to pitch an idea for a series of animated shorts . Groening initially intended to present an animated version of his Life in Hell series . However , Groening later realized that animating Life in Hell would require the rescinding of publication rights for his life 's work . He therefore chose another approach while waiting in the lobby of Brooks 's office for the pitch meeting , hurriedly formulating his version of a dysfunctional family that became the Simpsons . He named the characters after his own family members , substituting " Bart " for his own name , adopting an anagram of the word " brat " . 
 The Simpson family first appeared as shorts in The Tracey Ullman Show on April 19 , 1987 . Groening submitted only basic sketches to the animators and assumed that the figures would be cleaned up in production . However , the animators merely re @-@ traced his drawings , which led to the crude appearance of the characters in the initial shorts . The animation was produced domestically at Klasky Csupo , with Wes Archer , David Silverman , and Bill Kopp being animators for the first season . Colorist <unk> <unk> was the person who decided to make the characters yellow . 
 In 1989 , a team of production companies adapted The Simpsons into a half @-@ hour series for the Fox Broadcasting Company . The team included the Klasky Csupo animation house . Brooks negotiated a provision in the contract with the Fox network that prevented Fox from interfering with the show 's content . Groening said his goal in creating the show was to offer the audience an alternative to what he called " the mainstream trash " that they were watching . The half @-@ hour series premiered on December 17 , 1989 , with " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " . " Some Enchanted Evening " was the first full @-@ length episode produced , but it did not broadcast until May 1990 , as the last episode of the first season , because of animation problems . In 1992 , Tracey Ullman filed a lawsuit against Fox , claiming that her show was the source of the series ' success . The suit said she should receive a share of the profits of The Simpsons — a claim rejected by the courts . 
 = = = Executive producers and showrunners = = = 
 Matt Groening and James L. Brooks have served as executive producers during the show 's entire history , and also function as creative consultants . Sam Simon , described by former Simpsons director Brad Bird as " the unsung hero " of the show , served as creative supervisor for the first four seasons . He was constantly at odds with Groening , Brooks and the show 's production company Gracie Films and left in 1993 . Before leaving , he negotiated a deal that sees him receive a share of the profits every year , and an executive producer credit despite not having worked on the show since 1993 , at least until his passing in 2015 . A more involved position on the show is the showrunner , who acts as head writer and manages the show 's production for an entire season . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The first team of writers , assembled by Sam Simon , consisted of John Swartzwelder , Jon Vitti , George Meyer , Jeff Martin , Al Jean , Mike Reiss , Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky . Newer Simpsons ' writing teams typically consist of sixteen writers who propose episode ideas at the beginning of each December . The main writer of each episode writes the first draft . Group rewriting sessions develop final scripts by adding or removing jokes , inserting scenes , and calling for re @-@ readings of lines by the show 's vocal performers . Until 2004 , George Meyer , who had developed the show since the first season , was active in these sessions . According to long @-@ time writer Jon Vitti , Meyer usually invented the best lines in a given episode , even though other writers may receive script credits . Each episode takes six months to produce so the show rarely comments on current events . 
 Credited with sixty episodes , John Swartzwelder is the most prolific writer on The Simpsons . One of the best @-@ known former writers is Conan O 'Brien , who contributed to several episodes in the early 1990s before replacing David Letterman as host of the talk show Late Night . English comedian Ricky Gervais wrote the episode " Homer Simpson , This Is Your Wife " , becoming the first celebrity to both write and guest star in an episode . Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg , writers of the film Superbad , wrote the episode " Homer the Whopper " , with Rogen voicing a character in it . 
 At the end of 2007 , the writers of The Simpsons went on strike together with the other members of the Writers Guild of America , East . The show 's writers had joined the guild in 1998 . 
 = = = Voice actors = = = 
 The Simpsons has six main cast members : Dan Castellaneta , Julie Kavner , Nancy Cartwright , Yeardley Smith , Hank Azaria and Harry Shearer . Castellaneta voices Homer Simpson , Grampa Simpson , Krusty the Clown , Groundskeeper Willie , Mayor Quimby , Barney Gumble and other adult , male characters . Julie Kavner voices Marge Simpson and Patty and Selma , as well as several minor characters . Castellaneta and Kavner had been a part of The Tracey Ullman Show cast and were given the parts so that new actors would not be needed . Cartwright voices Bart Simpson , Nelson Muntz , Ralph Wiggum and other children . Smith , the voice of Lisa Simpson , is the only cast member who regularly voices only one character , although she occasionally plays other episodic characters . The producers decided to hold casting for the roles of Bart and Lisa . Smith had initially been asked to audition for the role of Bart , but casting director Bonita Pietila believed her voice was too high , so she was given the role of Lisa instead . Cartwright was originally brought in to voice Lisa , but upon arriving at the audition , she found that Lisa was simply described as the " middle child " and at the time did not have much personality . Cartwright became more interested in the role of Bart , who was described as " devious , underachieving , school @-@ hating , irreverent , [ and ] clever " . Groening let her try out for the part instead , and upon hearing her read , gave her the job on the spot . Cartwright is the only one of the six main Simpsons cast members who had been professionally trained in voice acting prior to working on the show . Azaria and Shearer do not voice members of the title family , but play a majority of the male townspeople . Azaria , who has been a part of the Simpsons regular voice cast since the second season , voices recurring characters such as Moe Szyslak , Chief Wiggum , Apu Nahasapeemapetilon and Professor Frink . Shearer also provides voices for Mr. Burns , Mr. Smithers , Principal Skinner , Ned Flanders , Reverend Lovejoy and Dr. Hibbert . Every main cast member has won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance . 
 With one exception , episode credits list only the voice actors , and not the characters they voice . Both Fox and the production crew wanted to keep their identities secret during the early seasons and , therefore , closed most of the recording sessions while refusing to publish photos of the recording artists . However , the network eventually revealed which roles each actor performed in the episode " Old Money " , because the producers said the voice actors should receive credit for their work . In 2003 , the cast appeared in an episode of Inside the Actors Studio , doing live performances of their characters ' voices . 
 The six main actors were paid $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode until 1998 , when they were involved in a pay dispute with Fox . The company threatened to replace them with new actors , even going as far as preparing for casting of new voices , but series creator Groening supported the actors in their action . The issue was soon resolved and , from 1998 to 2004 , they were paid $ 125 @,@ 000 per episode . The show 's revenue continued to rise through syndication and DVD sales , and in April 2004 the main cast stopped appearing for script readings , demanding they be paid $ 360 @,@ 000 per episode . The strike was resolved a month later and their salaries were increased to something between $ 250 @,@ 000 and $ 360 @,@ 000 per episode . In 2008 , production for the twentieth season was put on hold due to new contract negotiations with the voice actors , who wanted a " healthy bump " in salary to an amount close to $ 500 @,@ 000 per episode . The negotiations were soon completed , and the actors ' salary was raised to $ 400 @,@ 000 per episode . Three years later , with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut , the cast members accepted a 30 percent pay cut , down to just over $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 In addition to the main cast , Pamela Hayden , Tress MacNeille , Marcia Wallace , Maggie Roswell , and Russi Taylor voice supporting characters . From 1999 to 2002 , Roswell 's characters were voiced by Marcia Mitzman Gaven . Karl Wiedergott has also appeared in minor roles , but does not voice any recurring characters . Wiedergott left the show in 2010 , and since then Chris <unk> has appeared regularly to voice minor characters . Repeat " special guest " cast members include Albert Brooks , Phil Hartman , Jon Lovitz , Joe Mantegna , Maurice LaMarche , and Kelsey Grammer . Following Hartman 's death in 1998 , the characters he voiced ( Troy McClure and Lionel Hutz ) were retired ; Wallace 's character of Edna Krabappel was retired as well after her death in 2013 . 
 Episodes will quite often feature guest voices from a wide range of professions , including actors , athletes , authors , bands , musicians and scientists . In the earlier seasons , most of the guest stars voiced characters , but eventually more started appearing as themselves . Tony Bennett was the first guest star to appear as himself , appearing briefly in the season two episode " Dancin ' Homer " . The Simpsons holds the world record for " Most Guest Stars Featured in a Television Series " . 
 The Simpsons has been dubbed into several other languages , including Japanese , German , Spanish , and Portuguese . It is also one of the few programs dubbed in both standard French and Quebec French . The show has been broadcast in Arabic , but due to Islamic customs , numerous aspects of the show have been changed . For example , Homer drinks soda instead of beer and eats Egyptian beef sausages instead of hot dogs . Because of such changes , the Arabized version of the series met with a negative reaction from the lifelong Simpsons fans in the area . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Several different U.S. and international studios animate The Simpsons . Throughout the run of the animated shorts on The Tracey Ullman Show , the animation was produced domestically at Klasky Csupo . With the debut of the series , because of an increased workload , Fox subcontracted production to several international studios , located in South Korea . These are AKOM , <unk> , Rough Draft Studios , <unk> , and <unk> Entertainment . A subcontractor connection to the North Korean SEK Studio has been suspected but not confirmed . The production staff at the U.S. animation studio , Film Roman , draws storyboards , designs new characters , backgrounds , props and draws character and background layouts , which in turn become animatics to be screened for the writers at Gracie Films for any changes to be made before the work is shipped overseas . The overseas studios then draw the <unk> , ink and paint , and render the animation to tape before it is shipped back to the United States to be delivered to Fox three to four months later . 
 For the first three seasons , Klasky Csupo animated The Simpsons in the United States . In 1992 , the show 's production company , Gracie Films , switched domestic production to Film Roman , who continue to animate the show as of 2012 . In Season 14 , production switched from traditional cel animation to digital ink and paint . The first episode to experiment with digital coloring was " Radioactive Man " in 1995 . Animators used digital ink and paint during production of the season 12 episode " Tennis the Menace " , but Gracie Films delayed the regular use of digital ink and paint until two seasons later . The already completed " Tennis the Menace " was broadcast as made . 
 The series began high @-@ definition production in Season 20 ; the first episode , " Take My Life , Please " , aired February 15 , 2009 . The move to HDTV included a new opening sequence . Matt Groening called it a complicated change because it affected the timing and composition of animation . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The Simpsons uses the standard setup of a situational comedy , or sitcom , as its premise . The series centers on a family and their life in a typical American town , serving as a satirical parody of a middle class American lifestyle . However , because of its animated nature , The Simpsons ' scope is larger than that of a regular sitcom . The town of Springfield acts as a complete universe in which characters can explore the issues faced by modern society . By having Homer work in a nuclear power plant , the show can comment on the state of the environment . Through Bart and Lisa 's days at Springfield Elementary School , the show 's writers illustrate pressing or controversial issues in the field of education . The town features a vast array of media channels — from kids ' television programming to local news , which enables the producers to make jokes about themselves and the entertainment industry . 
 Some commentators say the show is political in nature and susceptible to a left @-@ wing bias . Al Jean admitted in an interview that " We [ the show ] are of liberal bent . " The writers often evince an appreciation for liberal ideals , but the show makes jokes across the political spectrum . The show portrays government and large corporations as callous entities that take advantage of the common worker . Thus , the writers often portray authority figures in an unflattering or negative light . In The Simpsons , politicians are corrupt , ministers such as Reverend Lovejoy are indifferent to churchgoers , and the local police force is incompetent . Religion also figures as a recurring theme . In times of crisis , the family often turns to God , and the show has dealt with most of the major religions . 
 = = Hallmarks = = 
 = = = Opening sequence = = = 
 The Simpsons ' opening sequence is one of the show 's most memorable hallmarks . The standard opening has gone through three iterations ( a replacement of some shots at the start of the second season , and a brand new sequence when the show switched to high @-@ definition in 2009 ) . Each has the same basic sequence of events : The camera zooms through cumulus clouds , through the show 's title towards the town of Springfield . The camera then follows the members of the family on their way home . Upon entering their house , the Simpsons settle down on their couch to watch television . The original opening was created by David Silverman , and was the first task he did when production began on the show . The series ' distinctive theme song was composed by musician Danny Elfman in 1989 , after Groening approached him requesting a retro style piece . This piece has been noted by Elfman as the most popular of his career . 
 One of the most distinctive aspects of the opening is that three of its elements change from episode to episode : Bart writes different things on the school chalkboard , Lisa plays different solos on her saxophone and different gags accompany the family as they enter their living room to sit on the couch . 
 = = = Halloween episodes = = = 
 The special Halloween episode has become an annual tradition . " Treehouse of Horror " first broadcast in 1990 as part of season two and established the pattern of three separate , self @-@ contained stories in each Halloween episode . These pieces usually involve the family in some horror , science fiction , or supernatural setting and often parody or pay homage to a famous piece of work in those genres . They always take place outside the normal continuity of the show . Although the Treehouse series is meant to be seen on Halloween , this changed by the 2000s , when new installments have premiered after Halloween due to Fox 's current contract with Major League Baseball 's World Series , however , as of 2011 every Treehouse of Horror episode has aired during the month of October . 
 = = = Humor = = = 
 The show 's humor turns on cultural references that cover a wide spectrum of society so that viewers from all generations can enjoy the show . Such references , for example , come from movies , television , music , literature , science , and history . The animators also regularly add jokes or sight gags into the show 's background via humorous or incongruous bits of text in signs , newspapers , billboards , and elsewhere . The audience may often not notice the visual jokes in a single viewing . Some are so fleeting that they become apparent only by pausing a video recording of the show . Kristin Thompson argues that The Simpsons uses a " flurry of cultural references , intentionally inconsistent characterization , and considerable self @-@ reflexivity about television conventions and the status of the programme as a television show . " 
 One of Bart 's early hallmarks was his prank calls to Moe 's Tavern owner Moe Szyslak in which Bart calls Moe and asks for a gag name . Moe tries to find that person in the bar , but soon realizes it is a prank call and angrily threatens Bart. These calls were apparently based on a series of prank calls known as the Tube Bar recordings , though Groening has denied any causal connection . Moe was based partly on Tube Bar owner Louis " Red " Deutsch , whose often profane responses inspired Moe 's violent side . As the series progressed , it became more difficult for the writers to come up with a fake name and to write Moe 's angry response , and the pranks were dropped as a regular joke during the fourth season . The Simpsons also often includes self @-@ referential humor . The most common form is jokes about Fox Broadcasting . For example , the episode " She Used to Be My Girl " included a scene in which a Fox News Channel van drove down the street while displaying a large " Bush Cheney 2004 " banner and playing Queen 's " We Are the Champions " , in reference to the 2004 U.S. presidential election and claims of conservative bias in Fox News . 
 The show uses catchphrases , and most of the primary and secondary characters have at least one each . Notable expressions include Homer 's annoyed grunt " D 'oh ! " , Mr. Burns ' " Excellent " and Nelson Muntz 's " Ha @-@ ha ! " . Some of Bart 's catchphrases , such as " ¡ Ay , caramba ! " , " Don 't have a cow , man ! " and " Eat my shorts ! " appeared on T @-@ shirts in the show 's early days . However , Bart rarely used the latter two phrases until after they became popular through the merchandising . The use of many of these catchphrases has declined in recent seasons . The episode " Bart Gets Famous " mocks catchphrase @-@ based humor , as Bart achieves fame on the Krusty the Clown Show solely for saying " I didn 't do it . " 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 = = = Idioms = = = 
 A number of neologisms that originated on The Simpsons have entered popular vernacular . Mark Liberman , director of the Linguistic Data Consortium , remarked , " The Simpsons has apparently taken over from Shakespeare and the Bible as our culture 's greatest source of idioms , catchphrases and sundry other textual allusions . " The most famous catchphrase is Homer 's annoyed grunt : " D 'oh ! " So ubiquitous is the expression that it is now listed in the Oxford English Dictionary , but without the apostrophe . Dan Castellaneta says he borrowed the phrase from James Finlayson , an actor in many Laurel and Hardy comedies , who pronounced it in a more elongated and whining tone . The staff of The Simpsons told Castellaneta to shorten the noise , and it went on to become the well @-@ known exclamation in the television series . 
 Groundskeeper Willie 's description of the French as " cheese @-@ eating surrender monkeys " was used by National Review columnist Jonah Goldberg in 2003 , after France 's opposition to the proposed invasion of Iraq . The phrase quickly spread to other journalists . " Cromulent " and " Embiggen " , words used in " Lisa the Iconoclast " , have since appeared in the Dictionary.com 's 21st Century Lexicon , and scientific journals respectively . " <unk> " , a fake Scrabble word invented by Bart in " Bart the Genius " , was used as one of the aliases of the creator of the Melissa worm . " I , for one , welcome our new insect overlords " , was used by Kent Brockman in " Deep Space Homer " and has become a common phrase . Variants of Brockman 's utterance are used to express obsequious submission . It has been used in media , such as New Scientist magazine . The dismissive term " Meh " , believed to have been popularized by the show , entered the Collins English Dictionary in 2008 . Other words credited as stemming from the show include " <unk> " and " <unk> " . 
 The Oxford Dictionary of Modern Quotations includes several quotations from the show . As well as " cheese @-@ eating surrender monkeys " , Homer 's lines , " Kids , you tried your best and you failed miserably . The lesson is never try " , from " Burns ' Heir " ( season five , 1994 ) as well as " Kids are the best , Apu . You can teach them to hate the things you hate . And they practically raise themselves , what with the Internet and all " , from " Eight <unk> ' " ( season 11 , 1999 ) , entered the dictionary in August 2007 . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 The Simpsons was the first successful animated program in American prime time since Wait Till Your Father Gets Home in the 1970s . During most of the 1980s , US pundits considered animated shows as appropriate only for children , and animating a show was too expensive to achieve a quality suitable for prime @-@ time television . The Simpsons changed this perception . The use of Korean animation studios for <unk> , coloring , and filming made the episodes cheaper . The success of The Simpsons and the lower production cost prompted US television networks to take chances on other animated series . This development led US producers to a 1990s boom in new , animated prime @-@ time shows , such as South Park , Family Guy , King of the Hill , Futurama and The Critic . For Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane , " The Simpsons created an audience for prime @-@ time animation that had not been there for many , many years ... As far as I 'm concerned , they basically re @-@ invented the wheel . They created what is in many ways — you could classify it as — a wholly new medium . " 
 The Simpsons has had crossovers with four other shows . In the episode " A Star Is Burns " , Marge invites Jay Sherman , the main character of The Critic , to be a judge for a film festival in Springfield . Matt Groening had his name removed from the episode since he had no involvement with The Critic . South Park later paid homage to The Simpsons with the episode " Simpsons Already Did It " . In " Simpsorama " , the Planet Express crew from Futurama come to Springfield in the present to prevent the Simpsons from destroying the future . In the Family Guy episode " The Simpsons Guy " , the Griffins visit Springfield and meet the Simpsons . 
 The Simpsons has also influenced live @-@ action shows like Malcolm in the Middle , which featured the use of sight gags and did not use a laugh track unlike most sitcoms . Malcolm in the Middle debuted January 9 , 2000 , in the time slot after The Simpsons . Ricky Gervais called The Simpsons an influence on The Office , and fellow British sitcom Spaced was , according to its director Edgar Wright , " an attempt to do a live @-@ action The Simpsons . " In Georgia , the animated television sitcom The <unk> , launched in November 2009 , has been noted for its very strong resemblance with The Simpsons , which its creator <unk> <unk> has acknowledged . 
 = = Reception and achievements = = 
 = = = Early success = = = 
 The Simpsons was the Fox network 's first television series to rank among a season 's top 30 highest @-@ rated shows . While later seasons would focus on Homer , Bart was the lead character in most of the first three seasons . In 1990 , Bart quickly became one of the most popular characters on television in what was termed " Bartmania " . He became the most prevalent Simpsons character on memorabilia , such as T @-@ shirts . In the early 1990s , millions of T @-@ shirts featuring Bart were sold ; as many as one million were sold on some days . Believing Bart to be a bad role model , several American public schools banned T @-@ shirts featuring Bart next to captions such as " I 'm Bart Simpson . Who the hell are you ? " and " Underachiever ( ' And proud of it , man ! ' ) " . The Simpsons merchandise sold well and generated $ 2 billion in revenue during the first 14 months of sales . Because of his popularity , Bart was often the most promoted member of the Simpson family in advertisements for the show , even for episodes in which he was not involved in the main plot . 
 Due to the show 's success , over the summer of 1990 the Fox Network decided to switch The Simpsons ' time slot so that it would move from 8 : 00 p.m. ET on Sunday night to the same time on Thursday , where it would compete with The Cosby Show on NBC , the number one show at the time . Through the summer , several news outlets published stories about the supposed " Bill vs. Bart " rivalry . " Bart Gets an F " ( season two , 1990 ) was the first episode to air against The Cosby Show , and it received a lower Nielsen ratings , tying for eighth behind The Cosby Show , which had an 18 @.@ 5 rating . The rating is based on the number of household televisions that were tuned into the show , but Nielsen Media Research estimated that 33 @.@ 6 million viewers watched the episode , making it the number one show in terms of actual viewers that week . At the time , it was the most watched episode in the history of the Fox Network , and it is still the highest rated episode in the history of The Simpsons . The show moved back to its Sunday slot in 1994 and has remained there ever since . 
 The Simpsons has been praised by many critics , being described as " the most irreverent and unapologetic show on the air . " In a 1990 review of the show , Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly described it as " the American family at its most complicated , drawn as simple cartoons . It 's this neat paradox that makes millions of people turn away from the three big networks on Sunday nights to concentrate on The Simpsons . " Tucker would also describe the show as a " pop @-@ cultural phenomenon , a prime @-@ time cartoon show that appeals to the entire family . " 
 = = = Run length achievements = = = 
