 On February 9 , 1997 , The Simpsons surpassed The Flintstones with the episode " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " as the longest @-@ running prime @-@ time animated series in the United States . In 2004 , The Simpsons replaced The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet ( 1952 to 1966 ) as the longest @-@ running sitcom ( animated or live action ) in the United States . In 2009 , The Simpsons surpassed The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet 's record of 435 episodes and is now recognized by Guinness World Records as the world 's longest running sitcom ( in terms of episode count ) . In October 2004 , Scooby @-@ Doo briefly overtook The Simpsons as the American animated show with the highest number of episodes . However , network executives in April 2005 again cancelled Scooby @-@ Doo , which finished with 371 episodes , and The Simpsons reclaimed the title with 378 episodes at the end of their seventeenth season . In May 2007 , The Simpsons reached their 400th episode at the end of the eighteenth season . While The Simpsons has the record for the number of episodes by an American animated show , other animated series have surpassed The Simpsons . For example , the Japanese anime series Sazae @-@ san has over 7 @,@ 000 episodes to its credit . 
 In 2009 , Fox began a year @-@ long celebration of the show titled " Best . 20 Years . Ever . " to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the premiere of The Simpsons . One of the first parts of the celebration is the " Unleash Your Yellow " contest in which entrants must design a poster for the show . The celebration ended on January 10 , 2010 ( almost 20 years after " Bart the Genius " aired on January 14 , 1990 ) , with The Simpsons 20th Anniversary Special – In 3 @-@ D ! On Ice ! , a documentary special by documentary filmmaker Morgan Spurlock that examines the " cultural phenomenon of The Simpsons " . 
 As of the twenty @-@ first season ( 2009 – 2010 ) , The Simpsons became the longest @-@ running American scripted primetime television series , having surpassed Gunsmoke . However , Gunsmoke 's episode count of 635 episodes surpasses The Simpsons , which will not reach that mark until its approximate 29th season under normal programming schedules . However , since Gunsmoke was a full @-@ hour series for its latter fourteen seasons , The Simpsons is the longest @-@ running half @-@ hour series in primetime television . In May 2015 , Fox renewed the show up to the end of a 28th season . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 The Simpsons has won dozens of awards since it debuted as a series , including 31 Primetime Emmy Awards , 30 Annie Awards and a Peabody Award . In a 1999 issue celebrating the 20th century 's greatest achievements in arts and entertainment , Time magazine named The Simpsons the century 's best television series . In that same issue , Time included Bart Simpson in the Time 100 , the publication 's list of the century 's 100 most influential people . Bart was the only fictional character on the list . On January 14 , 2000 , the Simpsons were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . Also in 2000 , Entertainment Weekly magazine TV critic Ken Tucker named The Simpsons the greatest television show of the 1990s . Furthermore , viewers of the UK television channel Channel 4 have voted The Simpsons at the top of two polls : 2001 's 100 Greatest Kids ' TV shows , and 2005 's The 100 Greatest Cartoons , with Homer Simpson voted into first place in 2001 's 100 Greatest TV Characters . Homer would also place ninth on Entertainment Weekly 's list of the " 50 Greatest TV icons " . In 2002 , The Simpsons ranked # 8 on TV Guide 's 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time , and in 2007 it was included in Time 's list of the " 100 Best TV Shows of All Time " . In 2008 the show was placed in first on Entertainment Weekly 's " Top 100 Shows of the Past 25 Years " . Empire named it the greatest TV show of all time . In 2010 , Entertainment Weekly named Homer " the greatest character of the last 20 years " , while in 2013 the Writers Guild of America listed The Simpsons as the 11th " best written " series in television history . In 2013 , TV Guide ranked The Simpsons as the greatest TV cartoon of all time and the tenth greatest show of all time . 
 = = = Criticism and controversy = = = 
 Bart 's rebellious , bad boy nature , which frequently resulted in no punishment for his misbehavior , led some parents and conservatives to characterize him as a poor role model for children . In schools , educators claimed that Bart was a " threat to learning " because of his " underachiever and proud of it " attitude and negative attitude regarding his education . Others described him as " egotistical , aggressive and mean @-@ spirited " . In a 1991 interview , Bill Cosby described Bart as a bad role model for children , calling him " angry , confused , frustrated " . In response , Matt Groening said , " That sums up Bart , all right . Most people are in a struggle to be normal [ and ] he thinks normal is very boring , and does things that others just wished they dare do . " On January 27 , 1992 , then @-@ President George H. W. Bush said , " We are going to keep on trying to strengthen the American family , to make American families a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons . " The writers rushed out a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek reply in the form of a short segment which aired three days later before a rerun of " Stark Raving Dad " in which Bart replied , " Hey , we 're just like the Waltons . We 're praying for an end to the Depression , too . " 
 Various episodes of the show have generated controversy . The Simpsons visit Australia in " Bart vs. Australia " ( season six , 1995 ) and Brazil in " Blame It on Lisa " ( season 13 , 2002 ) and both episodes generated controversy and negative reaction in the visited countries . In the latter case , Rio de Janeiro 's tourist board – who claimed that the city was portrayed as having rampant street crime , kidnappings , slums , and monkey and rat infestations – went so far as to threaten Fox with legal action . Groening was a fierce and vocal critic of the episode " A Star Is Burns " ( season six , 1995 ) which featured a crossover with The Critic . He felt that it was just an advertisement for The Critic , and that people would incorrectly associate the show with him . When he was unsuccessful in getting the episode pulled , he had his name removed from the credits and went public with his concerns , openly criticizing James L. Brooks and saying the episode " violates the Simpsons ' universe . " In response , Brooks said , " I am furious with Matt , ... he 's allowed his opinion , but airing this publicly in the press is going too far . ... his behavior right now is rotten . " " The Principal and the Pauper " ( season nine , 1997 ) is one of the most controversial episodes of The Simpsons . Many fans and critics reacted negatively to the revelation that Seymour Skinner , a recurring character since the first season , was an impostor . The episode has been criticized by Groening and by Harry Shearer , who provides the voice of Skinner . In a 2001 interview , Shearer recalled that after reading the script , he told the writers , " That 's so wrong . You 're taking something that an audience has built eight years or nine years of investment in and just tossed it in the trash can for no good reason , for a story we 've done before with other characters . It 's so arbitrary and gratuitous , and it 's disrespectful to the audience . " 
 The show has reportedly been taken off the air in several countries . China banned it from prime @-@ time television in August 2006 , " in an effort to protect China 's struggling animation studios . " In 2008 , Venezuela barred the show from airing on morning television as it was deemed " unsuitable for children " . The same year , several Russian Pentecostal churches demanded that The Simpsons , South Park and some other Western cartoons be removed from broadcast schedules " for propaganda of various vices " and the broadcaster 's license to be revoked . However , the court decision later dismissed this request . 
 = = = Criticism of declining quality = = = 
 Critics ' reviews of early Simpsons episodes praised the show for its sassy humor , wit , realism , and intelligence . However , in the late 1990s , around the airing of seasons nine and ten , the tone and emphasis of the show began to change . Some critics started calling the show " tired " . By 2000 , some long @-@ term fans had become disillusioned with the show , and pointed to its shift from character @-@ driven plots to what they perceived as an overemphasis on zany antics . Jim Schembri of The Sydney Morning Herald attributed the decline in quality to an abandonment of character @-@ driven storylines in favor of and overuse of celebrity cameo appearances and references to popular culture . Schembri wrote : " The central tragedy of The Simpsons is that it has gone from commanding attention to merely being attention seeking . It began by proving that cartoon characters don 't have to be caricatures ; they can be invested with real emotions . Now the show has in essence fermented into a limp parody of itself . Memorable story arcs have been sacrificed for the sake of celebrity walk @-@ ons and punchline @-@ hungry dialogue . " 
 The BBC noted " the common consensus is that The Simpsons ' golden era ended after season nine " , while Todd Leopold of CNN , in an article looking at its perceived decline , stated " for many fans ... the glory days are long past . " Similarly , Tyler Wilson of Coeur d 'Alene Press has referred to seasons one to nine as the show 's " golden age " , and Ian Nathan of Empire described the show 's classic era as being " say , the first ten seasons . " Jon Heacock of <unk> stated that " for the first ten years [ seasons ] , the show was consistently at the top of its game " , with " so many moments , quotations , and references – both epic and obscure – that helped turn the Simpson family into the cultural icons that they remain to this day . " 
 Mike Scully , who was showrunner during seasons nine through twelve , has been the subject of criticism . Chris Suellentrop of Slate wrote that " under Scully 's tenure , The Simpsons became , well , a cartoon . ... Episodes that once would have ended with Homer and Marge bicycling into the sunset now end with Homer blowing a tranquilizer dart into Marge 's neck . The show 's still funny , but it hasn 't been touching in years . " When asked in 2007 how the series ' longevity is sustained , Scully joked : " Lower your quality standards . Once you 've done that you can go on forever . " 
 Al Jean , showrunner since season thirteen , has also been the subject of criticism , with some arguing that the show has continued to decline in quality under his tenure . Former writers have complained that under Jean , the show is " on auto @-@ pilot " , " too sentimental " , and the episodes are " just being cranked out . " Some critics believe that the show has " entered a steady decline under Jean and is no longer really funny . " John Ortved , author of The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History , characterized the Jean era as " toothless " , and criticized what he perceived as the show 's increase in social and political commentary . Jean has responded to this criticism by saying : " Well , it 's possible that we 've declined . But honestly , I 've been here the whole time and I do remember in season two people saying , ' It 's gone downhill . ' If we 'd listened to that then we would have stopped after episode 13 . I 'm glad we didn 't . " 
 In 2003 , to celebrate the show 's 300th episode " Barting Over " , USA Today published a pair of Simpsons related articles : a top @-@ ten episodes list chosen by the webmaster of The Simpsons Archive fansite , and a top @-@ 15 list by The Simpsons ' own writers . The most recent episode listed on the fan list was 1997 's " Homer 's Phobia " ; the Simpsons ' writers most recent choice was 2000 's " Behind the Laughter " . The series ' ratings have also declined ; while the first season enjoyed an average of 13 @.@ 4 million viewing households per episode in the U.S. , the twenty @-@ first season had an average of 7 @.@ 2 million viewers . 
 In 2004 , Harry Shearer criticized what he perceived as the show 's declining quality : " I rate the last three seasons as among the worst , so Season Four looks very good to me now . " In response , Dan Castellaneta stated " I don 't agree , ... I think Harry 's issue is that the show isn 't as grounded as it was in the first three or four seasons , that it 's gotten crazy or a little more madcap . I think it organically changes to stay fresh . " 
 Author Douglas Coupland described claims of declining quality in the series as " hogwash " , saying " The Simpsons hasn 't fumbled the ball in fourteen years , it 's hardly likely to fumble it now . " In an April 2006 interview , Matt Groening said , " I honestly don 't see any end in sight . I think it 's possible that the show will become too financially cumbersome ... but right now , the show is creatively , I think , as good or better than it 's ever been . The animation is incredibly detailed and imaginative , and the stories do things that we haven 't done before . So creatively there 's no reason to quit . " 
 In 2016 , popular culture writer Anna Leszkiewicz suggested that despite the fact that the Simpsons still holds cultural relevance , contemporary appeal is only for the first ten seasons , with recent Simpsons episodes only garnering mainstream attention when a favourite character from the golden era is killed off , or when new information and shock twists are given for old characters . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Comic books = = = 
 Numerous Simpson @-@ related comic books have been released over the years . So far , nine comic book series have been published by Bongo Comics since 1993 . The first comic strips based on The Simpsons appeared in 1991 in the magazine Simpsons Illustrated , which was a companion magazine to the show . The comic strips were popular and a one @-@ shot comic book titled Simpsons Comics and Stories , containing four different stories , was released in 1993 for the fans . The book was a success and due to this , the creator of The Simpsons , Matt Groening , and his companions Bill Morrison , Mike Rote , Steve Vance and Cindy Vance created the publishing company Bongo Comics . Issues of Simpsons Comics , Bart Simpson 's Treehouse of Horror and Bart Simpson have been collected and reprinted in trade paperbacks in the United States by HarperCollins . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 20th Century Fox , Gracie Films , and Film Roman produced The Simpsons Movie , an animated film that was released on July 27 , 2007 . The film was directed by long @-@ time Simpsons producer David Silverman and written by a team of Simpsons writers comprising Matt Groening , James L. Brooks , Al Jean , George Meyer , Mike Reiss , John Swartzwelder , Jon Vitti , David Mirkin , Mike Scully , Matt Selman , and Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham . Production of the film occurred alongside continued writing of the series despite long @-@ time claims by those involved in the show that a film would enter production only after the series had concluded . There had been talk of a possible feature @-@ length Simpsons film ever since the early seasons of the series . James L. Brooks originally thought that the story of the episode " Kamp Krusty " was suitable for a film , but he encountered difficulties in trying to expand the script to feature @-@ length . For a long time , difficulties such as lack of a suitable story and an already fully engaged crew of writers delayed the project . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Collections of original music featured in the series have been released on the albums Songs in the Key of Springfield , Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons and The Simpsons : Testify . Several songs have been recorded with the purpose of a single or album release and have not been featured on the show . The album The Simpsons Sing the Blues was released in September 1990 and was a success , peaking at # 3 on the Billboard 200 and becoming certified 2 × platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . The first single from the album was the pop rap song " Do the Bartman " , performed by Nancy Cartwright and released on November 20 , 1990 . The song was written by Michael Jackson , although he did not receive any credit . The Yellow Album was released in 1998 , but received poor reception and did not chart in any country . 
 = = = The Simpsons Ride = = = 
 In 2007 , it was officially announced that The Simpsons Ride , a simulator ride , would be implemented into the Universal Studios Orlando and Universal Studios Hollywood . It officially opened May 15 , 2008 in Florida and May 19 , 2008 , in Hollywood . In the ride , patrons are introduced to a cartoon theme park called Krustyland built by Krusty the Clown . However , Sideshow Bob is loose from prison to get revenge on Krusty and the Simpson family . It features more than 24 regular characters from The Simpsons and features the voices of the regular cast members , as well as Pamela Hayden , Russi Taylor and Kelsey Grammer . Harry Shearer did not participate in the ride , so none of his characters have vocal parts . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Numerous video games based on the show have been produced . Some of the early games include Konami 's arcade game The Simpsons ( 1991 ) and Acclaim Entertainment 's The Simpsons : Bart vs. the Space Mutants ( 1991 ) . More modern games include The Simpsons : Road Rage ( 2001 ) , The Simpsons : Hit & Run ( 2003 ) and The Simpsons Game ( 2007 ) . Electronic Arts , which produced The Simpsons Game , has owned the exclusive rights to create video games based on the show since 2005 . In 2010 , they released a game called The Simpsons Arcade for iOS . Another EA @-@ produced mobile game , Tapped Out , was released in 2012 for iOS users , then in 2013 for Android and Kindle users . Two Simpsons pinball machines have been produced : one that was available briefly after the first season , and another in 2007 , both out of production . 
 = = Syndication and streaming availability = = 
 In 2013 the cable television network FXX acquired exclusive cable and digital syndication rights for The Simpsons for a reported $ 750 million , a deal which broke the record for being the biggest off @-@ network deal in television history . Original contracts had previously stated that syndication rights for The Simpsons would not be sold to cable until the series conclusion , at a time when cable syndication deals were highly rare . The series has been syndicated to local broadcast stations in nearly all markets throughout the United States since September 1993 . 
 FXX premiered The Simpsons on their network on August 21 , 2014 by starting a twelve @-@ day marathon which featured the first 552 episodes ( every single episode that had already been released at the time ) aired chronologically , including The Simpsons Movie , which FX Networks had already owned the rights to air . It was the longest continuous marathon in the history of television ( until VH1 Classic aired a 433 @-@ hour , nineteen @-@ day , marathon of Saturday Night Live in 2015 ; celebrating that program 's 40th anniversary ) . The first day of the marathon was the highest rated broadcast day in the history of the network so far , the ratings more than tripled that those of regular prime time programming for FXX . Ratings during the first six nights of the marathon grew night after night , with the network ranking within the top 5 networks in basic cable each night . 
 On October 21 , 2014 , a digital service courtesy of the <unk> app , called Simpsons World , launched . Simpsons World has every episode of the series accessible to authenticated FX subscribers , and is available on game consoles such as Xbox One , streaming devices such as Roku and Apple TV , and online via web browser . There was early criticism of both wrong aspect ratios for earlier episodes and the length of commercial breaks on the streaming service , but there are now fewer commercial breaks during individual episodes . Later it was announced that Simpsons World would now let users watch all of the SD episodes in their original format . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 The popularity of The Simpsons has made it a billion @-@ dollar merchandising industry . The title family and supporting characters appear on everything from T @-@ shirts to posters . The Simpsons has been used as a theme for special editions of well @-@ known board games , including Clue , Scrabble , Monopoly , Operation , and The Game of Life , as well as the trivia games What Would Homer Do ? and Simpsons Jeopardy ! . Several card games such as trump cards and The Simpsons Trading Card Game have also been released . Many official or unofficial Simpsons books such as episode guides have been published . Many episodes of the show have been released on DVD and VHS over the years . When the first season DVD was released in 2001 , it quickly became the best @-@ selling television DVD in history , although it was later overtaken by the first season of Chappelle 's Show . In particular , seasons one through seventeen have been released on DVD in the U.S. ( Region 1 ) , Europe ( Region 2 ) and Australia / New Zealand / Latin America ( Region 4 ) . However , on April 19 , 2015 , Al Jean announced that the Season 17 DVD would be the last one ever produced , leaving the collection from Season 1 to 17 , Season 20 ( released out of schedule in 2009 ) , with Seasons 18 , 19 , and 21 onwards unreleased . Jean also stated that the deleted scenes and commentary would try to be released to the Simpsons World app , and that they were pushing for Simpsons World to be expanded outside of the U.S. 
 In 2003 , about 500 companies around the world were licensed to use Simpsons characters in their advertising . As a promotion for The Simpsons Movie , twelve 7 @-@ Eleven stores were transformed into Kwik @-@ E @-@ Marts and sold The Simpsons related products . These included " Buzz Cola " , " Krusty @-@ O " cereal , pink doughnuts with sprinkles , and " Squishees " . 
 In 2008 consumers around the world spent $ 750 million on merchandise related to The Simpsons , with half of the amount originating from the United States . By 2009 , 20th Century Fox had greatly increased merchandising efforts . On April 9 , 2009 , the United States Postal Service unveiled a series of five 44 @-@ cent stamps featuring Homer , Marge , Bart , Lisa and Maggie , to commemorate the show 's twentieth anniversary . The Simpsons is the first television series still in production to receive this recognition . The stamps , designed by Matt Groening , were made available for purchase on May 7 , 2009 . Approximately one billion were printed , but only 318 million were sold , costing the Postal Service $ 1 @.@ 2 million . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = New York State Route 174 = 
 New York State Route 174 ( NY 174 ) is a state highway in Onondaga County , located in Central New York , in the United States . The highway is 16 @.@ 7 miles ( 26 @.@ 9 km ) long and passes through mostly rural regions . Route 174 begins at an intersection with NY 41 in Borodino , a hamlet of Spafford . It heads generally northward for most of its length , except for short distances in the villages of Marcellus and Camillus . The route ends at a junction with NY 5 west of Camillus , at the west end of the Route 5 Camillus bypass . Route 174 is located along a large mapped sedimentary bedrock unit , known as the Marcellus Formation . The formation is named for an outcrop found near the town of Marcellus , New York , during a geological survey in 1839 . 
 The road was first constructed in the early 19th century following the path of Nine Mile Creek , which connected several early settlements in Central New York . The northern half of the route , between the villages of Marcellus and Camillus , was later improved as a plank road in 1855 by a private corporation that collected tolls from travelers on the road . The state took over the maintenance of the road by the beginning of the 20th century . The former plank road and an extension south to Otisco Lake and southwest to Skaneateles Lake was first designated as Route 174 in the 1930 state highway renumbering . Since then , several minor realignments have been made in the areas of the villages of Marcellus and Camillus to accommodate newly built bypasses . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 174 begins its 16 @-@ mile ( 26 km ) route through Onondaga County at an intersection with NY 41 in the hamlet of Borodino , on the shores of Skaneateles Lake . The road heads north , passing to the east of Hardscrabble Point , to an intersection with <unk> Road ( County Route 131 or CR 131 ) where it turns east . The highway then heads eastward for about a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to a turn along the shore of Otisco Lake . It follows the shoreline of the lake northward into the town of Marcellus , soon entering the hamlet of Marietta . North of Marietta , the lake narrows into the Nine Mile Creek , which parallels NY 174 for the rest of the highway 's length . 
 Within the town of Marcellus , NY 174 intersects and becomes concurrent with U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) for about 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 5 km ) until Sevier Road . NY 174 continues north along Sevier Road , still paralleling the creek , towards the village of Marcellus . South of the village line , NY 175 joins NY 174 and the two routes are concurrent for about 2 miles ( 3 km ) . The two roads go around the southeast border of the village , passing by the county park , then split in different directions just east of the village . Route 175 turns to the east while NY 174 turns to the west along the West Seneca Turnpike , entering the village of Marcellus . 
 NY 174 passes through the village center then turns north along North Street and heads out of the village , turning northward through the hamlet of Marcellus Falls . After Marcellus , the land around the route becomes more developed with residential areas becoming more common . About 0 @.@ 3 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 5 km ) north of Marcellus , NY 174 crosses Nine Mile Creek ; the bridge itself is designated as NY <unk> , which is an internal designation used by NYSDOT and not signed as such . 
 The road continues north , still paralleling the Nine Mile Creek , into the town of Camillus . In Bennetts Corners , NY 174 intersects with Forward Road ( unsigned NY 931F ) , a connector road to NY 321 , then changes direction to head northeast . The road passes by Nose Hill before entering the village of Camillus . In the village center , NY 174 makes a sharp turn to the west onto West Genesee Street , where it comes to an end just west of the village line at a junction with NY 5 ( where its freeway begins ) that includes a jughandle , a slip road onto the freeway . NY 174 is located along a geological feature known as a mapped sedimentary bedrock unit , known as the Marcellus Formation . The formation is named for an outcrop found near the town of Marcellus , New York , during a geological survey in 1839 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old roads = = = 
 The village of Marcellus was first settled in 1794 at the intersection of two transportation routes : an old Iroquois trail running east – west ( later to become the Seneca Turnpike ) and the north – south Nine Mile Creek . At the beginning of the 19th century , land travel along the Nine Mile Creek was very difficult and most travel between Marcellus and the settlements along Onondaga Lake was by water . In 1831 the New York State Legislature authorized the construction of a road to follow Nine Mile Creek from Marcellus towards the town of Salina at Onondaga Lake . 
 In 1855 , the road from Marcellus to Camillus along the Nine Mile Creek route was improved by the Camillus and Marcellus Plank Road Company , which was first chartered in 1853 and authorized to collect tolls from travelers using the road . The improvement of the road led to it becoming a stagecoach route in the middle of the 19th century . The former plank road alignment in the village of Marcellus ( North Street ) and the southward continuation along Cherry Street ( now South Street ) was paved in 1911 as part of the construction of a new state highway that would pass through the town . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 The route from Marcellus ( at US 20 ) to Camillus was designated as NY 174 in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . At the time , the segment of modern NY 174 from Otisco Valley Road ( south of US 20 ) to Borodino was designated as NY 337 while NY 174 followed Otisco Valley and Oak Hill Roads southeast to an intersection with NY 80 in Otisco . NY 174 was truncated northwestward c . 1932 to begin at US 20 south of Marcellus . The portion of its former routing between US 20 and NY 337 became a northward extension of NY 337 . This change was short @-@ lived as NY 337 was supplanted by an extended NY 174 by the following year . The northernmost portion of NY 174 from Forward Road to NY 5 in Camillus village was originally designated as part of NY 26 in 1924 . The route began in Ithaca and ended in Syracuse . The portion of NY 26 between the villages of Skaneateles and Camillus became NY 321 as part of the 1930 renumbering , resulting in an overlap with NY 174 from Forward Road to NY 5 . NY 321 has since been relocated to the west on a county road , and Forward Road is now NY 931F , an unsigned , state @-@ maintained highway known as a reference route . 
 NY 20N was designated c . 1938 as a northerly alternate route of US 20 between Skaneateles and Cazenovia . It utilized existing numbered roads , including NY 174 from US 20 in Skaneateles north to Marcellus , where it turned eastward to follow NY 175 . The NY 20N designation was removed c . 1962 . 
 NY 174 has also had several minor realignments . After Route 5 was realigned onto a new expressway from Camillus to Fairmount , NY 174 was extended on its northern end to meet the west end of the bypass in Camillus . The new alignment makes a sharp hook west along the former Route 5 . NY 174 has also been relocated onto a southeastern bypass around the village of Marcellus that also carries Route 175 . Originally , NY 174 and 175 entered the village along South Street . The routes were realigned to the bypass between 1976 and 1989 . NY 174 now enters downtown Marcellus using several blocks of the historic Seneca Turnpike between the old and new alignments . This section of the route is maintained by Onondaga County as CR 41 . The former South Street alignment has been redesignated as CR 83 . 
 In April 2008 , the New York State Senate introduced and passed a bill to rename part of NY 174 as the " Father Joseph Champlin Memorial Highway " . This would include the portion of the highway from the Camillus town line to Route 5 . Also starting in 2008 , the New York State Department of Transportation began a rehabilitation project on NY 174 . The Marcellus Falls bridge over Nine Mile Creek , also known as NY <unk> , is closed off for a complete rehabilitation and a detour has been placed around it . Construction is reduced to one lane between Main Street and Scotch Hill Road and will continue until June 24 , 2008 . On November 21 , 2008 , the bridge was re @-@ opened and the construction completed . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Onondaga County . 
 = Michel Roux = 
 Michel Roux , OBE ( born 19 April 1941 ) , also known as Michel Roux Snr . , is a French @-@ born chef and restaurateur working in Britain . Along with his brother Albert , he opened Le Gavroche , later to become the first three Michelin starred restaurant in Britain , and The Waterside Inn , which was the first restaurant outside France to hold three stars for a period of 25 years . 
 Michel followed his brother into becoming a pastry chef , and again to England in order to open their first restaurant . Together they have been described as the " godfathers of modern restaurant cuisine in the UK " , and Michel has been inducted into several French orders , and has received two lifetime achievement awards from different publications . He was decorated during a period of National Service for France during the 1960s . 
 He founded the Roux Brothers Scholarship along with Albert in 1984 , and has worked as a consultant for companies such as British Airways and Celebrity Cruises over the years . After he and his brother split the business in 1986 , Michel took the Waterside Inn , which he handed over to his son , Alain , in 2002 . He remains an active food writer and has appeared on television shows such as Saturday Kitchen , MasterChef , the Roux family centric series , The Roux Legacy , and on the Woman 's Hour programme on BBC Radio 4 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Michel Roux was born in Charolles , Saône @-@ et @-@ Loire , in a room above his grandfather 's charcuterie ( a delicatessen specializing in meat products ) . He moved to Paris with his family after the war , where his father Michel set up his own charcuterie , after not taking over the family business in Charolles . His father gambled away all of the family 's money , and the shop was closed to prevent it from going bankrupt . By the time Michel turned ten , his father had left the family and was not heard from again . 
 Michel 's older brother Albert had already become a <unk> ( pastry chef ) , and Roux followed him into this field at the age of fourteen . He became an apprentice to Camille Loyal in Belleville , working seventy @-@ hour weeks . Michel 's tasks at the <unk> included making up to sixty Galette des Rois over the course of three days for Epiphany . Albert found Michel further employment as his apprenticeship ended . As Albert was working at the British Embassy in Paris as a sous chef , Michel joined him there as the pastry chef for the Embassy . He moved on from there to become a chef in Philippe de Rothschild 's service , while Albert moved to England to work there . Between 1960 and 1962 , Michel served his French National Service . He was first stationed at the Palace of Versailles , but was later posted overseas in Béchar , Algeria . He was awarded the Médaille <unk> des opérations de sécurité et de <unk> de l 'ordre en Afrique du Nord . 
 Michel nearly decided to give up cooking to become an opera singer , but instead followed Albert to London , despite not being able to speak English . He would later recall that people thought he was mad for travelling to England in view of the fact that he considered the state of English cooking at the time was horrific , describing it as " the dark ages " . In 1967 they opened their first restaurant , Le Gavroche at Lower Sloane Street in London . The opening party was attended by celebrities such as Charlie Chaplin and Ava Gardner . For the following week , Chaplin was reportedly shuttled across London so he could eat there . In 1972 the Roux brothers opened a second restaurant , the Waterside Inn , in Bray , Berkshire , and launched a catering business . In 1974 , when Michelin stars were first awarded in the UK , Le Gavroche and the Waterside Inn were both amongst those restaurants to win a star , and when a number of restaurants won two Michelin stars for the first time in 1977 , both Roux restaurants were among them . Le Gavroche would move to a new location in Mayfair in 1982 , and in the same year became the first restaurant in the UK to be awarded three Michelin stars . The same rating for the Waterside Inn would follow in 1985 , but Le Gavroche would go back down to two stars in 1993 has not regained the three star level . In 2010 , the Waterside Inn became the first restaurant outside France to hold three Michelin stars for a period of 25 years . 
 The Roux Brothers Scholarship was founded by Albert and Michel in 1984 . It is an annual competition to select a single chef to send out as an apprentice . The first winner was Andrew Fairlie , and winners over the years have included Sat Bains ( 1999 ) and Simon <unk> ( 2003 ) . In 1986 the brothers split their restaurant business between them following a disagreement over the direction that their joint business should take , Albert took Le Gavroche , while Michel took the Waterside Inn . Michel became a consultant to British Airways for twenty years between 1983 and 2003 , and for Celebrity Cruises since 1990 . The Roux brothers ' catering company was purchased by Compass Group in 1993 , with Albert retained as a consultant . 
 Michel Roux 's son , Alain Roux , currently runs the Waterside Inn in Bray , having taken over as chef patron in 2002 . In July 2008 , Roux announced that he would move permanently to <unk> @-@ Montana , Switzerland , citing concerns about the state of public safety in Britain . He also owns a vineyard and house on the Cote d 'Azur in France . 
 = = = Television and radio work = = = 
 Michel has spoken out against entertainment @-@ type cooking shows such as the 1990s cooking gameshow Can 't Cook , Won 't Cook , saying that " The way these people handle food is a crime . They don 't even know the basics . Little attention is paid to detail . Instead , they are intent on having a giggle and a joke . They can do this without involving food . " The Roux brothers had a BBC television show in the early eighties , and Michel is a fan of celebrity chefs such as Jamie Oliver and Delia Smith , but isn 't fond of Nigella Lawson as he feels she became well known for the wrong reasons . 
 Together with his brother Albert , Michel appeared on BBC Radio 4 's Desert Island Discs on 26 October 1986 . The Good Food channel aired a five @-@ part series entitled The Roux Legacy in January 2012 , which featured both Albert and Michel , along with their sons Michel Jr. and Alain . Michel had also appeared as a guest judge on MasterChef : The Professionals , alongside his nephew Michel Jr , and on Saturday Kitchen alongside his son Alain . 
 = = = Legacy and awards = = = 
 Michel and his brother have been called the " godfathers of modern restaurant cuisine in the UK " by hospitality industry magazine Caterer and Hotelkeeper , while The Observer Food Monthly described him as " perhaps the finest pastry chef this country has ever had " when he was awarded their Lifetime Achievement award in 2011 . Michel had previously won the Lifetime Achievement award from Tatler magazine in 2008 . Heston Blumenthal compared Michel and Albert to The Beatles . In a poll of UK chefs carried out by Caterer and Hotelkeeper magazine in 2003 , Michel and his brother Albert were voted the most influential chefs in the country , and in 2004 he was voted the AA Chef ’ s Chef . 
 A great number of well known chefs have been trained by one or other of the Roux brothers , with Michel estimating in 2010 that " Half of the Michelin star @-@ holders in Britain come from either my brother 's kitchen or my kitchen " . These chefs have included Gordon Ramsay , Marco Pierre White , and Pierre <unk> . 
 Michel was awarded the Meilleur <unk> de France en Pâtissier in 1976 . He is a member of several orders in France . In 1987 , he was inducted into the National Order of Merit as a Chevalier ( knight ) , and into the Mérite agricole as an officer . In 1990 he was made a Chevalier in the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres , and in 2004 the Legion of Honour followed . Outside France he was made an honorary Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 2002 and was made an honorary Doctor of Culinary Arts by the University of Rhode Island in the same year . 
 = = = = Military awards = = = = 
 Médaille <unk> des opérations de sécurité et de <unk> de l 'ordre en Afrique du Nord 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Michel Roux is the brother of Albert Roux . Michel has a son named Alain Roux , while Albert 's son is Michel Roux , Jr .. When Alain was ten years old , Michel and his wife divorced , with his wife taking British born Alain and his two sisters to France . Alain would visit during the school holidays and work with Michel in the kitchens and decided at the age of fourteen that he wanted to become a chef like his father . Michel met his second wife , Robyn Joyce , after being set up on a blind date with her by former apprentice Leigh Stone @-@ Herbert in Sydney , Australia . The relationship has been credited with opening the door to Australian chefs being trained by the Roux brothers . 
 = Casey Donovan ( actor ) = 
 Casey Donovan ( born John Calvin Culver ; November 2 , 1943 – August 10 , 1987 ) was an American male pornographic actor of the 1970s and 1980s , appearing primarily in adult films and videos catering to gay male audiences . Following a brief career as a teacher and a stint as a highly paid male model , Donovan appeared in the film that would cement his status as a gay icon , Boys in the Sand , in 1971 . Attempts to build on his notoriety to achieve mainstream crossover success failed , but Donovan continued to be a bankable star in the adult industry for the next 15 years . 
 = = Career = = 
 Culver attended <unk> College at Geneseo where he was a member of Phi Sigma Epsilon Fraternity and the drama club . After graduation in 1965 he accepted a teaching position in Peekskill , New York . He went on to take a job at the private Ethical Culture <unk> School on New York City 's Central Park West but was fired during his second year following an altercation in which he physically disciplined a female student ( reportedly the daughter of actor Eli Wallach ) . Following his dismissal he drifted into being an escort and relocated to New York City . He also began pursuing an acting career , appearing in summer stock theatre with the prestigious Peterborough Players . 
 Through one of his escorting clients , Culver landed a spot with the Wilhelmina Models modeling agency , commanding an hourly rate of US $ 60 . He continued to pursue stage work , landing an understudy job in 1969 in the Off @-@ Broadway gay @-@ themed play And Puppy Dog Tails , making his Broadway debut in 1970 in the Native American @-@ themed production Brave and a co @-@ starring role in the off @-@ Broadway Circle in the Water , also in 1970 . 
 In 1971 , Culver played a supporting role in a low budget sexploitation thriller film , Ginger . While the film was a commercial and critical failure , Variety noted his performance positively , saying " Only Calvin Culver ... shows any indication of better things to come . " This in turn led to an offer to appear in Casey , a gay pornographic film in which Culver played the title role , a gay man who is visited by his fairy godmother Wanda ( Culver playing a dual role in drag ) , and is granted a series of wishes which make him sexually irresistible to other men . Culver later took the character 's name , Casey , and that of the popular singer Donovan to create the pseudonym under which he would appear in all his other erotic roles . 
 Culver first appeared as Casey Donovan in Boys in the Sand , directed by Wakefield Poole , in 1971 . The film was an instant success and is considered one of the great classics of male erotic cinema . With the success and celebrity he garnered from the film , Donovan believed that he would be able to cross over into mainstream film . While there were meetings with directors like John Schlesinger and Raymond St. Jacques and talk of casting him in mainstream projects including adaptations of novels by Mary Renault and Patricia Nell Warren , the only film opportunities opened for him were as the star of more erotic films . These included the bisexual porn film Score , The Back Row with George Payne , L. A. Tool & Die with Bob Blount and Richard Locke , The Other Side of Aspen with Al Parker and Dick Fisk , Boys in the Sand II and Inevitable Love , with Jon King and Jamie Wingo . Shortly before his death he starred , heavily intoxicated , in the fisting movie Fucked Up , of Christopher Rage . He also appeared in a number of heterosexual porn films , most notably The Opening of Misty Beethoven where he had a scene with Constance Money . 
 Outside his adult film career , Donovan continued to pursue stage work . In 1972 he was cast in a short @-@ lived Broadway revival of Captain Brassbound 's Conversion . Star Ingrid Bergman described him as " having the same kind and as much charisma as Robert Redford . " He then landed a small role in the 1973 Lincoln Center production of The Merchant of Venice , which was praised as having " vivid appeal . " Donovan had a successful national tour in the play <unk> , written and directed by Jerry Douglas . While the play was critically deemed entertaining enough to its target gay audience ( having earned , in the words of one critic , a " nationwide gay housekeeping seal of approval " ) Donovan himself was judged as simply " no better nor worse [ an ] actor than most of the others [ in the cast ] . " In 1983 he turned his hand to producing , with an unsuccessful Broadway revival of Terrence McNally 's play The Ritz in which he also appeared . 
 Donovan 's iconic status allowed him to build a lucrative career as a high @-@ priced prostitute although it would cost him his legitimate modeling career as more and more clients made the connection between model Culver and porn star Donovan . He wrote an advice column , " Ask Casey , " for the gay @-@ oriented Stallion magazine beginning in 1982 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Casey Donovan was born John Calvin Culver in East Bloomfield , New York , growing up there with his parents and older brother , Duane . 
 In 1973 at the height of his popularity , Donovan met actor @-@ turned writer Tom Tryon and the two entered into a long @-@ term relationship the following year . Tryon was deeply closeted and grew increasingly disturbed by Donovan 's notoriety . Their relationship ended in 1977 . 
 In 1978 , Donovan purchased a house in Key West , Florida to run as a bed and breakfast dubbed " Casa Donovan . " Donovan struggled to keep the house running and ultimately it failed . More successful was Donovan 's time as a celebrity tour guide , conducting all @-@ gay trips in partnership with an outfit called Star Tours to Italy , China , Peru and other destinations . 
 By 1985 , Donovan 's health had begun to deteriorate , as he had contracted HIV . Although he had counseled his fans through his " Ask Casey " column as early as 1982 to reduce their number of sex partners and take steps to preserve their health and urged them to be tested for HIV once the test was developed , he himself made little or no effort to change his behavior . Donovan died in 1987 of an AIDS @-@ related pulmonary infection in Inverness , Florida , aged 43 . 
 = New Brunswick Route 95 = 
 Route 95 is a 14 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 9 @.@ 0 mi ) provincial highway in New Brunswick , which serves a connector route between Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) and U.S. Route 2 ( US 2 ) at the Houlton – Woodstock Border Crossing near Houlton , Maine , United States to Route 2 , which is part of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway , in Woodstock , New Brunswick , Canada . Prior to the construction of Route 95 , the connection between the two cities was served by Route 5 . In 2007 the New Brunswick government completed a roadworks project to turn Route 95 into a full freeway for its entire length . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 95 begins at the Houlton – Woodstock Border Crossing on the Maine – New Brunswick border as an extension of I @-@ 95 and US 2 . The border between the two countries also marks the border between the Eastern Time Zone and the Atlantic Time Zone . The highway travels northeast through woodlands as it approaches its first interchange with Route 540 via a hybrid diamond interchange / partial cloverleaf interchange , providing access to the towns of Richmond Corner and Belleville . Continuing east , the highway crosses over Plymouth Road before intersecting an eastbound exit for <unk> Road , which connects to Route 555 . The final exit on the highway is a trumpet interchange with Route 2 , which is part of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway , in Woodstock . 
 = = History = = 
 A road linking Houlton to Woodstock has existed since at least 1927 , and was numbered Route 5 between 1938 and 1951 . The current Route 95 was constructed in the late 1970s and numbered Route 95 by 1981 . By 1989 , the intersection between Route 95 and Route 2 was converted into an interchange . In 2007 , the New Brunswick Department of Transportation completed a CA $ 33 million construction project , turning Route 95 from a two @-@ lane undivided highway to a grade @-@ separated four lane freeway . The Province has contracted with Brun @-@ Way Highway Operations to provide maintenance for the highway until 2023 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Carleton County . 
 = The Whistleblower = 
 The Whistleblower is a 2010 biographical crime drama film directed by <unk> Kondracki and starring Rachel Weisz . Kondracki and Eilis Kirwan wrote the screenplay , which was inspired by the story of Kathryn Bolkovac , a Nebraska police officer who was recruited as a United Nations peacekeeper for DynCorp International in post @-@ war Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1999 . While there , she discovered a sex trafficking ring serving ( and facilitated by ) DynCorp employees , with the UN 's SFOR peacekeeping force turning a blind eye . Bolkovac was fired and forced out of the country after attempting to shut down the ring . She took the story to BBC News in England and won a wrongful @-@ dismissal lawsuit against DynCorp . 
 Kondracki wanted her debut film to concern human trafficking , and she encountered Bolkovac 's story in college . She and Kirwan struggled to obtain financial support for the project . Eight years after Kondracki decided to produce the film , she secured funding and cast Weisz in the lead role . The Whistleblower — a co @-@ production of Canada , Germany , and the United States — was filmed in Romania from October to December 2009 . 
 The Whistleblower premiered on September 13 , 2010 , at the Toronto International Film Festival , and Samuel Goldwyn Films distributed the film in theaters in the United States . The film was advertised as a fictionalization of events occurring during the late 1990s . Kondracki said that the facts are broadly accurate but some details were omitted for the film ; for example , a three @-@ week " breaking @-@ in " period for trafficking victims was not shown . The film received mixed reviews . The performances by Weisz and her co @-@ stars were praised , but the intense violence depicted in several scenes was debated by critics , with some calling it exploitative . Kondracki and Weisz responded that what happened in Bosnia had been toned down for the film . The Whistleblower received several awards and nominations , including three nominations at the 2012 Genie Awards . UN Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon hosted a screening of the film and promised action would be taken to prevent further instances of human trafficking . The Guardian reported that other UN officials attempted to downplay the events depicted and that initiatives against trafficking in Bosnia were aborted . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Kathryn Bolkovac is a police officer from Lincoln , Nebraska , who accepts an offer to work with the United Nations International Police in post @-@ war Bosnia and Herzegovina for a UK company , Democra Security ( a pseudonym for DynCorp International ) . After successfully advocating for a Muslim woman who experienced domestic abuse , Kathryn is appointed head of the department of gender affairs . 
 Raya , a young Ukrainian woman , and her friend Luba are sold to a Bosnian sex @-@ trafficking ring by a relative . Raya escapes with Irka , another girl forced into prostitution , and they are sent to a women 's shelter for victims of human trafficking . While investigating their case , Kathryn uncovers a large @-@ scale sexual slavery ring utilized by international personnel ( including Americans ) . She persuades Raya and Irka to testify against their traffickers in court , guaranteeing their safety ; however , an indifferent UN official drops Irka at the border between Bosnia and Serbia when she cannot produce a passport . A corrupt peacekeeper tips off the traffickers , and Raya is recaptured and tortured . Although Kathryn rescues Irka from the woods , the latter is too afraid to proceed with the trial . 
 When she brings the scandal to the attention of the UN , Kathryn discovers that it has been covered up to protect lucrative defense and security contracts . However , she finds allies in her investigation : Madeleine Rees , head of the Human Rights Commission , and internal @-@ affairs specialist Peter Ward . When one of the girls found dead , Kathryn sends an email to fifty senior mission personnel detailing her findings ; she is then fired from her job . She and Ward acquire evidence of an official admitting the scandal before she is forced to leave the country , and she brings it to the BBC News . The final credits note that after Kathryn 's departure , a number of peacekeepers were sent home ( although none faced criminal charges because of immunity laws ) , and the U.S. continues doing business with private contractors such as Democra Security ( including billion @-@ dollar contracts in Iraq and Afghanistan ) . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The Whistleblower is based on the experiences of Kathryn Bolkovac , an American police officer who in 1999 was assigned to serve as a peacekeeper with the United Nations in post @-@ war Bosnia . While there , she reportedly discovered a sex @-@ trafficking ring which served and was facilitated by other peacekeepers . Bolkovac was fired after trying to investigate the ring , but she later won a wrongful @-@ dismissal lawsuit . 
 Director <unk> Kondracki and co @-@ screenwriter Eilis Kirwan learned of Bolkovac 's story while attending Columbia University , eight years before the film 's production . Kondracki subsequently devoted significant time to research human trafficking and the sex trade . After Bolkovac sold her the film rights for $ 100 , she resolved to adapt the story for the screen . Financing for the project was initially difficult to secure , although the situation improved after Rachel Weisz was cast as Bolkovac . " I was young and naïve , " Kondracki said of her initial attempts to secure funding . " I thought : ' Of course they 're going to make my film . It 's brilliant ! ' " 
 The Whistleblower was described as a " fictionalized dramatic presentation " of a late @-@ 1990s scandal . The producers based it on Bolkovac 's experiences , rather than on her memoir . Vanessa Redgrave played Madeleine Rees , a UN human @-@ rights official ( " one of the film 's few heroic characters " ) who helps Bolkovac uncover the sex trade . Raya ( Roxana <unk> ) and Luba ( Paula Schramm ) , two Ukrainian young women who are trafficked into Bosnia , are the primary representations of the trafficking victims encountered by Bolkovac . Neither is based on a particular person ; they are composites of young women forced to work in Bosnian brothels . Kondracki 's younger sister , <unk> , also played a trafficking victim . For legal reasons the pseudonym " Democra Security " was used for DynCorp International , the organization whose employees reportedly sexually enslaved the women . 
 Although the producers kept the film factual , they debated how much to include . Details on the bureaucracy were removed . Kondracki said , " It was too much information and , frankly , people were bored . " Another concern was how much violence against the sex @-@ trafficking victims should be depicted in the film . Kondracki chose to bluntly portray the inhumane treatment of the young women , which she described as accurate representations of what happened . This included a graphic scene , in which Raya is raped with a lead pipe after her escape and recapture . Weisz thought the reality had been toned down , " In real life there were girls doing this as young as 8 years old . " Kondracki agreed , saying that she had lightened the events depicted out of fear that viewers would " tune it out " : 
 We show what is just about permissible to show . We couldn 't possibly include the three @-@ week desensitisation period , when they burn the girls in particular places . We couldn 't really capture the hopelessness of life these women are subjected to . 
 Kondracki said that her goal for The Whistleblower was " information and exposure " on human trafficking . She said , " No one is putting pressure on governments to stop it , and there is no accountability . It 's laziness . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The Whistleblower is a Canadian – German co @-@ production . Weisz received the script from producer Amy Kaufman in 2007 . Since she was pregnant with her son at the time , she initially turned down the offer . She said the story haunted her , and she later contacted Kaufman to ask if the project was still available . She signed on in August 2009 , and shooting began in October 2009 . 
 Bolkovac visited the set in Bucharest , Romania , where most of the movie was filmed . Weisz said that she made a point to spend " every waking moment " with her to accurately portray her . Weisz and Bolkovac are dissimilar in appearance : the former is dark @-@ haired and slight , and the latter is " blond and much more voluptuous " and " much taller " . As a result , the actress focused on emulating Bolkovac 's accent and determination . Bolkovac later said she commended the choice to portray her and appreciated Weisz 's efforts to be accurate . 
 Filming took around six weeks , relatively short for a thriller ; Weisz said most take about three months to complete . Producers used hand @-@ held cameras and had a lower budget than usual for the genre . Kondracki said filming in Eastern Europe was crucial , " In a story such as this , it 's more about what you don 't see , so you need to create that world . " The Carpathian Mountains in Romania served as the backdrop for the war @-@ ravaged Sarajevo of the late 1990s . Scenes set in UN buildings were filmed in Toronto . Most outdoor scenes are set at night ; daytime shots often appear bleak , gray and overcast . This , coupled with a grainy texture , helped create a documentary feel . 
 Weisz had to separate herself emotionally from the atrocities depicted in the film . " It 's something you learn , " she said . " It 's true between ' action ' and ' cut , ' and after ' cut ' it 's just not true anymore . " Bolkovac echoed Weisz 's sentiments , adding that distancing oneself emotionally is a necessity when working on a police force . However , the producers wanted the audience to be affected by scenes depicting brutal treatment of the women forced into prostitution , and the character of Raya was created to give a human face to the victims . Much of the rape scene was cut after its brutality caused a viewer to faint during the film 's first screening in Toronto . Weisz responded : 
 I completely understand . It would be just too harrowing for people to watch . What actually happened was so much worse . I mean the stories I could tell you from the first person who encountered these young women . That was the " light " version if you can believe that . But it isn 't a documentary , you don 't want to destroy people . You just want to illuminate something that actually happened that was a hundred times worse . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The Whistleblower focuses on sexual slavery , human trafficking , and corruption . Kondracki wanted her first project to concern sex trafficking but was unsure how to create a moving , original plot . Her mother was born in Ukraine , and she was aware of what she described as the country 's " epidemic " of trafficking . Victor Malarek 's book The <unk> inspired her to produce a film on the subject . She said of her initiative being a challenge , " No one wants to watch a film of an enslaved girl being raped for two hours . " Bolkovac 's experiences gave Kondracki a framework for the film and added the themes of corruption and wide @-@ scale cover @-@ ups . Film critic Rex Reed said that the abuse of power featured prominently in The Whistleblower ; a number of government officials participate in the sex trade or turn a blind eye to it ( including peacekeepers , UN members and mercenaries ) . Wallace <unk> of the Santa Cruz Sentinel wrote that these aspects ' portrayal made the movie " slippery and true @-@ to @-@ life " . She said , " There are clear and vivid monsters in this film , but there are also those existing in the shades @-@ of @-@ gray middle , nice @-@ enough guys tolerating crimes of unspeakable barbarity . " Justice , another prominent theme , does not materialize by the end . The sex trafficking victim Raya is killed , and none of the peacekeepers who participated in the trafficking are prosecuted ( although several are sent home ) . According to <unk> , viewers are left with the impression that " the worst violence in Bolkovac 's story was the violence done to justice " . 
 Bolkovac is portrayed as imperfect — a " noble but screwed up " individual . In the film ( which roughly mirrors her real life ) , her personal life is in disarray . She has lost custody of her children to her ex @-@ husband and goes to Bosnia to earn money to move closer to them . While there , she has an affair with a fellow peacekeeper . Kondracki wanted to promote the idea of an average protagonist who acted against injustice while her peers looked the other way . Her flaws are offset by her determination to fight the sex trade , and reviewers found these aspects instrumental in making her a three @-@ dimensional character . 
 Weisz compared Bolkovac 's story of " one lone woman fighting injustice " to that of David and Goliath , her favorite film genre . In the film , as in real life , Bolkovac begins by investigating a case of a kidnapped girl . As the story unfolds , she discovers a wide @-@ ranging web of corruption and faces growing obstacles . The sex trade is facilitated by a large , influential organization . When she tries to report her findings to the UN and local officials , she receives threats and is " shunned by coworkers and thwarted by higher @-@ ups " . Weisz explained that she liked the idea of an ordinary person doing something extraordinary . She said , " I love that kind of thriller , the ordinary person who , because of their character , it 's their character that leads them . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The Whistleblower premiered on September 13 , 2010 , at the 2010 Toronto Film Festival . Screenings were also held at film festivals in North America , including the 2011 Human Rights Watch Film Festival in New York . 
 A screening was held for The Whistleblower in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina for the first time in March 2014 . The film was shown in Sarajevo and Mostar , with Kathryn Bolkovac being invited to speak to the Bosnian audience . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Samuel Goldwyn Films purchased rights to distribute the film in the United States . The film had a limited release starting on August 5 , 2011 . It initially screened in seven theaters and expanded to a maximum of 70 theaters before drawing down . Its theatrical run lasted 12 weeks , during which it grossed $ 1 @.@ 1 million . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 At the time of its theatrical release , The Whistleblower received mixed reviews . Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes said critics commended Weisz 's performance but thought that " the film suffers from a literal @-@ minded approach to the material " . The website surveyed 115 critics and , categorizing the reviews as positive or negative , assessed 85 as positive and 30 as negative . Of the 115 reviews , it determined a rating average of 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 . Based on the reviews , the website gave the film a score of 74 % . Another aggregator Metacritic surveyed 30 critics and assessed 17 reviews as positive , 10 as mixed , and three as negative . Based on the reviews , it gave the film a score of 59 out of 100 , which it said indicated " mixed or average reviews " . 
 The Guardian 's Ed Vulliamy called The Whistleblower " the most searing drama @-@ documentary of recent years " , and The Huffington Post 's Marshall Fine said the story was " dark , grim , and harrowing " . Doris Toumarkine of Film Journal International called the movie a " well @-@ told but troubling story impressively wrapped for audiences who show up in theatres for do @-@ good cinema of a high order " . Leigh Paatsch of News.com.au said , " it is Bolkovac 's ferocious will to right so many wrongs ( expertly channelled by Weisz ) that keeps you glued to the screen " . Stephenie Foster of The Huffington Post gave the film a highly @-@ favorable review : 
 It 's a compelling and maddening story , and reflects the complexity of how international institutions function and interact and the difficulty of accountability in a situation where people have immunity for their actions . But , it 's also a story of gutsy people in tough and compromising situations making decisions that aren 't in their personal best interest . 
 An equally @-@ positive review appeared in The Balkan Chronicle : 
 Kondracki shows great promise with her direction . Pacing is tight for the most part , and the film feels well polished ... The film is unsatisfying only in its conclusion . This is not the fault of the filmmakers who choose to stay true to Bolkovac 's story . No one was ever brought to justice . A few of men were fired and sent home , but everyone had diplomatic immunity so no one ever faced criminal charges . Two million people worldwide are still being trafficked . 
 Allison Willmore of The A.V. Club gave The Whistleblower a negative review , criticizing the producers for making its antagonists one @-@ dimensional : " There 's no hint of the erosion of morality that led to this point . " Peter Rainer of The Christian Science Monitor called the film 's pace " frustratingly uneven " , but commended the actors ' performances : <unk> " makes Raya 's fears <unk> palpable " . Stephen Holden of The New York Times wrote that the film " tells a story so repellent that it is almost beyond belief . Its conclusion — that in the moral quagmire of war and its aftermath , human trafficking and corruption are collateral damage — is <unk> depressing . " He praised Weisz 's performance as " the strongest element " of the production . 
 The actors ' performances received overall praise from reviewers . <unk> Courtney of Christianity Today was dismayed that the main character engaged in a sexual relationship with a married man , but Weisz " is wonderful as Bolkovac , a no @-@ nonsense civil servant who is stunned at what she walks into " while " Vanessa Redgrave is a needed touch of strength and warmth as her mentor Madeleine , and David Strathairn is at his government thriller best as Peter Ward , an Internal Affairs agent . Raya is heart @-@ breaking as the young victim . " Steve Rea of The Post and Courier praised Redgrave 's acting in the supporting role of Madeleine Rees as " forceful , elegant , precise " . Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle said , " Weisz gives a psychologically astute performance as a woman who can 't leave things alone . " Rex Reed of The Observer called her " superb " in the lead role . 
 Kondracki 's graphic depiction of violence was controversial . Bob Mondello of NPR called it " sobering " , but felt the scenes detracted from the film and should have been more subtle . Ryan Rojas of Tonight at the Movies described the film as " gritty and merciless " , and cautioned that certain scenes might offend some viewers : " While the scenes do work as reinforcing the horror of the events , it really just made it obvious that the way that the director was going to win over fans was to simply shock them into numbness , as scenes showing rape , mutilation , and murder are shown in very disturbing fashion . " Christian <unk> of Crosswalk.com wrote : 
 The film is almost unremittingly grim , which may seem appropriate for such a horrifying subject , but the effect on the viewer is that of being struck repeatedly with a sledgehammer . Sex trafficking is bad . Really bad ! Did you get that , or do you need to watch a few more scenes of physical and sexual brutality ? Don 't worry : The Whistleblower has those aplenty . It takes brutality into the realm of gratuitousness , all in the name of showing the horrors of the issue it 's addressing . 
 A review in The Balkan Chronicle , an Internet @-@ based newspaper reporting from the Balkans , disagreed with the opinion that the violence was unnecessarily explicit or sensationalized : " <unk> it would do no one any good . Grisly authenticity is one of the film 's greatest aspects . " Later , when Bolkovac spoke at a screening of the film in Bosnia , it was reported that her message was well @-@ received and discussion about the events that occurred in the late 1990s " did not fail to engage and provoke " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the film on DVD on January 15 , 2012 . The movie was reportedly more successful on Blu @-@ ray Disc than in theatres , and film critic Lynette Porter said that the subject 's serious nature made it better @-@ suited for television . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Consistent with Bolkovac 's account , The Whistleblower portrays DynCorp International employees as participants in the postwar Bosnian sex trade with the UN turning a blind eye . UN Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon hosted a screening of the film and promised action would be taken to prevent further instances of human trafficking . Bolkovac responded , " Unfortunately , the widespread horror is already there . This is not going to be simple or a quick fix . " She said that in addition to Bosnia , peacekeepers had violated human rights in Nigeria , Kosovo , Burundi , Sierra Leone , the Congo , Liberia , Cambodia , Iraq , Afghanistan , Haiti , Colombia , Guinea and Sudan . Kondracki added that while she wanted to be optimistic and hoped that the screening would " lead to genuine discussion and thought about the UN 's involvement in sex trafficking and other crimes " , she worried that it might not have the desired lasting impact : " I know we are going to hear a lot about what has been done since the time depicted in this film , but rhetoric only goes so far . The situation has escalated . " Following the theatrical release of The Whistleblower , The Guardian reported that other UN officials attempted to downplay the events depicted and that initiatives against trafficking in Bosnia were aborted . 
 DynCorp International spokesperson Ashley Burke said : 
 I haven 't seen the movie so I can 't comment on its content , but I can tell you that , when we contacted the film 's distributor to learn more about the movie , we were informed that the film ' is a fictionalized dramatic presentation ' that while inspired by Ms. Bolkovac 's experiences , is not based on her book . There was no threatened legal action taken to ensure they did not use the company 's name in the film . 
 = Eurovision Song Contest 2012 = 
 The Eurovision Song Contest 2012 was the 57th edition of the annual Eurovision Song Contest . It took place in Baku , Azerbaijan , following Ell & Nikki 's win at the 2011 contest in Düsseldorf , Germany with the song " Running Scared " — marking the first time that the country had won the contest . The contest was held at the newly constructed Baku Crystal Hall , with semi @-@ finals held on 22 and 24 May 2012 , followed by the final held on 26 May 2012 . Forty @-@ two countries competed in the contest , with Montenegro returning for the first time since 2009 , and the withdrawal of Armenia due to security concerns in relation to the ongoing Nagorno @-@ Karabakh conflict with Azerbaijan , and Poland due to financial concerns . 
 The contest was won by singer Loreen from Sweden with the song " Euphoria " — written by Thomas G : son and Peter Boström , the song scored a total of 372 points . Russia finished in second place , with Serbia finishing in third . They were followed by the host country , Azerbaijan , which reached the 4th place . Albania finished 5th , achieving its first top 5 placing . Germany , Italy and Spain were the three members of the " Big Five " that managed to rank within the top 10 , finishing in 8th , 9th and 10th places respectively . 
 The lead @-@ up to the contest was met with political concerns and protests surrounding the host country , including its human rights record and allegations by advocacy groups that Baku was carrying out forced evictions in the construction of the contest 's venue , along with objections to the contest 's presence by Iranian officials — who felt that the event was anti @-@ Islamic because it was , according to them , a " gay parade " . 
 = = Location = = 
 Azerbaijan got the right to host the 2012 edition of the Eurovision Song Contest after winning the previous 2011 edition with the song " Running Scared " performed by Ell & Nikki . Baku , the capital and largest city of Azerbaijan , as well as the largest city on the Caspian Sea and of the Caucasus region , was named the host city for the contest , with the venue being the Baku Crystal Hall , built a few months prior to the contest on the city 's coastline . 
 Shortly after Azerbaijan 's victory at the 2011 edition , officials announced that a new 23 @,@ 000 seat concert venue was to be built near National Flag Square in Baku , as a potential venue for the event . Three days later , other venue options were revealed by organisers , such as the 37 @,@ 000 @-@ seat <unk> <unk> Stadium and the Heydar Aliyev Sports and Exhibition Complex . On 2 August 2011 , Alpine Bau Deutschland AG was awarded the contract to construct the Baku Crystal Hall . Preparations for construction began in the area shortly after the announcement . Even though the full cost of the contract was not named , the government allocated 6 million <unk> for the construction of the venue . 
 On 8 September 2011 , Azad Azerbaijan TV ( ATV ) reported that Baku Crystal Hall would be the venue of the contest , but no formal confirmation was made at the time by the EBU . On 31 October 2011 , <unk> <unk> , the director general of Azerbaijani national broadcaster İctimai Television announced that a decision on the venue choice would be taken by the steering committee in January 2012 . On 25 January 2012 , it was confirmed that the Baku Crystal Hall would be the venue of the contest . Even though the venue had an extended capacity of 23 @,@ 000 people , only 16 @,@ 000 people were able to attend each show . Tickets for the festival became available online for purchase on 28 February 2012 . 
 = = Format = = 
 In a meeting of the Eurovision Reference Group on 29 June 2011 , it was decided that the televoting system would revert the format used most recently in the 2009 Contest , in which the phone and SMS lines opened for a fifteen @-@ minute window after all songs had been performed , instead of opening before the show starts , which was the system used between 2010 and 2011 . The results format of each show remained the same with each country 's votes being decided on a 50 : 50 split between televoting and a national jury . Each participating country had their own national jury , which consisted of five professional members of the music industry . 
 Under the official rules released on 24 November 2011 , the number of participants in the final was raised to 26 , including the host nation , the " Big Five " , and the ten qualifiers from each semi @-@ final . This was the second time in the Eurovision Song Contest that 26 countries were in the final , the first being the 2003 Contest . 
 = = = Semi @-@ final allocation draw = = = 
 The draw that determined the semi @-@ final running order was held on 25 January 2012 at the <unk> Palace . The participating countries , excluding the automatic finalists ( Azerbaijan , France , Germany , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom ) , were split into six pots , based upon how those countries voted in past contests . From these pots , half ( or as close to half as possible ) competed in the first semi @-@ final on 22 May 2012 . The other half in that particular pot competed in the second semi @-@ final on 24 May 2012 . This draw also acted as an approximate running order , in order for the delegations from the countries to know when their rehearsals would commence and determine which semi @-@ final the automatic finalists would be allowed to vote in . 
 1 . ^ Armenia withdrew approximately a month and a half after the semi @-@ final allocation draw . 
 = = = Graphic design = = = 
 The design of the contest was built around the motto " Light your fire ! " , inspired by the nickname of Azerbaijan itself , " Land of Fire " . 
 Each introductory video postcard began with a shot of the artist and performers , followed with the flag and country name in a handwritten font with a background resembling the yellow , orange and red fire of the 2012 theme art . The postcards consisted of various shots of Azerbaijan , with a caption displaying ' Azerbaijan ' and underneath ' Land of ... ' ( e.g. Land of Abundance ; Land of Poetry etc . ) , which were then followed by the name of a town or geographic feature , showing the landscape and culture of the country . Some postcards focused on the host city of Baku with text changing to ' Baku ' and underneath ' City of ... ' ( e.g. City of Jazz ; City of Leisure etc . ) . The postcards finished with a shot of the Crystal Hall displayed in the colours of the performing country 's flag . These postcards acted as a tourism mechanism to present the country to a wider audience . 
 The artist , song and number graphics as well as tables and voting graphics were kept the same as those used in 2011 , with a slight modification to incorporate the 2012 theme art . The lower points ( 1 @-@ 7 ) were highlighted in red squares while the top points ( 8 , 10 , 12 ) were highlighted in orange squares with each square increasing in size in relation to the point value . Both sets of graphics were designed by London brand design agency Turquoise Branding . 
 = = = National host broadcaster = = = 
 İctimai Television ( <unk> ) , which was the EBU member that broadcast the Eurovision Song Contest in Azerbaijan , is one of country 's public @-@ service broadcasters . Deputy Minister of Communication and Information Technology of Azerbaijan , <unk> Mammadov , stated that telecom networks were ready to host the event . Azerbaijan 's largest telecommunications operator , <unk> , was chosen as the presenting partner for the contest . On 1 December 2011 , <unk> named the German production company <unk> as its official production partner for the contest , citing the quality of its work on the previous year 's contest . 
 = = Participating countries = = 
 On 17 January 2012 , the EBU announced that forty @-@ three countries would take part in the 2012 contest . The 57th edition saw the return of Montenegro , who was previously represented by Andrea <unk> in 2009 . Armenia , who had originally planned to participate , later withdraw their application due to security fears of the continuous Nagorno @-@ Karabakh War with Azerbaijan . Poland also withdrew from the competition , due to the financial burden of the 2012 UEFA European Football Championship ( which Poland co @-@ hosted with Ukraine ) and Summer Olympics . 
 = = = Returning artists = = = 
 Four artists returned in this year 's contest . <unk> for Macedonia who previously participated in the 1996 contest with the song " Samo ti " , which placed in 26th position in the pre @-@ qualifying round . Jónsi for Iceland and Željko Joksimović for Serbia both previously participated in 2004 . 
 Joksimović had represented Serbia and Montenegro in 2004 with the song " Lane <unk> " which placed second in that year , and co @-@ hosted the 2008 Contest with <unk> Janković . Jónsi performed " Heaven " in 2004 , which placed 19th . For a second consecutive year Jedward participated for Ireland , after their 8th @-@ place finish at the 2011 Contest with the song " Lipstick " . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 The Finnish entry , " <unk> jag <unk> " , sung by Pernilla Karlsson , was only Finland 's second entry in Swedish and the first entry at all to be sung in Swedish since 1998 . Russia 's entry , " Party for Everybody " , sung by <unk> <unk> , was the first entry ever to be performed in <unk> . The Georgian entry , " I 'm a Joker " was the first Eurovision entry containing the Georgian language while the Bulgarian song " Love Unlimited " had a few words in the Azerbaijani language , both of whom never appeared at the contest before . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Semi @-@ finals = = = 
 = = = = Semi @-@ final 1 = = = = 
 Azerbaijan , Italy and Spain voted in the first semi @-@ final . The EBU allowed the Albanian broadcaster Radio <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) to defer transmission and only use jury votes due to a serious bus accident in the country . 
 Notes 
 2 . ^ Contained some phrases in Montenegrin and German . 
 3 . ^ Although the song was completely in Albanian , the title is in Latin . 
 4 . ^ <unk> is a Latin third person reflexive possessive pronoun , and means " his " , " his own " . 
 5 . ^ Contained some phrases in Italian . 
 6 . ^ Specifically <unk> , a Central Bavarian dialect spoken in Upper Austria . 
 7 . ^ Although the song was completely in English , the title was in Romanian . 
 = = = = Semi @-@ final 2 = = = = 
 France , Germany and the United Kingdom voted in the second semi @-@ final . Germany requested that they vote in this semi @-@ final . Armenia was drawn to perform in the first half of this semi @-@ final , but later withdrew from the contest due to security reasons . 
 Notes 
 9 . ^ The song also contained phrases in Arabic , Azerbaijani , English , French , Greek , Italian , Romani , Serbo @-@ Croatian , Spanish and Turkish . 
 = = = Final = = = 
 = = Scoreboard = = 
 The EBU and PwC audit company checked and verified the individual jury and televoting results , which were combined to create the overall national vote for the contests . On 18 June 2012 , the EBU published these results , which were as follows . 
 = = = Semi @-@ final 1 = = = 
 = = = = 12 points = = = = 
 Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the first semifinal : 
 = = = Semi @-@ final 2 = = = 
 = = = = 12 points = = = = 
 Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the second semifinal : 
 = = = Final = = = 
 = = = = 12 points = = = = 
 Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the final : 
 No country took nul points ( receiving 0 points total ) when both scores were added together , but France received 0 points at the televoting stage . 
 = = Other countries = = 
 Andorra – On 19 October 2011 , Andorra announced that there are no plans for the country to participate in 2012 due to financial difficulties ; the country also had planned to withdraw from the EBU entirely . 
 Armenia – On 7 March 2012 , the EBU announced that Armenian Public Television ( <unk> ) had decided to withdraw from participation despite originally being included in the list of participating countries . Its decision came after President Aliyev of Azerbaijan gave a speech on 28 February 2012 when he stated " Our main enemies are Armenians of the world and the hypocritical and corrupt politicians under their control . " The country was consequently fined by the EBU and were expected to face further penalties , such as exclusion from participation in future contests if it failed to comply with the EBU requirements . Armenia had been in a continuous state of war with Azerbaijan since 1994 because of the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh War . 
 Czech Republic – On 24 November 2011 , it was reported that the Czech Republic would not compete at the 2012 contest , following the release of a television schedule by Česká televize ( ČT ) . 
 Liechtenstein – On 26 November 2011 , it was announced that two official EBU documents , published in March and October 2011 , showed Liechtenstein 's only national broadcaster 1FLTV as being granted active EBU membership , sparking speculations of a début for the nation . However , on 29 November 2011 , these documents were later confirmed as editing mistakes , and thus a début had yet to be planned . 
 Luxembourg – On 31 December 2011 , RTL Luxembourg confirmed that Luxembourg would not participate at the Eurovision in Baku . 
 Monaco – It had been reported on 23 November 2011 , at an EBU meeting in Geneva , that Monaco were considering a return to the 2012 contest . However , on 3 December 2011 , Phil Bosco , a former head of delegation told a French @-@ speaking website that the Monegasque national broadcaster Télé Monte Carlo ( TMC ) did not intend to return to the Eurovision Song Contest any time in the near future , as there were no financial budget available . 
 Morocco – In an interview with the French delegation it had been revealed that Morocco were " likely to return " to the Eurovision Song Contest in 2012 with a new broadcaster 2M TV . Reports about the proposed return of Morocco to the contest , after an absence of more than 30 years , were further enhanced at an EBU meeting in Geneva . 
 Poland – On 16 December 2011 , it had been reported on the official Facebook page of Telewizja Polska ( TVP ) that Poland were withdrawing from the 2012 Contest . This was confirmed a few days later , stating that the broadcaster had decided to focus on the 2012 UEFA European Football Championship ( which Poland co @-@ hosted with Ukraine ) and Summer Olympics . TVP stated that a return in 2013 has not been ruled out . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Human rights concerns = = = 
 Azerbaijan 's large investment in hosting the Eurovision contest was widely discussed in Western media as an attempt to " mitigate misgivings about its poor democracy and human rights record " . Elnur <unk> , an activist imprisoned during the Arab Spring @-@ inspired 2011 Azerbaijani protests , was released in an apparent effort to soften Azerbaijan 's image ahead of the contest , but many political prisoners remained . Human Rights Watch reported a " violent crackdown on protesters " on the eve of the contest , and Amnesty International condemned the " stern crackdown of freedom of expression , dissent , non @-@ governmental organizations ( NGOs ) , critical journalists , in fact anyone who criticised the Aliyev regime too strongly " that continued up to the contest . 
 Human Rights Watch also criticised the Azerbaijani government and the Baku City Authority for carrying out forced evictions against local residents , in order to allow for the demolition of flats to make way for construction in the neighbourhood where the Baku Crystal Hall was built . The Public Association for Assistance to Free Economy , a transparency and economic rights campaign group , had described the evictions as a " violation of human rights " , and as having " no legal authority " . However , in a statement to the BBC , Eurovision said that on a recent visit to Baku they had observed " that the construction of the concert hall [ which ] media reports refer to was already well under way on a clean construction site and thus there are no demolitions needed " . The EBU cited the " apolitical " nature of the contest and the Azerbaijani government 's claim that the construction was not tied to the Eurovision Song Contest . 
 The festival 's winner Loreen met local human rights activists during the contest , the only entrant to do so . She later told reporters , " Human rights are violated in Azerbaijan every day . One should not be silent about such things . " An Azerbaijan government spokesman criticized her in response , saying that the contest should not " be politicised " and requested the EBU prevented further meetings of a similar nature . Swedish diplomats replied that the EBU , Swedish TV and Loreen had not acted against the competition 's rules . 
 On 26 May , a flash mob of anti @-@ government protesters were quickly dispersed by police . Activists expressed fears that they would face a crackdown when the international spotlight left Azerbaijan again at the end of the contest . Before submitting the results of the German vote , the presenter from Germany Anke <unk> gave a live statement that alluded to the human rights issues in Azerbaijan , saying : " Tonight nobody could vote for their own country . But it is good to be able to vote . And it is good to have a choice . Good luck on your journey , Azerbaijan . Europe is watching you . " 
 = = = Tensions with Iran = = = 
 Iranian officials objected to Azerbaijan hosting the 2012 Eurovision Song Contest . Iranian clerics Ayatollah Mohammad <unk> <unk> and Ayatollah Ja 'far <unk> condemned Azerbaijan for " anti @-@ Islamic behaviour " , claiming that Azerbaijan were going to host a gay parade . This led to protests in front of Iranian embassy in Baku , where protesters carried slogans mocking the Iranian leaders . Ali <unk> , head of the public and political issues department in Azerbaijani President 's administration , said that gay parade claims were untrue , and advised Iran not to meddle in Azerbaijan 's internal affairs . In response , Iran recalled its ambassador from Baku , while Azerbaijan demanded a formal apology from Iran for its statements in connection with Baku 's hosting of the Eurovision Song Contest , and later also recalled its ambassador from Iran . 
 On 30 May , the Ministry of National Security of Azerbaijan announced that they had thwarted a series of planned terror attacks against the Eurovision Song Contest , among the targets being Baku Crystal Hall , as well as Marriott and Hilton hotels in Baku . On 22 August , The Daily Telegraph reported that according to Western intelligence services , Iran 's Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei personally gave orders to the elite Quds Force unit to launch terrorist attacks against the West and its allies , including Azerbaijan during the Eurovision Song Contest . 
 = = Other awards = = 
 = = = Marcel Bezençon Awards = = = 
 The Marcel Bezençon Awards were first handed out during the Eurovision Song Contest 2002 in Tallinn , Estonia honoring the best competing songs in the final . Founded by Christer Björkman ( Sweden 's representative in the 1992 Eurovision Song Contest and current Head of Delegation for Sweden ) and Richard Herrey ( member of the Herreys , Eurovision Song Contest 1984 winner from Sweden ) , the awards were named after the creator of the annual competition , Marcel Bezençon . The awards were divided into three categories ; Press Award ; Artistic Award ; and Composer Award . 
 = = = OGAE = = = 
 Organisation Générale des Amateurs de l 'Eurovision ( more commonly known as OGAE ) is an international organisation that was founded in 1984 in Savonlinna , Finland by Jari @-@ Pekka Koikkalainen . The organisation consisted of a network of 40 Eurovision Song Contest fan clubs across Europe and beyond , and is a non @-@ governmental , non @-@ political , and non @-@ profit company . In what had become an annual tradition for the OGAE fan clubs , a voting poll was opened allowing members from the respective clubs to vote for their favourite songs of the 2012 contest . Below are the top five overall results , after all the votes had been cast . 
 = = = Barbara Dex Award = = = 
 The Barbara Dex Award has been annually awarded by the fan website House of Eurovision since 1997 , and is a humorous award given to the worst dressed artist each year in the contest . It is named after the Belgian singer Barbara Dex , who came last in the 1993 contest wearing her own self @-@ designed and often @-@ mocked dress . 
 = = International broadcasts and voting = = 
 = = = Voting and spokespersons = = = 
 The order in which each country announced their vote was determined in a draw following the jury results from final dress rehearsal . Similar to the 2011 contest an algorithm was used to add as much excitement as possible . The spokespersons are shown alongside each country . 
 <unk> . ^ Ireland was originally scheduled to announce its votes as the 32nd country , but instead voted 42nd ( last ) . The reason for this was technical difficulties in the minutes running up to the voting presentation . 
 = = = Commentators = = = 
 Most countries sent commentators to Baku or commentated from their own country , in order to add insight to the participants and , if necessary , the provision of voting information . 
 = = = = Participating countries = = = = 
 The commentators of the 42 participating countries are as follows : 
 = = = = Non @-@ participating countries = = = = 
 The commentators of the non @-@ participating countries are : 
 = = Official album = = 
 Eurovision Song Contest : Baku 2012 was a compilation album put together by the European Broadcasting Union , and released by Universal Music Group on 3 May 2012 . The album featured all the songs from the 2012 contest . 
 = Hurricane Emily ( 2005 ) = 
 Hurricane Emily was a powerful , early season tropical cyclone that caused significant damage across the Caribbean Sea to Mexico . A Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane , the storm formed on July 10 , 2005 , in the central Atlantic Ocean before passing through the Windward Islands on July 14 . Tracking generally towards the west @-@ northwest , the storm gradually intensified as it traversed the Caribbean , peaking as a Category 5 hurricane on July 16 , marking the earliest date for a storm to do so during the course of a given year . The system subsequently made landfall in the Yucatán Peninsula as a Category 4 . Quickly crossing the peninsula , Emily emerged into the Gulf of Mexico and reorganized . On July 20 , the storm struck Tamaulipas as a major hurricane and rapidly dissipated within 24 hours . 
 When its central pressure fell to 929 mbar and its sustained winds reached 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) on July 16 , Emily became the strongest hurricane ever to form before August , breaking a record set by Hurricane Dennis just six days before . It was also the earliest Category 5 hurricane ever recorded in the Atlantic basin ( beating Hurricane Allen 's old record by nearly three weeks ) and the only Category 5 hurricane ever recorded before August . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Depression Five formed in the central tropical Atlantic the evening of July 10 . Late on July 11 , it strengthened and was named Tropical Storm Emily . Initially forecast to strengthen rapidly and move west @-@ northwest through the Greater Antilles , Emily instead moved almost due west toward the Windward Islands , remaining a moderate tropical storm . The storm languished while moving quickly west , and struggled with maintaining its form . Contrary to the normal occurrence that hurricanes leave a cold wake behind , Hurricane Dennis had made portions of the Caribbean Sea warmer , and therefore more favorable for tropical cyclone development . Late on July 13 , Emily strengthened rapidly and reached hurricane strength while passing Tobago and entering the eastern Caribbean . On July 14 , Emily made landfall in northern Grenada with 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) winds . 
 The intensification trend picked up again the next day with a fairly rapid drop in the storm 's central pressure as it entered the southeastern Caribbean Sea , a region typically unfavorable for intensification . Hurricane Emily 's winds increased in reaction , briefly bringing the storm to Category 4 strength early on July 15 . During the day , the storm 's strength fluctuated greatly , dropping to a Category 2 storm and then rebuilding to Category 4 . On July 16 , Emily strengthened considerably , making it the strongest hurricane ever on record to form in the month of July with peak winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) , the earliest known Category 5 in the Atlantic basin . Initially at this point Emily was thought to have peaked as a Category 4 storm , but the post @-@ storm analysis showed it was indeed a Category 5 hurricane . The storm weakened slightly as it continued westward , and remained a Category 4 while passing south of Jamaica and , on July 17 , the Cayman Islands . Hurricane Emily continued on its nearly straight track to the west @-@ northwest , weakening somewhat but remaining at Category 4 until striking Cozumel just before mainland landfall at Playa del Carmen at 06 : 30 UTC on July 18 . Sustained winds were 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) , and the eyewall passed directly over Cozumel . 
 The center of circulation emerged over the Gulf of Mexico later that morning . Passage over land disrupted the hurricane 's center of circulation , and it had weakened to a minimal hurricane with wind speeds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . However , several hours over the warm waters of the western Gulf provided the energy needed for Emily to regenerate , and by midnight wind speeds were increasing . The increase in wind speed stalled , but the storm continued to become better organized . Emily started to show very symmetrical outflow , but the hurricane 's strongest winds were being found at three different distances from the center . However , the outer wind radii subsided in the end , and the inner core prevailed . The result was a rapid strengthening of the inner core on the evening of July 19 . The pressure dropped about 30 millibars and the winds went from 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) to more than 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) , all within a few hours . 
 Further strengthening was expected by forecasters , but did not come . The storm 's motion slowed , and the center began wobbling erratically toward the coast . The storm made landfall around 11 : 00 UTC on July 20 near San Fernando in Tamaulipas . The storm had sustained winds of 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) , Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . After heading inland over northeast Mexico , it dissipated over the Sierra Madre Oriental on July 21 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In Mexico , tens of thousands of tourists and residents were evacuated from the beach resorts in and around Cancún , the Riviera Maya , and Cozumel . Hotel guests were evacuated on Saturday afternoon , and staff on Sunday afternoon . Though some hotel guests in second floor rooms and above were given the option to be bussed into the center of Cancun to safe houses and shelters or to stay and wait out the storm in only the modern built hotels and resorts . Most of the remaining guests were restricted to their rooms and were not allowed out on the beach areas . No alcohol was sold in Cancun for 36 hours prior to the arrival of the storm , in an attempt to avoid drunken tourists being injured during the night . Two helicopter pilots were killed when their aircraft crashed while evacuating offshore oil platforms operated by Pemex . A German resident was electrocuted while on his roof in Playa del Carmen . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 On July 14 , Emily hit Grenada which was still recovering from the impact of Hurricane Ivan less than a year earlier . Emily resulted in one reported fatality and significant damage in the northern part of the country , including Carriacou which had been spared the worst effects of Ivan . 16 houses were destroyed and well over 200 more were damaged , and two of the main hospitals were flooded . Damages in Grenada amounted to $ 110 @.@ 4 million . 
 Landslides were reported in eastern Jamaica , triggered by heavy rain as the storm passed south of the island . Five people were killed due to an accident caused by flash flooding . Damages in Jamaica were estimated at $ 65 million . Damage was also reported in Trinidad and Tobago , where landslides and flooding damaged several homes . In Honduras , a man drowned in a river swollen by rains from Emily . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 = = = = Yucatán Peninsula = = = = 
 Striking the Yucatán Peninsula on July 18 as a Category 4 hurricane , widespread damage was expected from 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) winds ; however , these winds were confined to a small area around Emily 's center . Areas in Playa del Carmen , Tulum and Cozumel sustained the most severe impact . In a few instances , concrete utility poles were snapped in half by powerful wind gusts . Due to the relatively fast movement of Emily , rainfall was fairly light , peaking at 4 @.@ 9 in ( 120 mm ) . Few meteorological reports exist during Emily 's passage of the Yucatán , though an unofficial station recorded a storm surge of 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) in San Miguel , Cozumel . Along the mainland , surge heights were generally less than 4 ft ( 1 m ) . Additionally , waves reached 13 ft ( 4 m ) , resulting in some beach erosion and damage to dunes and coral reefs . Additionally , 0 @.@ 7 mi ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) of retaining walls sustained damage , leaving areas vulnerable to flooding from future storms . 
 The high winds produced by Emily caused considerable impact in Quintana Roo , especially in the municipality of Solidaridad , leaving nearly 200 @,@ 000 residences without power . In terms of structural damage , 851 homes were impacted in varying degrees . Roughly 13 @,@ 345 acres ( 5 @,@ 400 hectares ) of forests and agricultural land was affected by the storm ; some swathes of trees experienced defoliation . The most substantial losses associated with the hurricane stemmed from the tourism industry , with hotels experiencing 947 million pesos ( $ 88 @.@ 7 million ) worth of damage . More than 12 @,@ 500 rooms , nearly one @-@ fifth of the state 's available hotel infrastructure , sustained damage . Overall , damage in the state reached 1 @.@ 11 billion pesos ( $ 104 @.@ 3 million ) . 
 = = = = Northeastern Mexico = = = = 
 Emily 's second landfall as a strong Category 3 hurricane brought significant damage to the northeast coast of Mexico . In the fishing community of Laguna Madre , over 80 % of the buildings were destroyed as a result of the storm surge . Several communities on the remote coast of Tamaulipas were isolated after the storm , and major coastal flooding was reported along with heavy wind damage , with numerous homes destroyed . Inland flooding was also reported in Monterrey . 
 Communication to the Riviera Maya area was difficult after the storm ; not all cellular phones were receiving coverage to the area , land lines were down , and electricity was out . About 18 @,@ 000 people in 20 low @-@ lying communities in the state of Tamaulipas , just south of the <unk> border , were evacuated . Including losses sustained by the oil industry , damage in Mexico amounted to 8 @.@ 87 billion pesos ( $ 834 @.@ 3 million ) . 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 In southern Texas , damage was relatively minor despite the proximity of the storm . Portions of the state experienced tropical storm force winds and gusts as high as 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) , resulting in scattered roof damage . Along the coast , a storm surge of 4 @.@ 26 ft ( 1 @.@ 30 m ) flooded portions of Texas State Highway 100 . No significant structural damage was reported , although some trees were down and over 30 @,@ 000 customers lost electricity . Rainfall from the storm peaked at 5 @.@ 2 inches in Mercedes , Texas . Additionally , eight tornadoes touched down in Texas as a result of Emily , damaging or destroying several homes . Some positive effects were noted ; the remains of Emily passed farther west into Texas and delivered some badly needed rainfall , helping relieve a drought . Agricultural losses in Texas amounted to $ 4 @.@ 7 million , while property losses reached $ 225 @,@ 000 . 
 = Hurricane Gordon ( 2006 ) = 
 Hurricane Gordon was the first tropical cyclone since 1992 to affect the Azores while retaining tropical characteristics . The eighth tropical storm , third hurricane , and first major hurricane of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season , Gordon formed on September 10 in the tropical Atlantic Ocean . It gradually matured into a hurricane as it tracked northward , reaching its peak intensity with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) early on September 14 while located about 575 mi ( 925 km ) southeast of Bermuda . After becoming nearly stationary , Gordon weakened to minimal hurricane status , although it re @-@ intensified after accelerating to the east . It weakened again after moving over cooler waters , and passed through the Azores on September 20 . Shortly thereafter , it became an extratropical cyclone and subsequently affected Spain , Ireland , and the United Kingdom . 
 The only land area affected while Gordon was tropical – the Azores – sustained little damage , in spite of wind gusts reaching hurricane force on Santa Maria Island . Impact was much more significant from the storm in its extratropical phase . In Spain , wind gusts reached 114 mph ( 183 km / h ) along the northwest coast and left 100 @,@ 000 people without power . Five people in the country sustained storm @-@ related injuries . Further north , the storm brought a surge of tropical air to Ireland and the United Kingdom , contributing to record warm temperatures . In Northern Ireland , high winds left 120 @,@ 000 people without power and caused one injury . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 1 , a tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa and quickly showed signs of organization . It possessed a low pressure area and some convection as the system moved generally westward . The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) first pinpointed the system as an area for potential development late on September 2 while it was about 750 mi ( 1 @,@ 210 km ) west @-@ southwest of Cape Verde . However , an upper @-@ level trough associated with the developing Hurricane Florence to its west increased wind shear across the region , which prevented significant tropical cyclone development over the next week . However , on September 5 , the NHC noted the potential for the storm system to organize into a tropical depression within the next several days , but its close proximity to Florence continued to stall its strengthening . By September 9 , the trough moved far enough away from the system to allow wind shear to relent , signalling an increase in convective thunderstorm activity . At around 1800 UTC that day , the system developed into a tropical depression about 540 mi ( 870 km ) east @-@ northeast of the Lesser Antilles . 
 Upon developing , the depression , small in physical size , moved slowly west @-@ northwestward . Initially , the NHC faced difficulties in forecasting the future of the system due to the potential for resumed strong wind shear , as well as uncertainty in its path of direction . It gradually organized and intensified , and based on observations from the Hurricane Hunters , the NHC assessed the depression as a tropical storm late on September 11 ; upon doing so , they gave it the name Gordon . As it strengthened , Gordon developed more substantial outflow and increasing banding features . On September 12 , the storm slowed and turned toward the north through a weakness in the subtropical ridge created by Florence . Wind shear decreased further , and the storm 's convection became more symmetric with an intermittent eye feature in the center . Based on the presence of the eye and estimates from satellite imagery , it is estimated that Gordon intensified into a hurricane early on September 13 . 
 After becoming a hurricane , Gordon underwent rapid deepening as the eye became better defined and more intense . In 24 hours , the winds increased by 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) to a peak intensity of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) early on September 14 , while located about 575 mi ( 925 km ) southeast of Bermuda . This made Gordon a major hurricane , as well as a Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale , the first of 2006 . As it curved to the northeast , the hurricane maintained its peak intensity for about 24 hours , during which the eye decreased in size and the eyewall convection weakened . Afterward , Gordon began weakening due to moving over an area of cooler water temperatures . On September 15 , the trough that was previously guiding the hurricane moved further away , allowing the ridge to build to the north and causing Gordon 's motion to become nearly stationary . Increased wind shear imparted further weakening , and the hurricane 's slow motion resulted in upwelling – the motion of cooler water to the ocean 's surface . On September 17 , a building ridge to the east caused Gordon to begin a steady northeast motion . By that time , the convection had diminished significantly and the winds weakened to minimal hurricane @-@ force . One NHC forecast predicted extratropical transition to occur within 48 hours . 
 On September 18 , Hurricane Gordon began accelerating to the northeast around a strengthening ridge , and later toward the east as guided by a trough . Wind shear decreased , which allowed for convection to redevelop near the eye . Unexpectedly , the hurricane began restrengthening , despite moving over slightly cooler waters ; instability from cooler upper @-@ level temperatures allowed for the reintensification . Despite continued forecasts of a weakening trend , Gordon 's resiliency presented a rare threat – the first since Hurricane Charley in 1992 – to the Azores , a Portuguese archipelago in the northeast Atlantic Ocean . At about 0600 UTC on September 19 , the hurricane attained its secondary peak intensity of 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) about 485 mi ( 775 km ) west @-@ southwest of the Azores . By that time , the cyclone consisted of a solid ring of convection around a contracting eye . Shortly thereafter , Gordon began steadily weakening due to the combination of increasing wind shear and even cooler water temperatures . Its motion became just south of due east , causing the strongest winds to remain south of the islands . At around 0900 UTC on September 20 , Gordon passed through the Azores between the islands of Santa Maria and São Miguel , producing hurricane @-@ force wind gusts on the former island . At the time , its sustained winds were estimated around 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) , which remained south of any landmasses . The cloud pattern had become less organized and more ragged . 
 After passing the Azores , Gordon began interacting with an approaching cold front . Early on September 21 , it completed the transition into an extratropical storm while simultaneously weakening below hurricane @-@ force , located about 275 mi ( 443 km ) west @-@ northwest of the west coast of Portugal . The cyclone maintained its identity as the system turned sharply northeastward and later northward , after passing about 100 mi ( 160 km ) northwest of the Spanish province of Galicia . Its forward motion accelerated to about 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , steered by another extratropical storm , while still maintaining sustained winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . After moving along the west coast of Ireland , the extratropical remnants of Gordon turned to the northwest and intensified to hurricane @-@ force winds . It turned to the southwest and later to the southeast , completing a large cyclonic loop before dissipating on September 24 to the south of Ireland . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Late on September 18 , while Gordon was beginning to accelerate to the northeast , a tropical storm watch was issued for all of the Azores . The hurricane was expected to weaken to tropical storm @-@ force before affecting the islands . When it became apparent that Gordon would continue intensifying , a hurricane warning replaced the watch about 27 hours before the strongest winds affected the region . The advance of the storm forced the closure of all schools in the region . Concurrently , officials increased the number of emergency workers on stand @-@ by . The two westernmost islands – Corvo and Flores – were placed under a red alert , the highest on a four @-@ level scale , which indicated the greatest threat for severe weather . The remainder of the archipelago was placed on low alert . Ultimately , the Azores escaped significant damage as the hurricane passed farther south than expected . Overall impact was limited to toppled trees and power lines , leaving portions of Santa Maria Island without electrical service . Santa Maria recorded sustained winds of 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) , with gusts to 82 mph ( 132 km / h ) . 
 In Portugal , coastal regions were put under a yellow alert , the second lowest level , since the extratropical remnants of Gordon were expected to produce rough seas and heavy rains . In Spain , the Galicia region was placed on red alert by authorities in anticipation of the storm . Classes on September 21 were also suspended by the regional education ministry . Eleven other regions of Spain , extending as far east as Madrid and as far south as Andalusia , received lower levels of warning . The storm 's threat also prompted the cancellation or delay of flights along the coast . While passing northwest of Spain , the remnants of Gordon produced strong wind gusts , reaching 114 mph ( 183 km / h ) at Punta <unk> in Galicia on the country 's northwest coast . The nearby city of A Coruña recorded sustained winds of 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) , while further inland , a station near Madrid reported winds of 65 mph ( 107 km / h ) . Along the coast , waves reached 23 ft ( 7 m ) in height , while rainbands dropped heavy precipitation , including a total of 2 @.@ 58 in ( 65 @.@ 5 mm ) in <unk> . Wind @-@ blown debris injured four people in the country , and a fifth storm @-@ related injury occurred as the result of a tree falling onto an occupied vehicle . The winds downed trees , traffic lights , and power lines , leaving about 100 @,@ 000 people without power . Throughout Galicia , total monetary losses reached € 3 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 8 million ; 2006 USD ) . 
 Stormy conditions threatened to affect the 2006 Ryder Cup in <unk> , County Kildare , Ireland at the K Club , and September 25 was set aside as an additional " reserve day " . The club 's media center was briefly evacuated , and one woman at the event was injured after being struck by a tree branch broken by the storm . The remnants of Gordon caused stormy conditions that left at least 5 @,@ 000 people without power in eastern and southern Ireland . One electric company had over 400 workers on duty to restore power in affected areas . High winds blowing down trees were responsible for power outages which affected 126 @,@ 000 people in Northern Ireland . 
 The remnants of Gordon affected the United Kingdom with strong winds , including gusts to 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) in the Isles of Scilly off the southwest coast and 81 mph ( 130 km / h ) on the mainland . The storm system produced heavy precipitation and thunderstorms that caused localized flooding . Wainfleet , Lincolnshire recorded 1 @.@ 66 in ( 42 @.@ 2 mm ) of rainfall , of which almost half fell within the span of an hour . High winds delayed rail service , and in Dawlish , the rail line was damaged by coastal flooding . More than 1 @,@ 000 homes were left without power in Truro , Cornwall . The storm brought moist air northward that contributed to record warm temperatures across portions of the UK . 
 = Nik Stauskas = 
 Nikolas Tomas " Nik " Stauskas ( born October 7 , 1993 ) is a Canadian professional basketball player for the Philadelphia 76ers of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . A native of Mississauga , Ontario , Stauskas played two seasons of National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) competition for the Michigan Wolverines ending with the 2013 – 14 team before declaring for the NBA draft . Stauskas was drafted eighth overall in the 2014 NBA draft by the Sacramento Kings for whom he began his NBA career . Towards the end of his rookie season , Stauskas was tagged with the nickname Sauce Castillo after a closed captioning error resulted in a social media meme . Stauskas , whose family is of Lithuanian heritage , is a member of the Canadian national basketball team . 
 Stauskas divided his high school years between Loyola Catholic Secondary School , South Kent School and St. Mark 's School , leading the latter to back @-@ to @-@ back New England Preparatory School Athletic Council ( NEPSAC ) Class AA Championship Games . The team won the NEPSAC championship in Stauskas 's 2012 senior season , and he was the championship game 's Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) . He was also selected to the NEPSAC All @-@ Class AA team . 
 As a freshman at for the 2012 – 13 Michigan Wolverines , he was named Sports Illustrated national Freshman of the week once , Big Ten Conference Freshman of the Week 3 times and to the Wayman Tisdale Award , United States Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) National Freshman of the Year , top 12 midseason list . During the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , he earned South All @-@ Regional Team recognition . As a sophomore for the 2013 – 14 team , Stauskas went on to be named a 2014 NCAA Men 's Basketball consensus All @-@ American and was named Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year for the 2013 – 14 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stauskas gravitated toward basketball during his childhood . Stauskas has never played ice hockey and barely has played street hockey . He tried soccer at age six , but a broken arm put an end to that . His first experience with basketball came as a member of the <unk> Sports Club , which is a Toronto @-@ based traveling team for children of Lithuanian descent . Stauskas grew up a Raptors fan with Vince Carter as his favorite player . At age eight or nine , he " played " Carter one @-@ on @-@ one at a Raptors open practice for fans held at Air Canada Centre , which boosted his enthusiasm for the sport . Ever since then shooting a basketball has been his favorite form of recreation . He became so devoted to basketball that his head coach at Michigan , John Beilein , said in 2013 @,@ 
 " He doesn 't know anything about hockey , he doesn 't know anything about football . The other day we had him try to throw a baseball pass as a press breaker . And he had never thrown a baseball . " 
 In fifth grade , his parents gave him and his brother a choice on how to landscape their backyard : a swimming pool , a putting green or a basketball court , leading to the family backyard court . He and his older brother Peter would play at all hours and all conditions , including a 2006 ice storm that was so severe that , as he recalled in 2013 , " The ball couldn 't hit the backboard without slipping off , but we didn 't care . " 
 = = High school career = = 
 His brother claims that Stauskas scored about 50 points a game in middle school . For much of his youth , he and future Gonzaga point guard Kevin Pangos attended basketball camps together , regularly playing one @-@ on @-@ one while other campers took breaks from basketball for other activities . Until 2009 , Stauskas played for Loyola Catholic Secondary School . He averaged 15 points , 5 rebounds and 5 assists in 2007 – 08 and 32 points , 14 rebounds and 7 @.@ 5 assists in 2008 – 09 . Its basketball team nearly disbanded before Stauskas 's 10th @-@ grade season in 2008 – 09 , when Loyola was in danger of not fielding a team because school policy required the presence of a teacher . Although his father , a computer consultant , was willing to volunteer as a coach , no teacher was willing to serve . Stauskas 's father finally found a French teacher who sat in the gym and graded papers while his father coached . In the meantime , Stauskas joined the premier Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) team in Toronto , run by Ro Russell . Some of Russell 's prior players , such as Tristan Thompson and Cory Joseph had gone to the United States to complete their scholastic years . Stauskas , not wishing to risk not having a team to play on after the crisis of 2008 – 2009 , spent the 2009 – 10 academic year at South Kent School , but the forested rural campus made him homesick and he transferred to St. Mark 's School the following year . He missed the 2009 – 10 basketball season as a result of a hip injury . Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball head coach John Beilein became familiar with Stauskas during the Summer 2010 NBA camp prior to Stauskas 's junior year . Stauskas visited Michigan that summer and was also being recruited by Villanova , Iowa State , Georgetown , Notre Dame , Florida and Providence . By the time he arrived at St. Mark 's , he was expected to be an All @-@ State performer . In the 2011 NEPSAC Class AA Championship game , Stauskas led St. Mark 's in scoring with 17 points against Nerlens Noel and the Tilton School , but St. Marks lost 72 – 56 . On March 26 , 2011 , Stauskas made a verbal commitment to Michigan . This commitment made him the second member of Michigan 's recruiting class of 2012 . That summer he scored 27 points in an exhibition of Canadian high school all @-@ stars against the Baylor Bears men 's basketball team . 
 Prior to his senior year , ESPN named him as one of the top 25 three point shooters in the national class of 2012 . At the time of their November 2011 National Letter of Intent signings , Stauskas , Glenn Robinson III and Mitch McGary gave Michigan a consensus top 10 entering class for its 2012 class . Stauskas visited Michigan along with future teammate Robinson to see the 61 – 56 New Year 's Day 2012 victory by the 2011 – 12 Wolverines team over Minnesota . Then Stauskas led St. Mark 's to 67 – 57 victory in a 2012 Hoophall Classic contest with 16 points against Friends Central . As the season progressed , Stauskas ( and Robinson ) improved in the national player ratings to offset McGary 's slide and maintain a top @-@ rated class . He scored 19 to lead his school to a 59 – 53 2012 NEPSAC Class AA Championship game victory over Noel 's Tilton . Stauskas earned the NEPSAC championship game MVP . He was selected to the 2012 All @-@ NEPSAC Class AA first team ( along with teammate Kaleb <unk> ) . Following these honors , Stauskas 's stock and rankings continued to rise . 
 = = College career = = 
 The 2011 – 12 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team had been co @-@ champions of 2011 – 12 Big Ten Conference , but lost both of its co @-@ captains , Zack Novak and Stu Douglass , to graduation and three players as transfers . The team was returning a nucleus of All @-@ Big Ten players Trey Burke and Tim Hardaway , Jr . 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 Stauskas began his college career with the expectation that he would be a sharpshooter based on his performance in three @-@ point field goal drills in which he had raised the bar for the team . In the championship rounds of the 2012 NIT Season Tip @-@ Off tournament at Madison Square Garden on November 21 and November 23 , Michigan defeated Pittsburgh and Kansas State , respectively , to win the tournament . On November 26 , Stauskas earned Big Ten Freshman of the Week honors for his NIT tournament performance in which he averaged 12 @.@ 5 points and 4 @.@ 5 rebounds . On November 27 , Michigan defeated its first ranked opponent of the season , NC State ( # 18 AP Poll / # 18 Coaches ' Poll ) , in the ACC – Big Ten Challenge with a then @-@ career @-@ high 20 points from Stauskas in a 79 – 72 victory . After that game , ESPN analyst Dan Dakich described Stauskas as the most underrated freshman in the country . That week , Burke called Stauskas the best shooter he has ever played with . On December 1 against Bradley , Stauskas made his first career regular season start and posted a new career @-@ high 22 points . For his first two 20 point performances , he repeated as Big Ten Freshman of the Week on December 3 . Stauskas also earned recognition from Sports Illustrated 's Seth Davis as National Freshman of the Week on December 3 . On December 29 , against Central Michigan , Stauskas posted 19 points on 5 @-@ for @-@ 8 three point shooting . His 5 three pointers and 7 rebounds were career @-@ highs , earning him his third Big Ten Freshman of the Week on December 31 . 
 Entering the day of December 31 , Stauskas led the nation in three point field goal percentage . This is somewhat confusing because various sources have various eligibility thresholds . ESPN reports leaders based on a 2 three point attempts per game minimum , while <unk> only requires a minimum of 1 @.@ 5 attempts per game for eligibility . <unk> requires a minimum of 2 @.@ 5 made per game , and Stauskas had been the leader since the December 9 weekly report . On January 16 , Sporting News named Stauskas the surprise player of the first half of the year . As late as January 28 Stauskas was leading the Big Ten in free throw shooting percentage ( <unk> ) as well as three pointers made and was second in 3 @-@ point shooting percentage ( <unk> ) . On that day , Michigan was ranked number one in the AP Poll with 51 of the 65 first place votes . It marked the first time Michigan ranked atop the AP Poll since the Fab Five 1992 – 93 team did so on December 5 , 1992 . On January 31 , Stauskas and Robinson were named to the Wayman Tisdale Award ( USBWA National Freshman of the Year ) top 12 midseason list , recognizing their performances as being among the 12 best freshman performances in the NCAA competition . Stauskas finished the 18 @-@ game 2012 – 13 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season schedule with a 37 % three point @-@ percentage on 30 @-@ for @-@ 81 shooting during conference play . 
 Prior to the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , Jeff Goodman of CBSSports.com named Michigan with Stauskas first among tournament teams in terms of having the most future NBA talent on its roster ( in the absence of Kentucky who was relegated to the 2013 National Invitation Tournament ) . Having made his last 20 consecutive free throws entering the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament Sweet Sixteen , Stauskas ended the season with an 85 @.@ 1 % ( 74 – 87 ) free throw shooting percentage , which was better than the Big Ten Conference free throw shooting percentage leader , Adreian Payne ( 84 @.@ 8 % ) . In the regional finals on March 31 against Florida , Stauskas made all 6 of his three @-@ point shot attempts , including all 5 in the first half as the team built a 41 – 17 lead before going into the half up 47 – 30 . Michigan advanced to the April 8 national championship game where the team lost to Louisville by an 82 – 76 margin . His 6 three @-@ point shots was a new career best and his 22 @-@ point performance tied his career high . All his three @-@ point shots came from the left corner . The 6 three point shots pushed Stauskas to a Michigan freshman @-@ season record total of 79 , surpassing Tim Hardaway , Jr . ' s 2 @-@ year @-@ old record of 76 . Stauskas joined McGary and Most Outstanding Player Trey Burke on the South All @-@ Regional team . For the season , his .9 fouls per 40 minutes was second in the country . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 In the offseason , Stauskas added 16 pounds ( 7 @.@ 3 kg ) to his frame and 6 inches ( 15 @.@ 2 cm ) to his vertical jump . Lindy 's Sports selected Stauskas to the preseason All @-@ Big Ten second team , naming Stauskas as the nation 's number 10 shooting guard and Big Ten 's best shooter . On November 12 , Stauskas posted career highs of 23 points and 5 assists in the second game of the regular season against South Carolina State . In the first half of the game , Stauskas made all six of his field goals , including 5 three @-@ pointers . In the next game , Stauskas contributed a career @-@ high 6 assists as well as 20 points against Iowa State on November 17 . Stauskas scored a game @-@ high 24 points on November 21 against Long Beach State in the first round of the Puerto Rico Tip @-@ Off , surpassing his career high set two games before and giving him three consecutive 20 @-@ point performances for the first time in his career . Stauskas established another career high the next day against Florida State as he scored 26 points including 7 of the team 's 13 points in overtime , despite scoring only 3 points in the first half . In the game he set a career high with 9 made free throws and logged his fourth consecutive 20 point game . Following a Michigan timeout with 11 seconds in regulation , Stauskas made a layup to force overtime . In the championship game against Charlotte , Stauskas tallied 20 points and a career @-@ high 3 steals . Although Michigan lost in the championship game , Stauskas earned tournament MVP honors . In the second half Stauskas twisted his ankle , but continued to play the final 9 ½ minutes . Stauskas sat out the November 29 game against Coppin State to rest his ankle . 
 In the January 2 Big Ten Conference opener against Minnesota , Stauskas set a career high with 7 assists while scoring 14 points . On January 14 , he had a game @-@ high 21 points , team @-@ high 5 assists as well as 6 rebounds against Penn State . On January 18 , Stauskas scored 23 points including the final 11 for Michigan as the team defeated ( # 3 ) Wisconsin at the Kohl Center for the first time since the 1998 – 99 team did so , ending an 11 @-@ game losing streak at Wisconsin . Stauskas made all 6 of his free throw attempts in the final 25 seconds . The game marked the highest ranked team Michigan has ever beaten on the road . On January 21 , Stauskas earned his first Big Ten Conference Player of the Week recognition . At the time he was leading the conference in scoring and 20 @-@ point games . On January 22 , against ( # 10 ) Iowa Stauskas tied his career high with 26 points and contributed 5 rebounds and 5 assists , helping Michigan defeated consecutive top 10 opponents for the first time since the 1996 – 97 team . On January 25 in the Michigan – Michigan rivalry game against the 2013 – 14 Spartans , Stauskas contributed 19 points and 4 assists , including a 5 @-@ for @-@ 6 effort on three point shots . The 80 – 75 victory over ( # 3 ) Michigan State marked the first time in school history that the team defeated three consecutive AP Poll top ten opponents and marked the first time since the 1986 – 87 Iowa Hawkeyes that any team has won three consecutive games all of which were against top 10 opponents . It also gave Michigan a 7 – 0 Big Ten start , which is the best since the 1976 – 77 team won its first eight games . His effort for the week earned a second Big Ten Player of the Week recognition as well as a CBS Sports National Player of the Week honor on January 27 . Stauskas also earned Oscar Robertson National Player of the Week recognition from United States Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) on January 28 . He led the conference in scoring and three point shooting percentage through January , but he only scored six points when Michigan got upset by Indiana on February 2 , ending a 10 @-@ game winning streak and 8 – 0 Big Ten conference start . Stuaskas established another career high in assists with 8 against Nebraska on February 5 as the team posted its largest conference game margin of victory since defeating Indiana 112 @-@ 64 on February 22 , 1998 . On February 23 against ( # 13 / 14 ) Michigan State , Michigan rebounded from an early 22 – 11 deficit to win 79 – 70 . Stauskas led the way with 25 points on 9 @-@ for @-@ 13 shooting and with 21 coming in the second half , including 10 that took the score from a 48 – 43 deficit to a 53 – 51 lead . It marked his first game with 9 made field goals . He added 5 assists , 3 rebounds and no fouls on his way to earning his third Big Ten Player of the Week recognition on February 24 . On March 4 , Stauskas had 24 points , including a career @-@ high seven three point shots , as part of a 7 @-@ for @-@ 9 three point effort against Illinois to help Michigan clinch its 14th and 8th outright Big Ten Conference championship . On March 8 , Stauskas had a team @-@ high 21 points to help Michigan close out its season with a season @-@ ending 84 – 80 victory over Indiana . On March 10 Stauskas earned his fourth Big Ten Player of the week award ( this time Co @-@ POTW with Shavon Shields ) . Stauskas 's four Player of the Week awards led the Big Ten for the season . At the end of the regular season , he was the only player in the Big Ten to rank among the top 10 for field goal percentage ( 48 @.@ 9 ) , three @-@ point percentage ( 45 @.@ 8 ) and free throw percentage ( 81 @.@ 1 ) . 
 On March 22 against Texas in Michigan 's second game of the 2014 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , Stauskas had a career @-@ high tying 8 assists as well as a team @-@ high 17 points . The 2013 – 14 team was eliminated in the elite eight round of the 2014 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament by Kentucky as Stauskas led all scorers with 24 points . Stauskas and teammate Caris LeVert , joined Julius Randle , Aaron Harrison and Marcus Lee on the All @-@ Midwest Regional team . The team reached the championship game . 
 = = = = Watchlists and awards = = = = 
 On February 13 , Stauskas was one of four Big Ten players ( along with Keith Appling , Gary Harris and Roy Devyn Marble ) who were named to the 30 @-@ man Naismith College Player of the Year midseason watchlist . On March 8 , Stauskas was one of two Big Ten players ( along with Harris ) listed among the 15 finalists for the John R. Wooden Award . 
 Stauskas was a 2014 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American second @-@ team selection by the Sporting News . Upon being named Sporting News All @-@ American , Stauskas was described as having made the biggest refinements to his game of his fellow honorees by Mike DeCourcy : " Every player on this list , save for the freshmen , made incremental improvements from season to season in order to wind up as an All @-@ American . More than anyone else , Stauskas redefined his game . As a freshman he primarily was a catch @-@ and @-@ shoot weapon for the Wolverines in their charge to the 2013 NCAA championship game . He became a <unk> in his second season , attacking defenders with his newly unleashed ability to dribble the ball and penetrate the lane . " Stauskas earned third team All @-@ American recognition from USA Today . He was a first team All @-@ American selection by the National Association of Basketball Coaches ( NABC ) . He was also a second team selection by Sports Illustrated and Bleacher Report , as well as a third team selection by NBC Sports . When Stauskas was named second team All @-@ American by the Associated Press , he became a consensus All @-@ American . Stauskas also earned John R. Wooden Award All @-@ American Team recognition . 
 Stauskas was the Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year and a unanimous first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media , becoming Michigan 's fifth B1G player of the year and 2nd consecutive . On March 11 Stauskas was named District V ( OH , IN , IL , MI , MN , WI ) Player of the Year by the United States Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) . Stauskas was listed on the The National Association of Basketball Coaches Division I All ‐ District 7 first team on March 12 . Stauskas was named to the 2014 Big Ten Men 's Basketball Tournament All @-@ Tournament Team . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 Stauskas 's career free throw percentage of 83 @.@ 16 % is second in Michigan history , and his 44 @.@ 10 % three point shot percentage ranks fifth . 
 = = = Canadian flag = = = 
 University of Michigan junior economics and psychology major James <unk> ordered the first custom maize and blue Canadian flag and waves it at half court during home games . ESPN 's Chantel Jennings tweeted a picture of such a flag at Crisler Arena on December 4 , 2012 . One of her followers noted that the big version on the wall was a general fan flag and that a little version of the flag were added next to it for each three pointer he made in the game . By mid @-@ December of his freshman season , the student in the Maize Rage ( Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball student section at Crisler Arena ) had begun cheering Stauskas on with such a flag . The Michigan Public & Media Relations office started mentioning the flag before Christmas . The flag was mentioned widely in the press as he continued his hot shooting into January . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2014 NBA draft = = = 
 Discussion about him entering the 2014 NBA draft began when he got hot in January 2014 and his father told Sports Illustrated , " He knows all he has to do is keep his nose to the grindstone for another couple of months , and there ’ s a really good possibility he might be able to go Pro . " However , a few days later , Stauskas attempted to distance himself from his father 's statements and apologized to his fans . Following the season , Stauskas , who was regarded as a likely late first round selection , said he would need some time to process his decision and that he would make his decision after talking to his coaches and family . On April 6 , Stauskas said he would make his decision within the next week or so . On April 7 , David Aldridge rated Stauskas as the number one potential draft entrant among shooting guards ( ahead of Harris , James Young , and Andrew Harrison ) and a late lottery selection . Others agree that Stauskas is a likely late lottery selection . Stauskas and teammates McGary and Robinson all submitted evaluation requests to the NBA Undergraduate Advisory Committee which must respond by April 14 , giving the players until April 27 to make themselves eligible for the draft if they so choose . On April 10 , reports emerged that Stauskas had decided to go pro , but he denied he had made a decision . The reports were based on rumors that Stauskas had decided to hire Mark Bartelstein as his agent . Bartelstein is the father of former Michigan teammate Josh Bartelstein , and agent for former teammate Tim Hardaway , Jr . On April 15 , in a joint press conference with Robinson on the Big Ten Network , Stauskas declared for the 2014 NBA draft . During his two years with Michigan , the school enjoyed its winningest two @-@ year stretch in school history marked by a total of 59 wins . Of Michigan 's prior 14 early NBA draft entrants , 10 were selected in the first round and 3 in the second . Stauskas did sign with Bartelstein ( along with teammate McGary ) . On May 5 , Stauskas threw out the ceremonial first pitch for the Detroit Tigers at Comerica Park . 
 At the May NBA Draft Combine , Stauskas opted to sit out of the shooting drills , but did elect to participate in official anthropometric measurements , strength / agility drills and team meetings . Stauskas participated in strength and agility testing along with 13 shooting guards , finishing fifth in running vertical jump , sixth in standing vertical leap , seventh in the shuttle run , ninth in the three @-@ quarter court sprint and 11th in the lane agility drill . Stauskas was drafted 8th overall by the Sacramento Kings . He is the highest Michigan selection since Jamal Crawford went 8th in the 2000 NBA draft . With teammates McGary and Robinson also being drafted , it marked the first time Michigan had at least three draft picks since the 1990 NBA draft . With Burke and Hardaway having been drafted the year before , every player that started in the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Championship Game was drafted either in the 2013 or 2014 NBA draft . 
 Stauskas committed to represent the Sacramento Kings in 2014 NBA Summer League . Although Stauskas is expected to be an NBA shooting guard , he will be vying with 2013 NBA Draft number 8 overall selection Ben McLemore for playing time . Since the two may be on the court at the same time , Stauskas is expected to play some point guard in the Summer League as preparation for regular season possibilities . He posted a video of his preparation for the 2014 NBA Summer League . 
 = = = Sacramento Kings ( 2014 – 2015 ) = = = 
 On July 8 , 2014 , Stauskas signed a rookie scale contract with the Sacramento Kings . During the 2014 NBA Summer League Stauskas was a starting member of the Summer League Champions . In the 2014 – 15 NBA.com Rookie Survey at the annual Rookie Photo Shoot on August 6 , Stauskas was named by his peers as the second best shooter in the Rookie class behind Doug McDermott . During his rookie pre @-@ season , he got a lot of publicity for the statement " I understand that I ’ m a rookie and I ’ m white , so people are going to attack me " because of stereotypes about race and his unproven and presumably weak defensive skills . Stauskas was surprised by the attention the statement received . In his first week in the league , he had a 3 @-@ block game against the Los Angeles Clippers . On December 8 in his first game against Utah and former teammate and fellow Big Ten Player of the Year Burke , Stauskas posted career highs of 15 points and 8 rebounds . Stauskas again posted 15 points against the New York Knicks and former Michigan teammate Hardaway on March 3 . On March 24 , he received the nickname " Sauce Castillo " via social media after a closed captioning error . Stauskas started in the Kings ' April 15 season finale against the Los Angeles Lakers and tallied 5 assists . It was his first and only start of the season . 
 = = = Philadelphia 76ers ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 On July 10 , 2015 , Stauskas was traded to the Philadelphia 76ers along with Carl Landry , Jason Thompson , a future first round pick , and the rights to swap first round picks in 2016 and 2017 , in exchange for the rights to <unk> <unk> and Luka Mitrović . During the preseason , Stauskas was impaired by a right tibia stress reaction . Although he felt recovered from the stress reaction by the beginning of the season , he missed the October 28 season opener with back spasms . The 2015 – 16 76ers team played no players over the age of 24 or with more than 3 years of NBA experience on opening night . Stauskas joined the young team 's rotation in October 30 against the Utah Jazz with a 12 @-@ point debut performance . Stauskas moved into the starting lineup on November 2 against the Cleveland Cavaliers . He posted a career @-@ high tying 15 points against his idol LeBron James . On November 7 , Stauskas posted a career @-@ high 18 points and career @-@ high tying five assists against the Orlando Magic . He tallied at least 12 points in each of his first five games of action for Philadelphia . However , by mid November , Stauskas was deep in a shooting slump . He was scoreless in back @-@ to @-@ back starts , going 0 @-@ for @-@ 10 ( 0 – 5 3 point shots ) combined against the San Antonio Spurs and Dallas Mavericks on November 14 and November 16 . Fortunately for Stauskas , his backup , Isaiah Canaan , was in a simultaneous slump , going 3 @-@ for @-@ 20 in the same games . However , Stauskas had a left knee contusion on November 23 against the Minnesota Timberwolves and was sidelined for the second half and the subsequent three @-@ game road trip . He missed only one game and returned to the lineup on November 27 in limited minutes off the bench . On December 1 , Stauskas and the 76ers defeated the Los Angeles Lakers 103 – 91 . The win ended the longest losing streak in the history of major professional sports in the United States ( 28 games going back to the prior season ) and the worst start in NBA history ( tied with the 2009 – 10 New Jersey Nets at 0 – 18 ) . Stauskas went scoreless in 4 consecutive appearances between December 16 and December 22 . He then did not play on December 23 when the 76ers played against the Milwaukee Bucks . When the 76ers defeated the Phoenix Suns in new point guard Ish Smith 's first game with the team for their second win of the season ( snapping a 12 @-@ game losing streak and a 23 @-@ game road losing streak ) on December 26 , Stauskas was coming off the bench and contributed 17 points . As Stauskas endured an up and down season , he became Kendall Marshall 's father 's target of blame for Marshall 's lack of playing time on January 2 . That night against the Los Angeles Clippers , Stauskas posted 18 points on 6 – 8 three point shooting . Stauskas returned to the starting lineup for the 76ers on January 4 against the Minnesota Timberwolves for the 76ers 4th win of the season . However , he was injured in overtime of the January 15 contest against the Chicago Bulls and missed three games before returning to the lineup on January 25 against the Boston Celtics . Stauskas scored 18 points again on March 15 against the Brooklyn Nets . Stauskas established a new career high on March 18 against the Oklahoma City Thunder , scoring 23 points . 
 = = International career = = 
 Stauskas played for Canada in the 2009 FIBA Americas Under @-@ 16 Championship held in Argentina . He helped lead the Canadian junior national team to a bronze medal , which qualified them for the 2010 FIBA Under @-@ 17 World Championship . He averaged 9 @.@ 4 points per game in the tournament , including a game @-@ high 21 points in a 126 – 78 loss against the United States team led by Bradley Beal and James Michael McAdoo on June 20 , 2009 . First overall 2013 NBA draft pick Anthony Bennett was one of Stauskas ' teammates in the tournament . Stauskas was later invited to train with the Canadian senior national team . 
 He represented Canada at the 2015 FIBA Americas Championship , contributing 111 points in 9 games — including 18 @-@ for @-@ 36 three point shooting , but did not play in the team 's final game . Food poisoning had impaired him in the semifinal loss against Venezuela , and the illness caused him to miss the bronze medal game against Mexico , which Canada won 87 – 86 . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = Personal = = 
 Stauskas is the son of Paul and <unk> Stauskas . His brother 's name is Peter . Three of Stauskas 's four grandparents lived in Lithuania before World War II . Stauskas previously attended Lithuanian Saturday School in Toronto and is able to understand and speak some Lithuanian . Geographically , Michigan is closer to Stauskas 's parents home in Ontario than any other major Division I school , according to Stauskas . 
 After Michigan lost to Louisville in the 2013 NCAA championship game , Stauskas met with Greg Harden , a counselor in the athletic department who had worked with Michigan athletes from Tom Brady to Desmond Howard . Stauskas said of Harden : “ He ’ s helped me a lot . That ’ s the main reason why I would say I ’ m a different person and a different player . I have a different kind of confidence now and a different mentality . ” 
 When he tweeted a Christmas Eve 2012 video of himself making 45 of 50 three point shots , Dick Vitale replied 14 minutes later . On April 24 , 2013 , he posted a video of himself making 70 of 76 three pointers in five minutes , and 8 hours later , Stephen Curry challenged him , via Twitter , to a three @-@ point shooting contest . Curry had set the National Basketball Association single @-@ season three pointers made record one week earlier . The following morning ESPN retweeted the video and noted that Stauskas made 46 in a row . A few hours later , when Stauskas woke up , he said he would look forward to such a contest . Soon Stauskas and Curry 's representatives arranged to have a showdown televised on TSN , but the contest would have been in violation of NCAA rules against competition between amateur athletes and professional athletes . 
 = 2004 – 05 Arsenal F.C. season = 
 The 2004 – 05 season was the 107th season of competitive football played by Arsenal . The club ended the campaign as FA Cup winners , but failed to retain their Premier League title as they finished second to Chelsea . In the UEFA Champions League , Arsenal made an exit in the knockout stages to Bayern Munich . 
 In the transfer window Arsenal purchased goalkeeper Manuel Almunia , who initially served a backup to Jens Lehmann , and midfielder Mathieu Flamini . The club kept hold of its captain Patrick Vieira after much transfer speculation over his expected move to Real Madrid . Several players left Arsenal before the campaign got under way ; defender Martin Keown left to play for Leicester City , Ray Parlour joined Middlesbrough while Sylvain Wiltord signed for Lyon . 
 Arsenal began the season in good form and equalled Nottingham Forest 's unbeaten league run of 42 matches against Middlesbrough . The team set a new English division record and went a further seven games unbeaten before losing to Manchester United in controversial circumstances . Arsenal 's form suffered as a result and defensive shortcomings became more apparent ; two draws and a defeat in November reinforced Chelsea 's position at the top of the table , where they remained for the rest of the season . At home to Crystal Palace in February 2005 , Wenger named an Arsenal squad with no English players – a first in the club 's history which attracted criticism from the media . The team ended the season strongly , with a run of eight wins from nine games ensuring a second @-@ place finish . 32 different players represented the club in five competitions and there were 15 different goalscorers . Arsenal 's top goalscorer was Thierry Henry , who scored 30 goals in 42 games . 
 = = Background = = 
 Arsenal ended the previous season as league champions , becoming the first side since Preston North End 115 years earlier to do so undefeated . They completed their historic league campaign with 26 wins , 12 draws and 90 points . 
 By the end of January 2004 Arsenal were still in the hunt for all four trophies , but suffered setbacks in each of the cup competitions ; they were unable to retain the FA Cup , losing out to eventual winners Manchester United in the semi @-@ finals and days later were knocked out of the UEFA Champions League by Chelsea at the quarter @-@ final stage . They exited the League Cup after defeat to Middlesbrough in early February . 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 In 
 Out 
 = = Pre @-@ season = = 
 = = FA Community Shield = = 
 The 2004 edition of the FA Community Shield , was contested between Manchester United and Arsenal at the Millennium Stadium on 8 August . Cesc Fàbregas started alongside Gilberto Silva in midfield for Arsenal as Vieira was absent , while Thierry Henry partnered Dennis Bergkamp up front . After a goalless first half , Arsenal took the lead when Gilberto scored in the 50th minute . Manchester United equalised through Alan Smith five minutes after , but José Antonio Reyes restored Arsenal 's advantage two minutes before the hour mark . Mikaël Silvestre scored an own goal 11 minutes before the end to give Arsenal a 3 – 1 victory . Wenger praised Fàbregas 's performance after the match , describing the midfielder as a " complete player " and reiterated his desire to keep Vieira . 
 = = Premier League = = 
 A total of 20 teams competed in the Premier League in the 2004 – 05 season . Each team played 38 matches ; two against every other team and one match at each club 's stadium . Three points were awarded for each win , one point per draw , and none for defeats . At the end of the season the top two teams qualified for the group stages of the UEFA Champions League ; teams in third and fourth needed to play a qualifier . The provisional fixture list was released on 24 June 2004 , but was subject to change in the event of clashes with other competitions , international football , inclement weather , or matches being selected for television coverage . 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Arsenal began their defence of the league title against Everton on 15 August 2004 . Fàbregas was named in the first eleven ; at 17 years 103 days he became the club 's youngest ever Premier League player . It was Bergkamp on his 500th league appearance who opened the scoring for Arsenal and Reyes made it 2 – 0 , heading the ball in from Fredrik Ljungberg 's cross . Ljungberg added a third goal in the second half and in spite of the team conceding moments after , Robert Pirès scored Arsenal 's fourth in the 83rd minute . Shortly before the kick @-@ off at home to Middlesbrough the following weekend , the club was presented a golden replica of the Premier League trophy , to commemorate their unbeaten season . In the match , Henry gave Arsenal the lead , which was cancelled out before half time by Joseph @-@ Désiré Job 's goal @-@ bound effort . Four minutes after the interval , Franck Queudrue exploited an error from defender Pascal Cygan and in turn passed the ball to Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink , who " finish [ ed ] with perfect brutality " . Queudrue scored to put Middlesbrough 3 – 1 up in the 53rd minute , but Bergkamp replied with a goal for Arsenal a minute later . The home team completed the comeback with further goals by Reyes , Pirès and Henry . Wenger afterwards admitted Arsenal 's defending was poor , but said their attacking threat made up for their deficiencies . The 5 – 3 win meant Arsenal equalled Nottingham Forest 's record of 42 league matches undefeated . Three days later , the team beat Blackburn Rovers 3 – 0 to set a new record . Arsenal at the end of the month travelled to Norwich City , where three first half goals set the team on the way to a 4 – 1 victory . The win ended Norwich 's eight @-@ month undefeated record at Carrow Road . 
 Due to international fixtures , Arsenal did not play another game for two weeks . On the resumption of club football , they travelled across London to face Fulham . Vieira made his return to the first team in place of Fàbregas . Fulham was awarded a penalty in the first half , after Ashley Cole brought down striker Andy Cole in the penalty area . Referee Mark Halsey however changed his mind after protests from the Arsenal players and a consultation with his assistant ; the game was restarted with a dropped @-@ ball . Arsenal scored three times in the second half and ended the weekend of 6 September 2004 top of the league table , two points clear of second place Chelsea . The league champions dropped their first points of the season at home to Bolton Wanderers . At the City of Manchester Stadium on 25 September 2004 , a goal by Cole earned Arsenal a 1 – 0 win against Manchester City . Journalist Russell Thomas , writing for The Guardian , commented on Arsenal 's fatigue during the second half and opined that the team needed to keep their focus against sterner opposition . 
 Arsenal beat Charlton Athletic in early October to extend their unbeaten run to 48 league matches . Charlton manager Alan Curbishley said of his opponents : " The gulf between Arsenal and the rest of the Premier League means that the rest have got it all to do to try and stop them , and I 'm including the big three or four . " Two goals from Pirès and one from Henry ensured a 3 – 1 win against Aston Villa , who had led the game early on . Attention soon turned to Arsenal 's trip to face Manchester United . The champions were looking to go half a century of league games unbeaten , whereas the home team – in transition , attempted to push on for a title challenge . In the match , a challenge by Sol Campbell on Wayne Rooney earned Manchester United a penalty , converted by Ruud van Nistelrooy in the 73rd minute . Rooney then scored United 's second goal of the match to end Arsenal 's unbeaten run on 49 games . Tempers boiled over in the players ' tunnel , where pizza was thrown at Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson . When speaking to the media , a distraught Wenger told reporters that Rooney dived to win the penalty and criticised the refereeing performance of Mike Riley . He was later found guilty of insinuating that Van Nistelrooy was a cheat , and fined £ 15 @,@ 000 by the FA . 
 The final match of October was against Southampton at Highbury . Henry who missed a penalty early on , scored to put Arsenal in front in the 67th minute . Southampton replied with two goals from Rory Delap , but Van Persie in stoppage time equalised for the home team with a curling shot . The draw meant Arsenal stood in first position and had accumulated 26 points . The team were level on points with Chelsea , with a marginally better goal difference . 
 = = = November – December = = = 
 For the second league game in succession , Arsenal dropped two points . The team drew 1 – 1 at Crystal Palace on 6 November 2004 , which meant Chelsea overtook them in first position . Wenger rued Arsenal 's inability to hold onto leads in matches and admitted the fluency had disappeared in their football , possibly because of the manner in which they lost the unbeaten record . A week later Arsenal faced Tottenham Hotspur at White Hart Lane . It was Tottenham who began the match the better of the two teams and took the lead after 36 minutes when <unk> <unk> scored . Henry equalised for Arsenal moments before half @-@ time , and the champions went in front after Lauren converted a penalty . Vieira scored on the hour mark to make it 3 – 1 , before Jermain Defoe replied for Tottenham instantly with a " wonderful , dipping finish into the top corner . " Fàbregas created Arsenal ’ s fourth goal , scored by Ljungberg . In the final 16 minutes Tottenham scored twice and Arsenal once ; the final score was 5 – 4 , making it the highest scoring North London derby . Arsenal 's defending was ridiculed by Chelsea manager José Mourinho , who told reporters : " Five @-@ four is a hockey score , not a football score . " 
 Arsenal only managed a draw against West Bromwich Albion on 20 November 2004 ; Robert Earnshaw 's goal with 11 minutes remaining of normal time cancelled out Pirès ’ s opener . Arsenal lost their final match of November , away to Liverpool at Anfield . Vieira finished off a one @-@ touch move to equalise for Arsenal – who were behind in the first half – but Neil Mellor scored the winning goal of the game , shooting from long range . Football pundit Alan Hansen in his analysis on Match of the Day criticised the temperament of Arsenal ’ s players and questioned their desire : " When you have success , sometimes it isn 't there and you have to dig in with great determination and hard work , and at the moment they are not doing that . When you look at their two big players , Henry and Vieira , [ you think they ] must do better in future . " Arsenal ended the month in second , five points behind leaders Chelsea . 
 Henry scored two late goals in Arsenal ’ s victory over Birmingham City on 4 December 2004 . Wenger replaced Lehmann in goal with Almunia , who made his league debut . Arsenal then faced league leaders Chelsea at Highbury ; the match was billed as " Judgement Day " by Sky Sports . With Vieira suspended and Gilberto and Edu injured , Wenger picked Flamini to partner Fabregas in midfield . The first chance of the match went to Henry , who scored inside 75 seconds . John Terry levelled the score , but Henry restored Arsenal ’ s lead from a contentious free @-@ kick – Graham Poll allowed the striker to take it quickly without warning the Chelsea players . Eiður Guðjohnsen equalised early in the second half for Chelsea , and late on Henry missed a chance to score a hat @-@ trick . There were no further goals and the match ended 2 – 2 , meaning Chelsea remained five points clear of Arsenal . Wenger said he was disappointed in the manner his team conceded to Chelsea – from two set pieces , but added : " I thought we did really well , and it was important for us to come back to the level we want to be at . " 
 Arsenal won their remaining games in December and conceded no goals . They beat Portsmouth courtesy of a Campbell goal in the second half , and on Boxing Day defeated Fulham by two goals . Vieira scored the winning goal against Newcastle United , a volley that deflected over goalkeeper Shay Given . After 20 games Arsenal accumulated 44 points and lay second in the league table . 
 = = = January – February = = = 
 On New Year 's Day , Ljungberg scored two goals in Arsenal ’ s 3 – 1 win against Charlton Athletic . The team four days later drew at home to Manchester City . Arsenal lost further ground to Chelsea after defeat to Bolton Wanderers at the Reebok Stadium . Wenger conceded that Chelsea were favourites to win the league because of their point advantage , but added : " We will keep going and fight until the last minute of the championship . " Arsenal ended January with a 1 – 0 home win against Newcastle United . Wenger made four changes from the Bolton defeat , with Bergkamp the match scorer coming in place of Van Persie . 
 The first night of February saw Arsenal host Manchester United at Highbury . In the tunnel before the match Roy Keane was seen confronting Vieira ; the United captain accused him of intimidating his teammate Gary Neville . Vieira scored after eight minutes , but Giggs equalised for Manchester United 10 minutes later . Bergkamp restored Arsenal ’ s advantage nine minutes before half time , but two goals by Cristiano Ronaldo and one by John O 'Shea in the second half gave United a 4 – 2 win . It was Arsenal 's fourth league defeat of the season and moved them down to third spot , overtaken by their opponents . Wenger ruled his team out of the title race and refused to blame Almunia for his error in Ronaldo 's first goal . The goalkeeper was dropped in Arsenal 's next game , away to Aston Villa . Three first half goals by Ljungberg , Henry and Cole gave Arsenal a comfortable win . 
 For the match against Crystal Palace on 14 February 2005 , Wenger named an Arsenal squad that did not feature a single British player – a first in the club ’ s history . The team did not get off to the best of starts with Lehmann <unk> a back pass and Vieira losing possession routinely , but grew as the game went on and scored three goals in seven minutes . On his 200th league appearance , Henry scored in either half , with the result 5 – 1 to Arsenal . The result was somewhat overshadowed by the foreign makeup of the team ; former player Paul Merson called it a " joke " and PFA chairman Gordon Taylor noted it was a " worrying pattern for English football . " When asked about his team selections , Wenger said : " I don 't look at the passport of people , I look at their quality and their attitude . " 
 Arsenal only earned a point at Southampton , where Van Persie was sent off for a late challenge on Graeme Le Saux . The team remained in third at the end of February , four points behind Manchester United and 10 behind leaders Chelsea , who played a game less than both challengers . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 Arsenal ’ s form improved as the season drew to a close . At home to Portsmouth on 5 March 2005 , the team earned three points courtesy of Henry ’ s hat @-@ trick . Van Persie scored the only goal in Arsenal ’ s match against Blackburn Rovers and the team moved back to second position with a home win against Norwich City – Henry scored another hat @-@ trick . A week later Pirès ’ s goal was enough for Arsenal to beat Middlesbrough at the Riverside Stadium and win their fourth consecutive match . The team then played out a goalless draw against Chelsea , who were on course to become champions ; Wenger congratulated his opponents on their season and felt Arsenal needed to score first so that they could " force them to come out from the back . " 
 Arsenal defeated Tottenham 1 – 0 on 25 April 2005 , which meant Chelsea needed to wait on Saturday in order to mathematically win the title . Second position was the best Arsenal could aim for by the time they faced West Bromwich Albion on 2 May 2005 . Goals from Van Persie and Edu earned a 2 – 0 win for the team and Arsenal beat Champions League finalists Liverpool at Highbury to all @-@ but secure second spot . Arsenal recorded the biggest win of the league season , against Everton at Highbury . An inspired performance by Bergkamp helped the team win 7 – 0 ; he created the opening two goals and scored in the second half . Arsenal lost their final game of the campaign , away to Birmingham City . It was a lacklustre performance by the visitors , who equalised through Bergkamp after going a goal behind , but conceded in the 90th minute . 
 = = = Matches = = = 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Source : 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals scored ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = = = Results summary = = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = = Results by round = = = = 
 Source : Ground : A 
 = Away ; H = 
 Home . Result : D 
 = Draw ; L = 
 Loss ; W 
 = Win ; P = 
 Postponed . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the competition in the third round , by virtue of their Premier League status . Their opening match was a home tie against Stoke City . The visitors took the lead just before the break , but goals from Reyes and Van Persie in the second half meant Arsenal won 2 – 1 . They then faced Wolverhampton Wanderers at home in the next round ; a goal apiece from Vieira and Ljungberg secured a comfortable 2 – 0 victory . 
 Arsenal 's opponent in the fifth round was Sheffield United . After 35 minutes Bergkamp was sent off for his apparent push on Cullip . With eleven minutes of normal time remaining , Robert Pirès scored for Arsenal , but the team conceded a late penalty which Andy Gray converted . The equaliser for Sheffield United meant the match was replayed at Bramall Lane on 1 March 2005 . Both teams played out a goalless draw after full @-@ time and throughout extra @-@ time , so the tie was decided by a penalty shootout . Almunia saved two penalties , which ensured progress into the quarter @-@ finals . 
 Bolton Wanderers hosted Arsenal at the Reebok Stadium in the sixth round of the competition . Ljungberg scored the only goal of the tie after just three minutes ; he had an opportunity to extend Arsenal 's lead in stoppage time , but hit the ball over from six yards . Arsenal faced Blackburn Rovers in the semi @-@ final which was played at the Millennium Stadium . Two goals from Van Persie and one from Pirès gave Arsenal a 3 – 0 win , in a match marred by Blackburn 's aggressive tactics . 
 This set up a showdown with Manchester United in the final on 21 May 2005 . United were on top for long periods of the game but Arsenal resisted their pressure and the match ended 0 – 0 after 120 minutes , albeit Arsenal were a man lighter after Reyes ' dismissal with a minute remaining for two bookable offences . The match went to penalties with all the penalty takers converting barring Paul Scholes , whose effort was denied by Lehmann . Vieira converted the final and winning spot @-@ kick to seal a tenth FA Cup crown for Arsenal . 
 = = Football League Cup = = 
 The Football League Cup is a cup competition open to clubs in the Premier League and Football League . Like the FA Cup it is played on a knockout basis , with the exception of the second round and semi @-@ finals , which are contested over a two @-@ legged tie . Together with the other clubs playing in European competitions , Arsenal entered the Football League Cup in the third round . The team were drawn to face Manchester City , on the week of 25 October 2004 . Wenger fielded a relatively young team for the tie , which took the lead in the second half when Van Persie scored . Daniel <unk> extended the visitor 's lead in the 90th minute , just before Manchester City striker Robbie Fowler scored from a free @-@ kick . 
 In the fourth round , Arsenal faced Everton at Highbury . The team went behind after eight minutes of play , but Quincy Owusu @-@ <unk> levelled the scoreline and in the second half Arturo Lupoli scored twice . Wenger was pleased with how his team responded to the setback and added : " They played intelligently , technically well and with the spirit we like to play the game . " Arsenal bowed out of the competition away to Manchester United ; the only goal of the match came inside 19 seconds when David Bellion profited from an error by goalkeeper Almunia . 
 = = UEFA Champions League = = 
 = = = Group stage = = = 
 Arsenal were drawn in Group E , along with Dutch champions PSV Eindhoven , Greek club <unk> and Norwegian side Rosenborg . An Alex own goal was enough for Arsenal to claim three points against PSV on the first matchday . The team drew away to Rosenborg and earnt a point at Panathinaikos , despite twice having taken the lead at the Apostolos <unk> Stadium . In the reverse fixture Cygan scored an own goal to cancel out Henry 's first @-@ half opener ; the result left Arsenal in second position . Their next match was against PSV at the Philips Stadion , where after eight minutes the home side took the lead . Henry equalised for Arsenal , having created the chance following a one @-@ two with Ljungberg . In the second half Lauren and Vieira were both sent off , for two bookable offences . Wenger accepted referee Herbert <unk> 's decision , but added his surprise that Mark van Bommel was not cautioned : " If you look at the number of fouls he made without being punished it is very surprising because he made some deliberate fouls . Some people might criticise Patrick when we were down to 10 men but he felt he had to fight harder to win the ball . " 
 The draw against PSV meant Arsenal had to beat against Rosenborg to qualify for the last 16 . A 5 – 1 win at home , with five different goalscorers on the scoresheet , put Arsenal top of the group given PSV lost to Panathinaikos . 
 = = = Knockout phase = = = 
 = = = = Round of 16 = = = = 
 Arsenal were drawn against Bayern Munich in the knockout stages . In the first leg a mistake from Touré presented Claudio Pizarro to score inside four minutes . The striker then scored his second of the match in the 58th minute , getting past his marker Touré , and Hasan Salihamidžić added a third for Bayern seven minutes later . Touré scored an away goal late on for Arsenal , which gave them a slender chance of progressing into the quarter @-@ finals . Arsenal beat Bayern in the second leg , but a solitary goal – scored by Henry in the 66th minute , meant the club was eliminated . 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 Arsenal used a total of 32 players during the 2004 – 05 season and there were 18 different goalscorers . There were also three squad members who did not make a first @-@ team appearance in the campaign . The team played in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation throughout the season , but Wenger deployed a 4 – 5 – 1 formation for the cup final . Touré featured in 49 matches – the most of any Arsenal player in the campaign . 
 The team scored a total of 117 goals in all competitions . The highest scorer was Henry , with 30 goals , followed by Pirès who scored 17 goals . Five Arsenal players were sent off during the season : Vieira , Reyes , Bergkamp , Van Persie and Lauren . 
 Key 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . Players with number struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Source : 
 = Toussaint Tyler = 
 Toussaint L 'Ouverture Tyler ( first name pronounced " Too @-@ San " , born March 19 , 1959 ) is a former running back in the National Football League ( NFL ) . He played with New Orleans Saints in 1981 and 1982 . 
 Born in Barstow , California , Tyler moved to Oceanside , California where he starred as halfback at El Camino High School . After receiving a number of awards following his senior season , he was recruited to the University of Washington . With the Washington Huskies , he played mainly as a fullback . The Huskies won the 1978 Rose Bowl his freshman year , and he started for the first time in a game the following season . The back took a larger role in his junior year as the team went 10 – 2 and won a bowl game . 
 Early in Tyler 's final year at Washington , injuries to the Huskies ' halfbacks prompted head coach Don James to move him there from fullback . Washington finished 8 – 2 in the regular season , earning them a trip to the 1981 Rose Bowl against the Michigan Wolverines . With the score tied at zero in the first quarter , Tyler fumbled at the one @-@ yard line ; Michigan went on to win the game 23 – 6 . The running back was drafted 222nd overall ( first in the ninth round ) by the New Orleans Saints in the 1981 NFL Draft . He played two seasons with the Saints , appearing in all 23 games over those two seasons . Before the 1983 NFL season , the Saints cut him in order to meet the limit on how many players a team may have . He then went on to a short stint with the Oakland Invaders , and then tried to make the Minnesota Vikings . He now lives in Kent , Washington , where he works as a juvenile detention officer . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born on March 19 , 1959 , Tyler was named after the 18th @-@ century Haitian leader Toussaint Louverture . His mother was a seamstress and his father , Walter , was a boxing trainer who handled , among others , heavyweight champion Mike Weaver . The running back later said " My father tried to interest me in boxing but I wasn 't into getting smacked in the face . " Tyler , along with two brothers and four sisters , lived in Barstow , California until he was in seventh grade . His parents then divorced and he went to live with his mother in Oceanside , California . 
 In Oceanside , he played at El Camino High School under coach Herb Meyer . Rushing for 1 @,@ 732 yards with an eight yards @-@ per @-@ carry average in his senior season , the halfback drew comparisons to fellow El Camino back C. R. Roberts . The El Camino team won the California Interscholastic Federation ( CIF ) district title in 1976 . One of six Californians named to that year 's All @-@ American high school football team by Scholastic Coach , a magazine for athletic directors and coaches , he was San Diego County 's player of the and shared CIF ( San Diego Section ) player of the year honors with offensive tackle Curt Marsh . Both players were considered blue @-@ chip recruits and went to the University of Washington . 
 = = College career = = 
 At Washington , Tyler was converted from halfback to fullback . Because of this , Tyler needed to learn how to block , a transition in which he said he " pinched a lot of nerves and got a lot of stiff necks " . When asked during his senior year a Washington which position he prefers , Tyler responded " I love tailback , but I 'll play any position to help our team . " Tyler finished third in a pre @-@ season poll of sportswriters predicting the conference 's offensive rookie of the year . In Tyler 's freshman year , the 1977 Washington Huskies finished with nine wins and two losses in the regular season . In his first collegiate contest , Tyler rushed for 70 yards on seven carries in a victory against San Jose State University . In a game against the California Golden Bears , then ranked 17th in the AP Poll , Tyler scored a touchdown to help the team win 50 – 31 , giving them a record of 4 – 1 , tying them with two other teams for the lead in the Pacific @-@ 10 Conference . They then won the 1978 Rose Bowl 27 – 20 over the Michigan Wolverines . 
 The following season , Tyler started at fullback for the first time in a game against Oregon State , winless at the time , and rushed for 151 yards , including a 55 @-@ yard fourth @-@ quarter touchdown , to lead the Huskies to a 20 – 14 victory . In the team 's next game , the back scored twice as Washington beat twelfth @-@ ranked Arizona State . The Huskies finished with seven wins and four losses , missing a bowl game . Tyler averaged 5 @.@ 5 yards a carry in the 1978 season . 
 To begin 1979 , Washington won 38 – 2 and 41 – 7 against non @-@ conference opponents , with Tyler scoring once in both games and averaging 8 @.@ 2 yards per carry . In their conference opener the next week , the Huskies won on a late @-@ fourth @-@ quarter punt return touchdown from Mark Lee , Lee 's first ever punt return ; Tyler gained 81 yards over 16 rushing attempts . The winning continued for two games , with Tyler scoring from three yards in both . Called " one of the Pac @-@ 10 's most under @-@ rated players " , the back now needed 65 yards to tie <unk> Green for tenth on Washington 's list of career rushing yards leaders . The now twelfth @-@ ranked Huskies lost their next two games , to Arizona and the Pittsburgh Panthers . To conclude the season , Washington , then number 13 , upset the Texas Longhorns 14 – 7 with Tyler rushing 19 times for 70 yards . 
 Going into his senior season , Tyler , wearing a jersey number of 45 , was the school 's seventh leading rusher . Tyler was moved to halfback early in the season after the Huskies ' third @-@ string halfback was injured . Washington won 50 – 7 and 45 – 7 in games against Air Force and Northwestern ; in the second game , Tyler scored from one , three , and six yards in the first quarter . After splitting their next two games , the back scored twice from nine yards to help the Huskies beat Oregon State 41 – 6 . At this point , Tyler was third in the conference with 49 points scored and fourth with 446 yards rushing . Washington then beat Stanford 27 – 24 ; during the game , Tyler injured a tendon in his right knee , leading to him being used sparsely in the final four regular season games . After a 24 – 10 loss to Navy in which head coach Don James said Washington was " embarrassed " , the Huskies were 5 – 2 ( 2 – 1 in the Pacific @-@ 10 Conference ) and still top contenders for a Rose Bowl appearance . 
 The Huskies proceeded to win 25 – 0 over Arizona State and 45 – 22 against the University of Arizona Wildcats , with Tyler scoring once in each game . Washington , although unranked at 7 – 2 , was leading in the race for the Pac @-@ 10 spot in the Rose Bowl . Only four other teams in the conference were eligible for the appearance , as , in the previous August , the presidents of Pac @-@ 10 schools had voted unanimously to disqualify half of the conference 's members from Rose Bowl contention because of rules violations . The teams disqualified included UCLA and USC , two of the league 's strongest teams . The next week , despite not having Tyler due to injury , Washington beat USC 20 – 10 ; this clinched a spot in Rose Bowl on New Year 's Day . In the 1981 Rose Bowl against the Michigan Wolverines , Washington was beaten 23 – 6 . In a scoreless first quarter , it was originally ruled a touchdown when Tyler dove over a pile near the goal line . After the officials conferred , however , it was decided that Tyler had fumbled at the one @-@ yard line , which he later admitted to . 
 Tyler , nicknamed " <unk> " in college , was a muscular 6 ⅓ feet and 215 pounds . He ran the 40 @-@ yard dash in 4 @.@ 7 seconds , on the low end for a halfback , but Mal Florence of the Los Angeles Times said he was " much faster in game situations " . 
 = = Professional career and later life = = 
 On the second day ( April 29 ) of the 1981 NFL Draft , the New Orleans Saints selected Tyler with the first pick of the ninth round , 222nd overall . The Saints also possessed the draft 's first @-@ overall pick , which they used on Heisman Trophy winner George Rogers , a halfback from the University of South Carolina . In his first training camp , Tyler wore number 42 , and was signed to a contract on June 23 . The 1981 New Orleans Saints finished with four wins and 12 losses , and Tyler played in all 16 games but started none . The former Washington Husky accumulated 183 yards rushing on 36 carries as well as 23 receptions . He fumbled four times overall . In the nine @-@ game 1982 NFL season , the Saints went 4 – 5 . Tyler played all nine games , but again did not start any . On August 29 , 1983 , the Saints cut Tyler , along with five other players , in order to reach the 49 @-@ man roster limit . 
 After a short stint with the Oakland Invaders of the United States Football League , Tyler attempted to earn a spot on the Minnesota Vikings but was waived during training camp . Tyler now lives in Covington , Washington , working as a juvenile detention officer for King County . When Marsh , Tyler 's former Huskies teammate and co @-@ CIF player of the year honoree , had his ankle amputated , Tyler spent two days at his bedside . 
 = Oklahoma State Highway 108 = 
 State Highway 108 ( abbreviated SH @-@ 108 ) is a minor state highway in Payne , Noble , and Pawnee counties in north @-@ central Oklahoma . It runs for 24 @.@ 1 miles ( 38 @.@ 8 km ) , from SH @-@ 33 south of Ripley to U.S. Route 64 ( US @-@ 64 ) in Lela . SH @-@ 108 has no lettered spurs . 
 SH @-@ 108 was added to the state highway system on July 11 , 1955 . At this time , the highway had the same extent as it does today ; the only changes made to the highway over the years were slight modifications to its alignment due to the straightening of connecting highways . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SH @-@ 108 begins in Payne County approximately halfway between Perkins and Cushing at SH @-@ 33 . From here , the highway runs north on Ripley Road . About two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) into its journey , the road passes through the town of Ripley ( pop . 444 ) . North of Ripley , it crosses the Cimarron River . Seven miles ( 11 km ) later , the highway intersects SH @-@ 51 , and SH @-@ 108 turns west along it , forming a one @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) concurrency . SH @-@ 108 then continues north on Rose Road . 
 Approximately eight miles ( 13 km ) north of SH @-@ 51 , SH @-@ 108 enters Glencoe ( pop . 583 ) . The highway then crosses the Cimarron Turnpike on a grade separation with no interchange . The highway shifts to the east about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of Glencoe . Upon exiting Payne County , the highway straddles the Noble – Pawnee County line all the way to its terminus at US @-@ 64 in the unincorporated settlement of Lela . 
 As of 2012 , the highest average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) count along SH @-@ 108 was 5 @,@ 900 , measured along the concurrency with SH @-@ 51 . The highest traffic volume on SH @-@ 108 alone was an AADT of 1 @,@ 900 , measured north of SH @-@ 51 . The lowest AADT measured was 1 @,@ 500 , which occurred both in Glencoe and south of Ripley . No part of SH @-@ 108 has been designated as part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 SH @-@ 108 was first designated on July 11 , 1955 . The highway was mostly gravel at that time ; only the portions from the southern terminus to Ripley and the concurrency with SH @-@ 51 were paved . In 1960 , the section of SH @-@ 108 between SH @-@ 51 and Glencoe was paved . In 1963 , the paved segment extended north of Glencoe , to the highway 's northern terminus . 
 The first change to the highway 's alignment occurred on November 1 , 1966 , when SH @-@ 51 was straightened between Stillwater and Yale ; SH @-@ 108 was realigned to continue to concur with SH @-@ 51 . Around the same time , the remainder of SH @-@ 108 was paved . The final change to SH @-@ 108 was made on June 4 , 1974 , when a straightening of SH @-@ 33 resulted in a slight extension of SH @-@ 108 to continue to meet the new highway . No changes have been made since . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = Bismarck ( video game ) = 
 Bismarck is a turn @-@ based strategy video game developed by Personal Software Services and published by Mirrorsoft . It was first released for the Commodore 64 and ZX Spectrum in 1987 for the United Kingdom . It was ported to Amiga , Apple II , Atari ST and Atari 8 @-@ bit home computers in both the United Kingdom and the United States the following year . The game is the tenth instalment in the Strategic Wargames series . In the game , the player can choose to control either the German battleship Bismarck or command the pursuing fleet of Royal Navy ships . 
 The game is set during the Last battle of the battleship Bismarck of World War II and revolves around the Bismarck attempting to escape a perusing fleet of Royal Navy ships , who desire to avenge the deaths of 1 @,@ 412 men in the sinking of the flagship and " pride of the Royal Navy " , HMS Hood . The game received positive reviews upon release ; critics praised the graphics and presentation , though one reviewer found difficulty with the controls . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a turn @-@ based strategy and takes place during the Last battle of the battleship Bismarck on 27 May 1941 . The battle is a sequel to the Battle of the Denmark Strait , in which the Kriegsmarine ships Bismarck and Prinz Eugen sank the Royal Navy flagship , HMS Hood , resulting in the deaths of 1 @,@ 412 men . Incensed by the loss of the " pride of the Royal Navy " , a large British force was dispatched in order to pursue and destroy the Bismarck and its support ship , the Prinz Eugen . 
 The player has the option to choose which side they wish to command at the beginning of the game . If the German side is picked , the objective of the game is to evade the Royal Navy fleet by either sailing to Iceland or heading to the safety of Nazi occupied France . The player will only have the ability to control the Bismarck itself , and must defend themselves against Royal Navy and Royal Air Force attacks if compromised . If the British side is chosen , then the player must command the hunting Royal Navy fleet in order to search and destroy the Bismarck . To achieve both these ends , the player will be able to access an in @-@ game command centre , which will give out alerts depending on the side chosen . If controlling the Bismarck , the player will be reported of hostile British U @-@ boat sightings . If controlling the Royal Navy fleet , they will be told of radio intercepts , which will pinpoint the Bismarck 's approximate location . 
 If the Bismarck has been intercepted or compromised by Royal Navy ships , the game will automatically shift to an arcade sequence which will give the player an opportunity to defend the ship against a British attack , or alternatively , if playing as the British , the sequence is utilised in order to destroy the Bismarck . The feature can be displayed at any time , though it is automatically enabled if either side comes into conflict . The interface of the feature is split into three sections ; the upper part of the screen shows a view of the ocean in front of the ship and any hostile ship in the vicinity . The middle section contains buttons and icons which are used to control ship movement and to fire weapons . The lower part of the screen displays a diagrammatic representation of the ship from the side chosen ( Bismarck or Royal Navy ships ) ; the diagram will change colours once the ship receives damage from shelling . 
 Once a hostile ship is in range , the player will have the choice to either open fire or outmanoeuvre the enemy . The Bismarck is able to withstand 99 points of damage ; internal fires may break out during battle and will risk destroying the ship if the fires are not contained quickly enough or if they reach fuel tanks . If fires occur , the player is given the option to order fire @-@ fighting crews to contain the blaze , although it will cause the ship to disengage from combat . The game proceeds in real time , and has the option to change speed from slow to fast at any time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Personal Software Services was founded in Coventry , England , by Gary Mays and Richard Cockayne in 1981 . The company were known for creating games that revolved around historic war battles and conflicts , such as Theatre Europe , Iwo Jima and Falklands ' 82 . The company had a partnership with French video game developer ERE Informatique , and published localised versions of their products to the United Kingdom . In 1986 , Cockayne took a decision to alter their products for release on 16 @-@ bit consoles , as he found that smaller 8 @-@ bit consoles such as the ZX Spectrum lacked the processing power for larger strategy games . The decision was falsely interpreted as " pull @-@ out " from the Spectrum market by a video game journalist . Following years of successful sales throughout the mid 1980s , Personal Software Services experienced financial difficulties , in which Cockayne admitted that " he took his eye off the ball " . The company was acquired by Mirrorsoft in February 1987 , and was later dispossessed by the company due to strains of debt . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received positive reviews upon release . Peter Berlin of Your Sinclair praised the presentation of the game , stating that it was " good to look at " and well organised . Philippa Irving of Crash asserted that the graphics and interface were " rather bland " but " pretty " . Despite stating that the map of the game was " unexciting " , Irving noted that it was offset by " pretty touches " and new graphical additions . A reviewer of Computer and Video Games stated that the game was " historically good " . Their only criticism was the unsuitability of using a joystick for the game , which they deemed " virtually unusable " . David Buckingham of Computer Gamer considered Bismarck the best game Personal Software Studios had released at the time , and added that the two genres of strategy and action work " very well " . 
 Gary Rook of Sinclair User heralded the gameplay as an " exciting " blend of strategy and arcade simulation . Berlin suggested that Bismarck was a good introduction for players who were " bored " with the arcade genre and preferred " something a little bit tougher " . Irving praised the gameplay as smoothly @-@ presented and " undemanding " , stating that the type of game Personal Software Studios were creating was " successful " . She also considered the rules of the game to be detailed in all important respects , well @-@ presented and " helpful " , albeit " not voluminous " . Regarding the arcade aspect of the game , Rook noted that the level of action in it was sufficient , but was sceptical that it was a " true " wargame . 
 = Torrie Wilson = 
 Torrie Anne Wilson ( born July 24 , 1975 ) is an American model , fitness competitor , actress and retired professional wrestler . She is best known for her time in World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) and World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . 
 As a fitness competitor , Wilson won the Miss Galaxy competition in 1999 . Shortly after , she was signed by World Championship Wrestling , where she stayed from 1999 until 2001 ( when it was purchased by WWE ) . In 2001 , she began appearing on World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) television as part of The Invasion ( by WCW , of the [ then- ] WWF ) storyline . Her most high profile storyline took place in 2003 when she feuded with Dawn Marie . Wilson has also been a part of the all @-@ female stable ( i.e. , a group of storyline @-@ associated characters ) , known as Vince 's Devils , which ended its run in 2006 . 
 Aside from pro wrestling , Wilson has been on the cover of several magazines , including FHM and Playboy ( for which she posed twice ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wilson was born in Boise , Idaho . She claims that while growing up she was painfully shy as a child . Wilson found her niche in many school activities , including cheerleading , dance , and was very competitive in track and field . 
 During her sophomore year of high school , after Wilson 's interest in modeling grew more serious , her mother urged her to pursue it . They visited an agency and were informed that Wilson would have to lose weight to be considered for jobs . In the process of losing weight , she began a bout with anorexia nervosa and then bulimia that lasted from ages 14 @-@ to @-@ 20 . 
 After recovering from the disorder , Wilson became involved in fitness . She began eating six meals a day and working out . She placed third in her first competition , and she later won the Miss Galaxy competition in 1998 . She then spent some time on the Extreme Fitness Team . As part of the Women 's Tri @-@ Fitness Championships in 1998 , Wilson won first place in the Grace and Physique round . 
 Later in 1998 , Wilson moved to Los Angeles to pursue acting . She began acting classes and was introduced to an agent who helped her gain a few jobs . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Championship Wrestling ( 1999 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Wilson 's start in wrestling came when she attended a World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) show with her boyfriend in 1999 . After going backstage , she was asked to walk out to the ring with Scott Steiner . Later , Kevin Nash expressed an interest in doing a storyline with her . She debuted as " Samantha " , who was brought in by the New World Order ( nWo ) to seduce David Flair into turning against his father , Ric Flair . They appeared together on February 21 at <unk> when Wilson slapped Ric , and David zapped him with a taser . After Ric Flair won the WCW World Heavyweight Championship from Hollywood Hogan at Uncensored inside a Barbed Wire Steel Cage match , David and Torrie took some time off from WCW television in April before returning in May to accompany David to the ring for matches . At the 1999 Bash at the Beach , Wilson acted as a valet for Flair as he successfully defended the WCW United States Heavyweight Championship against Dean Malenko . 
 She continued to accompany David to the ring until September when David was on the telephone with Torrie and later found out that Torrie was in the Filthy Animals ' locker room flirting with Billy Kidman , this resulted in a feud between Flair and Kidman on the October 18 , 1999 episode of Nitro when Torrie turned on him , resulting in Flair losing the match and the Animals beating on him , after the Animals stopped assaulting David , Torrie left with the Animals , It was around this time that Wilson began managing Billy Kidman and his Filthy Animals teammates . As a result , she found herself involved in the Animals continuing feud with The Revolution . On the November 22 , 1999 episode of Nitro , during a tag team match between Billy Kidman and Konnan facing Creative Control for the WCW World Tag Team Championship , Billy Kidman looked up at the <unk> and saw that Torrie Wilson and Eddie Guerrero were shown flirting inside his locker room on the " <unk> " , a hidden camera segment , which led to a storyline feud between Kidman and Guerrero . Following this , Wilson once again disappeared from television . Wilson however returned on the January 19 , 2000 episode of Thunder managing Billy Kidman , and in April 2000 , Kidman and Wilson joined a stable known as the New Blood , making them both villainous characters . As part of their newest storyline , Kidman became jealous of the attention Wilson began to give to fellow New Blood member Horace Hogan . In June , Wilson gave Kidman a hit at the Great American Bash , causing him to lose to Horace 's uncle , Hulk Hogan . 
 Wilson was taken off of television following the encounter , reappearing at July 's Bash at the Beach during a match between Shane Douglas and Buff Bagwell . After the match , Wilson and Douglas left together , which led to a feud between Kidman and Douglas . At September 's Fall Brawl , Wilson and Douglas defeated Kidman and Madusa in a mixed tag team match with scaffolding erected above the ring . Wilson was released from WCW in December 2000 . Although she would make one more appearance on the March 19 , 2001 episode of Nitro being held hostage by Shane Douglas . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = The Invasion ( 2001 – 2002 ) = = = = 
 Wilson made her television debut as a villain on the June 28 , 2001 episode of SmackDown ! as part of The Alliance during the Invasion angle in 2001 . In her first storyline with the company , she portrayed Vince McMahon 's latest affair . She also regularly teamed with fellow WCW performer Stacy Keibler . The duo made their wrestling debuts in a Bra and Panties match against Lita and Trish Stratus at the InVasion pay @-@ per @-@ view , which Stratus and Lita won by stripping their opponents to their underwear . The following night on Raw , Wilson defeated Stratus in a Paddle on a Pole match . Despite her relative lack of in @-@ ring experience , Wilson , alongside Keibler and Ivory , regularly feuded with the Divas , as well as interfering in matches on behalf of other wrestlers in The Alliance . 
 She became a fan favorite during the Invasion storyline when her character began an on @-@ screen romance with Tajiri . This new romance caused Keibler to turn against Wilson , and as a result of this , Wilson defected to the company . Wilson defeated Keibler in the first ever lingerie match at No Mercy . When the first ever brand separation of the company roster took place in April 2002 , Wilson was drafted to SmackDown ! . Shortly after this , as part of the storyline , Tajiri soon became jealous over the increased attention that Wilson received from other men , so he forced her to wear a geisha outfit , and he also appeared to mistreat her in matches . Wilson finally grew tired of this , and during Tajiri 's match against The Hurricane , she got on top of the announcer 's table and stripped off her clothing . The distraction allowed The Hurricane to pick up the win . At Rebellion 2002 , Torrie and her real life boyfriend at the time Billy Kidman defeated John Cena and Dawn Marie in an intergender tag team match . After the match Torrie and Kidman kissed . 
 = = = = Feud with Dawn Marie ( 2002 – 2003 ) = = = = 
 Wilson started a controversial feud with Dawn Marie in September 2002 , in which Dawn would start a relationship with Wilson 's real @-@ life father Al Wilson . On the October 17 episode of Smackdown ! , Torrie teamed up with Rikishi in losing effort to the team of Dawn Marie and Matt Hardy In response , Wilson defeated Dawn at No Mercy in October . Soon afterwards , Dawn would get engaged to Al , and told Wilson that she would break it off if she spent a night in a hotel room with her , though Dawn would later reveal this was a lie . Dawn would eventually show footage of this at Armageddon . The feud continued into the 2003 when Dawn and Al got married on the January 2 episode of SmackDown ! in their underwear . One week later , Al then , in storyline , died from a heart attack after having rigorous sex numerous times in succession on their honeymoon . Wilson would defeat Dawn again at the Royal Rumble in what was billed as a Stepmother vs. Stepdaughter match . The feud lasted four months . 
 = = = = Playboy and various feuds ( 2003 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 In March 2003 , Wilson appeared in a pictorial and on the cover of Playboy magazine . A few months earlier , when her pictorial was announced , a short storyline feud with Nidia developed , with the latter being jealous of the fact that Wilson was chosen for the cover and spread in the magazine . In weekly vignettes aired on SmackDown ! , both Nidia and her on @-@ screen boyfriend Jamie Noble made trips to The Playboy Mansion to complain to Hugh Hefner over his choice . 
 On the SmackDown ! after Wrestlemania XIX , during a segment labeled as Torrie 's Playboy Coming Out Party former Diva and Playboy covergirl Sable made her return to WWE after a four @-@ year absence . This began a storyline between the two women where for weeks , Sable played mind games with Wilson , being friendly one moment and unfriendly the next . This all led up to a bikini contest between the two at Judgment Day , which Wilson won . After the contest , Wilson kissed the former Women 's Champion Sable on the lips , showing her that there was " no hard feelings " due to Wilson 's win over the WWE veteran . Torrie then got her first WWE Women 's Championship match on Smackdown ! after Women 's Champion Molly Holly invaded the show interrupting Torrie 's photoshoot and challenging her to a match in which Torrie was unsuccessful in winning . 
 Continuing her feud with Noble and Nidia from earlier in the year , Wilson managed Billy Gunn upon his WWE return in the summer of 2003 . The feud came to an end after Nidia and Noble both became fan favorites and sided with Gunn and Wilson . After the formation of this alliance , Wilson , Nidia , and Dawn Marie feuded with Shaniqua for a short period of time , which led to Shaniqua physically dominating Wilson and Nidia in a handicap match . 
 Wilson teamed with Sable in March 2004 to feud with Raw Divas Stacy Keibler and Miss Jackie . The feud 's storyline centered on the latter duo 's jealousy of Wilson and Sable as Playboy cover girls , as well as their recently being named cover girls yet again , as the two Divas were announced to be featured together in an upcoming Playboy March 2004 issue . After weeks of rivalry , Wilson and Sable defeated Keibler and Miss Jackie in a Playboy Evening Gown match at WrestleMania XX by stripping their opponents of their evening gowns . 
 In May 2004 , Wilson began a second feud with Dawn Marie . As part of the feud , the two had a match with Torrie 's career on the line when the SmackDown ! General Manager at the time , Kurt Angle , made the stipulation for the match at Judgment Day , which Torrie defeated Dawn to keep her career . 
 Later in the year , Wilson engaged in a short feud with Sable , who defeated her at the Great American Bash . 
 In November 2004 , Wilson began feuding with Hiroko . On the December 2 episode of SmackDown ! , Wilson teamed up with Rey Mysterio and Rob Van Dam in winning effort against Hiroko , Kenzo Suzuki and Rene Dupree . On February 10 , 2005 on a special episode of SmackDown ! ( recorded on February 4 in Saitama , Japan ) , Torrie defeated Hiroko in a kimono match by removing her kimono first . 
 Torrie was then involved in a short @-@ lived feud with MNM valet Melina Perez . The two had a bra and panties match at The Great American Bash , with Candice Michelle as the special guest referee . Perez defeated Wilson in that match as well as a rematch later that week on Smackdown ! , with the help of Jillian Hall . 
 = = = = Vince 's Devils ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 It was revealed on August 22 , 2005 that Wilson and Candice Michelle had been moved to the Raw brand . On that night , Wilson and Candice became villains by attacking 2005 Diva Search winner Ashley Massaro . Her and Candice 's storyline feud with Massaro continued over the next couple weeks , as the duo , along with their enforcer Victoria ( dubbed as the " <unk> " by commentator Jim Ross ) , made things difficult for Massaro . On the September 5 episode of Raw , the evil Wilson defeated Massaro after interference from Victoria and Candice . Massaro evened the score on the September 12 , 2005 episode of Raw when she brought out the returning Trish Stratus , and the duo proceeded to attack the villains . Later that night , Wilson teamed up with Victoria in losing effort to Trish Stratus and Ashley . This led to a tag team match at Unforgiven , where the team of Stratus and Massaro defeated Wilson and Victoria . The following night on Raw , Wilson was defeated by Stratus after the match Wilson , Victoria and Candice attacked Ashley and Trish . The feud continued into WWE Homecoming , where Stratus and Massaro defeated Wilson , Candice , and Victoria in the first ever three on two Bra and Panties match by stripping all three of their opponents . 
 Wilson was absent from WWE television for quite some time after this , leading to rumors and false reports that she had been released from WWE . In actuality , she had taken a leave of absence to tend to some " personal issues " . Wilson was surprised by the rumors after some media personnel offered to help her find work . WWE issued a statement on their website , in which Wilson also commented , denouncing the rumors . In the statement she joked she had to " call the WWE office and ask them if they forgot to fire me " . 
 On October 17 , Wilson made her return to Raw , where she , Candice and Victoria faced off against the team of Stratus , Massaro , and their new ally Mickie James in a winning effort after Wilson pinned James . On November 28 episode of Raw , Wilson teamed up with Victoria and Candice Michelle in losing effort to Trish , Ashley and James . On the February 13 episode of Raw , Wilson was accompied by Michelle in losing effort to Ashley . Vince 's Devils was a short @-@ lived alliance . Wilson soon became a fan favorite once again , after Candice and Victoria both turned against her . On the March 13 episode of Raw , Torrie helped Trish retain the Women 's Championship against Victoria whom was accompied by Candice Michelle . The following week on Raw , Torrie teamed up with Trish to defeat Victoria and Candice . The storyline feud between Candice and Wilson led to a match where Wilson faced Playboy 's newest cover girl , Candice , at WrestleMania 22 in a Playboy Pillow Fight . Wilson won the match , but the feud still continued on @-@ and @-@ off for some time . On the June 12 , 2006 episode of Raw , Wilson defeated Candice in the first ever " Wet and Wild match " , a wrestling match involving water balloons and squirt guns , in which the winner of the match would be on the cover of the WWE 2006 Summer Special magazine . 
 = = = = Carlito 's girlfriend , return to Smackdown ! ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 Wilson also made a special appearance on WWE 's ECW brand on August 22 , 2006 representing Raw in a bikini contest against ECW Diva Kelly Kelly . A winner was not decided , however , and a six @-@ person mixed tag match began pitting Wilson , Tommy Dreamer , and The Sandman against the team of Kelly Kelly , Mike Knox , and Test . Wilson 's team was victorious . 
 In the final months of 2006 , Wilson entered into an on @-@ screen relationship with Carlito . On the November 27 RAW , Torrie Wilson participated in a # 1 Contenders Diva Battle Royal that was won by Victoria . On the December 11 RAW , Torrie was defeated by Victoria and after the match Chris Masters proceeded to put Torrie in a Masterlock until she was saved by Carlito . During this time , Ric Flair took an interest in Carlito , and Wilson accompanied the duo in a series of tag matches . On March 12 episode of Raw ! , Torrie was defeated by then Women 's Champion Melina , after the match Melina attacked Wilson but was stopped by Mickie James , who was then stopped by Victoria , Melina then attempted to escape but was stopped by Ashley Massaro . In May 2007 , however , Carlito turned against Flair and dumped Wilson when he became a heel . The storyline came to a halt when on the June 11 episode of Raw , when Wilson was drafted from Raw to SmackDown ! as part of the 2007 WWE Draft . As she returned , she acted a valet for Jimmy Wang Yang and the duo was placed in feuds against Victoria and Kenny Dykstra . 
 At the Summerslam pay @-@ per @-@ view , Torrie participated in a number one contenders Battle Royal which was won by Beth Phoenix . On the September 21 episode of SmackDown ! Torrie was one of the bridesmaids at the Theodore Long @-@ Kristal Marshall wedding . On the September 28 episode of SmackDown ! , after losing to Victoria , she was attacked in the ring by the debuting villainess Krissy Vaine , but the feud was prematurely dropped when Vaine left the company . On the October 29 episode of Raw ! Torrie competed in the Halloween Divas Battle Royal eliminating Victoria before being last eliminated by Kelly Kelly , who defeated her with a strike to the groin . On the November 16 episode of SmackDown ! , Torrie teamed up with Mickie James in a losing effort to Beth Phoenix and Victoria . She was on Mickie 's team at Survivor Series , which was victorious over Beth Phoenix 's . Torrie 's last appearance was on the November 23 episode of SmackDown ! , defeating long @-@ time rival Victoria . In November , Wilson took time off from wrestling to undergo physical therapy in relation to a previous back injury . On May 8 , 2008 , Wilson was released from her WWE contract , due to never returning . 
 She made her in @-@ ring return at WrestleMania XXV alongside many former divas to compete in the " Miss WrestleMania " battle royal , where she was eliminated by Beth Phoenix . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Wilson has appeared in nine WWE video games . She made her in @-@ game debut in WWE SmackDown ! Shut Your Mouth , and appears in WWE WrestleMania XIX , WWE Raw 2 , WWE SmackDown ! Here Comes the Pain , WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw , WWE Day of Reckoning 2 , WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw 2006 , WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw 2007 , and WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw 2008 . 
 Aside from Playboy , Wilson has also appeared on the cover of several other magazines , including the September 2006 cover of FHM magazine . 
 Wilson was also number forty @-@ three on FHM 's 100 Sexiest Women in the World list in 2007 . She has also been on AskMen.com 's list of the Most Desirable Women in the World twice : she was number twenty @-@ two in 2006 and number sixty @-@ five in 2007 . 
 Wilson , along with several other Divas , filmed Timbaland 's music video " Throw It On Me " in April 2007 . Also in 2007 , Wilson made a special appearance , along with Mick Foley , at the Special Olympics World Games in Shanghai . She appeared on the February 6 , 2008 episode of Project Runway where the contestants designed wrestling attire for several of the Divas . 
 In April 2009 , Wilson signed on to appear in the NBC reality show , I 'm a Celebrity ... Get Me out of Here ! , which premiered in June . On the show 's season finale , Wilson was named the runner @-@ up to winner Lou Diamond Phillips . 
 In September 2011 , Wilson along with Candice Michelle filmed Lilian Garcia 's music video " U Drive Me Loca " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Wilson admits not having watched wrestling when she was younger , but says that since becoming involved in the industry , she has become a fan of Hulk Hogan . 
 While working for WWE , Wilson was on the road up to 300 days per year . She has a Maltese named Chloe , who traveled with her . While on the road , Wilson worked out at least four days a week . Usually , her workout consisted of an hour of cardiovascular workouts and a half @-@ hour of lifting weights . 
 Wilson also has a close friendship with Stacy Keibler . At one point , they were roommates in Los Angeles , California . 
 After dating for four years , Wilson married Peter Gruner ( known on @-@ screen as Billy Kidman ) on July 11 , 2003 . They lived in Tampa , Florida , when not traveling . The couple legally divorced in 2008 . 
 In September 2007 , Wilson launched her clothing line , " Officially Jaded " , alongside Nick Mitchell , a former WWE wrestler who was known as " Mitch " of the Spirit Squad . The couple began dating in mid @-@ 2006 . She opened a store in The Woodlands , Texas , at the upscale Market Street district . On September 14 , 2008 , Torrie made an appearance at the inaugural Wrestler 's Rescue event held in Piscataway , New Jersey , an event to create awareness and to help raise money to support the health care needs of retired professional wrestlers . 
 Wilson dated New York Yankees third baseman Alex Rodriguez from 2011 to 2015 . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Springboard back elbow – 2001 ; adopted from Tajiri 
 Nose Job ( Sitout side facebuster ) – 2005 – 2007 
 Swinging neckbreaker – 2002 – 2004 ; used as a signature move from 2005 – 2007 
 Tornado DDT , sometimes while running to an opponent – 2003 
 Signature moves 
 Drop toe hold 
 Dropkick 
 Diving crossbody 
 Facial ( Stinkface , with theatrics ) 
 Knife edge chop 
 Leaping clothesline , sometimes done repeatedly in session 
 Multiple pinning variations 
 Inside cradle 
 Roll @-@ up 
 Schoolgirl 
 Sunset flip 
 Running corner clothesline 
 Spear , to an oncoming opponent 
 Snap suplex 
 Tilt @-@ a @-@ whirl headscissors takedown 
 With Candice Michelle 
 Double team finishing moves 
 Double DDT 
 Managers 
 Victoria 
 Candice Michelle 
 Trish Stratus 
 Jimmy Wang Yang 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Victoria 
 Candice Michelle 
 The Filthy Animals 
 Carlito 
 Jimmy Wang Yang 
 Shane Douglas 
 David Flair 
 Billy Gunn 
 Billy Kidman 
 Tajiri 
 Rey Mysterio 
 Entrance themes 
 WWE 
 " Lo @-@ Fi Groove " by Jim Johnston ( July 19 , 2001 – August 6 , 2001 ) 
 " Deep Beautiful " by Jim Johnston ( September 20 , 2001 – October 21 , 2001 ) 
 " Need a Little Time " by Lilian Garcia ( December 24 , 2001 – September 18 , 2005 ) 
 " Not Man Enough for Me " by Jim Johnston ( September 19 , 2005 – May 1 , 2006 ) 
 " A Girl Like That " by Eleventh Hour ( May 22 , 2006 – November 23 , 2007 ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 Golden Thong Award ( 2002 ) 
 = Clark Shaughnessy = 
 Clark Daniel Shaughnessy ( originally O 'Shaughnessy ) ( March 6 , 1892 – May 15 , 1970 ) was an American football coach and innovator . He is sometimes called the " father of the T formation " and the original founder of the forward pass , although that system had previously been used as early as the 1880s . Shaughnessy did , however , modernize the obsolescent T formation to make it once again relevant in the sport , particularly for the quarterback and the receiver positions . He employed his innovations most famously on offense , but on the defensive side of the ball as well , and he earned a reputation as a ceaseless experimenter . 
 Shaughnessy held head coaching positions at Tulane University , Loyola University New Orleans , the University of Chicago , Stanford University , the University of Maryland , the University of Pittsburgh , the University of Hawaii , and in the National Football League with the Los Angeles Rams . Shaughnessy also served in advisory capacities with the Chicago Bears and the Washington Redskins . 
 He reached the height of his success in 1940 , in his first season at Stanford , where he led the Indians to an undefeated season that culminated with a Rose Bowl victory . That year , he also helped prepare the Chicago Bears for the 1940 NFL Championship Game , in which they routed Washington , 73 – 0 . Shaughnessy 's successes showcased the effectiveness of the T formation and encouraged its widespread adoption . He was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1968 . Shaughnessy also coached college basketball at Tulane University . He played college football at the University of Minnesota . 
 = = Early life and college = = 
 Shaughnessy was born on March 6 , 1892 in St. Cloud , Minnesota , the second son of Lucy Ann ( Foster ) and Edward Shaughnessy . He attended North St. Paul High School , and prior to college , had no athletic experience . When he attended the University of Minnesota , however , he played college football under head coach Henry L. Williams and alongside halfback Bernie Bierman . Shaughnessy considered Williams to be football 's greatest teacher , and Williams considered him to be the best passer from the Midwest . Shaughnessy handled both the passing and kicking duties for the team . 
 He played on the freshman squad in 1910 and on the varsity squad from 1911 to 1913 , first as an end , then a tackle in 1912 , and finally as a fullback in 1913 . Of the three , Shaughnessy said he preferred the tackle position . In 1912 , he recovered three fumbles against Iowa , and Walter Camp named him an alternate on his All @-@ America team . As a senior , Shaughnessy was named to the All @-@ Big Ten Conference first team . 
 Shaughnessy played basketball as a guard and ran track in the <unk> and 880 @-@ yard events . The Minnesota athletic director asked him to join the basketball team before a game against Illinois , despite the fact he had never played and did not know the rules . He joined the track and field team in similar fashion , and replaced a half @-@ mile runner even though he did not own and had never worn track spikes . In The Big Ten : A Century of Excellence , Shaughnessy was called " one of the most versatile athletes in Minnesota 's history . " Shaughnessy also competed as a rower with the St. Paul Boat Club . He was a member of the Sigma Chi fraternity . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 = = = Tulane = = = 
 After graduation , he remained at his alma mater , Minnesota , for one season as an assistant coach in 1914 . Tulane University selected Shaughnessy as head football coach in 1915 over potential candidates Dana X. Bible and Charley Moran , among others . Notre Dame assistant coach Knute Rockne and Ray Morrison were both unable to travel to New Orleans for an interview , and Tulane officials required a face @-@ to @-@ face meeting with the applicants . The school offered Shaughnessy $ 1 @,@ 875 ( $ 43 @,@ 859 adjusted for inflation ) to be its football , basketball , and track coach , and athletic director . When he arrived , he found the football field in a state of disrepair and the equipment to be woefully inadequate . Because the athletic department was in dire financial straits , Shaughnessy paid to purchase new equipment for the team . With only one opponent scheduled in the upcoming season , he wrote letters to sixty schools to secure additional games . 
 Shaughnessy introduced to Tulane the Minnesota shift , an innovation created by his former coach Henry L. Williams . By 1919 , Shaughnessy had transformed Tulane into a competitor amongst Southern collegiate teams . That season , he guided them to a then school record of seven consecutive wins . In 1920 , Germany Schulz was hired to take over duties as athletic director , and he also aided Shaughnessy as the line coach from 1923 to 1925 . 
 In 1923 , Shaughnessy hired his former teammate Bernie Bierman as an assistant coach . Bierman remained on the staff for three seasons before he left to become head coach at Mississippi A & M. In 1924 , Tulane set a new school record for wins and finished with an 8 – 1 record . The following season , the Green Wave bested the prior year 's mark and posted a 9 – 0 – 1 record . School officials declined an invitation to face Washington in the Rose Bowl , because they believed the Tulane players were too small . Indiana University attempted to hire Shaughnessy after his undefeated season , but he instead chose to sign a ten @-@ year extension with Tulane . 
 In a 1926 article written for the NEA News Service , he responded to those who asked him how the " Shaughnessy System " worked so well . He said , " If there is a ' Shaughnessy system ' at Tulane , if it has any ' secret , ' two words tell the whole story — common sense . All that I have done at Tulane is take the material I found and train it in plays built around the individual abilities of each man . " 
 Despite optimistic preseason predictions , Tulane suffered its first and only losing season of Shaughnessy 's tenure in 1926 . He was considered for the head job at Northwestern in February 1927 after Clarence Spears turned it down . Shaughnessy later received similar offers from Louisiana State and Wisconsin . On April 8 , 1927 , he tendered his resignation without a publicly stated reason and was subsequently released from his contract . Tulane replaced him with former assistant Bernie Bierman . The Milwaukee Journal credited Shaughnessy with building a formidable team at Tulane , and noted that he increased revenue and improved facilities , while he used the available players and did not pay them " a nickel " . At the end of his tenure , Shaughnessy held a record of 59 – 28 – 7 , and as of 2010 , he continues to hold the record for the most wins of any Tulane football coach . He also coached the basketball team for three seasons between 1915 and 1918 and amassed a 27 – 15 record . 
 = = = Loyola = = = 
 In June 1927 , nearby Loyola of the South hired Shaughnessy as its head football coach . According to The Wow Boys : A Coach , a Team , and a Turning Point in College Football , a New Orleans millionaire offered him $ 175 @,@ 000 to coach Loyola for ten years ( $ 2 @,@ 383 @,@ 956 adjusted for inflation ) . This made him one of the highest paid football coaches in the nation at the time . 
 In 1928 , Loyola traveled to South Bend , Indiana to play Notre Dame in its season opener . The Wolves took a 6 – 0 halftime lead before they eventually fell , 12 – 6 . After the game , Notre Dame head coach Knute Rockne reportedly said , " Never get me another ' warm @-@ up game ' against a team coached by that guy . " The following year , Rockne was asked to name the best football coach and responded , " Modesty forbids ... But if I can name the two best football coaches in America , one of them is going to be Clark Shaughnessy . " 
 At Loyola , Shaughnessy retained his emphasis on the forward pass . In 1930 , the Wolves beat larger but unprepared Iowa State and Detroit teams in consecutive weeks with the same passing play . During his tenure , he was called " the greatest one man coaching staff in football . " He also brought to Loyola his modified version of the Minnesota shift , which he claimed no opponent had been able to completely counteract . In 1931 , California considered Shaughnessy as a candidate for its head coaching job . Despite opportunities to coach elsewhere , Shaughnessy remained in New Orleans because he liked the city and it was his wife 's hometown . He compiled a 38 – 16 – 6 record at Loyola from 1927 to 1932 . 
 = = = Chicago = = = 
 After the 1932 season , University of Chicago president Dr. Robert Maynard Hutchins forced out 70 @-@ year @-@ old head coach Amos Alonzo Stagg , whom he considered too old for the position . Stagg then moved on to coach at the College of the Pacific . Athletic director T. Nelson Metcalf hired Shaughnessy to replace Stagg as head coach in 1933 . Shaughnessy inherited a difficult situation at Chicago , and for the most part , lacked good material . He did , however , inherit from Stagg at least one important recruit : inaugural Heisman Trophy winner and future Hall of Fame back Jay Berwanger , whom many Midwest pundits considered the best back of the 1930s . 
 Under an academic program implemented in 1933 known as the New Plan or the Chicago Plan , annual comprehensive examinations replaced end @-@ of @-@ term testing . This new schedule conflicted with spring football practice , which was shortened each subsequent season until it was eventually eliminated altogether . Without that extra practice to learn Shaughnessy 's complex system , time had to be devoted to basics in the fall . The New Plan also hindered the availability of suitable football players : It encouraged younger students to enroll , discouraged the transfer of student @-@ athletes , and had stringent academic requirements to maintain athletic eligibility . Athletic director Metcalf said , " Others do legitimate recruiting , which we do not . " Putting Chicago at further disadvantage to its Big Ten opponents , university president Hutchins would not countenance the establishment of a physical education major . 
 At the first practice in 1933 , Shaughnessy assessed he would have a good line , but an undersized backfield . He told the assembled candidates that they would use an open game and fast passing attack to offset their disadvantages . In his first season , Shaughnessy awarded a box of candy to the Maroon player who made the first tackle of each game for the player to give to his girlfriend . The " C " men alumni organization created similar incentives for the most valuable player , best tackler , and best blocker . 
 In January 1934 , Shaughnessy hired Marchmont Schwartz as an assistant coach . Schwartz had played on Shaughnessy 's Loyola freshman team before he transferred to Notre Dame . In February , Shaughnessy declined interest from Ohio State to replace former head coach Sam <unk> , and said that he had already assembled his coaching staff and had no desire to leave Chicago . In 1935 , Harvard offered Shaughnessy a job as its head coach , which he seriously considered . Chicago moved to retain him , possibly with a salary increase , and the Harvard job ultimately went to former Western Maryland coach Dick Harlow . 
 After breaking even in each of his first three seasons , Shaughnessy 's Chicago teams suffered a losing record each year from 1936 to 1939 . Chicago finished the 1939 season with a 2 – 6 record and were winless in the Big Ten Conference . The Maroons were outscored by their opponents , 308 – 37 , and failed to tally in each loss . These included routs by Michigan , 85 – 0 ; Ohio State , 61 – 0 ; Illinois , 46 – 0 ; Harvard , 61 – 0 ; and Virginia , 47 – 0 . President Hutchins , who hated the sport and said " there is no doubt that football has been a major handicap to education in the United States , " successfully pushed to have the program disbanded . He said , " I did not de @-@ emphasize football at the University of Chicago , I abolished it . " Hutchins hoped the move would set an example for other universities to follow , but this did not occur . 
 Shaughnessy could have remained at Chicago , where he held a " lifetime sinecure " as a physical education professor and earned a comfortable salary of $ 7 @,@ 500 ( $ 127 @,@ 590 adjusted for inflation ) , but he was intent on continuing to coach . He described football as his passion and hobby . His final record at Chicago was 17 – 34 – 4 . 
 During his coaching tenure at the University of Chicago , Shaughnessy befriended George Halas , the owner and coach of the Chicago Bears . In 1930 , Halas had hired Ralph Jones , the athletic director and football coach at nearby Lake Forest College , who had been his freshman coach at the University of Illinois in 1914 . Under head coach Robert <unk> , Illinois employed the T formation in " its most rudimentary form " . With the Bears , Jones experimented with the old T formation , and he spread the linemen , pushed out one receiver , and used a back as a man in motion , the latter usually being Red Grange . While these changes were innovative , they were not game @-@ changing , and the T was used to complement the single @-@ wing offense rather than replace it . In 1935 , Shaughnessy described to Halas his vision of the T formation that used " hidden ball stuff , but with power " . He had not employed it at the University of Chicago because he lacked the players to execute it . In 1937 , Shaughnessy began to work part @-@ time as a consultant to the Bears for $ 2 @,@ 000 per year ( $ 32 @,@ 921 adjusted for inflation ) . In that capacity , he helped refine the T formation and analyzed scouting reports . The Bears continued to experiment with the T , and after Shaughnessy left Chicago , the formation became the club 's standard offensive formation in 1940 . The media has sometimes erroneously credited Shaughnessy for the invention of the T formation . The Associated Press wrote that " he was , however , undeniably the father of the modern T @-@ attack . " Shaughnessy himself called it the oldest formation in football . 
 = = = Stanford = = = 
 In 1939 , the Stanford Indians posted a 1 – 7 – 1 record to finish last in the Pacific Coast Conference , which resulted in the relief of head coach Tiny Thornhill . At the time , the 1939 Stanford Indians were considered the worst team to have ever represented the university . After the season , Stanford unsuccessfully attempted to hire Missouri coach Don Faurot . During the job search , Stanford officials were surprised to learn how well regarded Shaughnessy , a coach of only occasionally successful squads , was amongst his peers . Many considered him as a " mad scientist " of football experimentation . In January 1940 , Stanford University awarded a five @-@ year contract to Shaughnessy as its head football coach , passing over predicted frontrunner John Bain Sutherland . The move surprised even Shaughnessy , who said , " I didn 't expect it . " 
 Many Stanford alumni were upset with the decision to hire Shaughnessy . The most popular candidates for the vacant position were two Stanford alumni themselves : San Jose State coach Dudley DeGroot , and Santa Clara coach Buck Shaw . Some believed the Shaughnessy hiring was a ploy to eventually eliminate football at the school , as had happened at both Loyola and Chicago the year prior . The Bay Area media mocked the Shaughnessy hiring as comically inept . They believed that a prestigious academic school had foolishly hired an inveterate loser as its head coach . Prescott Sulivan of the San Francisco Examiner and Jack McDonald of the San Francisco Call @-@ Bulletin coined the nickname " Soup " for Shaughnessy , which they sarcastically explained was a diminutive for the word " super " . Sullivan wrote , " We have heard it said that Shaughnessy has developed the knack of losing to the point where , with him , it is an exact science . In light of his record , we aren 't at all surprised at this . " The Stanford players were also skeptical of Shaughnessy 's abilities . Center Milt Vucinich said , " We 'd been reading about all those beatings Shaughnessy 's men had taken , so we were joking among ourselves that wasn 't it just like Stanford to hire somebody like this to coach us . " 
 Although Stanford had fared poorly during the previous seasons , Thornhill had left behind a team with a talented roster , which included 24 returning lettermen . Shaughnessy believed the players were good , but unsuited to the single @-@ wing offense that his predecessor had employed . Perhaps most importantly , Shaughnessy inherited back Frankie Albert , whom he considered a prototypical T formation quarterback . In 1943 , Shaughnessy wrote that he considered the 1940 Stanford backfield — quarterback Frankie Albert , fullback Norm Standlee , right halfback Hugh Gallarneau , and left halfback Pete Kmetovic — as the greatest in history . While he believed the Indians backfield was better than any such combination in the single @-@ wing , double @-@ wing , short punt , or box formations , he added the caveat that this held true only in the Stanford players ' employment in the T @-@ formation . 
 Shaughnessy assembled a competent coaching staff in line coach Phil <unk> and backfield coach Marchmont Schwartz . He also hired former Chicago Bears quarterback Bernie Masterson to mentor Frankie Albert . Shaughnessy 's version of the T formation relied on motion and deception , and therefore differed from its earlier 19th @-@ century incarnations , such as that used by Amos Alonzo Stagg at the University of Chicago , which emphasized power . In contrast to the single @-@ wing , the new T did not use massed blocking formations for the ball @-@ carrier . Instead , it utilized " brush blocking " , where the linemen would only need to block a defender for one or two seconds . This scheme greatly reduced the disadvantage of an undersized line . Also different from the single @-@ wing , the direct snap and position of the backs in the T formation shielded the ball from the view of defenders . This allowed for far more effective deception . Shaughnessy reportedly drew inspiration for his strategy from the Panzer tactics of Wehrmacht general Heinz Guderian . 
 Most sportswriters , unfamiliar with the T formation , called it the " Shaughnessy Formation " or " Shaughnessy 's new razzle @-@ dazzle attacks . " Bill Reiser of the San Francisco Chronicle referred to it correctly when he wrote : 
 " No one knows for sure what kind of football the Indians will play from this new T @-@ Formation ... They start from the Notre Dame T and then stop looking like Notre Dame because they don 't shift at all and never do get into the famous box formation . The man @-@ in @-@ motion may stop anywhere on the field . He changes the formation . [ Quarterback Frankie ] Albert parks himself right behind the center and takes the ball directly from his hands on nearly all plays . It 's football unlike any previously played on the Coast . " 
 = = = = 1940 season = = = = 
 The team conducted intense preparations during the spring and fall practices before the 1940 season . On one occasion , Stanford athletic director Al Masters angrily complained that the maintenance department had left on the practice field lights , only to be told that the team was still practicing . In one scrimmage , the varsity offense managed only a single touchdown against the freshman team , which prompted Shaughnessy to secretly draft a single @-@ wing playbook in the event that the T formation failed . 
 The 1940 season opened with Stanford facing the University of San Francisco Dons at Kezar Stadium as part of the first @-@ ever major college football doubleheader . It also featured Santa Clara and Utah , but despite its unusual nature , the event was overshadowed by a concurrent game deemed much more significant between California and Michigan in nearby Berkeley . After Santa Clara defeated Utah , 34 – 14 , the Stanford game began at 3 : 30 p.m. It started off sloppily , and the Indians failed to advance the ball in their first two possessions . In their third series , however , Albert connected with an uncovered receiver , Hugh Gallarneau , for a 17 @-@ yard pass . Fullback Norm Standlee then rushed for 20 yards . Halfback Pete Kmetovic ran untouched up the middle for the game 's first touchdown . Stanford went on to win , 27 – 0 , and outgained San Francisco by a margin of 247 yards to eight . After the game , San Francisco head coach George Malley said , " We were baffled , naturally , by all that running around in the backfield . " After the game , convinced that the T formation worked , Shaughnessy discarded the single @-@ wing playbook he had drafted . 
 The following week , Stanford defeated Oregon , 13 – 0 . The Indians then beat Santa Clara , 7 – 6 , which was the Broncos ' only loss of the season . Stanford rallied to beat 19th @-@ ranked Washington State , 24 – 13 . A week later , the Indians defeated their fifth unbeaten opponent , 17th @-@ ranked Southern California , 21 – 7 . They continued on to beat UCLA , 20 – 14 ; 11th @-@ ranked Washington , 20 – 10 ; 19th @-@ ranked Oregon State , 28 – 14 ; and California , 13 – 7 . Stanford , with a perfect 9 – 0 record , secured the Pacific Coast Conference championship and an invitation to the 1941 Rose Bowl , where they faced seventh @-@ ranked Nebraska . The Indians won , 21 – 13 , with the final score coming on a 39 @-@ yard punt return by Kmetovic . 
 Before the Rose Bowl , Shaughnessy lent help to his old associate George Halas of the Chicago Bears , which in Sid Luckman , had found a quarterback well suited to the T formation . Before the NFL Championship Game against the Washington Redskins , Shaughnessy devised a series of counter plays to confuse their opponent , which on game film had shown a tendency to shift linebackers in the direction of the motion man . His preparations helped Chicago rout Washington , 73 – 0 . 
 At the end of the season , the Poling System named Stanford the national champions , and in later years , the Billingsley Report and Helms Athletic Foundation did likewise retroactively . Shaughnessy was voted the Scripps @-@ Howard Coach of the Year by a wide margin , and Albert and Gallarneau were named to All @-@ America first teams . The media nicknamed the 1940 squad the " Wow Boys " , a play on their impressive feats and the earlier Stanford " Vow Boys " , which were named for Tiny Thornhill 's promise to never lose to Southern California . 
 Stanford 's and the Chicago Bears ' unexpected success with the modern T formation prompted coaches around the nation to adopt it . Shaughnessy and Halas taught coaching clinics , and Bears quarterback Sid Luckman installed the formation at his alma mater , Columbia . Luckman also helped implement the T on national championship teams at both Army and Notre Dame . By 1944 , more than half of the country 's football teams at the collegiate and professional level were using the T. In 1949 , the Pittsburgh Steelers were the only NFL team still using the single @-@ wing . The T formation led to numerous derivatives , many of which remain in use today , including the power I , pro set , veer , wishbone , split T , wing T , and West Coast offense . 
 = = = = 1941 season = = = = 
 Shaughnessy made the " pessimistic " prediction of at least two losses for his 1941 squad , which lost Gallarneau and Standlee to graduation . His forecast proved accurate , as injuries took their toll , and the team lost to Oregon State , Washington State , and California to finish with a 6 – 3 record . After the Indians fell in their penultimate game , Stanford , Washington , and Oregon State were tied for first @-@ place in the Pacific Coast Conference with two losses each . California 's upset win over Stanford , 16 – 0 , in the finale ensured that Oregon State received the Rose Bowl bid . 
 In February 1942 , Shaughnessy traveled to Yale University , which was considering three candidates for its vacant head coaching position . A month later , he said he was not interested in Yale , but that he might move to an unnamed Eastern school with little football tradition . Shaughnessy resigned in March 1942 to move to Maryland . A 1977 Sports Illustrated article reported that he decided to leave when he realized Stanford might discontinue its football program during World War II . He expressed disappointment about leaving , but believed the new job would provide a challenge . Maryland reportedly offered the same salary as Stanford , $ 9 @,@ 000 ( $ 130 @,@ 344 adjusted for inflation ) , and a position on its faculty . 
 = = = First stint at Maryland = = = 
 At Maryland , Shaughnessy served as the head football coach , athletic director , and director of physical education , under a " lifetime contract " . Shaughnessy introduced a red and white color scheme for the Maryland uniforms , which replaced the longstanding combination of black and gold . He installed the T formation , and mentored quarterback Tommy Mont , whom he compared favorably with Frankie Albert . He also praised Terrapins fullback Jack Wright and likened him to Norm Standlee . In 1942 , the Terrapins amassed a 7 – 2 record under Shaughnessy , and the Associated Press assessed it was a " pretty fair ball club " . Mont finished the season as one of the top three passers in the nation . After the season , Shaughnessy left Maryland for Pittsburgh , a move he later called , " the worst thing I ever did . " 
 = = = Pittsburgh = = = 
 In 1943 , Shaughnessy replaced Pittsburgh head coach Charles W. Bowser , who had applied for a commission in the United States Navy . The University of Pittsburgh had de @-@ emphasized football , a move with which Shaughnessy said he was in accordance . He also said he would not guarantee any number of wins as coach . During this time , Shaughnessy had to contend with the loss of players to the wartime draft . At Pittsburgh , his teams compiled a 10 – 17 record from 1943 to 1945 without a winning season . In 1943 , the National Safety Council honored him with an award for " developing and applying coaching methods that provide maximum protection for the players . " 
 In March 1944 , Washington Redskins owner George Preston Marshall hired Shaughnessy as an advisor , a position he held concurrently with his duties at Pittsburgh . He mentored new head coach Dudley DeGroot in the T formation , in which quarterback Sammy Baugh excelled . Pittsburgh , however , disapproved of his affiliation with the professional franchise . 
 = = = Second stint at Maryland = = = 
 In February 1946 , Shaughnessy accepted an offer to return to Maryland amidst mounting criticism at Pittsburgh , which included the threat of resignation from assistant coaches Charles Hartwig , Bobby Hoel and Stan <unk> . University of Maryland president Dr. H. C. Byrd , himself a former football coach , called Shaughnessy one of the top @-@ three coaches in the nation . Shaughnessy complained that he was not given a fair chance to succeed at Pittsburgh and that controversy over his role with the Redskins was without basis . The Pittsburgh athletic board had recommended Shaughnessy be retained as coach if he resigned from the Redskins , but he refused . 
 Shaughnessy said , " The funny part of it is that I gave Maryland the roughest deal I have ever given anyone in my life , and when Dr. [ Byrd ] offered me a chance to come back , I accepted . " Because of his repeated job changes , the Associated Press dubbed <unk> " football 's man in motion " . At Maryland , he replaced Bear Bryant who had departed for Kentucky . Shaughnessy reintroduced his preferred red and white uniforms , which again replaced the black and gold scheme and remained the dominant colors until 1987 . 
 His return to Maryland was far less successful than his first stint . The Terrapins amassed a 3 – 6 record in 1946 . In November , he claimed a Washington Post story misquoted him as calling some of his ex @-@ servicemen players " bums " . The same article reported he would be fired at the end of the season . The Post ran another quote that Shaughnessy admitted was accurate : " There are some boys on this team who would have been fired a long time ago by another coach for their personal conduct . " 
 After the season , it was rumored that the Redskins were interested in promoting him to replace head coach Turk Edwards , but the franchise denied it and Shaughnessy would not comment on his plans . In January 1947 , he quit as Maryland coach , stating that he did not want to remain athletic director or resign from the Washington Redskins , both of which the school wanted . Shaughnessy said he would work full @-@ time for the Redskins for the remaining year on his contract , and might return to coach only college football at the end of his term , possibly with Maryland . President Byrd affirmed that Shaughnessy 's poor 1946 record was not related to his departure . He was replaced by split T proponent Jim Tatum . 
 = = = Los Angeles Rams = = = 
 In 1948 , Shaughnessy joined the Los Angeles Rams as a " technical advisor " to head coach Bob Snyder . In the preseason , owner Dan Reeves was so impressed with Shaughnessy that Reeves promoted him to head coach and fired Snyder . At Los Angeles , Shaughnessy developed the pro set that used a three wide receiver set . He made this change to capitalize on running back Elroy " Crazy Legs " Hirsch , whom he thought would make a better flanker . Los Angeles captured the Western Conference Championship in 1949 . 
 Reeves fired Shaughnessy after two seasons , because he had created " internal friction " . One source explained that Shaughnessy 's eccentricities and continuously expanding playbook had taken its toll on the players . He was replaced by assistant coach Joe Stydahar . Shaughnessy said , " Stydahar coach the Rams ? I could take a high school team and beat him . " Stydahar , however , led the Rams to the National Conference Championship that season , and the team set numerous NFL passing and scoring records . 
 = = = Chicago Bears = = = 
 In 1951 , Shaughnessy was rumored as a candidate for the vacant Washington Redskins head coaching job , but nothing came of it . From 1951 to 1962 , Shaughnessy served on the staff of the Chicago Bears as a technical advisor , vice president , and defensive specialist . Halas retained responsibility for the offense , including the Bears ' T formation . Ironically , Shaughnessy was tasked with developing a defense to counter the T formation . One of his solutions was the 5 – 3 – 3 defense , which left outside linebackers available to defend against end runs and passes in the flat . 
 In 1954 , Shaughnessy attended the Blue – Gray Game in Montgomery , Alabama , scouting specifically for flankers . Jacksonville State assistant Ray <unk> told him the best receiver in the state was not playing in the game : <unk> Hill of Florence State Teachers ' College . Shaughnessy requested game film from Hill 's coach , and eventually , the Bears selected him with their 15th pick in the 1954 NFL Draft . That season , he was named the NEA NFL MVP . 
 In October 1961 , the Bears — utilizing Shaughnessy 's complex , shifting defensive alignments — stifled San Francisco 49ers coach Red Hickey 's new shotgun formation , 31 – 0 . Chicago had learned lessons against the Baltimore Colts who had attempted to use the shotgun the previous week . Shaughnessy explained his Chicago defensive scheme in November 1961 : 
 " We can adjust to fit three things . We have defenses to fit the [ offense ] we face , the personnel we face and the situation in the game . Bill George calls the basic overall defense . Then Fred Williams calls the defense for the rush men . Richie <unk> calls the defense for the backs . All of these are real bright boys , and they do a great job . " 
 Shaughnessy mentored middle linebacker Bill George as the defensive play @-@ caller . Bears coach Abe Gibron likened George to having Shaughnessy himself on the field . Shaughnessy worked to counter the increasing use of the forward pass . He emphasized man @-@ to @-@ man coverage , dropped linebackers or defensive ends into pass coverage , and utilized blitzes from multiple directions — which had previously consisted mostly of just a middle linebacker . 
 Former Chicago Bears head coach <unk> " Hunk " Anderson gave a highly critical account of his interactions with Shaughnessy in Notre Dame , Chicago Bears , and Hunk Anderson . He described one incident , during a game against the Cleveland Browns , where Shaughnessy implored Anderson to call an " end run " . Anderson , thinking he noticed a vulnerability to exploit , asked which end run and which blocking assignments to use . Shaughnessy replied that any end run would do . Anderson asked in disgust for Shaughnessy to sit down and watch the rest of the game . He explained that the Bears had 28 different end runs to each side for each of the four backs , each of which had numerous blocking schemes . He added , " You just can 't say ' any end run ' ... You have to choose one . " Anderson also claimed Shaughnessy plagiarized plays from other coaches , renamed them , and claimed them as his own . 
 At the end of the 1962 season , Shaughnessy tendered his resignation with a year remaining on his contract . He expressed regret in his departure and admiration for Halas , but said that he felt it was time for a change . 
 = = = Hawaii = = = 
 Shaughnessy briefly returned to coaching in 1965 when he took over at Hawaii , where the football program was " in a moribund state " and " close to extinction " . Hawaii amassed a 1 – 8 – 1 record during Shaughnessy 's only season , but the Associated Press credited him with reviving the program . He was replaced by the school 's first full @-@ time coach , Phil <unk> . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In December 1917 , he married L. Mae , with whom he had one son and two daughters : Clark Shaughnessy , Jr . ; Janice Shaughnessy ; and Marcia Wilson . He met his wife in New Orleans while coaching at Tulane . A teetotaler , Shaughnessy held a negative opinion of both drinkers and smokers . Marchmont Schwartz noted , " When he said , ' Let 's go have a drink , ' he meant , ' Let 's go drink a milk shake ... He disappointed a lot of newspapermen that way . " Aside from his declared hobby as a football coach and experimenter , he enjoyed long @-@ distance driving . Shaughnessy preferred to devise plays late at night , between midnight and dawn , while his household slept . A 1977 Sports Illustrated article described him as an " ascetic " and his lifestyle as " Spartan " . It noted he would go to bed as early as 7 o 'clock , and wake up for work at three or four in the morning . 
 Shaughnessy did not take criticism well . In one incident , he demanded that a critical columnist leave a Northern California Football Writers ' Association meeting . During a 1945 press conference while coach at Pittsburgh , Shaughnessy responded to criticism that he had been too conservative in a 6 – 0 win over Temple and taken too many risks in a 39 – 9 loss to Notre Dame . He said , " You tell me what to do . Shall we play a conservative game — hold down the score and play to look good — or shall we gamble , depending on a freak chance to win but losing by a big score if we fail ? " 
 After he joined the Chicago Bears ' staff , sportswriter Roger Treat said , " I always looked upon Clark Shaughnessy as a conscientious idealist who might better have followed the trail of Father Flanagan of Boys Town . He may never be entirely happy in the jovial thuggery of pro football , where every man has a little assassin in him . " Illinois head coach Robert <unk> said , " The world lost the greatest undertaker when Clark Shaughnessy decided on football coaching . " 
 Shaughnessy 's grandson is Grateful Dead drummer Bill Kreutzmann . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Shaughnessy retired to Santa Monica , California . On May 4 , 1970 , he was admitted to Santa Monica Hospital suffering from hypertension . He died there at the age of 78 on May 15 . 
 The College Football Hall of Fame inducted Shaughnessy in 1968 . Shaughnessy was a semifinalist in the 2010 Pro Football Hall of Fame class , but was not selected . Shaughnessy had been a finalist for induction in 1970 , 1975 , and 1976 , but fell short in the voting each time . He was inducted into the University of Minnesota " M " Club Hall of Fame in 2010 , the Tulane University Athletics Hall of Fame in 1977 , and the Stanford University Athletic Hall of Fame . 
 = = Published works = = 
 The Modern " T " Formation with Man @-@ in @-@ Motion , Clark Shaughnessy , Ralph Jones , and George Halas , Chicago , 1941 . 
 Football in War & Peace , Clark Shaughnessy , Clinton , SC : Jacobs Press , 1943 . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = = = College football = = = 
