 = = Architecture = = 
 UNESCO considers Conwy Castle one of " the finest examples of late 13th century and early 14th century military architecture in Europe " . It hugs a rocky coastal ridge of grey sand- and limestone , and much of the stone from the castle is largely taken from the ridge itself , probably when the site was first cleared . The local stone was not of sufficient quality to be used for carving details such as windows , however , and accordingly sandstone was brought in from the <unk> peninsula , Chester and the Wirral . This sandstone was more colourful than the local grey stone , and was probably deliberately chosen for its appearance . 
 The castle has a rectangular plan and is divided into an Inner and Outer Ward , separated by a cross @-@ wall , with four large , 70 @-@ foot ( 21 m ) tall towers on each side ; originally the castle would have been white @-@ washed using a lime render . The outside of the towers still have the putlog holes from their original construction , where timbers were inserted to create a spiralling ramp for the builders . Although now somewhat decayed , the battlements originally sported triple finial designs and featured a sequence of square holes running along the outside of the walls . It is uncertain what these holes were used for – they may have been drainage holes , supports for defensive hoarding or for displaying ornamental shields . 
 The main entrance to the castle is through the western barbican , an exterior defence in front of the main gate . When first built , the barbican was reached over a drawbridge and a masonry ramp that came up sharply from the town below ; the modern path cuts east along the outside of the walls . The barbican features the earliest surviving stone machicolations in Britain , and the gate would originally have been protected by a portcullis . 
 The gate leads through to the Outer Ward which , when first built , would have been full of various administrative and service buildings . The north @-@ west tower was reached through the porter 's lodge and contained limited accommodation and space for stores . The south @-@ west tower may have been used either by the castle 's constable , or by the castle 's garrison , and also contained a bakehouse . On the south side of the ward is a range of buildings that included the great hall and chapel , sitting on top of the cellars , which are now exposed . The stubs and one surviving stone arches from the 1340s can still be seen . Behind the great hall was the tower used by the constable for detaining prisoners ; this included a special room for holding prisoners , called the " <unk> chambre " ( " debtors ' chamber " ) in the 16th century , and an underground dungeon . On the north side of the ward was a range of service buildings , including a kitchen , brewhouse and bakehouse , backed onto by the kitchen tower , containing accommodation and store rooms . 
 The Inner Ward was originally separated from the Outer Ward by an internal wall , a drawbridge and a gate , protected by a ditch cut into the rock . The ditch was filled in during the 16th century and the drawbridge removed . The spring @-@ fed castle well built alongside the gate survives , and today is 91 @-@ foot ( 28 m ) deep . Inside , the ward contained the chambers for the royal household , their immediate staff and service facilities ; today , historian Jeremy Ashbee considers them to be the " best preserved suite of medieval private royal chambers in England and Wales " . They were designed to form a royal palace in miniature , that could , if necessary , be sealed off from the rest of castle and supplied from the eastern gate by sea almost indefinitely , although in practice they were rarely used by the royal family . 
 The royal rooms were positioned on the first floor of a range of buildings that ran around the outside of the ward , facing onto a courtyard . The four towers that protected the Inner Ward contained service facilities , with the Chapel Tower containing the private royal chapel . Each tower has an additional watchtower turret , probably intended both for security and to allow the prominent display of the royal flag . The arrangement was originally similar to that of the 13th century <unk> at Corfe Castle , and provided a combination of privacy for the king while providing extensive personal security . The two sets of apartments were later unified into a single set of rooms , including a great chamber , outer chamber and inner chamber . 
 On the east side of the Inner Ward is another barbican , enclosing the castle garden . This was overlooked by the royal apartments , and changed in style over the years : in the early 14th century there was a lawn , in the late 14th century vines , in the 16th century crab @-@ apple trees and a lawn and in the 17th century formal ornamental flowers . A postern gate originally led down to the river where a small dock was built , allowing key visitors to enter the castle in private and for the fortress to be resupplied by boat , although this gate is now concealed by the later bridges built on the site . 
 The architecture of Conwy has close to links to that found in the kingdom of Savoy in the same period . These include window styles , the type of crenellation used on the towers and positioning of putlog holes , and are usually ascribed to the influence of the Savoy architect Master James . The links between Conwy and Savoy are not straightforward , however , as in some cases the relevant Savoy structures were built after James had left the region . The similarity in architectural details may , therefore , be the result of the wider role played by Savoy craftsmen and engineers on the Conwy project . 
 = Empress Matilda = 
 Empress Matilda ( c . 7 February 1102 – 10 September 1167 ) , also known as the Empress Maude , was the claimant to the English throne during the civil war known as the Anarchy . The daughter of King Henry I of England , she moved to Germany as a child when she married the future Holy Roman Emperor Henry V. She travelled with her husband into Italy in 1116 , was controversially crowned in St. Peter 's Basilica , and acted as the imperial regent in Italy . Matilda and Henry had no children , and when he died in 1125 , the crown was claimed by Lothair II , one of his political enemies . 
 Meanwhile , Matilda 's younger brother , William Adelin , died in the White Ship disaster of 1120 , leaving England facing a potential succession crisis . On Henry V 's death , Matilda was recalled to Normandy by her father , who arranged for her to marry Geoffrey of Anjou to form an alliance to protect his southern borders . Henry I had no further legitimate children and nominated Matilda as his heir , making his court swear an oath of loyalty to her and her successors , but the decision was not popular in the Anglo @-@ Norman court . Henry died in 1135 but Matilda and Geoffrey faced opposition from the Norman barons and were unable to pursue their claims . The throne was instead taken by Matilda 's cousin Stephen of Blois , who enjoyed the backing of the English Church . Stephen took steps to solidify his new regime , but faced threats both from neighbouring powers and from opponents within his kingdom . 
 In 1139 Matilda crossed to England to take the kingdom by force , supported by her half @-@ brother , Robert of Gloucester , and her uncle , King David I of Scotland , while Geoffrey focused on conquering Normandy . Matilda 's forces captured Stephen at the Battle of Lincoln in 1141 , but the Empress 's attempt to be crowned at Westminster collapsed in the face of bitter opposition from the London crowds . As a result of this retreat , Matilda was never formally declared Queen of England , and was instead titled the Lady of the English . Robert was captured following the Rout of Winchester in 1141 , and Matilda agreed to exchange him for Stephen . Matilda became trapped in Oxford Castle by Stephen 's forces that winter , and was forced to escape across the frozen River Isis at night to avoid capture . The war degenerated into a stalemate , with Matilda controlling much of the south @-@ west of England , and Stephen the south @-@ east and the Midlands . Large parts of the rest of the country were in the hands of local , independent barons . 
 Matilda returned to Normandy , now in the hands of her husband , in 1148 , leaving her eldest son to continue the campaign in England ; he eventually succeeded to the throne as Henry II in 1154 . She settled her court near Rouen and for the rest of her life concerned herself with the administration of Normandy , acting on Henry 's behalf when necessary . Particularly in the early years of her son 's reign , she provided political advice and attempted to mediate during the Becket controversy . She worked extensively with the Church , founding Cistercian monasteries , and was known for her piety . She was buried under the high altar at Bec Abbey after her death in 1167 . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Matilda was born to Henry I , King of England and Duke of Normandy , and his first wife , Matilda of Scotland , possibly around 7 February 1102 at Sutton Courtenay in Oxfordshire . Henry was the youngest son of William the Conqueror , who had invaded England in 1066 , creating an empire stretching into Wales . The invasion had created an Anglo @-@ Norman elite , many with estates spread across both sides of the English Channel . These barons typically had close links to the kingdom of France , which was then a loose collection of counties and smaller polities , under only the minimal control of the king . Her mother Matilda was the daughter of King Malcolm III of Scotland , a member of the West Saxon royal family , and a descendant of Alfred the Great . For Henry , marrying Matilda of Scotland had given his reign increased legitimacy , and for her it had been an opportunity for high status and power in England . 
 Matilda had a younger , legitimate brother , William Adelin , and her father 's relationships with numerous mistresses resulted in around 22 illegitimate siblings . Little is known about Matilda 's earliest life , but she probably stayed with her mother , was taught to read , and was educated in religious morals . Among the nobles at her mother 's court were her uncle David , later the King of Scotland , and aspiring nobles such as her half @-@ brother Robert of Gloucester , her cousin Stephen of Blois and Brian Fitz Count . In 1108 Henry left Matilda and her brother in the care of Anselm , the Archbishop of Canterbury , while he travelled to Normandy ; Anselm was a favoured cleric of Matilda 's mother . There is no detailed description of Matilda 's appearance ; contemporaries described Matilda as being very beautiful , but this may have simply reflected the conventional practice among the chroniclers . 
 = = Holy Roman Empire = = 
 = = = Marriage to the Emperor = = = 
 In late 1108 or early 1109 , Henry V , then the King of the Romans , sent envoys to Normandy proposing that Matilda marry him , and wrote separately to her royal mother on the same matter . The match was attractive to the English King : his daughter would be marrying into one of the most prestigious dynasties in Europe , reaffirming his own , slightly questionable , status as the youngest son of a new royal house , and gaining him an ally in dealing with France . In return , Henry V would receive a dowry of 10 @,@ 000 marks , which he needed to fund an expedition to Rome for his coronation as the Holy Roman Emperor . The final details of the deal were negotiated at Westminster in June 1109 and , as a result of her changing status , Matilda attended a royal council for the first time that October . She left England in February 1110 to make her way to Germany . 
 The couple met at Liège before travelling to Utrecht where , on 10 April , they became officially betrothed . On 25 July Matilda was crowned Queen of the Romans in a ceremony at Mainz . There was a considerable age gap between the couple , as Matilda was only eight years old while Henry was 24 . After the betrothal she was placed into the custody of Bruno , the Archbishop of Trier , who was tasked with educating her in German culture , manners and government . In January 1114 Matilda was ready to be married to Henry , and their wedding was held at the city of Worms amid extravagant celebrations . Matilda now entered public life in Germany , complete with her own household . 
 Political conflict broke out across the Empire shortly after the marriage , triggered when Henry arrested his Chancellor Adalbert and various other German princes . Rebellions followed , accompanied by opposition from within the Church , which played an important part in administering the Empire , and this led to the formal excommunication of the Emperor by Pope Paschal II . Henry and Matilda marched over the Alps into Italy in early 1116 , intent on settling matters permanently with the Pope . Matilda was now playing a full part in the imperial government , sponsoring royal grants , dealing with petitioners and taking part in ceremonial occasions . The rest of the year was spent establishing control of northern Italy , and in early 1117 the pair advanced on Rome itself . 
 Paschal fled when Henry and Matilda arrived , and in his absence the papal envoy Maurice Bourdin , later the Antipope Gregory VIII , crowned the pair at St. Peter 's Basilica , probably that Easter and certainly by Pentecost . Matilda used these ceremonies to claim the title of the Empress of the Holy Roman Empire . The Empire was governed by elected monarchs who , like Henry V , had been selected by the major nobles to become the King of the Romans . These kings typically hoped to be subsequently crowned by the Pope as the Holy Roman Emperor , but this could not be guaranteed . Henry V had coerced the Pope into crowning him in 1111 , but Matilda 's own status was less clear . As a result of her marriage she was clearly the legitimate Queen of the Romans , a title that she used on her seal and charters , but it was uncertain if she had a legitimate claim to the title of empress . 
 Both Bourdin 's status and the ceremonies themselves were deeply ambiguous . Strictly speaking , the ceremonies were not imperial coronations but instead were formal " crown @-@ wearing " occasions , among the few times in the year when the rulers would wear their crowns in court . Bourdin had also been excommunicated by the time he conducted the second ceremony , and he was later to be deposed and imprisoned for life by the Pope . Nonetheless , Matilda maintained that she had been officially crowned as the empress in Rome . The titles of emperor and empress were not always consistently used in this period , and in any case her use of the title became widely accepted . Matilda chose not to dispute Anglo @-@ Norman chroniclers who later incorrectly recorded that the Pope himself had crowned her in Rome . 
 = = = Death of Henry = = = 
 In 1118 , Henry returned north over the Alps into Germany to suppress fresh rebellions , leaving Matilda as his regent to govern Italy . There are few records of her rule over the next two years , but she probably gained considerable practical experience of government . In 1119 , she returned north to meet Henry in Lotharingia . Her husband was occupied in finding a compromise with the Pope , who had excommunicated him . In 1122 , Henry and probably Matilda were at the Council of Worms . The council settled the long @-@ running dispute with the Church when Henry gave up his rights to invest bishops with their episcopal regalia . Matilda attempted to visit her father in England that year , but the journey was blocked by Charles I , Count of Flanders , whose territory she would have needed to pass through . Historian Marjorie Chibnall argues Matilda had intended to discuss the inheritance of the English crown on this journey . 
 Matilda and Henry remained childless , but neither party was considered to be infertile and contemporary chroniclers blamed their situation on the Emperor and his sins against the Church . In early 1122 , the couple travelled down the Rhine together as Henry continued to suppress the ongoing political unrest , but by now he was suffering from cancer . His condition worsened and he died on 23 May 1125 in Utrecht , leaving Matilda in the protection of their nephew Frederick , the heir to his estates . Before his death , he left the imperial insignia in the control of Matilda , but it is unclear what instructions he gave her about the future of the Empire , which faced another leadership election . Archbishop Adalbert subsequently convinced Matilda that she should give him the insignia , and the Archbishop led the electoral process which appointed Lothair of Supplinburg , a former enemy of Henry , as the new King of the Romans . 
 Now aged 23 , Matilda had only limited options as to how she might spend the rest of her life . Being childless , she could not exercise a role as an imperial regent , which left her with the choice of either becoming a nun or remarrying . Some offers of marriage started to arrive from German princes , but she chose to return to Normandy . She does not appear to have expected to return to Germany , as she gave up her estates within the Empire and departed with her personal collection of jewels , her own imperial regalia , two of Henry 's crowns , and the valuable relic of the Hand of St James the Apostle . 
 = = Succession crisis = = 
 In 1120 , the English political landscape changed dramatically after the White Ship disaster . Around three hundred passengers – including Matilda 's brother William Adelin and many other senior nobles – embarked one night on the White Ship to travel from Barfleur in Normandy across to England . The vessel foundered just outside the harbour , possibly as a result of overcrowding or excessive drinking by the ship 's master and crew , and all but two of the passengers died . William Adelin was among the casualties . 
 With William dead , the succession to the English throne was thrown into doubt . Rules of succession were uncertain in western Europe at the time ; in some parts of France , male primogeniture was becoming more popular , in which the eldest son would inherit a title . It was also traditional for the King of France to crown his successor while he was still alive , making the intended line of succession relatively clear . This was not the case in England , where the best a noble could do was to identify what Professor Eleanor Searle has termed a pool of legitimate heirs , leaving them to challenge and dispute the inheritance after his death . The problem was further complicated by the sequence of unstable Anglo @-@ Norman successions over the previous sixty years . William the Conqueror had invaded England , his sons William Rufus and Robert Curthose had fought a war between them to establish their inheritance , and Henry had only acquired control of Normandy by force . There had been no peaceful , uncontested successions . 
 Initially , Henry put his hopes in fathering another son . William and Matilda 's mother - Matilda of Scotland - had died in 1118 , and so Henry took a new wife , Adeliza of Louvain . Henry and Adeliza did not conceive any children , and the future of the dynasty appeared at risk . Henry may have begun to look among his nephews for a possible heir . He may have considered his sister Adela 's son Stephen of Blois as a possible option and , perhaps in preparation for this , he arranged a beneficial marriage for Stephen to Matilda 's wealthy maternal cousin and namesake the Countess of Boulogne . Theobald of Blois , his close ally , possibly also felt that he was in favour with Henry . William Clito , the only son of Robert Curthose , was King Louis VI of France 's preferred choice , but William was in open rebellion against Henry and was therefore unsuitable . Henry might have also considered his own illegitimate son , Robert of Gloucester , as a possible candidate , but English tradition and custom would have looked unfavourably on this . Henry 's plans shifted when Empress Matilda 's husband , Emperor Henry , died in 1125 . 
 = = Return to Normandy = = 
 = = = Marriage to Geoffrey of Anjou = = = 
 Matilda returned to Normandy in 1125 and spent about a year at the royal court , where her father Henry was still hoping that his second marriage would generate a male heir . In the event that this might fail to happen , Matilda was now Henry 's preferred choice , and he declared that she was to be his rightful successor if he should die without a male heir . The Anglo @-@ Norman barons were gathered together at Westminster on Christmas 1126 , where they swore in January to recognise Matilda and any future legitimate heir she might have . 
 Henry began to formally look for a new husband for Matilda in early 1127 and received various offers from princes within the Empire . His preference was to use Matilda 's marriage to secure the southern borders of Normandy by marrying her to Geoffrey of Anjou , the eldest son of Fulk , the Count of Anjou . Henry 's control of Normandy had faced numerous challenges since he had conquered it in 1106 , and the latest threat came from his nephew William Clito , the new Count of Flanders , who enjoyed the support of the French King . It was essential to Henry that he did not also face a threat from the south as well as the east of Normandy . William Adelin had married Fulk 's daughter Matilda , which would have cemented an alliance between Henry and Anjou , but the White Ship disaster put an end to this . Henry and Fulk argued over the fate of the marriage dowry , and this had encouraged Fulk to turn to support William Clito instead . Henry 's solution was now to negotiate the marriage of Matilda to Geoffrey , recreating the former alliance . 
 Matilda appears to have been unimpressed by this plan . She felt that marrying the son of a count diminished her own status and was probably also unhappy about marrying someone so much younger than she was ; Matilda was 25 and Geoffrey was only 13 . Hildebert , the Archbishop of Tours , eventually intervened to persuade her to go along with the engagement . Matilda finally agreed , and she travelled to Rouen in May 1127 with Robert of Gloucester and Brian Fitz Count where she was formally betrothed to Geoffrey . Over the course of the next year , Fulk decided to depart for Jerusalem , where he hoped to become king , leaving his possessions to Geoffrey . Henry knighted his future son @-@ in @-@ law , and Matilda and Geoffrey were married a week later on 17 June 1128 in Le Mans by the bishops of Le Mans and Séez . Fulk finally left Anjou for Jerusalem in 1129 , declaring Geoffrey the Count of Anjou and Maine . 
 = = = Disputes = = = 
 The marriage proved difficult , as the couple did not particularly like each other . There was a further dispute over Matilda 's dowry ; she was granted various castles in Normandy by Henry , but it was not specified when the couple would actually take possession of them . It is also unknown whether Henry intended Geoffrey to have any future claim on England or Normandy , and he was probably keeping Geoffrey 's status deliberately uncertain . Soon after the marriage , Matilda left Geoffrey and returned to Normandy . Henry appears to have blamed Geoffrey for the separation , but the couple were finally reconciled in 1131 . Henry summoned Matilda from Normandy , and she arrived in England that August . It was decided that Matilda would return to Geoffrey at a meeting of the King 's great council in September . The council also gave another collective oath of allegiance to recognise her as Henry 's heir . 
 Matilda gave birth to her first son in March 1133 at Le Mans , the future Henry II . Henry was delighted by the news and came to see her at Rouen . At Pentecost 1134 , son Geoffrey was born in Rouen , but the childbirth was extremely difficult and Matilda appeared close to death . She made arrangements for her will and argued with her father about where she should be buried . Matilda preferred Bec Abbey , but Henry wanted her to be interred at Rouen Cathedral . Matilda recovered , and Henry was overjoyed by the birth of his second grandson , possibly insisting on another round of oaths from his nobility . 
 From then on , relations became increasingly strained between Matilda and Henry . The couple suspected that they lacked genuine support in England for their claim to the throne , and proposed in 1135 that the King should hand over the royal castles in Normandy to Matilda and should insist that the Norman nobility immediately swear allegiance to her . This would have given the couple a much more powerful position after Henry 's death , but the King angrily refused , probably out of a concern that Geoffrey would try to seize power in Normandy while he was still alive . A fresh rebellion broke out in southern Normandy , and Geoffrey and Matilda intervened militarily on behalf of the rebels . 
 In the middle of this confrontation , Henry unexpectedly fell ill and died near Lyons @-@ la @-@ Forêt . It is uncertain what , if anything , Henry said about the succession before his death . Contemporary chronicler accounts were coloured by subsequent events . Sources favourable to Matilda suggested that Henry had reaffirmed his intent to grant all his lands to his daughter , while hostile chroniclers argued that Henry had renounced his former plans and had apologised for having forced the barons to swear an oath of allegiance to her . 
 = = = Road to war = = = 
 When news began to spread of Henry I 's death , Matilda and Geoffrey were in Anjou , supporting the rebels in their campaign against the royal army , which included a number of Matilda 's supporters such as Robert of Gloucester . Many of these barons had taken an oath to stay in Normandy until the late king was properly buried , which prevented them from returning to England . Nonetheless , Geoffrey and Matilda took the opportunity to march into southern Normandy and seize a number of key castles around Argentan that had formed Matilda 's disputed dowry . They then stopped , unable to advance further , pillaging the countryside and facing increased resistance from the Norman nobility and a rebellion in Anjou itself . Matilda was by now also pregnant with her third son , William ; opinions vary among historians as to what extent this affected her military plans . 
 Meanwhile , news of Henry 's death had reached Stephen of Blois , conveniently placed in Boulogne , and he left for England , accompanied by his military household . Robert of Gloucester had garrisoned the ports of Dover and Canterbury and some accounts suggest that they refused Stephen access when he first arrived . Nonetheless Stephen reached the edge of London by 8 December and over the next week he began to seize power in England . The crowds in London proclaimed Stephen the new monarch , believing that he would grant the city new rights and privileges in return , and his brother , Henry of Blois , the Bishop of Winchester , delivered the support of the Church to Stephen . Stephen had sworn to support Matilda in 1127 , but Henry convincingly argued that the late King had been wrong to insist that his court take the oath , and suggested that the King had changed his mind on his deathbed . Stephen 's coronation was held a week later at Westminster Abbey on 26 December . 
 Following the news that Stephen was gathering support in England , the Norman nobility had gathered at Le Neubourg to discuss declaring his elder brother Theobald king . The Normans argued that the count , as the eldest grandson of William the Conqueror , had the most valid claim over the kingdom and the Duchy , and was certainly preferable to Matilda . Their discussions were interrupted by the sudden news from England that Stephen 's coronation was to occur the next day . Theobald 's support immediately ebbed away , as the barons were not prepared to support the division of England and Normandy by opposing Stephen . 
 Matilda gave birth to her third son William on 22 July 1136 at Argentan , and she then operated out of the border region for the next three years , establishing her household knights on estates around the area . Matilda may have asked Ulger , the Bishop of Angers , to garner support for her claim with the Pope in Rome , but if she did , Ulger was unsuccessful . Geoffrey invaded Normandy in early 1136 and , after a temporary truce , invaded again later the same year , raiding and burning estates rather than trying to hold the territory . Stephen returned to the Duchy in 1137 , where he met with Louis VI and Theobald to agree to an informal alliance against Geoffrey and Matilda , to counter the growing Angevin power in the region . Stephen formed an army to retake Matilda 's Argentan castles , but frictions between his Flemish mercenary forces and the local Norman barons resulted in a battle between the two halves of his army . The Norman forces then deserted the King , forcing Stephen to give up his campaign . Stephen agreed to another truce with Geoffrey , promising to pay him 2 @,@ 000 marks a year in exchange for peace along the Norman borders . 
 In England , Stephen 's reign started off well , with lavish gatherings of the royal court that saw the King give out grants of land and favours to his supporters . Stephen received the support of Pope Innocent II , thanks in part to the testimony of Louis VI and Theobald . Troubles rapidly began to emerge . Matilda 's uncle , David I of Scotland , invaded the north of England on the news of Henry 's death , taking Carlisle , Newcastle and other key strongholds . Stephen rapidly marched north with an army and met David at Durham , where a temporary compromise was agreed . South Wales rose in rebellion , and by 1137 Stephen was forced to abandon attempts to suppress the revolt . Stephen put down two revolts in the south @-@ west led by Baldwin de Redvers and Robert of Bampton ; Baldwin was released after his capture and travelled to Normandy , where he became a vocal critic of the King . 
 = = = Revolt = = = 
 Matilda 's half @-@ brother , Robert of Gloucester , was one of the most powerful Anglo @-@ Norman barons , controlling estates in Normandy as well as the Earldom of Gloucester . In 1138 , he rebelled against Stephen , starting the descent into civil war in England . Robert renounced his fealty to the King and declared his support for Matilda , which triggered a major regional rebellion in Kent and across the south @-@ west of England , although he himself remained in Normandy . Matilda had not been particularly active in asserting her claims to the throne since 1135 and in many ways it was Robert who took the initiative in declaring war in 1138 . In France , Geoffrey took advantage of the situation by re @-@ invading Normandy . David of Scotland also invaded the north of England once again , announcing that he was supporting the claim of Matilda to the throne , pushing south into Yorkshire . 
 Stephen responded quickly to the revolts and invasions , paying most attention to England rather than Normandy . His wife Matilda was sent to Kent with ships and resources from Boulogne , with the task of retaking the key port of Dover , under Robert 's control . A small number of Stephen 's household knights were sent north to help the fight against the Scots , where David 's forces were defeated later that year at the Battle of the Standard . Despite this victory , however , David still occupied most of the north . Stephen himself went west in an attempt to regain control of Gloucestershire , first striking north into the Welsh Marches , taking Hereford and Shrewsbury , before heading south to Bath . The town of Bristol itself proved too strong for him , and Stephen contented himself with raiding and pillaging the surrounding area . The rebels appear to have expected Robert to intervene with support , but he remained in Normandy throughout the year , trying to persuade the Empress Matilda to invade England herself . Dover finally surrendered to the Queen 's forces later in the year . 
 By 1139 , an invasion of England by Robert and Matilda appeared imminent . Geoffrey and Matilda had secured much of Normandy and , together with Robert , spent the beginning of the year mobilising forces for a cross @-@ Channel expedition . Matilda also appealed to the papacy at the start of the year ; her representative , Bishop Ulger , put forward her legal claim to the English throne on the grounds of her hereditary right and the oaths sworn by the barons . Arnulf of Lisieux led Stephen 's case , arguing that because Matilda 's mother had really been a nun , her claim to the throne was illegitimate . The Pope declined to reverse his earlier support for Stephen , but from Matilda 's perspective the case usefully established that Stephen 's claim was disputed . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 = = = Initial moves = = = 
 Empress Matilda 's invasion finally began at the end of the summer . Baldwin de Redvers crossed over from Normandy to Wareham in August in an initial attempt to capture a port to receive Matilda 's invading army , but Stephen 's forces forced him to retreat into the south @-@ west . The following month , the Empress was invited by her stepmother , Queen Adeliza , to land at Arundel instead , and on 30 September Robert of Gloucester and Matilda arrived in England with a force of 140 knights . Matilda stayed at Arundel Castle , while Robert marched north @-@ west to Wallingford and Bristol , hoping to raise support for the rebellion and to link up with Miles of Gloucester , who took the opportunity to renounce his fealty to the King and declare for Matilda . 
 Stephen responded by promptly moving south , besieging Arundel and trapping Matilda inside the castle . Stephen then agreed to a truce proposed by his brother , Henry of Blois ; the full details of the agreement are not known , but the results were that Matilda and her household of knights were released from the siege and escorted to the south @-@ west of England , where they were reunited with Robert of Gloucester . The reasons for Matilda 's release remain unclear . Stephen may have thought it was in his own best interests to release the Empress and concentrate instead on attacking Robert , seeing Robert , rather than Matilda , as his main opponent at this point in the conflict . Arundel Castle was also considered almost impregnable , and Stephen may have been worried that he risked tying down his army in the south whilst Robert roamed freely in the west . Another theory is that Stephen released Matilda out of a sense of chivalry ; Stephen had a generous , courteous personality and women were not normally expected to be targeted in Anglo @-@ Norman warfare . 
 After staying for a period in Robert 's stronghold of Bristol , Matilda established her court in nearby Gloucester , still safely in the south @-@ west but far enough away for her to remain independent of her half @-@ brother . Although there had been only a few new defections to her cause , Matilda still controlled a compact block of territory stretching out from Gloucester and Bristol south into Wiltshire , west into the Welsh Marches and east through the Thames Valley as far as Oxford and Wallingford , threatening London . Her influence extended down into Devon and Cornwall , and north through Herefordshire , but her authority in these areas remained limited . 
 She faced a counterattack from Stephen , who started by attacking Wallingford Castle which controlled the Thames corridor ; it was held by Brian Fitz Count and Stephen found it too well defended . Stephen continued into Wiltshire to attack Trowbridge , taking the castles of South Cerney and Malmesbury en route . In response , Miles marched east , attacking Stephen 's rearguard forces at Wallingford and threatening an advance on London . Stephen was forced to give up his western campaign , returning east to stabilise the situation and protect his capital . 
 At the start of 1140 , Nigel , the Bishop of Ely , joined Matilda 's faction . Hoping to seize East Anglia , he established his base of operations in the Isle of Ely , then surrounded by protective fenland . Nigel faced a rapid response from Stephen , who made a surprise attack on the isle , forcing the Bishop to flee to Gloucester . Robert of Gloucester 's men retook some of the territory that Stephen had taken in his 1139 campaign . In an effort to negotiate a truce , Henry of Blois held a peace conference at Bath , at which Matilda was represented by Robert . The conference collapsed after Henry and the clergy insisted that they should set the terms of any peace deal , which Stephen 's representatives found unacceptable . 
 = = = Battle of Lincoln = = = 
 Matilda 's fortunes changed dramatically for the better at the start of 1141 . Ranulf of Chester , a powerful northern magnate , had fallen out with the King over the winter and Stephen had placed his castle in Lincoln under siege . In response , Robert of Gloucester and Ranulf advanced on Stephen 's position with a larger force , resulting in the Battle of Lincoln on 2 February 1141 . The King commanded the centre of his army , with Alan of Brittany on his right and William of Aumale on his left . Robert and Ranulf 's forces had a superiority in cavalry and Stephen dismounted many of his own knights to form a solid infantry block . After an initial success in which William 's forces destroyed the Angevins ' Welsh infantry , the battle went well for Matilda 's forces . Robert and Ranulf 's cavalry encircled Stephen 's centre , and the King found himself surrounded by the Angevin army . After much fighting , Robert 's soldiers finally overwhelmed Stephen and he was taken away from the field in custody . 
 Matilda received Stephen in person at her court in Gloucester , before having him moved to Bristol Castle , traditionally used for holding high @-@ status prisoners . Matilda now began to take the necessary steps to have herself crowned queen in his place , which would require the agreement of the Church and her coronation at Westminster . Stephen 's brother Henry summoned a council at Winchester before Easter in his capacity as papal legate to consider the clergy 's view . Matilda had made a private deal with Henry that he would deliver the support of the Church in exchange for being granted control over Church affairs . Henry handed over the royal treasury to her , which proved to be rather depleted except for Stephen 's crown , and he excommunicated many of her enemies who refused to switch sides . Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury was unwilling to declare Matilda queen so rapidly , however , and a delegation of clergy and nobles , headed by Theobald , travelled to Bristol to see Stephen , who agreed that , given the situation , he was prepared to release his subjects from their oath of fealty to him . 
 The clergy gathered again in Winchester after Easter and declared Matilda the " Lady of England and Normandy " as a precursor to her coronation . Although Matilda 's own followers attended the event , few other major nobles seem to have attended and the delegation from London procrastinated . Stephen 's wife , Queen Matilda , wrote to complain and demand her husband 's release . Nonetheless , Matilda then advanced to London to arrange her coronation in June , where her position became precarious . Despite securing the support of Geoffrey de Mandeville , who controlled the Tower of London , forces loyal to Stephen and Queen Matilda remained close to the city and the citizens were fearful about welcoming the Empress . On 24 June , shortly before the planned coronation , the city rose up against the Empress and Geoffrey de Mandeville ; Matilda and her followers fled just in time , making a chaotic retreat back to Oxford . 
 Meanwhile , Geoffrey of Anjou invaded Normandy again and , in the absence of Waleran of Beaumont , who was still fighting in England , Geoffrey took all the Duchy south of the River Seine and east of the Risle . No help was forthcoming from Stephen 's brother Theobald this time either , who appears to have been preoccupied with his own problems with France — the new French king , Louis VII , had rejected his father 's regional alliance , improving relations with Anjou and taking a more bellicose line with Theobald , which would result in war the following year . Geoffrey 's success in Normandy and Stephen 's weakness in England began to influence the loyalty of many Anglo @-@ Norman barons , who feared losing their lands in England to Robert and the Empress , and their possessions in Normandy to Geoffrey . Many started to leave Stephen 's faction . His friend and advisor Waleran was one of those who decided to defect in mid @-@ 1141 , crossing into Normandy to secure his ancestral possessions by allying himself with the Angevins , and bringing Worcestershire into the Empress 's camp . Waleran 's twin brother , Robert of Leicester , effectively withdrew from fighting in the conflict at the same time . Other supporters of the Empress were restored in their former strongholds , such as Bishop Nigel of Ely , and still others received new earldoms in the west of England . The royal control over the minting of coins broke down , leading to coins being struck by local barons and bishops across the country . 
 = = = Rout of Winchester and the Siege of Oxford = = = 
 Matilda 's position was transformed by her defeat at the Rout of Winchester . Her alliance with Henry of Blois proved short @-@ lived and they soon fell out over political patronage and ecclesiastical policy ; the Bishop transferred his support back to Stephen 's cause . In response , in July Matilda and Robert of Gloucester besieged Henry of Blois in his episcopal castle at Winchester , using the royal castle in the city as the base for their operations . Stephen 's wife , Queen Matilda , had kept his cause alive in the south @-@ east of England , and the Queen , backed by her lieutenant William of Ypres and reinforced with fresh troops from London , took the opportunity to advance on Winchester . Their forces encircled Matilda 's army . Matilda decided to escape from the city with Fitz Count and Reginald of Cornwall , while the rest of her army delayed the royal forces . In the subsequent battle the Empress 's forces were defeated and Robert of Gloucester himself was taken prisoner during the retreat , although Matilda herself escaped , exhausted , to her fortress at Devizes . 
 With both Stephen and Robert held prisoner , negotiations were held to try to come to agreement on a long @-@ term peace settlement , but Queen Matilda was unwilling to offer any compromise to the Empress , and Robert refused to accept any offer to encourage him to change sides to Stephen . Instead , in November the two sides simply exchanged the two leaders , Stephen returning to his queen , and Robert to the Empress in Oxford . Henry held another church council , which reversed its previous decision and reaffirmed Stephen 's legitimacy to rule , and a fresh coronation of Stephen and Matilda occurred at Christmas 1141 . Stephen travelled north to raise new forces and to successfully persuade Ranulf of Chester to change sides once again . Stephen then spent the summer attacking some of the new Angevin castles built the previous year , including Cirencester , Bampton and Wareham . 
 During the summer of 1142 Robert returned to Normandy to assist Geoffrey with operations against some of Stephen 's remaining followers there , before returning in the autumn . Matilda came under increased pressure from Stephen 's forces and was surrounded at Oxford . Oxford was a secure town , protected by walls and the River Isis , but Stephen led a sudden attack across the river , leading the charge and swimming part of the way . Once on the other side , the King and his men stormed into the town , trapping Matilda in the castle . Oxford Castle was a powerful fortress and , rather than storming it , Stephen decided to settle down for a long siege . Just before Christmas , Matilda sneaked out of the castle with a handful of knights ( probably via a postern gate ) , crossed the icy river on foot and made her escape past the royal army to safety at Wallingford , leaving the castle garrison free to surrender the next day . 
 = = = Stalemate = = = 
 In the aftermath of the retreat from Winchester , Matilda rebuilt her court at Devizes Castle , a former property of the Bishop of Salisbury that had been confiscated by Stephen . She established her household knights on the surrounding estates , supported by Flemish mercenaries , ruling through the network of local sheriffs and other officials . Many of those that had lost lands in the regions held by the King travelled west to take up patronage from Matilda . Backed by the pragmatic Robert of Gloucester , Matilda was content to engage in a drawn @-@ out struggle , and the war soon entered a stalemate . 
 At first , the balance of power appeared to move slightly in Matilda 's favour . Robert of Gloucester besieged Stephen in 1143 at Wilton Castle , an assembly point for royal forces in Herefordshire . Stephen attempted to break out and escape , resulting in the Battle of Wilton . Once again , the Angevin cavalry proved too strong , and for a moment it appeared that Stephen might be captured for a second time , before finally managing to escape . Later in the year Geoffrey de Mandeville , the Earl of Essex , rose up in rebellion against Stephen in East Anglia . Geoffrey based himself from the Isle of Ely and began a military campaign against Cambridge , with the intention of progressing south towards London . Ranulf of Chester revolted once again in the summer of 1144 . Meanwhile , Geoffrey of Anjou finished securing his hold on southern Normandy , and in January 1144 he advanced into Rouen , the capital of the Duchy , concluding his campaign . Louis VII recognised him as Duke of Normandy shortly after . 
 Despite these successes , Matilda was unable to consolidate her position . Miles of Gloucester , one of the most talented of her military commanders , had died while hunting over the previous Christmas . Geoffrey de Mandeville 's rebellion against Stephen in the east ended with his death in September 1144 during an attack on Burwell Castle . As a result , Stephen made progress against Matilda 's forces in the west in 1145 , recapturing Faringdon Castle in Oxfordshire . Matilda authorised Reginald , the Earl of Cornwall , to attempt fresh peace negotiations , but neither side was prepared to compromise . 
 = = = Conclusion of the war = = = 
 The character of the conflict in England gradually began to shift ; by the late 1140s , the major fighting in the war was over , giving way to an intractable stalemate , with only the occasional outbreak of fresh fighting . Several of Matilda 's key supporters died : in 1147 Robert of Gloucester died peacefully , and Brian Fitz Count gradually withdrew from public life , probably eventually joining a monastery ; by 1151 he was dead . Many of Matilda 's other followers joined the Second Crusade when it was announced in 1145 , leaving the region for several years . Some of the Anglo @-@ Norman barons made individual peace agreements with each other to secure their lands and war gains , and many were not keen to pursue any further conflict . 
 Matilda 's eldest son Henry slowly began to assume a leading role in the conflict . He had remained in France when the Empress first left for England . He crossed over to England in 1142 , before returning to Anjou in 1144 . Geoffrey of Anjou expected Henry to become the King of England and began to involve him in the government of the family lands . In 1147 , Henry intervened in England with a small mercenary army but the expedition failed , not least because Henry lacked the funds to pay his men . Henry asked his mother for money , but she refused , stating that she had none available . In the end Stephen himself ended up paying off Henry 's mercenaries , allowing him to return home safely ; his reasons for doing so remain unclear . 
 Matilda decided to return to Normandy in 1148 , partially due to her difficulties with the Church . The Empress had occupied the strategically essential Devizes Castle in 1142 , maintaining her court there , but legally it still belonged to Josceline de Bohon , the Bishop of Salisbury , and in late 1146 Pope Eugene III intervened to support his claims , threatening Matilda with excommunication if she did not return it . Matilda first played for time , then left for Normandy in early 1148 , leaving the castle to Henry , who then procrastinated over its return for many years . Matilda re @-@ established her court in Rouen , where she met with her sons and husband and probably made arrangements for her future life in Normandy , and for Henry 's next expedition to England . Matilda chose to live in the priory of Notre Dame du Pré , situated just south of Rouen , where she lived in personal quarters attached to the priory and in a nearby palace built by Henry . 
 Matilda increasingly devoted her efforts to the administration of Normandy , rather than the war in England . Geoffrey sent the Bishop of Thérouanne to Rome in 1148 to campaign for Henry 's right to the English throne , and opinion within the English Church gradually shifted in Henry 's favour . Matilda and Geoffrey made peace with Louis VII , who in return supported Henry 's rights to Normandy . Geoffrey died unexpectedly in 1151 , and Henry claimed the family lands . Henry returned to England once again at the start of 1153 with a small army , winning the support of some of the major regional barons . Neither side 's army was keen to fight , however , and the Church brokered a truce ; a permanent peace followed , under which Henry recognised Stephen as king , but became Stephen 's adopted son and successor . Meanwhile , Normandy faced considerable disorder and the threat of baronial revolt , which Matilda was unable to totally suppress . Stephen died the next year , and Henry assumed the throne ; his coronation used the grander of the two imperial crowns that Matilda had brought back from Germany in 1125 . Once Henry had been crowned , the troubles facing Matilda in Normandy died away . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Matilda spent the rest of her life in Normandy , often acting as Henry 's representative and presiding over the government of the Duchy . Early on , Matilda and her son issued charters in England and Normandy in their joint names , dealing with the various land claims that had arisen during the wars . Particularly in the initial years of his reign , the King drew on her for advice on policy matters . Matilda was involved in attempts to mediate between Henry and his Chancellor Thomas Becket when the two men fell out in the 1160s . Matilda had originally cautioned against the appointment , but when the Prior of Mont St Jacques asked her for a private interview on Becket 's behalf to seek her views , she provided a moderate perspective on the problem . Matilda explained that she disagreed with Henry 's attempts to codify English customs , which Becket was opposed to , but also condemned poor administration in the English Church and Becket 's own headstrong behaviour . 
 Matilda helped to deal with several diplomatic crises . The first of these involved the Hand of St James , the relic which Matilda had brought back with her from Germany many years before . Frederick I , the Holy Roman Emperor , considered the hand to be part of the imperial regalia and requested that Henry return it to Germany . Matilda and Henry were equally insistent that it should remain at Reading Abbey , where it had become a popular attraction for visiting pilgrims . Frederick was bought off with an alternative set of expensive gifts from England , including a huge , luxurious tent , probably chosen by Matilda , which Frederick used for court events in Italy . She was also approached by Louis VII of France , in 1164 , and helped to defuse a growing diplomatic row over the handling of Crusading funds . 
 In her old age Matilda paid increasing attention to Church affairs and her personal faith , although she remained involved in governing Normandy throughout her life . Matilda appears to have had particular fondness for her youngest son William . She opposed Henry 's proposal in 1155 to invade Ireland and give the lands to William , however , possibly on the grounds that the project was impractical , and instead William received large grants of land in England . Matilda was more easy @-@ going in her later life than in her youth , but the chronicler of Mont St Jacques , who met her during this period , still felt that she appeared to be " of the stock of tyrants " . 
 = = Death = = 
 Matilda died on 10 September 1167 , and her remaining wealth was given to the Church . She was buried under the high altar at the abbey of Bec @-@ Hellouin in a service led by Rotrou , the Archbishop of Rouen . Her tomb 's epitaph included the lines " Great by birth , greater by marriage , greatest in her offspring : here lies Matilda , the daughter , wife , and mother of Henry " , which became a famous phrase among her contemporaries . This tomb was damaged in a fire in 1263 and later restored in 1282 , before finally being destroyed by an English army in 1421 . In 1684 the Congregation of St. Maur identified some of her remaining bones and reburied them at Bec @-@ Hellouin in a new coffin . Her remains were lost again after the destruction of Bec @-@ Hellouin 's church by Napoleon , but were found once more in 1846 and this time reburied at Rouen Cathedral , where they remain . 
 = = Matilda as ruler = = 
 = = = Government , law and court = = = 
 In the Holy Roman Empire , the young Matilda 's court included knights , chaplains and ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting , although , unlike some queens of the period , she did not have her own personal chancellor to run her household , instead using the imperial chancellor . When acting as regent in Italy , she found the local rulers were prepared to accept a female ruler . Her Italian administration included the Italian chancellor , backed by experienced administrators . She was not called upon to make any major decisions , instead dealing with smaller matters and acting as the symbolic representative of her absent husband , meeting with and helping to negotiate with magnates and clergy . 
 On her return from Germany to Normandy and Anjou , she styled herself as empress and the daughter of King Henry . During the civil war for England , her status was uncertain . The Anglo @-@ Saxon queens of England had exercised considerable formal power , but this tradition had diminished under the Normans : at most their queens ruled temporarily as regents on their husbands ' behalf when they were away travelling , rather than in their own right . Initially between 1139 and 1141 Matilda referred to herself as acting as a <unk> sole , " a woman acting alone " , highlighting her autonomy and independence from her husband Geoffrey . She had an imperial great seal created , which was round like the seal of a king – queens used an oval seal – but which showed Matilda enthroned as an empress and titled as the Queen of the Romans . The seal did not show her on horseback , however , as a male ruler would have been depicted . Since she was never crowned at Westminster , during the rest of the war she appears to have used her title of Lady of the English , rather than that of the Queen of England , although some contemporaries referred to her by the royal title . 
 Matilda presented herself as continuing the English tradition of centralised royal government , and attempted to maintain a government in England parallel to Stephen 's , including a royal household and a chancellor . Matilda gathered revenues from the royal estates in the counties under her control , particularly in her core territories where the sheriffs were loyal to her cause . She appointed earls to rival those created by Stephen . She was unable to operate a system of royal law courts , however , and her administrative resources were extremely limited , although some of her clerks went on to become bishops in Normandy . Matilda issued two types of coins in her name during her time in England , which were used in the west of England and Wales . The first were initially minted in Oxford during her stay there , and the design was then adopted by her mints at Bristol , Cardiff and Wareham after her victory at the Battle of Lincoln . A second design was minted at Bristol and Cardiff during the 1140s . 
 On returning to Normandy for the last time in 1148 , Matilda ceased to use the title Lady of the English , simply styling herself as empress again ; she never adopted the title of Countess of Anjou . Matilda 's household became smaller , and often merged with Henry 's own court when the two were co @-@ located in Rouen . She continued to play a special role in the government of the area around Argentan , where she held feudal rights from the grants made at the time of her second marriage . 
 = = = Relations with the Church = = = 
 It is unclear how strong Matilda 's personal piety was , although contemporaries praised her lifelong preference to be buried at the monastic site of Bec rather than the grander but more worldly Rouen , and believed her to have substantial , underlying religious beliefs . Like other members of the Anglo @-@ Norman nobility , she bestowed considerable patronage on the Church . Early on in her life , she preferred the well @-@ established Benedictine monastery of Cluny alongside some of the newer Augustinian orders , such as the <unk> and <unk> . As part of this patronage , she re @-@ founded the abbey of Notre @-@ Dame @-@ du @-@ <unk> near Cherbourg . 
 As time went by , Matilda directed more of her attention to the Cistercian order , This order was very fashionable in England and Normandy during the period , and was dedicated to the Virgin Mary , a figure of particular importance to Matilda . She had close links to the Cistercian Mortemer Abbey in Normandy , and drew on the house for a supply of monks when she supported the foundation of nearby La <unk> . She encouraged the Cistercians to build at Mortemer on a grand scale , with guest houses to accommodate a range of visitors of all ranks , and may have played a part in selecting the paintings for the monastic chapels . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Contemporary chroniclers in England , France , Germany and Italy documented many aspects of Matilda 's life , although the only biography of her , apparently written by Arnulf of Lisieux , has been lost . The chroniclers took a range of perspectives on her . In Germany , the chroniclers praised Matilda extensively and her reputation as the " good Matilda " remained positive . During the years of the Anarchy , works such as the Gesta Stephani took a much more negative tone , praising Stephen and condemning Matilda . Once Henry II assumed the throne , the tone of the chroniclers towards Matilda became more positive . Legends spread in the years after Matilda 's death , including the suggestion that her first husband , Henry , had not died but had in fact secretly become a hermit – making Matilda 's second marriage illegitimate – and a tale that Matilda had an affair with Stephen , resulting in the conception of Henry II . 
 Tudor scholars were interested in Matilda 's right of succession . According to 16th century standards , Matilda had a clear right to the English throne , and academics therefore struggled to explain why Matilda had acquiesced to her son Henry 's kingship at the end of the war , rather than ruling directly herself . By the 18th century , historians such as David Hume had a much better understanding of the irregular nature of 12th century law and custom and this question became less relevant . By the 19th century , the archival sources on Matilda 's life , including charters , foundation histories , and letters , were being uncovered and analysed . Historians Kate Norgate , Sir James Ramsay and J. H. Round used these to produce new , richer accounts of Matilda and the civil war ; Ramsay 's account , using the Gesta Stephani , was not complimentary , while Norgate , drawing on French sources , was more neutral in tone . The German academic Oskar <unk> 's 1897 biography drew heavily on German charters , not extensively used by Anglophone historians . 
 Matilda has attracted relatively little attention from modern English academics , being treated as a marginal figure in comparison to other contemporaries , particularly her rival Stephen , in contrast to the work carried out by German scholars on her time in the Empire . Popular , but not always accurate , biographies were written by the Earl of Onslow in 1939 and Nesta Pain in 1978 , but the only major academic biography in English remains Majorie Chibnall 's 1991 work . Interpretations of Matilda 's character have shifted over time , but there is , as Chibnall describes , a " general agreement that she was either proud or at least keenly conscious of the high status of an empress " . Like both Henry I and Henry II , Matilda had a certain autocratic grandeur , which was combined with a firm moral belief in her cause ; ultimately however she was limited by the political conventions of the 12th century . The treatment of Matilda by modern historians has been challenged by feminist scholars , including Fiona Tolhurst , who believe some traditional assumptions about her role and personality show gender bias . In this interpretation , Matilda has been unfairly criticised for showing qualities that have been considered praiseworthy when seen in her male contemporaries . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 The civil war years of Matilda 's life have been the subject of historical fiction . Matilda , Stephen and their supporters feature in Ellis Peters 's historical detective series about Brother Cadfael , set between 1137 and 1145 . Peters paints the Empress as proud and aloof , in contrast to Stephen , a tolerant man and a reasonable ruler . Matilda 's martial reputation may also have contributed to Alfred , Lord Tennyson 's decision to entitle his 1855 battle poem Maud . 
 = = Family tree = = 
 Matilda 's family tree : 
 = Mycena flavoalba = 
 Mycena flavoalba , commonly known as the ivory bonnet , is a species of inedible mushroom in the Mycenaceae family . The cap is initially conical in shape , before becoming convex and then flattening out ; it may reach dimensions of up to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) across . The cap color is ivory @-@ white to yellowish white , sometimes more yellowish at the center . The tubular stems are up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) long and 2 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 10 in ) thick , and have long , coarse white hairs at their bases . The mushroom is found in Europe , the Middle East , and North America , where it grows scattered or in dense groups under conifers and on humus in oak woods . 
 = = Taxonomy , classification , and naming = = 
 First described as Agaricus <unk> by Swedish mycologist Elias Magnus Fries in 1838 , it was assigned its current name in 1872 by Lucien Quélet . American mycologist Rolf Singer transferred the species to the genera Hemimycena and Marasmiellus in 1938 and 1951 , respectively . Singer later changed his mind about these placements , and his 1986 Agaricales in Modern Taxonomy , he considered the species a Mycena . The binomials resulting from these transfers are considered synonyms ; another synonym is Mycena <unk> ( Bolton ) Gray . 
 Mycena flavoalba is placed in the section <unk> of the genus Mycena , alongside species such as M. adonis and M. <unk> . 
 The specific epithet flavoalba ( " yellow @-@ white " ) is a compound of the Latin adjectives flavus ( " yellow ) and alba ( " white " ) . The mushroom 's common name is the " ivory bonnet " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of M. flavoalba is 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter , conical when young , becoming somewhat bell @-@ shaped , broadly conic or at times nearly convex . It may develop a papilla ( a nipple @-@ like structure ) in its center . The cap margin is initially pressed against the stem , but in maturity either flares out or curves inward slightly . The cap surface is smooth , moist , and partially translucent , so that the outline of the gills underneath the cap may be seen . The mushroom is hygrophanous ( changing color as it loses or gains moisture ) , being cream @-@ buff to yellowish initially , with a paler ( almost white ) margin , and fading to buff in the center and yellowish @-@ white along the margin when dry . The flesh is yellowish to white , thick under the disc but otherwise thin , moderately fragile , and without any distinctive odor and taste . 
 The gills are ascending and somewhat hooked or toothed , narrow at first but becoming rather broad ( 2 @.@ 5 mm and becoming 3 – 4 mm ) . They are nearly equal in width throughout or slightly ventricose in age , with a spacing that is close to subdistant . About 18 – 24 gills reach the stem , with two tiers of lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend fully from the cap margin to the stem ) that may develop veins running between them . The gills are white to creamy @-@ white with edges that are even and whitish , and waxy in appearance and consistency . The stem is 3 – 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) long , 1 – 2 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 – 0 @.@ 10 in ) thick , equal , tubular , somewhat elastic , cartilaginous , and not particularly fragile . The base of the stem is either strigose ( covered with sharp , straight , stiff white hairs ) or surrounded with a matted white mycelium . Above the base , the stem is smooth , and pruinose toward the apex . When moist it is translucent with slight ripples running transversely , and white to pale yellow in color . Mycena flavoalba is considered inedible . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are 7 – 9 by 3 – 4 @.@ 5 μm , ellipsoid , and nonamyloid . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored . The pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia ( cystidia found on the face and edge of a gill , respectively ) are similar in structure and abundant , ventricose with long , rather narrow necks , and measure 46 – 62 by 9 – 14 μm . The neck is often encrusted with a mucilaginous substance , but it is otherwise smooth and hyaline . The flesh of the gill is homogenous , and stains pale yellow in iodine . The flesh of the cap has a thin , poorly differentiated pellicle ( a thin membrane ) , a somewhat differentiated hypoderm ( that is most pronounced in old caps ) and the remainder is made up of somewhat enlarged cells that stain pale yellow in iodine . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Mycena flavoalba bears resemblance to some members of the genus Hemimycena , such as H. lactea and H. <unk> . It can be distinguished from these species by its white to yellowish cap , and differences in the shape of both its spores and caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) . H. <unk> , a Spanish species newly described from in 2005 , is also similar in appearance , but differs in the distribution of pigment in the cap , and the differential staining in response to the dye <unk> blue — M. flavoalba is positive , while H. <unk> is negative . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Mycena flavoalba grow scattered to densely gregarious on needle beds under conifers , and on humus in oak woods during the autumns months . Although generally rare , the species sometimes occurs in large quantities in certain localities . In the United States , it has been collected from Colorado , Idaho , Michigan , North Carolina , Oregon , Washington , Wyoming , Florida , and Kansas . It is also found in Europe , and Israel . The species is listed as " Least Concern " in the Danish Red Data Book . 
 = Charles Henry Smyth , Jr . = 
 Charles Henry Smyth , Jr . ( / <unk> / ; March 31 , 1866 – April 4 , 1937 ) was an American geologist . Born to a prominent family in Upstate New York , he studied geology at Columbia University before becoming a professor of geology at Hamilton College and Princeton University . At Princeton he strengthened the Department of Geology 's graduate program . 
 Smyth specialized in petrology , chemical geology , and economic geology . He showed the sedimentary origin of iron ore deposits near his native Clinton , New York , mapped the geology of the western Adirondack Mountains , and published a well known monograph on the origins of alkaline igneous rocks . He was a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science , a member of the American Philosophical Society , and a fellow of the Geological Society of America . 
 = = Family = = 
 Smyth was born March 31 , 1866 , in Oswego , New York , the second son of Alice DeWolf Smyth and Charles Henry Smyth , Sr. In 1873 , he moved with his family to nearby Clinton , New York . His mother belonged to a well known Oswego banking and manufacturing family . His father was a prominent local businessman , holding executive positions at the Franklin Iron Works , Clinton Bank , and the company that managed the Niagara Falls Suspension Bridge . He also served on the vestry of the local Episcopal church and was a brigadier general in the New York Guard . The family was considered among the local elite in Clinton . Katharine Blunt was a first cousin . 
 On July 30 , 1891 , the younger Charles Smyth married Ruth Anne Phelps , originally of Shreveport , Louisiana . They had two children , Charles Phelps Smyth ( 1895 – 1990 ) and Henry DeWolf Smyth ( 1898 – 1986 ) . Both became professors of science at Princeton University . 
 = = Education = = 
 Smyth studied at Clinton Grammar School in his youth . He became interested in geology at a young age : his native region of Upstate New York had many fossils , and his family 's business involved extracting the local iron ore . In 1884 , he entered Hamilton College in Clinton , where he studied science . After a year he transferred to the School of Mines at Columbia University . At Columbia he was president of the Glee Club . He graduated in 1888 as one of the top three students in his class . 
 Smyth continued his studies at Cornell University under James Furman Kemp and Harvard University under Nathaniel Shaler . He also worked as an analytical chemist at the Franklin Iron Works , his father 's company . He earned his Ph.D. in geology from Columbia in 1890 , writing a dissertation titled " The Origin of the Clinton Type of Iron Ore " . He then spent an additional year studying petrology at Heidelberg University under Harry <unk> , the world expert in the field . 
 = = Career = = 
 In 1891 Smyth returned to Hamilton College to become the Stone Professor of Natural History . In addition to his teaching duties at Hamilton , Smyth spent each summer from 1892 to 1903 doing field work for the New York State Museum in the western Adirondack Mountains , which had been studied very little in the fifty years prior . He collaborated with his old advisor Kemp , who specialized in the eastern Adirondacks , and Henry Platt Cushing , who claimed the northern and northeastern sections . He returned to field work a final time in 1908 ; ill health prevented further expeditions . 
 In 1905 Woodrow Wilson , then President of Princeton University , convinced Smyth to join the Princeton faculty , where Smyth remained until retiring in 1934 . He strengthened the graduate program in the Department of Geology , which awarded only two advanced degrees before 1912 ; during his 29 years , another 31 degrees were awarded . Among his students were Arthur Francis <unk> and Albert Orion Hayes . His courses in petrology and chemical geology introduced students to subjects that were relatively new in the United States . 
 Smyth was a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science , a member of the American Philosophical Society , and a fellow of the Geological Society of America . He was also a member of the Society of Economic Geologists , the American Institute of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers , the Washington Academy of Sciences , Phi Beta Kappa , and Sigma Xi . 
 = = Research = = 
 Smyth 's research was in the subfields of petrology , chemical geology , and economic geology . When he began his research most American geologists who used chemistry were mineralogists , volcanologists , or specialists in ore . Smyth was a pioneer in chemical petrology , applying chemistry to ordinary rocks , in the United States . 
 In his dissertation he argued that the iron ore near Clinton was a primary sediment ; at the time the deposits were believed to be secondary nodules formed by replacement of primary limestone . His Princeton graduate student Hayes proved a similar result about the iron ores of his native <unk> , Newfoundland and Labrador . In 1919 , Smyth showed that a green mineral in the Clinton ores was <unk> and also a primary sediment . 
 Smyth , Kemp , and Cushing 's field work in the Adirondacks yielded detailed geologic maps of the challenging region . Smyth described the nature and origins of the area 's rocks and mineral deposits . His conclusions were still largely accepted at the time of his death in 1937 . 
 His two best known contributions were his work on the Clinton iron ore and a 1927 monograph about the origins of alkaline igneous rocks . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 In his later years Smyth suffered from poor health , which an obituary in Princeton Alumni Weekly blamed on " overwork in certain rugged inaccessible wilderness portions of the Adirondacks . " He contracted tonsilitis during his 1898 expedition to the Adirondacks and suffered heart and digestive troubles thereafter . He died April 4 , 1937 , at Princeton Hospital . The cause was pneumonia and complications from a recent hip fracture . 
 The mineral <unk> is named after him . Its properties resemble those of <unk> samples Smyth studied in Upstate New York . 
 = Buster Smith = 
 Henry " Buster " Smith ( August 24 , 1904 – August 10 , 1991 ) , also known as Professor Smith , was an American jazz alto saxophonist and mentor to Charlie Parker . Smith was instrumental in instituting the Texas Sax Sound with Count Basie and Lester Young in the 1930s . Smith played saxophone for a range of musicians including Duke Ellington , Ella Fitzgerald and Earl Hines , though in his career only recorded one solo album in 1959 . Despite intending to release a follow @-@ up in the 1960s , Smith was injured in an accident leading to a follow @-@ up never eventuating . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Smith was born and raised in Alsdorf , Texas , a small township near <unk> in the outskirts of Dallas , where he attended school as a child . Smith earned the name " Buster " from his parents as a baby , as he was born as an overweight child . Buster was the third of five boys and had no sisters , though both of his older brothers died in childhood of measles . 
 Smith 's early musical influences were his mother , and his father , who played guitar . At the age of four years , Buster was playing the organ with his brother , pianist Boston Smith ; Buster played the keys and Boston stepped on the pedals . Soon thereafter , his grandfather gave away the family organ because he believed it would only direct Buster to a life of sin . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In 1919 , Smith picked cotton for a week to earn himself the money to buy a $ 3 @.@ 50 clarinet . Smith learned to play several instruments by the time he was eighteen years old . In 1922 , Smith and his family moved to Dallas . He joined the <unk> White Trio , playing Alto saxophone and clarinet . In 1923 , he began his professional music career playing alto saxophone with the medicine shows , though he had to play very loudly to draw in more customers . This experience led to Smith defining his own musical style , known for being loud . The time with the medicine shows also led to Oran " Hot Lips " Page inviting Smith to join his group , the Oklahoma City Blue Devils , in 1925 . Over the next few years , Smith wrote much of the group 's music , learning from banjo player Johnny Clark , writing lyrics with co @-@ workers from the bank that he worked in . 
 = = = Peak success = = = 
 When Smith joined the Blue Devils , the line @-@ up consisted of Walter Page , Oran Page , Lester Young , Count Basie , Jimmy Rushing , and Emir " Bucket " Coleman . They toured the Kansas City area and the Midwest , playing jazz for a year , bringing all of its members into prominence . Basie and Page both left the group ; however Smith decided to stay on , though this was very short lived and soon after he left also . After leaving the group , he and Basie formed the Buster Smith @-@ Count Basie Band of Rhythm , where the two innovated a louder style of Jazz . Buster 's contribution to the unique sound was by using a tenor saxophone reed in his alto saxophone to achieve a louder , " fatter " sound . Lester Young also joined the band and , to complement Smith 's louder sound , he also opted for a heavier reed , using a baritone saxophone reed on his tenor saxophone . This sound was later labelled the Texas Sax Sound . Smith gained a great amount of influence in the Texan music community and industry . Smith mentored legendary saxophonist Charlie Parker during the 1930s , developing a " father @-@ son relationship " through mentoring Parker . 
 In 1941 , Smith decided to return to Dallas and to cease touring , though he remained active in the local music scene . In the following years , he wrote for jazz and blues bands , played often , and taught many young Texan musicians , including Aaron " T @-@ Bone " Walker and Red Garland among others . He also performed session work with artists such as Pete Johnson 's Boogie @-@ Woogie Boys , Eddie Durham , Leo " Snub " Mosley , Bon and His Buddies , and the Don Redman Orchestra . 
 = = = Solo career = = = 
 In 1959 , Buster led his first solo recording session in Fort Worth , as prompted by Atlantic Records . From these sessions , released by Atlantic with the title The Legendary Buster Smith , Smith 's notable songs included " Kansas City Riffs , " " Buster 's Tune , " " E Flat Boogie , " and Kurt Weill 's " September Song . " For the sessions , Buster enlisted his brother Boston Smith to play piano , along with musicians spanning his career to date . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 In the 1960s , Smith was involved in auto accident , in which he was injured and no longer able to play the saxophone . In order to continue playing music , he started to play the bass guitar throughout Dallas and continued to participate in the Dallas musical community . Buster led a dance music band until 1980 , and played in the Legendary Revelations in the mid @-@ 1980s . Smith died in Dallas on August 10 , 1991 of a heart attack . 
 = = Discography = = 
 The Legendary Buster Smith , Atlantic Records , 1959 ( Reissued by Koch Records , 1999 ) 
 = Wirgman Building = 
 The Wirgman Building was an early 19th century Federal @-@ style commercial and residential building located on East Main Street ( U.S. Route 50 ) in Romney , West Virginia . Following its completion around 1825 to serve as the Romney branch office for the Bank of the Valley of Virginia , the Wirgman Building at various times served as a location for every subsequent bank established in Romney , to include the Bank of Romney and the First National Bank of Romney . During the American Civil War , the building was used as a military prison . For a time , the Wirgman Building 's second floor housed the offices and printing plant of the Hampshire Review newspaper . By 1937 , the ground floor of the Wirgman Building housed office and mercantile space , and the second floor was divided into apartments . After the Wirgman Building sustained damage in a fire in 1964 , it was demolished in 1965 to make way for the construction of the new Bank of Romney headquarters building . Prior to its demolition , the Wirgman Building was photographed and documented by the National Park Service 's Historic American Buildings Survey in 1937 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1790 , the trustees of the Town of Romney commissioned John Mitchel to draft a cadastral survey map of Romney . Prior to this survey , Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron had commissioned a similar cadastral survey of Romney sometime before the town 's incorporation on December 23 , 1762 . On June 30 , 1790 , Mitchel submitted to the trustees a " Plan of the Town of Romney , " which divided the town into 100 land lots of equal size , with four lots adjacent to the courthouse comprising the " publick " square . The Wirgman Building was later built upon the " publick " land lot numbered " Lot 76 " . Romney 's first cemetery was present on the lot when it was a part of the courthouse square . The cemetery 's interments were located on the actual site , and to the rear , of the future Wirgman Building . 
 = = = Bank of the Valley of Virginia = = = 
 The Wirgman Building was erected around 1825 by William Vance to house the office of the newly established Romney branch of the Bank of the Valley of Virginia , which was headquartered in Winchester , Virginia . In an act of the Virginia General Assembly on February 5 , 1817 , the Bank of the Valley of Virginia was authorized to open branches in Berkeley , Hampshire , Hardy , and Jefferson counties if citizens in each of the aforementioned areas could raise 100 @,@ 000 USD in stock to establish a branch . This provision was met when the necessary stock was raised , and the Bank of the Valley of Virginia branch in Romney was opened around 1825 in the Wirgman Building . In 1845 , historian Henry Howe traveled through Romney and described the town as " one of considerable business , and has a branch of the Bank of the Valley , several stores , and about 350 inhabitants . " The bank branch continued to operate from the Wirgman Building until the Bank of the Valley of Virginia in Winchester suspended its operations and those of its branches following the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 . 
 = = = American Civil War = = = 
 Throughout the American Civil War , the Wirgman Building was frequently used as a military prison by both Confederate States Army and Union Army forces during their occupations of Romney . In the Spring of 1862 , a spy for the command of Stonewall Jackson , Lieutenant John Blue , was captured by Union Army soldiers while he was conducting a reconnaissance mission to determine the size and strength of the Union Army forces occupying Romney . Pending his transfer to a military prison in Wheeling where he was to be tried as a suspected spy , Blue was imprisoned in a room on the second floor of the Wirgman Building . During the early morning on Easter Day , Blue disabled the only guard on duty , disguised himself in a Union Army coat and headgear and proceeded to barricade the remainder of the prison garrison within the Wirgman Building . Blue walked to the periphery of the town of Romney unnoticed by the occupying Union Army forces , and successfully made it to safety . 
 = = = Hampshire Review = = = 
 The Hampshire Review newspaper occupied the building 's second floor with its offices and printing plant from 1884 to 1895 . John J. Cornwell , who later became West Virginia 's governor , and his brother William B. Cornwell purchased the newspaper in 1890 . The newspaper continued to operate from the second floor of the Wirgman Building until 1895 , when the Cornwell brothers relocated the Hampshire Review office and printing plant to the first floor of their new brick building on West Main Street . In the newspaper 's printing plant on the second floor of the Wirgman Building , the Hampshire Review was printed by a hand @-@ operated Benjamin Franklin printing press . 
 = = = Bank of Romney = = = 
 Banking operations in Hampshire County ceased throughout the duration of the American Civil War , and a new banking institution was not established in Romney until 1888 . By September of that year , a coordinated effort by Romney 's leading citizens amassed subscriptions for the entirety of the initial offering of 300 shares of stock for the establishment of the Bank of Romney . The shareholders of the Bank of Romney petitioned the Secretary of State of West Virginia for a charter with capital stock totaling 30 @,@ 000 USD . Following the state 's approval of its charter , the Bank of Romney commenced its operations in the Wirgman Building on December 20 , 1888 . The bank occupied two rented rooms on the Wirgman Building 's first floor , which it shared with a pharmacy . The bank initially used a safe as its bank vault and security for the bank was provided by a nightwatchman who slept in one of the bank office 's two rooms . The Wirgman Building 's security was further enhanced with the installation of wire mesh glass and bars in the windows . During the bank 's residency at the Wirgman Building , Henry Bell Gilkeson served as the bank 's president . The Bank of Romney began to outgrow its spaces on the first floor of the Wirgman Building almost immediately after its incorporation , and in 1906 it moved across Main Street to a new bank building . 
 = = = First National Bank of Romney = = = 
 The Wirgman Building again housed a banking institution four years later when the First National Bank of Romney opened on June 11 , 1910 , utilizing the former first floor office space of the Bank of Romney . The First National Bank of Romney vacated the Wirgman Building in 1911 , when it moved to its new three @-@ story building , known as " The National Building , " at the corner of Main and High Streets across from Literary Hall . At various times from its construction around 1825 until 1911 , the Wirgman Building served as the location for every subsequent bank established in Romney since the Bank of the Valley of Virginia . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 In its final years , the Wirgman Building housed office and mercantile spaces on its first floor , and its second floor was divided into apartments . In 1937 , the National Park Service Historic American Buildings Survey ( HABS ) photographed and documented the architectural details of the Wirgman Building . At the time of its documentation by HABS , the building was under the ownership of Mrs. W. F. Wirgman , whose family 's surname likely gave the structure its local toponym . HABS referred to the Wirgman Building as the " Valley Bank Building " in its supplemental documentation , which was completed by Archie A. Biggs . In September 1937 , the West Virginia State Road Commission released a road map highlighting the history of the Potomac Highlands through photographs , which included a feature on the Wirgman Building and Lieutenant John Blue 's escape during its tenure as a military prison during the American Civil War . 
 After the Wirgman Building sustained damage from a fire in 1964 , it was purchased by the Bank of Romney and demolished along with the neighboring Brady House in 1965 to make way for the construction of the bank 's new headquarters building . Having outgrown its 1906 location , the Bank of Romney returned across Main Street to the former site of the Wirgman building following completion of the new , larger headquarters facility there in 1966 . 
 Two historical markers in front of the Bank of Romney are the only reminders of the Wirgman Building at its original site : the first was erected by the Stonewall Jackson Chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederacy commemorating the escape of Lieutenant John Blue from the Wirgman Building during its use as a Union Army military prison , and the second marker reads " Original Site of the Wirgman Building . Built 1825 . <unk> 1965 . " 
 In his Buildings of West Virginia ( 2004 ) , architectural historian S. Allen Chambers asserts that of the " most significant early buildings " demolished in Romney , the Wirgman Building is one of the town 's " major losses . " 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Existing information on the architectural details of the Wirgman Building are known through the HABS supplementary documentation written by Archie A. Biggs in 1937 . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The Wirgman Building was exemplary of the Federal style of architecture . It was a thick @-@ walled edifice rising two stories and constructed of brick . The building 's brickwork was built in the Flemish bond style on the building 's façade and in the American bond style on the building 's sides and on its rear face . The building 's façade along East Main Street measured 51 feet ( 16 m ) , and its sides measured 41 feet ( 12 m ) , with a rear extension measuring 34 feet ( 10 m ) in length . The building featured a brick cornice along its roofline and parapet end walls on its sides . According to HABS documentation , the building 's bricks measured 2 ¼ x 4 ¼ x 8 ½ in size . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 A circular wall , with a six @-@ panel wooden door rounded to mimic the wall 's curvature , was located between the building 's entrance hall and its stair hall . The stairway 's balustrade in the stair hall featured turned baluster shafts and a newel crafted from maple . The stairs themselves featured scrolled step ends . HABS supplementary documentation described " Coffee grinder " style locks and paneled door jambs as features of the building 's six @-@ panel wooden doors . Its doorways were reported to have maintained their original decorative molding trim , and the fireplace mantelpieces as being " delicately done . " 
 = Palmetto Leaves = 
 Palmetto Leaves is a memoir and travel guide written by Harriet Beecher Stowe about her winters in the town of Mandarin , Florida , published in 1873 . Already famous for having written Uncle Tom 's Cabin ( 1852 ) , Stowe came to Florida after the U.S. Civil War ( 1861 – 1865 ) . She purchased a plantation near Jacksonville as a place for her son to recover from the injuries he had received as a Union soldier and to make a new start in life . After visiting him , she became so enamored with the region she purchased a cottage and orange grove for herself and wintered there until 1884 , even though the plantation failed within its first year . Parts of Palmetto Leaves appeared in a newspaper published by Stowe 's brother , as a series of letters and essays about life in northeast Florida . 
 Scion of New England clergy , Stowe keenly felt a sense of Christian responsibility that was expressed in her letters . She considered it her duty to help improve the lives of newly emancipated blacks and detailed her efforts to establish a school and church in Mandarin toward these ends . Parts of the book relate the lives of local African @-@ Americans and the customs of their society . Stowe described the charm of the region and its generally moderate climate but warned readers of " excessive " heat in the summer months and occasional cold snaps in winter . Her audience comprises relatives , friends , and strangers in New England who ask her advice about whether or not to move to Florida , which at the time was still mostly wilderness . Although it is a minor work in Stowe 's oeuvre , Palmetto Leaves was one of the first travel guides written about Florida and stimulated Florida 's first boom of tourism and residential development in the 1880s . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Stowe buys an estate = = = 
 By the time Harriet Beecher Stowe ( 1811 – 1896 ) moved to Florida in 1867 , she was already internationally famous for authoring Uncle Tom 's Cabin , published as a serial between 1851 and 1852 . The novel expounded upon her abolitionist views and was extraordinarily influential in condemning slavery in the United States . Stowe 's opposition to slavery sprang from a moral passion based on her Christian faith . She had grown up the daughter of a Presbyterian minister , Lyman Beecher ; seven of her brothers became ministers in Calvinist or Congregational denominations , and she married a minister . 
 In 1860 , Stowe 's son Frederick " Fred " William Stowe enlisted in the First Massachusetts Infantry Regiment when Abraham Lincoln called for volunteers in anticipation of the Civil War . Much beloved , yet troubled , Fred Stowe had developed a problem with alcohol as early as sixteen . He took to army life , however , and was promoted to lieutenant . After receiving a head wound at the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863 , he endured severe headaches and was forced to resign his commission . His alcoholism worsened , and he may have compounded it with a liberal use of opiates and narcotics , which were widely available . 
 In 1866 , Fred encountered two young farmers in Connecticut who had spent time on duty as Union soldiers in Florida during the war . He learned from them that land there was plentiful and cheap , and many recently emancipated blacks were available at low wages to work it . When he shared this information with his mother , Stowe and her husband Calvin Ellis Stowe considered it a prime opportunity to hasten their son 's rehabilitation . For $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 153 @,@ 500 in 2009 ) she purchased a cotton plantation near Orange Park , south of Jacksonville , named Laurel Grove , that was originally established by slave trader Zephaniah Kingsley in 1803 and managed in part by his African wife , Anna Madgigine Jai , until 1811 . 
 Stowe intended that Fred would manage the estate as he recovered from his wounds and addictions . As an extension of her abolitionist ideals , she wrote to her brother Charles Beecher , however , about her potential role in the endeavor : 
 My plan ... is not in any sense a mere worldly enterprise . I have for many years had a longing to be more immediately doing Christ 's work on earth . My heart is with that poor people whose cause in words I have tried to plead , and who now , ignorant and docile , are just in that formative state in which whoever seizes has them . 
 Corrupt politicians are already beginning to speculate on them as possible capital for their schemes and to fill their poor heads with all sorts of vagaries . Florida is the State into which they have , more than anywhere else , been pouring . Emigration is positively and decidedly setting that way ; but as yet it is mere worldly emigration , with the hope of making money , nothing more . 
 Charles Stowe , her son , later wrote that his mother searched for higher purpose in everything she did , from growing potatoes to writing . She wrote that the prospect of setting up a series of churches along the St. Johns River would be the best way to train former slaves , remarking " I long to be at this work and cannot think of it without my heart burning within me " . Florida was little populated and developed : it had just a fraction of the population of Georgia and Alabama . South of Ocala , approximately two people lived per square mile . 
 Florida 's school system was in disarray at the end of the Civil War ; in 1866 a Northerner named A. E. Kinne noted there were fewer schools for white children than freedmen 's schools for black children . In 1860 , there were no official schools for black children and slaves were prohibited from any education . At the same time , there were 97 public schools for white children and 40 private academies for them , some of which appeared to get public funding . In May 1865 , the total Florida population was 154 @,@ 000 , and an estimated 47 % of it was black , almost all of whom were former slaves . A difference in attitudes about education between the races was apparent as freed blacks saw education as the key to increasing their opportunities , or at least escaping conditions they had endured during servitude . 
 = = = Transformation and failure = = = 
 In the late winter of 1867 , Stowe followed her son to Florida , finding that the warmer weather allowed her to spend more time on two novels she was writing . Her first weeks in Orange Park utterly transformed her and she became enchanted with Florida at once , writing that she felt she had sprouted wings and become " young & frisky " . She accompanied her son one day to collect the mail , which was deposited in Mandarin , about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) across the St. Johns River . They rowed to the eastern shore and Stowe fell in love with a cottage in Mandarin , attached to an orange grove . Stowe 's transformation in Florida was rooted in her identification and familiarity with Puritan New England : industry and thrift in a climate where cold sharpened one 's senses and values . The laid @-@ back attitude of the people and warmth of the Southern climate were seductive . She at first attempted to persuade her brother Charles to purchase the land in Mandarin , writing to him and asking " How do you think New England theology would have fared had been landed here instead of Plymouth Rock ? " She wrote about the land and climate intoxicating her and pondered the effect it might have had on literature when she posed an idea to her publisher : " I hate to leave my calm isle of Patmos — where the world is not and I have such quiet long hours for writing . [ Ralph Waldo ] Emerson could insulate himself here and keep his electricity . [ Nathaniel ] Hawthorne ought to have lived in an orange grove in Florida . " 
 Within a year , Laurel Grove failed . Fred was inexperienced and made poor bargains with local merchants . Before the war , plantations had been largely self @-@ sufficient , but Fred paid high prices for goods shipped in from Savannah and Charleston . He took days off at a time to visit saloons in Jacksonville . An unanticipated infestation of cotton @-@ worm larvae ( Helicoverpa zea ) destroyed much of the cotton crop . Only two bales were produced by Laurel Grove ; Stowe realized the venture was a failure . Fred committed himself to a rehabilitation asylum in New York , and at some point in 1867 , Stowe purchased the cottage and the attached grove in Mandarin . 
 Citrus was distributed primarily in a regional market and was a luxury in northern cities ; oranges in New York sold for about 50 cents per fruit . The acreage attached to the house Stowe purchased could produce an income of $ 2 @,@ 000 a month ( $ 30 @,@ 700 in 2009 ) . Stowe wrote to author George Eliot to update her on the progress of improvements to the house in Mandarin , putting up wallpaper , improving plaster , and building a veranda that wrapped around the structure . She took pains not to disturb a giant oak and instead built the veranda around the tree . The house could accommodate as many as 17 family members and friends . 
 From 1868 to 1884 , Stowe split her time between her residence in Hartford , Connecticut , a mansion named <unk> , and her house in Mandarin . A few weeks before Christmas each year , she would oversee arrangements to close <unk> for the season , which involved preparing the house for the winter , packing all their clothes , living necessities , her writing materials , and the carpets in the house and shipping everything to Florida . Various family members would accompany her , living in the comfortable two @-@ story house she modestly called a " cottage " or " hut " . In Hartford she was <unk> with requests and at the center of a whirl of activity . Mandarin was not connected to a telegraph line until the 1880s and mail was received only once a week by boat . Stowe was able to relax somewhat in Mandarin and write for at least three hours a day . 
 = = Description of text and publication = = 
 Stowe remained active , attending speaking engagements , writing , traveling frequently and publishing several novels while she was wintering in Mandarin . Though she promised her publishers , J. R. Osgood , another novel , she instead compiled a series of articles about Florida and letters to relatives in New England about her daily life . Some of them were first published in Christian Union , a local New England newspaper established by her brother Henry Ward Beecher . In all , twenty chapters make up Palmetto Leaves that vary in tone depending upon Stowe 's audience . " Buying land in Florida " , " Florida for Invalids " , and " Our Experience in Crops " are addressed more to general readers who may be considering moving to the region . Some essays are directed to describing the best sights in the area , such as " Flowery January in Florida " , " <unk> up Julington " , " The Grand Tour up River " , and " St. Augustine " . A more personal touch is included in chapters entitled " A Letter to the Girls " , " Letter @-@ Writing " , and " Our Neighbor Over the Way " as Stowe includes intimate details about her daily life in Mandarin . Her observations of the state and characteristics of emancipated slaves are mentioned intermittently in letters and essays , but the final two chapters , " Old Cudjo and The Angel " and " Laborers of The South " , are dedicated solely to this topic . 
 Palmetto Leaves was not Stowe 's first travel memoir . In 1854 she published Sunny Memoirs of Foreign Lands about her first trip to Europe , a book unique as an American woman 's view of Europe . She followed this with Agnes of Sorrento that appeared as a serial in The Atlantic Monthly from 1861 to 1862 . Source material for Agnes of Sorrento was culled from her observations of and experiences in Italy , collected during her third trip to Europe , which she took with her family . Olav <unk> , author of Harriet Beecher Stowe in Florida , recognizes Stowe 's tendency to spin everything she saw into something selectively positive . Stowe addressed this in the foreword to Sunny Memoirs of Foreign Lands , writing : 
 If the criticism be made that every thing is given couleur de rose , the answer is , Why not ? If there be characters and scenes that seem drawn with too bright a pencil , the reader will consider that , after all , there are many worse sins than disposition to think and speak well of one 's neighbors . 
 The object of publishing these letters is , therefore , to give to those who are true @-@ hearted and honest the same agreeable picture of life and manners which met the writer 's own eyes . 
 Because little was known about the region , the elements of its climate , citrus , water , and general ideas about illness and health , Stowe was possibly first among several authors and advertising schemes that portrayed Florida as an exotic place of natural wonders and powers that could rejuvenate frail health . What travel writers published on Florida were exaggerated claims , readily accepted by audiences hungry for escapist literature . Biographer Forrest Wilson considers the finished product , Palmetto Leaves — published in 1873 — to be the first promotional writing about Florida ever . Occasionally letters about the state were printed in local newspapers in the North , but because Florida was still very much a rugged wilderness , Northerners really had no concept of what the region was like . Rather besotted with the marvelous properties she saw in the orange , Stowe intended to call the book Orange Blossoms , but changed the title to better express the plant that proliferated the region the most . 
 = = Subject and themes = = 
 = = = Duty and calling = = = 
 In the first chapter of Palmetto Leaves , Stowe tells how she takes a steamer to Savannah , Georgia . On board is a stray dog who begs scraps of food and affection from the passengers . It finally becomes attached to a woman on board and follows her around . At Savannah , the dog is thrown into the street by the porters and waiters at the hotel , and is eventually left behind . Stowe compares the dog and the people who care for such stray animals to Christian ideals to take care of the poor and suffering . 
 The impressive orange tree served as a metaphor for Stowe in Palmetto Leaves . She calls it " the fairest , the noblest , the most generous , it is the most surprising and abundant of all trees which the Lord God caused to grow eastward in Eden " , and compares it to her task of educating emancipated slaves . When she first arrived in Mandarin , from 1868 to 1870 , religious services were held in the Stowes ' home , with Calvin presiding and Stowe teaching Sunday School to both black and white children and sometimes serving as an acolyte during services . Stowe purchased a lot in 1869 to build a church for her neighbors that would double as a school to educate children , freed slaves , and anyone eager to learn . Though she encountered considerable frustration in dealing with the bureaucracy of the Freedmen 's Bureau , construction was finished within a year and a teacher was in place , procured from Brooklyn , New York . Stowe had an organ that was rolled from her home to the church , but after it became too difficult to roll back and forth , they locked it in a closet in the school . The building burned down to Stowe 's deep dismay , probably because of some drifters who spent the night in it and caught the southern pine wood on fire from carelessness , although Olav <unk> suggests it was arson committed by Stowe 's neighbors who did not appreciate her efforts to educate black children . After a frost in 1835 , the orange trees in north Florida were killed , even underground , but they sprouted back only to be assaulted by insects , yet they recovered . While her neighbors helped to raise funds to rebuild the church , Stowe and the small community handed spellers to local blacks who were eager to learn . She decried the delay in the children 's education : " To see people who are willing and anxious to be taught growing up in ignorance is the <unk> sight that can afflict one " . 
 = = = Florida and daily life in Mandarin = = = 
 From her first sight of Florida , Stowe was greatly impressed . In Palmetto Leaves , she sings the praises of Florida in January as a beautiful land capable of producing superior citrus and flowers . In several letters Stowe describes the abundant plant life in the area , dedicating a chapter to yellow <unk> ( <unk> sempervirens ) and another to magnolia ( Magnolia grandiflora ) flowers . She details watching sugarcane pressed into sugar crystals , going visiting with her elderly and obstinate mule named Fly , and discovering the myriad things to find in the woods and what can be made of them . She also keeps a cardinal ( Cardinalis cardinalis ) in a cage and four cats , but sadly reports later in the year that all four cats have died , to the relief and joy of <unk> the cardinal . 
 In an honest description of the disadvantages of Florida , Stowe attempts to disabuse readers of the notion that the region is perfect . She writes , " In New England Nature is an up @-@ and @-@ down smart , decisive , <unk> that has her times and seasons and brings up her ends of life with a positive jerk " and contrasts that characterization with Nature in Florida , an " indulgent old grandmother , who has no particular time for any thing and does every thing when she happens to feel like it " . Those who wish to live in Florida , Stowe warns , must also get to know its deficiencies : occasional freezing weather in winter , <unk> lawns , insects and snakes , and people who disagree as they do everywhere else . Were Florida a woman , Stowe writes , she would be a dark brunette , full of jolly untidiness . Malaria is a fact of life , and Stowe cautions Northerners who may be lured to the region by tales of the mild climate to understand that temperature extremes are common , taking particular effort to address <unk> , or those afflicted with tuberculosis . Those who consider moving to the region should weigh all these issues before making their decisions . In The Journal of Southern History , Susan Eacker attests that Stowe 's assignment of female characteristics to Florida coincided with her own gradual admission that she may be turning into a " woman 's rights woman " . 
 Stowe recounts several sailing trips she takes on the St. Johns and Julington Creek and the animals she sees during her excursion , appreciating the alligators , " water @-@ turkeys " ( Anhinga anhinga ) , and " fish @-@ hawks " , or ospreys ( Pandion haliaetus ) . Long an animal lover , she took her dogs , cats , and birds with her as part of the " earthquake " of the annual relocation from Hartford to Mandarin . She extended this care to other animals as well . In Naples , Italy , she once got out of a carriage to walk as it was being pulled up a steep hill by two beleaguered horses that were being whipped by the driver , and asked her companions and guide to do the same . Not only did she write the first travel guide to Florida , but Stowe also became the first defender of wild animals . She pays particular attention in Palmetto Leaves to hunters who shoot at anything they see . Not taking offense at hunting for the sake of eating , Stowe laments killing for its own sake : " it must be something that enjoys and can suffer ; something that loves life , and must lose it " . In 1877 she followed her book with a pamphlet that urged the cessation of the slaughter of Florida 's wading birds , whose feathers were selling at the price of gold and used in women 's hats . 
 = = = <unk> slaves = = = 
 The final two letters in Palmetto Leaves address the newly freed slaves in Florida . Two strong women who are less docile than Stowe is accustomed are included . One , a field hand turned domestic named Minnah , whom Stowe has tried in vain to teach how to do household chores , is so forthright in her speech that Stowe writes , " Democracy never assumes a more rampant form than in some of these old <unk> , who would say their screed to the king on his throne if they died for it the next minute . Accordingly , Minnah 's back was marked and scored with the tyrant 's answers to free speech . " Minnah eventually returns happily to the fields . Another , Judy , is complacent and enjoys taking mornings and afternoons off to see to her husband . Stowe attributes their work ethic to poor training and " the negligent habits inducted by slavery " ; the truly talented and hard @-@ working black laborers had moved on from homesteads to industry , able to demand their own price for their labors . 
 Although Stowe describes Minnah and Judy with some tempered exasperation , she praises a riverboat stewardess named Commodore Rose . Once a slave owned by the captain , Rose had since been freed for saving his life during a boating accident and continues to work for him following emancipation . She is as forthright as Minnah and Judy , but Rose knows every portion of the river as well as the houses and sites along the banks , and their histories . Her knowledge of the ship and its guests is unparalleled , and all the crew and guests revere her opinion in all matters . 
 In another story , Stowe and Calvin meet a man on a Mandarin dock who has been cheated out of much the land he was given by the government . Named Old Cudjo , he worked the small homestead on which he grew cotton for years . Where at first the neighbors surrounding the colony of former slaves from South Carolina were hesitant and suspicious , Old Cudjo and his colony were so industrious and honest that they won their white neighbors over . One who was a justice of the peace intervened on his behalf and Old Cudjo 's land was returned to him . Stowe 's final chapter is dedicated to defending the notion that blacks should be employed to help build the state of Florida to transform it from a wilderness into a civilization . They are better suited for work in the hot sun , more resistant to malaria , and are trustworthy and extremely eager to learn . She also dedicates a few pages to her interested observations on their culture as she details overhearing their festivities at night and sitting outside an informal church service . 
 = = Reception and criticism = = 
 Palmetto Leaves became a best @-@ seller for Stowe and was released in several editions . It was published again in 1968 as part of Bicentennial <unk> , a series of original facsimile texts about the history of the state . It was so popular that through publishing it , Stowe virtually ruined the peace and quiet she sought in Mandarin to be able to work . The year following the publication of Palmetto Leaves , Stowe reported that 14 @,@ 000 tourists had visited North Florida . Two years after its initial publication , a writer working for Harper 's magazine noted that Stowe was " besieged by hundreds of visitors , who do not seem to understand that she is not an exhibition " . 
 Stowe 's house , which was located on the bank of the St. Johns River , became a tourist attraction , as riverboats shuffling tourists from Jacksonville to Palatka or Green Cove Springs passed close by and slowed , so the captains could point out her home to their clients . Eventually a dock was built so that visitors could come ashore and peek into the windows of the home . One , who dared to pull down a tree branch covered with orange blossoms in full bloom over the Stowe 's veranda , was chased off the property by Calvin . Local residents who held Stowe in less than high regard insinuated that she worked with the enterprising riverboat captains to pose for tourists . 
 Stowe was among several authors who wrote about Florida following the Civil War . By far , the majority were men who concentrated on hunting prospects , but the women who wrote about the region often used an adolescent narrator who was usually male as a device to describe their encounters with the novelty of what they saw . Stowe wrote simply as herself , something that may have been allowed because of her celebrity . Gene Burnett , author of Florida 's Past : People and Events That Shaped the State writes : 
 Harriet was probably never fully aware of how great had been her influence in advertising Florida to the country , turning it from an obscure down under tip on the map into a beckoning , lush , tropical paradise , to which tens of thousands would flock to help build a state over the following decades . She herself would doubtless have viewed it as a fitting Christian act to help restore a prostrate , defeated <unk> to its feet ; Florida 's first promoter was merely a Good Samaritan . 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin was clearly Stowe 's magnum opus ( although she considered Old Town Folks , which was written while she was in Mandarin , to have that designation ) , as Stowe family history recalls that Abraham Lincoln entertained the author during a visit to the White House , and greeted her by saying " So this is the little lady who made this big war ? " Compared to it , Palmetto Leaves is considered a minor work and is rarely included in the canon of criticism about Stowe 's writings . The Cambridge Introduction to Literature series on Stowe addresses it briefly , however , noting that the mixed essay and letter format make it " uneven in quality and unstable in stance " . More assertive criticism was directed toward Stowe 's portrayals of the local Mandarin blacks . Cambridge Introduction to Literature author Sarah Robbins called it " downright offensive " and declared that Stowe negated her own attempts to persuade her readers that emancipated slaves were industrious and could assist in rebuilding the South of their own volition by including unflattering descriptions of their physical features — comparing Old Cudjo to a baboon , for example — and writing that supervising and taking care of them was necessary . Susan Eacker agrees , writing that Stowe 's views were representative of the majority of white Americans ' ideas of where blacks should be in the social scheme of the New South . 
 = = Post @-@ publication = = 
 The effects of Stowe 's writings about Florida were duly noted by authorities . Her brother Charles purchased his own land upon her recommendation , not in Mandarin but in Newport near Tallahassee . During a visit to his home in 1874 , she and a few Northern investors had an audience with Governor Marcellus Stearns . They were met by his cabinet and staff on the steps of the state capitol building — which was festooned with greenery and a large welcome sign for the occasion — and they gave Stowe a round of loud and exuberant cheers . 
 In 1882 Stowe purchased a plot of land in Mandarin on the St. Johns to build the Mandarin Church of Our Saviour , the dedication of which she attended . The windows of the church were installed by its benefactors . Calvin 's health began to fade and in 1884 the Stowe family left Mandarin forever to spend the rest of their years in Hartford . He died two years later and Stowe asked to add a window in the Mandarin church in his memory , but it remained plain glass for 30 years . The church 's parishioners remained so loyal to Stowe that they neglected to suggest an alternate plan for the window . Stowe declined into a childlike state after 1894 , losing much of her memory but keeping her fascination with plants and flowers as she would wander Hartford exclaiming over those she came across . She died in 1896 . 
 A frost in 1886 killed much of the orange industry in Mandarin and the town saw an economic decline . In 1916 , an ornate stained glass window constructed by Louis Comfort Tiffany was installed in the Church of Our Saviour , depicting a large oak tree overlooking the river . The church and Mandarin residents offered no more than $ 500 for the window ; for three years ten cent subscriptions were raised around Mandarin , and notices were placed in New York magazines to solicit finances for it . Although scholars have stated that Stowe 's efforts to educate local blacks were ultimately unsuccessful , the woman who spearheaded the fundraising effort for the memorial window noted that the project was enthusiastically supported by local black churches and residents , who gave what they could out of affection for Stowe , remembering that she taught some of them to read . The window probably cost Tiffany $ 850 ( $ 18 @,@ 206 in 2009 ) , and though there is no record of exactly how much Tiffany was paid , he took the project on because he liked the design : the tree , the moss , the Southern motif , and because it was to memorialize the Stowes . He probably made no profit from it . 
 Beneath it read " In that hour , fairer than daylight dawning / Remains the glorious thought , I am with Thee " , part of a hymn penned by Stowe . The school Stowe sponsored closed in 1929 . Following Stowe 's departure , the next owners of the house turned it into a lodge named after her . It closed in the 1940s and was subsequently replaced by a spacious home ; what survives is the 500 @-@ year @-@ old oak tree , which the Stowes built around instead of removing . The oak had continued to grow and upset the foundation of the new home . 
 The stained glass window became a tourist attraction and the last memorial to Stowe in Florida ; in later decades some of the parishioners and clergy had doubts about its " <unk> " as it was a rare depiction in an Anglican church not referencing a Biblical theme . In 1964 Hurricane Dora destroyed the Church of Our Saviour , including the stained glass window . Across the street , is the Mandarin Community Club , the former school sponsored by Stowe ; the structure was given to Mandarin in 1936 . It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Mandarin has since grown into a suburb of the expansive city of Jacksonville . 
 Artist Christopher Still created an oil on linen painting named The <unk> on the <unk> River that hangs in the Florida House of Representatives . It is one of a series of images that encompass symbols of cultural and historical significance to Florida that were commissioned by the State of Florida in 1999 and completed in 2002 . Palmetto Leaves is shown lying next to a large alligator and hollowed tree trunk in front of a riverboat passing through a swamp . 
 = Yantaromyrmex = 
 Yantaromyrmex is an extinct genus of ants first described in 2013 . Members of this genus are in the subfamily Dolichoderinae of the family Formicidae , known from Middle Eocene to Early Oligocene fossils found in Europe . The genus currently contains five described species , Y. constrictus , Y. geinitzi , Y. intermedius , Y. mayrianum and Y. samlandicus . The first specimens were collected in 1868 and studied by Austrian entomologist Gustav Mayr , who originally placed the fossils in other ant genera until the fossils were reviewed and subsequently placed into their own genus . These ants are small , measuring from 4 to 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 to 0 @.@ 24 in ) in length and can be characterized by their <unk> shaped head @-@ capsules and oval compound eyes that are located slightly to the rear of the capsules midpoint , with no known ocelli present . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Individuals of Yantaromyrmex species have been found as inclusions in four different Middle Eocene to Early Oligocene amber deposits in Europe . Baltic amber is approximately 46 million years old , having been deposited during the Lutetian stage of the Middle Eocene . There is debate on what plant family the amber was produced by , with evidence supporting them being relatives of either Agathis or <unk> . Rovno amber , recovered from deposits in the <unk> region of Ukraine , is slightly younger in age , being dated to the <unk> to <unk> of the Late Eocene . Bitterfeld amber is recovered from coal deposits in the Saxony area of Germany and the dating of the deposits is uncertain . Bitterfeld represents a section of the Eocene Paratethys Sea , and the amber that is recovered from the region is thought to be redeposited from older sediments . The fossil record of Bitterfeld and Baltic amber insects is very similar with a number of shared species , and that similarity is noted in the suggestions of a single source for the <unk> that produced the amber . The amber deposits on the Danish coast , often referred to as Scandinavian amber , is of similar age to the other three European <unk> , however a study of the ant fauna <unk> in 2009 indicates Scandinavian amber has a fairly distinct ant assemblage . Y. <unk> and Y. geinitzi are both identified from all four European <unk> , while Y. samlandicus has been described from Baltic , Bitterfeld and Rovno fossils . Y. intermedius and Y. mayrianum , are each known from only a few fossils , Y. intermedius from only a single Bitterfeld amber fossil while Y. mayrianum is known from a Baltic amber and a Rovno amber fossil . 
 = = History and classification = = 
 The type specimens of Y. geinitzi and Y. constrictus were collected in 1868 , and when first described were part of the University of Königsberg 's amber collection . The fossils were initially studied by Austrian entomologist Gustav Mayr who placed the two species in the genus Hypoclinea , now considered a junior synonym of the living genus Dolichoderus . Mayr 's 1868 type descriptions of the new species were published in the journal Beiträge zur Naturkunde <unk> . All the Y. samlandicus syntypes were collected by 1915 , and the first 73 described were part of the University of Königsberg amber collection . These fossils were first studied by American entomologist William Morton Wheeler , whose type description of " Iridomyrmex " <unk> was published in the journal Schriften der Physikalisch @-@ <unk> Gesellschaft zu Königsberg . Both Y. geinitzi and Y. constrictus were both moved from Hypoclinea to the small related genus <unk> in 1873 by Dalla Torre . In his 1915 paper The ants of Baltic Amber Wheeler suggested both species and the newly named " I. " <unk> would be better placed in the genus Iridomyrmex and noted Y. geinitzi to be one of the most abundant ant species in the Baltic amber he had studied . 
 Wheeler based the placement on the structuring of the labial and maxillary palpi . This placement was unchallenged until the genus was reviewed , redefined and split up in 1992 by Steven Shattuck . In his review , Iridomyrmex was split into a more restricted genus group while the other species which did not match the definition of that genus were moved to other genera . At that time Shattuck provisionally kept Y. geinitzi in Iridomyrmex citing a lack of specimens for him to study , while both Y. constrictus and Y. samlandicus were transferred to the genus Anonychomyrma . The placements of Y. geinitzi was retained until 2011 when Shattuck and Brian <unk> again reviewed Iridomyrmex . With more fossils to study and based on a number of characters , Y. geinitzi was also moved to Anonychomyrma . The three species were reviewed again , this time in 2013 . The species were examined by Russian entomologists G.M. Dlussky and D.A. <unk> , who they came to the conclusion that the three species , along with two unnamed species , were distinct from Anonychomyrma and Iridomyrmex . Based on the differences they noted , Dlussky and <unk> erected the new genus Yantaromyrmex in 2013 for these ants and described two new species , Y. intermedius and Y. <unk> . The name is a combination of the Russian word <unk> , translated as <unk> , meaning " amber " and the Greek <unk> which means " ant " . They noted the new species name intermedius was derived from the Latin word of that same spelling , meaning " intermediate " . They chose the name mayrianum to honor Gustav Mayr for his work as a myrmecologist . 
 = = Description = = 
 The genus is characterized by workers which have head @-@ capsules that are <unk> in shape , narrowing at the front and widening towards the rear of the capsule . The oval compound eyes are generally placed slightly to the rear of the capsules midpoint , and lacking ocelli completely . The mandibles have a number of teeth along the masticatory margin ( the middle area of the mandibles ) and an overall triangular shape . The gaster has a flat first tergite that does not cover the petiole , a flat fourth abdominal sternite . 
 = = = Y. constrictus = = = 
 Overall Y. constrictus can be distinguished from the congeneric Y. geinitzi in several ways . Y. geinitzi individuals are overall more gracile in form with a less constricted mesonotum and the mesosoma has a less convex appearance . Y. constrictus specimens have maxillary palps ( sensory organs ) which are six @-@ jointed , labial palps which are four jointed , and an abundantly hairy body . The antennae have a scape ( the first segment of the antenna ) which just passes the back @-@ edge of the head capsule on both female and <unk> ( male ) workers . The <unk> have larger and more rounded compound eyes than the workers , and the antennae are overall longer than in the workers . Both males and workers have a five segmented gaster and the males are distinguished by the slightly protruding <unk> ( the second segment of the maxilla ) at the tip of segment five . 
 = = = Y. geinitzi = = = 
 Overall Y. geinitzi can be distinguished from the related Baltic amber species Y. <unk> in several ways . Y. geinitzi individuals are overall more gracile in form with a less constricted mesonotum and the mesosoma has a less convex appearance . Y. geinitzi specimens have maxillary palps which are six @-@ jointed , labial palps which are four jointed , and the clypeal border is <unk> indented in the middle . The pupae which Wheeler referred to the species are noted to not have any cocoon unlike the modern larvae of some ant subfamilies which will spin a cocoon to pupate in . The eyes of Y. geinitzi are placed more to the front and sides of the head capsule than seen in Iridomyrmex species . Due to the shape of Y. geinitzi , the species may have been a <unk> ( an inhabitant of the soils surface ) , but scientists suggest that these ants inhabited trees , dwelling inside epiphytes and dead plant material ( such as branches ) . 
 = = = Y. intermedius = = = 
 The only specimen of Y. intermedius is 4 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 18 in ) that has several cracks surrounding it , and areas of white " mold " coatings . The indent behind the propodeum ( the first abdominal segment ) is deep , the connection between the segment and the thorax is wide and covered in wrinkles of the exoskeleton . The propodeum has an angular appearance with a rounded corner when viewed from the side . This separates the species from both Y. geinitzi and Y. mayrianum . The legs of Y. intermedius are generally free of hairs while the mesosoma and head have only a few sparse hairs on the upper surface . This is different then the much hairier Y. constrictus which always has numerous erect hairs on the body and legs . The high conical propodeum and scape which does not extend to the edge <unk> head capsule isolate Y. intermedius from Y. samlandicus . The right antennae of the type specimen is preserved with the head of a <unk> <unk> worker ant clamped near the tip , and it seems the two had just fought prior to entombment . 
 = = = Y. mayrianum = = = 
 Workers of Y. mayrianum range in length from approximately 4 to 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 to 0 @.@ 20 in ) and look very similar to workers of Y. geinitzi . In both species the indent behind the first abdominal segment is broader and shallower then seen in Y. constrictus , Y. samlandicus and Y. intermedius . Also unlike the other three species the first abdominal segments surface is smooth and <unk> . Y. mayrianum can be distinguished from Y. geinitzi by the amount of hairs found on the workers body . In Y. mayrianum there is abundant erect hair covering the entire body , on the underside head capsule and along the eye margins and leg undersides . In contrast Y. geinitzi workers have smooth eye margins and legs , and a sparse scattering of hairs on the <unk> , last segments of the abdomen and along the upper side of the head . 
 = = = Y. samlandicus = = = 
 Y. samlandicus specimens have maxillary palps which are six jointed , labial palps which are four jointed , and a total body length between 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 0 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 22 – 0 @.@ 24 in ) . The antennae each possess twelve segments and a scape that curves at the base . The thorax is narrower in profile than the head capsule , reaching its widest in the broad flattened pronotum . The petiole is notably broad and short , having a high node that has a rounded point on the upper side . Y. samlandicus specimens have fine to coarse punctuation ( small spots ) across the head and thorax and an overall coloration that is black , though some specimens have a reddish tone to the legs or antennae . 
 = Queen Elizabeth Way = 
 The Queen Elizabeth Way ( QEW ) is a 400 @-@ series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario linking Toronto with the Niagara Peninsula and Buffalo , New York . The freeway begins at the Peace Bridge in Fort Erie and travels 139 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 86 @.@ 4 mi ) around the western shore of Lake Ontario , ending at Highway 427 . The physical highway , however , continues as the Gardiner Expressway into downtown Toronto . The QEW is one of Ontario 's busiest highways , with an average of close to 200 @,@ 000 vehicles per day on some sections . Major highway junctions are located at Highway 420 in Niagara Falls , Highway 405 in Niagara @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Lake and Highway 406 in St. Catharines , the Red Hill Valley Parkway in Hamilton , Highway 403 and Highway 407 in Burlington , Highway 403 at the Oakville – Mississauga boundary and Highway 427 in Etobicoke . Within the Regional Municipality of Halton , the QEW is signed concurrently with Highway 403 . 
 The history of the QEW dates back to 1931 , when work began to widen the Middle Road in a similar fashion to the nearby Dundas Highway and Lakeshore Road as a relief project during the Great Depression . Following the 1934 provincial election , Ontario Minister of Highways Thomas McQuesten and his deputy minister Robert Melville Smith changed the design to be similar to the autobahns of Germany , dividing the opposite directions of travel and using grade @-@ separated interchanges at major crossroads . When it was initially opened to traffic in 1937 , it was the first intercity divided highway in North America and featured the longest stretch of consistent illumination in the world . While not a true freeway at the time , it was gradually upgraded , widened and modernized beginning in the 1950s , more or less taking on its current form by 1975 . Since then , various projects have continued to widen the route . In 1997 , the provincial government turned over the responsibility for the section of the QEW between Highway 427 and the Humber River to the City of Toronto . This section was subsequently redesignated as part of the Gardiner Expressway . 
 = = Name and signage = = 
 The Queen Elizabeth Way was named for the wife of King George VI who would later become known as Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother . It is sometimes referred to as the Queen E. In 1939 , the royal couple toured Canada and the United States in part to bolster support for the United Kingdom in anticipation of war with Nazi Germany , and also to mark George VI 's coronation . The highway received its name to commemorate the visit ; it was unveiled on June 7 as the King and Queen drove across the Henley Creek bridge in St. Catharines . Originally , the entire length of the highway featured stylized light standards with the letters " ER " , the Royal Cypher for Elizabeth Regina , the Latin equivalent to " Queen Elizabeth " . While mostly removed , they remain in place on three bridges along the route of the highway : in Mississauga over the Credit River , in Oakville over Bronte Creek , and in St. Catharines over Twelve Mile Creek . A short section of Highway 420 and its extension Falls Avenue in Niagara Falls had replicas of these light standards installed in 2002 . 
 The markers identifying the QEW have always used blue lettering on a yellow background instead of the black @-@ on @-@ white scheme used on other provincial highway markers . They originally showed the highway 's full name only in small letters , with the large script letters " ER " placed where the highway number is on other signs . In 1955 , these were changed to the current design , with the lettering " QEW " . Although the QEW has no posted highway number , it is considered to be part of the Province of Ontario 's 400 @-@ series highway network . The Ministry of Transportation of Ontario designates the QEW as Highway 451 for internal , administrative purposes . 
 A monument was originally located in the highway median at the Toronto terminus of the highway , dedicated to the 1939 visit of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth and known as the Lucky Lion . Carved on @-@ site under the direction of Frances Loring for C $ 12 @,@ 000 ( in 1940 , $ 190 @,@ 000 adjusted for inflation ) , it consisted of a column with a crown at the top and a lion at the base . The monument was removed in 1972 in order to accommodate widening of the original QEW , and relocated in August 1975 to the nearby Sir Casimir Gzowski Park along Lake Ontario , on the east side of the Humber River . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The QEW is a 139 km ( 86 mi ) route that travels from the Peace Bridge – which connects Fort Erie with Buffalo , New York – to Toronto , the economic hub of the province . The freeway circles the western <unk> of Lake Ontario , cutting through Niagara Falls , St. Catharines , Hamilton , Burlington , Oakville and Mississauga en route . A 22 km ( 14 mi ) portion of the freeway is signed concurrently with Highway 403 . Unlike other provincial highways in Ontario , the QEW is directionally signed using locations along the route as opposed to cardinal directions . Driving towards Toronto , the route is signed as " QEW Toronto " throughout its length . In the opposing direction , it is signed as " QEW Hamilton " , " QEW Niagara " and " QEW Fort Erie " depending on the location . 
 = = = Fort Erie – St. Catharines = = = 
 The Queen Elizabeth Way begins at the foot of the Peace Bridge , which crosses the border with the United States and connects the QEW with I @-@ 190 in Buffalo , New York . A customs booth is located between the bridge and the freeway , beyond which a toll is charged to Canada @-@ bound drivers . West of there , access is provided to nearby Highway 3 and the Niagara Parkway . Through customs , the freeway proper begins , immediately curving northwest . Within the town of Fort Erie , interchanges provide access to and from the freeway at Central Avenue , Concession Road , Thompson Road , Gilmore Road and Bowen Road . While there is some urban development at the beginning of the freeway , the majority of the first 25 km ( 16 mi ) are located within lowland forests . Numerous creeks flow through these forests , often flooding them . The Willoughby Marsh Conservation Area lies southwest of the freeway approximately 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) south of Niagara Falls . After an interchange with Lyons Creek Road , the freeway curves northward . 
 After crossing the Welland River , the original route of the Welland Canal , the freeway exits the forests and enters agricultural land surrounding the suburbs of Niagara Falls , which the highway enters north of the McLeod Road interchange . Within the city , Highway 420 meets the QEW at a large stack interchange , which replaced the former Lundy 's Lane / Highway 20 interchange . Exiting the northern fringe of the city , the freeway curves northwest and begins to descend through the Niagara Escarpment , a World Biosphere Reserve . Highway 405 , also known as the General Brock Parkway , merges with the QEW along the short rural stretch between Niagara Falls and St. Catharines . While there is no Toronto @-@ bound access , Niagara @-@ bound drivers can follow Highway 405 to Lewiston , New York . The QEW continues west into St. Catharines . 
 = = = St. Catharines – Burlington = = = 
 As the Queen Elizabeth Way enters St. Catharines , it ascends onto the Garden City Skyway to cross the Welland Canal . The 2 @.@ 2 km ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) structure replaced the lift bridge located south of it , one of two major bottlenecks prior to the early 1960s , and is one of two high @-@ level skyways along the length of the route . As the QEW was the first long distance freeway in North America , several modern engineering concepts were not considered and further expansion of the highway is inhibited by the proximity of properties throughout most of its length . Consequently , most of the route beyond the Welland Canal is sandwiched between service roads which provide access to and from the QEW as well as to local businesses and residences . After passing the Ontario Street ( Regional Road 42 ) interchange , the freeway crosses Martindale Pond , which forms the mouth of Twelve Mile Creek . West of the crossing is an interchange with Highway 406 , which travels south to Welland , after which the QEW crosses out of St. Catharines and into the town of Lincoln at Fifteen Mile Creek . 
 Throughout Lincoln , the QEW travels along the Lake Ontario shoreline through the Niagara Fruit Belt ; numerous wineries line the south side of the freeway . Interchanges at Victoria Road ( Regional Road 24 ) and Ontario Street ( Regional Road 18 ) provide access to the communities of Vineland and Beamsville , respectively . The latter encroaches upon the south side of the QEW , interrupting the otherwise agricultural surroundings of the highway in Lincoln . Immediately east of the Bartlett Avenue interchange , the freeway enters Grimsby , where it becomes sandwiched between the Niagara Escarpment and Lake Ontario . The route passes under three overpasses that have remained unchanged since the highway was built : Maple Avenue , Ontario Street and Christie Street , all served by a single diamond interchange . South of the 50 Point Conservation Area , the freeway exits Niagara Region and enters the city of Hamilton . 
 Within Hamilton , the highway passes almost entirely within an industrial park , with interchanges at 50 Road , Fruitland Road and Centennial Parkway ( formerly Highway 20 ) . The third is intertwined with the Red Hill Valley Parkway interchange , completed in 2009 . From here , the freeway curves northwest onto Burlington Beach and begins to ascend the Burlington Bay James N. Allan Skyway Bridge , the second high @-@ level bridge along the route . As it crosses over the entrance to Hamilton Harbour , the freeway enters the Regional Municipality of Halton and descends into the city of Burlington . 
 = = = Burlington – Toronto = = = 
 After descending into Burlington , the QEW crosses former Highway 2 before it encounters the Freeman Interchange , opened in 1958 to allow construction of Highway 403 and expanded in 1999 to accommodate Highway 407 . The freeway curves to the east , becoming concurrent with Highway 403 through Burlington and Oakville within Halton Region . The two routes travel east straight though a commercial office area . Service roads reappear through this stretch to serve businesses fronting the highway . The segment includes high @-@ occupancy vehicle lanes , opened in 2011 , which required the construction of a second structure over Sixteen Mile Creek . In the eastern end of Oakville , the route curves northeast , passing the Ford Motor Assembly Plant . Highway 403 diverges and travels north as the QEW curves back to the east and enters Mississauga and Peel Region . 
 Within Mississauga , the freeway encounters its narrowest right @-@ of @-@ way , sandwiched between residential subdivisions on either side that prevent further expansion of the busy route . It crosses the Credit River Valley , where a second bridge is currently under construction . The segment east of the Credit River is being examined for expansion possibilities , but like the previous section there is little room for more lanes without property acquisition . After crossing Etobicoke Creek , which forms the boundary between Mississauga / Peel Region and Toronto , the route curves eastward to meet Highway 427 at a large sprawling interchange . The QEW formerly continued beyond this interchange to the old Toronto city limits at the Humber River ; this section was downloaded from provincial to municipal ownership on April 1 , 1997 , and became part of the Gardiner Expressway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The Middle Road = = = 
 As automobile use in southern Ontario grew in the early 20th century , road design and construction advanced significantly . A major issue faced by planners was the improvement of the routes connecting Toronto and Hamilton , which were consistently overburdened by the growing traffic levels . Following frequent erosion of the former macadamized Lakeshore Road , a cement road known as the Toronto – Hamilton Highway was proposed in January 1914 . The highway was designed to run along the lake shore , instead of Dundas Street to the north , because the numerous hills encountered along Dundas would have increased costs without improving accessibility . Middle Road , a dirt lane named because of its position between the two , was not considered since Lakeshore and Dundas were both overcrowded and in need of serious repairs . Construction began on November 8 , 1914 , but dragged on throughout the ongoing war . It was formally opened on November 24 , 1917 , 5 @.@ 5 m ( 18 ft ) wide and nearly 64 km ( 40 mi ) long . It was the first concrete road in Ontario , as well as one of the longest stretches of concrete road between two cities in the world . 
 Over the next decade , vehicle usage increased substantially , and by 1920 Lakeshore Road was again highly congested on weekends . In response , the Department of Highways examined improving another road between Toronto and Hamilton . The road was to be more than twice the width of Lakeshore Road at 12 m ( 39 ft ) and would carry two lanes of traffic in either direction . Construction on what was then known as the Queen Street Extension west of Toronto began in early 1931 as a depression @-@ relief project . 
 Before the highway could be completed , Thomas McQuesten was appointed the new minister of the Department of Highways , with Robert Melville Smith as deputy minister , following the 1934 provincial elections . Smith , inspired by the German autobahns — new " dual @-@ lane divided highways " — modified the design for Ontario roads , and McQuesten ordered that the Middle Road be converted into this new form of highway . A 40 m ( 130 ft ) right @-@ of @-@ way was purchased along the Middle Road and construction began to convert the existing sections to a divided highway . Work also began on Canada 's first interchange at Highway 10 . 
 By the end of 1937 , the Middle Road was open between Toronto and Burlington , and would soon connect with what was first known as the Hamilton – Niagara Falls Highway . When it opened , it was the first intercity divided highway in North America and boasted the longest continuous stretch of illumination in the world until World War II . It soon came time to name the new highway , and an upcoming visit by King George VI and Queen Elizabeth proved to be the focal point for a dedication ceremony . On June 7 , 1939 , the two royal family members drove along the highway ( which now connected to Niagara Falls ) and passed through a light beam at the Henley Bridge in St. Catharines . This caused two Union Jacks to swing out , revealing a sign which read The Queen Elizabeth Way . 
 However , the ceremony only designated the highway between St. Catharines and Niagara Falls . The remainder of the road was known by various names , including the Toronto – Burlington / Hamilton Highway and The New Middle Road Highway . 
 = = = The New Niagara Falls Highway = = = 
 McQuesten also foresaw the financial opportunities that came with cross @-@ border tourism and opening the " Ontario frontier " to Americans . In 1937 , construction began on a new dual highway along the bottom of the Niagara Escarpment . This route was originally known as the New Niagara Falls Highway , but it was intended to connect with the Middle Road on the opposing shore of Lake Ontario . Work began at the end of March to grade the route between Stoney Creek and Jordan . 
 The prospect of removing hundreds of acres of farmland did not sit well with many , especially farmers in the path of the new highway . Rumours spread that the prices paid for land were to be well below market value , and local protests erupted throughout the summer . However , the purpose of the new highway was to replace the congested , winding and hilly route of Highway 8 along the escarpment ; several groups of collisions that summer gradually persuaded the public in support of the new highway . By the autumn , 340 acres ( 140 ha ) of <unk> were cleared to make way for the route . 
 Over the next two years , numerous bridges and cloverleaf interchanges along the new highway were constructed . In addition , a large traffic circle was built in Stoney Creek to connect with Highway 20 . The majority of this structural work was completed before the royal visit in 1939 . However , despite being opened to traffic between Stoney Creek and Jordan , the majority of the new route was gravelled . Over a ten @-@ week period in the late spring and early summer of 1940 , 58 km ( 36 mi ) were paved , completing the four lane highway between Hamilton and Niagara . On August 23 , 1940 , McQuesten cut a ribbon at the Henley Bridge in St. Catharines and officially declared the Queen Elizabeth Way open between Toronto and Niagara Falls . Construction towards Fort Erie continued , but the ongoing war would delay its completion for some time . As an interim measure , the unpaved highway was opened during the summer of 1941 . Two lanes of pavement were laid in 1946 , but the four @-@ lane highway was not fully paved until 1956 . The completed QEW was officially opened on October 14 of that year , completing the envisioned highway 25 years after work had begun . 
 = = = Conversion to freeway = = = 
 = = = = 1950s – Control of access = = = = 
 Despite some modern infrastructure , including traffic circles , interchanges , and some grade @-@ separations , the majority of the new superhighway was not controlled @-@ access . This meant that existing farmers and homeowners along several segments that were once concession roads were permitted to build driveways and entrances onto the road . In addition , the majority of the crossroads encountered along the route were at @-@ grade intersections . This combined with the ever @-@ increasing number of automobiles , traffic jams , accidents and deteriorating pavement led the Department of Highways to report that it had begun " salvaging " the QEW in their 1953 annual report . 
 The first new interchange opened at Dixie Road in 1953 , beginning a seven @-@ year program to make the Hamilton – Toronto section into a full @-@ fledged freeway . Over the next three years , the route was improved west to Highway 10 ( Hurontario Street ) . This work was completed in early 1956 . Service roads were installed and 13 intersections eliminated , resulting in a 50 % reduction of the accident rate along that section . In Toronto , work began in 1955 to construct the Gardiner Expressway , which would tie in with the end of the QEW . The first section of the Gardiner , connecting the QEW to Jameson Avenue , was officially opened by mayor Fred Gardiner and Premier Leslie Frost on August 8 , 1958 Work was also underway on the Toronto Bypass , involving the upgrade of Highway 27 to a freeway between the QEW and the new Highway 401 . Construction began in 1953 , and included an upgrade of the cloverleaf interchange with the QEW with larger loop ramps . This interchange would become one of the worst bottlenecks in the province a decade after its completion , according to Highways Minister Charles MacNaughton . 
 On September 11 , 1957 , construction began to widen the QEW to six lanes between Highway 27 and the Humber River . It was completed by December 1958 , as were interchanges with Mississauga Road and Kerr Street . Service roads allowed engineers to separate local access from the highway and avoid space @-@ consuming interchanges in many places . As such , interchanges were only opened at Bronte Road ( then Highway 25 ) , Kerr Street , Royal Windsor Drive ( then Highway 122 ) , Erin Mills Parkway , Mississauga Road , Hurontario Street ( then Highway 10 ) , Cawthra Road , Dixie Road , and Highway 27 . 
 = = = = The Skyways = = = = 
 Two major projects were ongoing near Burlington at this point . On April 29 , 1952 , the W.E. Fitzgerald struck the two lane lift @-@ bridge at the entrance to Hamilton Harbour . Damage to the crossing resulted in the closure of the QEW until a temporary bridge was erected . To remedy what was becoming a major delay and hazard , the Department of Highways began planning a high @-@ level bridge to cross the shipping channel . To provide better access to the new structure as well as the proposed Chedoke Expressway , construction began on the Freeman Diversion , bypassing the old trumpet interchange and creating a new three @-@ level stack . Work on both proceeded over the next six years . 
 The Freeman Diversion opened to traffic in August 1958 , with the old route becoming an eastward extension of Plains Road . The 2 @,@ 700 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 8 @,@ 900 ft ) four @-@ lane skyway was opened to traffic by Leslie Frost two months later on October 30 . Although it greatly reduced traffic delays , it was not without controversy due to its height , cost , tolling , and most especially its name . Residents in Burlington demanded it be named the Burlington Skyway , while Hamilton residents countered with the Hamilton Skyway . As a compromise , the Thomas B. McQuesten Skyway was proposed . However , the provincial government had the final say in the matter , and opted to name it the Burlington Bay Skyway . Tolls were collected beginning on November 10 . 
 Elsewhere , in St. Catharines , planning was already advanced on a second skyway to cross the Welland Canal . The Homer Lift Bridge , a longstanding feature along Highway 8 , was another point where the QEW narrowed to two lanes and traffic faced regular delays . Construction of the Homer Skyway , as it was tentatively known , began in July 1960 and progressed over the following three years . The $ 20 million ( in 1963 , $ 158 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 adjusted for inflation ) structure was officially opened by Premier John Robarts on November 15 , 1963 . However , traffic had already been flowing on the 2 @,@ 200 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 7 @,@ 200 ft ) bridge since October 18 . As with the Burlington Bay Skyway , tolls were collected on the new bridge . However , the name was almost unanimously chosen by St. Catharines residents to be the Garden City Skyway . The collection of tolls on both skyways continued until December 28 , 1973 . 
 = = = = 1960s and 1970s – Expansion and new interchanges = = = = 
 On September 15 , 1960 , the Shook 's Hill interchange , a unique rotary junction , was completed . It was opened to traffic the following day , and completed the program to make the QEW a freeway between Burlington and Toronto . A final project , to reconstruct the intersection with Brant Street into an interchange , was carried out in 1964 and made the QEW a freeway between Hamilton and Toronto . 
 By 1963 , work was underway to improve the Niagara Falls – Hamilton stretch of the QEW into a controlled @-@ access highway . At the end of 1966 , the QEW was six lanes wide through Mississauga and Toronto , as well as between the Freeman Interchange and east of Brant Street . This six @-@ laning was extended west from Ninth Line to Kerr Street by 1968 . The remaining section of four @-@ lane highway along the Burlington to Toronto stretch , between Brant Street and Kerr Street , was reconstructed beginning in 1970 and completed by 1972 . 
 The late 1960s and early 1970s also saw the complete reconstruction of three important interchanges : The Rainbow Bridge Approach ( later Highway 420 ) in Niagara Falls , Highway 20 ( Centennial Parkway ) in Hamilton and Highway 27 in Toronto . The former two were traffic circles in place since the QEW was opened in 1940 . The third was a large cloverleaf interchange that had become outdated with the expansion of Highway 27 to ten lanes throughout the 1960s . The connections with the Rainbow Bridge Approach and with Highway 27 required new massive high @-@ speed interchanges to accommodate freeway – freeway traffic movements . 
 The junction with Highway 27 was built over 48 @.@ 5 ha ( 120 acres ) and required the construction of 19 bridges and the equivalent of 42 km ( 26 mi ) of two @-@ lane roadway . Construction began in September 1968 , although preliminary work had been ongoing since 1966 ; the interchange opened to traffic on November 14 , 1969 , and included an expansion of the QEW to ten lanes between what would become known as Highway 427 and Lake Shore Boulevard . Construction of the three @-@ level stack interchange between the QEW and Rainbow Bridge Approach began in 1971 . This removed the two traffic circles along the approach at the QEW and Dorchester Road . The interchange between the QEW and Lundy 's Lane ( Highway 20 ) was also removed ; instead , the new stack interchange provided access to Montrose Road . The work was completed by April 1972 , at which point the Rainbow Bridge Approach was designated as Highway 420 . Planning for the removal of the Stoney Creek traffic circle was completed by 1970 , and reconstruction began in 1974 . This involved the removal of a rail line which crossed through the circle , and was the demise of one of two major features along the route . The new interchange opened in 1978 , completing the transformation of the QEW into a controlled @-@ access highway . 
 During the late 1970s , construction was carried out on several new interchanges between Hamilton and Toronto . A new interchange at Dorval Drive and Trafalgar Road replaced the one at Kerr Street . In Mississauga , work commenced at Cawthra Road , while in Burlington a new interchange was built at Appleby Line . 
 = = = = 1980s to 1997 - Growing capacity = = = = 
 Now functioning as a freeway , the QEW was already overburdened by the ever @-@ increasing number of vehicles . The Burlington Bay Skyway , the lone four @-@ lane link on the route between Hamilton and Toronto , was initially designed to handle 50 @,@ 000 vehicles daily , but by 1973 there were 60 @,@ 000 vehicles crossing it . Preliminary work on a second parallel structure began a decade later in 1983 . In July of that year , Transportation Minister James Snow broke ground for the new bridge . Construction was carried out over two years , and the twinned structure was opened on October 11 , 1985 . It was named the James N. Allan Skyway , in honour of James Allan , Minister of Highways during construction of the original skyway . The new name was not well received by locals , and debate erupted once again whilst the original bridge was closed and repaired for several years . It reopened on August 22 , 1988 , with Toronto @-@ bound traffic crossing the original bridge . The twin structure was renamed the Burlington Bay James N. Allan Skyway , though it is commonly referred to as simply the Burlington Skyway . 
 Alongside the twinning of the skyway , the QEW was widened to eight lanes between Burlington Street in Hamilton and Northshore Boulevard ( then Highway 2 ) in Burlington , and to six lanes north to the Freeman Interchange and south to Centennial Parkway . A variable lighting system , changeable message signs and traffic cameras were added to create a new traffic @-@ management system called COMPASS . Modern interchanges were constructed with Burlington Street , Northshore Boulevard , Fairview Street and Brant Street , and the interchange with Plains Road was removed . Eastport Drive was built at the same time to relieve traffic on Beach Boulevard . This work was completed between late 1984 and 1990 . 
 With the expanded capacity of the skyway , and the unanticipated traffic volumes on Highway 403 , the Freeman Interchange was now faced with a capacity problem . To resolve this , the renamed Ministry of Transportation began planning on Highway 403 between Burlington and Mississauga ; this right @-@ of @-@ way would be sold to the 407 ETR consortium in 1995 and built as part of that route . Work began in August 1991 to rebuild the interchange and add a fourth leg . The rebuilt interchange was opened on October 23 , 1993 ; the first sod for what would open as Highway 407 was turned that day . 
 Budgetary restraints in the 1990s forced the provincial government to sell off or download many highways to lower levels of government , or , in the case of Highway 407 , to a private consortium . As part of recommendations , the QEW east of Highway 427 to the Humber River was transferred to the responsibility of the City of Toronto . The transfer took place on April 1 , 1997 . The city subsequently renamed it as part of the Gardiner Expressway . 
 = = = Recent work = = = 
 Beginning in May 1999 , the grade @-@ separated traffic circle junction with Erin Mills Parkway and Southdown Road , which dated back to the early 1960s , was completely reconstructed as a standard parclo A4 interchange ; it was reopened in 2001 . The nearby Hurontario Street interchange was upgraded from a cloverleaf to a parclo A4 on the south side and a diamond interchange on the north side . Work was completed in 2010 . 
 The Red Hill Valley Parkway project , which opened on November 16 , 2007 , added a significant new interchange to the QEW . The ramp to the southbound parkway did not open until December 2008 . As part of this project , the Burlington Street and Centennial Parkway interchanges were reconstructed , and the QEW widened to eight lanes from Burlington Street to Centennial Parkway . Construction was completed in 2009 . 
 The highway was widened to permit an additional HOV lane in either direction between Guelph Line and Trafalgar Road starting in 2007 . These lanes were opened to traffic on November 29 , 2010 . In 2005 , work began to widen the QEW through St. Catharines from Highway 406 to the Garden City Skyway . This work was completed on August 26 , 2011 , at a cost of $ 186 million . 
 = = = High @-@ occupancy toll lanes = = = 
 On December 7 , 2015 , Ontario 's Transportation Ministry announced that it was working on a plan to create permanent high @-@ occupancy toll lanes ( HOT ) on a 16 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 10 @.@ 3 mi ) stretch , in both ways , between Trafalgar Road in Oakville and Guelph Line in Burlington starting on September 15 , 2016 . This would require vehicles with a single occupant to purchase a permit for such use . ( A portion of Highway 427 would also have HOT lanes . ) Vehicles that are classified as environmentally @-@ friendly , and denoted with a green license plate , would not be required to pay when using the HOT lanes . Prices for the permits had not yet been determined for this plan , described as a pilot project , said Transportation Minister Steven Del Duca during a press conference . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the exits along the QEW . Exits are numbered from Fort Erie to Toronto . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 As the principal travel route between Toronto and Buffalo , whenever sports teams from the two cities face each other ( particularly the Sabres and Maple Leafs in the National Hockey League ) the game or series is called as The Battle of the QEW . 
 = Italian ironclad Lepanto = 
 Lepanto was an Italian ironclad battleship built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) , the second and last ship of the Italia class . Lepanto was laid down in November 1876 , launched in March 1883 , and completed in August 1887 . She was armed with a main battery of four 17 in ( 432 mm ) guns mounted in a central barbette and was capable of a top speed of 17 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 0 km / h ; 20 @.@ 5 mph ) . Unlike other capital ships of the era , Lepanto had an armored deck rather than the more typical belt armor . 
 Lepanto spent the first two decades of her career in the Active and Reserve Squadrons , where she took part in annual training maneuvers with the rest of the fleet . In 1902 , she was withdrawn from service for use as a training ship . During the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , the ship provided fire support to Italian troops defending Tripoli in Libya . Lepanto was ultimately stricken from the naval register in January 1914 and sold for scrapping in March 1915 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Lepanto was 124 @.@ 7 meters ( 409 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 22 @.@ 34 m ( 73 @.@ 3 ft ) and an average draft of 9 @.@ 39 m ( 30 @.@ 8 ft ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 336 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 125 long tons ; 14 @,@ 700 short tons ) normally and up to 15 @,@ 649 t ( 15 @,@ 402 long tons ; 17 @,@ 250 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of four compound steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal @-@ fired , oval boilers and sixteen fire @-@ tube boilers . Her engines produced a top speed of 18 @.@ 4 knots ( 34 @.@ 1 km / h ; 21 @.@ 2 mph ) at 15 @,@ 797 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 780 kW ) . She could steam for 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 669 – 701 officers and men . 
 Lepanto was armed with a main battery of four 17 in ( 432 mm ) 27 @-@ caliber guns , mounted in two pairs en echelon in a central barbette . She carried a secondary battery of eight 6 in ( 152 mm ) 26 @-@ caliber guns and four 4 @.@ 7 in ( 119 mm ) 32 @-@ caliber guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried four 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . Unlike other ships built at the time , Lepanto dispensed with vertical belt armor . Her designer , Benedetto Brin , believed that contemporary steel alloys could not effectively defeat armor @-@ piercing shells of the day , and so he discarded it completely . Lepanto was instead protected by an armored deck that was 4 in ( 102 mm ) thick . Her conning tower was armored with the same thickness of steel plate . The barbette had 19 in ( 483 mm ) of steel armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Lepanto was under construction for nearly 11 years . She was laid down at the Cantiere navale fratelli Orlando shipyard at Livorno on 4 November 1876 , ten months after her sister Italia . She spent nearly six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years on the building ways and was not launched until 17 March 1883 , two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years after Italia . Lepanto was not completed for another four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years , her construction finally being finished on 16 August 1887 , twenty @-@ two months after the completion of Italia . After entering service , Lepanto took part in the annual 1888 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclads Caio Duilio , Italia , Enrico Dandolo , and San Martino , a protected cruiser , four torpedo cruisers , and numerous smaller vessels . The maneuvers consisted of close @-@ order drills and a simulated attack on and defense of La Spezia . Later that year , the ship was present during a naval review held for the German Kaiser Wilhelm II during a visit to Italy . 
 In 1890 , Lepanto participated in the annual fleet maneuvers in the First Squadron , along with the protected cruisers Piemonte and Dogali and several torpedo boats . The exercises were conducted in the Tyrrhenian Sea , where the First Squadron was tasked with defending against an attacking " hostile " squadron . The ship served as the flagship of the 1st Division of the Active Squadron during the 1893 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclad Ruggiero di Lauria , the torpedo cruisers Euridice and Monzambano , and four torpedo boats . During the maneuvers , which lasted from 6 August to 5 September , the ships of the Active Squadron simulated a French attack on the Italian fleet . 
 In 1895 , Italia and Lepanto were assigned to the Reserve Squadron , along with the ironclads Ruggiero di Lauria and Re Umberto . That year , unrest in the Ottoman Empire that killed hundreds of foreign nationals prompted several of the European great powers to send an international fleet to pressure the Ottomans into compensating the victims . In November , a small Italian squadron sent to Smyrna to join the fleet in there ; Folgore was mobilized as part of a larger force in Naples that consisted of the ironclads Francesco Morosini and Ruggiero di Lauria , the protected cruiser Elba , the torpedo cruisers Calatafimi and Folgore , and five torpedo boats . This second squadron was stocked with coal and ammunition in the event that it would need to reinforce the squadron at Smryna . In June 1897 , Lepanto steamed to Britain to represent Italy at the Fleet Review for Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee , held on the 26th of the month . For the periodic fleet maneuvers later that year , Lepanto was assigned to the First Division of the Reserve Squadron , which also included the ironclads Caio Duilio and Ruggiero di Lauria and the protected cruiser Lombardia . The following year , the Reserve Squadron consisted of Lepanto , Ruggiero di Lauria , Francesco Morosini , and five cruisers . In 1899 , Lepanto , Re Umberto , Sicilia , and the three Ruggiero di Lauria @-@ class ironclads served in the Active Squadron , which was kept in service for eight months of the year , with the remainder spent with reduced crews . 
 In the early 1890s , the Italian Navy had considered rebuilding Lepanto along the same lines as Enrico Dandolo , which had received new , quick @-@ firing 10 @-@ inch ( 250 mm ) guns in place of her slow 17 @-@ inch guns . Lepanto and her sister were to have their guns replaced with new 13 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) guns , but by 1902 this plan had been abandoned as too costly . Lepanto was withdrawn from front @-@ line service in that year and she became a gunnery training ship . By that time , her armament consisted of her original 17 in guns and four of her 4 @.@ 7 in guns ; to these , nine 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ caliber guns , six 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 25 @-@ caliber guns , and two machine guns had been added . Her torpedo tubes had been removed by this time . In 1910 she became a depot ship at La Spezia . 
 During the annual fleet maneuvers in September – October 1907 , Lepanto was present to carry observers of the exercises , though she did not directly take part in the training . At the start of the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , Lepanto was assigned to the 5th Division of the Italian fleet , along with her sister Italia and the ironclad Enrico Dandolo . In December 1911 , Lepanto and Italia were sent to Tripoli , replacing the three Re Umberto @-@ class ironclads , to support the Italian garrison that had captured the city . The two <unk> were sent in large part because the Italian Navy had a large stockpile of 17 in shells . Lepanto was stricken on 26 May 1912 , but was reinstated on 13 January 1913 as a first @-@ class auxiliary ship . She was stricken a second time on 15 January 1914 , sold for scrap on 27 March 1915 , and subsequently broken up . 
 = Norma Paulus = 
 Norma Paulus ( born March 13 , 1933 ) is an American lawyer and politician in the state of Oregon . A native of Nebraska , she was raised in Eastern Oregon before becoming a lawyer . A Republican , she first held political office as a representative in the Oregon House of Representatives , and then became the first woman to hold a statewide elected office in Oregon when she became Oregon Secretary of State in 1977 . Paulus later served as Oregon Superintendent of Public Instruction for nine years . She had failed bids to become Governor of Oregon and United States Senator . She lives in Portland where she is involved with several non @-@ profit groups and sponsored a ballot measure to create open primaries in Oregon 's statewide elections . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Norma Jean Petersen was born in Belgrade , Nebraska , on March 13 , 1933 . She was raised as one of seven children in Eastern Oregon , where she graduated from Burns Union High School in Burns , in 1950 . Paulus started her career as the secretary for the district attorney for Harney County in Burns , Oregon . 
 After recovering from polio she moved to Salem , Oregon ( the state 's capitol ) , and worked as a legal secretary , including working for Oregon Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl C. <unk> . At this time <unk> recommended Paulus to attend law school , which she did at Willamette University without a college degree , enrolling in 1956 . While in law school she met her future husband William G. Paulus . Norma Paulus graduated with honors from Willamette University College of Law in Salem with a LL.B. in 1962 . Following law school Paulus worked in private practice until entering politics . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Paulus began her political career by winning election to the Oregon House of Representatives in 1970 . Elected as a Republican , she represented Salem and Marion County in District 11 . She won re @-@ election in 1972 and 1974 to additional two @-@ year terms in the House with her district changing to District 31 , serving through the 1975 special legislative session . Paulus was then elected as Oregon 's first female Secretary of State in 1976 , the first time a woman won election to a statewide office in Oregon . 
 She took office on January 3 , 1977 , and served through January 7 , 1985 , after winning re @-@ election to a second four @-@ year term in 1980 . Paulus keeps a small statue of a lion on a desk in her downtown Portland home that was given to her in October 1981 by the northeast Portland Lions Club when she was inducted as their first female member . The next day , Paulus was visited in her office at the Oregon Capitol by the president of the statewide Oregon Lions Club . He had come to ask Paulus to return the Portland club 's gift . He did not think the statue – or membership into the club – should have been given to a woman . 
 She was one of the speakers at a national conference for women legislators in 1982 . Paulus remarked in her speech that " We have come a long way " referring to women in politics . In 1984 , followers of the Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh bused homeless people to Wasco County in an attempt to sway local elections . As Secretary of State , Paulus recommended the county institute emergency procedures to restrict these transients from registering to vote , which the <unk> challenged in federal court . At that time Oregon allowed citizens to register to vote on the same day as an election . Then federal district judge Edward Leavy ruled against the <unk> , determining the emergency procedures were proper . The religious sect later faced government investigations over immigration fraud , a related failed murder plot , and the first bioterrorist attack in the United States . 
 Following her two terms as the Secretary of State , Paulus ran for governor in 1986 . She won the Republican primary in May , but lost to Democrat Neil Goldschmidt in the November election . While campaigning for the office she had been a critic of the new MAX Light Rail that opened that year . Paulus was appointed by President Ronald Reagan to help oversee the 1986 Filipino presidential elections . 
 In 1987 , she was appointed as one of two Oregon members of the Northwest Power and Conservation Council . While on the council , she was a supporter of regional fish habitat protection . She resigned her position on the Council in late 1989 to run for Oregon Superintendent of Public Instruction after the retirement of Verne Duncan . 
 Goldschmidt later appointed her as the Superintendent of Public Instruction on October 1 , 1990 . Paulus won election to a full four @-@ year term in that office later in the year , and was re @-@ elected in 1994 . Paulus then ran for the United States Senate in the December 5 , 1995 , special primary election . The election was for the nominations to replace Bob Packwood who resigned . Paulus lost to Gordon Smith in the Republican primary . Smith then lost to Ron Wyden in the general election before he was elected later in 1996 to fill the vacancy left when Mark Hatfield retired . 
 As state superintendent , Paulus helped introduce statewide assessment testing for grades 3 , 5 , 8 , and 11 in 1991 . Other education reforms introduced that year were the Certificate of Initial Mastery ( CIM ) and Certificate of Advanced Mastery ( CAM ) that were designed to replace the high school diploma in Oregon . These were optional programs which were part of a broader program that included issuing a report card outlining the progress as a state , as required by a law the state legislature passed in 1991 . Paulus also supported school to work initiatives for reforming public education while in office , which were part of the 1991 reforms . At the time Paulus was one of only ten women in the nation to hold the top education position in their state . She left the office on January 4 , 1999 , after two terms . In 2007 , the Oregon Legislature eliminated the optional certificates from schools in the state . 
 = = Later life and family = = 
 Norma and her husband William ( Bill ) have two children , Elizabeth and Fritz . In 1996 , she was named to National Assessment Governing Board by US Secretary of Education Richard Riley . She has been conferred with honorary degrees by Willamette University in 1999 , Whitman College , Lewis & Clark College , and Linfield College . In December 2000 , she was appointed as the executive director of the Oregon Historical Society and served in that position until 2003 . Since April 2000 , Paulus has served on the Oregon State Capitol Foundation Board . She is an original member of the organization and has served as chair of the group . She also serves on the boards of the High Desert Museum in Bend , the Oregon Coast Aquarium in Newport , and the City Club of Portland . In 2004 , she received University of Oregon 's Distinguished Service Award . 
 She worked to raise funds for a statue honoring former governor and longtime friend Tom McCall , with the statue completed and installed in Salem along the Willamette River in 2008 . In 2008 , Paulus and co @-@ petitioner Phil <unk> , also a former Oregon Secretary of State , brought Ballot Measure 65 to the November ballot , in an effort to reform the state 's primary election system for partisan races . 
 = F @-@ Zero GX = 
 F @-@ Zero GX is a futuristic racing video game for the Nintendo GameCube console . Developed by Sega 's Amusement Vision department and supervised and published by Nintendo , it was released in Japan , North America and Europe in 2003 . F @-@ Zero GX runs on an enhanced version of the engine used in Super Monkey Ball . F @-@ Zero AX , the arcade counterpart of GX , uses the Triforce arcade system board conceived from a business alliance between Nintendo , Namco and Sega . Published by Sega , it was released alongside GX in 2003 . 
 F @-@ Zero GX is the successor to F @-@ Zero X and continues the series ' difficult , high @-@ speed racing style , retaining the basic gameplay and control system from the Nintendo 64 game . A heavy emphasis is placed on track memorization and reflexes , which aids in completing the game . GX introduces a " story mode " element , where the player assumes the role of F @-@ Zero pilot Captain Falcon through nine chapters while completing various missions . 
 The F @-@ Zero GX and AX project was the first significant video game collaboration between Nintendo and Sega . GX received critical acclaim as one of the best racers of its time and one of the greatest racers on the GameCube platform . Overall , the game was well received by critics for its visuals , intense action , high sense of speed , and track design . Complaints centered on its sharp increase in difficulty that may alienate players . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 F @-@ Zero GX is a futuristic racing game where up to thirty competitors race on massive circuits inside plasma @-@ powered machines in an intergalactic Grand Prix . Tracks include enclosed tubes , cylinders , tricky jumps , and rollercoaster @-@ esque paths . Some courses are littered with innate obstacles like dirt patches and mines . Each machine handles differently , has its own performance abilities affected by its weight , and a grip , boost , and durability trait graded on an A to E ( best to worst ) scale . Before a race , the player is able to adjust a vehicle 's balance between maximum acceleration and maximum top speed . Every machine has an energy meter , which serves two purposes . First , it is a measurement of the machine 's health and is decreased , for example , when the machine hits another racer or the side of the track . Second , the player is usually given the ability to boost after the first lap . Boosting greatly increases the racer 's speed for a few seconds , but also drains their energy . Pit areas and dash plates are located at various points around the track for vehicles to drive over . The former replenishes energy , while the latter gives a speed boost without using up any energy . The less time spent in the pit area , the less energy will regenerate . Courses may also have jump plates , which launch vehicles into the air enabling them to cut corners . 
 Each racing craft contains air brakes for navigating tight corners by using the control stick and shoulder buttons . Afterwards , the game 's physics modeling give vehicles setup with high acceleration a boost of acceleration . Players can easily exploit this on a wide straight stretch of a circuit to generate <unk> movements . This technique called " snaking " delivers a massive increase in speed , but it is best used on the easier tracks , when racing alone in Time Trial , and with heavy vehicles with a high grip rating and given high acceleration . According to Nintendo , the snaking technique was an intentional addition to F @-@ Zero GX 's gameplay . 
 F @-@ Zero GX features numerous gameplay modes and options . In the Grand Prix mode , the player races against twenty @-@ nine opponents through three laps of each track in a cup . There are four cups available ( Ruby , Sapphire , Emerald , and Diamond ) with five tracks in each . Unlocking the AX cup gives the player all six tracks from the arcade game , F @-@ Zero AX . Each cup has four selectable difficulty levels : Novice , Standard , Expert , and Master . Players get a certain amount of points for finishing a track depending on where they placed , and the winner of the circuit is the character who receives the most total points . If the player has a " spare machine " — the equivalent of an extra life — then the race can be restarted even if the player falls off a track or runs out of energy . A predetermined amount of spare machines based on the difficulty level chosen are given to players before starting a cup . Players get an additional spare machine for every five contenders he or she eliminates , and each eliminated contender recovers a portion of the player 's energy meter . Competitors can be damaged and eliminated by means of a spin or side attack . 
 The Vs . Battle is the multiplayer mode where two to four players can compete simultaneously . Time Attack lets the player choose any track and complete it in the shortest time possible . An Internet ranking system was established where players enter a password on the official F @-@ Zero website and get ranked based on their position in the database . Players receive a password after completing a Time Attack race , which records their time and machine used . Ghost data , transparent re @-@ enactments of the player 's Time Attack performances , can be saved on memory cards to later race against . Up to five ghosts can be raced against simultaneously . The Replay mode allows saved Grand Prix and Time Attack gameplay to be replayed with different camera angles and in @-@ game music . The Pilot Profile mode has each character 's biography , theme music , information on their machine , and a short full motion video sequence . 
 <unk> mode is divided between the F @-@ Zero Shop , Garage , and Emblem Editor . The shop is where opponent machines , custom parts for vehicle creation , and miscellaneous items such as story mode chapters and staff ghost data can be purchased with tickets . Tickets are acquired as the player progresses through the Grand Prix , Time Attack , and Story mode . In the Garage section , players can create a machine with three custom parts or print emblems on any vehicle . The parts are divided into body , cockpit , and booster categories , and affect the vehicle 's overall durability , maximum speed , cornering , and acceleration . The Emblem Editor is a tool @-@ set for decal creation . 
 F @-@ Zero GX is the first F @-@ Zero game to feature a Story mode . Its story has the player assume the role of F @-@ Zero pilot Captain Falcon in nine chapters of various racing scenarios ; such as Falcon 's training regiment , a race against a rival through a canyon with falling boulders , attack and eliminate a rival 's gang , and escape from a collapsing building through closing blast doors . Each chapter can be completed on a normal , hard , and very hard difficulty setting . Toshihiro Nagoshi , one of the game 's co @-@ producers , stated that this mode was included because the development team felt that the F @-@ Zero universe was unique and they wanted to explain some of the characters ' motivations and flesh out the game world . 
 = = Arcade counterpart = = 
 F @-@ Zero AX is a futuristic racing arcade game developed by Amusement Vision and published by Sega for the Triforce arcade system board . It is the second game by Sega to use Triforce , which was conceived from a business alliance between them , Nintendo and Namco . This hardware allows for connectivity between the GameCube and arcade games . F @-@ Zero AX 's arcade cabinet is available for purchase in standard , and deluxe . The standard version is a regular sit @-@ down model , while the deluxe version is shaped like Captain Falcon 's vehicle and has a tilting seat simulating the craft 's cockpit . IGN demoed the <unk> version dubbed " F @-@ Zero Monster Ride " at the 2003 JAMMA arcade show . The <unk> machine , co @-@ developed between Sega and <unk> , is a cabin suspended in midair controlled by three servomotors for a in @-@ depth motion @-@ based simulation . 
 The game introduces ten playable vehicles with their pilots , and brings back four from F @-@ Zero GX . It includes six new selectable courses and two game modes . Each track must be completed before time runs out . Time extensions are awarded for reaching multiple checkpoints on a course , however the player will receive time penalties for falling off @-@ course or depleting their energy meter . Race mode allows the player to select a track and race against twenty @-@ nine opponents . Connecting multiple cabinets opens up " Versus Play " in the race mode , thus enabling up to three other people to compete simultaneously . In Time Attack , the player chooses any track and complete it in the shortest time possible . 
 = = = Data storage devices = = = 
 F @-@ Zero AX cabinets can dispense magnetic stripe cards called a " F @-@ Zero license card " to keep track of custom machine data , pilot points , and race data . A card was bundled with the Japanese release of F @-@ Zero GX . The card expires after fifty uses , but its data can be transferred to a new card . Once inserted , the game builds a machine with three custom parts which can be upgraded by earning pilot points . Pilot points are acquired as the player progresses through the Race and Time Attack modes . Players can increase point earnings by improving finish place , eliminating opponents , and finishing races with a large amount of energy reserved . A magnetic stripe card is needed to enter the F @-@ Zero AX Internet Ranking system . Similarly to GX , players receive a password after completing a Time Attack race to enter on the official F @-@ Zero website 's ranking system . 
 Nintendo GameCube memory cards , on which saved games are kept , can be inserted into these arcade units . A memory card is required for players a chance to win the AX @-@ exclusive pilots , their vehicles , and tracks for use in GX . Players can store up to four machines from GX on a memory card , then play them in AX . If a memory card is used with a magnetic stripe card , players have additional options ; they can enter stored GX machines into the F @-@ Zero AX Internet ranking system , and transfer custom AX machine parts to GX . F @-@ Zero AX content is also unlockable by progressing through GX 's tougher challenges . It was discovered in early 2013 that the arcade version is playable within the GameCube version by the use of a cheat cartridge . 
 = = Development and audio = = 
 Nintendo announced on February 18 , 2002 that an arcade system board under the name of " Triforce " was being developed in conjunction between Nintendo , Namco , and Sega . The idea for the arcade board originated after discussions between Sega and Namco about the capabilities and cost effectiveness of the GameCube architecture to make arcade games . A month later , an announcement from Sega and Nintendo revealed Sega 's subsidiary Amusement Vision and Nintendo will collaborate to release F @-@ Zero video game titles for the Triforce arcade board and the Nintendo GameCube . Nintendo revealed the first footage of F @-@ Zero GX at the Pre @-@ Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) press conference on May 21 , 2002 . While the game was known to exist several months prior , it had remained behind closed doors until that conference . F @-@ Zero GX runs on an enhanced version of the engine used in Super Monkey Ball . 
 In early March 2003 , according to the official Nintendo website , F @-@ Zero was delayed by two months . Via a live video conference call from Japan on July 7 , 2003 , co @-@ producers Shigeru Miyamoto and Toshihiro Nagoshi , and supervisor Takaya Imamura answered questions about the two F @-@ Zero games . There , Miyamoto announced the Japanese version of the game was finished and would soon be available to the public . Nagoshi mentioned that back at E3 2003 , he was hoping that they would have that time to include a local area network ( LAN ) multiplayer mode , however they chose not to support this mode . The development team focused more on the game 's single @-@ player aspects , and a LAN multiplayer mode would distract greatly from it . Imamura commented that even though he worked directly on F @-@ Zero throughout its different incarnations , this time he took a " step back and was involved at kind of a producer level at looking over the game . " Imamura added " hav [ ing ] worked on the F @-@ Zero series , and seeing the results of the collaboration with Sega , I found myself at something of a loss as to how we can take the franchise further past F @-@ Zero GX and AX . " 
 F @-@ Zero GX / AX Original Soundtracks , a two @-@ CD set composed of BGM soundtracks to the video games GX and its arcade counterpart , was released in Japan under the Scitron Digital Content record label on July 22 , 2004 . The first disc consists of forty @-@ one tracks and the second has forty with an additional track rearranged by <unk> 's <unk> ( Ayako Sasō ) of " Big Blue " . The soundtracks features an array of songs from rock and techno musical styles originally composed by the game music staff 's Hidenori Shoji and Daiki Kasho . <unk> is known for his musical scores in Daytona USA 2 and Fighting Vipers 2 , while Kasho worked on the Gran Turismo series . Kasho composed the character themes and their lyrics were by Alan Brey . Both Shoji and Kasho supervised the soundtracks ' audio mastering . 
 = = = Collaboration and relationship = = = 
 F @-@ Zero GX and AX was the first significant video game collaboration between Nintendo and Sega . After Sega transited from first to third @-@ party development in 2001 , the two companies developed a close relationship and worked together on F @-@ Zero GX and AX . Amusement Vision president , Toshihiro Nagoshi , was working on Super Monkey Ball for GameCube which opened up the opportunity for a collaboration between the two companies . Since Sega helped to develop Nintendo 's Triforce arcade system , the company wanted to support it with software that would " stand out and draw attention to Nintendo 's platform . " Nagoshi was suggested to develop a driving game and agreed under the stipulation he could come up with something unique — which was working on the next installment in Nintendo 's F @-@ Zero series . During its development , Nagoshi focused on what he called the self @-@ explanatory " Interface " of the game , and " Rhythm " — to give the way the tracks are laid out a rhythmic feel . Miyamoto stated " [ Nintendo ] have gained a lot of fans among current game developers , including famous producers like Mr. Nagoshi who grew up playing Nintendo games and are big fans of some of our titles . " In 2002 , Nagoshi claimed that 1991 's F @-@ Zero " actually taught me what a game should be " and that it served as an influence for him to create Daytona USA and other racing games . Before development started on F @-@ Zero GX and AX , he mentioned abandoning the project due to personal pressures he faced to make a great impression on Nintendo and personal admiration of an established franchise . Still the announcement that Nintendo had handled development of one of its franchises to former competitor Sega came as a surprise to some critics . 
 While Amusement Vision was responsible for most of the game 's development , Nintendo EAD employees Shigeru Miyamoto and Takaya Imamura took on the role of producer and supervisor , respectively . Sega handled planning and execution and Nintendo was responsible for supervision of their product . Nagoshi was initially concerned about differences in opinion between the two companies , and mentioned " If Nintendo planned to hold our hands through development , I would have suggested they develop the game themselves . That way we could focus on a project which would reflect our studio 's abilities . I figured that would cause a war , but I was told most of the responsibility would be left to us . " Miyamoto thought the collaboration resulted in a " true evolution of the F @-@ Zero series " , enhancing the simulation of racing at high speeds and expanding the " F @-@ Zero world on a grand scale . " Published by Nintendo , F @-@ Zero GX was released in Japan on July 25 , 2003 , in North America on August 25 , 2003 , and in PAL regions on October 31 , 2003 . The Arcade version was released in 2003 alongside its Gamecube counterpart . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When F @-@ Zero GX was released , the game was well @-@ received overall by reviewers ; the title has an 89 % average on aggregate websites Metacritic and Game Rankings with some considering it as one of the best racers of its time and the greatest racer on the GameCube platform . It was listed " Best GameCube Racing Game " in the E3 2003 IGN Awards and " Best Racing Game of 2003 " by IGN . F @-@ Zero GX was awarded " Best GameCube Driving Game " in GameSpot 's " Best and Worst of 2003 " feature and was nominated for " Console Racing Game of the Year " in the 7th Annual Interactive Achievements Awards held by the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences . Official Nintendo Magazine ranked it the 92nd best game available on Nintendo platforms . The staff felt it was best for hardcore fans . 
 The game has been credited for its visuals , arcade / home connectivity , longevity , sharp controls , tough challenge , and fleshed @-@ out single @-@ player modes . The game 's most common criticism is its difficulty , specifically in the game 's story mode . It earned fourth place in IGN 's and GameTrailers ' toughest games to beat . GameTrailers mentioned F @-@ Zero GX demanded players to master the " rollercoaster @-@ style tracks [ which ] required hairline precision " to avoid falling off @-@ course . Electronic Gaming Monthly criticized GX 's sharp increase in difficulty and GameSpot 's Jeff Gerstmann agreed stating it " will surely turn some people away before they 've seen the 20 tracks and unlocked all the story mode chapters " . Bryn Williams of GameSpy mentioned that " purists may find it too similar to [ sic ] N64 version " and criticized the lack of LAN play . 
 1UP.com stated that the F @-@ Zero series is " finally running on hardware that can do it proper justice " . Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed pointed out that , graphically , " it 's hard to imagine how Amusement Vision could have done a better job " . Matt Casamassina of IGN praised the developers ' work commenting they have " done a fine job of taking Nintendo 's dated franchise and updating it for the new generation " and summed up the general opinion by stating that " For some , GX will be the ultimate racer . For others , it will be flat out too difficult . " In Japan , F @-@ Zero GX sold 100 @,@ 981 units and became qualified for the Player 's Choice line in both Europe and North America by selling at least 250 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = L 'ange de Nisida = 
 L 'ange de Nisida ( The Angel of Nisida ) is an opera <unk> in four acts by Italian composer Gaetano Donizetti , from a libretto by Alphonse Royer and Gustave <unk> . 
 Parts of the libretto are considered analogous with the libretto for Giovanni Pacini 's Adelaide e <unk> , and the final scene is based on the François @-@ Thomas @-@ Marie de <unk> d 'Arnaud play Les Amants <unk> , ou le comte de <unk> . Donizetti worked on the opera in late 1839 — its final page is dated 27 December 1839 . Because the subject matter involved the mistress of a Neapolitan king , and may thus have caused difficulties with the Italian censors , Donizetti decided that the opera should be presented in France . The theater company Donizetti contracted went bankrupt ; L 'ange was never performed and was reworked as La favorite in September 1840 . 
 = = Composition history = = 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Donizetti completed L 'ange de Nisida on 27 December 1839 , the date on the final page of the autograph score . He had been working on Le duc d <unk> , but postponed work on the half @-@ completed score in favor of L 'ange and La fille du régiment . 
 Although Donizetti noted in correspondence to his close friend Tommaso Persico in Naples that L 'ange was " an opera in three acts " , both the autograph score and Donizetti 's contract with Anténor Joly , the owner of the theater company Donizetti contracted , make clear that L 'ange had four acts . Regardless , Donizetti 's letter has caused confusion among opera journalists and scholars . For example , The Musical Times journalist Winton Dean wrote of the Italian version of La favorite in 1979 : " [ I ] t was expanded from an unperformed three @-@ act French opera , L 'ange de Nisida . " Ashbrook speculates that Donizetti may have considered the first two acts as one . 
 = = = Contract and cancellation = = = 
 On 5 January 1840 , Donizetti signed a rehearsal and performance contract with his librettists and Anténor Joly , who was operating a company named Théâtre de la Renaissance and giving performances at the Salle <unk> in Paris . Théâtre de la Renaissance chose L 'ange over Richard Wagner 's Das Liebesverbot . Joly 's company had premiered the French version of Donizetti 's Lucia di Lammermoor the previous year , and L 'ange was meant to be its successor . The contract , which is on display at the Bibliothèque @-@ Musée de l 'Opéra National de Paris , stipulates that L 'ange be performed uninterrupted twenty times unless three consecutive performances sold poorly , and that Joly could not premiere any other opera until the revenue from L 'ange started to decline . The contract contains nothing about Donizetti 's compensation ; therefore , it is possible that another contract existed . L 'ange was set to begin rehearsal on 1 February 1840 . Donizetti had two other operas in various stages of preparation at other theaters during this time : Les martyrs and La fille du régiment . 
 Later in January , Joly terminated all opera productions of the Théâtre de la Renaissance company due to financial hardship , despite a reported 5 @,@ 000 @-@ franc loan from Donizetti . Joly tried to keep the operation afloat by staging ballets , but it closed completely in May 1840 . He filed for bankruptcy and therefore avoided paying Donizetti the large fee owed for backing out of the production . Writing for the Cambridge Opera Journal , Mark <unk> referred to L 'ange as one of " the most spectacular casualties of the collapse of music drama at the Théâtre de la Renaissance " . 
 = = = Reworked as La favorite = = = 
 Donizetti managed to retrieve the score of L 'ange de Nisida from Joly 's company and reworked it as La favorite ( now more commonly known by its Italian title , La <unk> ) in September 1840 for a December premiere in Italy . To circumvent the Italian censors Donizetti agreed to plot modifications ; La favorite is about a medieval King of Castile . 
 The presence and influence of L 'ange is evident in Donizetti 's autograph score of La favorite , which features " large chunks " of L 'ange " cut up and interleaved " in which new character names and text for La favorite overwrite the old . The final page of L 'ange was used as the final page of La favorite ; therefore , both operas bear the same finish date on the last page . Donizetti 's contract for La favorite demanded a 1 December 1840 premiere , leaving him little time for dramatic changes . In his 1965 biography Donizetti , Ashbrook surmises that this tight deadline gave rise to the legend that Donizetti actually composed the last act of La favorite in a single night . In fact , the libretto of L 'ange and the autograph score of La favorite make clear that the final act of La favorite was completed long before Donizetti began the rest of it in September — Donizetti lifted it from L 'ange with the exception of two solo passages . He brought in librettist Eugène Scribe to oversee the new text , which also required the approval of starring mezzo @-@ soprano Rosine Stoltz . The finished product was an amalgamation of the unfinished Adelaide , the never @-@ performed L 'ange de Nisida , and new material worked into the score by Donizetti and into the libretto by Scribe . La favorite premiered on 2 December 1840 . 
 Ashbrook has compared the surviving autograph scores of L 'ange de Nisida and La favorite to determine precisely how much material L 'ange provided for the latter . While the events in L 'ange are set in 1470 in Nisida and Naples , La favorite is set in Santiago de Compostela and Castile , both in Spain , prior to 1350 . Donizetti made fundamental changes to the first half of La favorite and little remains of L 'ange . The central conflict of the story involving the marriage and subsequent death is essentially the same from one opera to the other , and some of the character names are also similar or identical . 
 A transcription of the L 'ange libretto is kept at the Fondazione Donizetti library in Bergamo , and was printed in a 2002 issue of the Italian @-@ language journal for The Donizetti Society . 
 = = Roles = = 
 As the opera never got to the rehearsal stage , little is known about the intended cast . In a letter to his close friend Tommaso Persico , Donizetti expressed his desire to give the title role to Juliette Bourgeois , a temperamental soprano who requested a large sum of money to perform in France . ( She was later to create the title role in Donizetti 's La fille du régiment ) 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Time : 1470 
 Place : Naples and Nisida 
 Leone de <unk> is an exiled soldier who makes a forbidden journey to the island of Nisida , outside Naples , Italy , to see Sylvia , with whom he is infatuated . Leone knows she is a noble but little else . While on Nisida , Leone encounters Don Gaspar , Chamberlain to King Fernand of Naples . After hearing Leone 's plight , Don Gaspar convinces him to travel to Naples to have his exile lifted . Leone and Sylvia meet in Naples , at which time Leone discovers that she is actually Sylvia de Linares , the King 's mistress . She declares her love for Leone but implores him to abandon her and his plans in Naples . When he refuses , the King discovers him and orders Don Gaspar to arrest and imprison him . 
 The King expresses to Sylvia his desire that she wed him . However , agents of Rome have been plotting to banish the mistress from Naples . When the King , dismayed , offers to grant her any request , she asks that Leone be set free . A monk appears , brandishing the Papal bull and threatening to banish Sylvia if she remains a mistress to the King . The King plots with Don Gaspar to free Leone and wed him to Sylvia , although Leone would be sent away and Sylvia would remain the King 's mistress . Leone and Sylvia marry , but when Leone discovers the plot , he breaks his sword in front of the King and leaves under the monk 's escort . 
 Leone is preparing to take his vows as a monk when Sylvia appears , having followed him disguised as a novice . When she confronts Leone and asks for forgiveness , he realizes his feelings and attempts to flee with her . Sylvia , who has been near death , dies at Leone 's feet despite his calls for help . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 See La favorite for recordings based on much of the music from this opera . 
 = Atom Heart Mother = 
 Atom Heart Mother is the fifth studio album by English progressive rock band Pink Floyd . It was released by Harvest and EMI Records 2 October 1970 in the UK , and by Harvest and Capitol on 10 October 1970 in the US . It was recorded at Abbey Road Studios in London , England , and was the band 's first album to reach number 1 in the UK , while it reached number 55 in the US chart , eventually going gold there . A remastered CD was released in 1994 in the UK and the United States , and again in 2011 . Ron Geesin , who had already influenced and collaborated with Roger Waters , made a notable contribution to the album and received a then @-@ rare outside songwriting credit . 
 This was the first Pink Floyd album to be specially mixed for four @-@ channel quadraphonic sound as well as conventional two @-@ channel stereo . The SQ quadraphonic mix was released on LP in a matrix format compatible with standard stereo record players . There was also a release of the quadraphonic version in the UK in fully discrete four @-@ channel form on the " Quad @-@ 8 " format , a four @-@ channel variant of the stereo 8 @-@ track tape cartridge . 
 The cover was designed by Hipgnosis , and was significant in that it was the first one to not feature the band 's name on the cover , or contain any photographs of the band anywhere . This was a trend that would continue on subsequent covers throughout the 1970s and beyond . 
 Although it was commercially successful on release , the band , particularly Waters and David Gilmour , have expressed several negative opinions of the album in more recent years . Nevertheless , it remained popular enough for Gilmour to perform the title track with Geesin in 2008 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The album came about after Pink Floyd had completed work on the soundtrack to the film Zabriskie Point in Rome , which had ended somewhat acrimoniously , and headed back to London in early 1970 for rehearsals . A number of out @-@ takes from the Rome sessions were used to assemble new material during these rehearsals , though some of it , such as " The Violent Sequence " , later to become " Us and Them " , would not be used for some time . 
 = = = Side one = = = 
 The title track to Atom Heart Mother resulted from a number of instrumental figures the band had composed during these rehearsals , including the chord progression of the main theme , which guitarist David Gilmour had called " Theme from an Imaginary Western " , and the earliest documented live performance was on 17 January 1970 at Hull University . The band felt that the live performances developed the piece into a manageable shape . Recording of the track commenced at Abbey Road Studios in London , and was somewhat cumbersome , as it was the first recording to use a new eight @-@ track one @-@ inch tape and EMI <unk> transistorised mixing console ( 8 track 20 microphone inputs ) in the studio , and , as a result , EMI insisted the band were not allowed to do any splicing of the tape to edit pieces together . Consequently , band members Roger Waters and Nick Mason had little choice but to play the bass and drums , respectively , for the entire 23 minute piece in one sitting . The other instruments the band played were overdubbed later . Mason recalled the final backing track 's lack of precise timekeeping would cause problems later on . 
 By March , they had finished recording the track , but felt that it was rather unfocused and needed something else . The band had been introduced to Ron Geesin via the Rolling Stones tour manager , Sam Cutler , and were impressed with his composition and tape editing capabilities , particularly Waters and Mason . Geesin was handed the completed backing tracks the band had recorded , and asked to compose an orchestral arrangement over the top of it while the band went on tour to the US . Geesin described the composing and arranging as " a hell of a lot of work . Nobody knew what was wanted , they couldn 't read music … " According to him , Gilmour came up with some of the melodic lines , while the pair of them along with keyboardist Richard Wright worked on the middle section with the choir . When it came to recording his work in June with the EMI Pops Orchestra , the session musicians present were unimpressed with his tendency to favour avant garde music over established classical works , and , combined with the relative difficulty of some of the parts , harassed him during recording . John Alldis , whose choir were also to perform on the track , had experience in dealing with orchestral musicians , and managed to conduct the recorded performance in place of Geesin . 
 The track was originally called " The Amazing Pudding " , though Geesin 's original score referred to it as " Epic " . A refined and improved version ( with Geesin 's written parts ) was played at Bath Festival of Blues and Progressive Music on 27 June . Its name was changed after the band were due to play an " in concert " broadcast for BBC Radio 1 on 16 July 1970 , and had needed a title for John Peel to announce it . Geesin pointed to a copy of the Evening Standard , and suggested to Waters that he would find a title in there . The headline was : " <unk> <unk> MOTHER <unk> " , a story about a woman being fitted with a nuclear @-@ powered pacemaker . 
 The piece as presented on the completed album is a progression from Pink Floyd 's earlier instrumental pieces such as " A Saucerful of Secrets " and even earlier , " Interstellar Overdrive " . The " Atom Heart Mother " suite takes up all of side one , and is split into six parts , individually named . Geesin chose the opening section name , " Father 's Shout " after Earl " <unk> " Hines , while other names such as " Breast Milky " and " Funky Dung " were inspired by the album cover artwork . The orchestral arrangements feature a full brass section , a cello and the 16 @-@ piece John Alldis choir , which take most of the lead melody lines , while Pink Floyd mainly provide the backing tracks ; a reverse of the 1960s pop music practice of using orchestration as the background , and putting the rock band in front . Nevertheless , there are several occasions where Gilmour 's electric guitar and Wright 's keyboards take the lead . 
 = = = Side two = = = 
 The album 's concept is similar to their previous Ummagumma album , in that it features the full band in the first half , and focuses on individual members in the second half . Side two opens with three five @-@ minute songs : one by each of the band 's three resident songwriters , and closes with a suite with sound effects primarily conceived by Mason , but credited to the whole group . Waters contributes a folk ballad called " If " , playing acoustic guitar . Pink Floyd rarely played the song live , but Waters often performed it at solo shows in support of his Radio K.A.O.S. album , more than a decade later . This is followed by Wright 's " Summer ' 68 " , which also features prominent use of brass in places . It was issued as a Japanese single in 1971 , and was the only track on the album never to be played live in concert . 
 According to Mason , Gilmour , having had little songwriting experience at that point , was ordered to remain in Abbey Road until he had composed a song suitable for inclusion on the album . He came up with a folk @-@ influenced tune , " Fat Old Sun " , which he still cites as a personal favourite . The song was extended in arrangement to fifteen minutes as a key part of the band 's live set , and is a staple of Gilmour 's various solo tours . 
 The final track , " Alan 's Psychedelic Breakfast " , is divided into three segments , each with its own descriptive title , joined by dialogue and sound effects of then @-@ roadie Alan Styles preparing , discussing , and eating breakfast . The idea for the piece came about by Waters experimenting with the rhythm of a dripping tap , which combined sound effects and dialogue recorded by Mason in his kitchen with musical pieces recorded at Abbey Road . A slightly re @-@ worked version was performed on stage on 22 December 1970 at Sheffield City Hall , Sheffield , England with the band members pausing between pieces to eat and drink their breakfast . The original LP ends with the sound of a dripping tap which continues into the inner groove , and thus plays on indefinitely . 
 While recording sessions for his Barrett album were underway ( with help from Gilmour and Wright ) , previous Floyd frontman Syd Barrett would occasionally observe his old band as they were recording Atom Heart Mother . 
 = = Cover art = = 
 The original album cover , designed by art collective Hipgnosis , shows a cow standing in a pasture with no text nor any other clue as to what might be on the record . Some later editions have the title and artist name added to the cover . This concept was the group 's reaction to the psychedelic space rock imagery associated with Pink Floyd at the time of the album 's release ; the band wanted to explore all sorts of music without being limited to a particular image or style of performance . They thus requested that their new album had " something plain " on the cover , which ended up being the image of a cow . Storm Thorgerson , inspired by Andy Warhol 's famous " cow wallpaper " , has said that he simply drove out into a rural area near Potters Bar and photographed the first cow he saw . The cow 's owner identified her name as " <unk> III " . More cows appear on the back cover , again with no text or titles , and on the inside gatefold . Also , a pink balloon shaped like a cow udder accompanied the album as part of Capitol 's marketing strategy campaign to " break " the band in the US . The liner notes in later CD editions give a recipe for Traditional Bedouin Wedding Feast on a card labelled " Breakfast Tips " . Looking back on the artwork , Thorgerson remembered : " I think the cow represents , in terms of the Pink Floyd , part of their humour , which I think is often underestimated or just unwritten about . " 
 In the mid @-@ 1970s , a bootleg containing rare singles and B @-@ sides entitled The Dark Side of the Moo appeared , with a similar cover . Like Atom Heart Mother , the cover had no writing on it , although in this case it was to protect the bootlegger 's anonymity rather than any artistic statement . The album cover to The KLF 's concept album Chill Out was also inspired by Atom Heart Mother . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Atom Heart Mother was released in the UK and US in October 1970 , reaching number 1 and number 55 , respectively . It was released in the quadraphonic format in the UK , Germany and Australia . A remastered CD was released in 1994 in the UK and the US . Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab released a <unk> gold CD in the US in 1994 , while a LP version was released in the US in the same year . As part of the Why Pink Floyd ... ? campaign , a remaster was released in 2011 . Then the album was re @-@ issued again in 2016 on the band 's own Pink Floyd Records label . 
 Critical reaction to the suite has always been mixed , and all band members have expressed negativity toward it in recent times . For instance , Gilmour has said the album was " a load of rubbish . We were at a real down point ... I think we were scraping the barrel a bit at that period " and " a good idea but it was dreadful ... Atom Heart Mother sounds like we didn 't have any idea between us , but we became much more prolific after it . " Similarly , in a 1984 interview on BBC Radio 1 , Waters said " If somebody said to me now – right – here 's a million pounds , go out and play Atom Heart Mother , I 'd say you must be fucking joking . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The band were initially enthusiastic about performing the suite in the early 1970s . An early performance was taped for the San Francisco based television station KQED , featuring just the band , on 28 April 1970 . Two memorable performances were at the Bath Festival of Blues and Progressive Music on 27 June and the " <unk> Garden Party " in Hyde Park , London on 18 July . On both occasions the band were accompanied by the John Alldis Choir and the Philip Jones Brass Ensemble . Later , the band took a full brass section and choir on tour just for the purpose of performing this piece . However , this caused the tour to lose money , and the band found problems with the hired musicians , which changed from gig to gig as they simply took who was available , which , combined with lack of rehearsal and problems miking up the whole ensemble , made a full live performance more problematic . Reflecting on this , Gilmour said " some of the brass players have been really hopeless " . According to Mason , the band arrived at one gig in Aachen , Germany , only to discover they had left the sheet music behind , forcing tour manager Tony Howard to go back to London and get it . Because of this , a later arrangement without brass or choir , and pared down from 25 minutes to fifteen by omitting the " collage " sections and closing reprise of the main theme , remained in their live repertoire into 1972 . For instance , during the first concert of that year , halfway through the first ever public live performance of The Dark Side of the Moon in Brighton , technical problems resulted in the abandoning of that performance , replaced by Atom Heart Mother . The last documented live performance of the suite was on 22 May 1972 at the <unk> Stadium , Amsterdam , Netherlands . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stanley Kubrick wanted to use the album 's title track in A Clockwork Orange . The group refused permission , primarily because Kubrick was unsure of exactly which pieces of music he wanted and what he wished to do with them . In retrospect , Waters said " maybe it 's just as well it wasn 't used after all " . Nevertheless , the album is visible behind the counter in the record store scene . 
 On 14 and 15 June 2008 , Geesin performed " Atom Heart Mother " with Italian tribute band Mun Floyd over two nights as part of the Chelsea Festival . Geesin introduced it with a history and slide show . The performances featured the chamber choir Canticum , brass and noted cellist Caroline Dale , who has worked with Gilmour . The second night saw Gilmour join Geesin on stage for the performance , which was extended to 30 minutes . 
 In 2013 , Geesin produced a book , The Flaming Cow , which documented his experience with working with Pink Floyd , including the making of this album from his point of view . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Taken from sleeve notes 
 Pink Floyd 
 ( all instrumentation uncredited ) 
 Roger Waters – bass guitar , acoustic guitar and vocals on " If " , tape effects , tape collages 
 David Gilmour – guitars , vocals , bass and drums on " Fat Old Sun " 
 Rick Wright – keyboards , vocals on " Summer ' 68 " 
 Nick Mason – drums , percussion , tape editing , tape collage , additional engineering on " Alan 's Psychedelic Breakfast " 
 Additional musicians 
 EMI Pops Orchestra – brass and orchestral sections ( uncredited ) 
 <unk> <unk> – cello ( uncredited ) 
 John Alldis Choir – vocals 
 Alan Styles – voice and sound effects on " Alan 's Psychedelic Breakfast " ( uncredited ) 
 Production 
 Peter Bown – engineering 
 Alan Parsons – engineering ( misspelled as " Allan Parsons " on the original sleeve ) 
 Ron Geesin – orchestration and co @-@ composition on Atom Heart Mother ( uncredited on sleeve ) 
 James Guthrie – 1994 remastering 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = HMS Carnarvon = 
 HMS Carnarvon was one of six Devonshire @-@ class armoured cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . She was assigned to the 3rd Cruiser Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet upon completion in 1905 and was transferred to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet in 1907 . She was assigned to the reserve Third Fleet in 1909 and became flagship of the 5th Cruiser Squadron of the reserve Second Fleet in 1912 . 
 When World War I began in August 1914 , she was assigned to the Cape Verde Station to search for German commerce raiders while protecting British shipping . Carnarvon was transferred to the South Atlantic two months later and assigned to the squadron that destroyed the German East Asia Squadron at the Battle of the Falklands . She was assigned to the North America and West Indies Station in 1915 and continued to patrol against German raiders and escort convoys to the end of the war . In 1919 , she became a training ship and was then sold for scrap in 1921 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Carnarvon was designed to displace 10 @,@ 850 long tons ( 11 @,@ 020 t ) . The ship had an overall length of 473 feet 6 inches ( 144 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 68 feet 6 inches ( 20 @.@ 9 m ) and a deep draught of 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) . She was powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which produced a total of 21 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 16 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . The engines were powered by seventeen Niclausse and six cylindrical boilers . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 033 long tons ( 1 @,@ 050 t ) of coal and her complement consisted of 610 officers and enlisted men . 
 Her main armament consisted of four breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk I guns mounted in four single @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure and one on each side . The guns fired their 200 @-@ pound ( 91 kg ) shells to a range of about 13 @,@ 800 yards ( 12 @,@ 600 m ) . Her secondary armament of six BL 6 @-@ inch Mk VII guns was arranged in casemates amidships . Four of these were mounted on the main deck and were only usable in calm weather . They had a maximum range of approximately 12 @,@ 200 yards ( 11 @,@ 200 m ) with their 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shells . Carnarvon also carried eighteen quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and two submerged 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes . Her two 12 @-@ pounder 8 cwt guns could be dismounted for service ashore . 
 At some point in the war , the main deck six @-@ inch guns of the Devonshire @-@ class ships were moved to the upper deck and given gun shields . Their casemates were plated over to improve seakeeping and the four 3 @-@ pounder guns displaced by the transfer were landed . 
 The ship 's waterline armour belt ranged from two to six inches ( 51 to 152 mm ) in thickness and was closed off by five @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) transverse bulkheads . The armour of the gun turrets was also five inches thick whilst that of their barbettes was six inches thick . The protective deck armour ranged in thickness from .75 – 2 inches ( 19 – 51 mm ) and the conning tower was protected by twelve inches ( 305 mm ) of armour . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Carnarvon , named to commemorate the Welsh county , was laid down by William Beardmore & Company at their Dalmuir shipyard on 1 October 1902 and launched on 7 October 1903 . She was completed on 29 May 1905 and was initially assigned to the 3rd Cruiser Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet . She was transferred to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet in June 1907 and was then assigned to the reserve Third Fleet at Devonport in April 1909 . The ship was transferred to the Second Fleet at Devonport in March 1912 and subsequently became the flagship of the 5th Cruiser Squadron until the start of World War I. She participated in the fleet manoeuvres in July – August 1913 as well as those in July 1914 . On 31 July , a few days before war was declared on Germany , she encountered the German light cruiser Strassburg in the English Channel returning home and the two ships saluted each other . 
 When the war began on 5 August , Carnarvon , now the flagship of Rear Admiral Archibald Stoddart , was in Gibraltar . She was quickly sent to Cape Verde and captured the German merchant ship SS Professor Woermann on 23 August 1914 . She escorted her prize to Freetown , Sierra Leone for disposal and resumed patrolling . She moved to the Brazilian coast in October and then proceeded to the Falkland Islands with the squadron commanded by Vice @-@ Admiral Doveton Sturdee . 
 = = = Battle of the Falklands = = = 
 Upon arrival at Port Stanley on 7 December , Sturdee informed his captains that he planned to recoal the entire squadron the following day from the two available colliers and to begin the search for the East Asia Squadron , believed to be running for home around the tip of South America , the day after . Vice @-@ Admiral Maximilian von Spee , commander of the German squadron , had other plans and intended to destroy the radio station at Port Stanley on the morning of 8 December . The appearance of two German ships at 07 : 30 caught Sturdee 's ships by surprise , but the Germans were driven off by 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) shells fired by the predreadnought battleship Canopus when they came within range around 09 : 20 . Carnarvon completed <unk> at 08 : 00 and the squadron cleared the harbour by 10 : 30 . Sturdee ordered " general chase " at that time , but Carnarvon could only manage 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) and fell behind the other British ships . His two battlecruisers were the fastest ships present and inexorably began to close on the German cruisers , opening fire at 12 : 55 that straddled the light cruiser Leipzig , the rear ship in the German formation . It was clear to Spee that his ships could not outrun the battlecruisers and that the only hope for any of his ships to survive was to scatter . So he turned his two armoured cruisers around to buy time by engaging the battlecruisers and ordered his three light cruisers to disperse at 13 : 20 . Carnarvon , now 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) behind , had no hope of catching the scattering German ships and continued to trail the battlecruisers . 
 Carnarvon finally came within range of the German armoured cruisers and opened fire shortly before Scharnhorst rolled over and capsized at 16 : 17 . She then engaged Gneisenau until Sturdee ordered " cease fire " at 17 : 50 . The German captain had started to scuttle his ship 10 minutes earlier when it was clear that the situation was hopeless and his ship sank at 18 : 00 . Carnarvon rescued 20 survivors from Gneisenau , but only wreckage was visible when she later steamed through the area where Scharnhorst had sunk . 
 After the battle she participated in the hunt for the light cruiser Dresden that had escaped during the battle and investigated anchorages in Argentina , Chile and the island of South Georgia before proceeding north to Brazil in February . She struck a coral reef off the Abrolhos Archipelago on 22 February 1915 and had to be beached to avoid sinking . The ship received temporary repairs at Rio de Janeiro the following month . Carnarvon received permanent repairs in Montreal , Canada , from May to July after which she escorted several British H @-@ class submarines from Halifax to the United Kingdom en route to Devonport . She then returned to Halifax where she was based for the rest of the year . Now assigned to the North America and West Indies Station , she resumed her duties protecting British shipping for the rest of the war . In 1919 , she began serving as a cadet training ship , remaining in that role until she was listed for sale in March 1921 . Carnarvon was sold for scrap on 8 November 1921 and subsequently broken up in Germany . 
 = Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus = 
 Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus ( Paris , National Library of France , Greek 9 ; Gregory @-@ Aland no . C or 04 , von Soden δ 3 ) is a fifth @-@ century Greek manuscript of the Bible , sometimes referred to as one of the four great uncials ( see Codex Sinaiticus , Alexandrinus and Vaticanus ) . The manuscript is not intact : in its current condition , Codex C contains material from every New Testament book except Second Thessalonians and Second John ; however , only six books of the Greek Old Testament are represented . 
 The manuscript is called Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus because ( a ) it is a codex , i.e. , a handmade book ; ( b ) its parchment has been recycled ; originally inscribed with Scriptural texts , the pages were washed ( removing most of the ink ) and reused for another text , and ( c ) the text that was written on the recycled pages , in the 12th century , consisted of Greek translations of 38 treatises composed by Ephrem the Syrian , a prominent theologian of the mid @-@ 4th century . Manuscripts of this sort , consisting of recycled pages , are known as palimpsests . The later ( or , " upper " ) text was written in the 12th century . 
 The lower text of the palimpsest was deciphered by biblical scholar and <unk> Tischendorf in 1840 – 1843 , and was edited by him in 1843 – 1845 . Currently it is housed in the Bibliothèque nationale de France ( <unk> 9 ) in Paris . 
 = = Description = = 
 208 leaves of the codex are extant ; 144 belong to the New Testament and 64 to the Old Testament . The codex measures 12 ¼ in / 31 @.@ 4 @-@ 32 @.@ 5 cm by 9 in / 25 @.@ 6 @-@ 26 @.@ 4 cm . The text is written in a single column per page , 40 – 46 lines per page , on parchment leaves . The letters are medium @-@ sized uncials . 
 The uncial writing is continuous , with the punctuation consisting only of a single point , as in codices Alexandrinus and Vaticanus . The capitals at the beginning sections stand out in the margin as in codices Codex Alexandrinus and Codex Basilensis . Iota and <unk> , which in Alexandrinus and many other manuscripts have two dots over them ( diaeresis ) when they commence a syllable – sometimes only one dot – have in the Codex Ephraemi a small straight line in their place . The breathings and accents were added by a later hand . The nomina sacra tend to be contracted into three @-@ letter forms rather than the more common two @-@ letter forms . 
 Before the Gospel of Luke and the Gospel of John , a list of κεφαλαια ( chapters ) is preserved ( and one may deduce that the manuscript contained such lists for Matthew and Mark when it was in pristine condition ) , but their τιτλοι ( titles of chapters ) were apparently not placed in the upper margin of the page as in Codex Alexandrinus . It is possible , however , that the upper margins once contained τιτλοι in red ink which has completely faded away ; another possibility is that the upper portions of the pages have been <unk> . The text of the Gospels is accompanied by marginal notations indicating the Ammonian Sections . Probably when the codex was pristine , numerals representing the Eusebian Canons were also present in red ink which has completely vanished . There are no systematic divisions in the other books . 
 The Pericope Adulterae ( John 7 : 53 – 8 : 11 ) was almost certainly not included in Codex C when it was in pristine condition . The two leaves which contained John 7 : 3 – 8 : 34 are not extant . By counting the lines and calculating how much space would be required to include John 7 : 53 @-@ 8 : 11 , it can be demonstrated that , barring a large omission elsewhere in the text on the missing leaves , they did not contain sufficient space to include the passage . The text of Mark 16 : 9 – 20 is included in Codex C on folio <unk> . 
 It is difficult to determine whether Luke 22 : 43 @-@ 44 Christ 's agony at Gethsemane was originally in the text of Codex C ; the leaves that contained the surrounding verses are not extant . Mark 15 : 28 is not included . 
 Lacunae 
 Gospel of Matthew : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 5 : 15 – 7 : 5 ; 17 : 26 – 18 : 28 ; 22 : 21 – 23 : 17 ; 24 : 10 – 45 ; 25 : 30 – 26 : 22 ; 27 : 11 – 46 ; 28 : 15 @-@ fin . ; 
 Gospel of Mark : 1 : 1 – 17 ; 6 : 32 – 8 : 5 ; 12 : 30 – 13 : 19 ; 
 Gospel of Luke : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 2 : 5 – 42 ; 3 : 21 – 4 : 25 ; 6 : 4 – 36 ; 7 : 17 – 8 : 28 ; 12 : 4 – 19 : 42 ; 20 : 28 – 21 : 20 ; 22 : 19 – 23 : 25 ; 24 : 7 – 45 
 Gospel of John : 1 : 1 – 3 ; 1 : 41 – 3 : 33 ; 5 : 17 – 6 : 38 ; 7 : 3 – 8 : 34 ; 9 : 11 – 11 : 7 ; 11 : 47 – 13 : 7 ; 14 : 8 – 16 : 21 ; 18 : 36 – 20 : 25 ; 
 Acts of the Apostles : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 4 : 3 – 5 : 34 ; 6 : 8 ; 10 : 43 – 13 : 1 ; 16 : 37 – 20 : 10 ; 21 : 31 – 22 : 20 ; 23 : 18 – 24 : 15 ; 26 : 19 – 27 : 16 ; 28 : 5 @-@ fin . ; 
 Epistle to the Romans : 1 : 1 – 3 ; 2 : 5 – 3 : 21 ; 9 : 6 – 10 : 15 ; 11 : 31 – 13 : 10 ; 
 First Epistle to the Corinthians : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 7 : 18 – 9 : 6 ; 13 : 8 – 15 : 40 ; 
 Second Epistle to the Corinthians : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 10 : 8 @-@ fin . 
 Epistle to the Galatians : 1 : 1 – 20 
 Epistle to the Ephesians : 1 : 1 – 2 : 18 ; 4 : 17 @-@ fin . 
 Epistle to the Philippians : 1 : 1 – 22 ; 3 : 5 @-@ fin . 
 Epistle to the Colossians : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 
 First Epistle to the Thessalonians : 1 : 1 ; 2 : 9 @-@ fin . ; 
 Second Epistle to the Thessalonians lost 
 First Epistle to Timothy : 1 : 1 – 3 : 9 ; 5 : 20 @-@ fin . ; 
 Second Epistle to Timothy : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 
 Epistle to Titus : 1 : 1 – 2 
 Epistle to Philemon : 1 – 2 
 Epistle to the Hebrews : 1 : 1 – 2 : 4 ; 7 : 26 – 9 : 15 ; 10 : 24 – 12 : 15 ; 
 Epistle of James : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 4 : 2 @-@ fin . 
 First Epistle of Peter : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 4 : 5 @-@ fin . ; 
 Second Epistle of Peter : 1 : 1 ; 
 First Epistle of John : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 4 : 3 @-@ fin . 
 Second Epistle of John lost ; 
 Third Epistle of John : 1 – 2 ; 
 Epistle of Jude : 1 – 2 ; 
 Book of Revelation : 1 : 1 – 2 ; 3 : 20 – 5 : 14 ; 7 : 14 – 17 ; 8 : 5 – 9 : 16 ; 10 : 10 – 11 : 3 ; 16 : 13 – 18 : 2 ; 19 : 5 @-@ fin . 
 In the Old Testament , parts of Book of Job , Proverbs , Ecclesiastes , Song of Songs , Wisdom , and Sirach survived . 
 = = Text = = 
 = = = Text @-@ type = = = 
 The New Testament text of Codex C is primarily Alexandrian , although the strength and character of its testimony varies from book to book . It is a weak Byzantine witness in Matthew , a weak Alexandrian witness in Mark , and a strong Alexandrian witness in John . In Luke its textual character is unclear . Westcott @-@ Hort classified it as mixed ; Hermann von Soden classified it as in the Alexandrian text @-@ type . 
 According to Kurt Aland it agrees with the Byzantine text @-@ type 87 times in the Gospels , 13 times in the Acts , 29 times in Paul , and 16 times in the Catholic epistles . It agrees with the Nestle @-@ Aland text 66 times ( Gospels ) , 38 ( Acts ) , 104 ( Paul ) , and 41 ( Cath . ) . It has 50 independent or distinctive readings in the Gospels , 11 in Acts , 17 in Paul , and 14 in the Catholic epistles . Aland placed the text of the codex in Category II . According to the Claremont Profile Method its text is mixed in Luke 1 , Luke 10 , and Luke 20 . 
 In the Apocalypse , Codex Ephraemi is a witness of the same form of the text as Alexandrinus . 
 = = = Unusual Interpolations = = = 
 In Matthew 8 : 13 it has additional text ( see Luke 7 : 10 ) : και <unk> ο <unk> εις τον <unk> αυτου εν <unk> τη ωρα <unk> τον <unk> <unk> ( and when the centurion returned to the house in that hour , he found the slave well ) -- a reading also found in codices ( Sinaiticus , N ) , Θ , f1 , 545 , g1 , syrh . 
 In Matthew 27 : 49 Codex C contains added text : ἄλλος δὲ λαβὼν λόγχην <unk> αὐτοῦ τὴν πλευράν , καὶ ἐξῆλθεν <unk> καὶ <unk> ( the other took a spear and pierced His side , and immediately came out water and blood ) . This reading was derived from John 19 : 34 and occurs in other manuscripts of the Alexandrian text @-@ type ( א , B , L , Γ , 1010 , 1293 , pc , <unk> ) . 
 In Acts 14 : 19 it has additional text : και <unk> αυτων <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ' αυτων <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> αλλα παντα <unk> for και <unk> <unk> <unk> ; similar readings appear in codices : 6 , 36 , 81 , 104 , 326 , 452 , 945 , 1175 , 1739 . 
 = = = Some corrections = = = 
 In Matthew 11 : 2 its original text has the reading δια ( by ) as well as codices א , B , D , P , W , Z , Δ , Θ , <unk> , f13 , 33 , but the third corrector C3 changed it into <unk> ( two ) — as in codices L , f1 , <unk> 
 In Acts 20 : 28 it reads του κυριου ( of the Lord ) along with the manuscripts <formula> 74 D E Ψ 33 36 453 945 1739 1891 , but the corrector added και του <unk> ( and God ) as have P 049 326 1241 2492 and the Byzantine manuscripts . 
 In 1 Corinthians 12 : 9 the original scribe omits phrase εν τω <unk> <unk> ( in His spirit ) , but it was added by the third corrector ( C3 ) . 
 In 1 Timothy 3 : 16 it reads <unk> ἐφανερώθη ( He was manifested ) , but the second corrector ( C2 ) changed it into θεός ἐφανερώθη ( God was manifested ) ; 
 In James 1 : 22 it reads <unk> ( of the word ) as majority of manuscripts , but the second corrector ( C2 ) corrected into <unk> ( of the law ) , which is read by manuscripts such as 88 , 621 , 1067 , 1852 . 
 = = = Other Textual Variants = = = 
 Acts 15 : 23 Codex C has the unique reading γραψαντης δια χειρος αυτων <unk> <unk> <unk> ( they wrote by their hands the letter containing this ) , which is not supported by any other Greek manuscripts , though it is supported by versions : ar , c , gig , w , geo . The majority of the Greek manuscripts read γραψαντης δια χειρος αυτων <unk> ( they wrote this by their hands ) , the Alexandrian manuscripts read γραψαντης δια χειρος αυτων ( wrote by their hands ) . 
 Romans 16 : 24 
 Verse is omitted along with Codex Sinaiticus A B 5 81 263 623 1739 1838 1962 2127 <unk> <unk> copsa , bo <unk> <unk> ) 
 Revelation 13 : 18 
 " The number of the beast " is written as <unk> <unk> hex , lit. six hundred sixteen ( 616 ) . This is one of the most famous readings of the codex , it is also attested by Papyrus 115 . 
 Matthew 22 : 10 – <unk> ] <unk> ; some manuscripts read <unk> ( codices א , B , L , 0138 , 892 , 1010 ) ; 
 Mark 10 : 35 – οι <unk> <unk> ( the sons of Zebedee ) ] οι <unk> <unk> <unk> ( the two sons of Zebedee ) ; the reading is supported by Codex Vaticanus and the Coptic version ; 
 Romans 16 : 15 – <unk> , <unk> ] <unk> , <unk> ; the reading is supported only by Codex Boernerianus ( Greek text ) . 
 1 Corinthians 2 : 1 – <unk> ( testimony ) ] <unk> ( secret ) ; the reading is supported by <formula> 46 , א , Α , 88 , 436 , ita , r , syrp , copbo ; other manuscripts read <unk> ( savior ) . 
 1 Corinthians 7 : 5 – τη νηστεια και τη προσευχη ( fasting and prayer ) ] τη προσευχη ( prayer ) ; the reading is supported by <formula> 11 , <formula> 46 , א * , A , B , C , D , G , P , Ψ , 33 , 81 , 104 , 181 , 629 , 630 , 1739 , 1877 , 1881 , 1962 , it vg , cop , arm , eth . Other manuscripts read τη προσευχη και νηστεια ( prayer and fasting ) . 
 James 1 : 12 – ο κυριος ( the Lord ) ] κυριος ( Lord ) ; some manuscripts have ο <unk> ( God ) ( 4 , 33 , <unk> , 323 , 945 , 1739 , vg , syrp ) , others omit this word ( א , A , B , Ψ , 81 , ff , co ) . 
 2 Timothy 4 : 10 – <unk> ] <unk> – the reading is supported by Sinaiticus , 81 , 104 , 326 , 436 . 
 Revelation 1 : 5 – <unk> ημας εκ ( washed us from ) ] <unk> ημας εκ ( freed us from ) — as have manuscripts : <unk> , <unk> , A , 2814 , 2020 , 2081 . 
 = = History = = 
 The place where Codex C was written sometime in the 400 's is unknown ; Tischendorf tentatively suggested Egypt . Tischendorf also proposed that two scribes produced the manuscript — one for the Old Testament and one for the New Testament . Subsequent research has indicated that a third scribe may have been involved . The text has been corrected by three correctors , designated by C1 , C2 , and C3 ( Tischendorf designated them by C * , C * * , and C * * * ) . Sometimes they are designated by Ca , Cb , and <unk> . The first corrector ( C1 ) worked in a scriptorium , probably in the 500 's , but the exact location where any of the correctors worked is unknown . The latter 's corrections are not numerous except in the Book of Sirach . 
 The third and last corrector ( C3 ) wrote in the 800 's , possibly in Constantinople . He conformed readings of the codex to ecclesiastical use , inserting many accents , breathings , and vocal notes . He also added liturgical directions in the margin , and worked extensively on the codex . The codex was recycled in the twelfth century . 
 After the fall of Constantinople in 1453 , the codex was brought to Florence by an émigré scholar . It belonged to Niccolo <unk> ( † 1550 ) Cardinal of Florence . After his death it was probably bought by Piero Strozzi , an Italian military leader , for Catherine de ' Medici . Catherine brought it to France as part of her dowry , and from the Bourbon royal library it came to rest in the Bibliothèque nationale de France , Paris . The manuscript was bound in 1602 . 
 The older writing was first noticed by Pierre <unk> , a Protestant pastor . Jean Boivin , supervisor of the Royal Library , made the first extracts of various readings of the codex ( under the notation of Paris 9 ) to <unk> <unk> , who published Mill 's New Testament in 1710 . In 1834 – 1835 potassium <unk> was used to bring out faded or eradicated ink , which had the effect of defacing the vellum from green and blue to black and brown . 
 The first collation of the New Testament was made in 1716 by Johann Jakob Wettstein for Richard Bentley , who intended to prepare a new edition of the Novum Testamentum Graece . According to Bentley 's correspondence , it took two hours to read one page , and Bentley paid Wettstein £ 50 . This collation was used by Wettstein in his own Greek New Testament of 1751 – 1752 . Wettstein also made the first description of the codex . Wettstein only occasionally examined the text of the Old Testament but he did not publish them . Various editors made occasional extracts from the manuscript but Tischendorf was the first who read it completely ( Old and New Testament ) . Tischendorf gained an international reputation when he published the Greek New Testament text in 1843 and the Old Testament in 1845 . Although Tischendorf worked by eye alone , his deciphering of the palimpsest 's text was remarkably accurate . The torn condition of many folios , and the ghostly traces of the text overlaid by the later one , made the decipherment extremely difficult . Even with modern aids like ultraviolet photography , not all the text is securely legible . Robert W. Lyon published a list of corrections of Tischendorf 's edition in 1959 . This was also an imperfect work . 
 According to Edward Miller ( 1886 ) , Codex C was produced " in the light of the most intellectual period of the early Church . " 
 According to Frederic Kenyon " the original manuscript contained the whole Greek Bible , but only scattered leaves of it were used by the scribe of St. <unk> 's works , and the rest was probably destroyed " . 
 <unk> examined only the text of the Old Testament . According to him the original order of the Old Testament cannot be reconstructed ; the scribe who converted the manuscript into a palimpsest used the leaves for his new text without regard to their original arrangement . The original manuscript was not a single volume . 
 The manuscript is cited in all critical editions of the Greek New Testament ( UBS3 , UBS4 , NA26 , NA27 ) . In NA27 it belongs to the witnesses consistently cited of the first order . Even readings of correctors ( C1 , C2 , and C3 ) are regularly cited in critical editions ( as in Sinaiticus , Vaticanus , Bezae , and <unk> ) . 
 = Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District = 
 The Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District is located in Hartford City , Indiana . Hartford City has a population of about 7 @,@ 000 and is the county seat of Blackford County and the site of the county courthouse . The National Park Service of the United States Department of the Interior added the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District to the National Register of Historic Places on June 21 , 2006 — meaning the buildings and objects that contribute to the continuity of the district are worthy of preservation because of their historical and architectural significance . The District has over 60 resources , including over 40 contributing buildings , over 10 non @-@ contributing buildings , 1 contributing object ( a World War I statue ) , 8 non @-@ contributing objects , and two other buildings that are listed separately in the National Register . 
 Much of the District 's significance relates to the discovery of natural gas in the east central region of Indiana . The discovery led to a regional economic boom known as the Indiana Gas Boom . Beginning in the late 1880s and lasting for about 15 years , the Gas Boom changed the economy and the appearance of the region . The Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District is situated in what was the center of Hartford City in the 19th and 20th centuries , and most of the buildings within the District were constructed during the Gas Boom era . The buildings within the District were built in several architectural styles , including Commercial Italianate , Romanesque Revival , Renaissance Revival , and others . Many of the buildings ' exteriors have not been changed from their original appearance . 
 = = History = = 
 Hartford City began in the late 1830s as a few log cabins near a creek in East Central Indiana . The community was originally named Hartford . This was later changed to " Hartford City " after it was discovered that another " Hartford " already existed elsewhere in Indiana . The East Central Indiana version of Hartford was named county seat of Blackford County early in its existence , thereby ensuring its importance . It took over 40 years for the rural community to grow to a population of nearly 1 @,@ 500 . During that time , community planners had the foresight to plan for railroads , which linked the community to other cities , beginning in the 1860s . With a focus on agriculture , the entire county had only 171 people working in manufacturing as of June , 1880 . 
 Hartford City Gas and Oil Company was formed in February 1887 , and the company found natural gas in March of the same year . Surnames of some of the directors of this company can be found on the District 's buildings today — Campbell , Smith , Dowell , and Weiler . Both oil and natural gas were discovered in the county in 1887 , and the city began a period of rapid growth . Described as the " future metropolis of Eastern Indiana " , the city successfully used its railroad facilities and abundant natural gas resource as enticements for manufacturers to locate there , and became a boom town . Hartford City was not alone with its good fortune — natural gas ( and some oil ) had also been discovered in adjacent counties . The entire East Central Indiana region was transformed during a fifteen to twenty @-@ year period that became known as the Indiana Gas Boom , as manufacturers moved to the area . 
 Upon examination of Hartford City 's infrastructure , the Gas Boom 's transformation of the city is apparent . The wooden buildings surrounding the courthouse prior to the Gas Boom were vulnerable to fire , and the District had at least three major fires between 1871 and 1881 . During the Gas Boom , wooden buildings were torn down and replaced with brick buildings . The courthouse was replaced with a magnificent stone and brick structure ( see recent photo herein ) . Eventually , an interurban rail line ran by the east side of the courthouse square , providing easy access to the courthouse square commercial district and adding to the two rail lines that already served the city . The Gas Boom 's economic transformation of the city is also apparent when examining the city 's population . By 1900 , the city had grown to a population of 5 @,@ 912 . Over 1 @,@ 200 people worked in manufacturing in Hartford City in 1902 — and this was in addition to the bankers , merchants , physicians , and lawyers necessary for a growing population . These population and manufacturing figures are considerably larger than the pre @-@ Gas Boom figures for 1880 . 
 The gas and oil became depleted in the early 20th century , and the Gas Boom era came to an end . However , Hartford City was permanently changed . The city 's infrastructure was vastly improved . Buildings in the commercial district surrounding the courthouse square were made of brick and stone instead of wood . A municipal waterworks was built in 1894 . Telephones became available to Hartford City 's surrounding rural areas in 1903 . By 1914 , 98 percent of the houses in Hartford City were wired for electricity . Roads were being paved , and the interurban line made it easier to travel to / from other cities . While some of the manufacturing facilities that depended on a low @-@ cost source of fuel were closed after the boom , others remained in the city because they did not have a better alternative . A city that had very few manufacturing jobs now had a supply of skilled manufacturing personnel . Some of this skilled workforce remained in the city after the boom , while some found new occupations in the automobile and auto parts manufacturing facilities that were beginning to be located in nearby cities . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Three styles of architecture are well represented in the collection of buildings that are part of the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District : Commercial Italianate , Renaissance Revival , and Romanesque Revival . A few examples of the Queen Anne style can also be found . Grouped together , these styles are called Victorian architecture , and buildings constructed in these styles during the 19th century are more likely to have decorative ornamentation ( such as the face @-@ like object from the east side of the Weiler Building shown herein ) than buildings constructed later in the 20th century . Because many of the District 's buildings were constructed during the Gas Boom era ( between 1885 and 1905 ) , these styles of architecture are more prevalent than the styles that became popular later in the 20th century . However , additional architecture styles are also represented . An outstanding example of the Art Deco style can be found in the district 's Scheidler Theatre , and the Post Office is the single outstanding example of the Neoclassical style . The commercial building at 210 East Washington Street is the District 's sole representative of the Art Moderne style of architecture . 
 Romanesque Revival architecture was very popular in Hartford City , and at least 7 of the District 's contributing buildings were built using this style . This style of architecture is known for round arches in many of the openings . Smooth surfaces , sometimes with belt courses are also typical . A variation of the Romanesque Revival architectural style known as Richardsonian Romanesque was popular in America near the end of the 19th century , when much of the construction around Hartford City 's courthouse took place . The courthouse and Presbyterian Church are outstanding examples of Henry Hobson Richardson 's variation in Romanesque Revival style . ( See photos herein . ) A corner tower , arched windows , recessed entrances , steeply pitched roofs , and multiple exterior textures ( rustication ) are typical of this style of architecture . The Richardsonian Romanesque buildings differ from the original Romanesque Revival buildings by having rough @-@ textured exterior surfaces instead of all @-@ smooth surfaces . The Hotel Ingram , Kirshbaum , and Weiler buildings were built in Romanesque Revival style with arched windows and multiple exterior textures , but they were not identified in the National Register of Historic Places Registration Form as Richardsonian ( see photos of all three buildings herein . ) 
 = = Boundaries = = 
 Located in the original center of the community , the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District includes significant portions of the city 's historic commercial district . The town was platted using the Public Land Survey System typical of Northwest Ordinance communities — with rectangular blocks , and streets running north @-@ south and east @-@ west . Hartford City 's layout of a courthouse surrounded by an open area was a common design in the " Midwest " of the United States . The Courthouse Square Historic District includes the courthouse and surrounding blocks . Franklin Street is the northern most street in the district , and Water Street borders part of the southern part of the district . The west side is past High Street almost to Walnut Street , and the east side reaches half a block past Monroe Street toward Mulberry Street . The adjacent diagram shows the district and its buildings . ( The buildings may not be exactly to scale . ) The property locations shown in orange are the sites of outstanding buildings of historic and / or architectural significance . Two of these buildings , the Blackford County Courthouse and the First Presbyterian Church , are listed in the National Register of Historic Places . The locations shown in bright green are for buildings considered notable in historic or architectural significance , and the buildings sites ( and one monument ) denoted in pale green contribute to the continuity of the district . The dark gray locations are for properties that do not contribute to the historic district . At least two contributing buildings have been torn down since the Courthouse Square District was added to the National Register . Two additional Gas Boom era buildings located nearby and often mentioned in Hartford City history , the Van Cleve Block and the Cooley Block , were gone by the time the District was nominated for the National Register . 
 = = Outstanding properties = = 
 The Historic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana , which has since been renamed Indiana Landmarks , identified seven properties within the Courthouse Square Historic District that have enough historic or architectural significance to potentially be listed in the National Register of Historic Places . These properties have been assigned a rating of " outstanding " , which is the top rating . The properties are assessed for their historic significance , architectural merit , environment , and integrity . All seven of the outstanding properties listed here are contributing properties to the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District , and two have already been listed in the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = = Blackford County Courthouse = = = 
 The Blackford County Courthouse was added to the National Register of Historic Places on August 11 , 1980 . Like most of the other buildings in the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District , the Blackford County Courthouse was built during the Indiana Gas Boom . The county 's original courthouse was condemned in 1893 , and removed to enable the construction of a new all @-@ stone structure . The courthouse was built by Christian Boseker & Son in 1894 . Designed by Arthur LaBelle and Burt L. French ( of Marion , Indiana ) , the courthouse features the Richardsonian Romanesque style of architecture . ( See adjacent photo . ) The building has two main entrances ( north side and south side ) that both open into a main hall . The walls feature marble paneling , and the ceilings are covered with paneled steel . ( Fireproofing was an important consideration for the courthouse construction plan . ) The magnificence in architecture and size of the courthouse dominates downtown Hartford City . The Blackford County Courthouse reflects the wealth of the city during the Gas Boom , and could be considered a monument to that era . Continuing the " monument " theme , the grounds of the courthouse are the location for American war memorials , including structures commemorating the Revolutionary War , World War I , World War II , Korean War , and Vietnam War . A Civil War monument was added in 2006 . 
 = = = First Presbyterian Church = = = 
 Hartford City 's First Presbyterian Church was added to the National Register of Historic Places on June 13 , 1986 . The building was designed by local architect Alec Gable , and built in the Richardsonian Romanesque style . Another monumental building built during the Indiana Gas Boom , construction of the church building started in 1892 , and was completed in 1893 . The church is the oldest church building in Hartford City . Located at the corner of Franklin and High Streets , the structure features huge stained @-@ glass windows that were installed by local glass workers . ( See photo herein . ) The chapel contains features a pipe organ that was partially funded by a donation made by businessman and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie . With only one major addition to the original structure , the exterior of the building looks almost the same as it did in the 1890s . 
 = = = Other outstanding properties = = = 
 Blackford County Jail The Blackford County Jail was completed in 1879 , and it is considered an outstanding example of the Italianate style of architecture . It is located at 120 East Main Street . The jail is the Courthouse District 's oldest contributing building still in existence . T. G. Tolan and Son was the architectural firm , and the firm of Hinkley and Norris ( of Indianapolis ) was the builder . 
 Campbell Building The Campbell Building was built in the Renaissance Revival style in 1901 . The two @-@ story building is crowned with a large gable that bears a limestone tablet that reads " 1901 Campbell " . This building has the addresses of 207 through 211 West Washington Street . This building was originally an office building , and some of the occupants in the early 1900s were an attorney , a dentist , insurance agents , a physician , a realtor , and a steamship agent . 
 Ervin Building The Ervin Building was built in the Queen Anne style around 1890 . It occupies the addresses of 201 through 205 West Washington Street . The facade of this corner building features three oriel windows . The name " Ervin " appears in stained @-@ glass in the center of the building . The Campbell & Ervin dry goods store was housed in this building in the 1890s and early 1900s . The store sold clothing , hats , and shoes . ( See 2010 photo herein ) 
 Kirshbaum Building The Kirshbaum Building was built in the Romanesque Revival style in 1893 . It is located on the corner of High and Washington Streets , with an address of 123 W. Washington Street . An early occupant was the city 's First National Bank , and its name is engraved in limestone on the building . The engraving " 1893 Kirshbaum " is located centrally atop the cornice . ( See 2010 photo of Briscoe Block and Kirshbaum Building , Kirshbaum Building is corner building on far right . ) Raphael Kirshbaum ( also spelled " <unk> " in earlier years ) was the builder of this building . Another building constructed for Kirshbaum in nearby Randolph County is listed in the National Register of Historic Places . Kirshbaum was a German merchant that sold goods in Portland , Union City , and Hartford City ( all in Indiana ) . At one time , he partnered with Adolph Weiler in Hartford City . ( See also section on Weiler 's Building . ) Eventually , Mr. Kirshbaum settled in Indianapolis , and was the key contributor for the Kirshbaum Center in that city . 
 United States Post Office Hartford City 's Post Office is one of the few buildings in the Courthouse District built during a period other than the Indiana Gas Boom . Built during the Great Depression , the project was Federal Public Works Number 207 . Construction began in 1934 , and was finished in 1935 . Designed by Louis A. Simon , the Post Office is the only example of the Neoclassical style of architecture in the Courthouse District . It is located at 123 South High Street . 
 = = Notable properties = = 
 The Historic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana has also identified five properties within the Courthouse Square Historic District that are above average in importance . After further research , these properties may have enough historic or architectural significance to be listed in the National Register of Historic Places . These properties have been assigned a rating of " notable " , which is just below the top rating . The properties are assessed for their historic significance , architectural merit , environment , and integrity . All five of the notable properties listed here are contributing properties to the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District . 
 210 East Washington Street Commercial Building This building was constructed around 1940 using the Art Modern style of architecture that evolved from Art Deco . This architectural style is not found elsewhere in the Courthouse District . 
 Hotel Ingram A three @-@ story building built in the Romanesque Revival style . This corner building occupies addresses of 118 through 122 North Jefferson Street , and is located at the corner of Jefferson and Main streets , which is the northeast corner of the courthouse square . ( See photo herein ) Hotel Ingram is written in limestone on the second story of the building 's facade . The building was constructed in 1893 , and opened to the public on January 9 , 1894 . The hotel originally had 45 guest rooms , and featured a large dining room with excellent food . The hotel building included a saloon known as the Ingram Bar . The Hotel Ingram 's grand opening included a dinner for about 150 guests , plus entertainment provided by the Montani Brothers ' orchestra . W. F. Crist was the hotel 's original proprietor . During the hotel 's first month in existence , it had 1 @,@ 200 " arrivals " . The building was also the site of the Ingram grocery . The hotel became known as the Hartford Hotel in 1922 . George D. Stevens , a local business executive and one of the community 's leading citizens , lived in a room at this hotel for many years during the first half of the 20th century . Stevens , who was described as " one of the richest men in Hartford City " , made news after his death when it was discovered that he was a black man living as a white man in a town that had become all white . 
 Knights of Pythias / Tyner Building Designed by A. W. Maxwell and constructed around 1900 , the building 's architecture is a mixture of Romanesque , Classical , and Queen Anne , and it is located at 204 – 210 West Main Street . ( See photo herein ) The three @-@ story building also has decorative limestone elements that resemble flames — possibly in tribute to the Gas Boom . " K of P " can be found on a western tablet , while " W.H. Tyner " can be found in the eastern panel . Among the offices in this Main Street building in the early 1900s were a confectioner , a doctor , and an attorney . The Knights of Pythias , Fraternal Order of Eagles , and Maccabees all held meetings in this building in the early 1900s . During a tumultuous period in the 1920s , the Ku Klux Klan had an office on the third floor of the building . Three events helped drive the Klan out of Hartford City — including one that happened in the Tyner building , and one that happened about four blocks away . First , a disturbing murder case against the state Klan leader disgusted many members . ( Charles E. Cox , uncle of local newsman and Cox Building owner Edward E. Cox , assisted in the prosecution of this case . ) Second , a safe in the Tyner Building was broken into , and the names of local Klan members were revealed . Third , violence that occurred at an event a few blocks from the courthouse caused the Hartford City mayor to order the local Klan leader out of town in 1926 . 
 Rosenbush Building The Renaissance Revival building was built around 1890 . Located at 110 West Main Street , the name Rosenbush can be found on the two @-@ story building , written on a limestone tablet . The building has terra cotta star @-@ like patterns on the brick above the windows . Tailor Aaron W. Rosenbush ran his business from this building in the early 1900s . The Rosenbush building was also the site of Rosenbush 's Royal Theatre , where silent movies were shown accompanied by piano . Years later , when the theater was closed , the building was the home of a tavern . 
 Scheidler Theater First owned by Matt Scheidler , this " very elegant and beautifully decorated " building was originally called the Hartford Theatre . Unlike most of the buildings in the district , this building was built after the Gas Boom , in 1947 . Its architectural style is Art Deco . The structure is located at 122 East Washington Street . 
 = = Other properties = = 
 Other properties , in addition to those listed as outstanding or notable , contribute to the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District . Many of these were also built during the Gas Boom . Some of the contributors are listed below . 
 The terminology used to describe the buildings of the Gas Boom era is slightly different from that used today . The term " block " was often used to describe the group of offices or stores located in a building instead of referring to the building . As can be seen in the boundaries diagram and descriptions herein , these " block " buildings did not occupy an entire city block , but they often had multiple storefronts or offices with multiple occupants . For example , the New York Times article from 1899 ( see below ) refers to the " Briscoe Block " instead of the Briscoe Building . The article also lists multiple businesses that occupied the building . Another example can be found in a business directory from the Gas Boom Era . Some of the attorneys ( and other businesses too ) listed their address as part of a " block " such as " Campbell Block " or " Tyner Block " . Most of the building names used herein rely on the building names found in either National Register forms or publications from the Historic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana . 
 Bank Block This two @-@ story building was constructed in the Commercial Italianate style in the 1880s . In the early 1900s , Citizen 's State Bank was located at the 102 North Jefferson Street address . A law firm and barber also listed " Bank Block " as their addresses . The southern portion of the original building still has much of its original appearance . It is located at the corner of Jefferson and Washington streets , with an address of 100 North Jefferson Street . However , the northern portion has been substantially remodeled , and is now considered a separate building . The words " Bank Block " are on the northern portion that occupies addresses of 102 and 104 North Jefferson Street . All of the north building 's Commercial Italianate features are now removed . The Historic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana 's Blackford County Interim Report has a picture , on page 63 , of the entire magnificent building circa 1900 . 
 Briscoe Building This two @-@ story Romanesque Revival building was constructed in 1893 , and occupies the addresses of 113 through 121 West Washington Street . Three colors of brick are found on the facade , effectively dividing the building into three sections . ( Adjacent photo shows building in 2010 . ) While the county 's new courthouse was being constructed in 1893 and 1894 , Blackford County 's courtroom and office of the county clerk were located in two rooms in this building . In 1899 , this building , described as the " Briscoe Block " , was originally thought to have been destroyed by fire . However , the fire destroyed the roof of the building , and the remaining portion of the building escaped significant damage . The damage to the building was repaired , and the Briscoe Building still stands today . Occupants at the time of the 1899 fire included Kentucky Liquors , Western Union , Central Telephone , a grocer , and the J. L. Hoover Furniture Company — which later became long @-@ time local retailer Hoover @-@ Needler Furniture . 
 Cox Building Located at 217 North Jefferson Street ( Jefferson and Franklin streets ) , the Cox Building is simply identified as " Commercial Building " in the District 's National Register of Historic Places Registration Form . An industrial building originally used for printing newspapers such as Hartford City 's Telegram , its architecture style has some Craftsman influences . The original building was designed by local architect P. J. Loney in 1895 , and owned by newsman and prominent Democrat Edward E. Cox . The Cox Building was expanded to its present size around 1915 . 
 Dowell Building Located at 107 – 109 West Washington Street , the Dowell building was constructed in 1893 using the Italianate style of architecture . Frank P. Dowell maintained an office in this building , conducting transactions related to real estate such as loans , mortgages , insurance , and titles . A notary public , he was also involved in buying , selling , and renting property . Frank Dowell 's father is Jessie H. Dowell , founder and president of Hartford City Natural Gas and Oil Company . In 1887 , this company drilled the city 's first successful natural gas well . The Dowell building is located on the south side of the square , east of the adjacent Briscoe Block . 
 W.H. Gable Block This two @-@ story Commercial Italianate building was constructed in 1891 , and occupies the addresses of 118 through 122 West Main Street . Five brick pilasters divide it into three storefronts and a stairway to the upstairs offices . " W.H. Gable 1891 " appears in the center of the cornice . William H. Gable participated in the California Gold Rush in 1850 through 1852 , and returned with enough money to begin various business interests , including furniture , undertaking , and real estate . The W. H. Gable business block was eventually built on land that was Gable 's first real estate investment . 
 Griffin Buildings Two Griffin buildings are located side by side with addresses of 106 and 108 East Washington Street . The name " Griffin " can be found on the cornice of both buildings . Both were constructed around 1900 . The 106 East Washington Street building was built in the Romanesque Revival style , and a second source believes this building was constructed in the 1890s . The Russell Lewis saloon was located at the 108 East Washington address during the early 1900s . 
 E. Smilack Building The E. Smilack Building is located at 203 East Washington Street . The building was constructed around 1910 using the Craftsman style of architecture . A stone tablet above the second floor says “ E. Smilack ” . Elbert Smilack was a well @-@ educated Russian , originally named <unk> , who immigrated to the United States in 1899 . After brief stays in Philadelphia , Chicago , and Michigan , he found steady employment in Marion , Indiana . Smilack saved enough money to move to Hartford City with a horse and buggy – and 35 cents in his pocket . A friend loaned him five dollars to start a junk business . After about a decade in the business , Smilack was involved in scrap iron , metals , hides , fur , and wool . He also became a provider of coal and firewood . Smilack prospered enough that he was able to invest in land and oil wells . By 1914 , he was considered one of the wealthier men in Blackford County . Smilack , along with other family members , was killed on July 22 , 1922 , when his automobile was struck by a passenger train . 
 Sowers & Gough Drugstore This corner building , located at 200 West Main Street , was originally built around 1910 , and remodeled using the Art Deco style of architecture around 1940 . The Sowers & Gough Drugstore was originally across the street , but Gough bought the building at the 200 West Main street address and moved the drugstore after Sowers ' health failed . Cecil Gough 's drugstore became a favored gathering place during the 1930s and 1940s , as the store had a soda fountain and seating . The drugstore was bought by Merrit Tams in 1947 , and was later run by Pat <unk> as <unk> 's Drugstore . A 2010 photo of building , painted white and no longer a drugstore , is shown herein ( notable properties section ) . 
 Weiler Building Completed in 1896 according to the engraving at the top of the building , the three @-@ story structure was built in the Romanesque Revival style . The Weiler name , written on a limestone tablet , can be found on the third story . The uppermost portion of the building above the windows features terracotta rosettes and faces of men . The building is located at 104 West Main Street . This building housed the Weiler Brothers department store , and later a Montgomery Ward store . At one time , the Weiler Brothers store housed in this building was thought to be one of the largest department stores in Indiana . During construction , over 250 feet of glass cases were ordered , and the interior furniture was said to be " equal to that in any store in the large cities . " The store employed 80 people during the " busy season " in the early 1900s . The Weiler brothers originally involved with the store at this location were German immigrants Abraham , Adolph R. , and Meyer M. Weiler . Abraham Weiler was also on the board of directors of the Hartford City Gas and Oil Company that had the first gas well in town . Abraham Weiler became involved with dry goods when he moved to Union City , Indiana , and worked with Raphael Kirshbaum . ( See Kirshbaum Building , section above . ) They later established Kirshbaum & Weiler in Hartford City , Indiana , and Weiler eventually purchased Kirshbaum 's share of the business . The Weiler Brothers store was established in 1878 , and moved to the Weiler 's Building in 1896 . Products sold included hardware , furniture , clothing , carpets , crockery , glassware , boots and shoes . Because of Ku Klux Klan @-@ led boycotts of Jewish and Catholic merchants , Hartford City 's Weiler store closed during the 1920s . On April 14 , 2014 , this building partially collapsed . Most of the damage was to the roof and the rear of the building . On June 12 , 2014 the building was demolished . 
 World War I Memorial Hartford City 's Blackford County courthouse lawn is the home of numerous war memorials . The World War I memorial was the first of the four larger memorials to be located at the corners of the courthouse lawn . It was dedicated on September 28 , 1921 . James Taylor , president of Taylor University , was the dedication ceremony speaker . The sculptor was Ernest Moore Viquesney . The sculpture is known as the " Spirit of the American Doughboy " , and this particular version was the third one erected . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Hartford City Courthouse Historic District is eligible for the National Register under two criteria . First , a number of events influenced the development of the area ( Criterion A ) , most notable the establishment of Hartford City as the county seat , and the Indiana Gas Boom . The district is the historic center of Blackford County 's commercial , social , and governmental activity . As county seat , the courthouse and nearby offices became the focus of Blackford County government . In the late 1880s , the Indiana Gas Boom brought major growth and prosperity to the region , resulting in the construction of numerous commercial , retail , and social facilities in the area surrounding the courthouse . Later , during the 1920s , the courthouse square was the site for events involving the Ku Klux Klan . 
 The second reason the district is significant is its collection of buildings and their architectural styles ( Criterion C ) . Most of these buildings were constructed during the Indiana Gas Boom in the late 19th century or early 20th century , and have many of their original features . Three styles of architecture , Italianate , Renaissance Revival , and Romanesque Revival are all well represented , and additional styles can also be found . 
 = Ni no Kuni = 
 Ni no Kuni ( Japanese : 二ノ国 ) is a series of role @-@ playing games developed by Level @-@ 5 . The first games in the series chiefly follow the young Oliver , and his journey to another world to save his mother and stop the beckoning evil . An upcoming game will follow Evan <unk> <unk> , a boy king who is usurped from his castle , and sets out to reclaim his kingdom . The games utilize several magic elements , allowing players to use magical abilities during gameplay , as well as creatures known as imajinn / familiars , which can be tamed for suitability during battle . 
 Conceived as a project for Level @-@ 5 's tenth anniversary , Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn was released in December 2010 for the Nintendo DS . An enhanced version of the game for the PlayStation 3 , Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch , was released in Japan in November 2011 . The games were developed separately , retaining similar stories , but featuring significant artwork , graphics and specification changes . A localized version of the game was published in Western regions by Namco Bandai Games in January 2013 . A sequel , Ni no Kuni II : Revenant Kingdom , was announced in December 2015 for the PlayStation 4 . Two mobile games have also been released : Hotroit Stories in December 2010 through the Roid service , and Daibouken Monsters in May 2012 through the GREE service . The former follows the story of Oliver and Mark as they try to find parts for a car , and the latter is a social card game in which players collect cards featuring imajinn . 
 The animated sequences for Dominion of the Dark Djinn and Wrath of the White Witch were produced by Studio Ghibli , and the original score was composed by Joe Hisaishi and Rei Kondoh . The artwork was also greatly inspired by Studio Ghibli 's other productions . The character development — particularly that of Oliver and his friends — was a large focus of development , and was intended to make children empathize with the characters and for adults to relive their adolescence . The developers chose to initially develop for the Nintendo DS due to its suitability for gameplay , and later used the power of the PlayStation 3 to its full potential to render the world with great detail . 
 Games in the series have been praised as being among the best modern role @-@ playing games . Reviewers mostly aimed their praise at particular elements of the games : visual design , and its resemblance to Studio Ghibli 's previous work ; characters and story , for their believability and complexity ; the soundtrack , and Hisaishi 's ability to capture the essence of the game world ; and the unique gameplay , particularly for its ability to blend formulas from other role @-@ playing game franchises . The games also won awards from several gaming publications . In March 2014 , Bandai Namco reported that the series had sold more than 1 @.@ 7 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Games = = 
 Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn was released in Japan on December 9 , 2010 , for the Nintendo DS . After his mother dies , Oliver sets out on a journey to another world to save her . Alongside the fairy Shizuku , Oliver meets Maru and Jairo on the way , who assist him on journey . After retrieving three magical stones to complete a wand to defeat Jabou , Oliver discovers that he cannot save his mother , but vows to protect the world regardless . He defeats Jabou , who uses his power to ensure that Oliver does not die as well . 
 Ni no Kuni : Hotroit Stories was released in Japan on December 9 , 2010 , for mobile devices through the Roid service . It follows the story of Oliver and his friend , who create a custom car by finding parts around Hotroit , eventually making their way to an abandoned factory and encountering creatures . 
 Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch was released for the PlayStation 3 in Japan on November 17 , 2011 , and published in Western regions by Namco Bandai Games in January 2013 . The game is an enhanced version of Dominion of the Dark Djinn ; the plot is almost identical , featuring an extended ending . Some character names were also changed ; Shizuku was changed to Drippy , Maru to Esther , Jairo to Swaine , Lars to <unk> , and Jabou to Shadar , among others . After Shadar is defeated , the White Witch appears and casts a spell that turns the citizens into undead @-@ like creatures . When Oliver and his friends reverse the spell , they discover that the White Witch was once a young queen called Cassiopeia who had noble intentions , but was manipulated into wanting the destruction of the world . After Oliver defeats the White Witch , she is restored to her former self , and declares to dedicate her life to making amends for her actions . Oliver then returns to his old life in Motorville . 
 Ni no Kuni : Daibouken Monsters was released in Japan on May 11 , 2012 , for mobile devices through the GREE service . Players travel to another world and collect cards featuring imajinn . An occupant of the other world is trapped in every card ; by flipping the card , players have the ability to use the occupant 's abilities during battles . 
 Ni no Kuni II : Revenant Kingdom was announced at PlayStation Experience in December 2015 , in development for the PlayStation 4 . The story follows King Evan <unk> <unk> , who is usurped from his castle , and sets out to reclaim his kingdom . He is aided by Roland , a visitor from another world . 
 = = Common elements = = 
 The series consists of four role @-@ playing games and one social card game . Each game typically features a third @-@ person camera . The player controls the player character in a combination of combat and puzzle game elements to achieve goals and complete the story . Hotroit Stories is the only installment to feature an overhead perspective , while Daibouken Monsters is played as a card game , with no character movement . All games in the series feature a battle mode . During battles , player command a single human ally . To fight enemies in the main game , players use magical abilities or familiars ; in Hotroit Stories , players attack using items such as dry ice for similar effects , while Daibouken Monsters limits players to using familiars only . The battle mode in Wrath of the White Witch is on an open battlefield , allowing players to freely roam around the area , while Dominion of the Dark Djinn employs a grid layout , whereby players can create formations to avoid attacks . 
 The main games in the series use a third @-@ person perspective . Players complete quests — linear scenarios with set objectives — to progress through the story . Outside of quests , players can freely roam the open world . Players explore towns , villages , dungeons and dangerous places scattered throughout the world . One of the core aspects of the games is the ability to travel between worlds ; the majority of the games take place in a magical world , often referred to as the " other world " , while part of the games take place in Oliver 's hometown . Upon leaving a location , players enter the World Map , which can be navigated , or used to select a destination . The world may be fully explored from the beginning of the game without restrictions , although story progress unlocks more gameplay content and forms of transport to navigate the world . In the main games , players initially run to navigate the world , though later gain the ability to travel by boat ; Wrath of the White Witch adds the ability to ride on the back of a dragon . 
 Familiars , known as imajinn ( <unk> ) in the Japanese version of the games , are creatures that wander throughout the game world . They can be found in different shapes and forms , and can be obtained after being defeated in battle . They can then be tamed , in order to be suitable to send out in battle to fight for players . Players command familiars , who generally have a range of magic and physical attacks . Familiars level up and evolve alongside the human characters ; each have unique statistics and capabilities , and can be guided through their upgrades with treats and equipped with items . 
 = = Development = = 
 Conceived as a project for Level @-@ 5 's tenth anniversary , Ni no Kuni : The Another World was announced in the September 2008 issue of Famitsu , as a title for the Nintendo DS . In June 2010 , Level @-@ 5 announced that the game would also be released for the PlayStation 3 , with significant differences ; the DS version was renamed Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn , while the PlayStation 3 version was given the title Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch . Both versions were revealed to be in development separately , only retaining the same " story axle " , while features such as artwork , graphics and specifications all received significant changes . Journalists noted that the game 's announcement ignited widespread anticipation within the gaming industry . 
 Level @-@ 5 collaborated with Studio Ghibli to produce the game 's animated sequences , and the game features graphics and visuals replicating the traditional animation style of Studio Ghibli films . The collaboration began when musician Naoya Fujimaki , who had previously worked with both companies , introduced Level @-@ 5 president Akihiro Hino to Studio Ghibli president Toshio Suzuki . At the time , Studio Ghibli had completed work on Ponyo ( 2008 ) , and the animation team had no ongoing projects , which influenced Suzuki 's decision to collaborate with Level @-@ 5 . Another influencing factor of the collaboration was witnessing Hino 's passion for the project . Studio Ghibli approached the production process in the same way that they would create an animated film . Work on the animation began in July 2008 , and took much longer than the predicted three months . 
 For Dominion of the Dark Djinn , the development team found that the Nintendo DS was best suited to the game 's development . Alongside the launch of Dominion of the Dark Djinn on December 9 , 2010 , Level @-@ 5 also launched the first chapter of Hotroit Stories , titled " Oliver and Mark " ( <unk> 〜 <unk> ) , for mobile devices via the Roid service . Wrath of the White Witch was developed for the PlayStation 3 . The team planned to bring the game to the console from the beginning of development , but opted to work on the DS version of the game beforehand due to the larger number of DS users in Japan at the time . The team found they could render the game world with great detail , using the hardware to its full potential to present the animation , world and music . Hino felt that the PlayStation 3 version allowed the game 's music to accompany the imagery , which was not possible on the DS version . 
 Following the Japanese launch of Wrath of the White Witch on November 17 , 2011 , Level @-@ 5 developed Daibouken Monsters . The development of the game is the result of a comprehensive partnership between Level @-@ 5 and GREE , which resulted in the former developing three titles for the latter . Early registrations for the game began on March 21 , 2012 , and it launched for mobile devices through the GREE service on May 11 , 2012 . 
 Level @-@ 5 worked with localization company <unk> to translate Wrath of the White Witch for Western regions ; the two studios collaborated for many weeks . The team found great difficulty when localizing the game for Western regions , particularly due to the large amounts of text and audio that required translation . Other minor changes to the artwork and animation also occurred , such as making Oliver bow in a Western manner . By December 12 , 2012 , development on the localized version of Wrath of the White Witch stopped as the game was submitted for manufacturing . It was released in North America on January 22 , 2013 , in Australia on January 31 , and in Europe on February 1 . 
 Ni no Kuni II : Revenant Kingdom was announced at PlayStation Experience on December 5 , 2015 . It will be released for the PlayStation 4 on an unannounced date , and may later release on other platforms . Studio Ghibli will not have direct involvement with the game . Hino said that the game would better fulfill the ambitions of the original game , with deeper stories and improved visuals . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 When Studio Ghibli agreed to produce the animated sequences of Ni no Kuni , they contacted Joe Hisaishi to work on the game 's music . Hisaishi , who previously worked with Studio Ghibli on films such as Princess Mononoke ( 1997 ) and Spirited Away ( 2001 ) , met with Level @-@ 5 producer and writer Akihiro Hino . After witnessing Hino 's passion for the project , Hisaishi agreed to work on the game 's soundtrack . Rei Kondoh also created background music for the score , and all in @-@ game music was performed by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra . " Kokoro no Kakera " , the theme song for Dominion of the Dark Djinn and Wrath of the White Witch , was written by Hisaishi ; his daughter Mai Fujisawa performed the song in Japanese , while chorister Archie Buchanan performed the English version . The team found great difficulty in selecting a performer for the English version , though ultimately settled upon Buchanan due to his ability to convey the " vulnerability and innocence " of the game 's characters in a " moving and powerful performance " . For the orchestral music to fit onto the Nintendo DS at a high quality , Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn was shipped on a 4 @-@ gigabit game card . Hisaishi also worked on the score for Ni no Kuni II : Revenant Kingdom . 
 Two Ni no Kuni soundtracks were commercially released . An album titled Ni no Kuni : Shikkoku no Madoushi Original Soundtrack was released in Japan on February 9 , 2011 , featuring music from Dominion of the Dark Djinn . A two @-@ disc soundtrack was later released on March 28 , 2013 ; the first disc is a re @-@ release of the Japanese soundtrack , while the second disc contains additional tracks from Wrath of the White Witch . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The first two main games were very well received , with praise particularly directed at the visual design , characters and story , soundtrack , and unique gameplay . Dominion of the Dark Djinn scored 38 / 40 from Japanese publication Famitsu , who felt that the game 's elements are effectively utilized to maintain excitement . Michael Baker of RPGamer named it the " best overall game " at the time , and Janelle Hindman of RPGLand wrote that the game is " a reminder of why people used to flock to the JRPG genre in the first place " . Nintendo Gamer 's Matthew Castle called it " one of the best experiences on DS " . Wrath of the White Witch also received critical acclaim . It received 85 out of 100 from Metacritic , indicating " generally favorable reviews " , and 86 % from GameRankings . Colin Moriarty of IGN named it " one of the best RPGs " , and among the best PlayStation 3 exclusives , and Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot wrote that it joins the " hallmark of the greatest RPGs " . 
 The artistic design of Dominion of the Dark Djinn and Wrath of the White Witch received acclaim , being favorably compared to Studio Ghibli 's previous work ; Stephanie Bendixsen of Good Game called the art " vibrant and exciting " , noting that it " brings the game to life in the most beautiful way " . The story and characters were also well received , with IGN 's Moriarty naming them among the game 's standout features and Edge praising the believable and complex characters . Critics considered the games ' music to be appropriate for gameplay ; Jim Sterling of Destructoid compared the soundtrack favorably to Dragon Quest VIII , and RPGLand 's Hindman lauded the music as " gorgeously crafted " . The gameplay and combat system polarized reviews ; some reviewers found it a refreshing mix of styles from other role @-@ playing games , with Joystiq 's Sinan Kubba calling it a " triumph " , while others noted its difficulty , and similarity to similar games . 
 The game 's received multiple nominations and awards from several gaming publications . Dominion of the Dark Djinn won the award for Future Division from the Japan Game Awards in 2009 and 2010 , and the Excellence Award in 2011 , and also awarded the Rookie Award from Famitsu in 2011 . Wrath of the White Witch appeared on several year @-@ end lists of the best role @-@ playing games of 2013 , receiving wins from Destructoid , Game Revolution , GameTrailers , IGN , the 18th Satellite Awards and the Spike VGX 2013 Awards . It also received Best Game from The Huffington Post , Best Sound from Cheat Code Central , and Excellence in Animation at the SXSW Gaming Awards . At the 13th National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers Awards , it received multiple wins , including awards for Animation , Art Direction , Original Light Mix Score , Original Family Game , as well as Original / Adapted Song for " Kokoro no Kakera " . 
 In March 2014 , Namco Bandai reported that the two main games had collectively sold more than 1 @.@ 7 million copies worldwide , with Wrath of the White Witch selling over 1 @.@ 1 million copies alone . By the end of 2011 , it was reported that Dominion of the Dark Djinn sold over 560 @,@ 000 units ; it was the 33rd best @-@ selling game in Japan in 2010 , and the 45th best @-@ selling in 2011 . Following the release of Wrath of the White Witch in the United Kingdom , it topped the charts , selling out in many stores across the region . 
 = Pattern Recognition ( novel ) = 
 Pattern Recognition is a novel by science fiction writer William Gibson published in 2003 . Set in August and September 2002 , the story follows Cayce Pollard , a 32 @-@ year @-@ old marketing consultant who has a psychological sensitivity to corporate symbols . The action takes place in London , Tokyo , and Moscow as Cayce judges the effectiveness of a proposed corporate symbol and is hired to seek the creators of film clips anonymously posted to the internet . 
 The novel 's central theme involves the examination of the human desire to detect patterns or meaning and the risks of finding patterns in meaningless data . Other themes include methods of interpretation of history , cultural familiarity with brand names , and tensions between art and commercialization . The September 11 , 2001 attacks are used as a motif representing the transition to the new century . Critics identify influences in Pattern Recognition from Thomas Pynchon 's postmodern detective story The Crying of Lot 49 . 
 Pattern Recognition is Gibson 's eighth novel and his first one to be set in the contemporary world . Like his previous work , it has been classified as a science fiction and postmodern novel , with the action unfolding along a thriller plot line . Critics approved of the writing but found the plot unoriginal and some of the language distracting . The book peaked at number four on the New York Times Best Seller list , was nominated for the 2003 British Science Fiction Association Award , and was shortlisted for the 2004 Arthur C. Clarke Award and Locus Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before writing Pattern Recognition , the author , William Gibson , published seven novels ( one co @-@ written ) and numerous short stories beginning in 1977 . His previous novel , All Tomorrow 's Parties , was published in October 1999 as the conclusion of the Bridge trilogy . Pattern Recognition was written between 2001 and 2002 while Gibson was living in Vancouver , British Columbia and released in February 2003 . Pattern Recognition was originally intended to be a stand @-@ alone novel , but afterwards Gibson wrote Spook Country and Zero History which take place in the same universe and use some of the same characters . 
 Gibson traveled to Tokyo in 2001 to prepare for this new novel , which takes place in London , Moscow , and Tokyo . He did not travel to London or Moscow but used interviews with friends and internet resources for research . In September 2001 Gibson had written about 100 pages but was struggling to finish . He stopped writing after watching the September 11 , 2001 attacks on television and " realized [ the novel ] had become a story that took place in an alternate time track , in which Sept . 11 hadn 't happened " . He considered abandoning the novel but a few weeks later re @-@ wrote portions to use the attacks as a motivating factor for the distress the main character feels . In a 2003 interview he said , " There I was , in the winter of 2001 , with no idea what the summer of 2002 was going to be like . ... In the original post @-@ 9 / 11 draft , London felt more like London is feeling right now . Cayce keeps seeing trucks full of soldiers . But I took that out , because as it got closer to the time , it wasn 't actually happening . " 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Advertising consultant Cayce Pollard , who reacts to logos and advertising as if to an allergen , arrives in London in August 2002 . She is working on a contract with the marketing firm Blue Ant to judge the effectiveness of a proposed corporate logo for a shoe company . During the presentation , graphic designer Dorotea Benedetti becomes hostile towards Cayce as she rejects the first proposal . After dinner with some Blue Ant employees , the company founder Hubertus Bigend offers Cayce a new contract : to uncover who is responsible for distributing a series of anonymous , artistic film clips via the internet . Cayce had been following the film clips and participating in an online discussion forum theorizing on the clips ' meaning , setting , and other aspects . Wary of corrupting the artistic process and mystery of the clips , she reluctantly accepts . Cayce is not entirely comfortable with Ivy 's chat group called " Fetish : Footage : Forum " ( or F : F : F ) , as shown by the following excerpt : 
 There are perhaps twenty regular posters on F : F : F , and some much larger and uncounted number of <unk> . And right now there are three people in Chat , but there 's no way of knowing exactly who until you are in there , and the chat room she finds not so comforting . It 's strange even with friends , like sitting in a pitch @-@ dark cellar conversing with people at a distance of about fifteen feet . 
 A friend from the discussion group , who uses the handle Parkaboy , privately emails her saying a friend of a friend has discovered an encrypted watermark on one clip . They concoct a fake persona , a young woman named Keiko , to seduce the Japanese man who knows the watermark code . Cayce , along with an American computer security specialist , Boone Chu , hired to assist her , travels to Tokyo to meet the man and retrieve the watermark code . Two men attempt to steal the code but Cayce escapes and travels back to London . Boone travels to Columbus , Ohio to investigate the company that he believes created the watermark . Meanwhile , Blue Ant hires Dorotea who reveals that she was previously employed by a Russian lawyer whose clients have been investigating Cayce . The clients wanted Cayce to refuse the job of tracking the film clips and it was Dorotea 's responsibility to ensure this . 
 Through a completely random encounter Cayce meets Voytek <unk> and <unk> , the former an artist using old ZX81 microcomputers as a sculpture medium , the latter a collector of rare technology ( he mentions purchasing Stephen King 's word processor , for example ) . Another collector , and sometime ' friend ' of <unk> 's , Hobbs Baranov , is a retired cryptographer and mathematician with connections in the American National Security Agency . Cayce strikes a deal with him : she buys a Curta calculator for him and he finds the email address to which the watermark code was sent . Using this email address Cayce makes contact with Stella Volkova whose sister Nora is the maker of the film clips . 
 Cayce flies to Moscow to meet Stella in person and watch Nora work . Nora is brain damaged from an assassination attempt and can only express herself through film . At her hotel , Cayce is intercepted and drugged by Dorotea and wakes up in a mysterious prison facility . Cayce escapes ; exhausted , disoriented and lost , she nearly collapses as Parkaboy , who upon Cayce 's request was flown to Moscow , retrieves her and brings her to the prison where the film is processed . There Hubertus , Stella and Nora 's uncle Andrei , and the latter 's security employees are waiting for her . Over dinner with Cayce , the Russians reveal that they have been spying on her since she posted to a discussion forum speculating that the clips may be controlled by the Russian Mafia . They had let her track the clips to expose any security breaches in their distribution network . The Russians surrender all the information they had collected on her father 's disappearance and the book ends with Cayce coming to terms with his absence while in Paris with Parkaboy , whose real name is Peter Gilbert . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Cayce Pollard – A 32 @-@ year @-@ old woman who lives in New York City . She pronounces her given name " Case " although her parents named her after Edgar Cayce . She uses her interest in marketing trends and fads , and her psychological sensitivity to logos and advertising , in her work as an advertising consultant . Her sensitivity becomes a phobia towards older corporate mascots , especially the Michelin Man . She wears only black , gray or white , usually Fruit of the Loom shrunken cotton T @-@ shirts ( all tags removed ) with Levis jeans ( with the trademarks filed off the buttons ) or skirts , tights , boots , as well as a Buzz Rickson MA @-@ 1 bomber jacket . 
 Hubertus Bigend – The 35 @-@ year @-@ old founder of advertising agency Blue Ant . He was born in Belgium but educated at a British boarding school and at Harvard University . 
 Dorotea Benedetti – The representative of the graphic design company . She has a background in industrial espionage and is secretly hired to encourage Cayce to leave London without accepting Bigend 's offer to track the film clips . 
 Bernard Stonestreet – A representative of the advertising agency Blue Ant . 
 " Parkaboy " / Peter Gilbert – Cayce 's friend from the online discussion forum . He lives in Chicago and describes himself as a " middle @-@ aged white guy since 1967 " . 
 Boone Chu – A Chinese @-@ American living in Washington State , but raised in Oklahoma . He had a failed start @-@ up company specializing in security . He is hired to assist Cayce in the search for the maker of the footage . 
 Voytek <unk> – A blond man born in Poland and raised in Russia . He acquires and sells antique calculators to raise funds for an exhibition on Sinclair ZX81 computers . 
 Damien Pease – A 30 @-@ year @-@ old friend of Cayce whose flat she stays at while in London . He is a video director shooting a documentary on WWII battleground excavation near Stalingrad . 
 Hobbs Baranov – A former NSA cryptographer and mathematician . He collects antique calculators and sells intelligence as he squats near Poole with a Gypsy group . 
 Ivy – Creator of website , discussion group , and chatroom Fetish : Footage : Forum that Cayce frequents . The website 's intention is to discuss the anonymous film postings . 
 = = Style and story elements = = 
 The novel uses a third @-@ person narrative in the present tense with a somber tone reminiscent of a " low @-@ level post @-@ apocalypticism " . Cayce 's memories of the September 11 , 2001 attacks , which briefly use the future tense , are told by Gibson as " a <unk> seed of time " , as one reviewer calls it , because of the monistic and lyrical descriptions of Cayce 's relationship to objects with the attacks in the background . Two neologisms appear in the novel : gender @-@ bait and mirror @-@ world . Gibson created the term mirror @-@ world to acknowledge a locational @-@ specific distinction in a manufactured object that emerged from a parallel development process , for example opposite @-@ side driving or varied electrical outlets . Gender @-@ bait refers to a male posing as a female online to elicit positive responses . The term <unk> , not coined by Gibson but used in the marketing industry for several years , is used to describe Cayce 's profession of identifying the roots of emerging trends . 
 The September 11 , 2001 attacks are used as a motif representing a break with the past with Cayce 's father , who disappears during the attacks , as the personification of the 20th century . Gibson viewed the attacks as a nodal point after which " nothing is really the same " . One reviewer commented that in " Gibson 's view , 9 @-@ 11 was the end of history ; after it we are without a history , careening toward an unknown future without the benefit of a past — our lives before 9 @-@ 11 are now irrelevant . " Cayce 's search for her father and Damien 's excavation of the German bomber symbolize the historicist search for a method to interpret people 's actions in the past . Coming to terms with her father 's disappearance may be interpreted as a requiem for those lost to the 20th century , something that may have been influenced by Gibson coming to terms with the loss of his own father . 
 The film clips are a motif used to enhance the theme of the desire to find meaning or detect patterns . They are released over the internet and gain a cult following , in the same way that the lonelygirl15 <unk> gained an international following in 2006 . Corporate interest in the footage is aroused by its originality and global distribution methods . The characters debate whether the anonymous clips are part of a complete narrative or a work in progress , and when or where they were shot . This enigmatic nature of the footage is said to metaphorically represent the nature of the confusing and uncertain post @-@ 9 / 11 future . The author Dennis Danvers has remarked that the footage being edited down to a single frame is like the world compressed into a single novel . The footage , released freely to a global audience with a lack of time or place indicators , has also been contrasted to Pattern Recognition written under contract for a large corporation and which uses liminal name @-@ dropping that definitively sets it in London , Tokyo , and Moscow in 2002 . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 = = = Pattern recognition = = = 
 The central theme throughout the novel involves the natural human propensity to search for meaning with the constant risk of apophenia . Followers of the seemingly random clips seek connections and meaningfulness in them but are revealed to be victims of apophenia as the clips are just edited surveillance camera footage . Likewise , Cayce 's mother turns to investigating electronic voice phenomena after Cayce 's father disappears . Science fiction critic Thomas Wagner underscores the desire for meaning , or pattern recognition , using a comparison between the film clips and Cayce 's search for her father after the attacks : 
 [ T ] he very randomness and ineffability of the clips flies in the face of our natural human tendency towards pattern recognition ... [ T ] he subculture that surrounds " following the footage " ... [ is ] an effective plot device for underscoring the novel 's post @-@ 9 / 11 themes : to wit , the uncertainty of the fabric of day @-@ to @-@ day life people began to feel following that event … [ We ] as people don 't like uncertainty , don 't like knowing that there 's something we can 't comprehend . And if we can 't fit something into an existing pattern , then by golly we 'll come up with one . 
 Within the marketing world , Cayce is portrayed not as an outside rebel , but rather a paragon of the system . <unk> within the system , she seeks an epistemological perspective to objectively interpret patterns . The review in The Village Voice calls this search " a survival tactic within the context of no context — dowsing for meaning , and sometimes settling for the illusion of meaning " . 
 = = = Memory of history = = = 
 Using 20th @-@ century relics , such as a Curta calculator , an excavated Stuka , Hobbs Baranov , and Voytek 's planned ZX81 show , Gibson raises the question of how a contemporary society views past societies . Gibson portrays the past century as dominated by conflict , suspicion , and espionage . Following the disappearance of Cayce 's father , a designer of embassy security systems , on September 11 , 2001 , Cayce is left feeling " <unk> " until she reviews footage and records of that day tracking his movements until he vanishes . 
 Following this line of thought Gibson raises the question of how the future will view today 's society . The novel " adopts a postmodern historicism " perspective , through the arguments presented by Bigend , Cayce , and Parkaboy . Bigend and Cayce 's view of history are compared to those of philosopher Benedetto Croce in that they believe history is open for interpretation when re @-@ written from the frame of reference of another society . Parkaboy rejects this view , believing that history can be an exact science . 
 = = = Originality and monoculture = = = 
 The book explores a tension between originality and monoculture by focusing on the artist 's relationship with a commercialized world and its marketing of free art and consumer products . Critic Lisa Zeidner argues that the artist 's " loyalty and love " involved with creating originality counters Bigend 's assertion that everything is a reflection of something else and that the creative process no longer rests with the individual . Commercialism is portrayed as a monoculture that assimilates originality . The Tommy Hilfiger brand is used as an example , " simulacra of simulacra of simulacra . A dilute tincture of Ralph Lauren , who had himself diluted the glory days of Brooks Brothers , who themselves had stepped on the product of Jermyn Street and Savile Row ... There must be some Tommy Hilfiger event horizon , beyond which it is impossible to be more derivative , more removed from the source , more devoid of soul . " 
 One critic points out that the marketing agency Blue Ant is named after the wasp Blue Ant : " it 's a wasp with a painful sting . The female hunts for a ground @-@ dwelling cricket . She paralyses it with a sting and lays her egg on it . The still living yet immobile cricket becomes food for the wasp 's young . What a clever metaphor for the process of targeting , <unk> , and marketing cool . " On the other hand , as Rudy Rucker notes , while new art is constantly threatened by commodification , it is dependent on the monoculture for its launching point and uniqueness . Gibson 's product positioning language and Cayce 's analysis of consumerist trends show that society is not a victim of consumerism , but rather its creator who helps shape it without ever stepping outside it . Alex Link argues that rather than a simple attack on consumerism outright , the novel outlines a complex interrelationship between art , brand design , and terrorism as varying attitudes to history , terror , and community . 
 = = = Branding , identity , and globalization = = = 
