 Bede addressed his work In regum <unk> XXX <unk> to Nothhelm , who had asked the thirty questions on the biblical book of Kings that Bede answered . Bede 's work De VIII <unk> may have been written for Nothhelm . While he was archbishop , Boniface wrote to him , requesting a copy of the Libellus responsionum of Pope Gregory I for use in Boniface 's missionary efforts . Boniface also asked for information on when the Gregorian mission to England arrived in England . This text of the Libellus responsionum has been the subject of some controversy , with the historian Suso Brechter arguing that the text was a forgery created by Nothhelm and a Roman archdeacon . The historian Paul Meyvaert has refuted this view , and most historians incline towards the belief that the text is genuine , although it is not considered conclusively proven . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Nothhelm died on 17 October 739 @.@ and was buried in Canterbury Cathedral . He is considered a saint , and his feast day is 17 October . The antiquaries and writers John Leland , John Bale , and Thomas Tanner all felt that Nothhelm was the author of various works , but later research has shown them to be authored by other writers . A verse eulogy for Nothhelm , of uncertain date , survives in a 16th @-@ century manuscript now at the Lambeth Palace library . 
 = Duff Cooley = 
 Duff Gordon " Sir Richard " Cooley ( March 29 , 1873 – August 9 , 1937 ) was a professional baseball player whose career spanned 17 seasons , 13 of which were spent in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Cooley , an outfielder and first baseman , had a career batting average of .294 in 1 @,@ 317 games played . He compiled 849 runs , 1 @,@ 579 hits , 180 doubles , 102 triples , 26 home runs , and 557 runs batted in ( RBI ) . In Major League history , he is tied in 148th place for most all @-@ time triples and , his 224 career stolen bases , place him equal 279th on the all @-@ time list . Cooley made his Major League debut at the age of 20 , and spent the majority of his career there , but he also appeared in minor league baseball . After breaking his leg with the Tigers in 1905 , he was replaced with future Hall of Fame outfielder Ty Cobb . Cooley , nicknamed " Sir Richard " due to his aristocratic manner , was listed as standing 5 feet 11 inches ( 180 cm ) and weighing 158 pounds ( 72 kg ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 Cooley was born on March 29 , 1873 , in Leavenworth , Kansas . He began his Major League career in 1893 , playing for Topeka , Kansas , before playing for the St. Louis Browns of the National League ( NL ) . Although the seventh youngest player in the league during his first season , he batted .346 , which remained a career @-@ high . Defensively , Cooley was a utility player , starting at multiple positions for the Cardinals . On September 30 of 1873 , Cooley recorded six hits against the Boston Beaneaters . He played for St. Louis in 1894 , nearly doubling his at bats ( 206 ) and games played ( 54 ) . 
 Cooley played more regularly in 1895 and averaged 4 @.@ 2 at bats per game throughout the season . One of the most successful batters on the team , he had the highest batting average at .342 and led the Cardinals in hits , triples , runs scored and total bases . His slugging ( <unk> ) and on @-@ base plus slugging ( <unk> ) percentages remained the highest of his career . His 20 triples and 264 total bases were both the fifth @-@ highest total in a season for the Cardinals franchise from between the years of 1892 when they entered the NL to 1920 , which marked the end of the Dead @-@ ball era . At the end of the year , he had played 133 games , two behind Major League leader and teammate , Joe Quinn . Offensively , Cooley tied for seventh in most hits and finished fourth in triples . 
 At the beginning of the 1896 season , Cooley continued to play for the Browns . However , after 40 games in which he had a .307 batting average , he was moved to the Philadelphia Phillies in exchange for Joe Sullivan , Tuck Turner , and an unknown sum of money . The Phillies , under manager Billy Nash , finished 62 – 68 , eighth in the NL . Cooley remained with the Phillies in 1897 , when he tied with Fred Tenney , George Van Haltren , and Gene DeMontreville for the MLB lead in at @-@ bats . Cooley led his team in runs scored and stolen bases , and finished third , behind Ed Delahanty and Nap Lajoie , in hits . The following two seasons , playing for Philadelphia , he hit .312 in 1898 and .276 in 1899 , before he was purchased by the Pittsburgh Pirates for US $ 1 @,@ 000 in April 1900 . In his only season with the Pirates , Cooley recorded a batting average of .201 , the worst of his career . He also compiled 30 runs , 50 hits , and 22 RBI . 
 After being purchased by the Boston Beaneaters in 1901 , Cooley made his minor @-@ league debut for the Syracuse Stars of Syracuse , New York . After recording a team @-@ high in batting average and slugging percentage , Cooley was promoted to the Major League Beaneaters . Next season , under manager Al <unk> , Cooley played in 135 games , more than double the previous year for the Beaneaters . He finished the year eighth in the NL in both hits and total bases , and third in doubles . 
 Cooley remained with the Beaneaters for the following two seasons , hitting .289 in 1903 . On June 20 , 1904 , Cooley hit for the cycle ( a single , double , triple , and home run in the same game ) , becoming the second Beaneater to do so . Cooley finished the 1904 season with six total errors , five in the outfield and one at first base . Cooley 's 70 RBIs were eighth most in the NL . After the season , in October 1904 , he was selected off the Beaneater 's waivers by the Detroit Tigers . 
 In his final Major League season , Cooley played in 97 games before breaking his leg , which led to Ty Cobb , a future inductee to the National Baseball Hall of Fame taking his place as center fielder for the rest of the season . He was sold to the Beaneaters following the 1905 season , but decided to retire instead . 
 = = After MLB = = 
 Following his retirement from baseball , Cooley moved to Dallas and began to work as a salesman . In his final years , he battled alcoholism , which partially contributed to his death from heat stroke in Dallas on August 9 , 1937 . By then , he and his wife Louise were divorced and he left no children . Cooley was buried in Grove Hill Memorial Park in Dallas . 
 = England expects that every man will do his duty = 
 " England expects that every man will do his duty " was a signal sent by Vice Admiral Horatio Nelson , 1st Viscount Nelson , from his flagship HMS Victory as the Battle of Trafalgar was about to commence on 21 October 1805 . Trafalgar was a decisive naval engagement of the Napoleonic Wars . It gave the United Kingdom control of the seas , removing all possibility of a French invasion and conquest of Britain . Although there was much confusion surrounding the wording of the signal in the aftermath of the battle , the significance of the victory and Nelson 's death during the battle led to the phrase becoming embedded in the English psyche , and it has been regularly quoted , paraphrased and referenced up to the modern day . 
 = = Signals during the battle = = 
 As the British fleet closed with the opposing combined fleets of France and Spain , Lord Nelson signalled all the necessary battle instructions to his ships . Aware of the <unk> of events to come , Lord Nelson felt that something extra was required . He instructed his signal officer , Lieutenant John Pasco , to signal to the fleet , as quickly as possible , the message " England confides [ i.e. is confident ] that every man will do his duty . " Pasco suggested to Nelson that expects be substituted for confides , since the former word was in the signal book , whereas confides would have to be spelt out letter @-@ by @-@ letter . Nelson agreed to the change ( even though it produced a less trusting impression ) : 
 His Lordship came to me on the poop , and after ordering certain signals to be made , about a quarter to noon , he said , ' Mr. Pasco , I wish to say to the fleet , ENGLAND <unk> THAT <unk> MAN WILL DO HIS <unk> ' and he added ' You must be quick , for I have one more to make which is for close action . ' I replied , ' If your Lordship will permit me to substitute the confides for expects the signal will soon be completed , because the word expects is in the vocabulary , and confides must be spelt , ' His Lordship replied , in haste , and with seeming satisfaction , ' That will do , Pasco , make it <unk> 
 Thus , at around 11 : 45 a.m. on 21 October 1805 , the most famous naval signal in British history was sent . The exact time the signal was sent is not known ( one account puts it as early as 10 : 30 ) , as the message was repeated throughout the fleet , but Pasco puts it at " about a quarter to noon " and logs from other ships of the line also put it close to this time . 
 The signal was relayed using the numeric flag code known as the " Telegraphic Signals of Marine Vocabulary " , devised in 1800 by Rear Admiral Sir Home Popham , and based on the signal books created earlier by Admiral Lord Howe . This code assigned the digits 0 to 9 to ten signal flags , which were used in combination . Code numbers 1 – 25 represented letters of the alphabet ( omitting J and with V = 20 before U = 21 ) ; higher numbers were assigned meanings by a code book . The code numbers are believed to have been hoisted on the mizzenmast , one after another , with the " telegraphic flag " also being flown to show that the signals employed Popham 's code . As well as digit flags , the code used " repeat " flags so that only one set of digits was needed ; thus the word " do " , coded as " 220 " , used a " 2 " flag , a " first repeat " flag here serving as a second 2 , and a " 0 " flag . The word " duty " was not in the codebook ( and was not replaced as " confides " had been ) , so had to be spelt out , and the whole message required twelve " lifts " . It is believed that it would have taken about four minutes . A team of four to six men , led by Lt. Pasco , would have prepared and hoisted the flags onboard Lord Nelson 's flagship HMS Victory . The message shows one of the shortcomings of Popham 's code — even the two @-@ letter " do " required three flags hoisted for the signal . It is reported that a great cheer went up as the signal was hoisted and repeated throughout the fleet . 
 The message " engage the enemy more closely " was Nelson 's final signal to the fleet , sent at 12 : 15 p.m. , before a single British cannon had been fired at the enemy . This message was signalled using the telegraphic flag and flags 1 and 6 . Nelson ordered this signal hauled up and kept aloft . It remained up until shot away during the battle . 
 = = After the battle = = 
 Almost immediately , the signal began to be misquoted . A number of ships in the fleet recorded the signal as " England expects every man to do his duty " ( omitting that and replacing will with to ) . This version became so prevalent that it is recorded on Nelson 's tomb in St. Paul 's Cathedral . The word that is also omitted on the version around the base of Nelson 's Column , as seen in the photo above . However , the Victory 's log and the accounts of signal officer John Pasco and Henry Blackwood ( captain of the frigate Euryalus ) , both present at the preparation of the signal , agree on the form given here . On 26 December 1805 , The Times newspaper in London reported the signal as ; " England expects every officer and man to do his duty this day " . In 1811 , the tenor John Braham composed a song , " The Death of Nelson " , including the words of the signal . The song became popular almost immediately and was performed throughout the British Empire during the 19th century . To make the words fit the metre , they were altered to " England expects that every man this day will do his duty " . This version of the wording is also persistent . 
 Between 1885 and 1908 it was believed that the signal had been sent using the 1799 code book , as in 1885 it was pointed out that this had not been replaced until 1808 . In 1908 it was discovered , the Admiralty had , in fact , changed the signal code in November 1803 , after the 1799 version had been captured by the French , and new code books had been issued to Nelson 's fleet at Cadiz in September , 1805 . As a result , books published between these two dates show the signal using the wrong flags . 
 The signal is still hoisted on the Victory at her dry dock in Portsmouth on Trafalgar Day ( 21 October ) every year , although the signal flags are displayed all at once , running from fore to aft , rather than hoisted sequentially from the mizzenmast . 
 = = = Similar signals = = = 
 Nelson 's famous signal has been imitated in other navies of the world . Napoleon ordered the French equivalent , " La France <unk> que chacun <unk> son <unk> " , to be displayed on French vessels . At the opening of the Battle of Plattsburgh in September 1814 , Commodore Thomas MacDonough of the U.S. Navy flew the signal " Impressed seamen call on every man to do his duty " , referring to the fact that impressment of U.S. mariners had been a popular cause of the War of 1812 . Before the Battle of Tsushima , Japanese Admiral Togo ( who had studied naval science in England from 1871 to 1878 ) signalled to his fleet : " The fate of the Empire depends upon today 's battle : let every man do his utmost " . 
 = = Later uses = = 
 Charles Dickens quotes it in Chapter 43 of Martin Chuzzlewit : 
 " ... as the poet informs us , England expects Every man to do his duty , England is the most sanguine country on the face of the earth , and will find itself continually disappointed . " 
 In Lewis Carroll 's The Hunting of the Snark , the Bellman says : 
 " For England Expects — I forbear to proceed . Tis a maxim tremendous , but trite . " 
 In Ogden Nash 's collection of poems I 'm a Stranger Here Myself ( 1938 ) there is a short poem " England Expects " . 
 During the Second World War , an Admiralty propaganda poster intended to increase industrial production on the home front , carried the slogan ; " Britain expects that you too , this day , will do your duty " . Nelson 's flag signal was hoisted by the Royal Navy monitor , HMS Erebus at the start of the bombardment for the Normandy landings on 6 June 1944 . 
 It was also referenced by Margaret Thatcher during her crucial speech to the cabinet which finally persuaded them to rally behind her over the divisive issue of the poll tax . Further afield , it has been adapted by James Joyce in his novel , Ulysses , such as " Ireland expects that every man this day will do his duty " . 
 In the United States , former Secretary of the Navy of the United States of America Gordon R. England wore a tie with the flags representing the famous quote when he visited naval vessels . 
 Today " England expects ... " is often adapted for use in the media , especially in relation to the expectations for the victory of English sporting teams . Such is the sentence 's connotation with sport that a recent book on the history of the England national football team by James Corbett was entitled England Expects . A BBC Scotland television drama also bears its name . 
 = Waddesdon Road railway station = 
 Waddesdon Road railway station , called Waddesdon railway station before 1922 , was a small halt in open countryside in Buckinghamshire , England . It was opened in 1871 as part of a short horse @-@ drawn tramway to assist with the transport of goods from and around the Duke of Buckingham 's extensive estates in Buckinghamshire and to connect the Duke 's estates to the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway at Quainton Road . In 1872 the line was expanded and converted for passenger use , becoming known as the Brill Tramway . In 1899 the operation of the line was taken over by the London @-@ based Metropolitan Railway . 
 In 1933 the Metropolitan Railway was taken into public ownership to become the Metropolitan line of the London Underground , and despite its rural setting Waddesdon Road station became a part of the London Transport system . The new management could not see a future for the line as a financially viable passenger route , and Waddesdon Road , along with the rest of the former Brill Tramway , was closed in late 1935 . 
 The station was heavily used for the transport of construction materials during the building of Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild 's estate at Waddesdon Manor in the 1870s and 1880s , but aside from that it saw little use . The station was inconveniently sited and served by few passenger trains , and other more frequently served stations were in easy walking distance . In 1932 , the last full year of operations prior to the Metropolitan Railway being taken into public ownership , the station was used for only 281 passenger journeys and generated just £ 4 of passenger revenue . 
 = = Brill Tramway = = 
 On 23 September 1868 the small Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway ( A & BR ) was opened . It ran south from the London and North Western Railway 's Oxford to Bletchley line at Verney Junction , via Quainton Road railway station , to connect with the Great Western Railway at Aylesbury . 
 The 3rd Duke of Buckingham and Chandos served as Chairman of the London and North Western Railway from 1852 to 1861 and had a long interest in railways . In the early 1870s he decided to build a light railway to carry goods between his estates in Buckinghamshire and the A & BR 's line at Quainton Road . The first stage of the line , known as the Wotton Tramway , was a 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) line from Quainton Road via Wotton to a coal siding at Kingswood , and opened on 1 April 1871 . Intended for use by horse trams , the line was built with longitudinal sleepers to avoid horses tripping on the sleepers . 
 Lobbying from residents and businesses in the nearby town of Brill led to an extension being built in 1872 from Wotton to Brill railway station , at the foot of Brill Hill three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) from the hilltop town of Brill itself . Two mixed trains each day were introduced in each direction , and the line was renamed the Brill Tramway . The Duke bought two Aveling and Porter traction engines modified to work as locomotives for the line , each with a top speed of 8 miles per hour ( 13 km / h ) , although a speed limit of 5 miles per hour ( 8 km / h ) was enforced . 
 The Duke died in 1889 , and in 1894 the trustees of his estate set up the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company ( O & ATC ) with the intention of extending the line from Brill to Oxford . On 1 September 1894 London 's Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) reached Aylesbury , and shortly afterwards connected to the A & BR line , with local MR services running via Quainton Road to Verney Junction from 1 April 1894 . Through trains from the MR 's London terminus at Baker Street commenced on 1 January 1897 . From 1 December 1899 the MR leased the Brill Tramway from the O & ATC and took over the operation of services on the line , although the Tramway continued to be owned by the O & ATC . 
 = = Services = = 
 Waddesdon Road was the first station out from the Quainton Road junction station , in open countryside immediately north of Akeman Street ( the A41 road after 1919 ) , about 1 @.@ 1 miles ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) southeast of Quainton Road , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) northwest of the town of Waddesdon , and 1 @,@ 300 yards ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) from Waddesdon Manor . The station was initially built with a single low wooden platform , primarily intended for loading and unloading freight . After the 1899 transfer of services to the Metropolitan Railway , the MR introduced a single Brown Marshall passenger carriage on the line ; at this time , a short section of platform was raised to conventional height to allow access to the higher doors on the new carriage . 
 Initially known as " Waddesdon Road Siding " , the station was renamed " Waddesdon " shortly after opening . On 1 October 1922 the nearby Waddesdon Manor railway station , on the Metropolitan Railway southeast of Quainton Road , was renamed " Waddesdon " and the former Waddesdon station was renamed " Waddesdon Road " in an effort to reduce confusion . 
 The station was heavily used during the construction of Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild 's estate at Waddesdon Manor in the 1870s and 1880s . The brickworks at Brill sent 25 @,@ 000 bricks per week along the Brill Tramway , and 7 @,@ 000 tons ( 7 @,@ 100 t ) of Bath Stone were shipped from Corsham . Aside from goods traffic associated with the building of Waddesdon Manor , the station was little used other than for shipping milk from nearby farms to Aylesbury and London . <unk> sited away from any nearby towns and villages , and with the far more frequently served Quainton Road and Waddesdon Manor stations within easy walking distance , the station saw very little passenger use . In 1932 , the last year of private operation , Waddesdon Road station saw only 281 passengers and made only £ 4 ( about £ 300 in 2016 ) in passenger receipts over the entire year . 
 Limited by poor quality locomotives and bumpy , cheaply laid track which followed the contours of the hills , trains ran very slowly in the area : in 1882 trains took 13 minutes to travel the short distance from Waddesdon Road to Quainton Road , and 57 minutes from Waddesdon Road to Brill . From 1872 to 1894 the station was served by two passenger trains per day in each direction , and between 1895 and 1899 the number was increased to three per day . Following the 1899 transfer of services to the Metropolitan Railway , the station was served by four trains per day in each direction until closure in 1935 . Improvements to the line carried out at the time of the transfer to the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad , and the improved locomotives of the Metropolitan Railway , reduced journey times from Waddesdon Road to Quainton Road and Brill to 6 minutes and 22 minutes respectively . 
 = = Closure = = 
 On 1 July 1933 the Metropolitan Railway , and all of London 's other underground railways except the small Waterloo & City Railway , were taken into public ownership as part of the newly formed London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) . As a consequence , despite its distance from London , Waddesdon Road station became part of the London Underground network . 
 By this time the Brill Tramway was losing significant sums of money . Goods traffic had dwindled , and unlike other areas served by the former Metropolitan Railway there had not been a growth in population and thus passenger numbers remained low . Frank Pick , Managing Director of the Underground Group from 1928 and the Chief Executive of the LPTB , planned to move the new London Underground away from goods services to concentrate solely on serving passengers . He saw the lines beyond Aylesbury to Brill and Verney Junction as having little future as financially viable passenger routes , concluding that over £ 2 @,@ 000 ( about £ 130 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) would be saved by closing the Brill Tramway . As a result , the LPTB decided to abandon all passenger services beyond Aylesbury . 
 The Brill Tramway was closed on 1 December 1935 , with the last trains running on 30 November . Upon the withdrawal of London Transport services the railway and stations reverted to the control of the by now almost dormant Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company . With no funds and no rolling stock of its own the O & ATC was unable to operate the line , and on 2 April 1936 the entire infrastructure of the line was sold at auction ; the most expensive lot sold was the 37 @-@ yard ( 34 m ) platform of Waddesdon Road station , which fetched £ 7 10s ( about £ 1 @,@ 070 in 2016 ) . Excluding the station houses at Westcott and Brill , which were sold separately , the auction raised £ 112 10s ( about £ 6 @,@ 890 in 2016 ) in total . No trace of the buildings at Waddesdon Road remains , but the former trackbed is now a public footpath known as the Tramway Walk . 
 Metropolitan line passenger trains ceased to run north of Aylesbury from 6 July 1936 . London and North Eastern Railway services ( British Rail from 1948 ) continued to run from London 's Marylebone station over the line to Verney Junction via Quainton Road until March 1963 , and the LPTB continued to maintain and to operate freight services over the Verney Junction line until 6 September 1947 . After the withdrawal of services from London , Verney Junction station remained open to serve trains on the Oxford – Bletchley line . It was closed following the withdrawal of services between Oxford and Cambridge from 1 January 1968 . 
 = Son of Three = 
 " Son of Three " is a song by the American group the Breeders that was written and sung by band member Kim Deal . The original version of the composition was recorded at Grandmaster Recording Ltd. in Hollywood , and was released in May 2002 on the album Title TK . The Breeders — who then consisted of Kim Deal , Kelley Deal , Jose Medeles , Richard Presley , and Mando Lopez — later re @-@ recorded " Son of Three " at a different Hollywood studio as Title TK 's third European single . This subsequent recording is shorter and faster than the album track , and matches how they were playing the song in concert in 2002 . 
 The " Son of Three " single was released in September 2002 on 4AD , and reached No. 72 in the United Kingdom . The single includes a live performance of the group 's 1992 song " Safari " and a cover of Nerf Herder 's theme from the Buffy the Vampire Slayer television series . Deal , a Buffy fan , also negotiated to have the Breeders appear in an episode of the show . Critics have praised both the album and single versions of " Son of Three " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The original version of " Son of Three " appeared on the Breeders ' 2002 album Title TK . While most of the album 's tracks were recorded by Steve Albini at his Electrical Audio studio in Chicago , " Son of Three " is one of two songs from a session recorded by Mark Arnold and Andrew Alekel at Grandmaster Recording Ltd. in Hollywood . The composition was written by Kim Deal , who also sang on the track . The other musicians who played on the recording were Kim 's sister Kelley Deal on guitar and vocals ; Richard Presley on guitar ; Mando Lopez on bass and guitar ; and Jose Medeles on percussion . 
 Following the release of Title TK 's first two singles , " Off You " and " Huffer " , a third single was requested for the European market . For this purpose , the Breeders decided to record a new version of " Son of Three " . The session , which took place in July 2002 at Track Record Studios in North Hollywood , was fit in during a short break between a European and a US concert tour . This recording is faster than the album version , and reflects the sound of the group 's live performances of the song in 2002 . The engineers for this session were Ai <unk> and Justin Hamilton , with additional engineering credited to Marc Arnold . 
 The sound of " Son of Three " has been described as " dark punk " , and elsewhere as a " garage symphony of bubblegum grunge , woo @-@ woo <unk> harmonies and body @-@ snatching sci @-@ fi eeriness " . One interviewer in 2002 described the lyrics of " Son of Three " as " <unk> " , noting the numerous references to driving in the song and throughout the Title TK album . The song 's lyrics include lines such as " No more time on the meter " , " Cross another county line " , and " Are we there ? " 
 The second track on the three @-@ song single , " Buffy Theme " , was also recorded at the July 2002 session . This composition was originally performed by the group Nerf Herder , whose version was included on Buffy the Vampire Slayer : The Album . It was written by Nerf Herder members Dennis , Grip , and Sherlock . Kim and Kelley Deal were both fans of the Buffy the Vampire Slayer television show and had been playing " Buffy Theme " in concert in the first half of 2002 . At some point after the July recording session , Kim Deal telephoned Buffy musical supervisor John King to ask whether the Breeders could be on the show . On November 5 , the group appeared on the episode " Him " , in which they performed " Son of Three " and " Little Fury " . The Breeders ' " Buffy Theme " was also later included on the album Buffy the Vampire Slayer : Radio Sunnydale . 
 The final track on the " Son of Three " single , " Safari " , written by Deal , was recorded in concert at the Melkweg music venue in Amsterdam in June 2002 as part of the <unk> Live radio show . The original studio version of the song had been released on the Breeders ' Safari EP in April 1992 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Title TK came out on May 20 – 21 , 2002 , and the " Son of Three " single on September 2 of that year . The single reached No. 72 on the UK Singles Chart . The album and single versions of " Son of Three " have mostly been well received by critics . AllMusic 's Heather Phares calls the Title TK track " sweet [ and ] playfully spiky " , while Will Bryant of Pitchfork cites it as a " standout " of the album , that " get [ s ] the job done " . PopMatters ' Matt Cibula reports " rockin ' ... hard " to the song and comments on the originality of the lyrics , such as the line “ If I find the door / I am the son of Go ” . A reviewer at Contactmusic.com describes the single version of " Son of Three " as " special " , and for NME 's Stephen Dalton , it is a " jewel " . Richard Garnett of Leeds Music Scene similarly praises the track , commenting that " the beefy descending bass line is enough to send shivers " . 
 Critical appraisal of the single 's B @-@ sides has been mixed . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic characterizes the Breeders ' " Buffy Theme " as " wonderful " . Garnett calls the track " cheap " , noting its short running time ( 1 minute 14 seconds ) . For Dalton , the recording amounts to " a comedy cover " , and the live version of " Safari " is " inessential " . By contrast , the Contactmusic.com reviewer rates this performance of " Safari " as " fantastic " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two . = 
 Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two ( stylized as ef - a fairy tale of the two . ) is a two @-@ part Japanese adult visual novel series by Minori for Windows PCs . The first game in the series , Ef : The First Tale , was released on December 22 , 2006 , and the second game , Ef : The Latter Tale , was released on May 30 , 2008 . The opening video for the game was animated by Makoto Shinkai , and a majority of the music was produced by Tenmon , who has worked in the past with Shinkai and Minori . Female character design was by Naru Nanao of Da Capo fame , while male character design was by 2C Galore . 
 Before the release of Ef : The First Tale , a manga based on the overall story was serialized between 2005 and 2015 starting in Dengeki Comic Gao , but later transferred to Dengeki Daioh . In addition , a light novel was serialized in Kadokawa Shoten 's Comptiq from July 2006 to July 2008 . A 12 @-@ episode anime adaptation titled Ef : A Tale of Memories was produced by Shaft and aired between October and December 2007 . A second season of the anime titled Ef : A Tale of Melodies aired 12 episodes between October and December 2008 . 
 On September 26 , 2010 , it was announced that MangaGamer had acquired the rights of the visual novel for a worldwide English release , in partnership with the translation group No Name Losers . The English version of the two games were released in 2012 and 2013 . The license holding company Sentai Filmworks licensed both Ef anime series . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay requires little interaction from the player as most of the duration of the game is spent simply reading the text that appears on the screen which represents either dialogue between the various characters or the inner thoughts of the protagonist . The player has a chance to assume the role of four protagonists , two in each Ef : The First Tale and Ef : The Latter Tale . Each protagonist is paired with a heroine , and each scenario in the original PC versions of the visual novels includes scenes with sexual content . These scenes are removed or modified in the PlayStation 2 port . 
 Every so often , the player will come to a point where he or she is given the chance to choose from multiple options . The time between these points is variable and can occur anywhere from a minute to much longer . Gameplay pauses at these points and depending on which choice the player makes , the plot will progress in a specific direction . There are four main plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience , one for each of the heroines in the story . The plot lines carry on from each other in a linear fashion . The game can end prematurely if the player makes the wrong decisions . When this occurs , the player must go back to a previously saved spot and choose different decisions . 
 For Ef , Minori attempted to create a movie @-@ like experience , using a lot of animated two @-@ dimensional computer graphics presented from various angles . Instead of presenting the visuals straight @-@ on with a character 's image in the middle of the screen and the character being the main focus , the character images in the Ef series are off @-@ center and appear closer to " event " computer graphics ( CGs ) in typical visual novels . These types of CGs occur at certain pivotal times in a visual novel 's story and are meant to be artistic and much more detailed than normal visuals . 
 = = Plot and characters = = 
 Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two consists of two parts . The first part is titled Ef : The First Tale and primarily consists of the story of Hiro Hirono , Miyako Miyamura , Kyosuke Tsutsumi , Kei Shindo , and Yuko Amamiya . It consists of a prologue and two main chapters with Miyako as the focus for the first chapter , and Kei for the second . This is followed by the second part of the story , Ef : The Latter Tale , which primarily deals with the story of Renji Aso , Chihiro Shindo , Shuichi Kuze , Mizuki Hayama , and Yu Himura . The second part consists of two more main chapters and an ending chapter , with Chihiro as the focus for the third chapter , and Mizuki for the fourth . Bringing the two parts together forms the all @-@ encompassing Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two . The story is set in the town Otowa ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Ef : The First Tale = = = 
 Prologue 
 Yuko Amamiya ( <unk> <unk> , Amamiya Yūko , voiced by : Yumiko Nakajima ( Japanese ) , Carli <unk> ( English ) ) , a mysterious girl dressed like a nun , and Yu Himura ( <unk> <unk> , Himura Yū , voiced by : Kōichi <unk> ( Japanese ) , David Matranga ( English ) ) , a mysterious gentleman who is somehow attached to the church where Yuko first appears , are having a reunion in a church during Christmas time . Despite her attire , Yuko is not affiliated with the church . She always appears generally out of nowhere , and disappears just as quickly in various places throughout the story to talk with Hiro or other characters and give them advice . Yuko and Yu reminisce about the past and remember events of the previous year around the same time at the beginning of the first chapter of the story . Yuko hints of events that are revealed throughout Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two . After the conclusion of the first chapter , the story cycles back to the prologue and the talk between Yuko and Yu . Yuko ends with her talk about the events in the first chapter . At the end of the second chapter , the story shifts again to the scene with Yuko and Yu . Yuko finishes her talk on the events from the second chapter and says that she misses talking to Hiro , Kyosuke , and their friends . Their talk ends with allusions to the continuation of the story , Ef : The Latter Tale . 
 First chapter 
 The first chapter 's protagonist is Hiro Hirono ( <unk> <unk> , Hirono Hiro , voiced by : Hiro Shimono ( Japanese ) , Greg Ayres ( English ) ) , an already established manga author despite still attending high school . Due to the pressures of his work , he often skips school and puts most of his time into his job as a manga artist of shōjo manga under the pseudonym " Nagi Shindo " ( <unk> 凪 , Shindō Nagi ) . Writing manga causes him to lose interest in school and focuses mainly on his work in order to earn an income , as usually he does not have much money as it is . While out one Christmas night , a purse snatcher rushes past Hiro on a bike and soon Miyako Miyamura ( <unk> <unk> , Miyamura Miyako , voiced by : Hiroko Taguchi ( Japanese ) , Luci Christian ( English ) ) appears , chasing after the purse thief , taking Hiro 's bike without asking to pursue the culprit . She ends up destroying his bike , and later hangs out with him for the rest of the night . 
 Hiro later meets Miyako again at school , and learns that she is a student of the same year there , but in a different class ; she too does not attend classes much because she finds them boring . Miyako has an energetic personality and enjoys doing unorthodox things . She eventually starts to become attracted to Hiro after they start spending more time together , but during this time Hiro 's childhood friend Kei Shindo ( <unk> <unk> , Shindō Kei , voiced by : Junko Okada ( Japanese ) , Brittney Karbowski ( English ) ) begins to feel left out and a love triangle develops between the three students . She is attracted to Hiro , and becomes jealous when she finds out how much time he is spending with Miyako Miyamura . Hiro and Miyako eventually become a couple , despite Kei 's feelings for him . 
 Second chapter 
 The second chapter begins several months after the end of the first . It is now summer , and the story focuses on a new protagonist named Kyosuke Tsutsumi ( <unk> <unk> , Kyōsuke Tsutsumi , voiced by : Yūki Tai ( Japanese ) , Chris Patton ( English ) ) . Kyosuke is an acquaintance of Hiro 's and happens to be in the same grade and school . He has a passion for filming , and constantly carries a digital video recorder around with him . On Christmas night , he saw Kei Shindo , who is the main heroine of the second chapter , running down the street and tried to get a shot of her , but a truck passed by , so he could not get a clean shot of the mystery girl . After thinking about the mystery girl , he ends up quitting the film club and agrees with his girlfriend to break up . 
 One day , while filming near the gymnasium , Kyosuke catches sight of Kei practicing basketball for her school 's girl 's basketball team and becomes infatuated by her image . He desires to cast Kei in an amateur film he is making for an upcoming film festival . Occupied with thoughts of Kei , he sets out determined to get closer to Kei by becoming better friends with Hiro , Kei 's childhood friend . Kei is one year younger than Hiro and she attends the same school as him too . After being asked to be cast in one of his films , Kei initially refuses Kyosuke 's offer , but agrees to watch some of his previous films . While initially put off by the films , she eventually comes to like aspects of his work . After hanging out together more , the two eventually fall in love and go out together . 
 = = = Ef : The Latter Tale = = = 
 Prologue 
 Ef : The Latter Tale begins once again with Yuko Amamiya and Yu Himura in the middle of a reunion in a church during Christmas time . Yuko tells Yu how she has influenced people in two separate stories ( from Ef : The First Tale ) . After she is done with this , she asks him to tell her about the people he has influenced . Yu starts to tell his first story , that of Chihiro Shindo ; the third chapter begins . Like Yuko , Yu also abruptly appears out of nowhere and disappears just as mysteriously . He often gives advice and warnings to Renji and others . Yu is close to Chihiro and takes care of her . After the conclusion of the third chapter , the story goes back to Yuko and Yu with Yu ending his recount of the third chapter , and goes on to talk about how he and Yuko were separated in the past . Yu starts his recount of the events from the fourth chapter . At the end of the fourth chapter , the story shifts one final time back to Yuko and Yu . Up to this point the two have been recounting individual tales to each other . The meaning of the overall title Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two is revealed to be in connection with Yuko and Yu . 
 Third chapter 
 Like the first chapter , the third chapter is also set in winter , but now focuses on another protagonist named Renji Aso ( <unk> <unk> , Asō Renji , voiced by : Motoki Takagi ( Japanese ) , Clint Bickham ( English ) ) who is half German , half Japanese . One day , he goes to an abandoned train station in town he would often frequent to read at since it is so quiet there and meets a girl wearing an eyepatch over her left eye and sitting alone named Chihiro Shindo ( <unk> <unk> , Shindō Chihiro , voiced by : Natsumi Yanase ( Japanese ) , Monica Rial ( English ) ) . Chihiro is the younger twin sister of Kei Shindo from Ef : The First Tale and the main heroine of the third chapter in the story . Despite them being mutually shy , Renji comes back to see her at the station every day after school and quickly becomes friends with her . Renji later learns that she has a severe case of anterograde amnesia , where she can only remember 13 hours ' of memory at a time , aside from the events before the accident that led to her current state , which she can recall perfectly . Now , she carries a diary with her which she writes in every day the events of that day so that the next day , after she had forgotten everything , she will be able to remind herself of what happened the previous day . Ironically , she has a fantastic memory of anything that happened that is less than thirteen hours old . 
 Renji also finds out that it is her dream to write a fantasy novel , but due to her condition has never been able to get far . Renji loves to read novels , and after discussing it with Chihiro , he collaborates with her to see if he can finally make her dream come true . Through the process of writing the novel , the two eventually become very close and they fall in love with each other . As the story progresses and more of the novel is written , Renji soon discovers that the novel is an allegory for Chihiro 's life and how she sees the world around her due to the state of her limited memory . 
 Fourth chapter 
 Shuichi Kuze ( <unk> <unk> , Kuze Shūichi , voiced by : Kenji Hamada ( Japanese ) , Illich Guardiola ( English ) ) is the main protagonist of the fourth chapter in the story . He is an older man who is a professional violinist . He had been studying abroad in Germany for a time , and comes back to where Ef 's story takes place . Shuichi is a neighbor of Renji 's and is good friends with him despite the age difference . Shuichi knows Yu Himura and Chihiro as well , but she forgets Shuichi due to her condition . He meets the main heroine from the fourth chapter of the story named Mizuki Hayama ( <unk> <unk> , Hayama Mizuki , voiced by : Mai Goto ( Japanese ) , Hilary Haag ( English ) ) after being introduced by Renji 's mother . She goes to an affiliated school and admires Kei greatly as someone who is older than she is ; in fact , Mizuki is also on her school 's girl 's basketball team . She greatly enjoys reading shōjo manga . She has a straightforward attitude and likes to be frank towards others , especially to Kei . She initially comes to Otowa to visit her older cousin Renji , and this is when she meets Shuichi . Shuichi keeps to himself that he is dying of a special case of neurosis , of which Mizuki is aware of , but even though she tries to get closer to him , he forcibly pushes her away and rejects her affections . Mizuki becomes depressed and obtains Chihiro 's diary . Casually reading it , she finds Yu 's name which she recognizes from her past . Mizuki goes to the church to find Yu , but the chapter ends shortly after . 
 = = Development and release history = = 
 Planning for Ef started in 2004 headed by <unk> Sakai ( also known as <unk> ) , who is the main producer for Minori . The director for Ef was Mikage , who was also one of the main scenario writers along with Yū Kagami . Character design for Ef was headed by two artists , Naru Nanao who drew the female characters , and 2C Galore who drew the males . The opening movie animation was done via a collaboration between the animation studio <unk> @-@ do Animation Works and Makoto Shinkai . Music in the Ef series was provided by Tenmon , who was the sole composer for Ef : The First Tale , and was accompanied by <unk> Yanagi for additional music used in Ef : The Latter Tale . It cost Minori over 100 million yen to produce the Ef series . 
 A fan disc entitled Ef : First Fan Disc was initially released during Comiket 72 between August 11 and August 13 , 2007 ; the disc , playable on a PC was later sold in retail stores starting on August 25 , 2007 . The disc , unlike the normal visual novels in the series , did not contain adult content , and offered a glimpse into the world of Ef , though only touched on points from Ef : The First Tale , the first game in the series . Ef : The First Tale was released as an adult game for the PC on December 22 , 2006 . The second game in the series , Ef : The Latter Tale was released on May 30 , 2008 . MangaGamer released both games in English : Ef : The First Tale was released on July 27 , 2012 and Ef : The Latter Tale was released on December 20 , 2013 . 
 A game demo of Ef : The First Tale is available via a free download at Getchu.com 's special website for Ef : The First Tale . A second fan disc entitled Ef : Second Fan Mix , released as a preview of Ef : The Latter Tale , was initially released at during Comiket 73 on December 29 , 2007 ; the disc , playable on a PC , was later sold in retail stores starting on February 8 , 2008 . A PlayStation 2 port combining The First Tale and The Latter Tale was released on April 29 , 2010 published by Comfort . A fan disc titled Tenshi no Nichiyōbi " Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two " <unk> Box . ( <unk> " ef - a fairy tale of the two " <unk> Box . ) was released on September 17 , 2010 . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Print media = = = 
 A manga adaptation titled Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two began serialization in the April 2005 issue of the shōnen manga magazine Dengeki Comic Gao ! sold on February 27 , 2005 , published by MediaWorks . The manga ended serialization in the April 2008 issue Dengeki Comic Gao ! at 35 chapters , but continued serialization in the June 2008 issue of ASCII Media Works ' manga magazine Dengeki Daioh sold on April 21 , 2008 . After a lengthy hiatus , the manga ended serialization in the March 2015 issue . The story was written by Mikage and Yū Kagami , two scenario writers of Minori , and illustrated by Juri Miyabi . Ten tankōbon volumes were published under ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki Comics imprint between February 27 , 2006 and January 27 , 2015 . 
 A series of 24 short side @-@ stories in a light novel form were serialized under the title Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two Another Tale in Kadokawa Shoten 's seinen magazine Comptiq between the July 2006 and July 2008 issues sold on June 10 , 2006 and June 10 , 2008 , respectively . The stories are written by the same scenario staff as with the original games and manga , and illustration is handled by Naru Nanao , 2C Galore , and <unk> <unk> . The chapters of Another Tale were released in a single volume on February 27 , 2009 entitled Another Tales .. Another two separate light novels , under the general title Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two , were published by Fujimi Shobo on October 25 , 2007 . They were written by Yū Kagami , and illustrated by <unk> Shimotsuki . The first novel was a novelization of Miyako 's route , and the second was centered around Kei 's route . 
 The Ef series , encompassing the visual novels and anime adaptation , was the only Minori title to receive coverage in an entire issue of Dengeki G 's Festival ! Deluxe , a special edition version of Dengeki G 's Magazine which is published by ASCII Media Works ; the issue in question was the first , and was published on November 30 , 2007 . Along with information pertaining to Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two and Ef : A Tale of Memories , the magazine came bundled with an ergonomic mousepad , a small cell phone cleaner which can also attach to a cell phone , and an ID card / pass case . 
 = = = Radio shows and drama CDs = = = 
 There are two Internet radio shows for Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two The first , entitled <unk> Minori <unk> ( <unk> ) , was broadcast between October 13 , 2006 to June 1 , 2007 every Friday and was produced by Onsen , Cospa , and Minori . The show contained thirty @-@ three episodes and was mainly used to promote the visual novels . In this way , the promotion mainly entailed news about the series and any updates related to the visual novels while also discussing points about the games themselves . The second radio broadcast began on June 8 , 2007 called Yumiko & <unk> no Ef Memo Radio ( <unk> & <unk> ) . This broadcast is mainly used to promote the anime series which entails reporting on updates related to the anime and goods for the anime including musical CDs or DVDs . 
 A set of four drama CDs were released by Frontier Works based on the series between October 2006 and April 2007 . A special edition drama CD was released on November 21 , 2007 , and another special drama CD was released on January 1 , 2008 . The first print release of the special edition CD will contain comments from the cast . The drama CDs used the same female cast as with the games and anime versions ( albeit under assumed names ) , but the two males that appeared in the dramas , Hiro and Kyosuke , had different voice actors in respect to the anime version . Hiro was voiced by Takashi <unk> , and Kyosuke was by Shō <unk> . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 On August 24 , 2007 , a short prologue for an Ef anime series was released as a DVD . The prologue was a teaser which introduced the characters and some conflict that would appear in the series . The anime series , under the title Ef : A Tale of Memories , aired 12 episodes on Chiba TV between October 7 and December 22 , 2007 . The anime was produced by Shaft and directed by Shin <unk> who volunteered for the job when it was offered . Even though the script for Ef : The Latter Tale was finished at the time of the anime 's production , in order to direct the anime from the viewer 's standpoint , Shin <unk> himself never read it . However , Katsuhiko Takayama who wrote the screenplay for the anime , had read the script . Each episode ends with a still image drawn by Japanese illustrators of anime , manga , and visual novels . The first letter in each episode 's title , plus the " coda " title of the last episode , can be brought together to form " Euphoric Field " . The series was released in six limited and regular edition DVD compilations , each containing two episodes . The first DVD volume was released on December 7 , 2007 , and the sixth DVD was released on May 9 , 2008 . A second season entitled Ef : A Tale of Melodies aired 12 episodes between October 7 and December 22 , 2008 in Japan . The license holding company Sentai Filmworks licensed both Ef anime series . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc box sets of Ef : A Tale of Memories were released on January 31 , 2012 in North America with an English dub , and the Ef : A Tale of Melodies box sets were released on March 20 , 2012 . 
 = = Music = = 
 The opening theme song for Ef : The First Tale is " Yūkyū no Tsubasa " ( <unk> , Eternal Feather ) by Hitomi Harada which was released as a maxi single called " Eternal Feather " on October 27 , 2006 . For Ef : The Latter Tale , the opening theme is " Emotional Flutter " , and the ending theme is " Ever Forever " ; the single containing the two themes was released on April 11 , 2008 . Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two 's original soundtrack , <unk> , was released on February 27 , 2009 containing three CDs . The PlayStation 2 version released by Comfort will include an image song CD in the game disc , which will contain a song called " Echt <unk> " by Hitomi Harada . 
 The opening theme for Ef : A Tale of Memories , starting with episode three , is the English version of " Euphoric Field " by Tenmon featuring Elisa . The first episode used a background music track for the opening theme , and the second and tenth episodes had no opening theme ; the English version of " Euphoric Field " was also used for the ending theme in episode two . The Japanese version of " Euphoric Field " was used as the opening theme for the twelfth episode . The opening theme single was released on October 24 , 2007 by Geneon . The first ending theme for the anime is " I 'm here " by Hiroko Taguchi which was used for episodes one , three , seven , and ten ; the single for the song ( entitled " Adagio by Miyako Miyamura " ) was also released on October 24 , 2007 by Geneon . The second ending theme , " Kizamu Kisetsu " ( <unk> , Carving Season ) by Junko Okada , was used for episodes four , five , and nine , and the single ( entitled " Vivace by Kei Shindo " ) was released on November 21 , 2007 . The third ending theme , " Sora no Yume " ( <unk> , Sky 's Dream ) by Natsumi Yanase , was used for episode six , eight , and eleven , though the second verse of the song was used in that episode ; the single ( entitled " Andante by Chihiro Shindo " ) was released on December 21 , 2007 . A remix of the visual novel 's theme song called " Yūkyū no Tsubasa 07.mix " ( <unk> 07.mix , Eternal Feather 07.mix ) sung by Yumiko Nakajima was used as the ending theme in episode twelve . The single for this ( entitled " Yūkyū no Tsubasa 07.mix / Euphoric Field <unk> " ) was released on September 26 , 2008 . The first original soundtrack for the anime series ( <unk> ) was released on February 8 , 2008 , and the second ( Fortissimo ) was released on April 2 , 2008 . 
 The opening theme of Ef : A Tale of Melodies is the English version of " Ebullient Future " , also by Tenmon featuring Elisa , with the sixth episode featuring the instrumental version and episode eleven with the second verse . The opening sequence is shown to change many times ; episode ten contains no opening , but a piano remix of the song was used as the ending for that same episode . Episode twelve uses the Japanese version of the song , with a different opening sequence . The first ending theme is called " Egao no Chikara " ( <unk> , Strength of Smiles ) by Mai Goto and was used in episode two through five , seven , and the second verse was used in episode eleven . The second ending theme is called " Negai no Kakera " ( <unk> , Pieces of Wish ) by Yumiko Nakajima which was used in episode six , nine , and the second verse was used in episode eight . The song " A moon filled sky . " by Mai Goto was featured at the end of episode eleven and a new Japanese version of the opening sequence of the first season was inserted in the same episode . Episode twelve uses the song " Ever Forever <unk> " sung by the voice actresses of all the major female characters . The singles for " Ebullient Future " and " Egao no Chikara " ( the latter entitled " <unk> by Mizuki Hayama " ) were released on November 5 , 2008 and the single for " Negai no Kakera " ( entitled " Fine by Yuko Amamiya " ) was released on November 26 , 2008 . The first original soundtrack for the series ( Elegia ) was released on December 26 , 2008 while the second original soundtrack ( Felice ) was released on February 27 , 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the October 2007 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine , poll results for the fifty best bishōjo games were released . Out of 249 titles , Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two ranked 23rd with 11 votes , tying with Muv @-@ Luv Alternative and Snow . The first game in the Ef series , Ef : The First Tale , was the highest selling game for the month of December 2006 on Getchu.com , and dropped to 19th in the ranking the following month . Also , Ef : The First Tale was the fourth most widely sold game of 2006 on Getchu.com despite it being released with a little over a week left in 2006 . In the January 25 , 2007 issue of the Japanese gaming magazine PC News , it was reported that Ef : The First Tale was the fifth @-@ highest selling game of 2006 with 40 @,@ 843 units sold . Across the national ranking of bishōjo games in amount sold in Japan , Ef : The First Tale premiered at number two , and ranked twice more at number five and 32 . From mid @-@ April to mid @-@ May 2008 , Ef : The Latter Tale ranked fourth in national PC game pre @-@ orders in Japan . Ef : The Latter Tale ranked first in terms of national sales of PC games in Japan in May 2008 , and ranked at 30th on the same ranking the following month . 
 Theron Martin of Anime News Network reviewed the Blu @-@ ray edition of Ef : A Tale of Memories , where he praised the anime series for not resorting to " even a whiff of the supernatural " , and called the way in which characters behave as " largely believable " . The anime received a mostly positive review from Bradley Meek THEM Anime Reviews . Bradley appreciated the animation , saying that " It does wonders for the mood in the series , adding a tangible layer of mysticism and fantasy . " However , he criticized the series being " cheesy and melodramatic more often than not . " He concluded the review saying , " Despite some laughable melodrama , the raw emotions and Shaft 's hypnotic animation makes ef ~ a tale of memories ~ a memorable romance . The plotting is slow , though , so it 's not for people with short attention spans . " 
 = Social identity theory = 
 A social identity is the portion of an individual 's self @-@ concept derived from perceived membership in a relevant social group . As originally formulated by Henri <unk> and John Turner in the 1970s and the 1980s , social identity theory introduced the concept of a social identity as a way in which to explain intergroup behaviour . 
 Social identity theory is best described as a theory that predicts certain intergroup behaviours on the basis of perceived group status differences , the perceived legitimacy and stability of those status differences , and the perceived ability to move from one group to another . This contrasts with occasions where the term " social identity theory " is used to refer to general theorizing about human social selves . Moreover , and although some researchers have treated it as such , social identity theory was never intended to be a general theory of social categorization . It was awareness of the limited scope of social identity theory that led John Turner and colleagues to develop a cousin theory in the form of self @-@ categorization theory , which built on the insights of social identity theory to produce a more general account of self and group processes . The term social identity approach , or social identity perspective , is suggested for describing the joint contributions of both social identity theory and self @-@ categorization theory . 
 = = Aspects = = 
 = = = The interpersonal @-@ intergroup continuum = = = 
 Social identity theory states that social behavior will vary along a continuum between interpersonal behavior and intergroup behaviour . Completely interpersonal behaviour would be behaviour determined solely by the individual characteristics and interpersonal relationships that exists between two or more people . Completely intergroup behaviour would be behaviour determined solely by the social category memberships that apply to two or more people . 
 The authors of social identity theory state that purely interpersonal or purely intergroup behaviour is unlikely to be found in realistic social situations . Rather , behaviour is expected to be driven by a compromise between the two extremes . The cognitive nature of personal vs. social identities , and the relationship between them , is more fully developed in self @-@ categorization theory . Social identity theory instead focuses on the social structural factors that will predict which end of the spectrum will most influence an individual 's behaviour , along with the forms that that behavior may take . 
 = = = Positive distinctiveness = = = 
 A key assumption in social identity theory is that individuals are intrinsically motivated to achieve positive distinctiveness . That is , individuals " strive for a positive self @-@ concept " . As individuals to varying degrees may be defined and informed by their respective social identities ( as per the interpersonal @-@ intergroup continuum ) it is further derived in social identity theory that " individuals strive to achieve or to maintain positive social identity " . It should be noted that the precise nature of this strive for positive self @-@ concept is a matter of debate ( see the self @-@ esteem hypothesis ) . 
 Both the interpersonal @-@ intergroup continuum and the assumption of positive distinctiveness motivation arose as outcomes of the findings of minimal group studies . In particular , it was found that under certain conditions individuals would endorse resource distributions that would maximize the positive distinctiveness of an ingroup in contrast to an outgroup at the expense of personal self @-@ interest . 
 = = = Positive distinctiveness strategies = = = 
 Building on the above components , social identity theory details a variety of strategies that may be invoked in order to achieve positive distinctiveness . The individual 's choice of behaviour is posited to be dictated largely by the perceived intergroup relationship . In particular the choice of strategy is an outcome of the perceived permeability of group boundaries ( e.g. , whether a group member may pass from a low status group into a high status group ) , as well as the perceived stability and legitimacy of the intergroup status hierarchy . The self @-@ enhancing strategies detailed in social identity theory are detailed below . Importantly , although these are viewed from the perspective of a low status group member , comparable behaviours may also be adopted by high status group members . 
 = = = = Individual mobility = = = = 
 It is predicted that under conditions where the group boundaries are considered permeable individuals are more likely to engage in individual mobility strategies . That is , individuals " disassociate from the group and pursue individual goals designed to improve their personal lot rather than that of their ingroup " . 
 = = = = Social creativity = = = = 
 Where group boundaries are considered impermeable , and where status relations are considered reasonably stable , individuals are predicted to engage in social creativity behaviours . Here , low @-@ status ingroup members are still able to increase their positive distinctiveness without necessarily changing the objective resources of the ingroup or the outgroup . This may be achieved by comparing the ingroup to the outgroup on some new dimension , changing the values assigned to the attributes of the group , and choosing an alternative outgroup by which to compare the ingroup . 
 = = = = Social competition = = = = 
 Here an ingroup seeks positive distinctiveness via direct competition with the outgroup in the form of ingroup favoritism . It is considered competitive in that in this case favoritism for the ingroup occurs on a value dimension that is shared by all relevant social groups ( in contrast to social creativity scenarios ) . Social competition is predicted to occur when group boundaries are considered impermeable , and when status relations are considered to be reasonably unstable . Although not privileged in the theory , it is this positive distinctiveness strategy that has received the greatest amount of attention . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Historical background = = = 
 By the late 1920s the collectivist perspective had all but disappeared from mainstream social psychology . Around the time of the first formal statement of social identity theory , <unk> wrote this on the state of social psychology : 
 " Thus , social categorization is still conceived as a haphazardly floating ' independent variable ' which strikes at random as the spirit moves it . No links are made or attempted , between the conditions determining its presence and mode of operation , and its outcomes in widely diffused commonalities of social behaviour . Why , when and how is social categorisation salient or not salient ? What kind of shared constructions of social reality , mediated through social categorization , lead to a social climate in which large masses of people feel they are in long @-@ term conflict with other masses ? What , for example , are the psychological transitions from a stable to an unstable social system ? " ( Original emphasis , p . 188 ) 
 Thus , social identity theory in part reflects a desire to reestablish a more collectivist approach to social psychology of the self and social groups . 
 = = Implications = = 
 = = = <unk> favoritism = = = 
 In @-@ group favoritism ( also known as " ingroup bias " , despite Turner 's objections to the term ) is an effect where people give preferential treatment to others when they are perceived to be in the same ingroup . Social identity attributes the cause of ingroup favoritism to a psychological need for positive distinctiveness and describes the situations where ingroup favoritism is likely to occur ( as a function of perceived group status , legitimacy , stability , and permeability ) . It has been shown via the minimal group studies that ingroup favoritism may occur for both arbitrary ingroups ( e.g. a coin toss may split participants into a ' heads ' group and a ' tails ' group ) as well as non @-@ arbitrary ingroups ( e.g. ingroups based on cultures , genders , sexual orientation , and first languages ) . 
 Continued study into the relationship between social categorization and ingroup favoritism has explored the relative prevalences of the ingroup favoritism vs. outgroup discrimination , explored different manifestations of ingroup favoritism , and has explored the relationship between ingroup favoritism and other psychological constraints ( e.g. , existential threat ) . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Self @-@ esteem hypothesis = = = 
 Social identity theory proposes that people are motivated to achieve and maintain positive concepts of themselves . Some researchers , including Michael Hogg and Dominic Abrams , thus propose a fairly direct relationship between positive social identity and self @-@ esteem . In what has become known as the " self @-@ esteem hypothesis " , self @-@ esteem is predicted to relate to in @-@ group bias in two ways . Firstly , successful intergroup discrimination elevates self @-@ esteem . Secondly , depressed or threatened self @-@ esteem promotes intergroup discrimination . Empirical support for these predictions has been mixed . 
 Some social identity theorists , including John Turner , consider the self @-@ esteem hypothesis as not canonical to social identity theory . In fact , the self @-@ esteem hypothesis is argued to be conflictual with the tenets of the theory . It is argued that the self @-@ esteem hypothesis misunderstands the distinction between a social identity and a personal identity . Along those lines , John Turner and Penny Oakes argue against an interpretation of positive distinctiveness as a straight forward need for self @-@ esteem or " quasi @-@ biological drive toward prejudice " . They instead favour a somewhat more complex conception of positive self @-@ concept as a reflection of the ideologies and social values of the perceiver . Additionally , it is argued that the self @-@ esteem hypothesis neglects the alternative strategies to maintaining a positive self @-@ concept that are articulated in social identity theory ( i.e. , individual mobility and social creativity ) . 
 = = = Positive @-@ negative asymmetry = = = 
 In what has been dubbed the Positive @-@ Negative Asymmetry Phenomenon , researchers have shown that punishing the out @-@ group benefits self @-@ esteem less than rewarding the in @-@ group . From this finding it has been extrapolated that social identity theory is therefore unable to deal with bias on negative dimensions . Social identity theorists , however , point out that for ingroup favouritism to occur a social identity " must be psychologically salient " , and that negative dimensions may be experienced as a " less fitting basis for self @-@ definition " . This important qualification is subtly present in social identity theory , but is further developed in self @-@ categorization theory . Empirical support for this perspective exist . It has been shown that when experiment participants can self @-@ select negative dimensions that define the ingroup no positive – negative asymmetry is found . 
 = = = Intergroup similarity = = = 
 It has been posited that social identity theory suggests that similar groups should have an increased motivation to differentiate themselves from each other . Subsequently , empirical findings where similar groups are shown to possess increased levels of intergroup attraction and decreased levels of in @-@ group bias have been interpreted as problematic for the theory . Elsewhere it has been suggested that this apparent inconsistency may be resolved by attending to social identity theory 's emphasis on the importance of the perceived stability and legitimacy of the intergroup status hierarchy . 
 = = = Predictive power = = = 
 Social identity theory has been criticised for having far greater explanatory power than predictive power . That is , while the relationship between independent variables and the resulting intergroup behaviour may be consistent with the theory in retrospect , that particular outcome is often not that which was predicted at the outset . A rebuttal to this charge is that the theory was never advertised as the definitive answer to understanding intergroup relationships . Instead it is stated that social identity theory must go hand in hand with sufficient understanding of the specific social context under consideration . The latter argument is consistent with the explicit importance that the authors of social identity theory placed on the role of " objective " factors , stating that in any particular situation " the effects of [ social identity theory ] variables are powerfully determined by the previous social , economic , and political processes " . 
 = = = SIT @-@ lite = = = 
 Some researchers interpret social identity theory as drawing a direct link between identification with a social group and ingroup favoritism . For example , Charles <unk> and John Jost state that " a main premise of social identity theory is that ingroup members will favour their own group over other groups " . This interpretation is rejected by other researchers . For example , Alex Haslam states that " although vulgarized versions of social identity theory argue that ' social identification leads automatically to discrimination and bias ' , in fact … discrimination and conflict are anticipated only in a limited set of circumstances " . The likening of social identity theory with social competition and ingroup favouritism is partly attributable to the fact that early statements of the theory included empirical examples of ingroup favouritism , while alternative positive distinctiveness strategies ( e.g. , social creativity ) were at that stage theoretical assertions . Regardless , in some circles the prediction of a straightforward identification @-@ bias correlation has earned the pejorative title " social identity theory @-@ lite " . 
 = SMS Jagd = 
 SMS Jagd was an aviso of the Imperial German Navy , the second and final member of the Wacht class . She had one sister ship , Wacht . Jagd was laid down in 1887 at the AG Weser shipyard , launched in July 1888 , and commissioned in June 1889 . She served in the German fleet for the next fifteen years , until she was withdrawn from active duty in 1904 . Thereafter , she was used as a harbor ship . In 1910 , she was stricken from the naval register and hulked . She was later used as a torpedo training platform until 1920 , when she was sold for scrapping . 
 = = Design = = 
 Jagd was 85 @.@ 5 meters ( 281 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 9 @.@ 66 m ( 31 @.@ 7 ft ) and a maximum draft of 3 @.@ 74 m ( 12 @.@ 3 ft ) forward . She displaced 1 @,@ 499 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 475 long tons ; 1 @,@ 652 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two angled 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 19 kn ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) and a range of approximately 2 @,@ 860 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 300 km ; 3 @,@ 290 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Jagd had a crew of 7 officers and 134 enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with three 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) K L / 35 gun placed in single pivot mounts . The guns were supplied with a total of 180 rounds of ammunition . Jagd also carried three 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes , one mounted submerged in the bow and the other two in deck @-@ mounted launchers on the broadside . In 1891 , four 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns in single mounts were added . The ship was the first German aviso to carry armor : a 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) thick deck , along with 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) of armor plating for the conning tower . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Jagd was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1887 . She was launched on 7 July 1888 , after which fitting @-@ out work was completed . The finished ship was commissioned into the German fleet on 25 June 1889 . She served in the fleet starting in 1889 . Jagd served in the Training Squadron in 1891 as a torpedo boat flotilla leader , along with the avisos Blitz and Pfeil . During the annual summer exercises , the Training Squadron served as the hostile fleet , and conducted a mock attack on the harbor at Kiel . In 1893 , Jagd was assigned as the dispatch vessel for the II Division of the Maneuver Squadron . During the 1896 annual maneuvers , Jagd was assigned to the I Division . 
 She was transferred to the I Division in 1897 , where she participated in the annual fleet exercises in August and September . After the conclusion of the maneuvers , the Maneuver Squadron returned to its home port in Wilhelmshaven . She served in the defending squadron during the August – September 1900 maneuvers . In 1904 , Jagd was withdrawn from active service and used as a harbor ship . Jagd was stricken from the naval register on 14 May 1910 and subsequently hulked . She was based in Friedrichsort outside Kiel and used as a firing platform for torpedo training until she was broken up for scrap in 1920 at Rüstringen . 
 = William Shirley = 
 William Shirley ( 2 December 1694 – 24 March 1771 ) was a British colonial administrator who was the longest @-@ serving governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay ( 1741 – 1749 and 1753 – 1756 ) and then Governor of the Bahamas ( 1760 – 1768 ) . He is best known for his role in organizing the 1745 Siege of Louisbourg during King George 's War , and for his role in military affairs during the French and Indian War . He spent most of his years in the colonial administration of North America working to defeat New France , but his lack of formal military training led to political difficulties and his eventual downfall . 
 Politically well connected , Shirley began his career in Massachusetts as advocate general in the admiralty court , and quickly became an opponent of Governor Jonathan Belcher . He joined with Belcher 's other political enemies to bring about Belcher 's recall , and was appointed Governor of Massachusetts Bay in Belcher 's place . He successfully quieted political divisions within the province , and was able to bring about united action against New France when King George 's War began in 1744 . The successful Siege of Louisbourg , which Shirley had a major role in organizing , was one of the high points of his administration . 
 After King George 's War Shirley became mired in disputes over funding and accounting for the war effort , and returned to England in 1749 to deal with political and legal matters arising from those disputes . He was then assigned to a commission established by Great Britain and France to determine the colonial borders in North America . His hard @-@ line approach to these negotiations contributed to their failure , and he returned to Massachusetts in 1753 . 
 Military matters again dominated Shirley 's remaining years in Massachusetts , with the French and Indian War beginning in 1754 . Shirley led a military expedition to reinforce Fort Oswego in 1755 , and became Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , North America upon the death of General Edward Braddock . His difficulties in organizing expeditions in 1755 and 1756 were compounded by political disputes with New York politicians , and over military matters with Indian agent Sir William Johnson . These disagreements led to his recall in 1757 as both Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief and as governor . In his later years he served as governor of the Bahamas , before returning to Massachusetts , where he died . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Shirley , the son of William and Elizabeth Godman Shirley , was born on 2 December 1694 at Preston Manor in East Sussex , England . He was educated at Pembroke College , Cambridge , and then read law at the Inner Temple in London . In 1717 his grandfather died , leaving him <unk> Hall in <unk> and some funds , which he used to purchase a clerkship in London . About the same time he married Frances Barker , with whom he had a large number of children . He was called to the bar in 1720 . Although his inheritance had been substantial ( about £ 10 @,@ 000 ) , he cultivated an expensive lifestyle , and suffered significant financial reverses in the depression of 1721 . The financial demands of his large family ( he and Frances had eight children by 1731 ) prompted him to seek an appointment in the North American colonies . His family was connected by marriage to the Duke of Newcastle , who became an important patron and sponsor of Shirley 's advancement , and to that of Arthur Onslow , the Speaker of the House of Commons . Armed with letters of introduction from Newcastle and others ( but no appointment ) , Shirley arrived in Boston , Massachusetts in 1731 . 
 = = Advocate general = = 
 Shirley was initially received with indifference by Massachusetts Governor Jonathan Belcher , who refused him patronage positions that became available . In 1733 Shirley sought to secure from David Dunbar the commission as the crown surveyor general , but Dunbar eventually decided to retain the office . Influence from Newcastle eventually yielded Shirley a position as advocate general in the admiralty court . Belcher resisted further entreaties from Newcastle to promote Shirley , and Shirley began using his position to actively prosecute Belcher supporters whose illegal logging activities came under his jurisdiction . 
 Shirley also made common cause with Samuel Waldo , a wealthy merchant and major landowner in the province eastern district ( present @-@ day Maine ) where Belcher 's lax enforcement of timber @-@ cutting laws was harming his business with the Royal Navy . In 1736 Shirley sent his wife to London to lobby on his behalf against Belcher . Waldo also eventually went to London ; the combination of Shirley 's connection to Newcastle and Waldo 's money soon made inroads in the colonial administration . When these were joined by discontented New Hampshire interests ( Belcher was also governor of New Hampshire ) , a full @-@ scale offensive was launched in the late 1730s to unseat Belcher . This included at least one forged letter on the part of Belcher opponents in an attempt to discredit the governor , which Shirley denounced . By 1738 Newcastle was in a dominant position in not just the colonial administration , but also in the British government as an opponent of Prime Minister Sir Robert Walpole , and he actively encouraged Belcher 's opponents . 
 In 1739 the Privy Council reprimanded Belcher , voted to separate the Massachusetts and New Hampshire governorships , and began debating the idea of replacing the governor . The exact reasons for Belcher 's dismissal have been a recurring subject of scholarly interest , due to the many colonial , imperial , and political factors at play . Two principal themes within these analyses are Belcher 's acquisition of many local enemies , and the idea that good imperial governance in London eventually required his replacement . Before the issues of 1739 most of the efforts to unseat Belcher had failed : Belcher himself noted in that year that " the <unk> I am <unk> 'd in is carrying on in much the same manner as for 9 years past . " Historian Stephen Foster further notes that someone as powerful as Newcastle was at the time generally had much weightier issues to deal with than arbitrating colonial politics . In this instance , however , imperial and colonial considerations coincided over the need for Massachusetts to provide a significant number of troops for Newcastle 's proposed West Indies expedition in the War of Jenkins ' Ear . In April 1740 Newcastle in effect offered Shirley the opportunity to prove , in the light of Belcher 's political difficulties , that he could more effectively raise troops than the governor could . Shirley consequently engaged in recruiting , principally outside Massachusetts ( where Belcher refused his offers of assistance , understanding what was going on ) , and deluged Newcastle with documentation of his successes while Belcher was preoccupied with a banking crisis . Newcastle handed the issue off to Martin Bladen , secretary to the Board of Trade and a known Belcher opponent . The Board of Trade then apparently decided , based on the weight of the extant evidence , that Belcher needed to be replaced . In April 1741 the Privy Council approved William Shirley 's commission as governor of Massachusetts , and Benning Wentworth 's commission as governor of New Hampshire was issued the following June . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 When Shirley assumed the governorship of Massachusetts in August 1741 , he was immediately confronted with a currency crisis . The province had been suffering for many years with inflation caused by issuance of increasing quantities of paper currency . Late in Belcher 's tenure , competing banking proposals had been made in a bid to address the issue , and a popular proposal for a bank secured by real estate had been enacted . This bank ( the controversy over it having contributed to Belcher 's recall ) had been dissolved by an Act of Parliament , and Shirley had to negotiate the dissolution of the bank 's assets and reclamation of the notes it had issued . In this process , which occupied the rest of 1741 , Shirley deftly navigated legislation through the provincial assembly that provided a schedule for redeeming the bank 's currency without causing the bank 's principal owners to collapse under a deluge of redemptions . 
 With rising tensions Shirley acted to strengthen the military defenses of the colony . He created a series of volunteer militia companies along the frontier . These included Burke 's Rangers and Gorham 's Rangers which became the model for Shirley 's more famous creation Roger 's Rangers . 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 Britain captured Acadia from France in Queen Anne 's War ( 1702 – 1713 ) , but the Treaty of Utrecht left Cape Breton Island in French hands , and did not clearly demarcate a boundary between New France and the British colonies on the Atlantic coast . To protect the crucial passageway of the Saint Lawrence River into the heart of New France , France built a strong fortress at Louisbourg on the Atlantic coast of Cape Breton Island . 
 When Shirley took office , relations between France and Britain were strained , and there was a possibility that Britain would be drawn into the War of the Austrian Succession , which had started on the European mainland in 1740 . Shirley was able to finesse his restrictions on the production of paper currency to achieve an updating of the province 's defences , and in 1742 requested permission from the Board of Trade for the printing of additional currency should war break out . This permission was granted in 1743 , along with a warning that war with France was likely . France declared war against Britain in March 1744 , and forces from Louisbourg raided the British fishing port of Canso on the northern end of mainland Nova Scotia before its residents were aware they were at war . French privateers also began preying on British and colonial vessels . British colonial governors along the coast , including Shirley , sent colonial guard ships and authorized their own privateers in response , neutralizing the French activity . 
 Canso was used by New England fishermen , and as such its fall was of interest to Massachusetts . Shirley had , prior to its capture , received a request for assistance from the lieutenant governor of Nova Scotia , Paul Mascarene , for support in the defence of Annapolis Royal . In response to the fall of Canso and a second , urgent request from Mascarene , Shirley promptly despatched two companies of volunteers to Annapolis Royal . The timely arrival of these troops in early July broke up a siege . 
 John Bradstreet , who had been captured at Canso and held prisoner at Louisbourg , returned to New England in a prisoner exchange , and gave a detailed report to Shirley that emphasised the weaknesses of the French fort . William Vaughn , who owned several businesses in Maine that were vulnerable to raids from New France , toured New England advocating an expedition to capture Louisbourg . Shirley and other leaders in New England and New York sent letters to colonial authorities in London seeking support for such an expedition , citing the vulnerable conditions at Louisbourg . Vaughn and Bradstreet wanted to attack Louisbourg that winter with an all @-@ colonial force . Shirley doubted the practicality of that plan , but in January 1745 submitted it to the provincial assembly ( General Court ) , which declined to support the plan , but did request that Britain undertake an attack on Louisbourg . 
 Vaughn continued to advocate for a quick all @-@ American expedition , enlisting the support of fishing captains , merchants and 200 " principal gentlemen " of Boston . Shirley called the General Court into session to discuss the matter once more , and the proposal was submitted to a committee chaired by William Pepperrell . The committee reported favourably on the plan , and it was approved by a single vote when several opponents were absent from the chamber . 
 Shirley appointed a reluctant William Pepperrell to command the expedition , William Vaughn was appointed colonel , but without a command position , and John Bradstreet was appointed as a military advisor to Pepperrell . Shirley requested support for the expedition from Peter Warren , commodore of the Royal Navy squadron in the West Indies , but Warren declined due to the strenuous objections of his captains . This news arrived in Boston just as the expedition was preparing to leave . 
 Despite the absence of support from the Royal Navy , the New England expedition set out in March 1745 for Louisbourg . More than 4 @,@ 000 men on more than 90 transports ( mainly fishing boats and coastal traders ) , escorted by six colonial guard ships , descended on Canso , where the expedition waited for the ice to clear from <unk> Bay , the site just south of Louisbourg that had been chosen for the troop landing . Starting on 22 April the expedition was joined by four Royal Navy warships under the command of Commodore Warren , who received orders ( issued in January , but not received until after his previous refusal ) to assist the expedition . 
 = = = Siege of Louisbourg = = = 
 The provincial forces began landing at <unk> Bay on 30 April , and laid siege to the fortress while the British ships blockaded the harbour . The Americans began suffering battle losses , while the British naval officers , who had a low opinion of American soldiers , grew increasingly critical of the American efforts . Warren tried to exert control over the provincial troops , but Pepperrell resisted him . Louisbourg surrendered on 17 June . The Americans lost 180 men in combat , to disease or at sea during the siege , while the Royal Navy ships did not fire on the fortress , and lost just one sailor . As the victors settled into occupation of Louisbourg , friction grew between the Americans and the British . The terms of surrender guaranteed the French in all of their possessions ; there was no plunder for the American troops . On the other hand , the Royal Navy had captured several rich French prizes , and British sailors on shore leave bragged to the Americans about how rich they were going to be from their shares . 
 The American troops had signed up to capture Louisbourg , and expected to go home after siege ended . The British government , who had believed that the provincial troops were incapable of capturing Louisbourg on their own , had made no plans to send British troops to take over occupation of the fortress . When it become evident that British troops would not be relieving the provincials until after winter had passed , Governor Shirley travelled to Louisbourg to raise the morale of the troops . His first speech to the troops had little effect , and some troops were close to mutiny . In a second speech Shirley promised to send home more troops immediately , and provide higher pay and better supplies for those who stayed until spring . Honors from the British government were sparse ; Pepperrell was made a baronet , he and Shirley were made colonels in the British Army with the right to raise their own regiments , and Warren was promoted to rear admiral . 
 = = = Aborted campaign = = = 
 Shirley had engaged in the Louisbourg campaign primarily as a way to ensure British interests in the Atlantic fisheries . The victory , however , made him expand his vision to encompass the possibility of capturing all of New France . After capturing the French fort he wrote to Newcastle , proposing a series of expeditions to gain control of all of North America as far west as the Mississippi River , starting with one that would go up the Saint Lawrence from Louisbourg . Upon his return to Boston , Shirley began making preparations for such an expedition . In May 1746 he received plans for London outlining an attempt on Quebec using Royal Navy and provincial forces , while a second expedition was to attack Fort Saint @-@ Frédéric on Lake Champlain . Shirley stepped up recruiting in Massachusetts and asked neighboring governors to contribute men and resources to the effort . Expected support from Britain never arrived , however , and the 1746 expeditions were called off . 
 While waiting for definite word from London of plans for 1747 Shirley beefed up the province 's western defenses , and in the spring of 1747 he began sending supplies to the Hudson River valley in anticipation of a move toward Fort Saint @-@ Frédéric . Word then arrived from Newcastle that the British establishment would not support any expeditions against New France . The drop in military spending that resulted had negative consequences on the Massachusetts economy , harming Shirley 's popularity . 
 Shirley personally profited from the supply activities surrounding the Louisbourg expedition . In 1746 he used the funds to purchase an estate in Roxbury , on which he built an elaborate mansion , now known as the Shirley @-@ Eustis House . Before the building was complete his wife died of a fever in August 1746 ; she was interred in King 's Chapel . 
 = = = <unk> crisis = = = 
 While Governor Shirley was at Louisbourg trouble had been brewing between the Royal Navy and the people of Boston . The Navy had long sought to press Americans into service on its ships . <unk> was a long @-@ standing practice in Britain , but its application in America was resisted by the colonists . In 1702 Fort William on Castle Island had fired on HMS Swift as it tried to leave Boston Harbour with six recently impressed men aboard . As a result of American complaints ( reinforced by British merchants ) , Parliament in 1708 banned impressment in the American colonies . Navy leaders argued that the American exemption from impressment had been in force only during Queen Anne 's War , which ended in 1713 . In practice , Royal Navy captains had to apply to colonial governors for a license to press men . In late November 1745 a fight between a press gang and some sailors staying in a boarding house in Boston left two of the sailors with fatal injuries . Two members of the press gang were charged with murder and convicted , but were released when the indictment was found invalid . 
 Two years later Commodore Charles Knowles , who served as Governor of Louisbourg after its capture , had a large number of seamen from Boston harbour impressed for service in his squadron . A mob of more than 300 men seized three naval officers and a deputy sheriff and beat the sheriff . The mob then went to Governor Shirley 's house , demanding the release of the men impressed by Knowles . Shirley tried to call out the militia , but they did not respond . Shirley did succeed in getting the naval officers into his house , and the mob eventually left . Later in the day Shirley went to the Town House to meet the people . The mob , now consisting of several thousand people , attacked the Town House , breaking many windows in the building . Shirley spoke to the mob and promised to present their demands to Commodore Knowles . The mob left , intending to find a Royal Navy ship to burn . 
 After Shirley had returned home that afternoon , the mob , which had seized another naval officer and several petty officers , returned to his house . Shirley ordered a number of armed men who were protecting his house to fire at the mob , but William Pepperrell was able to stop Shirley 's men from firing and to persuade the mob to leave . In the meantime , Commodore Knowles threatened to bombard Boston with his squadron . It was only after the Massachusetts Council adopted resolutions in support of the demands of the mob that the situation became quieter in Boston . The mob eventually released its hostages and Knowles released the impressed seamen . 
 = = = Compensation and currency = = = 
 Another issue of contention was compensation to the American colonies by Britain for the costs of the expedition against Louisbourg and the long occupation by American troops until the British Army finally took over . This presented Shirley with a problem , because the expedition 's leaders , including his former ally Samuel Waldo , grossly inflated their claimed costs . Waldo used Shirley 's unwillingness to openly act against him to begin his own efforts to topple the governor . Shirley was only able to forestall this effort by promising the colonial administration that he would achieve financial stability in the province by retiring its paper currency . 
 The British government was also slow in responding to requests for compensation . While waiting for a response , the question of how to use any compensation was debated in provincial newspapers and pamphlets . Some , such as Samuel Adams ( father of the famous American Revolution leader ) , advocated placing the money in London banks to serve as backing for the paper currency issued by the colonies . Others , including William Douglass and Thomas Hutchinson , speaker of the General Court , favoured using the compensation to redeem the paper currency and give Massachusetts a hard currency . In 1748 the Treaty of Aix @-@ la @-@ Chapelle returned <unk> to France , with Massachusetts still awaiting compensation for its seizure . 
 In the meantime , Governor Shirley had been trying to finance a campaign to capture Fort St. Frédéric ( at present @-@ day Crown Point , New York ) , for which he issued more paper money . The campaign was abandoned when the colonies failed to support it , but the resulting inflation helped turn supporters of Shirley against him . The loss of Louisbourg increase public dissatisfaction with Shirley , who seen as complicit in British scheming against the American colonies . Even William Pepperrell joined the large number of citizens calling for Shirley 's removal . Samuel Adams edited and Gamaliel Rogers and Daniel Fowle published The Independent Advertiser , which regularly criticised the British government and Shirley 's administration . The paper published several of Shirley 's letters to officials in Britain that were critical of Americans , and regularly called for the governor 's removal . William Douglass , a prominent physician in Boston , wrote a series of pamphlets ( published by Rogers and Fowle ) attacking Shirley , Commodore Knowles , and the whole conduct of the campaign for Louisbourg and its occupation . Both Shirley and Knowles sued Douglass for libel , but lost their cases in court . 
 Shirley 's conflict with Samuel Waldo over expenses eventually reached a high pitch : Shirley had successfully attached some of Waldo 's assets in legal action , which Waldo had countered with further legal action . Shirley appealed these actions to London , and was granted permission ( received in August 1749 ) to travel to London to deal with the matter . He sailed for Britain in September 1749 , just before the long promised compensation reached Boston . Under legislation shepherded by Thomas Hutchinson , the specie delivered was used to retire the paper currency . While Shirley was abroad , Hutchinson , Andrew Oliver , and others served as his surrogates , and he carefully instructed Lieutenant Governor Spencer Phips to not give his enemies opportunities to manoeuvre in his absence . 
 = = European interlude = = 
 In London Shirley met with Newcastle and the colonial secretary , the Duke of Bedford to discuss colonial matters and his situation . Newcastle ordered the military books of Waldo and Pepperrell to be scrutinized ; the analysis was found to confirm Shirley 's position . Shirley 's accounts were also examined , and were found to be " made up with great exaction " , " more conformable to his Majesty 's orders ... than any other of the colonies . " 
 Shirley also communicated political concerns over which he and New York Governor George Clinton had commiserated . While he was in London , word arrived that Clinton wanted to leave his post . Shirley applied to Newcastle for the job , but was turned down . Newcastle may have been upset with Shirley , who had accepted an unexpected offer from Bedford to participate in a commission established to delineate the boundaries between the British and French territories in North America . The commission was set to meet in Paris , and Shirley saw it as an opportunity to advance his expansionist views . Newcastle and Bedford were at the time involved in a political struggle , and Newcastle was unhappy that Shirley had accepted Bedford 's offer . Shirley was able to convince Newcastle that his experience and position would be of use in the negotiations . 
 The commission met in Paris , and Shirley was accompanied by William Mildmay , a somewhat mild @-@ mannered merchant , as <unk> . Shirley adopted a hard line in the negotiations , arguing in a technical and lawyerly fashion for an expansive reading of British territory ; he claimed all territory east of a line from the Kennebec River north to the Saint Lawrence River , while the French claimed all of that area except peninsular Nova Scotia . Shirley 's approach served to harden negotiating positions and bogged the commission 's work down in minutiae . When Mildmay complained of this to London , Bedford rebuked Shirley for spending too much effort on trivialities . While the negotiations dragged on , both French and British operatives were actively expanding their interests in the Ohio River valley , raising tensions . 
 In 1751 Shirley incited a minor scandal when he married Julie , the young daughter of his Paris landlord . He was recalled to London after Mildmay complained that Shirley was taking actions without consulting him . Shirley returned to London convinced that the French needed to be driven from North America . Mildmay attempted to continue the negotiations , believing that he could overcome Shirley 's previous obstructionism , but the negotiations ended in failure . 
 Shirley renewed his application for the New York governorship , but was snubbed by Newcastle , who was upset over Shirley 's marriage . He was instead ordered to return to Massachusetts . This he did , leaving his wife in London . It is unclear if they ever saw each other again : biographer John Schutz believes they did not , but family lore is that they were reunited after Shirley left the Massachusetts governorship . 
 = = Return to Massachusetts = = 
 The opposition in Massachusetts to Shirley had died down while he was in England and Paris . Shirley soon had to deal with the increasing conflict on the frontier with French Canada . Tensions had been increasing , particularly in the Ohio Country , where British and French traders were coming into conflict . When ( false ) rumors reached Boston in 1754 of French military activity on the province 's northern frontier ( Maine ) , Shirley was quick to organize an expedition to the Kennebec River to bolster the area 's defenses . This expedition erected Fort Halifax in what is now Winslow , Maine . News of hostilities in the Ohio Country brought further urgency to that matter , as well as attendance at a planned conference of colonies at Albany , New York . Because of the urgency , and the support of politically powerful Maine landowners , Shirley 's relationship with the provincial assembly was relatively good . Shirley instructed the provincial representatives to the Albany Conference to seek a colonial union , but the provincial assembly ( along with those of other provinces ) rejected the conference 's proposals . 
 = = = Seven Years War : 1755 campaigns = = = 
 Shirley was approached by Nova Scotia Governor Charles Lawrence for assistance in dealing with the French threat on that province 's frontiers , suggesting that the collaborate on military actions there . Shirley and Lawrence believed their proposed expedition would also require assistance from Britain , and sent letters requesting the same . At the same time they ramped up preparations in anticipation of the request being approved . Shirley was also ordered to activate and recruit for his regiment , which was to serve in Braddock 's force . Because he could not leave the province he sent one of his sons to New York to recruit troops there ; Massachusetts men were being drafted for the Nova Scotia expedition . He furthermore revived the idea of an expedition against Fort St. Frédéric , although he limited the first year 's action to the establishment of a fort at the southern end of Lake George , and sought to draw the leaders of neighboring colonies to assist in the operation . He mollified New York 's Acting Governor James DeLancey , who was generally hostile to Massachusetts interests , by proposing that the expedition be led by New York 's Indian Commissioner , Colonel William Johnson . Johnson was at first reluctant , but Shirley was able to convince him to take the command . 
 Since the French and Indian War had become a matter of imperial concern , two British Army regiments under General Edward Braddock were sent to America . In written exchanges , Braddock announced his intention to use this force against Fort Duquesne in the Ohio Country , while Shirley unsuccessfully lobbied him to instead target Fort Niagara . At a conference of governors and military leaders in April 1755 Shirley favorably impressed Braddock . Braddock declared that Duquesne would be his target , but he authorized Shirley to take his regiment and that of Sir William Pepperrell to Fort Niagara , and confirmed Johnson 's command of the Lake George campaign . Braddock 's instructions only gave Shirley the vaguest command over Johnson , which was to later become a source of trouble . The two northern expeditions were to be made without logistical assistance from the regular army . 
 From the conference Shirley traveled to New York City , where he negotiated with merchants for supplying his expedition . The frosty relationship he had with Governor DeLancey continued ; the <unk> objected to what they saw as Massachusetts interference in their provincial affairs . When Shirley moved to prevent New York agent Oliver DeLancey from recruiting in Connecticut , it caused a stink and threatened to derail planning for the New York expeditions . Shirley then created a breach with Johnson by attempting to siphon troops from Johnson 's command to increase his own force for the Fort Niagara expedition . The antagonism was furthered by the fact that the two expeditions were competing for supplies from the same sources , and was also exacerbated by ongoing border disputes between the provinces . 
 When Shirley and Johnson met in July 1755 before their respective expeditions set off , tension between the two men continued , and Johnson delayed decisions on assigning Indian auxiliaries to Shirley 's campaign , observing that much of the expedition was traveling through friendly Iroquois territory , where they would not yet be needed . Shirley took offense at this as an act of insubordination . Believing he outranked Johnson , Shirley next sought to bypass the Indian agent and negotiate directly with the tribes for recruits , but Johnson and his subordinates actively opposed the move . The Iroquois also objected to the presence of Shirley 's recruiting agent , Colonel John <unk> , with whom they had outstanding issues over past land transactions . The situation was not made easier by the fact that neither Johnson nor Shirley had ever commanded expeditions of the size and scope proposed . 
 Shirley 's expedition reached Fort Oswego in mid @-@ August . The trek up the Mohawk River had been slowed by low water , and it was being incompetently supplied , resulting in a shortage of provisions . Shirley learned en route that General Braddock had died in the aftermath of the 13 July Battle of the Monongahela , which also claimed the life of Shirley 's son William . As a result , he became temporary commander @-@ in @-@ chief of North American forces . His expedition then became bogged down at Fort Oswego by the need to improve its defenses , and the ongoing provisioning crisis . In a council on 18 September it was decided to proceed with plans to reach Fort Niagara , but one week later the decision was reversed . Shirley returned to Albany , preoccupied with the need to manage the entire British war effort on the continent . 
 William Johnson 's expedition fared little better than Shirley 's . He reached the southern end of Lake George , where his forces had an inconclusive encounter with French forces on 8 September , and began work on Fort William Henry . Rumors of French movements brought a flurry of activity in November , but when the opposition failed to materialize , much of Johnson 's force abandoned the camp to return home . Shirley had to pressure New England 's governors to assign militia to the new posting for the winter . 
 In Nova Scotia , Governor Lawrence had easily captured Fort Beauséjour , and had then embarked on what has since become known as the Great Expulsion , the forcible removal of more than 12 @,@ 000 Acadians from Nova Scotia . When some of the ships carrying the Acadians entered Boston Harbor in early December 1755 , Shirley ordered that they not disembark . For three winter months , until March 1756 , the Acadians remained on the ships , where half died from the cold weather and malnutrition . 
 = = = Seven Years War : 1756 campaigns = = = 
 During the winter of 1755 – 56 Shirley 's feud with Johnson continued . Johnson , who was being advised by Thomas Pownall , continued to assert his exclusive authority over interactions with Indians , and renewed complaints about Shirley 's interference in recruiting for the 1755 campaign . In one letter Johnson wrote that Shirley had " become my inveterate enemy " who would do everything he could " to blast if he can my character . " Johnson made common cause with the <unk> ( to whom he was related by marriage ) in their dislike of Shirley . They all fed unflattering reports to the new New York governor , Sir Charles Hardy , who forwarded them on to London . Shirley was unaware of this looming threat to his authority . 
 As commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Shirley made a grandiose proposal for the 1756 campaign season in November 1755 , continuing the routes of attack begun in 1755 and adding an expedition to Quebec via the Kennebec River . However , the complaints against him had reached the Duke of Newcastle , who felt he needed someone less embroiled in controversies with other leaders in charge of military matters in North America . British leaders had also received intercepted letters destined for France that some believed might have been written by Shirley , in part because he married a Frenchwoman . Thomas Pownall traveled to London in early 1756 and further denounced Shirley to the colonial administration . Shirley did not learn of these matters until April 1756 , by which time the British leadership had already decided to replace him as commander @-@ in @-@ chief . 
 While waiting for his replacement ( Lord Loudoun ) Shirley made every effort to advance supplies and reinforcements to the Fort Oswego garrison , which had been on short rations for the winter , and whose supply line had been interrupted by the Battle of Fort Bull in March 1756 . He continued to mobilize resources and personnel for at least the Oswego and Lake George efforts , but his authority was waning due to widespread knowledge of his replacement . Military affairs continued to deteriorate on the New York frontier before Loudoun finally arrived in July 1756 ; Fort Oswego fell to the French on 10 August . 
 Although Shirley had been removed as commander @-@ in @-@ chief , he retained the Massachusetts governorship . He expected to lose even that post not long after his return to Boston in August . However , no replacement had yet been named , and Loudoun saw either Shirley 's interference or ineffectiveness in all that was wrong on the New York frontier . He also raised detailed questions about Shirley 's war @-@ related expenditures , which he ( and later historians ) concluded was poorly @-@ disguised patronage spending . Loudoun and Shirley argued over many issues , including Shirley 's continuance of military preparations after January 1756 , when Loudoun 's commission was issued . Shirley pointed out that British leadership could hardly expect preparations to cease in the interval between Loudoun 's commission and his arrival to take command . While he waited for a replacement to be announced , Shirley took depositions , gathered evidence to support his version of affairs , and worked to close his financial affairs down . ( Loudoun was of the opinion that Shirley delayed his departure intentionally as a political maneuver . ) He sailed for England in October 1756 . Shirley would be formally replaced by Thomas Pownall in 1757 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Upon his arrival in London , Shirley was received by Newcastle and other sympathetic figures , but Newcastle had been forced from office by the poor showing in the war , and Shirley 's ongoing disagreements with Loudoun meant he was unlikely to receive another North American posting . Newcastle then withdrew his support from Shirley over a hearing into matters disputed between Loudoun and Shirley . Shirley was not granted formal hearings on other aspects of his conduct , and managed to convince Newcastle to overlook the matter of his " muddled " accounts . His prospects brightened when Loudoun and Pownall were both damaged by the continued poor military performance in North America ( notably the debacle of the Siege of Fort William Henry in August 1757 , which resulted in Loudoun 's recall ) . These failures served to rehabilitate Shirley and bring him back into Newcastle 's good graces . 
 In late 1758 Shirley was commissioned as Governor of the Bahamas . This was followed in early 1759 with a promotion to lieutenant general . After a lengthy passage , Shirley arrived in the Bahamas on 31 December , when his ship was wrecked on a reef in the islands . He eventually arrived without incident or injury at Nassau and assumed the reins of power . His rule was quiet ; dealing with smugglers in the islands was the major issue demanding the governor 's attention . In part to combat illicit trade he lobbied the London government that Nassau be established as a free port . Although he was influential in this regard , Nassau did not receive this status until after he left office . He also oversaw renovations to the governor 's mansion , and promoted the construction of churches with funding from the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel . In 1765 , after his wife 's death , he took his children to England so that they could be properly cared for . He returned to the islands , where he had to deal with protests of the recently enacted Stamp Act . When he proposed the use of the stamps on official documents to the local assembly , the reaction in opposition was so visceral that Shirley dissolved the body . By the time the next assembly met , the Stamp Act had been repealed . 
 His health failing , Shirley was eventually replaced as governor by his son Thomas , who was appointed in November 1767 and arrived to assume office the following year . Shirley sailed for Boston , where he took up residence in his old house in Roxbury with his daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law . There he died on 24 March 1771 . After a state funeral , he was interred in King 's Chapel . 
 = = Family and legacy = = 
 His son Thomas became a major general in the British army , was created a baronet in 1786 , and served , after his posting to the Bahamas , as Governor of Dominica and Governor of the Leeward Islands . He died in 1800 . Another son , William Jr . , was killed in 1755 at the Battle of the Monongahela whilst serving with Edward Braddock . Shirley 's daughter Anne married John Erving , a member of the Massachusetts Governor 's Council . 
 Shirley built a family home in Roxbury between 1747 and 1751 . He sold it to his daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law , Eliakim Hutchinson , in 1763 . It later came into the hands of William Eustis , Governor of Massachusetts in the 19th century . Now known as the Shirley @-@ Eustis House , it still stands at 33 Shirley Street . It has largely been restored and is a museum open to the public . 
 The town of Shirley , Massachusetts was founded during his term as Massachusetts governor . The Winthrop , Massachusetts geographical feature Shirley Point and the former feature Shirley Gut are named for him . Shirley helped to establish a cod fishery in Winthrop in 1753 . Shirley is also the namesake of Shirley Street in Halifax , Nova Scotia ( which is parallel to Pepperell Street , named after William Pepperell ) . 
 = = Works = = 
 Shirley , William ( 1746 ) . Letter to the Duke of Newcastle , with a Journal of the Siege of Louisburg . London : E. Owen . OCLC <unk> . 
 Shirley , William ; Alexander , William ( 1758 ) . The Conduct of Major Gen. William Shirley briefly stated . London : R. and J. Dodsley . OCLC <unk> . 
 Shirley , William ( 1912 ) . Lincoln , Charles Henry , ed . Correspondence of William Shirley , Volume 1 . New York : Macmillan . OCLC <unk> . 
 Shirley , William ( 1912 ) . Lincoln , Charles Henry , ed . Correspondence of William Shirley , Volume 2 . New York : Macmillan . OCLC <unk> . 
 = 1925 Florida tropical storm = 
 The 1925 Florida tropical storm was the deadliest tropical cyclone to impact the United States that did not become a hurricane . The fourth and final storm of the season , it formed as a tropical depression on November 27 near the Yucatán Peninsula , the system initially tracked southeastward before turning north as it gradually intensified . After skirting western Cuba on November 30 , the storm reached peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) before striking central Florida on December 1 . Within hours , the system transitioned into an extratropical cyclone and emerged into the Atlantic Ocean . The system moved onshore once more on December 2 in North Carolina before turning east , away from the United States . On December 5 , the system is presumed to have dissipated offshore . 
 Throughout the system 's existence , it was responsible for 73 fatalities , most of which resulted from offshore incidents . The worst loss of life took place off East Coast , where the 30 crewmen of the American SS Catopazi drowned . Property damage amounted to $ 3 million , $ 1 million of which was in Jacksonville . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The 1925 Florida tropical storm was first identified on November 27 , 1925 as a tropical depression situated to the southeast of the Yucatán Peninsula , nearly a month after the official end of the hurricane season . Situated over 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) waters , the system slowly intensified , attaining tropical storm status roughly 12 hours after forming , as it drifted towards the southeast before abruptly turning north @-@ northwestward . Throughout November 30 , the storm quickly strengthened as it brushed the western tip of Cuba with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Once in the Gulf of Mexico , the storm turned northeastward and intensified to peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . The lowest known barometric pressure attained by the storm was 995 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 38 inHg ) as it moved inland . Within hours of reaching this strength , the storm made landfall just south of Fort Myers , Florida early on December 1 as it began to transition into an extratropical cyclone . The storm was originally thought to have moved ashore as a minimal hurricane , thus becoming the latest @-@ landfalling hurricane in United States history . However , a reanalysis in 2011 lowered the peak winds . While crossing the Florida peninsula , the storm briefly weakened as it completed its transition ; however , once back over water , it re @-@ intensified . 
 Off the coast of The Carolinas , the former tropical storm became a large and powerful extratropical cyclone , attaining peak winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) along with a pressure of 979 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 91 inHg ) , measured by the USS Patoka . Gale force winds extended to at least New Jersey , where winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) were recorded . Throughout December 2 , the storm gradually slowed as it tracked roughly parallel to the East Coast . Later that day , the system moved onshore again , this time between Wilmington and Cape Hatteras , with winds equivalent to a minimal hurricane . A strong area of high pressure located over the Canadian Maritimes caused the system to turn towards the east @-@ southeast . Over the following few days , the storm gradually weakened as it moved away from North Carolina . By December 5 , the storm was no longer identifiable and is presumed to have dissipated offshore . However , a monthly weather review published in 1925 that documented the system indicated that the cyclone continued towards the east , eventually impacting Bermuda and the Azores . Later analysis in 2009 concluded that a separate extratropical low , which formed near the remnants of the storm , was responsible for inclement weather in both areas . 
 = = Impact = = 
 From November 28 to November 30 , the storm brought light rains to most of eastern Cuba . Although the cyclone had tropical storm @-@ force winds at the time , the highest recorded wind in Cuba was 12 mph ( 18 km / h ) in Havana and only 0 @.@ 22 in ( 5 @.@ 58 mm ) of rain fell in the city . The Swan Islands , off the northern coast of Honduras , recorded 2 @.@ 36 in ( 59 @.@ 94 mm ) of precipitation during a three @-@ day span . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 During its passage through Florida , the storm produced torrential rain over coastal cities , peaking in Miami at 14 @.@ 08 in ( 358 mm ) . The storm caused significant property and crop damage along the Gulf Coast of Florida . Trees , power lines , and telegraph wires were knocked down by high winds along the Suwannee River . Communication throughout southern Florida was severed as miles of telegraph wires were downed during the evening of November 30 . Structures previously considered safe from storms due to their location over 100 ft ( 30 @.@ 4 m ) inland sustained significant damage , probably from storm surge . Beaches along the Atlantic coast also sustained considerable damages from the storm . Four people were killed near Tampa in two separate incidents . The first occurred when a house collapsed on three men , pinning them to the ground . The second incident occurred after a woman ran outside her home and was struck by a tree limb . At least 12 workmen were killed and 38 others injured after the bunkhouse they were sleeping in collapsed due to high winds . The facility in which they were working in also sustained $ 200 @,@ 000 in damage from a fire ignited by the cyclone . Throughout Florida , property loses were estimated at $ 3 million , with $ 1 million in Jacksonville alone . Damages to the citrus industry were also significant , with total losses exceeding $ 600 @,@ 000 . Losses in Miami amounted to $ 250 @,@ 000 as up to 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) inundated the city for more than two days . 
 Shipping incidents resulting from the storm caused several deaths . A schooner carrying seven people sunk , killing all its occupants . A tug boat sank off the coast of Mobile , Alabama while towing a lumber barge ; the fate of the crew is unknown . A ship named the American SS Catopazi sank between Charleston , South Carolina and the northern coast of Cuba , with all 30 crew members lost . Near Daytona Beach , a vessel carrying 2 @,@ 000 cases of liquor sank along with all six crewmen . The last incident , involving a yacht , occurred off the coast of Georgia . The ship sank near Savannah , Georgia with the 12 crew members drowning . The total loss of life at sea was at least 55 . Shipping throughout the East Coast was crippled by the storm as vessels were forced to seek shelter at port . 
 Due to the large size of the storm as an extratropical cyclone , gale and storm warnings in force from Beaufort , North Carolina to Eastport , Maine . In North Carolina , heavy rains and strong winds were reported along the coast . Near record high water rises were recorded around Wilmington . Cape Hatteras was temporarily isolated from the surrounding areas as the high winds from the storm knocked down power lines throughout the area . Several buildings along the coast and numerous boats sustained considerable damage . As far north as New Jersey , gale @-@ force winds produced by the powerful extratropical storm caused significant damage and killed at least two people . Large swells and high winds throughout New Jersey , southern New York and Connecticut resulted in significant damage . Along the coast of Long Island , large waves resulted in severe beach erosion which threatened to undermine homes . Parts of Coney Island were inundated by the increased surf , damaging homes and businesses . Several barges in nearby marinas were torn from their moorings and swept out to sea . In Sandy Hook , several workmen were nearly killed after a building collapsed amidst high winds . Minor precipitation was recorded throughout Rhode Island , peaking at 0 @.@ 62 in ( 16 mm ) . 
 = Joan Curran = 
 Joan Elizabeth Curran ( 26 February 1916 – 10 February 1999 ) was a Welsh scientist who played important roles in the development of radar and the atomic bomb during the Second World War . She invented chaff , a radar countermeasure technique credited with reducing losses among Allied bomber crews . She also worked on the development of the proximity fuse and the electromagnetic isotope separation process for the atomic bomb . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Joan Elizabeth Strothers was born on 26 February 1916 in Swansea , Wales , the daughter of an optician , Charles William Strothers , and his wife , Margaret Beatrice , née Millington . She was educated at Swansea Girls ' High School , and in 1934 won an open scholarship to Newnham College , Cambridge . In 1935 , she rowed for the ladies ' university eight , in the first real Women 's boat race against Oxford . She gained an honours degree in physics , which was not awarded because it was before women were allowed Cambridge degrees . In her seventies , in 1987 , she was honoured with the degree of Doctor of Laws honoris causa by the University of Strathclyde . 
 Strothers , who " had the scientific equivalent of gardening green fingers " , was awarded a government grant to study for a higher degree , and elected to go to the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge , where she joined Sam Curran in a team under the direction of Philip Dee . She soon established a reputation for " extreme dexterity and being outstandingly neat and skilful in the deployment of equipment . " In 1939 , Dee proposed that the team spend a month at the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough Airfield . They arrived on 1 September 1939 . Two days later , Britain declared war on Germany , and Britain entered the Second World War . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Instead of returning to the Cavendish , the team moved to Exeter , where Dee and three others worked on developing rockets as anti @-@ aircraft weapons , while Strothers and Curran joined a group under John Coles working on the development of the proximity fuse . Strothers was based at Leeson House and Durnford School . She and Curran developed a workable fuse , which was codenamed VT , an acronym of " Variable Time fuze " . The system was a small , short @-@ range , Doppler radar that used a clever circuit . However , Britain lacked the capacity to mass @-@ produce the fuze , so the design was shown to the United States by the Tizard Mission in late 1940 . The Americans perfected and mass @-@ produced the fuse . In due course , these proximity fuses arrived in the United Kingdom , where they played an important part in the defence of the kingdom against the V @-@ 1 flying bomb . 
 Strothers married Curran on 7 November 1940 . Soon afterwards they were transferred to the Telecommunications Research Establishment near Swanage , where Sam worked on centimetric radar , while Joan joined the Counter Measures Group in an adjoining lab . It was with this group , at Swanage , and later at Malvern , that Joan devised the technique that was codenamed Window , which is also known as chaff . She tried various types of radar reflectors , including wires and sheets , before settling on strips of tin foil 1 to 2 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 79 in ) wide and 25 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) long that could be scattered from bombers , thus disrupting the enemy 's radar . Window was first employed in Operation Gomorrah , a series of raids on Hamburg , and resulted in a much lower loss rate than usual . As part of Operation Taxable on 5 – 6 June 1944 , Window was dropped by Avro Lancasters of 617 Squadron to synthesise a phantom invasion force of ships in the Straits of Dover and keep the Germans unsure as to whether the brunt of the Allied assault would fall on Normandy or in the Pas de Calais area . R. V. Jones later declared : " In my opinion , Joan Curran made an even greater contribution to victory , in 1945 , than Sam . " 
 In early 1944 the <unk> were part of a group of British scientists invited to go to the US to take part in the Manhattan Project – the Allied project to develop an atomic bomb . They joined the British Mission at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory in California , headed by Mark Oliphant , a distinguished Australian scientist that Joan knew from the Cavendish Laboratory . Oliphant also acted as de facto deputy to Ernest Lawrence , the director of the Radiation Laboratory . The mission of the laboratory was to develop the electromagnetic isotope separation process to create enriched uranium for use in atomic bombs . 
 While at Berkeley , Joan gave birth to her first child , a daughter , Sheena , who was born severely mentally handicapped . They later had three sons , all of whom went on to complete a PhD . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the war ended , Sam took up an offer from Dee to become Professor of Natural Philosophy at Glasgow University . In Glasgow , the <unk> , together with a few friends , set up the Scottish Society for the Parents of Mentally Handicapped Children ( Enable ) , which eventually grew to 100 branches and more than 5000 members . Later , when Joan was a member of the Greater Glasgow Health Board and the Scottish Special Housing Association , the needs of the disabled were always at the forefront of her mind , and she did much to promote their welfare . She took a close interest in the work of the Council for Access for the Disabled and helped improve the range of facilities , especially for disabled university students . 
 Sam worked at the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment at Aldermaston on the development of the British hydrogen bomb from 1955 to 1959 . He returned to Glasgow in 1959 as principal the Royal College of Science and Technology . When it became the University of Strathclyde in 1964 , the first new university in Scotland in 384 years , he became its first Principal and Vice Chancellor . While her husband was Principal , Joan founded the Strathclyde Women 's Group and became its president . 
 During the war the Polish 1st Armoured Division had been based in Scotland , establishing ties between the community and Poland . Joan promoted a special relationship with the Technical University of Lodz , and also devoted care and attention to the children 's hospital of that city . Later she established the Lady Curran Endowment fund for overseas , particularly Polish , students . 
 Sam died on 25 February 1998 . While gravely ill with cancer in 1998 , Joan unveiled a memorial plaque in Barony Hall , Glasgow , to commemorate her husband , and it was announced that the walled garden at Ross Priory , on Loch <unk> , was to be named in her honour , and the Joan Curran Summer House would be built there . Joan died on 10 February 1999 , and was cremated at the <unk> Crematorium . Her daughter , Sheena , three sons and three grandsons survived her . 
 = The Last Temptation of Krust = 
 " The Last Temptation of Krust " is the fifteenth episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 22 , 1998 . It was written by Donick Cary and directed by Mike B. Anderson . Comedian Jay Leno makes a guest appearance . In the episode , Bart convinces Krusty the Clown to appear at a comedy festival organized by Jay Leno , but Krusty 's old material does not go over well with the audience and he receives bad reviews . He briefly retires from comedy but returns with a new , more well received gimmick . He soon returns to his old ways , selling out to a motor @-@ vehicle company . 
 The production team 's decision to write an episode about stand @-@ up comedy was influenced by comedy festivals . The writing staff initially had trouble getting Krusty 's offensive bad jokes through network censors , but convinced them this was simply a way to emphasize his old and dated comedic material . The " Canyonero " sequence was modeled after Ford commercials and was given its own segment at the end of the episode because the production staff liked it so much . The episode was highlighted by USA Today in a review of The Simpsons ' ninth season and received positive reviews in The Washington Times , the Evening Herald , and in books on The Simpsons . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Krusty is persuaded by Bart to appear at a comedy festival organized by Jay Leno . His old @-@ fashioned and outdated material fails to impress the audience when compared with the more trendy comedians also appearing . After reading a critical review of his act in the press , Krusty decides to go on a " bender to end all benders " and a montage sequence shows him getting drunk . After Bart finds him passed out on Ned Flanders ' lawn , he enlists the help of Leno to clean him up . Krusty holds a press conference to announce his retirement and in short order launches into a bitter tirade against modern @-@ day comedians . The audience finds Krusty 's rant hysterically funny and he subsequently announces his return to comedy . 
 Krusty is inspired to return to doing low @-@ key events , where he structures a new image for himself as a stand @-@ up comedian who tells the truth , criticizes commercialism , and refuses to sell out to corporate America . He also changes his appearance , sporting a dark sweater and tying his hair in a ponytail . Observing his newfound popularity , two marketing executives try to persuade Krusty to endorse a new sport utility vehicle called the Canyonero . Although he tries to resist , he eventually succumbs to the lure of money . After promoting the Canyonero at a comedy performance in Moe 's Tavern , he is booed off stage by the patrons . He finally admits to himself that comedy is not in his blood and selling out is . The episode ends with an extended advertisement for the Canyonero , as Krusty and Bart leave Moe 's tavern in Krusty 's new SUV . 
 = = Production = = 
 In the DVD commentary for The Simpsons ' ninth season , writer Donick Cary stated that the inspiration for the idea of an episode about stand @-@ up comedy came out of comedy festivals at the time . Executive producer Mike Scully said that the writers had difficulty getting Krusty 's offensive bad jokes through the network censors . The stereotypical jokes were allowed because the writers convinced the network censors that viewers would understand it was simply emphasizing Krusty 's dated comedic material . 
 Mike B. Anderson stated that at least three different acts of material were written and animated for Krusty 's comeback stand @-@ up appearance at Moe 's Tavern . It was not until the editing process that the material used was decided upon . The episode was still being animated three weeks before it was due to air and the production process moved frantically shortly before completion . The Canyonero sequence was originally planned to be displayed during the closing credits . The production team liked the scene so much that they did not want it to be obscured by the credits and gave it its own segment at the end of the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In addition to Jay Leno , other real @-@ life comedians that portrayed themselves in the episode include Steven Wright , Janeane Garofalo , Bobcat Goldthwait , and Bruce Baum , whose appearance helped increase his popularity . Krusty 's " Krustylu Studios " is a spoof on the company Desilu studios , set up by Lucille Ball and her husband Desi Arnaz , where the series Star Trek was once filmed . During Krusty 's " bender to end all benders " montage , he is seen drinking out of and vomiting into the Stanley Cup . The National Hockey League sent a letter regarding this scene . Mike Scully described it as a " kind of a cease and desist " , but the production staff decided not to cut the scene from the episode . Krusty attends the coffee shop Java the Hut , a reference to the Star Wars character Jabba the Hutt . 
 = = = Canyonero = = = 
 The " Canyonero " song and visual sequence was modeled after Ford commercials . The sequence is a parody of a commercial for a sport utility vehicle and Hank Williams Jr. sings a song about the Canyonero accompanied by country guitar music and whip cracks . The song " Canyonero " closely resembles the theme to the 1960s television series Rawhide . This episode was the first appearance of the Canyonero , which again appeared in the season 10 episode " Marge Simpson in : " Screaming Yellow Honkers " " . The " Canyonero " song is included on the 1999 soundtrack album Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons . 
 Chris Turner wrote positively of the Canyonero spoof piece in Planet Simpson : How a Cartoon Masterpiece Defined a Generation , calling it " a brilliant parody of an SUV ad " . In an article in the journal Environmental Politics Steve <unk> commented that the Canyonero reflected an " anti @-@ SUV " stance by The Simpsons . <unk> wrote : " Even the popular animated television series ‘ The Simpsons ’ joined the anti @-@ SUV fray in 1998 , featuring a mammoth vehicle called the ‘ Canyonero ’ ( marketed with the jingle : ‘ Twelve yards long , two lanes wide / Sixty @-@ five tons of American pride ! ’ ) , which promised to help the family transcend its mundane station @-@ wagon existence but instead brought only misery . " The term " Canyonero " has since been used in the news media to refer critically to large trucks and SUVs . In an article in the San Francisco Chronicle about SUV owners , Vicki Haddock wrote " SUV owners have become something of a punch line , succinctly captured in a " Simpsons " parody touting the apocryphal Canyonero " . In a 2006 article , Seth Jayson of The Motley Fool compared the wording in a Ford advertisement <unk> Owner Magazine to this episode , writing : " the <unk> of <unk> is the writing , which is so thick with absurd <unk> , you 'd think it was written by the crew at The Onion or The Simpsons – especially that episode where Krusty starts shilling for the Canyonero . " In a 2004 article in the Chicago Tribune , Jim Mateja noted that people have pointed out a similarity between the GMC Canyon and the Canyonero . When contacted , GMC responded that the GMC is a pickup truck , while the Canyonero is a parody of an SUV . Joshua Dowling of The Sun Herald described the philosophy of the Ford F @-@ 250 as " The Canyonero comes to life " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Last Temptation of Krust " finished 21st in ratings for the week of February 16 – 23 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 7 , equivalent to approximately 9 @.@ 5 million viewing households . It was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , The World 's Scariest Police Chases , and King of the Hill . 
 In 2006 , USA Today highlighted the episode in a review of The Simpsons ninth season . In his review of the season nine DVD , Joseph Szadkowski of The Washington Times noted : " Among the 22 @-@ minute gems found in the set , I most enjoyed ... [ Krusty 's ] work with Jay Leno . " Mark Evans of the Evening Herald wrote : " ' The Last Temptation of Krust ' is a winner for its title alone as Krusty the clown becomes a satiric ' alternative ' comedian but then sells out by advertising the Canyonero SUV road hazard . " Alan Sepinwall wrote positively of the episode in The Star @-@ Ledger , citing the Canyonero sequence as " the real reason to watch " the episode and that " It 's an oversize vehicle that will create oversized laughs . " Some sources mistakenly refer to this episode as " The Last Temptation of Krusty " . 
 In the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood characterized the episode as " a good twist on the never @-@ ending Krusty story " and suggested that while " Jay Leno turns in a nice cameo [ ... ] the show is stolen by the advert for the Canyonero " . The authors also praised Krusty 's " ponytail and black sweater " look . In the DVD audio commentary for " The Last Temptation of Krust " , Leno said that he believed the essence of comedy clubs was depicted very well in the episode and referred to Krusty 's remodeled appearance as " [ George ] Carlin post @-@ Vegas act " . He also appreciated Krusty 's poke at Leno 's use of news headlines on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and said that he could not figure out whether parts of the episode were making fun of him or complimenting him . William Irwin 's The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer references a scene from the episode as an example of Marge 's passive resistance , her moral influence on Lisa , and her value as a role model for her children . 
 = Reg Saunders = 
 Reginald Walter " Reg " Saunders , MBE ( 7 August 1920 – 2 March 1990 ) was the first Aboriginal Australian to be commissioned as an officer in the Australian Army . He came from a military family , his forebears having served in the Boer War and the First World War . Enlisting as a soldier in 1940 , he saw action during the Second World War in North Africa , Greece and Crete , before being commissioned as a lieutenant and serving as a platoon commander in New Guinea during 1944 – 45 . His younger brother Harry also joined the Army , and was killed in 1942 . 
 After the war , Saunders was demobilised and returned to civilian life . He later served as a company commander with the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) during the Korean War , where he fought at the Battle of Kapyong . Saunders left the Army in 1954 and worked in the logging and metal industries , before joining the Office of Aboriginal Affairs ( later the Department of Aboriginal Affairs ) as a liaison officer in 1969 . In 1971 , he was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) for his community service . He died in 1990 , aged 69 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Saunders was born near <unk> on the Framlingham Aboriginal Reserve in western Victoria on 7 August 1920 . He was a member of the <unk> people . His father , Chris , was a veteran of the First World War , having served as a machine gunner in the Australian Imperial Force . One of his uncles , William Reginald Rawlings , who was killed in action and after whom Saunders was named , had been awarded the Military Medal for service with the 29th Battalion in France . Another ancestor , John Brook , fought with the Victorian Rifles and the Australian Commonwealth Horse in the Boer War . Saunders ' mother died in 1924 from complications caused by pneumonia while giving birth to her third child , a girl who also died . After this , his father moved to Lake Condah in Victoria , with Reg and his younger brother , Harry , born in 1922 . As their father undertook various labouring jobs , the two boys were raised largely by their grandmother . 
 Saunders attended the local mission school at Lake Condah , where he did well in maths , geometry and languages . His father , meanwhile , taught Reg and Harry about the bush , and encouraged them to read Shakespeare and Australian literature . After completing eight years of schooling , Saunders earned his merit certificate . His formal education thus ended , he went to work at the age of 14 as a <unk> in a sawmill . Employers regularly withheld payments for Aboriginal labourers at this time , but Saunders refused to work unless he was paid his full entitlement , and his employer relented . He worked and furthered his education until 1937 , when he went into business with his father and brother , operating a sawmill in Portland , Victoria ; the sawmill was destroyed in a bushfire in 1939 . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War , Saunders was determined to serve in the armed forces . Patriotism and his family 's history of soldiering both played a major part in his decision . His father suggested that he wait six months ; according to Reg , " They were talking about this war being all over in six months with the Maginot Line and all the other garbage that we were told ... But we waited six months and the duck season was over so there was no more shooting to do except go to war " . Saunders enlisted in the Second Australian Imperial Force on 24 April 1940 , joining up with friends he had made while playing Australian rules football . The armed forces later adopted a policy to accept only persons " substantially of European origin or descent " , but at the time Saunders encountered no barriers to his enlistment . He recalled that his fellow soldiers " were not colour @-@ conscious " , and that during training in northern Queensland his white mates would sit alongside him in the " Aboriginal " section of movie theatres . His natural leadership qualities gained him temporary promotions in quick succession : within six weeks of enlistment he was a lance corporal , and after three months he made sergeant . 
 After completing his training , Saunders was allocated to an infantry unit , the 2 / 7th Battalion , which was serving overseas in North Africa at the time . Upon reaching the 2 / 7th , Saunders reverted to the rank of private . His first experience of war came fighting the Italians around Benghazi . In early April 1941 , the 6th Division , to which the 2 / 7th belonged , was sent to Greece to help defend against a German invasion . Following a series of withdrawals , the battalion was evacuated on 26 April , embarking upon the Costa Rica at Kalamata . It was originally bound for Alexandria , but after the ship was attacked in Suda Bay by German aircraft and began to sink , the men of the 2 / 7th , including Saunders , were picked up by several British destroyers and disembarked on the island of Crete . The 2 / 7th was subsequently allocated to the island 's defending garrison . 
 Following the invasion of Crete in May 1941 , the 2 / 7th Battalion was initially employed in a coastal defence role , before taking part in the fighting around Canea . After this , it took part in a devastating bayonet charge at 42nd Street , along with the New Zealand Maori Battalion , which killed almost 300 Germans and briefly checked their advance . It was during this battle that Saunders killed his first opponent : " ... I saw a German soldier stand up in clear view about thirty yards [ 30 m ] away . He was my first sure kill ... I can remember for a moment that it was just like shooting a kangaroo ... just as remote . " As the Allies began to evacuate the island , the 2 / 7th was called upon to carry out a series of rearguard actions in order to allow other units to be taken off the island . After the final Allied ships departed the island on 1 June 1941 , the battalion was left behind . As a result , many of its men were taken prisoner , though some were able to evade capture by hiding out in the hills and caves around the island . Adopting Cretan dress , learning the dialect , and enlisting the help of local inhabitants , Saunders managed to remain hidden for eleven months . 
 Saunders was among a party of men evacuated from Crete by a British submarine in May 1942 , and returned to Australia in October . He rejoined his old unit , the 2 / 7th Battalion , which had re @-@ formed in Palestine and been brought back to Australia along with the rest of the 6th Division to help defend against the threat posed by Japan 's entry into the war . In November 1942 , Saunders ' younger brother Harry , who had enlisted shortly after him in 1940 , was killed in action while serving in New Guinea with the 2 / 14th Battalion . When Harry had joined up , Reg recalled , " I was angry because I was the only one that was supposed to go . ... with two of us there , one of us was going to get killed ... " The elder Saunders subsequently served in New Guinea as well , fighting in the Salamaua – Lae campaign in mid @-@ 1943 where , having again been promoted temporary sergeant , he took over command of a platoon when its commander was wounded in action . For his leadership , he was recommended for a commission by his commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Henry Guinn . When Guinn told him of his plan , Saunders laughed and said , " I don 't want to be an officer ... I 'd rather be Regimental Sergeant Major " . Guinn responded , " Christ , they don 't make boys <unk> " . 
 Saunders went before an officer selection board that had been set up on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland , where the units of the 6th Division had been based following their return from New Guinea . The interview panel on the board consisted of three senior officers – all experienced infantry battalion commanders – who were tasked with determining a candidate 's suitability for commissioning as an infantry officer . Saunders was found to be an acceptable candidate and posted to an officer training unit in Seymour , Victoria . Upon completion of the 16 @-@ week course , he was promoted to lieutenant in November 1944 , becoming the first Aboriginal commissioned officer in the Australian Army . The precedent of his commissioning had caused the Army some concern due to its " special significance " , and as a result the paperwork for its confirmation was eventually sent to the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , General Sir Thomas Blamey , for approval . Nevertheless , Blamey is reported to have " insisted upon following the usual procedure " , believing that there should be no difference in the way Saunders ' commission should be treated to any other soldier who had completed the necessary training . The story garnered much press coverage in Australia , most of it favourable , if in parts paternalistic . 
 After his promotion was confirmed , Saunders returned to New Guinea and , although it was contrary to policy , rejoined his old battalion . He subsequently took part in the Aitape – Wewak campaign , commanding a platoon until the end of the war . Due to the discriminatory laws in force at the time , Saunders had fewer rights as a citizen than the white Australians he led . He was wounded in the knee by Japanese gunfire during fighting around Maprik , and was hospitalised for three weeks as a result . 
 = = Interbellum and Korean War = = 
 Saunders was discharged from the Army on 5 October 1945 , following the end of the Second World War . Returning to Australia , he volunteered for service in Japan with the British Commonwealth Occupation Force , but the government would not accept Aborigines for the operation . Saunders spoke publicly against this policy , calling it " narrow @-@ minded and ignorant " ; the wartime restriction on non @-@ European enlistments in the armed forces was not lifted until 1949 . Saunders moved to Melbourne with his family , which by this time consisted of his wife Dorothy , whom he had married in 1944 , and their three young children . Dorothy had served in the Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force during the war . Saunders recalled that he " had a hard time after the war ... and poor old Dotty , she , you know , didn 't know what the hell to make of it " . Facing discrimination that he had rarely encountered as a soldier , he worked in the ensuing years as a tram conductor , a foundry worker , and a shipping clerk . 
 In August 1950 , the government called for Second World War veterans to serve in the Korea War as part of the specially raised ' K ' Force . Saunders volunteered and returned to the Army as a lieutenant . After training at Puckapunyal , Victoria , and in Japan , he arrived in Korea in November 1950 . He served with the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) , initially as a platoon commander in A Company . In February 1951 , he took charge of A Company when its commander was wounded ; he was subsequently given command of C Company . Promoted to captain , Saunders led C Company during the Battle of Kapyong in April , when 3 RAR and a Canadian battalion held off a Chinese division north @-@ east of the South Korean capital Seoul . Frustrated by the conduct of the war prior to Kapyong , he afterwards recorded that , " At last I felt like an Anzac and I imagine there were 600 others like me " . The 3rd Battalion was awarded a US Presidential Unit Citation for its part in the action . Saunders himself was recommended for a decoration but turned it down . Leading a Vickers machine gun platoon at the Battle of Maryang San in October , he reportedly shared the following exchange with a fellow 3 RAR officer : as they surveyed the forbidding mountain before them , Saunders ' companion remarked , " No country for white men " , to which Saunders replied , " It 's no country for black men , either " . He returned to Australia in November 1951 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1953 the Returned and Services League ( RSL ) , a veterans organisation , recommended Saunders for inclusion in the official Australian contingent to the coronation of Elizabeth II ; the Federal government rejected the suggestion on the grounds that including Saunders would have meant excluding an officer who had been previously selected . Following his service in the Korean War , Saunders remained in the Army overseeing training for national servicemen at Puckapunyal . Away from active service , however , he soon became dissatisfied and in 1954 was discharged at his own request . The same year , he married an Irish nurse , Pat Montgomery ; his first marriage had broken down soon after he returned from Korea . 
 Saunders went to work in the logging industry in Gippsland , after which he moved to Sydney , where he was employed by the Austral Bronze Company . Seen by many as a role model and spokesman for Aboriginal Australians , in 1969 Saunders took up a position in the Office of Aboriginal Affairs as one of its first liaison officers . Among his tasks was promulgating information on recently legislated Federal funding for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses and schooling , following up on recommendations made to government departments , and liaising with Aboriginal welfare groups . He later stated , " I felt a sense of leadership of Aboriginal people and a desire to do something about the Aboriginal situation " . His community work was recognised in the Queen 's Birthday Honours of June 1971 when he was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) in the Civil Division . He continued to serve with the Department of Aboriginal Affairs in Canberra until retiring in 1980 . In July 1985 he was appointed to the Council of the Australian War Memorial , and held this position until his retirement . He was also involved in the RSL , though he fell out with leaders Alf Garland and Bruce Ruxton over Garland 's suggestion that Aborigines be blood @-@ tested to determine their entitlement to government benefits . " They can take all the blood they want from me , " Saunders declared in a 1986 interview , " and they 'll never find out what I am – least of all an Aborigine – bloody stupid ! " 
 During his two marriages , both of which ended in divorce , Saunders fathered ten children , two of whom predeceased him . Having suffered recent heart trouble , he died on 2 March 1990 . His ashes were scattered on Lake Condah , traditional territory of the <unk> people . Of Saunders ' children , one of his sons followed him into the Army , while four of his daughters married soldiers . His son Christopher portrayed him in a 1978 episode of the television series The Sullivans . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 On 14 December 2001 , Saunders was honoured with the dedication of Reg Saunders Way , which passes through the Canberra suburbs of Campbell and Russell , in a ceremony attended by the Secretary of Defence , Dr Allan Hawke , and the Chief of the Defence Force , Admiral Chris Barrie . Saunders was also commemorated with a room in the Canberra Services Club , and by the RSL 's Captain Reg Saunders Scholarship . The Australian War Memorial holds Saunders ' medals and several personal effects in its national collection , along with an official portrait and several photographs . 
 = Hurricane Cosme ( 1989 ) = 
 Hurricane Cosme was an unusually large tropical cyclone that made landfall in south @-@ western Mexico in June 1989 . The third tropical storm and second hurricane of the 1989 Pacific hurricane season , Cosme formed on June 19 from a tropical wave , the storm initially moved westward before being upgraded into Tropical Storm Cosme . It ultimately intensifying into a Category 1 hurricane . Cosme turned northward and made landfall near Acapulco during the night of June 21 . It rapidly weakened over land . The storm caused excessive rainfall on land , leading to deadly and destructive flooding . It is estimated that 30 people died in the hurricane . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In early June 1989 , a tropical wave emerged from the west coast of Africa and traversed the Atlantic Ocean , eventually crossing into the eastern North Pacific . Initially , several centers of circulation were associated with the system . Continuing organize , the storm is estimated to have attained tropical depression status at 0000 UTC on June 18 . The depression was broad and lacked substantial thunderstorm activity . However , it did have respectable outflow and banding . It moved towards the west and intensified into a tropical storm at 0000 UTC on June 20 , 48 hours after being classified . 
 Upon being named , Cosme meandered and remained nearly stationary as it continued to intensify . It became a hurricane midday UTC on June 21 ; this upgrade was delayed in real time . At this time , the hurricane accelerated towards the north . As the cyclone approached the coast of Mexico , it reached maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 979 millibars . 
 During the night of June 21 , Cosme made landfall just east of Acapulco . It moved inland and quickly deteriorated , weakening into a tropical storm shortly after coming ashore . It trekked northward through eastern Mexico and further diminished into a tropical depression before becoming indistinguishable south of Brownsville , Texas on June 23 . Tropical Storm Allison 's development in the Gulf of Mexico was partially related to residual conditions from Cosme 's remnants . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Prior to the hurricane 's landfall , Mexican officials evacuated nearly 260 people from low @-@ lying areas near Acapulco . Ports in the region were also closed several days before the storm and remained closed for two days after as a precaution . In addition , flash flood watches and warnings were issued . Cosme brought heavy rains , which killed at least 30 people due to drowning . Many adobe homes were destroyed , but the specific cost of damage is unknown . The highest rainfall recorded in relation to Cosme was 16 @.@ 1 in ( 410 mm ) in San Bartolo Yautepec , Mexico . Many mountainous areas received rainfall in excess of 7 in ( 180 mm ) and most other areas received 1 in ( 25 mm ) . High winds produced by the storm damaged numerous trees and power lines throughout the affected areas . Authorities in Acapulco stated that there were no major damage or injuries from the storm , with only one hotel sustaining minor damage . 
 = Hurricane Greta – Olivia = 
 Hurricane Greta – Olivia was one of six Atlantic hurricanes to cross over Central America into the eastern Pacific while remaining a tropical cyclone . The seventh named storm of the 1978 Atlantic hurricane season , Greta formed from a tropical wave just northwest of Trinidad on September 13 , and despite being in a climatologically unfavorable area , gradually intensified while moving west @-@ northwestward . On September 16 , it became a hurricane south of Jamaica . Two days later , the well @-@ defined eye approached northeastern Honduras but veered to the northwest . After reaching peak winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) that day , Greta weakened while paralleling the northern Honduras coast just offshore . On September 19 , it made landfall on Belize near Dangriga and quickly weakened into a tropical depression while crossing Guatemala and southeastern Mexico . After entering the eastern Pacific , the system re @-@ intensified into a hurricane and was renamed Olivia , which weakened before dissipating over Chiapas on September 23 . 
 Taking a similar path to Hurricane Fifi four years prior , Greta threatened to reproduce the devastating effects of the catastrophic storm ; however , damage and loss of life was significantly less than feared . In Honduras , about 1 @,@ 200 homes were damaged , about half of which in towns along the coastline . The storm damaged about 75 % of the houses on Roatán along the offshore Bay Islands , and there was one death in the country . In the Belize Barrier Reef , Greta downed trees and produced high waves , while on the mainland , there was minimal flooding despite a high storm surge . In Dangriga where it made landfall , the hurricane damaged or destroyed 125 houses and the primary hospital . In Belize City , a tornado flipped over a truck and damaged four houses . Damage in Belize was estimated at $ 25 million ( 1978 USD ) , and there were four deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa near Dakar , Senegal on September 7 . Moving westward across the Atlantic Ocean , the wave spawned an area of convection three days later , which gradually organized . On September 13 , the wave moved through the Windward Islands , producing wind gusts of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on Barbados . Later that day , it is estimated the system developed into a tropical depression about 75 mi ( 120 km ) west @-@ northwest of Trinidad , based on ship and land reports . Though located in a climatologically unfavorable area , the depression intensified and continued to develop . A Hurricane Hunters flight on September 14 indicated that the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Greta to the north of the Netherlands Antilles . 
 After becoming a tropical storm , Greta intensified slowly due to a strong trough to the northwest , and with the South American coastline located to the south , the southerly inflow was disrupted . With a ridge to the north along the 30th parallel , the storm moved quickly west @-@ northwestward across the Caribbean . On September 16 , Greta intensified into a hurricane about 275 mi ( 443 km ) south of Jamaica . Shortly thereafter , the trough to the northwest weakened , which had been preventing the storm 's intensification . An increasingly well @-@ defined eye developed while approaching the coast of Honduras as the barometric pressure quickly dropped . Early on September 18 , the eyewall passed just offshore Cabo Gracias a Dios , the sparsely populated border between Honduras and Nicaragua The NHC described the eye as having " literally ricocheted off of the protruding northeast coast of Honduras " , thus sparing much of the country from the strongest winds . At <unk> UTC on September 18 , the Hurricane hunters observed a minimum pressure of 947 mbar ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) just off the northern Honduras coast , which was the basis for the estimated peak intensity of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) . This made it a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale . 
 Despite the proximity to land , Greta initially maintained a well @-@ defined structure . The hurricane continued generally west @-@ northwestward due to the ridge to the north , and initially was expected to enter the Bay of Campeche . After passing through the Bay Islands off northern Honduras , Greta weakened slightly while approaching Belize , and made landfall near Dangriga at 0000 UTC on September 19 , with winds of about 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . The calm of the eye was reported for three to five minutes there . Rapidly weakening over land , the hurricane deteriorated to tropical depression status over Guatemala within 12 hours of landfall . A large high pressure area from the Carolinas to the central Gulf of Mexico turned Greta southwestward toward the eastern Pacific Ocean . At 0000 UTC on September 20 , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) took over responsibility for issuing advisories while Greta was 30 mi ( 50 km ) from the coast . Soon after , the depression emerged over the warm waters of the eastern Pacific and re @-@ intensified . At 0600 UTC , the depression re @-@ attained tropical storm status and was named Olivia by the EPHC , due to the storm entering the Pacific basin . After initially moving to the north , Olivia began executing a slow counterclockwise loop . Based on observations from nearby ships and radar , it is estimated Olivia attained hurricane status early on September 22 . While tracking towards the Mexican coastline , the system weakened below hurricane threshold ; between 1900 and 2000 UTC , Olivia made landfall about 60 mi ( 95 km ) east of Salina Cruz . Early on September 23 , Olivia dissipated over the Mexican state of Chiapas . 
 Hurricane Greta – Olivia was a rare crossover storm from the Atlantic to the Pacific , one of six to maintain tropical cyclone status during the crossing . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Early in its duration , Greta produced heavy rainfall in the Netherlands Antilles , but the strongest winds remained north of the island . 
 Late on September 17 when Greta 's eye was just offshore Honduras , the country 's government issued a hurricane warning for the eastern coastline . Around the same time , the Mexican government issued a hurricane warning for the eastern Yucatán peninsula , and on September 18 a hurricane warning was issued for the Belize and Guatemala coastlines . These advanced warnings helped reduce fatalities . In Puerto Castilla , Honduras , about 2 @,@ 000 people were evacuated in advance of the storm . The Honduran government put its military , police , and Red Cross on standby in advance of the storm , due to fears of a repeat of Hurricane Fifi in 1974 . However , unlike Fifi , which caused deadly floods in the region four years prior and took a similar track , Greta did not cause as significant river flooding in Honduras . 
 Across much of Greta 's track in Central America , the hurricane dropped locally heavy rainfall . When Greta passed just offshore northeastern Honduras , it produced sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) in Puerto Lempira , with gusts to 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . Winds along the northern Honduras coast were diminished due to the eyewall passing to the north . In Honduras , meteorologists estimated that upwards of 15 in ( 380 mm ) of rain fell in mountainous regions . Many villages were isolated and communication with them was severely hampered . In Puerto Lempira , roughly 1 @,@ 500 of the town 's 7 @,@ 000 residents sought refuge in five large structures during the storm . In twelve communities along the coastline , military officials reported that 656 homes were destroyed , of which 278 were in Punta <unk> . In the offshore Bay Islands , the hurricane destroyed 26 houses on Guanaja , where many roofs were lost and several boats were destroyed . On nearby Roatán , about 75 % of the houses lost their roofs after experiencing wind gusts of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . There was one death in Honduras , and nationwide , the hurricane damaged about 1 @,@ 200 homes , washed out roads and bridges , and wrecked coconut and rice crops . 
 At Greta 's final landfall in Belize , the highest sustained winds were 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) in Belize City , with gusts to 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) at Dangriga near the landfall location . On the offshore Ambergris Caye , winds reached 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , and there was heavy rainfall . On Half Moon Caye , the hurricane damaged the base of a lighthouse and knocked over several coconut trees . Along the Belize Barrier Reef , the hurricane downed palm trees and produced high waves , with significant wave heights of about 33 ft ( 10 m ) along Carrie Bow Caye . On the mainland , storm tides in Dangriga were 6 to 7 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 1 m ) above normal , which did not cause much flooding . The strong winds destroyed 50 houses there and unroofed a further 75 , including damage to the hospital . There were also disruptions to power and water service . About 90 % of the grapefruit crop was destroyed , and 50 % of the orange crop was lost . Tides were 2 to 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) above normal in Belize City , which caused flooding in conjunction with swollen rivers . The United States embassy was flooded with about one foot of mud . There was little damage in the city , although a tornado in Belize City that damaged four houses and flipped over a truck . During the storm , the Belize International Airport was closed . Farther inland , strong winds caused heavy damage at Guanacaste National Park . Damage throughout Belize was estimated at $ 25 million ( 1978 USD ) , and there were four deaths . Three of the deaths were on offshore islands in areas without radios , and the other was due to electrocution . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the storm damage in Honduras , the country requested help from the United States . The Tactical Air Command had sent two squadrons to Central America in the middle of 1978 , and in response to the request from Honduras , two aircraft delivered over 100 @,@ 000 lb ( 45 @,@ 000 kg ) of cots , water , and generators ; the units also deployed a 13 – person crew who specialized in disaster relief . The aid was distributed by the Military of Honduras . 
 In late October 1978 , the United Methodist Church sent books and other supplies via aircraft to Belize , after a youth group rode out the storm there and desired to help residents . Despite the hurricane damage , the economy of Belize continued to grow after Greta struck , including an increase in banana production . 
 Although the National Hurricane Center does not consider it retired , the World Meteorological Organization lists Greta in its retired hurricane name list . 
 = Radiohead = 
 Radiohead are an English rock band from Abingdon , Oxfordshire , formed in 1985 . The band consists of Thom Yorke ( lead vocals , guitar , piano , keyboards ) , Jonny Greenwood ( lead guitar , keyboards , other instruments ) , Ed O 'Brien ( guitar , backing vocals ) , Colin Greenwood ( bass ) , and Phil Selway ( drums , percussion , backing vocals ) . They have worked with producer Nigel Godrich and cover artist Stanley Donwood since 1994 . 
 Radiohead released their debut single " Creep " in 1992 . It became a worldwide hit after the release of the band 's debut album , Pablo Honey ( 1993 ) . Their popularity and critical standing rose in the United Kingdom with the release of their second album , The Bends ( 1995 ) . Radiohead 's third album , OK Computer ( 1997 ) , propelled them to international fame ; with an expansive sound and themes of modern alienation , it is often acclaimed as a landmark record of the 1990s and one of the best albums of all time . The group 's next album Kid A ( 2000 ) marked a dramatic evolution in their style , as they incorporated influences from experimental electronic music , 20th @-@ century classical music , krautrock , and jazz . Despite initially dividing fans and critics , Kid A was later named the best album of the decade by Rolling Stone , Pitchfork and the Times . Amnesiac , recorded during the same sessions as Kid A , was released the following year . 
 Radiohead 's sixth album , Hail to the Thief ( 2003 ) , mixed rock and electronic music with lyrics inspired by the War on Terror , and was the band 's final album for their record label , EMI . Their subsequent releases have pioneered alternative release platforms such as pay @-@ what @-@ you @-@ want and BitTorrent . Radiohead released their seventh album , In Rainbows ( 2007 ) , as a download for which customers could set their own price , to critical and chart success . Their eighth album , The King of Limbs ( 2011 ) , an exploration of rhythm , was developed using extensive looping and sampling . Their ninth album , A Moon Shaped Pool ( 2016 ) , prominently featured Jonny Greenwood 's orchestral arrangements . 
 Radiohead have sold more than 30 million albums worldwide . Their work places highly in both listener polls and critics ' lists of the best music of the 1990s and 2000s . In 2005 , they were ranked 73rd in Rolling Stone 's list of " The Greatest Artists of All Time " ; Jonny Greenwood ( 48th ) and O 'Brien were both included in Rolling Stone 's list of greatest guitarists , and Yorke ( 66th ) in their list of greatest singers . In 2009 , Rolling Stone readers voted the group the second best artist of the 2000s . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1985 – 92 : Formation and first years = = = 
 The members of Radiohead met while attending Abingdon School , an independent school for boys in Abingdon , Oxfordshire . Guitarist and singer Thom Yorke and bassist Colin Greenwood were in the same year , guitarist Ed O 'Brien and drummer Phil Selway in the year above , and multi @-@ instrumentalist Jonny Greenwood two years below . In 1985 , they formed On a Friday , the name referring to the band 's usual rehearsal day in the school 's music room . Jonny was the last to join , first on harmonica and then keyboards , but soon became the lead guitarist ; he had previously been in another band , Illiterate Hands , with musician Nigel Powell and Yorke 's brother Andy Yorke . According to Colin , the band members picked their respective instruments " because we wanted to play music together , rather than just because we wanted to play that particular instrument . So it was more of a collective angle , and if you could contribute by having someone else play your instrument , then that was really cool . " 
 The band disliked the school 's strict atmosphere and found solace in the school 's music department . They credited their music teacher for introducing them to jazz , film scores , postwar avant @-@ garde music , and 20th @-@ century classical music . Colin said : " When we started , it was very important that we got support from him , because we weren 't getting any from the headmaster . You know , the man once sent us a bill , charging us for the use of school property , because we practiced in one of the music rooms on a Sunday . " Oxfordshire and the Thames Valley had an active independent music scene in the late 1980s , but it centred on shoegazing bands such as Ride and Slowdive . At one point , On a Friday featured a saxophone section . 
 Although all but Jonny had left Abingdon by 1987 to attend university , On a Friday continued to rehearse on weekends and holidays . At the University of Exeter , Yorke played with the band Headless Chickens , performing songs including future Radiohead material , and met artist Stanley Donwood , who would later create artwork for the band . In 1991 , On a Friday regrouped , sharing a house on the corner of Magdalen Road and Ridgefield Road , Oxford . They recorded demos such as Manic Hedgehog , and performed in Oxford , including more performances at the Jericho Tavern . 
 As On a Friday continued to perform live , record labels and producers became interested . Chris Hufford , Slowdive 's producer and the co @-@ owner of Oxford 's Courtyard Studios , attended an early On a Friday concert at the Jericho Tavern . Impressed , he and his partner Bryce Edge produced a demo tape and became On a Friday 's managers ; they remain Radiohead 's managers today . In late 1991 , after a chance meeting between Colin Greenwood and EMI A & R representative Keith <unk> at Our Price , the record shop where Colin Greenwood worked , the band signed a six @-@ album recording contract with EMI . At the request of EMI , the band changed their name ; " Radiohead " was taken from the song " Radio Head " on the Talking Heads album True Stories ( 1986 ) . 
 = = = 1992 – 94 : " Creep " , Pablo Honey and early success = = = 
 Radiohead recorded their debut release , the Drill EP , with Chris Hufford and Bryce Edge at Courtyard Studios . Released in May 1992 , its chart performance was poor . The band enlisted Paul Kolderie and Sean Slade , who had worked with US indie bands Pixies and Dinosaur Jr . , to produce their debut album , recorded quickly in an Oxford studio in 1992 . With the release of the " Creep " single later that year , Radiohead began to receive attention in the British music press , not all of it favourable ; NME described them as " a lily @-@ <unk> excuse for a rock band " , and " Creep " was blacklisted by BBC Radio 1 because it was deemed " too depressing " . 
 Radiohead released their debut album , Pablo Honey , in February 1993 . It stalled at number 22 in the UK charts , as " Creep " and its follow @-@ up singles " Anyone Can Play Guitar " and " Stop Whispering " failed to become hits . " Pop Is Dead " , a non @-@ album single , also sold poorly . Some critics compared the band 's early style to the wave of grunge music popular in the early 1990s , dubbing them " Nirvana @-@ lite " , and Pablo Honey failed to make a critical or a commercial splash upon its initial release . Despite shared influences with popular guitar acts , and some notice for Yorke 's falsetto , Radiohead toured only British universities and clubs . 
 In early 1993 , Radiohead began to attract listeners elsewhere . " Creep " had been played frequently on Israeli radio by influential DJ Yoav Kutner , and in March , after the song became a hit in that country , Radiohead were invited to Tel Aviv for their first live gig overseas . Around the same time , the San Francisco alternative radio station <unk> added " Creep " to its playlist . Soon other radio stations along the west coast of the United States followed suit . By the time Radiohead began their first North American tour in June 1993 , the music video for " Creep " was in heavy rotation on MTV . The song rose to number two on the US modern rock chart , entered the lower reaches of the top 40 pop chart , and hit number seven in the UK Singles Chart when EMI rereleased it in the UK in September . 
 Unexpected attention for the single in America prompted EMI to improvise new promotional plans , and the band shuttled back and forth between continents , playing over 150 concerts in 1993 . Radiohead nearly broke up due to the pressure of sudden success as the Pablo Honey supporting tour extended into its second year . The band members described the tour as difficult to adjust to , saying that towards its end they were " still playing the same songs that [ they had ] recorded two years previously ... like being held in a time warp , " when they were eager to work on new songs . 
 = = = 1994 – 95 : The Bends , critical recognition and growing fanbase = = = 
 Radiohead began work on their second album in 1994 , hiring veteran Abbey Road Studios producer John Leckie . Tensions were high , with mounting expectations to deliver a follow @-@ up to match the success of " Creep " . Recording felt unnatural in the studio , with the band having over @-@ rehearsed the material . Seeking a change of scenery , they toured the Far East , Australasia and Mexico and found greater confidence performing their new music live . However , troubled by the fame he had achieved , Yorke became disillusioned with being " at the sharp end of the sexy , sassy , MTV eye @-@ candy lifestyle " he felt he was helping to sell to the world . 
 My Iron Lung , an EP and single released late in 1994 , was Radiohead 's reaction , marking a transition towards the greater depth they aimed for on their second album . It was their first time working with their future producer Nigel Godrich , then working under Leckie as an audio engineer . It was also Radiohead 's first collaboration with artist Stanley Donwood , who has produced all of their artwork since . Promoted through alternative radio stations , My Iron Lung 's sales were better than expected , and suggested for the first time that the band had found a loyal fanbase and were not one @-@ hit wonders . 
 Having introduced more new songs on tour , Radiohead finished recording their second album by year 's end , and released The Bends in March 1995 . The album was driven by dense riffs and ethereal atmospheres from the band 's three guitarists , with greater use of keyboards than their debut . It received stronger reviews for its songwriting and performances . While Radiohead were seen as outsiders to the Britpop scene that dominated media attention at the time , they were finally successful in their home country with The Bends , as singles " Fake Plastic Trees " , " High and Dry " , " Just " , and " Street Spirit ( Fade Out ) " made their way to UK chart success ; the latter song placed Radiohead in the top five for the first time . In 1995 , Radiohead again toured North America and Europe , this time in support of R.E.M. , one of their formative influences and at the time one of the biggest rock bands in the world . The buzz generated by such famous fans as R.E.M singer Michael Stipe , along with distinctive music videos for " Just " and " Street Spirit " , helped to sustain Radiohead 's popularity outside the UK . 
 " High and Dry " became a modest hit , but Radiohead 's growing fanbase was insufficient to repeat the worldwide success of " Creep " . The Bends peaked at 88 on the US album charts , which remains Radiohead 's lowest showing there . Nonetheless , Radiohead were satisfied with the album 's reception . Jonny Greenwood said : " I think the turning point for us came about nine or twelve months after The Bends was released and it started appearing in people 's [ best of ] polls for the end of the year . That 's when it started to feel like we made the right choice about being a band . " In later years , The Bends appeared in many publications ' lists of the best albums of all time , including Rolling Stone 's 2012 edition of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " at # 111 . 
 = = = 1995 – 98 : OK Computer and critical acclaim = = = 
 By late 1995 , Radiohead had already recorded one song that would appear on their next record . " Lucky " , released as a single to promote the War Child charity 's The Help Album , had come out of a brief session with Nigel Godrich , the young audio engineer who assisted on The Bends and produced a 1996 B @-@ side , " Talk Show Host " . The band decided to self @-@ produce their next album with Godrich 's assistance , and began work in early 1996 . By July they had recorded four songs at their rehearsal studio , Canned Applause , a converted apple shed in the countryside near Didcot , Oxfordshire . 
 In August 1996 , Radiohead toured as the opening act for Alanis Morissette . " It was silly money and it gave us a chance to work out everything live , " explained Colin Greenwood . " That , and the strangely perverse kick out of being these five men in black , scaring <unk> American girls with our own brand of dark music . ' Paranoid Android ' used to have this appalling , ten @-@ minute , Brian Auger Hammond solo at the end of it , which went on and on , with Jonny just jamming . We 'd beg him not to do it . That was quite full @-@ on . There 'd be little children crying at the end , begging their parents to take them home . ( But ) I don 't think you could say that OK Computer is a reaction against the crass commercialism of the most successful solo artist in the world at the moment and her music . It 's a desperate bid on our behalf to emulate that crass commercialisation , which I think we 've singularly failed to do . " 
 They then resumed recording , not at a traditional music studio , but instead at St. Catherine 's Court , a 15th @-@ century mansion near Bath . The sessions were relaxed , with the band playing at all hours of the day , recording songs in different rooms , and listening to the Beatles , DJ Shadow , Ennio Morricone and Miles Davis for inspiration . Radiohead contributed " Talk Show Host " and the newly recorded " Exit Music ( For a Film ) " to Baz Luhrmann 's adaptation of Romeo + Juliet ( 1996 ) late in the year . Most of the rest of the album was complete by the end of 1996 , and by March 1997 , the record was mixed and mastered . 
 Radiohead released their third album , OK Computer , in June 1997 . Largely composed of melodic rock , the new record also found the band experimenting with song structures and incorporating ambient , avant garde and electronic influences , prompting Rolling Stone to call the album a " stunning art @-@ rock tour de force " . Radiohead denied being part of the progressive rock genre , but critics in the mid- ' 90s began to compare their work to Pink Floyd , a band whose early 1970s work influenced Greenwood 's guitar parts at the time . Some compared OK Computer thematically to Floyd 's best @-@ seller The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) , although Thom Yorke said the album 's lyrics had been inspired by observing the " speed " of the world in the 1990s . Yorke 's lyrics , embodying different characters , had expressed what one magazine called " end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ millennium blues " in contrast to the more personal songs of The Bends . According to journalist Alex Ross , the band had become " the poster boys for a certain kind of knowing alienation — as the Talking Heads and R.E.M. had been before . " OK Computer met with great critical acclaim , and Yorke admitted that he was " amazed it got the reaction it did . None of us fucking knew any more whether it was good or bad . What really blew my head off was the fact that people got all the things , all the textures and the sounds and the atmospheres we were trying to create . " 
 OK Computer was the band 's first number one UK chart debut , propelling them to commercial success around the world . Despite peaking at number 21 in the US charts , the album eventually met with mainstream recognition there , receiving the first Grammy Awards recognition of the band 's career , a win for Best Alternative Album and a nomination for Album of the Year . " Paranoid Android " , " Karma Police " and " No Surprises " were released as singles from the album , of which " Karma Police " was most successful internationally . In the same year , Radiohead became one of the first bands in the world to have a website , and developed a devoted online following ; within a few years , there were dozens of fan sites devoted to the band . 
 The release of OK Computer was followed by the " Against Demons " world tour . Grant Gee , the director of the " No Surprises " video , accompanied and filmed the band , releasing the footage in the 1999 documentary Meeting People Is Easy . The film portrays the band 's disaffection with the music industry and press , showing their burnout as they progressed from their first tour dates in mid @-@ 1997 to mid @-@ 1998 , nearly a year later . The film is also notable for documenting earlier versions of songs that were never released or were not released until years later , such as " How to Disappear Completely " , " Life in a Glasshouse " , " I Will " and " Nude " . The film was screened at festivals such as the 1999 Maryland Film Festival and had a limited theatrical release in select cities . During this time the band also released a music video compilation , 7 Television Commercials , as well as two EPs , Airbag / How Am I Driving ? and No Surprises / Running from Demons , that compiled their B @-@ sides from OK Computer singles . 
 = = = 1998 – 2002 : Kid A , Amnesiac and change in sound = = = 
 Radiohead were largely inactive following their 1997 – 1998 tour ; after its end , their only public performance in 1998 was at an Amnesty International concert in Paris . Yorke later said that during that period the band came close to splitting up , and that he had developed severe depression . In early 1999 , Radiohead began work on a follow @-@ up to OK Computer . Although the album 's success meant there was no longer any pressure or a deadline from their record label , tension during this period was high . Band members all had different visions for Radiohead 's future , and Yorke experienced writer 's block , influencing him toward a more abstract , fragmented form of songwriting . Radiohead secluded themselves with producer Nigel Godrich in studios in Paris , Copenhagen , and Gloucester , and in their newly completed studio in Oxford . Eventually , all the members agreed on a new musical direction , redefining their instrumental roles . After nearly 18 months , Radiohead 's recording sessions were completed in April 2000 . 
 In October 2000 Radiohead released their fourth album , Kid A , the first of two albums from these recording sessions . A departure from OK Computer , Kid A featured a minimalist and textured style with more diverse instrumentation , including the ondes Martenot , programmed electronic beats , strings , and jazz horns . It debuted at number one in many countries , including the US , where its debut atop the Billboard chart marked a first for the band , and the first US number one album by any UK act since the Spice Girls in 1996 . This success was attributed variously to marketing , to the album 's leak on the file @-@ sharing network Napster a few months before its release , and to advance anticipation based , in part , on the success of OK Computer . Although Radiohead did not release any singles from Kid A , promos of " Optimistic " and " <unk> " received radio play , and a series of " blips " , or short videos set to portions of tracks , were played on music channels and released freely on the internet . The band had read Naomi Klein 's anti @-@ globalisation book No Logo during the recording , and they decided to continue a summer 2000 tour of Europe later in the year in a custom @-@ built tent free of advertising ; they also promoted Kid A with three sold @-@ out North American theatre concerts . 
 Kid A received a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Album and a nomination for Album of the Year in early 2001 . It won both praise and criticism in independent music circles for appropriating underground styles of music ; some mainstream British critics saw Kid A as a " commercial suicide note " , labelling it " intentionally difficult " and longing for a return to the band 's earlier style . Radiohead 's fans were similarly divided ; along with those who were appalled or mystified , there were many who saw the album as the band 's best work . Yorke , however , denied that Radiohead had set out to eschew commercial expectations , saying : " I was really , really amazed at how badly [ Kid A ] was being viewed ... because the music 's not that hard to grasp . We 're not trying to be difficult ... We 're actually trying to communicate but somewhere along the line , we just seemed to piss off a lot of people ... What we 're doing isn 't that radical . " The album has since been ranked one of the best of all time by publications including Rolling Stone , Time , Pitchfork , the Times and the Guardian . 
 Radiohead 's fifth album , Amnesiac , was released in June 2001 . It comprised additional tracks from the Kid A recording sessions , plus one track recorded after Kid A 's release , " Life in a Glasshouse " , featuring the Humphrey Lyttelton Band . Radiohead stressed that they saw Amnesiac not as a collection of B @-@ sides or " leftovers " from Kid A but an album in its own right . It topped the UK Albums Chart and reached number two in the US , being nominated for a Grammy Award and the Mercury Music Prize . Radiohead embarked on a world tour , visiting North America , Europe and Japan . " Pyramid Song " and " Knives Out " , Radiohead 's first singles since 1998 , were modestly successful . A live album , I Might Be Wrong : Live Recordings , released in November 2001 , features performances of seven songs from Kid A and Amnesiac , and the previously unreleased acoustic track " True Love Waits " . 
 = = = 2002 – 04 : Hail to the Thief and departure from EMI = = = 
 In July and August 2002 , Radiohead toured Portugal and Spain , playing a number of new songs . They recorded the new material in two weeks in a Los Angeles studio with Godrich , adding several tracks later in Oxford , where they continued their work into the next year . The band described the recording process as relaxed , in contrast to the tense sessions for Kid A and Amnesiac . 
 Radiohead 's sixth album , Hail to the Thief , was released in June 2003 , combining guitar rock with electronic music . Its lyrics were influenced by what Yorke called " the general sense of ignorance and intolerance and panic and stupidity " following the 2000 election of US President George W. Bush . The album debuted at number one in the UK and number three on the Billboard chart , and was eventually certified platinum in the UK and gold in the US . The singles " There There " , " Go to Sleep " and " 2 + 2 = 5 " achieved heavy circulation on modern rock radio . At the 2003 Grammy Awards , Radiohead were again nominated for Best Alternative Album , and producer Godrich and engineer Darrell Thorp received the Grammy Award for Best Engineered Album . In May 2003 , Radiohead embarked in on a world tour and headlined Glastonbury Festival . The tour finished in May 2004 with a performance at the Coachella Festival . A compilation of Hail to the Thief B @-@ sides , remixes and live performances , COM LAG ( 2plus2isfive ) , was released in April 2004 . 
 Radiohead 's six @-@ album record contract with EMI ended with the release of Hail to the Thief . In 2005 , Yorke told Time : " I like the people at our record company , but the time is at hand when you have to ask why anyone needs one . And , yes , it probably would give us some perverse pleasure to say ' Fuck you ' to this decaying business model . " In 2006 , the New York Times described Radiohead as " by far the world 's most popular unsigned band " . 
 = = = 2004 – 09 : Solo work , In Rainbows and " pay what you want " = = = 
 Following the Hail to the Thief tour , Radiohead went on hiatus to spend time with their families . Jonny Greenwood composed soundtracks for the films <unk> ( 2004 ) and There Will Be Blood ( 2007 ) . In July 2006 , Yorke released his debut solo album , The Eraser . He told Pitchfork : " I 've been in the band since we left school and never dared do anything on my own ... It was like , ' Man , I 've got to find out what it feels like , ' you know ? " 
 Radiohead began work on their seventh album in February 2005 with no record label . In an effort to " get out of the comfort zone " , they decided against involving producer Godrich , with whom they had recorded five albums , and hired producer Spike Stent . The collaboration with Stent was unsuccessful and ended in April 2006 . In September 2005 , Radiohead recorded " I Want None of This " for the War Child charity album Help : A Day in the Life . The album was sold online , with " I Want None of This " the most downloaded track , though it was not released as a single . In late 2006 , after touring Europe and North America with new material , the band resumed work with Godrich in London , Oxford and rural Somerset , England . Work was finished in June 2007 and the recordings were mastered the following month . 
 Radiohead 's seventh album , In Rainbows , was released through the band 's website in October 2007 as a download for any amount users wanted , including £ 0 — a landmark use of the pay @-@ what @-@ you @-@ want model for music sales . The pay @-@ what @-@ you @-@ want release , the first for a major act , made headlines worldwide and sparked debate about the implications for the music industry . According to Mojo , the release was " hailed as a revolution in the way major bands sell their music " , and the media 's reaction was " almost overwhelmingly positive " ; Time called it " easily the most important release in the recent history of the music business " . 1 @.@ 2 million downloads were reportedly sold by the day of release , but the band 's management did not release official sales figures , claiming that the internet @-@ only distribution was intended to boost later retail sales . Colin Greenwood explained the internet release as a way of avoiding the " regulated playlists " and " straitened formats " of radio and TV , ensuring fans around the world could all experience the music at the same time , and preventing leaks in advance of a physical release . O 'Brien said the self @-@ release strategy sold fewer records , but made more money for the band as there was no middleman . A special " discbox " edition of In Rainbows , including a second disc from the recording sessions , vinyl and CD editions of the album , and a hardcover book of artwork , was also sold and shipped in late 2007 . 
 In Rainbows was released physically in the UK in late December 2007 on XL Recordings and in North America in January 2008 on TBD Records , charting at number one both in the UK and in the US . The record 's retail success in the US – after having been legally available for months as a free download – was Radiohead 's highest chart success in that country since Kid A , while it was their fifth UK number one album . In Rainbows sold more than three million copies within one year . The album received critical acclaim for its more accessible sound and personal lyrics . It was nominated for the short list of the Mercury Music Prize and went on to win the 2009 Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album . Their production team won the Grammy for Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package , while Radiohead received their third nomination for Album of the Year . Along with three other nominations for the band , Godrich 's production and the " House of Cards " music video also received nominations . 
 Radiohead released a number of singles from In Rainbows : " Jigsaw Falling into Place " in January 2008 , followed by " Nude " , which debuted at number 37 in the Billboard Hot 100 , Radiohead 's first song to make that chart since 1995 's " High and Dry " and their first top 40 hit in the US since " Creep " . In July they released a digitally @-@ shot video for " House of Cards " . " House of Cards " , along with " Bodysnatchers " , also received a single release on radio . In September the band announced a fourth single , " Reckoner " , and a remix competition similar to one organised for " Nude " . In April 2008 , Radiohead launched <unk> Central , a social networking service for Radiohead fans . 
 EMI released a greatest hits album , Radiohead : The Best Of , in June 2008 . The compilation was made without Radiohead 's input and only contains songs released under their recording contract with EMI . Yorke was critical of the release , saying : " There 's nothing we can do about it . The work is really public property now anyway , in my head at least . It 's a wasted opportunity in that if we 'd been behind it , and we wanted to do it , then it might have been good . " In August 2008 , EMI reissued " special editions " of OK Computer , Kid A , Amnesiac and Hail to the Thief as part of the " From the Capitol Vaults " series . From mid @-@ 2008 to early 2009 , Radiohead toured North America , Europe , Japan and South America to promote In Rainbows , and headlined the Reading and Leeds Festivals in August 2009 . 
 As social media began to expand , Radiohead gradually withdrew their public presence , with no promotional interviews or tours to promote new releases . Pitchfork wrote that around this time " their popularity became increasingly untethered from the typical formalities of record promotion , placing them on the same level as Beyoncé and Kanye West . " 
 = = = 2009 – 12 : The King of Limbs , two drummers and Toronto stage collapse = = = 
 In May 2009 , Radiohead began new recording sessions with Godrich . In August , they released " Harry Patch ( In Memory Of ) " , a tribute song to Harry Patch , the last surviving British soldier to have fought in World War I , with proceeds donated to the British Legion . Later that month , another new song , " These Are My Twisted Words " , was leaked via torrent , possibly by Radiohead themselves . It was released as a free download on the Radiohead website the following week . Yorke formed a new band to perform The Eraser live , Atoms for Peace , with musicians including Godrich and Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea ; the band played eight North American shows in 2010 . 
 In January 2010 , Radiohead played their only full concert of the year in the Los Angeles Henry Fonda Theater as a benefit for Oxfam . Tickets were auctioned , raising over half a million US dollars for the NGO 's 2010 Haiti earthquake relief . In June , Yorke and Jonny Greenwood performed a surprise set at Glastonbury Festival , performing Eraser and Radiohead songs . On 30 August , Selway released his debut solo album , Familial . In December , a fan @-@ made video of Radiohead 's Oxfam benefit performance was released via YouTube and torrent with Radiohead 's support and a " pay @-@ what @-@ you @-@ want " link to donate to Oxfam . In September 2010 , Radiohead released the soundboard recording of their 2009 Prague performance for use in another fan @-@ made concert video . The Radiohead for Haiti and Live in Praha videos were described as examples of the band 's openness to fans and positivity toward non @-@ commercial internet distribution . 
 Radiohead finished recording their eighth album , The King of Limbs , in January 2011 . Following the protracted recording and more conventional rock instrumentation of In Rainbows ( 2007 ) , Radiohead developed The King of Limbs by sampling and looping their recordings with turntables while incorporating ambient sounds . According to O 'Brien : " Rhythm is the king of limbs ! The rhythm dictates the record . It 's very important . " The album was announced on Valentine 's Day and self @-@ released on 18 February 2011 through the Radiohead website . It was followed by a retail release on CD and vinyl formats in March , and a special " newspaper album " edition in May . 
 The King of Limbs sold an estimated 300 @,@ 000 to 400 @,@ 000 copies through Radiohead 's website ; the retail edition debuted at number six on the United States Billboard 200 and number seven on the UK Albums Chart . It was nominated for five categories in the 54th Grammy Awards : Best Alternative Music Album , Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package , Best Short Form Music Video ( for " Lotus Flower " ) , Best Rock Performance ( " Lotus Flower " ) and Best Rock Song ( " Lotus Flower " ) . Two tracks not included on The King of Limbs but worked on during the same sessions , " <unk> " and " The Butcher " , were released as a single for Record Store Day on 16 April 2011 . A series of King of Limbs remixes by various artists were compiled on TKOL RMX 1234567 , released in September 2011 . 
 To perform the rhythmically complex King of Limbs material live , Radiohead enlisted a second drummer , Clive Deamer , who has worked with Portishead and Get the Blessing . Selway said of the collaboration : " That was fascinating . One played in the traditional way , the other almost mimicked a drum machine . It was push @-@ and @-@ pull , like kids at play , really interesting . " With Deamer , Radiohead recorded a second From the Basement session , released as The King of Limbs : Live from the Basement in December 2011 . The performance included two new songs , " The Daily Mail " and " Staircase " , released as a double A @-@ side download single on 19 December 2011 . Deamer has joined Radiohead on subsequent tours . 
 On 24 June , Radiohead played a surprise performance on the Park stage at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival , performing songs from The King of Limbs before an audience for the first time . In September , they played two dates at New York City 's Roseland Ballroom and made American TV appearances including a one @-@ hour special episode of The Colbert Report and the season première of Saturday Night Live . In February 2012 , they began their first extended North American tour in four years , including dates in the United States , Canada and Mexico . While on tour , Radiohead spent a day working on new material at Jack White 's Third Man Records studio . 
 On 16 June 2012 , an hour before gates were due to open at Toronto 's Downsview Park for the final concert of Radiohead 's North American tour , the roof of the venue 's temporary stage collapsed , killing drum technician Scott Johnson and injuring three other members of Radiohead 's touring technical crew . The collapse also destroyed the band 's light show and much of their musical equipment . No band members were on stage . The concert was cancelled and Radiohead 's tour dates in Europe were postponed . After rescheduling the tour , Radiohead paid tribute to Johnson and their stage crew at their next concert , in Nîmes , France , in July . Yorke later wrote that finishing the tour after the collapse was his " biggest achievement so far " . In June 2013 , the Ontario Ministry of Labour charged Live Nation Canada Inc , Live Nation Ontario Concerts GP Inc , <unk> Staging & Services Inc and an engineer with 13 charges under the Occupational Health and Safety Act . The hearing began in November 2015 . 
 = = = 2012 – present : Hiatus , further solo work , and A Moon Shaped Pool = = = 
 After the King of Limbs tour , during which the band performed several new songs , Radiohead entered hiatus again . In February 2013 , Yorke and Godrich 's band Atoms for Peace released a studio album , Amok . The pair made headlines that year for their criticism of the free music streaming service Spotify , which they believe cannot support new artists ; Yorke accused Spotify of only benefiting major labels with large back catalogues , and encouraged artists to build their own " direct connections " with audiences instead . 
 On 11 February 2014 , Radiohead released the Polyfauna app for Android and iOS phones , an " experimental collaboration " between the band and the British digital arts studio Universal Everything which uses musical elements and imagery from The King of Limbs . On 26 September 2014 , Yorke released his second solo album , Tomorrow 's Modern Boxes , and on 7 October , Selway released his second solo album , <unk> . Jonny Greenwood composed the soundtrack for the Paul Thomas Anderson film Inherent Vice , released in October 2014 , featuring a new version of an unreleased Radiohead song , " Spooks " , performed by Greenwood and two members of Supergrass . In 2015 , Yorke contributed a soundtrack , <unk> , to The Panic Office , an installation of Radiohead artwork in Sydney , Australia . 
 Radiohead began work on their ninth studio album with Godrich in September 2014 in France . In February 2015 , Greenwood told Pitchfork that Radiohead had changed their methods again , " working in limits " and using " very old and very new technology " together . In October , Radiohead sued their previous record label , Parlophone , for deductions made from downloads of their back catalogue . The following month , Junun , a collaboration between Greenwood , Israeli composer <unk> Ben Tzur and Indian musicians , produced by Godrich , was released . It was accompanied by a documentary of the same name directed by Paul Thomas Anderson , for whom Greenwood has composed several film scores . On Christmas Day 2015 , Radiohead released a new song , " Spectre " , on the audio streaming site SoundCloud . It was written for the James Bond film of the same name , but was rejected , in Greenwood 's words , for being " too dark " . 
 In April 2016 , XL Recordings purchased Radiohead 's back catalogue from Warner Music Group ( WMG ) . The catalogue was recorded under Parlophone before Radiohead 's recording contract ended with the release of Hail to the Thief in 2003 , and sold approximately 115 @,@ 000 units in 2015 . As part of WMG 's purchase of Parlophone in 2013 , WMG made an agreement with the independent music label trade group Impala to reach distribution agreements with independent labels for the 11 @,@ 000 acquired acts , which required artist approval . XL Recordings has released the physical editions of every Radiohead release since In Rainbows , along with records by Atoms for Peace and some of Yorke 's solo work . As a result of the purchase , the " special editions " of the albums , issued by WMG in the mid @-@ 2000s without Radiohead 's approval , were removed from streaming services . 
 On 30 April , fans who had previously made orders from Radiohead received embossed cards with lyrics from a new song , " Burn the Witch " . On 1 May 2016 , Radiohead deleted all content from their website and social media profiles , replacing them with blank images , a move Pitchfork interpreted as symbolic of Radiohead 's re @-@ emergence . " Burn the Witch " was released as a download on 3 May , accompanied by a stop @-@ motion animated music video . On 6 May , Radiohead released another new download single , " Daydreaming " , accompanied by a music video directed by Paul Thomas Anderson ; the video was screened in 35 mm film in select cinemas . 
 Radiohead 's ninth studio album , A Moon Shaped Pool , was released digitally on 8 May 2016 , followed by physical versions on 17 June via XL Recordings . It includes several songs written some years earlier , including " True Love Waits " ( which dates to at least 1995 ) along with strings and choral vocals performed by the London Contemporary Orchestra and additional percussion from Deamer . The album was simultaneously released on paid streaming services including Tidal and Apple Music , but was not released on Spotify , a free service , until 17 June , six weeks later . Spotify had been in " advanced discussions " with Radiohead ’ s management and label to make A Moon Shaped Pool the first album available exclusively to Spotify 's paid subscribers , but the deal fell through , according to Spotify , due to technical hurdles . In Rainbows , the only other Radiohead album not previously available on Spotify , was added on 10 June . 
 Radiohead began a tour in support of A Moon Shaped Pool in May 2016 , joined again by Deamer , with performances in Europe , North America , and Japan . The physical release of the album was promoted with " Live From a Moon Shaped Pool " , which took place in participating record shops around the world . The event featured a " day @-@ long " audio stream , including playlists curated by Radiohead and a recording of their recent performance at the London Roundhouse , along with competitions , artwork , and other activities . Attendees in a record shop in Istanbul , Turkey , were attacked by a group of men who were angry that customers were drinking beer and playing music during Ramadan , the Muslim holy month of fast . Radiohead released a statement condemning the attacks and offering " love and support " to Istanbul fans . 
 = = Style and songwriting = = 
 Among Radiohead members ' earliest influences were Queen , Pink Floyd and Elvis Costello , post @-@ punk acts such as Joy Division , Siouxsie and the Banshees and Magazine , and significantly 1980s alternative rock bands such as R.E.M. , Pixies , the Smiths and Sonic Youth . By the mid @-@ 1990s , Radiohead began to adopt some recording methods from hip hop , inspired by the sampling work of DJ Shadow , and became interested in using computers to generate sounds . Other influences on the group include the jazz music of Miles Davis , Charlie Mingus and Alice Coltrane , the soundtracks of Ennio Morricone , 1960s rock groups such as the Beatles and the Beach Boys , and Phil Spector 's " wall of sound " production technique . 
 The electronic music of Kid A and Amnesiac was inspired by Yorke 's admiration for glitch , ambient techno and IDM as exemplified by Warp Records artists such as Autechre and Aphex Twin ; in 2013 , Yorke named Aphex Twin as biggest influence . The album also samples early computer music . The jazz of Charles Mingus , Alice Coltrane and Miles Davis , and 1970s krautrock bands such as Can and Neu ! , were other major influences during this period . Jonny Greenwood 's interest in 20th century classical music also had a role , as the influence of composers Krzysztof Penderecki and Olivier Messiaen was apparent ; for several songs on Kid A and later albums , Greenwood has played the ondes Martenot , an early electronic instrument popularised by Messiaen . 
 Recording In Rainbows , Radiohead members mentioned a variety of rock , electronic , hip hop and experimental musicians as influences , including Björk , M.I.A , Liars , <unk> and Spank Rock . In 2011 , Yorke denied that Radiohead had ever set out deliberately to change musical styles or to make " experimental music " , saying the band was " constantly absorbing music " and that a variety of musicians are always influencing their work . Drummer Clive Deamer , who has recorded and performed with Radiohead since 2012 , said that Radiohead did not see themselves as a rock band and felt their methodology had closer parallels with jazz : “ they deliberately try to avoid cliché and standard forms for the sake of the song ... Rock bands don ’ t do that . It ’ s far more like a jazz mentality . " 
 Since their formation , Radiohead have been lyrically and musically spearheaded by Yorke . Although Yorke is responsible for writing nearly all the lyrics , songwriting is a collaborative effort , with all the band members having roles in the process ; all the band 's songs are officially credited to " Radiohead " . Radiohead songs usually begin with a sketch by Yorke , which is harmonically developed by Jonny Greenwood before the other members develop their own parts . The Kid A and Amnesiac sessions brought about a change in Radiohead 's musical style and working method . Since their shift from conventional rock music instrumentation toward an emphasis on electronic sound , the members have gained flexibility and now regularly switch instruments depending on the particular song requirements . On Kid A and Amnesiac , Yorke played keyboard and bass , while Jonny Greenwood often played ondes Martenot rather than guitar , bassist Colin Greenwood worked on sampling , and O 'Brien and Selway branched out to drum machines and digital manipulations , also finding ways to incorporate their primary instruments , guitar and percussion , respectively , into the new sound . The relaxed 2003 recording sessions for Hail to the Thief led to a different dynamic in Radiohead , with Yorke admitting in interviews that his power in the band had been " absolutely unbalanced " and that he would " subvert everybody else 's power at all costs . But ... it 's actually a lot more healthy now , democracy @-@ wise , than it used to be . " 
 = = Collaborators = = 
 Radiohead have maintained a close relationship with a number of frequent collaborators . Producer Nigel Godrich made his name with Radiohead , working with the band as an audio engineer on The Bends and as their producer on every studio album afterwards . He has been dubbed the " sixth member " of the band , in an allusion to George Martin being called the " Fifth Beatle " . In 2016 , Godrich said of the collaboration : " I can only ever have one band like Radiohead who I 've worked with for this many years . That 's a very deep and profound relationship . The Beatles could only have ever had one George Martin ; they couldn 't have switched producers halfway through their career . All that work , trust , and knowledge of each other would have been thrown out of the window and they 'd have to start again . " 
 Graphic artist Stanley Donwood met Yorke when both were art students , and with Yorke has produced all of Radiohead 's album covers and visual artwork since 1994 . Donwood works in the studio with the band as they record , allowing the music to influence the artwork . He and Yorke won a Grammy in 2002 for the special edition of Amnesiac packaged as a library book . 
 Dilly Gent has been responsible for commissioning all Radiohead music videos since OK Computer , working with the band to find a director suitable for each project . Since Radiohead 's inception , Andi Watson has been their lighting and stage director , designing the visuals of live concerts , such as the carbon @-@ neutral " LED forest " of the In Rainbows tour . Radiohead 's chief live technician , Peter " Plank " Clements , has worked with the band since before The Bends , overseeing the setup of their instruments for studio recordings and live performances . Drummer Clive Deamer has performed and recorded with Radiohead since 2011 . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Colin Greenwood – bass guitar 
 Jonny Greenwood – guitar , keyboards , ondes Martenot , analogue synthesisers 
 Ed O 'Brien – guitar , backing vocals , percussion 
 Philip Selway – drums , percussion , backing vocals 
 Thom Yorke – lead vocals , guitar , keyboards , piano 
 Additional live members 
 Clive Deamer – drums , percussion , backing vocals ( 2011 – present ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Pablo Honey ( 1993 ) 
 The Bends ( 1995 ) 
 OK Computer ( 1997 ) 
 Kid A ( 2000 ) 
 Amnesiac ( 2001 ) 
 Hail to the Thief ( 2003 ) 
 In Rainbows ( 2007 ) 
 The King of Limbs ( 2011 ) 
 A Moon Shaped Pool ( 2016 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = White @-@ eared titi = 
 The white @-@ eared titi ( Callicebus <unk> ) , also known as the Bolivian titi or Bolivian gray titi , is a species of titi , a type of New World monkey , from eastern Bolivia and an area of western Brazil . The species has a range that extends east from the <unk> River in Beni Department , Bolivia to southern Rondônia in Brazil . The southern end of its range includes forests around the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra . 
 It is a medium @-@ sized monkey with a grey back , orange underside and distinctive white ear tufts . It has an omnivorous diet , eating fruits , other plant materials and invertebrates . It is predated upon primarily by raptors , though felids and other monkey species have been known to attack the species . It is a monogamous species and lives in small groups of two to seven members consisting of the pair and their offspring . The family group has a home range of 0 @.@ 005 to 0 @.@ 14 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ <unk> to 0 @.@ <unk> sq mi ) and the adults have a complex vocal repertoire to maintain their territory . It is also known for its characteristic twining of tails when groups are sitting together . White @-@ eared titis can live for more than 25 years in captivity . 
 The white @-@ eared titi population has a declining trend . The decline is believed to be mainly caused by human @-@ induced habitat loss and degradation . Despite this , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) classified the species as being of least concern in 2008 as it has shown adaptability to habitat disturbance and is found over a wide range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The white @-@ eared titi belongs to the New World monkey family <unk> , which contains the titis ( Callicebus ) , saki monkeys ( <unk> ) , bearded <unk> ( <unk> ) , and <unk> ( <unk> ) . It is a member of the subfamily <unk> , of which the only extant genus is Callicebus , containing all of the titi monkeys . 
 Although the exact position of species within the Callicebus genus is debated , the white @-@ eared titi has been placed within the subgenus Callicebus in the C. <unk> group with the Rio Beni titi ( C. modestus ) , Rio Mayo titi ( C. oenanthe ) , <unk> brothers ' titi ( C. <unk> ) , and white @-@ coated titi ( C. pallescens ) . The white @-@ coated titi has sometimes been considered a subspecies of the white @-@ eared titi , but they are treated as separate species in the latest edition of Mammal Species of the World . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 The white @-@ eared titi is a medium @-@ sized primate with grey to orange pelage . The species does not exhibit sexual dimorphism ; the male 's head and body length averages 311 millimetres ( 12 @.@ 2 in ) while females average 340 millimetres ( 13 in ) . The white @-@ eared titi 's fluffy tail is longer than the length of its head and body together . It typically has thick fur , with a dorsal side and limbs that vary in colour from grey agouti to orange agouti , with an orange underside and white ear tufts . 
 Body weight ranges from around 800 to 1 @,@ 200 grams ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 6 lb ) , with the female generally a little lighter . It has the dental formula 2 : 1 : 3 : 32 : 1 : 3 : 3 × 2 = 36 , meaning that on each side of the jaw it has two incisors , one canine tooth , three premolars , and three molar teeth . The canine teeth are relatively short when compared with other New World monkeys . In captivity , the white @-@ eared titi has been known to live for over 25 years . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The white @-@ eared titi is cryptic , diurnal and known to live in small family groups . It is a monogamous species that is thought to mate for life and lives in groups that usually consist of two to seven members ; an adult pair and up to five young . Multi @-@ male groups have also been recorded . Offspring are carried by the male , and are always with them , except when feeding . Between the ages of two to four years , offspring will disperse from the natal group , with females leaving earlier than the males . 
 There is a strong bond between the adult mating pair , they stay close and carry out activities together . Either member of the pair may follow the other and leadership changes through the day . Evidence of the strength of the pair bond is shown by grooming , huddling together with their tails twined , nuzzling , and gentle grasping . Titi monkeys are highly territorial and when confronted with another family group , both will respond with threatening behaviour , males showing increased agitation towards intruding males . When not close together , the pair show a significant amount of distress and agitation . 
 Titi monkeys are well known for their vocal communication , and have a complex repertoire of calls . The calls can be divided into two categories : high @-@ pitched quiet calls and low @-@ pitched loud calls . Vocalisations are often combined and repeated to form sequences that are used to indicate distress , conflict , play , bonding , disturbance , and to strengthen territory . The high @-@ pitched quiet calls are mostly used when the monkeys are disturbed , but may also be used before or after group calling , while foraging , or to find other members of the group . The loud low @-@ pitched calls are mostly used in long distance group calling . Their function is to ensure adequate spacing between the home ranges of different family groups . These vocalisations are known as duets , and generally involve the male and female . If a neighbouring group is within earshot of these calls they will respond with their own duetting . 
 The white @-@ eared titi is arboreal , spending most of its time in the lower strata of the forest . It may enter the main canopy when travelling longer distances and may also cross small areas of open ground , though the latter is rare . During normal movement through its environment it is quadrupedal and mostly walks , clambers and leaps , but it can also bound and climb . It leaps small distances , no more than a few body lengths , between trees where vegetation is not thick enough to support its primary forms of locomotion . When travelling on the ground it is said to use a " bounding movement " whereby it leaps more than 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) off the ground . The titi monkey prefers branches which are less than 5 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter and its tail never touches the support it is on . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 There is relatively little known about the ecology of the white @-@ eared titi or even titi monkeys in general , and few studies have focused on the white @-@ eared titi . It is diurnal , commencing activity around sunrise and continuing until sunset . Food availability may influence activity times ; if there is an abundance of food in the warmer months when plants are fruiting titi monkeys may start earlier , or if there is a lack of food , titi monkeys may remain at the feeding tree into the evening . The titi monkey usually rests during the middle of the day and has two main feeding periods , in the morning and in the afternoon . It has an increased period of feeding towards the end of the day . In total , the titi monkey is active for an average of 11 @.@ 5 hours , 2 @.@ 7 hours of which is spent feeding . Titi monkeys sleep on branches at least 15 metres ( 49 ft ) above the ground . In the same manner as resting during the day , titi monkeys huddle together and twine tails to sleep . 
 Though there is little published research on the diet of the white @-@ eared titi , titi monkeys in general are omnivores that eat fruit , leaves , insects , and seeds . They mostly eat leaves , especially protein @-@ rich young leaves and leaf buds , so a significant period of the day is spent resting to digest the cellulose . They consume more than 100 different species of plants and fruit . Titi monkeys will also eat small insects ( ants , moths , butterflies , and their cocoons ) , spiders , and can catch flying prey if it comes close to them . During the dry season there is an increased feeding time on leaves , and during lactation it is thought insect consumption increases to augment the protein content of the diet . 
 The titi monkey may travel between 425 and 1 @,@ 152 m ( 1 @,@ 394 and 3 @,@ 780 ft ) during the day , and can maintain a home range of 0 @.@ 005 to 0 @.@ 14 km2 ( 0 @.@ <unk> to 0 @.@ <unk> sq mi ) . During the dry season there is less fruit available and therefore less need to travel large distances , so the day range may only be a third of the usual distance . Its home range is often shared with other primate species including marmosets , squirrel monkeys , capuchins , owl monkeys , howler monkeys , and spider monkeys . It is sometimes chased from feeding sites by larger species , and will generally try to avoid other primates . 
 = = = Habitat and distribution = = = 
 The white @-@ eared titi is found in tropical humid forests , preferring drier regions to more humid ones . It is found in riparian zones and gallery forests and is clearly associated with open habitats like grasslands and swampy grasslands . It is found in areas with dense vegetation , often choosing to inhabit the thickest parts of the forest . The species seems to be quite tolerant of habitat disturbance . In Bolivia , the white @-@ eared titi is found in the upper parts of the <unk> , Grande , and San Miguel river basins , east of the <unk> River in Beni and in the forests surrounding the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra . Its range extends north to southern Rondônia in Brazil . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The white @-@ eared titi is considered to be of least concern on the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) Red List . The species is not considered threatened due to its adaptability and abundance over a relatively wide range , and despite having a decreasing population trend the decline is not rapid enough to be placed in a threatened category . The species is also listed on CITES Appendix II . 
 The white @-@ eared titi 's main threat is deforestation and habitat loss due to agriculture . The area of greatest habitat loss is around the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra , but it still survives within the city limits and on the edges of many rural establishments . It has few natural predators and is proven to be adaptable to habitat disturbance . Farmland may surround and isolate areas of titi habitat which occasionally has positive benefits to the monkey . Farmers may prevent hunters on the land , thereby inadvertently protecting the species . It also appears that the titi monkey can cross open ground between forest fragments , and some groups can thrive in disturbed habitats near human activities . However , the fragmented habitats may prevent the establishment of new territories and decrease reproductive opportunities . Forest corridors to connect fragmented forests have been proposed as an effective means to help ensure the survival of the titi monkey . The white @-@ eared titi is found in the Beni Biological Station Biosphere Reserve and the <unk> National Park in Bolivia and benefits from the protection these reserves provide . 
 = Lamellerie 's expedition = 
 Lamellerie 's expedition was a French naval operation launched in February 1806 . Four French Navy frigates and a brig , all survivors of the Battle of Trafalgar in October 1805 , attempted to break past the British blockade of Cadiz on 23 February 1806 , taking advantage of the withdrawal of the principal blockade squadron several months earlier at the start of the Atlantic campaign of 1806 . Although the squadron was intercepted by elements of the British blockade force , Captain Louis @-@ Charles @-@ Auguste <unk> de Lamellerie escaped with the four frigates by abandoning the slower brig , which was captured . During the next six months , Lamellerie 's squadron cruised the Atlantic , visiting Senegal , Cayenne and the West Indies but failing to cause any significant disruption to British trade . 
 On 27 July , as the squadron neared Rochefort , it was spotted by HMS Mars , a Royal Navy ship of the line stationed off the port to intercept French ships entering or leaving . Signalling to the rest of the British squadron , Captain Robert Dudley Oliver took Mars in pursuit , chasing the French squadron all through the night and into the next morning , by which time the frigate Rhin had fallen far behind the others . Recognising that Rhin was in danger of being captured , Lamellerie turned back to her defence with his main squadron but then changed his mind , turning once more and retreating to Rochefort as Oliver took possession of the heavily outgunned Rhin . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 21 October 1805 , the French and Spanish allied fleet was almost destroyed at the Battle of Trafalgar by a Royal Navy fleet under Vice @-@ Admiral Lord Nelson . Among the scattered survivors of the Allied fleet were five French frigates , untouched during the action . With the rest of the surviving ships , the frigates anchored in Cadiz during the week that followed the battle and remained there for the rest of the year , contained in the harbour by a large British blockade squadron led by Vice @-@ Admiral Sir John Thomas Duckworth . In December 1805 however , Duckworth abandoned the station in search of a French squadron under Vice @-@ Admiral Zacharie Allemand that was raiding British convoys off the Savage Islands . Although Allemand escaped Duckworth , the British admiral became embroiled in the Atlantic campaign of 1806 and did not return to Cadiz , eventually sailing to the Caribbean where he won the Battle of San Domingo on 6 February 1806 . In his absence , Duckworth 's squadron was replaced at Cadiz by ships grudgingly despatched from the Mediterranean Fleet , under the command of Vice @-@ Admiral Lord Collingwood . 
 The French Navy was concerned about its ships trapped in Cadiz and sought to bring them back to French harbours , particularly to make up for the heavy losses suffered in the Trafalgar Campaign . Therefore four frigates and a brig were prepared for sea under the most senior frigate captain , Captain Louis @-@ Charles @-@ Auguste <unk> de Lamellerie of Hortense . These ships were to break out of Cadiz , conduct a six @-@ month raiding mission in the Atlantic to distract attention from the ongoing Atlantic campaign , and raid British merchant shipping . At the conclusion of the six months , Lamellerie was to return to Rochefort to join the French Atlantic Fleet . 
 = = Breakout = = 
 Word of Lamellerie 's preparations reached Collingwood , and he planned a ruse to lure the French frigate squadron out into open water . Withdrawing all the large vessels of the blockade squadron , Collingwood kept only the 36 @-@ gun frigate HMS Hydra and the 18 @-@ gun sloop HMS Moselle in position to create the impression that the principal blockading force had been driven off . This it was hoped would draw Lamellerie into an attack on the lone ships that would allow the rest of Collingwood 's squadron , hidden just beyond the horizon , to counterattack and annihilate the French squadron . However on 23 February a strong westerly wind blew up and the main squadron , Hydra and Moselle were all blown too far to the east . This was spotted by lookouts on shore and Lamellerie took the opportunity to leave port on 26 February , while the British ships were still out of position . 
 Lamellerie 's squadron was spotted late on 26 February by lookouts on Hydra and Captain George Mundy , supported by Captain John Surman Carden on Moselle , steered a parallel course in the hope of cutting off their advance . At 23 : 00 , Carden was detached to look for Collingwood and inform him of the location and direction of the French while Mundy continued to follow the enemy squadron . Although Hydra was now isolated and hopelessly outnumbered , Lamellerie made no effort to attack the British ship : he even failed to respond when the brig <unk> , falling behind the larger and faster frigates , came within range of Hydra . Mundy opened fire at 04 : 30 , Lieutenant <unk> on <unk> acknowledging that he was hopelessly outgunned and completely unsupported by immediately striking his colours . As Collingwood 's squadron was nowhere within sight and the French were rapidly pulling ahead , Mundy abandoned the chase , secured his prize and turned back eastwards as the French continued into the Atlantic . It is not known why Lamellerie fled from such an inferior force and allowed one of his ships to be captured without opposition : modern historian Richard Woodman describes his conduct as " astonishing , given the weakness of the opposition and [ the strength of his ] own combined force " , but in a separate work suggests that Lamellerie 's orders precluded any engagement until his force was safely off the coast . 
 = = Operations in the Atlantic = = 
 Following the escape from Cadiz , the remaining four ships of Lamellerie 's squadron sailed southwards , reaching the French African trading post of Senegal in March and then crossing the Atlantic to Cayenne , arriving on 27 March . Taking on fresh supplies , the squadron sailed from Cayenne on 7 April and operated with limited success against British merchant shipping in the Caribbean Sea , including 15 days cruising off Barbados . Retiring to the Spanish colony of Puerto Rico , Lamellerie resupplied his ships again in preparation for the journey back to France . The frigate squadron sailed on 18 May , leaving the Caribbean just as a large French squadron under Vice @-@ Admiral Jean @-@ Baptiste Willaumez arrived . 
 = = = Capture of Rhin = = = 
 The journey back to France was largely uneventful , Lamellerie crossing the Atlantic during May , June and July without meeting any Royal Navy vessels . At 18 : 00 on 27 July however , at 47 ° 00 ′ N 07 ° 00 ′ W in the Bay of Biscay , the frigates were spotted by lookouts on the British ship of the line HMS Mars . Mars was a large and powerful ship , a veteran of Trafalgar that was operating as a scout for the squadron under Commodore Richard Goodwin Keats , detailed to blockade the French Atlantic port of Rochefort . Immediately giving chase , Captain Robert Dudley Oliver signaled from Mars to the nearest British ship HMS Africa , warning of the position and direction of the French . Africa passed this information on to Keats while Mars set all sail in pursuit of Lamellerie . 
 Running before the more powerful ship under all possible sail , the four French frigates gradually became separated from one another in the dark . Mars too was alone , Dudley easily outrunning the rest of his squadron but unable to catch the leading French ships . When dawn rose on 28 July , it was clear that Hortense and the other leading vessels were stretching the distance between themselves and Mars but that the rearmost French ship , the frigate Rhin was struggling to keep up . Realising that he was gaining on Rhin , Oliver continued pushing his ship forward and Lamellerie , recognising the danger to his rearmost frigate , turned his squadron about and bore down on the isolated ship of the line . Although Mars was far larger than any of the individual frigates , together they carried more guns and could have made an effective defence if handled efficiently . Determined to engage the French , Oliver continued to sail towards Lamellerie and at 15 : 00 the French captain suddenly reversed his direction and fled eastwards with his three faster ships , abandoning Rhin to Oliver . 
 By the time Lamellerie had turned away , the chase had traveled over 150 nautical miles ( 280 km ) from its original position and Rhin could no longer hold off the British ship . A fierce rain squall caused the frigate to roll and Oliver maintained the pursuit so that at 18 : 00 he was close enough to fire a single shot at Rhin , a warning of that a full broadside was to follow . Aware that his ship could not hope to withstand an attack from the ship of the line , Captain Michel Chesneau hauled down his flag and surrendered without a fight . Although the rest of Lamellerie 's ships were still within sight , the approaching night , increasingly stormy weather and the large number of prisoners of war to be transferred from the prize persuaded Oliver to give up any further pursuit . Lamellerie steered his remaining squadron along the coast , where it split up during the night . The following day Hortense and Hermione entered Bordeaux while <unk> was the only one of the squadron to reach its intended destination of Rochefort . Oliver secured his prize , but was so far from his station that he did not manage to rejoin Keats ' squadron until 31 July . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Rhin and the prisoners were taken to Britain , where the frigate was immediately fitted out as a Royal Navy ship under her old name as HMS Rhin . Oliver was commended for his perseverance and he and his men shared in the prize money from the frigate . In France , there appears to have been no condemnation of Lamellerie 's repeated failure to engage Royal Navy forces that in terms of weight of shot at least were the inferior of his squadron . In his official report he inaccurately claimed that his frigates had all been too badly damaged during the Atlantic cruise to consider fighting a ship of the line . He was later made a peer after the return of the French monarchy and remained in the French Navy for many years . In British histories his actions have been roundly condemned – William James accuses him of lying in his official despatches and wrote in 1827 : " What , then , but a misrepresentation of the facts could have saved this French commodore from being cashiered ? " , while Richard Woodman wrote in 1998 that " such apparent <unk> fed stories of British superiority against all odds and tended to breed a dangerous conceit " . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 = The Witch 's Tales = 
 The Witch 's Tales was a pulp magazine edited by Tom Chadburn which published two issues in November and December 1936 . It was a companion to a radio program , called The Witch 's Tale , which had begun broadcasting in May 1931 . With the exception of the lead story in each issue , all the stories were reprints from the American edition of Pearson 's Magazine . Alonzo Deen Cole , who wrote the radio series , contributed one lead story , and provided the plot for the other . The authors of the reprint stories included George Daulton , <unk> Allan Curtis , William Hamilton Osborne , and John C. Haywood . 
 = = Publication history and contents = = 
 The Witch 's Tale was a radio program that began on American radio in May 1931 . A weekly anthology show , it was the first radio horror program , and soon became quite popular . In 1936 , the magazine The Witch 's Tales appeared as a companion to it , perhaps inspired by The Shadow , a successful pulp magazine which had also been launched as the companion of a radio program of the same name . The Witch 's Tales was published by The Carwood Publishing Co . , a small and relatively inexperienced firm . The named editor of the magazine was Alonzo Deen Cole , who wrote the radio episodes , but the editorial work was actually done by Tom Chadburn . Having both a pulp magazine and radio show act as vehicles for Cole 's work is an early example of the 21st century 's media industry 's approach , with content tied together across more than one media platform , but although Street & Smith demonstrated that this could be done successfully for The Shadow , Carwood did little to promote the radio show in the magazine , probably because of their inexperience . Only one more issue appeared , the following month ; it is unlikely that the publisher could have received sales data on the first issue by that time , so there may have been reasons other than poor sales for the magazine 's short run , perhaps including weak financing and distribution . 
 The first issue , dated November 1936 , led with " The Madman " , a story by Cole about a mad scientist . Cole 's work also appeared in the second issue with " Mrs. Hawker 's Will " . Originally an episode Cole had written for the radio show , it was adapted from the script for the magazine by Laurence D. Smith . All the other stories , from both issues , were reprinted from the American edition of Pearson 's Magazine . These included " The Monster of Lake <unk> " , by <unk> Allan Curtis , from 1899 ; " The Fountain of Youth " , by William Hamilton Osborne , and " Phantom of the Links " , by John C. Haywood , both from 1906 ; and " The Death @-@ Trap " , by George Daulton , which had originally appeared in 1908 . The reprints were good stories , in the opinion of Mike Ashley , and they often had science fiction themes : Curtis 's story involved the transplant of a man 's brain into the body of a prehistoric monster . Despite the relatively high quality of the material , the stories were not action @-@ oriented enough to have pleased a typical pulp magazine reader of the era . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The magazine 's two issues were dated November and December 1936 , and numbered as a single volume of two issues . The publisher was The Carwood Publishing Co . , of New York , and the editor was Tom Chadburn . The magazine was in bedsheet format , with 48 pages , and was priced at 15 cents . 
 = Djibouti women 's national football team = 
 Djibouti women 's national football team represents the country in international competitions . Football is organised by Fédération <unk> de Football , with women 's football formally organised in the country in 2002 , and a national team was later created . The country has no women 's youth national teams . Djibouti has only played in one FIFA recognised match , which they lost to Kenya by a score of 7 – 0 . The team is unranked . The development of women 's football in the country faces both national and regional issues that impede the team 's potential success . 
 = = Background and history = = 
 The country became independent in 1977 . Fédération <unk> de Football was founded in 1977 and joined FIFA in 1994 . Football is one of the most popular sports in the country . Women 's football development in Africa has to deal with several challenges that impact the ability to develop a high level of play , including limited access to education , poverty amongst women in the wider society , and fundamental inequality present in the society that occasionally allows for female specific human rights abuses . When high level women 's players are developed , many leave the country seeking greater opportunity in Northern Europe or the United States . Another issue facing women 's football in Africa is that most of the money for the game does not come from national football federations but instead from FIFA . 
 In 1985 , almost no country in the world had a women 's national football team . Djibouti was no exception : women 's football was not officially organised in the country until 2002 and then , only for players sixteen years and older . As of 2009 , there were only eight women 's clubs for these players in the country . There is a regional and national women 's competition , which was established in 2007 . The league provided the first opportunity for women outside the capital and major cities to play football . The country has a women 's national team but has no youth teams , meaning no U17 or U20 teams . 12 % of the money from the FIFA Financial Assistance Programme ( FAP ) is targeted at the technical development of the game , which includes women 's football , sport medicine and futsal . This compares to 11 % specifically set aside for men 's competitions and 10 % set aside for youth football . Between 1991 and 2010 , there was no FIFA FUTURO III regional course for women 's coaching . A FUTURO III regional course men 's coaching workshop was hosted in 2008 . In 2007 , there was a women 's football seminar held in the country . In 2007 , there was a FIFA MA course held for women / youth football . 
 = = Performance = = 
 Between 1977 and April 2012 , Djibouti women 's national football team played in only one FIFA sanctioned match . It was played in Nairobi on 26 March 2006 , with Kenya women 's national football team winning 7 – 0 , holding a lead of 4 – 0 over Djibouti at the half . The women 's national team has not competed at the Women 's World Cup . They played two non @-@ sanctioned games , one in 2004 and one in 2005 . In March 2012 , the team was not ranked in the world by FIFA and did not formally exist . 
 = L 'Arianna = 
 L 'Arianna ( English : Ariadne ) ( SV 291 ) , composed in 1607 – 1608 , was the second opera by the Italian composer Claudio Monteverdi . One of the earliest operas , it was first performed on 28 May 1608 , as part of the musical festivities for a royal wedding at the court of Duke Vincenzo Gonzaga in Mantua . All the music is lost apart from the extended recitative known as " Lamento d 'Arianna " ( " Ariadne 's Lament " ) . The libretto , which survives complete , was written in eight scenes by Ottavio Rinuccini , who used Ovid 's Heroides and other classical sources to relate the story of Ariadne 's abandonment by Theseus on the island of Naxos and her subsequent elevation as bride to the god Bacchus . 
 The opera was composed under severe pressure of time ; the composer later said that the effort of creating it almost killed him . The initial performance , produced with lavish and innovative special effects , was highly praised , and the work was equally well received in Venice when it was revived under the composer 's direction in 1640 as the inaugural work for the Teatro San Moisè . 
 Rinuccini 's libretto is available in a number of editions . The music of the " Lamento " survives because it was published by Monteverdi , in several different versions , independently from the opera . This fragment became a highly influential musical work and was widely imitated ; the " expressive lament " became an integral feature of Italian opera for much of the 17th century . In recent years the " Lamento " has become popular as a concert and recital piece and has been frequently recorded . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 In about 1590 Claudio Monteverdi , born in Cremona in 1567 , secured a position as a viol player at the Mantuan court of Duke Vincenzo Gonzaga . Over the following ten years he advanced to become the duke 's maestro della musica . During that time , significant developments were taking place in the world of musical theatre ; in 1598 the work generally recognised as the first in the new genre of " opera " — Jacopo Peri 's Dafne — was performed in Florence . The duke was quick to recognise the potential of this new musical form , and its potential for bringing prestige to those willing to sponsor it . 
 As part of his duties to the Gonzaga court , Monteverdi was often required to compose or arrange music for staged performances . These works included a fully @-@ fledged opera , L 'Orfeo , written to a libretto by Alessandro Striggio the Younger and presented before the court on 24 February 1607 . This performance pleased the duke , who ordered a repeat showing for 1 March . A contemporary account records that the piece " could not have been done better ... The music , observing due propriety , serves the poetry so well that nothing more beautiful is to be heard anywhere " . Monteverdi was then required to write several pieces for performance at the wedding of the duke 's son and heir Francesco , planned for early May 1608 . These included a musical prologue for Battista Guarini 's play L <unk> and a setting of the dramatic ballet Il ballo delle ingrate ( " Dance of the Ungrateful Ladies " ) , with a text by Ottavio Rinuccini . There was also to be an opera , though it was not initially certain that Monteverdi would provide this . Other works under consideration were Peri 's Le nozze di <unk> e <unk> ( " The marriage of Peleus and Thetis " ) with a libretto by Francesco Cini , and a new setting of Dafne by Marco da Gagliano . In the event , the former was rejected and the latter designated for performance at the 1607 – 08 Carnival . The duke decreed that the wedding opera should be based on the myth of Arianna ( Ariadne ) , and that Rinuccini should write the text . Monteverdi was instructed to provide the music . 
 = = Creation = = 
 = = = Libretto = = = 
 At the time of his commission for L 'Arianna , Rinuccini was probably the most experienced and distinguished of all librettists . His writing career stretched back to 1579 , when he had written verses for the Florentine court entertainment <unk> d <unk> . He had become widely known through his verse contributions to the celebrated intermedi for Girolamo <unk> 's play La <unk> ( The Pilgrim Woman ) , performed in May 1589 at the wedding of Ferdinando I de ' Medici and Christina of Lorraine . According to Gagliano , Rinuccini was a primary influence in the emergence of opera as a genre ; he adapted the conventions of his contemporary lyric poets to produce the librettos for two of the earliest operas , Dafne and Euridice — the latter set to music by both Peri and Giulio Caccini . 
 For his Arianna libretto Rinuccini drew on a variety of classical sources , notably the tenth book of Ovid 's Heroides , parts of the Carmina of Catullus , and the section in Virgil 's epic Aeneid dealing with Dido 's abandonment by Aeneas . He also used aspects of more recent literary works — Ludovico Ariosto 's Orlando Furioso , Torquato Tasso 's Gerusalemme liberata , and Giovanni Andrea dell ' <unk> 's 1561 translation of Ovid 's Metamorphoses . The libretto was extended during the rehearsals when Carlo de ' Rossi , a member of the duke 's court , reported the Duchess Eleonora 's complaint that the piece was " very dry " and needed to be enriched with further action . The libretto published in Venice in 1622 takes the form of a prologue and eight scenes , although other arrangements of the text have been suggested . For example , the musicologist Bojan <unk> has posited an alternative of a prologue and five scenes . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Monteverdi probably began composing in late October or early November 1607 , since Rinuccini 's arrival in Mantua can be dated to 23 October . With rehearsals due to begin in the new year , Monteverdi composed the work in a hurry and under considerable pressure ; nearly 20 years later he was still complaining , in a letter to Striggio , of the hardships he had been made to suffer : " It was the shortness of time that brought me almost to death 's door in writing L 'Arianna " . 
 Monteverdi had apparently completed the score by early January , and rehearsals began . However , his work was not over as he was required to write further music when the work was extended after Rossi 's intervention . Among the material added or lengthened were the early scene between Venus and Cupid , and Jupiter 's blessing from heaven at the end of the opera . In March 1608 , well into the rehearsal period , the opera 's scheduled performance was jeopardised by the death , from smallpox , of the leading soprano Caterina Martinelli . Fortunately a replacement was to hand , a renowned actress and singer , Virginia <unk> @-@ Andreini , known professionally as " La Florinda " , who was performing in Mantua . A courtier , Antonio <unk> , later reported that she learned the part of Arianna in six days . The musicologist Tim Carter suggests that Arianna 's lament may have been added to the opera at this late stage , to exploit La Florinda 's well @-@ known vocal capabilities . 
 = = Roles = = 
 The casting for the opera 's premiere is uncertain . While the participation of singers such as La Florinda and Francesco Rasi can be established , sources have speculated on the involvement of other singers . There are several versions of the published libretto ; the list of roles is taken from the publication by Gherardo & <unk> <unk> , Venice 1622 . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The action is preceded by a brief prologue , delivered by Apollo . Venus and Cupid are then discovered , in conversation , on a desolate seashore . Venus informs Cupid that Duke Theseus of Athens , together with Ariadne , will soon be arriving on the island of Naxos on their way to Athens . They are fleeing from Crete , where the pair have been complicit in the slaying of Ariadne 's monster half @-@ brother , the Minotaur , in the labyrinth below the palace of her father , King Minos . Venus is aware that Theseus intends to abandon Ariadne on Naxos , and to proceed to Athens alone . Cupid offers to rekindle Theseus 's passion for Ariadne , but Venus has decided to unite her with the god Bacchus , and asks Cupid to arrange this . 
 Cupid conceals himself , as Theseus and Ariadne arrive on the island a short distance away . Ariadne muses over her disloyalty to her father , but declares her love for Theseus . She departs to find shelter for the night , after which a fishermen 's chorus compares her eyes with the stars of heaven . Theseus , alone with his counsellor , discusses his abandonment of Ariadne , and is advised that this decision is justified , as she will not be acceptable to the people of Athens as their ruler 's consort . 
 A chorus greets the dawn as Ariadne , after a troubled night 's sleep , returns to the shore with her companion , <unk> , to find that Theseus has departed . <unk> offers her comfort . In despair at the thought that Theseus will not return , Ariadne nevertheless decides to go to the landing area to wait for him . In a pastoral interlude a chorus sings of the joys of rural life , and expresses the hope that Theseus will not forget Ariadne . <unk> by an envoy with the news that Ariadne is alone and sorrowing , the chorus again sings in sympathy with her . On the beach , Ariadne sings her lament for her lost love and prepares to kill herself . At this point fanfares are heard heralding an arrival , causing Ariadne to hope that it is Theseus returning . In another interlude the chorus empathises , but a second envoy announces that it is Bacchus who has arrived , having taken pity on Ariadne . A sung ballo celebrates the anticipated betrothal of Bacchus and Ariadne . In the final scene Cupid reappears , and Venus rises from the sea before Jupiter speaks his blessing from the heavens . The union is sealed as Bacchus promises Ariadne immortality in heaven , and a crown of stars . 
 = = Performance history = = 
 = = = Premiere : Mantua , 1608 = = = 
 The date of the Gonzaga wedding was repeatedly postponed , because of diplomatic problems which delayed the bride 's arrival in Mantua until 24 May . The wedding festivities began four days later ; L 'Arianna was performed on 28 May 1608 , the first of the several spectacular entertainments . A large temporary theatre had been built for the occasion ; according to the court 's chronicler Federico Follino this held 6 @,@ 000 people — a figure which Carter deems unlikely . Whatever its size , the arena could not hold everyone who wished to be present . Follino 's account records that although the duke had strictly limited the numbers from his household entitled to be there , many distinguished foreign visitors could not be seated and were obliged to crowd around the doors . 
 Although contained within a single stage set , the production was lavish , with 300 men employed to manipulate the stage machinery . Follino 's report described the set as " a wild rocky place in the midst of the waves , which in the furthest part of the prospect could be seen always in motion " . As the action began , Apollo was revealed " sitting on a very beautiful cloud ... which , moving down little by little ... reached in a short space of time the stage and ... disappeared in a moment " . Thereafter , all the performers proved excellent in the art of singing ; " every part succeeded more than wondrously " . Follino 's enthusiasm was echoed in other reports made by dignitaries to their own courts . The ambassador for the House of Este , who referred to the work as " a comedy in music " , mentioned in particular Andreini 's performance which , in her lament , " made many weep " , and that of Francesco Rasi , who as Bacchus " sang divinely " . Monteverdi 's fellow composer Marco da Gagliano wrote that Monteverdi 's music had " moved the entire audience to tears " . In all , the opera lasted for two and a half hours . 
 = = = Revival : Venice , 1639 – 40 = = = 
 Despite the positive reception accorded to L 'Arianna at its premiere , the duke did not request a second showing , as he had with L 'Orfeo the previous year " . The next hint of a performance of L 'Arianna is in 1614 , when the Medici court in Florence requested a copy of the score , presumably with the intention of staging it . There is , however , no record of any such performance there . Early in 1620 Striggio asked Monteverdi to send him the music for a projected performance in Mantua as part of the celebration for the Duchess Caterina 's birthday . Monteverdi went to the trouble and expense of preparing a new manuscript with revisions ; had he had more time , he informed Striggio , he would have revised the work more thoroughly . Hearing nothing further from the Mantuan court , Monteverdi wrote to Striggio on 18 April 1620 , offering to help with the staging . A month or so later , however , he learned that the duchess 's celebrations had been scaled back , and that there had been no performance of L 'Arianna . 
 There is some evidence to suggest a possible performance in Dubrovnik , in or some time after 1620 ; a Croatian translation of the libretto was published in Ancona in 1633 . However , the only known revival of the work came in Venice , in 1640 . Public theatre opera had come to the city in March 1637 , when the new Teatro San Cassiano opened with a performance of L <unk> by Francesco Manelli . The popularity of this and other works led to more theatres converting their facilities for opera ; L 'Arianna was chosen to inaugurate the Teatro San Moisè as an opera house during the 1639 – 40 Carnival ( the precise date of this performance is not recorded ) . A revised version of the libretto had been published in 1639 , with substantial cuts and revisions from the 1608 version to remove passages too specifically linked to the Mantuan wedding . The composer , who was by then 73 years old , had acquired considerable prestige in Venice , having been director of music at St Mark 's Basilica since 1613 . The dedication in the revised and republished libretto describes him as " [ the ] most celebrated Apollo of the century and the highest intelligence of the heavens of humanity " . The opera was received with great enthusiasm by a Venetian audience already familiar with the lament , which had been published in the city in 1623 . Within a few weeks the theatre replaced L 'Arianna with Monteverdi 's new opera Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria , which proved an even greater success . 
 = = Loss = = 
 After the Venice revival of 1639 – 40 there are no further records of performances of L 'Arianna . Rinuccini 's libretto , which was published on several occasions during Monteverdi 's lifetime , has survived intact , but the opera 's music disappeared some time after 1640 , with the exception of Ariadne 's Scene 6 lament , known as Lamento d 'Arianna . In the loss of its music the opera shares the fate of most of Monteverdi 's theatrical works , including six of his other nine operas . Carter 's explanation for the high rate of attrition is that " memories were short and large @-@ scale musical works often had limited currency beyond their immediate circumstances " ; such music was rarely published and quickly discarded . 
 = = " Lamento d 'Arianna " = = 
 The lament was saved from oblivion by Monteverdi 's decision to publish it independently from the opera : first in 1614 as a five @-@ voice madrigal , then in 1623 as a monody , and finally in 1641 as a sacred hymn , Lamento della Madonna . The five @-@ voice adaptation was included in the composer 's Sixth Book of Madrigals ; there is evidence that this arrangement was made at the suggestion of an unnamed Venetian gentleman who thought that the melody would benefit from counterpoint . In 1868 the lament was published in Paris , and in 1910 the Italian composer Ottorino Respighi issued an edited , orchestral transcription . 
 In her analysis of the lament , the musicologist Suzanne Cusick asserts that " [ T ] o a large extent Monteverdi 's fame and historical status rested for centuries on the universal appreciation of his achievement in the celebrated lament [ which ] was among the most emulated , and therefore influential , works of the early 17th century " . In Cusick 's view Monteverdi " creat [ ed ] the lament as a recognizable genre of vocal chamber music and as a standard scene in opera ... that would become crucial , almost genre @-@ defining , to the full @-@ scale public operas of 17th @-@ century Venice " and she concludes by noting that the women of Mantua would have recognised the transformations enacted in the lament as representative of their own life stories . Monteverdi , she believes , sought to represent in music the eventual triumph of female piety over promiscuity : " Arianna 's gradual loss of her passionate self in the lament constitutes a public musical chastening of this incautious woman who dared to choose her own mate " . In her study The Recitative Soliloquy , Margaret Murata records that laments of this kind became a staple feature of operas until about 1650 , " thereafter more rarely until the total triumph of the aria around 1670 " . Mark Ringer , in his analysis of Monteverdi 's musical drama , suggests that the lament defines Monteverdi 's innovative creativity in a manner similar to that in which , two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half centuries later , the " Prelude " and the " Liebestod " in Tristan und Isolde announced Wagner 's discovery of new expressive frontiers . 
 In its operatic context the lament takes the form of an extended recitative of more than 70 vocal lines , delivered in five sections divided by choral comments . Some of the wording is prefigured in the immediately preceding scene in which the First Envoy describes Arianna 's plight to a sympathetic chorus of fishermen . The lament depicts Arianna 's various emotional reactions to her abandonment : sorrow , anger , fear , self @-@ pity , desolation and a sense of futility . Cusick draws attention to the manner in which Monteverdi is able to match in music the " rhetorical and syntactical gestures " in Rinuccini 's text . The opening repeated words " <unk> morire " ( Let me die ) are accompanied by a dominant seventh chord which Ringer describes as " an unforgettable chromatic stab of pain " ; Monteverdi was one of the first users of this musical device . What follows , says Ringer , has a range and depth " comparable to Shakespeare 's most searching soliloquies " . The words " <unk> morire " are followed by " O Teseo , O Teseo mio " ( O Theseus , my Theseus " ) ; the two phrases represent Arianna 's contrasting emotions of despair and longing . Throughout the lament indignation and anger are punctuated by tenderness , until the final iteration of " O Teseo " , after which a descending line brings the lament to a quiet conclusion . 
 Among other composers who adopted the format and style of Arianna 's lament were Francesco Cavalli , whose opera Le nozze di Teti e di <unk> contains three such pieces ; Francesco Costa , who included a setting of Rinuccini 's text in his madrigal collection Pianta d 'Arianna ; and Sigismondo d <unk> , who wrote several laments in the 1620s after the <unk> version of Arianna 's lament was published in 1623 . Monteverdi himself used the expressive lament format in each of his two late operas , Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria and L 'incoronazione di Poppea , for the respective characters of Penelope and Ottavia . In 1641 Monteverdi adapted Arianna 's lament into a sacred song with a Latin text , " <unk> dell Madonna " , which he included in Selva morale e <unk> , the last of his works published during his lifetime . 
 = = Recordings , " Lamento d 'Arianna " = = 
 Many recordings are available of both the five @-@ voice madrigal and the solo voice version of the " Lamento " . The solo recordings include several versions which use a tenor or baritone voice . Among leading singers who have issued recordings are the sopranos Emma Kirkby and Véronique Gens , and the mezzo @-@ sopranos Janet Baker and Anne Sofie von Otter . 
 = = Editions = = 
 At least eight versions of the libretto were published between 1608 and 1640 . The following is a list of the known editions : 
 Aurelio et Ludovico Osanna , Mantua , 1608 . Publication of the text included in Federico <unk> 's report of the 1608 performance ; 
 <unk> di Francesco Osanna , Mantua , 1608 . Possibly the text circulated to the audience at the 1608 performance ; 
 I. <unk> , Florence , 1608 ; 
 Bernardo <unk> , Giovan Battista <unk> & Co . , Venice , 1608 ; 
 <unk> et <unk> <unk> , Venice , 1622 ; 
 G. F. <unk> , Ancona , 1633 . Croatian translation , prepared for possible performance in Dubrovnik c . 1620 . ( 5 scenes version ) ; 
 Angelo Salvadori , Venice , 1639 . Revised version prepared for the 1640 revival ; 
 Antonio <unk> , Venice , 1640 . 
 = Speaker of the United States House of Representatives election , October 2015 = 
 An election for the Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives took place on October 29 , 2015 , during the 114th U.S. Congress . The election was necessitated by the announcement of Speaker John Boehner 's resignation , set for October 30 . The Speaker of the House follows the Vice President in the line of succession to the presidency of the United States in accordance with the Presidential Succession Act . 
 Due to friction within the Republican Party caucus , Boehner decided to step down as speaker and resign his seat in Congress . He scheduled a Republican caucus non @-@ binding vote for speaker on October 8 , and a full floor vote on October 29 . Kevin McCarthy , the House Majority Leader and second @-@ in @-@ command to the Speaker , was initially viewed as the favorite to win the Speakership . However , due to the opposition of the Freedom Caucus , McCarthy dropped out of the race on October 8 , and the caucus vote was postponed . 
 Jason Chaffetz initially declared his candidacy to challenge McCarthy , and Bill Flores declared his candidacy after McCarthy withdrew , but both dropped out later to express their support for Paul Ryan , who entered the race after being widely viewed as a potential frontrunner . Daniel Webster of the Republican Party and former Speaker Nancy Pelosi of the Democratic Party were also declared candidates . Ryan won the rescheduled caucus vote on October 28 , and was elected Speaker of the House , receiving 54 @.@ 6 % of the House vote , on October 29 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Process and conventions = = = 
 The Speaker of the United States House of Representatives is the presiding officer of the United States House of Representatives , and is second in the United States presidential line of succession , after the Vice President and ahead of the President pro tempore of the United States Senate . Though the Constitution does not require that the Speaker be an elected member of the House of Representatives , every Speaker to date has been elected from House membership . 
 The 435 members of the House of Representatives elect a Speaker by majority rule at the beginning of each session of the United States Congress , who serves until the end of the Congress . Typically , the election is a formality , as the majority party 's members vote as a bloc for their party 's previously @-@ chosen Speaker @-@ designate ( such as the speaker , majority leader , or minority leader from the previous term ) . Open elections are uncommon but have occurred . The last Speaker election to require multiple ballots occurred in 1923 . 
 = = = Speakership and resignation of John Boehner = = = 
 John Boehner , a member of the Republican Party from Ohio , served as the Majority Leader of the United States House of Representatives from February 2006 until January 2007 . As the Democratic Party assumed control of the House following the 2006 elections , Boehner served as Minority Leader from January 2007 until January 2011 . When Republicans reassumed control of the House of Representatives in January 2011 , Boehner was elected as Speaker , with the votes of all 241 of his fellow Republicans . In 2014 , some House Republicans reached out to Ben Carson about his interest in becoming Speaker should they be able to oust Boehner ; Carson declined , citing his impending candidacy for president . Boehner 's Republican opponents formed a congressional caucus , called the Freedom Caucus , in January 2015 to focus their opposition . Though Boehner was reelected as Speaker at the beginning of the 114th United States Congress that month , 25 conservative members of the Republican caucus did not vote for him . Daniel Webster , a Republican from Florida , received 12 votes . 
 Throughout 2015 , Boehner and the Freedom Caucus remained at odds . Boehner stripped his opponents of leadership posts and other perks , while the American Action Network , a group allied with Boehner , aired television ads against Freedom Caucus members in their home districts . Meanwhile , the Freedom Caucus opposing Boehner 's plans , forcing him to rely on Democratic votes to pass bills . Needing to pass a federal budget for the 2016 fiscal year beginning October 1 , the Freedom Caucus , now consisting of approximately 40 conservative Republicans affiliated with the Tea Party movement , threatened to block a resolution from passing unless it would defund Planned Parenthood and to initiate a vote to vacate the speakership if Boehner did not support their demands . The caucus sought the following promises : ( 1 ) the decentralization of the House Steering Committee , so that the Speaker and House Majority Leader are not solely in charge of committee assignments , ( 2 ) not supporting an increase in the U.S. debt ceiling without entitlement reform , ( 3 ) willingness to impeach John <unk> , the Commissioner of Internal Revenue , and ( 4 ) passing spending bills approved by the caucus rather than a continuing resolution favored by Democrats in the United States Senate . 
 On July 28 , 2015 , Mark Meadows , a member of the Freedom Caucus from North Carolina , filed a motion to vacate the speakership , only the second time the motion had been filed . The next day , Boehner referred to the motion as " no big deal . " However , following continued pressure from the Freedom Caucus , and to avoid the vacation of his speakership , Boehner announced on September 25 that he would resign the Speakership and retire from Congress effective October 30 . Sources from his office indicated he chose to resign due to the increasing discord within the Republican caucus so that he could manage passage of a continuing resolution to fund the government and avoid a government shutdown . 
 = = Candidates = = 
 On September 28 , Kevin McCarthy of California , the House Majority Leader , and Webster announced that they would run for Speaker of the House . McCarthy was considered the presumptive favorite in the race . Jason Chaffetz , a Republican from Utah and the Chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee , announced his candidacy on October 4 , claiming that McCarthy did not have the votes to win the election . Several Republicans urged Paul Ryan of Wisconsin , the running mate of Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election , to run for Speaker , but he declined , saying he is a " policy guy " with a preference to focus on his role as Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee . 
 Democrat Nancy Pelosi , who served as the Speaker from January 2007 through January 2011 , asked her Democratic colleagues for their vote in the election . Steny Hoyer , the House Minority Whip , said that he expects that the " overwhelming majority " of Democrats will vote for Pelosi . He said that if a Republican cannot get the votes needed , Democrats may consider their options . 
 On October 7 , the day before the Republican caucus scheduled a non @-@ binding vote for speaker , Ryan and former Vice President Dick Cheney endorsed McCarthy , as did 11 of the 13 House Republicans from Pennsylvania . The Freedom Caucus decided to endorse Webster in the race . Other Republicans said they would vote against McCarthy , including Thomas Massie of Kentucky , who called McCarthy " absolutely not an option " because of his previous role as Boehner 's " right @-@ hand man " . Also , Walter B. Jones , Jr. of North Carolina sent a letter to the Republican Conference Chairwoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers stating that any candidates for a leadership position with " misdeeds " should withdraw from the race . Jones has stated that his comment did not specifically refer to McCarthy , but it was widely seen as referring to rumors that McCarthy had been committing an extramarital affair with a fellow Representative , a rumor that both have denied ; the basis for such an allegation and interpretation is unclear . 
 Citing opposition from within the Republican Party , as well as fallout from controversial comments he made about the United States House Select Committee on Benghazi , McCarthy dropped out of the race on October 8 . Following McCarthy 's departure from the race , Republicans renewed their efforts to recruit Ryan as a candidate . Boehner personally called Ryan twice to ask him to run , and Chaffetz said that he would not run against Ryan if he chose to enter the race . Ryan also received calls from Mitt Romney and Trey Gowdy , among others , encouraging him to run for Speaker . Additional Ryan endorsements came from Wisconsin Senator Ron Johnson , 2016 Republican presidential frontrunner Donald Trump , and House Majority Whip Steve Scalise from Louisiana . On October 9 , close aides of Ryan confirmed that Ryan was reconsidering the possibility of a run . 
 A possible Ryan candidacy received support from the same Freedom Caucus that opposed Boehner and McCarthy , as Meadows said on October 11 that Ryan running would " definitely change the equation , " and Chairman Jim Jordan described Ryan as " a good man " and stated that the Freedom Caucus would view a Ryan run " favorably . " 
 Others who expressed their interest in running included Texas representatives Bill Flores and Michael McCaul , Georgia representative Lynn Westmoreland , Montana representative Ryan Zinke , and California representative and former Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa . However , several candidates have made clear that they would only run if Ryan chooses not to , including Issa , McCaul , and Minnesota representative John Kline . On October 12 , Flores confirmed that he would run for Speaker . He stated that he would run only if Ryan stayed out of the contest . 
 Ryan held a closed @-@ door meeting with the Republican Caucus on October 20 , where he explained that he would run for Speaker if he could be guaranteed an overwhelming majority of the Republican caucus would support him . Specifically , Ryan requested an increased threshold for the political maneuver of vacating the Speakership , stated that he would not lessen the amount of time he spends with his family , and requested an official endorsement from the Freedom Caucus , Republican Study Committee , and The Tuesday Group by October 23 , before he could make his decision . Immediately after Ryan 's announcement , Chaffetz announced that he would be dropping out of the race to support Ryan . The next day , the Freedom Caucus held a vote to determine which of its members would support Ryan ; although the exact tally was not revealed , roughly two @-@ thirds of the caucus voted to endorse Ryan . Although this was shy of the 80 % vote needed for an official endorsement over Webster , both the caucus leaders and Ryan were satisfied with the result , and Ryan made efforts to move forward with a potential Speaker bid . 
 On October 22 , Ryan announced his bid for Speaker . Flores , who chairs the Republican Study Committee , dropped out of the race and endorsed Ryan . Mo Brooks of Alabama , a member of the Freedom Caucus , announced on the floor of the House on October 27 that Ryan had agreed not to advance immigration reform legislation while Barack Obama is President of the United States , or unless it meets the " Hastert Rule " , as it has the support of the majority of Republicans . 
 = = = Declared = = = 
 The following officially declared their candidacy : 
 Nancy Pelosi , ( Democratic Party ) , Minority Leader of the United States House of Representatives ( since 2011 ; 2003 – 2007 ) , United States representative for California 's 12th congressional district ( since 2013 ) , and Speaker of the United States House of Representatives ( 2007 – 2011 ) . 
 Paul Ryan , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Wisconsin 's 1st congressional district ( since 1999 ) , Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee ( since 2015 ) , Republican Party nominee for Vice President of the United States in the 2012 election . 
 Daniel Webster , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Florida 's 10th congressional district ( since 2013 ) . 
 = = = Publicly expressed interest = = = 
 The following publicly expressed interest in becoming candidates : 
 Darrell Issa , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for California 's 49th congressional district ( since 2003 ) , Chairman of the House Oversight Committee ( 2011 – 2015 ) . 
 Newt Gingrich , ( Republican Party ) , Speaker of the United States House of Representatives ( 1995 – 1999 ) , House Minority Whip ( 1989 – 1995 ) , United States representative for Georgia 's 6th congressional district ( 1979 – 1999 ) . 
 Michael McCaul , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Texas 's 10th congressional district ( since 2005 ) , Chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee ( since 2013 ) . 
 Mike Pompeo , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Kansas 's 4th congressional district ( since 2011 ) . 
 Lynn Westmoreland , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Georgia 's 3rd congressional district ( since 2007 ) . 
 Ryan Zinke , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Montana 's at @-@ large congressional district ( since 2015 ) . 
 = = = Received speculation = = = 
 The following received speculation about a possible candidacy in at least two reliable sources : 
 Diane Black , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Tennessee 's 6th congressional district ( since 2011 ) . 
 Mike Conaway , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Texas 's 11th congressional district ( since 2005 ) . 
 Mike Kelly , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Pennsylvania 's 3rd congressional district ( since 2011 ) . 
 John Kline , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Minnesota 's 2nd congressional district ( since 2003 ) , Chairman of the House Education Committee ( since 2011 ) . 
 = = = Withdrawn = = = 
 The following were candidates , but subsequently withdrew : 
 Jason Chaffetz , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Utah 's 3rd congressional district ( since 2008 ) , Chairman of the United States House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform ( since 2015 ) ( Withdrew on October 20 , 2015 ; endorsed Paul Ryan ) . 
 Bill Flores , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Texas 's 17th congressional district since 2011 . ( Withdrew on October 22 , 2015 ; endorsed Paul Ryan ) . 
 Kevin McCarthy ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for California 's 23rd congressional district ( since 2013 ) , Majority Leader of the United States House of Representatives ( since 2014 ) . ( Withdrew on October 8 , 2015 ) . 
 = = = Declined to run = = = 
 The following received some speculation about a possible candidacy , but subsequently ruled themselves out : 
 Marsha Blackburn , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Tennessee 's 7th congressional district ( since 2003 ) . 
 Trey Gowdy ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for South Carolina 's 4th congressional district ( since 2011 ) , Chairman of the House Benghazi Committee ( since 2014 ) . 
 Jeb <unk> ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Texas 's 5th congressional district ( since 2003 ) , Chairman of the House Committee on Financial Services ( since 2013 ) . 
 Cathy McMorris Rodgers ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Washington 's 5th congressional district ( since 2005 ) , Chairman of the House Republican Conference ( since 2013 ) . 
 Peter <unk> , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Illinois 's 6th congressional district ( since 2007 ) . 
 Steve Scalise ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Louisiana 's 1st congressional district ( since 2008 ) , Majority Whip of the United States House of Representatives ( since 2014 ) . 
 = = Election = = 
 House Republicans planned to hold a non @-@ binding caucus vote on October 8 , followed by the official floor vote on October 29 . The winning candidate requires a 218 @-@ vote majority to win . Multiple ballots may be cast if the majority of the House cannot agree on a candidate . While McCarthy and Chaffetz both said they would vote for the winner of the caucus vote in the floor vote , Webster did not make the same promise . 
 Following McCarthy dropping out of the race on October 8 , the caucus vote was indefinitely postponed . Massie and Peter T. King referred to the House as a " banana republic . " Massie also criticized Boehner for postponing the election , saying they " called off the election because they didn ’ t like the result , " which was echoed by Tom Rice , Louie <unk> , and Justin Amash . McMorris Rodgers and Conference Vice Chairwoman Lynn Jenkins defended Boehner , saying the matter was handled properly , as conference rules give him sole discretion . Rich Lowry of National Review asked McCarthy in a phone interview if the House was governable , to which McCarthy replied " I don ’ t know . Sometimes you have to hit rock bottom . " Charlie Dent , a Republican from Pennsylvania who had supported McCarthy , suggested that if Republicans are unable to agree on a candidate , the best option might be for a bipartisan coalition to select a Speaker . 
 Once it appeared certain that Ryan would run , and win an overwhelming majority of the caucus 's votes , Boehner rescheduled the Republican caucus vote for October 28 . Ryan won the nomination , defeating Webster 200 to 43 in the secret ballot voting . Blackburn and McCarthy each received one vote . The next day , Webster reportedly urged Republicans to vote for Ryan instead of him . 
 = = = Final result = = = 
 On October 29 , Ryan was elected Speaker with 236 of the 432 votes cast . Others receiving votes were Pelosi ( 184 ) , Webster ( 9 ) , Jim Cooper , John Lewis , and Colin Powell ( 1 each ) . Votes were cast by 432 of the 435 House members . 
 Following the election , Raúl Labrador , a Freedom Caucus member from Idaho , said that Paul will need to " realize the honeymoon is over and start bringing us some conservative policy , " and that " the final exam for Paul Ryan will be in January 2017 , when there is a Speaker election , and we will look at his body of work and determine whether he gets a passing grade or not . " 
 = Montana Vigilantes = 
 The history of vigilante justice and the Montana Vigilantes began in 1863 in what was at the time a remote part of eastern Idaho Territory . Vigilante activities continued , although somewhat sporadically , through the Montana Territorial period until the territory became the state of Montana in 1889 . Vigilantism arose because territorial law enforcement and the courts had very little power in the remote mining camps during the territorial period . 
 In 1863 – 1864 , Montana Vigilantes followed the model of the San Francisco Committee of Vigilance that existed in 1850s California to bring order to lawless communities in and around the gold fields of Alder Gulch and Grasshopper Creek . There are estimates that over 100 persons were killed in " road agent " robberies in the fall of 1863 . The Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch organized in December 1863 , and in the first six weeks of 1864 at least 20 road agents of the infamous Plummer gang , known as the " Innocents " , were captured and hanged by the organization . Formal territorial law reached Alder Gulch in late 1864 with the arrival of Territorial Judge Hezekiah L. Hosmer and vigilante activity ceased in the region . 
 As the gold fields of Alder Gulch and Grasshopper Creek declined in 1865 , prospectors and fortune seekers migrated to newly discovered areas in and around Last Chance Gulch ( now Helena , Montana ) . As lawlessness increased , vigilante justice continued there with the formation of the Committee of Safety in 1865 . During the period 1865 – 1870 , at least 14 alleged criminals were executed by Helena 's vigilantes . In 1884 , ranchers in Central and Eastern Montana resorted to vigilante justice to deal with cattle rustlers and horse thieves . The best @-@ known vigilante group in that area were " Stuart 's Stranglers " , organized by Granville Stuart in the Musselshell region . As formal law enforcement became more prevalent in the region , vigilantism fell into decline . 
 Vigilantism in pre @-@ territorial and territorial Montana has been written about , romanticized and chronicled in personal memoirs , biographies , documentary and scholarly works , film and fiction for well over a century . The first book published in Montana was Thomas J. Dimsdale 's 1866 first edition of The Vigilantes of Montana , which was compiled from a series of newspaper articles he wrote for the Montana Post in 1865 . Historical analysis of the period ranges from disrepute to heroism , with debates over whether the lack of any functioning justice system and the understanding of due process at the time meant the vigilantes acted in a way they thought was best for their communities or if modern standards of due process should govern analysis of their actions . 
 = = Bannack and Virginia City = = 
 On July 28 , 1862 , gold was discovered along Grasshopper Creek , a tributary of the Beaverhead River , in a remote part of eastern Idaho Territory , leading to the establishment of the town of Bannack . Bannack was a gold rush boomtown that was the first territorial capital of Montana Territory for a brief period after the territory was established in 1864 . Less than a year after the Grasshopper Creek find , on May 26 , 1863 , gold was discovered along Alder Gulch , a tributary creek northeast of the Ruby River that lies between the Tobacco Root Mountains and the <unk> Range and 70 miles ( 110 km ) east of Bannack . The Alder Gulch find became one of the largest placer mining gold fields in the western U.S. The mining settlements of Virginia City and Nevada City , Montana , which sprang up in Alder Gulch , boasted thousands of prospectors and fortune seekers by the end of 1863 . These new settlements generally lacked justice systems found in populated portions of the territory , such as in the territorial capital in Lewiston , Idaho . In 1863 , gold was the preferred form of currency in western frontier communities and had a value , fixed and guaranteed by the U.S. Government , of $ 20 @.@ 67 per ounce . Almost all economic transactions in western mining communities were accomplished with gold nuggets , flakes or dust as currency and not surprisingly , the more gold one had , the more wealth one possessed . During the early years of the territory , there was no secure way to transport wealth out of the region . The only means of transporting wealth out of the Alder Gulch gold fields was via horseback or slow moving wagons and stagecoaches on a limited number of trails and primitive roads leading south and west to Salt Lake City and San Francisco or east to Minnesota . Roads and trails leading to Alder Gulch included the Bozeman and Bridger Trails connecting to the Oregon Trail from the east , the Mullan Road from points west and from Fort Benton , Montana the head of navigation on the Missouri River and the Corinne Road from Corinne , Utah and points south . Additionally , there was a single track , 70 @-@ mile ( 110 km ) stage road that connected Alder Gulch with Bannack . Several commercial freight and two passenger stage companies — Peabody and Caldwell 's and A.J. Oliver 's — operated on this route . <unk> had to stop at several different ranches during the trip to water and change horses , feed passengers and provide overnight lodging . One of these ranches , the Rattlesnake Ranch , was owned by Bill Bunton and Frank Parish , who were later hanged by the vigilantes as road agents and members of the Plummer gang . 
 = = = Road agents and the Plummer gang = = = 
 In a region where valuable gold was plentiful , transportation was insecure and effective law and order was lacking , travelers became easy prey for robbers . By late 1863 , thefts and murders along the routes in and around Alder Gulch had become common . In their writings about the vigilantes , Thomas Dimsdale and Nathaniel P. Langford estimated that at least 102 travelers were killed by robbers in the fall of 1863 . Many more travelers left the region and were never heard from again . As this became a more frequent occurrence locals began suspecting that these crimes were being carried out by a single group of outlaws , known as " road agents " , under the control of Bannack sheriff Henry Plummer . The gang became known as the Innocents because of their passwords , I am innocent . 
 = = = = Notorious robberies , attempted robberies and murders in 1863 = = = = 
 On October 13 , 1863 , Lloyd Magruder was killed by road agent Chris Lowrie . Magruder was an Idaho merchant leaving Virginia City with $ 12 @,@ 000 in gold dust from goods he had sold there . Several of the men he hired to accompany him back to Lewiston , Idaho were in fact criminals . Four other men in the party were also murdered in camp — Charlie Allen , Robert Chalmers , Horace Chalmers and William Phillips — by Lowrie , Doc Howard , Jem Romaine and William Page . 
 On October 26 , 1863 , the Peabody and Caldwell 's stage was robbed between the Rattlesnake Ranch and Bannack by two road agents believed to be Frank Parish and George Ives . Bill Bunton , the owner of the Rattlesnake Ranch who joined the stage at the ranch was also complicit in the robbery . The road agents netted $ 2 @,@ 800 in gold from the passengers and threatened them all with death if they talked about the robbery . 
 On November 13 , 1863 , a teenage Henry Tilden was in the employ of Wilbur Sanders and Sidney Edgerton to locate and corral some horses owned by Sanders and Edgerton . Near Horse Prairie , Tilden was confronted by three armed road agents . He was carrying very little money and was allowed to depart unmolested , but with the warning that if he talked , he would be killed . He did not heed the warning and told Sanders ' wife , Hattie and Sidney Edgerton that he had recognized one of the road agents as sheriff Henry Plummer . Although Tilden 's report was discounted because Plummer was respected , this incident led to increased suspicion in the region that Plummer was the leader of a gang of road agents . 
 On November 22 , 1863 , the A.J. Oliver stage was robbed on its way to Bannack from Virginia City by road agents George Ives , " Whiskey Bill " Graves and Bob Zachary . The robbery netted less than $ 1000 in gold and treasury notes . One of the victims , Leroy Southmayd made the mistake of reporting the robbery and identifying the road agents to Bannack Sheriff , Henry Plummer . Members of Plummer 's gang confronted Southmayd on his return trip to Virginia City , but Southmayd was cunning enough to avoid injury or death . 
 In November 1863 , Conrad Kohrs traveled to Bannack from Deer Lodge , Montana with $ 5000 in gold dust to buy cattle . A conversation with Sheriff Plummer in Bannack led Kohrs to believe he might be robbed while on the trail back to Deer Lodge . While in an overnight camp his associates located road agents George Ives and " Dutch John " Wagner surveying the camp , armed with shotguns . A day or two later , Kohrs was on horseback returning to Deer Lodge when Ives and Wagner gave chase . Kohrs ' horse proved the faster and he evaded confrontation before reaching the safety of Deer Lodge . 
 In early December 1863 , a three wagon freight outfit organized by Milton S. Moody was going to Salt Lake City from Virginia City . Among the seven passengers was John Bozeman . The freight wagons were carrying $ 80 @,@ 000 in gold dust and $ 1500 in treasury notes . While camped on Blacktail Deer Creek , road agents " Dutch John " Wagner and Steve Marshland entered the camp , armed and ready to rob the train . Members of the camp had armed themselves well and Wagner and Marshland were able to escape , claiming they were just looking for lost horses . Two days later , Wagner and Marshland were both wounded in an unsuccessful attempt to rob the wagon train as it crossed the Continental Divide at Rock Creek . 
 On December 8 , 1863 , Anton Holter ( who later became a Montana Power Company executive and had Holter Dam named for him ) , who was taking oxen to sell in Virginia City , survived an attempted robbery and murder . When road agents George Ives and Aleck Carter , whom Holter recognized , discovered Holter was not carrying any significant wealth , they tried to shoot him . He was able to avoid being shot and escaped into the brush . 
 = = = The failure of miners ' courts = = = 
 Prior to the creation of the Montana Territory on May 26 , 1864 , and the arrival of the territorial courts , the only court system available for the residents of Bannack and Virginia City were the informal miners ' courts . The miners ' courts were a vehicle of the organized mining districts to resolve mining claims and disputes between miners in the district . When confronted with a major crime such as murder , they usually proved ineffective at resolving the crime to the satisfaction of the community . 
 While there are not many accounts of early courts in Alder Gulch , probably due to their informality and short existence , John X. Beidler recalled a murder trial in the Virginia City miners ' court in his memoirs . The trial recalled by Beidler occurred in the fall of 1863 . It concerned the matter of the murder of J.W. Dillingham . The trial was held outside , due to the fact that every resident took part . In the end all three defendants were set free . The first , Charley Forbes , was freed after he gave an eloquent and sentimental speech about his mother . The other two , Buck Stinson and Haze Lyons , were convicted and set to be the first men executed in what would become the state of Montana . However , at what would be a very public hanging friends and sympathizers of Stinson and Lyons convinced the crowd to vote again on the execution . Two attempts at counting the vote were made according to Beidler . The first people voting ' hang ' were to walk up @-@ hill while those voting ' no hang ' were to walk down @-@ hill . This vote was rejected and the next attempt had four men form two gates and people would cast their vote by walking through the ' hang ' gate or the ' no hang ' gate . Beidler claims that friends of the condemned men simply walked through the ' no hang ' gate multiple times casting multiple fraudulent votes that possibly allowed two murderers to walk free . 
 On December 19 – 21 , 1863 , a public trial was held for George Ives , the suspected murderer of a young Dutch immigrant Nicholas <unk> . Hundreds of miners from around the area attended the 3 @-@ day , outdoor trial . George Ives was prosecuted by Wilbur F. Sanders and Ives was convicted and hanged on December 21 , 1863 . Sanders played a prominent role in Montana history and eventually became the first U.S. Senator from Montana when the territory gained statehood in 1889 . While the Ives trial resulted in an execution many residents were frustrated by a cumbersome process that could easily be manipulated . This sentiment is illustrated by a quote from Thomas Dimsdale who wrote the first published account of the Montana Vigilantes , originally written in 1865 as a series of articles for the Montana Post and later compiled into a book . 
 Another powerful incentive to wrong @-@ doing is the absolute <unk> of the civil law in such cases . No matter what may be the proof , if the criminal is well liked in the community ' Not Guilty ' is almost certain to be the verdict , despite the efforts of the judge and prosecutor . 
 = = = Formation of the Vigilance Committee = = = 
 On December 23 , 1863 , two days after the Ives trial , a group of five Virginia City residents , led by Wilbur F. Sanders , and including Major Alvin W. Brockie , John Nye , Captain Nick D. Wall and Paris Pfouts organized the Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch . The committee was organized similar to the earlier San Francisco Committee of Vigilance ( 1851 – 56 ) in California of which some of the Alder Gulch organizers were familiar with . The original committee oath signed by its earliest members was : 
 We the undersigned uniting ourselves in a party for the laudable <unk> [ sic ] of arresting <unk> [ sic ] & murderers & recovering <unk> [ sic ] property do pledge ourselves upon our sacred honor each to all others & solemnly swear that we will reveal no secrets , violate no laws of right & never desert each other or our standard of justice so help us God as witness our hand and seal this 23 of December ad 1863 
 Paris Pfouts was elected as the president of the committee which drafted and adopted a comprehensive set of by @-@ laws establishing a formal structure and process . The by @-@ laws established the position of president , an executive officer , an executive committee , a secretary , treasurer and positions of captains and lieutenants of companies . The most relevant process contained in the by @-@ laws was : 
 It shall be the duty of members to attach themselves to some company and whenever any criminal act shall come to their knowledge to inform his Captain or Lieutenant of the same , when the officers so informed shall call together the members of his Company , ( unless the Company has chosen a committee for such purpose ) when they shall proceed to investigate the case , and elicit the facts and should the said company conclude that the person charged with any offense should be punished by the committee , the Captain or Lieutenant will first take steps to arrest the Criminal and then report same with proof to the Chief who will thereupon call a meeting of the Executive Committee and the judgement of such Executive Committee shall be final . The only punishment that shall be inflicted by this Committee is death . 
 = = = Prominent members = = = 
 Although the vigilance committee started as a small secret institution in Virginia City , knowledge of it soon spread in the territory and membership grew . As a secret organization , exact accounts of membership vary , but many members became prominent in the history of the territory and state . Among those who were members include Wilbur Sanders ( 1st U.S. Senator from Montana ( 1890 ) ) , Sidney Edgerton ( first Governor of Montana Territory ( 1864 ) ) , Nelson Story ( famous for his 1866 cattle drive from Texas to Bozeman and prominent Bozeman merchant ) , John Bozeman ( founder of Bozeman , Montana ( 1864 ) and the Bozeman Trail ) , Nathaniel P. Langford ( first Yellowstone National Park superintendent ( 1872 – 1877 ) ) , James Stuart ( brother of Granville Stuart , who would form the Stuarts ' Stranglers in 1884 ) , Tom Cover ( one of the Alder Gulch prospectors who discovered the first gold there and alleged murderer of John Bozeman ( 1867 ) ) and Thomas Dimsdale ( editor of Montana 's first newspaper , the Montana Post and author of The Vigilantes of Montana ( 1866 ) ) . 
 Due to the secret nature of the organization it is difficult to be sure when an execution was carried out by the vigilance committee or another group of motivated citizens . In the months following the Ives trial many suspected road agents were hanged . Notably , Henry Plummer , the sheriff of Bannack , who was suspected by many of being the ringleader of the road agents . The Montana Vigilantes hanged men using the testimony of other men who faced their imminent executions as the sole evidence . Of the few accounts of the early actions of the Alder Gulch Vigilantes , Beidler and Dimsdale are the most complete , although they give little information about the secret trials conducted by the vigilantes . Estimates vary , but noted vigilante historian Frederick Allen believes that between the years 1863 and 1865 somewhere from 15 to 35 people were killed due to the actions of the Alder Gulch vigilantes . 
 = = = Vigilante justice = = = 
 Over of course of approximately six weeks between December 1863 and February 1864 , vigilante companies located , arrested and executed suspected members of the Plummer road agent gang in Bannack , Virginia City and Hellgate , Montana . 
 = = = = Bannack = = = = 
 Shortly after its formation , the Vigilance Committee dispatched a posse of men to search for Aleck Carter , " Whiskey Bill " Graves and Bill Bunton , known associates of George Ives . The posse was led by vigilante Captain James Williams , the man who had investigated the Nicolas <unk> murder by George Ives . Near the Rattlesnake Ranch on the Ruby River , the posse located " Erastus Red " Yeager and George Brown , both suspected road agents . While traveling back to Virginia City , Yeager made a complete confession , naming the majority of the road agents in Plummer 's gang , including Henry Plummer . After obtaining the confession , Yeager and Brown were found guilty by the posse and summarily hanged from a cottonwood tree on the Lorrain 's Ranch on the Ruby River . On January 6 , 1864 , " Dutch John " Wagner , a road agent wounded in the Moody robbery was captured by vigilante Captain Nick Wall and Ben Peabody on the Salt Lake City trail . The vigilantes transported Wagner to Bannack where he was hanged on January 11 , 1864 . By this time , Yeager 's confession had mobilized vigilantes against Plummer and his key associates , deputies Buck Stinson and Ned Ray . Plummer , Stinson and Ray were arrested on the morning of January 10 , 1864 and summarily hanged . On January 11 , 1864 , " Greaser Joe " Pizanthia , a road agent on Yeager 's list , was located in his cabin just outside Bannack . A gunfight ensued that took the life of one vigilante , George Copley . Pizanthia 's cabin was bombarded with three shells from a mountain howitzer belonging to Sidney Edgerton . The bombardment severely wounded Pizanthia and he was shot and killed as he was removed from the wreckage of the cabin . 
 = = = = Virginia City = = = = 
 After Wagner 's execution on January 11 , 1864 , the vigilantes who were mostly men from Virginia City , returned there to deal with the remaining road agents in the Plummer gang . On the evening of January 13 , 1864 , the Vigilance Committee voted to arrest and hang six road agents believed to be living in Virginia City — Frank Parish , Boone Helm , Hayes Lyons , Jack Gallagher , George " <unk> " Lane and Bill Hunter . On the morning of January 14 , 1864 , five of the six road agents were located in town and arrested . They were all summarily hanged from a beam in a building under construction on Wallace Street . Bill Hunter escaped capture in Virginia City , but was later arrested at a cabin on the Gallatin River and was hanged from a Cottonwood tree on February 3 , 1864 . 
 After the January 14 , 1864 hangings , the vigilante companies left Virginia City in search of the remaining road agents on Yeager 's list . The first to be located was Steve Marshland holed up in a cabin on the Big Hole River and was hanged on January 16 , 1864 . A posse led by Captain Williams found Bill Bunton at his Cottonwood Ranch on the Ruby River and hanged him on January 18 , 1864 . 
 = = = = Hell Gate = = = = 
 After the Bunton execution , the vigilante companies regrouped and made a 90 @-@ mile ( 140 km ) ride to Hell Gate , Montana where they believed more road agents were hiding . In Hell Gate , Captain William 's vigilante company located and arrested Cyrus Skinner , Aleck Carter , and John Cooper . A vigilante trial of Skinner and Carter was held in the Worden and Higgins dry goods store on January 24 , 1864 . Both men were found guilty and hanged outside the store . Later that same day , Cooper was tried , convicted and hanged . On January 25 , 1864 , the vigilantes located Bob Zachary in a cabin outside of Hell Gate and George Shears in another cabin in the Bitterroot Valley . Zachary was brought to Hell Gate and hanged . Shears was hanged outside the cabin he was captured in . As the vigilante companies were leaving Hell Gate to return to Virginia City , they received word that " Whiskey Bill " Graves was at Fort Owen , Montana . Three vigilantes located and arrested him on January 26 , 1864 . He was hanged the same day . 
 = = = Known road agents executed by the Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch = = = 
 Henry Plummer , sheriff of Bannack , executed in Bannack on January 10 , 1864 
 Erastus " Red " Yeager , road agent and messenger , executed along the Ruby River , January 4 , 1864 
 George Brown , road agent and gang secretary , executed along the Ruby River , January 4 , 1864 
 " Dutch John " Wagner , road agent , executed in Bannack , January 11 , 1864 
 Ned Ray , executed in Bannack , January 10 , 1864 
 Buck Stinson , executed in Bannack , January 10 , 1864 
 " Greaser Joe " Pizanthia , road agent , shot and killed in Bannack , January 11 , 1864 
 Frank Parish , road agent , executed in Virginia City , January 14 , 1864 
 Boone Helm , road agent , executed in Virginia City , January 14 , 1864 
 Jack Gallagher , road agent , executed in Virginia City , January 14 , 1864 
 George " <unk> " Lane , road agent , executed in Virginia City , January 14 , 1864 
 Hayes Lyon , road agent , executed in Virginia City , January 14 , 1864 
 Steve Marshland , road agent , executed near the Big Hole River , January 16 , 1864 
 Bill Bunton , road agent , executed at Cottonwood Ranch on the Clark Fork River , January 18 , 1864 
 Cyrus Skinner , road agent , executed in Hell Gate , January 24 , 1864 
 Aleck Carter , road agent , executed in Hell Gate , January 24 , 1864 
 Johnny Cooper , road agent , executed in Hell Gate , January 24 , 1864 
 Bob Zachary , road agent , executed in Hell Gate , January 25 , 1864 
 George Shears , road agent , executed in the Bitterroot Valley , January 25 , 1864 
 " Whiskey Bill " Graves , road agent , executed near Fort Owen , January 26 , 1864 
 Bill Hunter , road agent , executed in Gallatin Valley , February 3 , 1864 
