 = = Electoral history = = 
 = SMS Thüringen = 
 SMS Thüringen was the third vessel of the Helgoland class of dreadnought battleships of the German Imperial Navy . Thüringen 's keel was laid in November 1908 at the AG Weser dockyard in Bremen . She was launched on 27 November 1909 and commissioned into the fleet on 1 July 1911 . The ship was equipped with twelve 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in six twin turrets , and had a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . Thüringen was assigned to the I Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet for the majority of her career , including World War I. 
 Along with her three sister ships , Helgoland , Ostfriesland , and Oldenburg , Thüringen participated in all of the major fleet operations of World War I in the North Sea against the British Grand Fleet . This included the Battle of Jutland on 31 May and 1 June 1916 , the largest naval battle of the war . Thüringen was involved in the heavy night fighting at Jutland , including the destruction of the armored cruiser HMS Black Prince . The ship also saw action against the Imperial Russian Navy in the Baltic Sea , where she participated in the unsuccessful first incursion into the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 . 
 After the German collapse in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet was interned in Scapa Flow during the peace negotiations . The four Helgoland @-@ class ships were allowed to remain in Germany and were therefore spared the destruction of the fleet in Scapa Flow . Thüringen and her sisters were eventually ceded to the victorious Allied powers as war reparations ; Thüringen was transferred to France in April 1920 and used as a target ship for the French Navy . She was sunk off Gavres and broken up in situ in 1923 – 1933 , though some sections of the ship remain . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Thüringen was ordered by the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) under the provisional name Ersatz Beowulf , as a replacement for the old coastal defense ship Beowulf . The contract for the ship was awarded to the AG Weser dockyard in Bremen under construction number 166 . Work began on 2 November 1908 with the laying of her keel , and the ship was launched a year later on 27 November 1909 . She was christened by Duchess Adelheid von Sachsen @-@ Altenburg , and Grand Duke Wilhelm Ernst gave the speech . Fitting @-@ out , including completion of the superstructure and the installation of armament , lasted until June 1911 . Following her completion , six pontoon barges were attached to the new battleship to reduce her draft to allow her to be towed down the Weser River to the North Sea . Thüringen , named for Thuringia , a state in central Germany , was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 1 June 1911 , less than three years after work commenced , at a cost of 46 @.@ 314 million gold marks , the most expensive unit of her class . 
 The ship was 167 @.@ 2 m ( 548 ft 7 in ) long overall , had a beam of 28 @.@ 5 m ( 93 ft 6 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 94 m ( 29 ft 4 in ) , and displaced 24 @,@ 700 metric tons ( 24 @,@ 310 long tons ) at full load . She was powered by three vertical triple expansion steam engines and fifteen water @-@ tube boilers . The engines were rated at 27 @,@ 617 ihp ( 20 @,@ 594 kW ) and were capable of producing a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . Thüringen stored up to 3 @,@ 200 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 100 long tons ) of coal , which allowed her to steam for 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . After 1915 , the boilers were modified to spray oil on the coal to increase its burn rate ; the ship could carry up to 197 metric tons ( 194 long tons ) of fuel oil . 
 Thüringen was armed with a main battery of twelve 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 50 guns in six twin gun turrets , with one turret fore , one aft , and two on each flank of the ship . The ship 's secondary armament consisted of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 guns and fourteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns . After 1914 , two of the 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were removed and replaced by 8 @.@ 8 cm anti @-@ aircraft guns . Thüringen was also armed with six 50 cm ( 20 in ) submerged torpedo tubes ; one was in the bow , one in the stern , and two on each broadside . Her main belt of armor was 300 mm ( 12 in ) thick , with the same thickness of armor on her main battery turrets . Her deck was 63 @.@ 5 mm ( 2 @.@ 50 in ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning on 1 July 1911 , Thüringen conducted sea trials , which were completed by 10 September . On 19 September , she was assigned to the I Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet , alongside her sisters . She then went on to conduct individual ship training exercises , which were followed by I Squadron exercises and then fleet maneuvers in November . The annual summer cruise in July and August , which typically went to Norway , was interrupted by the Agadir Crisis . As a result , the cruise only went into the Baltic . Thüringen and the rest of the fleet then fell into a pattern of individual ship , squadron , and full fleet exercises over the next two years . In October 1913 , William Michaelis became the ship 's commanding officer ; he held the post until February 1915 . 
 On 14 July 1914 , the annual summer cruise to Norway began . During the last peacetime cruise of the Imperial Navy , the fleet conducted drills off Skagen before proceeding to the Norwegian fjords on 25 July . The following day the fleet began to steam back to Germany , as a result of Austria @-@ Hungary 's ultimatum to Serbia . On 27 July , the entire fleet assembled off Cape Skudenes before returning to port , where they remained at a heightened state of readiness . War between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia broke out the following day , and within a week all the major European powers had joined the conflict . By 29 July Thüringen and the rest of I Squadron were back in Wilhelmshaven . During the first year of the war , the future anti @-@ Nazi Lutheran pastor Martin Niemöller served aboard the ship as an officer . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Thüringen was present during the first sortie by the German fleet into the North Sea , which took place on 2 – 3 November 1914 . No British forces were encountered during the operation . A second operation followed on 15 – 16 December . This sortie was the initiation of a strategy adopted by Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet . Admiral von Ingenohl intended to use the battlecruisers of Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group to raid British coastal towns to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet where they could be destroyed by the High Seas Fleet . Early on 15 December the fleet left port to raid the towns of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby on the English coast . That evening , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts — including Thüringen and her three sisters — and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . Skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced von Ingenohl that he was faced with the entire Grand Fleet . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battle fleet back toward Germany . 
 The Battle of Dogger Bank , in which Vice Admiral David Beatty 's 1st and 2nd Battlecruiser Squadrons ambushed the I Scouting Group battlecruisers , occurred on 24 January 1915 . Thüringen and the rest of I Squadron were sortied to reinforce the outnumbered German battlecruisers ; I Squadron left port at 12 : 33 CET , along with the pre @-@ dreadnoughts of II Squadron . The High Seas Fleet was too late , so it failed to locate any British forces . By 19 : 05 , the fleet had returned to the Schillig Roads outside Wilhelmshaven . In the meantime , the armored cruiser Blücher had been overwhelmed by concentrated British fire and sunk , while the battlecruiser Seydlitz was severely damaged by an ammunition fire . As a result , Wilhelm II removed von Ingenohl from his post and replaced him with Admiral Hugo von Pohl on 2 February . 
 The eight I Squadron ships went into the Baltic on 22 February 1915 for unit training , which lasted until 13 March . Following their return to the North Sea , the ships participated in a series of uneventful fleet sorties on 29 – 30 March , 17 – 18 April , 21 – 22 April , 17 – 18 May , and 29 – 30 May . Thüringen and the rest of the fleet then remained in port until 4 August , when the I Squadron returned to the Baltic for another round of training maneuvers . From there , the squadron was attached to the naval force that attempted to sweep the Gulf of Riga of Russian naval forces in August 1915 . The assault force included the eight I Squadron battleships , the battlecruisers Von der Tann , Moltke , and Seydlitz , several light cruisers , 32 destroyers and 13 minesweepers . The plan called for channels to be swept in Russian minefields so that the Russian naval presence , which included the pre @-@ dreadnought Slava , could be eliminated . The Germans would then lay minefields of their own to prevent Russian ships from returning to the Gulf . Thüringen and the majority of the other big ships of the High Seas Fleet remained outside the Gulf for the entirety of the operation . The dreadnoughts Nassau and Posen were detached on 16 August to escort the minesweepers and to destroy Slava , though they failed to sink the old battleship . After three days , the Russian minefields had been cleared , and the flotilla entered the Gulf on 19 August ; reports of Allied submarines in the area prompted a German withdrawal from the Gulf the following day . By 26 August , the I Squadron had returned to Wilhelmshaven . 
 On 23 – 24 October , the High Seas Fleet undertook its last major offensive operation under the command of von Pohl , though it ended without contact with British forces . By January 1916 hepatic cancer had weakened von Pohl to the point where he was no longer able to carry out his duties , and he was replaced by Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer in January . Scheer proposed a more aggressive policy designed to force a confrontation with the British Grand Fleet ; he received approval from the Kaiser in February . Scheer 's first operation was a sweep into the North Sea on 5 – 7 March , followed by two more on 21 – 22 March and 25 – 26 March . During Scheer 's next operation , Thüringen supported a raid on the English coast on 24 April 1916 conducted by the German battlecruiser force . The battlecruisers left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 and the rest of the High Seas Fleet followed at 13 : 40 . The battlecruiser Seydlitz struck a mine while en route to the target , and had to withdraw . The other battlecruisers bombarded the town of Lowestoft unopposed , but during the approach to Yarmouth , they encountered the British cruisers of the Harwich Force . A short gun duel ensued before the Harwich Force withdrew . Reports of British submarines in the area prompted the retreat of the I Scouting Group . At this point , Scheer , who had been warned of the sortie of the Grand Fleet from its base in Scapa Flow , also withdrew to safer German waters . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Thüringen was present during the fleet operation that resulted in the battle of Jutland which took place on 31 May and 1 June 1916 . The German fleet again sought to draw out and isolate a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it before the main British fleet could retaliate . During the operation , Thüringen was the second ship in the I Division of I Squadron and the tenth ship in the line , directly astern of the squadron flagship Ostfriesland and ahead of another sister Helgoland . The I Squadron was the center of the German line , behind the eight König- and Kaiser @-@ class battleships of III Squadron . The six elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the III and IV Divisions , II Battle Squadron , formed the rear of the formation . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 , the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron under the command of David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that saw the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary , less than half an hour later . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south to draw the British ships toward the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , the crew of the leading German battleship , König , spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers , and a minute later , the order to open fire was given . 
 While the leading battleships engaged the British battlecruiser squadron , Thüringen and ten other battleships , too far out of range to attack the British battlecruisers , fired on the British 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron . Thüringen and Kronprinz engaged the cruiser Dublin , though both ships failed to score a hit . Thüringen fired for eight minutes at ranges of 18 @,@ 600 to 20 @,@ 800 yd ( 17 @,@ 000 to 19 @,@ 000 m ) , expending twenty @-@ nine 30 @.@ 5 cm shells . The British destroyers Nestor and Nomad , which had been disabled earlier in the engagement , laid directly in the path of the advancing High Seas Fleet . Thüringen and three other battleships destroyed Nestor with their primary and secondary guns while several III Squadron battleships sank Nomad . Shortly after 19 : 15 , the British dreadnought Warspite came into range ; Thüringen opened fire at 19 : 25 with her main and secondary battery guns , at ranges of 10 @,@ 600 to 11 @,@ 800 yd ( 9 @,@ 700 to 10 @,@ 800 m ) . The ship fired twenty @-@ one 30 @.@ 5 cm and thirty @-@ seven 15 cm shells in the span of five or six minutes , after which Thüringen 's gunners lost sight of Warspite , without scoring any hits . They then shifted fire to Malaya . Thüringen fired twenty main battery rounds at Malaya , also unsuccessfully , over seven minutes at a range of 14 @,@ 100 yd ( 12 @,@ 900 m ) before conforming to a 180 degree turn ordered by Scheer to disengage from the British fleet . 
 At around 23 : 30 , the German fleet reorganized into the night @-@ cruising formation . Thüringen was the seventh ship , stationed toward the front of the 24 @-@ ship line . An hour later , the leading units of the German line encountered British light forces and a violent firefight at close range ensued . Sometime around 01 : 10 , the armored cruiser Black Prince stumbled into the German line . Thüringen illuminated the vessel with her spotlights and poured salvos of 30 @.@ 5 cm rounds into the ship at point @-@ blank range . The first salvo struck near Black Prince 's rear gun turret , which appears to have been blown overboard . Thüringen fired a total of ten 30 @.@ 5 cm , twenty @-@ seven 15 cm , and twenty @-@ four 8 @.@ 8 cm shells . She was joined by three other battleships , and Black Prince was soon destroyed by a huge ammunition explosion . Around a half an hour later , Thüringen spotted what appeared to be a Birkenhead @-@ class cruiser . She fired a starshell to illuminate the British cruiser and opened fire with her secondary guns . The ship was actually the destroyer Turbulent . Thüringen fired eighteen 15 cm and six 8 @.@ 8 cm shells before launching another starshell . Turbulent appeared to be capsized to starboard , though she remained afloat and was dispatched later by the cruiser Regensburg and the destroyers V71 and V73 . 
 Despite the ferocity of the night fighting , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British destroyer forces and reached Horns Reef by 04 : 00 on 1 June . A few hours later , the fleet arrived in the Jade ; Thüringen , Helgoland , Nassau , and Westfalen took up defensive positions in the outer roadstead and four undamaged III Squadron ships anchored just outside the entrance locks to Wilhelmshaven . The remaining eight dreadnoughts entered port , where those that were still in fighting condition restocked ammunition and fuel . In the course of the engagement , Thüringen had fired one @-@ hundred and seven 30 @.@ 5 cm , one @-@ hundred and fifteen 15 cm , and twenty @-@ two 8 @.@ 8 cm shells , while she and her crew emerged from the battle unscathed . 
 = = = = Subsequent operations = = = = 
 On 18 August , Admiral Scheer attempted to repeat the 31 May operation . The two serviceable German battlecruisers ( Moltke and Von der Tann ) , supported by three dreadnoughts , would bombard Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . The rest of the fleet , including Thüringen , would trail behind and provide cover . British signals intelligence informed Jellicoe of the German departure later in the day , and he sent the Grand Fleet out to intercept the Germans . On the approach to the English coast , Scheer turned north after receiving a false report from a zeppelin about a British unit in the area . As a result , the bombardment was not carried out , and by 14 : 35 on 19 August , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and so turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 On 25 – 26 September , Thüringen and the rest of I Squadron covered an advance conducted by the second commander of the torpedo @-@ boat flotillas ( II Führer der Torpedoboote ) to the Terschelling Bank . Scheer conducted another fleet operation on 18 – 20 October in the direction of the Dogger Bank , though rudder damage prevented Thüringen from participating . For the majority of 1917 , Thüringen was assigned to guard duty in the German Bight . During Operation Albion , the amphibious assault on the Russian @-@ held islands in the Gulf of Riga , Thüringen and her three sisters were moved to the Danish straits to block any possible British attempt to intervene . On 28 October the four ships arrived in Putzig Wiek , and from there steamed to Arensburg on the 29th . On 2 November the operation was completed and Thüringen and her sisters began the voyage back to the North Sea . A final abortive fleet sortie took place on 23 – 24 April 1918 . Thüringen , Ostfriesland , and Nassau were formed into a special unit for Operation Schlußstein , a planned occupation of St. Petersburg . The three ships reached the Baltic on 10 August , but the operation was postponed and eventually canceled . The special unit was dissolved on 21 August and the battleships were back in Wilhelmshaven on the 23rd . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Thüringen and her three sisters were to have taken part in a final fleet action at the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Großadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , to improve Germany 's bargaining position , despite the expected casualties . But many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt that the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . Stokers turned off the boilers and refused to work . The following day , the torpedo boats B110 and <unk> came alongside and the U @-@ boat U @-@ 135 pointed her guns at the ship . A significant portion of the crew , 314 sailors and 124 stokers , were arrested and taken off the ship . This was not enough to stop the mutiny , which quickly spread throughout the fleet . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . Informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated " I no longer have a navy " . 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , was interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Thüringen and her three sisters , along with the four Nassau @-@ class battleships , were permitted to remain in Germany during the peace negotiations . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and in their absence Reuter ordered the crews to scuttle the ten battleships and five battlecruisers interned at Scapa Flow . Thüringen was decommissioned on 16 December 1918 and used as a barracks ship while she remained in Germany . She was stricken from the naval register on 5 November 1919 and placed out of commission . The fate of the eight remaining German battleships was determined in the Treaty of Versailles , which stated that the ships were to be disarmed and surrendered to the governments of the principal Allied powers . Thüringen was surrendered to the French Navy on 29 April 1920 under the name " L " . A skeleton crew took the ship to Cherbourg for the official transfer . Thüringen was briefly used as a target ship by the French Navy before sinking off Gavres . The ship was partially broken up in situ in 1923 – 1933 , though significant portions of the ship remain off the French coast . 
 = Mir EO @-@ 19 = 
 Mir EO @-@ 19 ( Russian : Мир <unk> @-@ 19 , also known as Principal Expedition 19 ) was the nineteenth manned expedition to the space station Mir , lasting from June to September 1995 . The crew , consisting of Russian cosmonauts Anatoly Solovyev and Nikolai Budarin , launched on June 27 , 1995 aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on the STS @-@ 71 mission . After remaining aboard Mir for approximately 75 days , Solovyev and Budarin returned aboard the Soyuz TM @-@ 21 spacecraft on September 11 , 1995 . 
 EO @-@ 19 lasted just under three months and was the only complete all @-@ Russian crewed expedition to Mir in 1995 and was the first Mir expedition launched on an American Space Shuttle . The mission that launched EO @-@ 19 , STS @-@ 71 , was the first Space Shuttle docking to Mir . 
 = = Crew = = 
 <unk> Solovyev served as a crew member on three spaceflights prior to EO @-@ 19 : Mir EP @-@ 2 , Soyuz TM @-@ 9 , and Soyuz TM @-@ 15 . This flight was his first aboard a Space Shuttle , with his three previous flights being on the Soyuz . EO @-@ 19 was the first spaceflight for Nikolai Budarin , who completed his cosmonaut training in 1991 and completed specialized training on the systems of Mir and the Soyuz @-@ TM spacecraft in 1993 . 
 Both spent just over 75 days in space during EO @-@ 19 and completed 1194 orbits of the Earth . 
 = = = Backup crew = = = 
 = = Mission highlights = = 
 = = = Crew launch and arrival = = = 
 The crew of Mir EO @-@ 19 launched aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on June 27 , 1995 as part of the STS @-@ 71 mission . STS @-@ 71 was the first docking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir space station and the first docking of an American and Russian spacecraft in 20 years . 
 STS @-@ 71 docked with Mir on June 29 and performed a crew exchange between the EO @-@ 19 and EO @-@ 18 crews aboard the space station . The crews of EO @-@ 18 , EO @-@ 19 , and STS @-@ 71 performed a ceremony inside Spacelab aboard Atlantis during which the ten crew members assembled a commemorative pewter medallion and exchanged gifts . Shortly thereafter , the crews began transferring supplies and tools to Mir from Atlantis . 
 On July 4 , The newly arrived crew of EO @-@ 19 undocked temporarily from the station aboard Soyuz TM @-@ 21 to observe and photograph the departure of the STS @-@ 71 and EO @-@ 18 crews aboard Atlantis . TM @-@ 21 undocked at 10 : 55 GMT , followed by STS @-@ 71 at 11 : 09 : 45 GMT . The EO @-@ 19 crew <unk> aboard TM @-@ 21 at 11 : 39 GMT as Atlantis conducted a fly @-@ around of the station . Atlantis , carrying the crews of EO @-@ 18 and STS @-@ 71 , landed on July 7 after several more days in Earth orbit . 
 = = = Mission operations = = = 
 The crew of EO @-@ 19 conducted their first Extra @-@ vehicular activity , or spacewalk , on July 14 . Before the mission , the crew had trained to use special tools in order to release a stuck solar array on the exterior of the Spektr module . During the spacewalk , the pair cut a problematic restraint from the solar array . All but one section of the array deployed successfully . They then proceeded to inspect a docking mechanism in preparation for the relocation of the Kristall module . The final task of the spacewalk was to inspect a solar array on Kristall that was not tracking the Sun properly . The excursion ended after five hours and thirty @-@ four minutes outside the station . 
 The crew relocated the Kristall module to another docking port from the port intended for use by Progress M @-@ 28 on July 17 using its Lyappa manipulator arm . This operation was performed in preparation for the next docking of Space Shuttle Atlantis to the station on the STS @-@ 74 mission later in the year . 
 During the mission 's second spacewalk on July 19 , the crew were to deploy a 220 kg ( 490 lb ) Belgian @-@ French spectrometer , named MIRAS ( Mir infrared spectrometer ) on the Spektr module . Following a malfunction in Anatoly Solovyev 's Orlan space suit minutes into the excursion , mission control directed him to remain attached to the Kvant @-@ 2 module via umbilical cable . Despite this setback , Nikolai Budarin was able to perform several tasks alone , including preparatory work for the installment of MIRAS and retrieval of an American cosmic ray detector , TREK . The crew returned to the airlock after three hours and eight minutes . Upon returning to the airlock , the crew discovered a 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 079 in ) gap in the seal , which created difficulty in sealing the hatch . 
 July 20 saw the launch of the Progress M @-@ 28 resupply ship to the station , which docked on July 22 . The Progress @-@ M spacecraft remained docked to the station until September 4 , when it undocked from Mir filled with waste and excess equipment and intentionally burned up on reentry . 
 During the mission 's third and final spacewalk on July 21 , the two cosmonauts made a second attempt at installing the MIRAS spectrometer , which they completed without any major problems . The spacewalk lasted five hours and thirty @-@ five minutes . 
 During the later part of their mission in August , the crew focused on completing experiments and doing research in the areas of astrophysics , life sciences , and smelting . The remainder of the crew 's activities during this time consisted of unloading the newly arrived Progress cargo ship and monitoring its automated refueling of the station 's core module . 
 = = = End of mission and crew departure = = = 
 The Mir EO @-@ 20 crew consisting of cosmonauts Yuri Gidzenko and Sergei Avdeyev , as well as ESA astronaut Thomas Reiter conducting Euromir ' 95 , launched on September 3 at 9 : 00 GMT aboard Soyuz TM @-@ 22 . The crew of EO @-@ 20 docked with the station on September 5 at 10 : 29 : 54 GMT , with hatch opening occurring at 11 : 01 : 23 . 
 After transferring command of Mir to EO @-@ 20 , the crew of EO @-@ 19 boarded the Soyuz TM @-@ 21 spacecraft , which arrived with the crew of Mir EO @-@ 18 in March 1995 , on September 11 and undocked from the Kvant @-@ 1 module at 3 : 30 : 44 GMT . Soyuz TM @-@ 21 , along with cosmonauts Solovyev and Budarin , subsequently landed at 6 : 52 : 40 GMT about 108 km ( 67 mi ) Northeast of <unk> , Kazakhstan . 
 = Scottish society in the early modern era = 
 Scottish society in the early modern era encompasses the social structure and relations that existed in Scotland between the early sixteenth century and the mid @-@ eighteenth century . It roughly corresponds to the early modern era in Europe , beginning with the Renaissance and Reformation and ending with the last Jacobite risings and the beginnings of the industrial revolution . 
 Scotland in this period was a hierarchical society , with a complex series of ranks and orders . This was headed by the monarch and the great magnates . Below them were the lairds , who emerged as a distinct group at the top of local society was whose position was consolidated by economic and administrative change . Below the lairds in rural society were a variety of groups , often ill @-@ defined , including yeomen , who were often major landholders , and the husbandmen , who were landholders , followed by cottars and grassmen , who often had only limited rights to common land and pasture . Urban society was led by wealthy merchants , who were often burgesses . Beneath them , and often in conflict with the urban elite , were the craftsmen . Beneath these ranks , in both urban and rural society , there were a variety of groups of mobile " masterless men " , the unemployed and vagrants . 
 Kinship was agnatic , with descent counted only through the male line , helping to build the importance of surnames and clans . The increased power of the state and economic change eroded the power of these organisations , and this process would accelerate as the government responded to the threat of Jacobite risings by undermining the power of clan chiefs in the eighteenth century . The Reformation had a major impact on family life , changing the nature of baptism , marriage and burials , leading to a change in wider relationships , sacramental status and burial practices and placing a greater emphasis on the role of the father . 
 Limited demographic evidence indicates a generally expanding population , limited by short @-@ term subsistence crises , of which the most severe was probably that of the " seven ill years " of the 1690s . The urban centres of the burghs continued to grow , with the largest being Edinburgh , followed by Glasgow . Population growth and economic dislocation from the second half of the sixteenth century led to a growing problem of vagrancy , which was responded to by a series of Acts of Parliament that established what would become the " Old Poor Law " , which attempted to ensure relief for the " deserving " local poor , but punishments for the mobile unemployed and beggars . The patriarchal nature of society meant that women were directed to be subservient to their husbands and families . They remained an important part of the workforce and some were economically independent , while others lived a marginal existence . At the beginning of the period women had little or no legal status , but were increasingly criminalised after the Reformation , and were the major subjects of the witch hunts that occurred in relatively large numbers until the end of the seventeenth century . 
 = = Social structure = = 
 = = = Aristocracy = = = 
 Early modern Scotland was a hierarchical society , with a series of ranks and marks of status . Below the king were the great magnates , who by this period were no longer a feudal nobility , whose power was based on territorial landholding , but an honorific peerage , and land had become a commodity to be traded . They were headed by a small number of dukes ( usually descended from very close relatives of the king ) and a larger group of earls . These senior nobles formed the political classes at the beginning of the period : sometimes holding major office , holding a place on the king 's council and taking part in the major crises and rebellions of the period . They considered themselves the king 's " natural councillors " and were also the heads of a system of local patronage and loyalty . This was often formalised through bonds of manrent that set out mutual obligations and allegiances . 
 Under the magnates were the barons , who held increasingly nominal feudal tenures of which an important vestige was the right to hold baronial courts , which could deal with both matters of land ownership and interpersonal offences , including minor acts of violence . Also important were the local tenants @-@ in @-@ chief , who held legally held their land directly from the king and who by this period were often the major local landholders in an area . In this period , as feudal distinctions declined , the barons and tenants @-@ in @-@ chief merged to form a new identifiable group , the lairds . This group was roughly equivalent to the English gentlemen . Just as the magnates saw themselves as the king 's natural counsellors , so the lairds advised and exerted influence over the dukes and earls . The lairds were often the most important individual in a local community . They ran baronial courts , acted as sheriffs @-@ depute , sat on local assizes and were called in as private arbitrators . In the course of the sixteenth century they would acquire a role in national politics , gaining representation in Parliament and playing a major role in the Reformation crisis of 1560 . As a result of the Reformation and the creation of a Presbyterian Kirk , their position in local society was enhanced . They often gained the new status of elder and greater oversight of the behaviour of the local population through the disciplinary functions of kirk sessions . 
 = = = Middle ranks = = = 
 Below the lairds were a variety of groups , often ill @-@ defined . These included yeomen , later characterised by Walter Scott as " bonnet lairds " , often owning substantial land . The practice of <unk> ( by which a tenant paid an entry sum and an annual feu duty , but could pass the land on to their heirs ) meant that the number of people holding heritable possession of lands , which had previously been controlled by the church or nobility , expanded . These and the lairds probably numbered about 10 @,@ 000 by the seventeenth century and became what the government defined as heritors , on whom the financial and legal burdens of local government increasingly fell . 
 Below the substantial landholders were those engaged in subsistence agriculture , who made up the majority of the working population . Those with property rights included husbandmen , lesser landholders and free tenants . Most farming was based on the lowland fermtoun or highland baile , settlements of a handful of families that held individual land rights , but jointly farmed an area notionally suitable for two or three plough teams . Below them were the cottars , who often shared rights to common pasture , occupied small portions of land and participated in joint farming as hired labour . Farms also might have grassmen , who had rights only to grazing . Eighteenth @-@ century evidence suggests that the children of cottars and grassmen often became servants in agriculture or handicrafts . Serfdom had died out in Scotland in the fourteenth century , but was virtually restored by statute law for miners and <unk> . 
 Society in the urban settlements of the burghs was headed by wealthier merchants , who often held local office as a burgess , alderman , bailies , or as a member of the burgh council . Below them were craftsmen and workers that made up the majority of the urban population . Both merchants and craftsmen often served a long apprenticeship , acquiring skills and status , before they became freemen of a burgh , and could enjoy certain rights and privileges . Major sources of trade included the export of wool , fish , coal , salt and cattle . Imports included wine , sugar and other luxury goods . Important crafts included metal working , carpentry , leather working , pottery and later brewing and wig @-@ making . There were frequent disputes between the burgesses and craftsmen over rights and political control of the burgh , occasionally bursting into violence , as occurred at Perth in the first half of the sixteenth century . 
 = = = The poor = = = 
 At the bottom of society were the " masterless men " and women ( who lacked a clear social relationship with a social superior , such as service or apprenticeship ) the unemployed and vagrants , whose numbers were swelled in times of economic downturn or hardship . <unk> women may have made up as much as 18 per cent of all households and particularly worried authorities . In rural society those that needed relief from extreme hardship tended from the lowest ranks of rural society , including cottars , labourers and servants . Most of those who took to the roads , around three quarters , were men . Most had a disability such as blindness , or claimed to have suffered a personal disaster such as fire or theft . Some were discharged soldiers and sailors , probably returning home or searching for work . Most tended to move around a restricted area , probably moving between a limited number of parishes in search of work and relief . For some this may have been tied to the agricultural calendar , and individuals may have moved in a circuit as different foodstuffs and work became available . Poor relief was more abundant in urban centres , particularly in the largest centres like Edinburgh . As a result , particularly in times of extreme hardship the poor would gravitate to the burghs . They could form a large section of society , with roughly a quarter of population of Perth in 1584 being classified as poor . The poor in urban society were a diverse group , the largest numbers women and most of those were widows . In Aberdeen in the period 1695 – 1705 three @-@ quarters of the poor who received relief were women and of those two thirds were widows . The remainder were made up of servants , casual labourers , journeymen artisans , beggars , vagrants and orphans . 
 = = Kinship and clans = = 
 Unlike in England , where kinship was predominately cognatic , derived through both males and females , in Scotland kinship was agnatic , with members of a group sharing a ( sometimes fictional ) common ancestor . Women retained their original surname at marriage and marriages were intended to create friendship between kin groups , rather than a new bond of kinship . In the Borders this was often reflected in a common surname . A shared surname has been seen as a " test of kinship " , proving large bodies of kin who could call on each other ’ s support . At the beginning of the period this may have helped intensify the idea of the feud , which was usually carried out as a form of revenge for a kinsman , and for which a large body of kin could be counted on to support rival sides , although conflict within kin groups also occurred . From the reign of James VI , systems of judicial law were enforced , and by the early eighteenth century the feud had been suppressed . In the Borders , the leadership of the heads of the great surnames was largely replaced by the authority of landholding lairds in the seventeenth century . 
 The combination of agnatic kinship and a feudal system of obligation has been seen as creating the highland clan system . The head of a clan was usually the eldest son of the last chief of the most powerful sept or branch . The leading families of a clan formed the fine , often seen as equivalent to lowland lairds , providing council in peace and leadership in war ; below them were the daoine usisle ( in Gaelic ) or tacksmen ( in Scots ) , who managed the clan lands and collected the rents . In the isles and along the adjacent western seaboard there were also buannachann , who acted as a military elite , defending the clan lands from raids or taking part in attacks on clan enemies . Most of the followers of the clan were tenants , who supplied labour to the clan heads and sometimes acted as soldiers . In the early modern era they usually took the clan name as their surname , turning it into a massive , if often fictive , kin group . Because the Highland Clans were not a direct threat to the Restoration government , or relations with England , the same effort was not put into suppressing their independence as had been focused on the Borders , until after the Glorious Revolution . Economic change and the imposition of royal justice had begun to undermine the clan system before the eighteenth century , but the process was accelerated after the rebellion of 1745 , with Highland dress banned , the enforced disarming of clansmen , the compulsory purchase of heritable jurisdictions , the exile of many chiefs , and the sending of ordinary clansmen to the colonies as indentured labour . All of this largely reduced clan leaders to the status of simple landholders within one generation . 
 = = Family = = 
 There was considerable concern over the safety of children in this period , prompted by high infant mortality . The abolition of godparents in the Reformation meant that baptism became a mechanism for emphasising the role and responsibilities of fathers . Wet @-@ nurses were used for young children , but in most families mothers took the primary role in bringing up children , while the Kirk emphasised the role of the father for older children . After the Reformation there was an increasing emphasis on education , resulting in the growth of a parish school system , but its effects were limited for the children of the poor and for girls . Most children left home for a period of life @-@ cycle service , in which youths left home to be domestic or agricultural servants , or to become apprentices , and which ended when they married and established independent households . 
 Marriages were often the subject of careful negotiation , particularly higher in society . Marriage lost its sacramental status at the Reformation , and irregular marriage , a simple public promise or mutual agreement , followed by consummation , or cohabitation , continued to be accepted as valid throughout the period . Women managed the household and sometimes worked beside their husbands , and although obedience to husbands was stressed , this may have been limited in practice . Divorce developed after the Reformation , and was available for a wider range of causes and accessed by a much larger section of society than in England . Because of high mortality rates , widowhood was a relatively common state , and some women acquired independence and status , but others were forced into a marginal existence ; remarriage was common . The elaborate funerals and complex system of prayers for the dead that dominated in late Medieval Scotland were removed at the Reformation , when simpler services were introduced . Burial inside the church was discouraged , causing some consternation among local lairds who wished to be buried with their ancestors . This led to the uniquely Scottish solution of adding a fourth aisle to " T " -plan churches , usually behind the pulpit , which were closed off and used for the burial of the families of the local laird . For the majority , however , burial had to be outside the church , and graveyards with stone markers became increasingly common from the early seventeenth century . 
 = = Demography = = 
 There are almost no reliable sources with which to track the population of Scotland before the late seventeenth century . Estimates based on English records suggest that by the end of the Middle Ages , the Black Death and subsequent recurring outbreaks of the plague , may have caused the population of Scotland to fall as low as half a million people . Price inflation , which generally reflects growing demand for food , suggests that this probably expanded in the first half of the sixteenth century . Almost half the years in the second half of the sixteenth century saw local or national scarcity , necessitating the shipping of large quantities of grain from the Baltic . Distress was exacerbated by outbreaks of plague , with major epidemics in the periods 1584 @-@ 8 , 1595 and 1597 – 1609 . 
 The population expansion probably levelled off after the famine of the 1590s , as prices were relatively stable in the early seventeenth century . In the early seventeenth century famine was common , with four periods of famine prices between 1620 and 1625 . The invasions of the 1640s had a profound impact on the Scottish economy , with the destruction of crops and the disruption of markets resulting in some of the most rapid price rises of the century , but population probably expanded in the period of stability that followed the Restoration in 1660 . Calculations based on Hearth Tax returns for 1691 indicate a population of 1 @,@ 234 @,@ 575 . The population may have been seriously affected by the failed harvests ( 1695 , 1696 and 1698 @-@ 9 ) known as the " seven ill years " . The result was severe famine and depopulation , particularly in the north . The famines of the 1690s were seen as particularly severe , partly because famine had become relatively rare in the second half of the seventeenth century , with only one year of dearth ( in 1674 ) , and the shortages of the 1690s were the last of their kind . The first reliable information on national population is from the census conducted by the Reverend Alexander Webster in 1755 , which showed the inhabitants of Scotland as 1 @,@ 265 @,@ 380 persons . 
 Compared with the situation after the redistribution of population as a result of the clearances and the industrial revolution that began in the eighteenth century , these numbers must have been evenly spread over the kingdom , with roughly half living north of the Tay . Most of the early modern population , in both the Lowlands and Highlands , was housed in small hamlets and isolated dwellings . As the population expanded , some of these settlements were sub @-@ divided to create new hamlets and more marginal land was settled , with sheilings ( clusters of huts occupied while summer pasture was being used for grazing ) , becoming permanent settlements . Perhaps ten per cent of the population lived in one of many burghs that had grown up in the later Medieval period , mainly in the east and south of the country . It has been suggested that they had a mean population of about 2 @,@ 000 , but many were much smaller than 1 @,@ 000 , and the largest , Edinburgh , probably had a population of over 10 @,@ 000 at the beginning of the era . During the seventeenth century the number of people living in the capital grew rapidly . It also expanded beyond the city walls in suburbs at Cowgate , Bristo and Westport and by 1750 , with its suburbs , it had reached a population of 57 @,@ 000 . The only other towns above 10 @,@ 000 by the end of the period were Glasgow with 32 @,@ 000 , Aberdeen with around 16 @,@ 000 and Dundee with 12 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Poverty and vagrancy = = 
 In the Middle Ages Scotland had much more limited organisation for poor relief than England , lacking the religious confraternities of the major English cities . It possessed a few hospitals , <unk> houses and leper houses , which offered confinement rather than treatment . Because so many Scottish parishes had been <unk> for some religious foundation , perhaps as many as 87 per cent , funds were not available for local causes such as poor relief . Protestant reformers in the Book of Discipline ( 1560 ) proposed that part of the patrimony of the Catholic Church be used to support the poor , but this aim was never realised . Population growth and economic dislocation from the second half of the sixteenth century led to a growing problem of vagrancy . The government reacted with three major pieces of legislation on poverty and vagrancy in 1574 , 1579 and 1592 . The kirk became a major element of the system of poor relief , and justices of the peace were given responsibility for dealing with the issue . The 1574 poor law act was modelled on the English act passed two years earlier ; it limited relief to the deserving poor of the old , sick and infirm , imposing draconian punishments on a long list of " masterful beggars " , including jugglers , <unk> and unlicensed tutors . Parish deacons , elders or other overseers , and in the burghs bailies and provosts , were to draw up lists of deserving poor , and each would be assessed . Those not belonging to the parish were to be sent back to their place of birth and might be put in the stocks or otherwise punished , probably actually increasing the level of vagrancy . Unlike the English act , there was no attempt to provide work for the able @-@ bodied poor . In practice , the strictures on begging were often disregarded in times of extreme hardship . Poor rates were very slow to be set up in the burghs , with Edinburgh the first as a result of the outbreak of plague in 1584 . It was then gradually introduced in other cities , such as St Andrews in 1597 , Perth in 1599 , Aberdeen in 1619 , and Glasgow and Dundee in 1636 . 
 This legislation provided the basis of what would later be known as the " Old Poor Law " in Scotland , which remained in place until the mid @-@ nineteenth century , when , faced with the much greater problems of poverty caused by industrialisation and population growth , a more comprehensive system , known as the New Poor Law , was created . Most subsequent legislation built on its principles of provision for the local deserving poor and punishment of mobile and undeserving " <unk> beggars " . The most important later act was that of 1649 , which declared that local heritors were to be assessed by kirk session to provide the financial resources for local relief , rather than relying on voluntary contributions . By the mid @-@ seventeenth century the system had largely been rolled out across the Lowlands , but was limited in the Highlands . The system was largely able to cope with general poverty and minor crises , helping the old and infirm to survive and provide life support in periods of downturn at relatively low cost , but was overwhelmed in the major subsistence crisis of the 1690s . 
 = = Women = = 
 Early modern Scotland was a theoretically patriarchal society , in which men had total authority over women , but how this worked is practice is difficult to discern . Marriages , particularly higher in society , were often political in nature and the subject of complex negotiations over the tocher ( dowry ) . Some mothers took a leading role in negotiating and finding marriages , as Lady Glenorchy did for her children in the 1560s and 1570s , or as matchmakers , finding suitable and compatible partners . Before the Reformation , the extensive marriage bars for kinship meant that most marriages necessitated a papal dispensation , which could later be used as grounds for annulment if the marriage proved politically or personally inconvenient . At the beginning of the period , women had a very limited legal status . The criminal courts refused to recognise them as witnesses or independent criminals , and responsibly for their actions was assumed to lie with their husbands , fathers and kin . In the post @-@ Reformation period there was a criminalisation of women , partly evident in witchcraft prosecutions from 1563 . Through the 1640s , independent commissions were set up to try women for child murder , and after pressure from the kirk a law of 1690 placed the presumption of guilt on a woman if she concealed a pregnancy and birth , and her child later died . 
 By the eighteenth century many poorer girls were being taught in dame schools , informally set up by a widow or spinster to teach reading , sewing and cooking . Among the nobility there were many educated and cultured women . Women formed an important part of the workforce . Many unmarried women worked away from their families as farm servants , and married women worked with their husbands around the farm , taking part in all major agricultural tasks . They had a particular role as shearers in the harvest , forming most of the reaping team of the bandwin . Women also played an important part in the expanding textile industries , spinning and setting up warps for men to weave . There is evidence of single women engaging in independent economic activity , particularly for widows , who can be found keeping schools , brewing ale and trading . Some were highly successful , such as Janet Flockhart , an Edinburgh <unk> or moneylender , who had been left a widow with seven children after her third husband 's suicide , and who managed her business affairs so successfully that she amassed a moveable estate of £ 22 @,@ 000 by her death in the late sixteenth century . Lower down the social scale , the rolls of poor relief indicate that large numbers of widows with children endured a marginal existence . 
 = = Popular religion = = 
 Scottish Protestantism was focused on the Bible , which was seen as infallible and the major source of moral authority . Many Bibles were large , illustrated and highly valuable objects . In the early part of the century the Genevan translation was commonly used . In 1611 the Kirk adopted the Authorised King James Version and the first Scots version was printed in Scotland in 1633 , but the Geneva Bible continued to be employed into the seventeenth century . Bibles often became the subject of superstitions , being used in divination . Family worship was strongly encouraged by the Covenanters . Books of devotion were distributed to encourage the practice and minsters were encouraged to investigate whether this was being carried out . The seventeenth century marked the high @-@ water mark of kirk discipline . Kirk sessions were able to apply religious sanctions , such as excommunication and denial of baptism , to enforce godly behaviour and obedience . In more difficult cases of immoral behaviour they could work with the local magistrate , in a system modelled on that employed in Geneva . 
 Public occasions were treated with mistrust and from the later seventeenth century there were efforts by kirk sessions to stamp out activities such as well @-@ dressing , bonfires , <unk> , penny weddings and dancing . The Reformation had a severe impact on church music . The Lutheranism that influenced the early Scottish Reformation attempted to accommodate Catholic musical traditions into worship , drawing on Latin hymns and vernacular songs . The most important product of this tradition in Scotland was The Gude and Godlie Ballatis , which were spiritual satires on popular ballads composed by the brothers James , John and Robert Wedderburn . Never adopted by the kirk , they nevertheless remained popular and were reprinted from the 1540s to the 1620s . Later the Calvinism that came to dominate was much more hostile to Catholic musical tradition and popular music , placing an emphasis on the Psalms . The Scottish Psalter of 1564 was commissioned by the Assembly of the Church . Whole congregations would now all sing these psalms , often using common tunes , unlike the trained choirs who had sung the many parts of polyphonic hymns . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 From late Medieval Scotland there is evidence of occasional prosecutions of individuals for causing harm through witchcraft , but these may have been declining in the first half of the sixteenth century . In the aftermath of the initial Reformation settlement , Parliament passed the Witchcraft Act 1563 , similar to that passed in England one year earlier , which made witchcraft a capital crime . Despite the fact that Scotland probably had about one quarter of the population of England , it had three times the number of witchcraft prosecutions , at about 6 @,@ 000 for the entire period . James VI 's visit to Denmark , a country familiar with witch hunts , may have encouraged an interest in the study of witchcraft . After his return to Scotland , he attended the North Berwick witch trials , the first major persecution of witches in Scotland under the 1563 Act . Several people , most notably Agnes Sampson , were convicted of using witchcraft to send storms against James ' ship . James became obsessed with the threat posed by witches and , inspired by his personal involvement , in 1597 wrote the Daemonologie , a tract that opposed the practice of witchcraft and which provided background material for Shakespeare 's Tragedy of Macbeth . James is known to have personally supervised the torture of women accused of being witches . After 1599 , his views became more sceptical . 
 In the seventeenth century the pursuit of witchcraft was largely taken over by the kirk sessions , and was often used to attack superstitious and Catholic practices in Scottish society . Most of the accused , 75 per cent , were women , with over 1 @,@ 500 executed , and the witch hunt in Scotland has been seen as a means of controlling women . The most intense witch hunt was in 1661 – 62 , which involved 664 named witches in four counties . From this point prosecutions began to decline , as trials were more tightly controlled by the judiciary and government , torture was more sparingly used and standards of evidence were raised . There may also have been a growing scepticism , and with relative peace and stability the economic and social tensions that contributed to accusation may have reduced . There were occasional local outbreaks such as the one in East Lothian in 1678 and Paisley in 1697 . The last recorded executions were in 1706 , and the last trial was in 1727 . The British parliament repealed the 1563 Witchcraft Act in 1736 . 
 = 1956 Winter Olympics = 
 The 1956 Winter Olympics , officially known as the VII Olympic Winter Games ( French : Les <unk> Jeux olympiques d 'hiver ) ( Italian : VII Giochi <unk> <unk> ) , was a winter multi @-@ sport event celebrated in Cortina d 'Ampezzo , Italy . This celebration of the Games was held from 26 January to 5 February 1956 . Cortina , which had originally been awarded the 1944 Winter Olympics , beat out Montreal , Colorado Springs and Lake Placid for the right to host the 1956 Games . The Cortina Games were unique in that many of the venues were within walking distance of each other . The organising committee received financial support from the Italian government for infrastructure improvements , but the rest of the costs for the Games had to be privately financed . Consequently , the organising committee was the first to rely heavily on corporate sponsorship for funding . 
 Thirty @-@ two nations — the largest number of participating Winter Olympic countries to that point — competed in the four sports and twenty @-@ four events . The Soviet Union made its Winter Olympics debut and won more medals than any nation . Austrian Toni Sailer became the first person to sweep all three alpine skiing events in a single Olympics . The figure skating competition was held outdoors for the last time at these Games . Logistically , the only problem encountered was a lack of snow at the alpine skiing events . To remedy this , the Italian army transported large amounts of snow to ensure the courses were adequately covered . 
 Politics did not impact the 1956 Winter Games as at the Summer Games in Melbourne , Australia , where the Soviet response to the Hungarian Uprising and the Suez War caused many nations to boycott the Games . The Cortina Olympics were the first Winter Olympics televised to a multi @-@ national audience . Since Communist countries had superior technology , western European countries like Finland and a few isolated geographic areas of West Germany and Austria were only able to receive Communist broadcasts of the Games . This was perceived to be a significant win for the Soviets in the propaganda front of the Cold War , even though western Europe ( including most of West Germany and Austria ) was receiving the Eurovision broadcast signal . 
 = = Host city selection = = 
 Cortina d 'Ampezzo is a ski resort village situated in the Dolomite Alps in the north @-@ eastern corner of Italy . In 1956 , it had a population of 6 @,@ 500 people . Count Alberto Bonacossa , an accomplished alpine skier , figure skater and a member of the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) since 1925 , spearheaded the effort to bring the Olympic Games to Cortina d 'Ampezzo . He persuaded the city council of Cortina to bid for the 1944 Games . During the 38th IOC Congress held in London in 1939 , Cortina d 'Ampezzo was awarded the 1944 Winter Olympics , but the Games were canceled due to the outbreak of World War II . 
 In 1946 the Italian Winter Sports Federation convened in Milan and decided to support a new attempt from Cortina to host the Winter Games . A delegation , led by Count Bonacossa , presented Cortina 's bid to host the 1952 Winter Olympics at the 40th IOC Session in Stockholm , Sweden . They were backed by the city 's council and the Italian National Olympic Committee ( CONI , Comitato Olimpico Nazionale Italiano ) . A rival bid from Oslo , Norway , soundly defeated Cortina . Count Bonacossa 's and CONI prepared a third bid , this time for the 1956 Winter Games . The host city selection took place in Rome , during the 43rd IOC Session . On 28 April 1949 , Cortina d 'Ampezzo was selected with 75 % of the votes , over bids from Montreal , Colorado Springs and Lake Placid . Unfortunately , Bonacossa died on 30 January 1953 , three years before he could witness Cortina host the Games . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The 1956 Winter Olympics was organised by a committee composed of members of the Italian National Olympic Committee and the Italian government . Observers were sent to the Oslo Games in 1952 to collect information regarding the sports programme , infrastructure , and accommodation requirements . The intelligence gathered there indicated that Cortina 's facilities were not up to Olympic standards . The town did not have an ice stadium , or a speed skating rink ; the alpine ski runs , ski jump and bobsleigh run were in poor condition . Cortina was a small village , and its infrastructure would be overwhelmed by the crowds expected for the Games . To accommodate the influx of people , new roads and rail lines had to be built , and the city 's power grid and telephone lines expanded . Enhancements also had to be made to sewer and water capacity . The Italian government supplied Italian lira 460 million for infrastructure improvements . The Italian Olympic Committee was responsible for funding the rest of the costs of hosting the Games . They did this by setting aside monies from their own budget , ticket sales , and even culling funds from local football betting pools . The organising committee also took the unprecedented step of selling corporate sponsorship . For example , Fiat was designated the official car of the 1956 Winter Olympics , and Olivetti supplied typewriters for the 400 journalists attending the Games . 
 = = Politics = = 
 The Cold War began after the allied victory in World War II . Until 1952 , many of the Communist countries of Eastern Europe had participated in Worker 's Olympics or <unk> . The Soviet Union emerged from international isolation by eschewing the <unk> and participating in the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki ; they made their Winter Olympics debut at the Cortina Games . Soviet general secretary Nikita Khrushchev 's aim was to use international sports competitions , such as the Olympics , to demonstrate the superiority of Communism , strengthen political ties with other Communist countries , and project the Soviet Union as a peace @-@ loving nation actively engaged in the world . The Soviets ' participation at the Olympics raised the level of competition as they won the most medals and more gold medals than any other nation . The Cortina Games were held before the Hungarian uprising , and the Suez War , which occurred in the autumn of 1956 ; the Winter Games escaped the boycotts that plagued the Melbourne Olympics , which were celebrated in November and December of that year . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 The Cortina Games were the first Winter Olympics to be broadcast to a multi @-@ national audience . Television as a mass communication technology was expanding rapidly in the 1950s . In the midst of the Cold War , Europe was a propaganda battlefield as countries relayed television signals across the Iron Curtain . By 1956 , countries in the Soviet sphere of influence had achieved a technological advantage and were able to broadcast Communist television programmes into Finland , the eastern border regions and more isolated geographic areas of West Germany and Austria , where residents had coverage from an East German broadcast with a pro @-@ Communist point @-@ of @-@ view . Most West Germans watched the 1956 Winter Olympics via Eurovision broadcasts which were relayed all over western Europe including all major West German stations ( Eurovision connectivity in 1956 ) The political ramifications were not the only impact television had these Olympics . The Cortina Games did not generate revenue from television – the 1960 Winter Olympics in Squaw Valley were the first to do so @-@ but were an experiment in the feasibility of televising a large multi @-@ sport event . For the first time at an Olympic Games , the venues were built with television in mind . For example , the grand stand at the cross @-@ country ski venue ( Lo Stadio della <unk> ) was built facing south so that the television cameras would not be adversely affected by the rising or setting sun . 
 = = Events = = 
 Medals were awarded in 24 events contested in 4 sports ( 8 disciplines ) . The programme for the 1956 Winter Games saw two new events added to the four sports and twenty @-@ two events from the 1952 Olympics , namely the men 's 30 kilometre cross @-@ country ski race and the women 's 3x5 kilometre cross @-@ country relay race . The Soviet Union requested the inclusion of a women 's speed skating event , but this was rejected by the IOC at the 49th Session in Athens in 1954 . 
 Bobsleigh ( 2 ) ( ) 
 Ice hockey ( 1 ) ( ) 
 Skating 
 Figure skating ( 3 ) ( ) 
 Speed skating ( 4 ) ( ) 
 Skiing 
 Alpine skiing ( 6 ) ( ) 
 Nordic skiing ( ) 
 Cross @-@ country skiing ( 6 ) ( ) 
 Nordic combined ( 1 ) ( ) 
 Ski jumping ( 1 ) ( ) 
 = = = Opening ceremonies = = = 
 The opening ceremonies took place on Thursday , 26 January 1956 in the Olympic Ice Stadium . Temporary seating was added to boost the stadium 's capacity to 14 @,@ 000 people . Athletes representing 32 nations marched in the ceremony and Mr Giovanni <unk> , President of the Italian Republic , declared the Games open . At this point , speed skater Guido Caroli skated into the stadium with the Olympic flame . While he was on a circuit of the Ice Stadium he tripped and fell over a television cable ; he regained his feet and lit the cauldron . The Olympic oath was delivered by Giuliana <unk> @-@ <unk> ; this was the first time a female athlete gave the oath at an Olympic Games . The Olympic Hymn , officially recognised as such at the IOC congress in Paris on 13 June 1955 , was played for the first time at the Cortina Games . 
 = = = Bobsleigh = = = 
 There were two bobsleigh events , the two @-@ man and four @-@ man competitions . Every participating nation was limited to two sleighs in each event . The sleighs made four runs , with the total time summed . The Italians won gold and silver in the two @-@ man event . Switzerland took third place when they passed Spain on the fourth run . In the four @-@ man event held a week later , the Swiss won the gold medal , Italy picked up the silver , and the United States won the bronze . Italy had participated in all six previous Olympic bobsleigh competitions but had never reached the podium . Italians Renzo <unk> and Eugenio Monti won the silver in the two @-@ man competition and were also on the silver @-@ winning four @-@ man sleigh . Monti 's silver medals at the 1956 Games were the first of six Olympic medals he would win in his bobsleigh career . The bobsleigh run at Cortina was eventually renamed the Eugenio Monti track to honour his bobsleigh career . The medals won in bobsleigh would be the host nation 's only medals at these Games . One complaint of the bobsleigh events was that the track surface suffered extensive damage due to overuse . This hampered the performance of teams drawn late in the competition . 
 = = = Ice hockey = = = 
 The eighth Olympic ice hockey tournament also served as both the European and World Championships . Split into three pools before the tournament , the ten participating nations began by playing each team in their pool in a round robin format . The top two teams from each pool advanced to the final rounds , with the remaining teams playing in a consolation group for 7th through 10th places . Canada , Czechoslovakia , and the Soviet Union finished their preliminary pools with undefeated records . Germany , the United States , and Sweden took second place in their pools . 
 An important early matchup of the final rounds was the game between Canada ( winners of six gold medals and one silver in the previous seven tournaments ) and the United States ( which had finished one place behind Canada each of the five times the Americans played ) . The United States beat Canada 4 – 1 . The US then faced the USSR in a game that would eventually make the difference in the gold medal . The Soviets went on to win the match 4 – 0 . The Soviets claimed the gold by beating Canada , while the United States took the silver and Canada , with their two losses , earned the bronze . The victory of the Soviet team was particularly noteworthy given the fact that they only began competing internationally in 1954 . 
 = = = Figure skating = = = 
 The Cortina Games were the last Olympics to feature figure skating outdoors . Skaters from the United States won five medals , sweeping the men 's event and taking the top two spots in the ladies ' event . <unk> Albright was the women 's Olympic champion despite sustaining a serious injury in practice . Less than two weeks before the Olympics she was practicing her skating routine when she hit a rut in the ice and fell . Her skate cut through several layers of clothing , and sliced her right leg at the ankle . Her teammate Carol Heiss won the silver , and Austrian Ingrid Wendl earned the bronze medal . Americans Hayes Jenkins , Ronald Robertson , and Jenkins ' brother David Jenkins were the men 's medallists . The Austrian pair of Sissy Schwarz and Kurt <unk> took the gold medal in the pairs event . Canadians Frances Dafoe and Norris Bowden won the silver and the Hungarian siblings Marianna Nagy and László Nagy defended their bronze medal from the 1952 Games . 
 = = = Speed skating = = = 
 The Soviet Union dominated the speed skating events by winning seven of the twelve medals , including four golds . Soviet skaters set two world records , an Olympic record , and had at least one medallist in each of the four events . Yevgeny Grishin was the top individual performer , with two gold medals and two world records . Grishin and Soviet teammate Yuri <unk> tied in the 1 @,@ 500 metre race . It was decided to award both of the athletes gold medals and leave the silver medal position vacant . <unk> Ericsson of Sweden earned gold and silver medals and set an Olympic record in the 10 @,@ 000 metre event . 
 = = = Alpine skiing = = = 
 Six alpine skiing events were held , three for men and three for women . The races were the downhill , slalom and giant slalom . Toni Sailer of Austria swept the men 's gold medals , becoming the first person to win three alpine skiing golds in a single Olympics . Led by Sailer , the Austrians dominated the alpine skiing events for both men and women , winning nine out of a possible eighteen medals . The Austrians were particularly successful in the giant slalom ; the men swept the medals and the women took silver and bronze . Chiharu <unk> won the first Winter Olympics medal for Japan when he placed second in the slalom . Swiss teammates , Madeleine <unk> and Renée <unk> won the women 's downhill and slalom races . Germany earned its only gold medal of the Games when Ossi Reichert took first in the giant slalom . 
 = = = Cross @-@ country skiing = = = 
 Two women 's events were added to the cross @-@ country skiing programme for the first time . The Soviet women took the top two spots in the individual 10 kilometre race but lost to Finland in the new 3x5 kilometre relay . The men had a new event as well , the 30 kilometre race , which was won by Veikko Hakulinen from Finland . The other three men 's events were won by three different nations : Norway took the 15 kilometre race , Sweden the 50 kilometre event , and the Soviet Union won the relay . Overall the Soviet Union won seven out of a possible eighteen medals in cross @-@ country skiing . Sweden , behind the strong skiing of Sixten Jernberg , won six medals . Jernberg won a gold , two silvers , and a bronze , which were the first of nine Olympic medals he would earn in his cross @-@ country career . 
 = = = Nordic combined = = = 
 There were significant changes to the Nordic combined event at the 1956 Games . The event had always been a cross @-@ country race followed by a ski jump . Originally the competitors in the Nordic combined were entered into the open 18 kilometre cross @-@ country race , which meant that they competed alongside athletes who were dedicated cross @-@ country skiers . Their times were combined with their score from two ski jumps to determine the winner . At the Cortina Games , the format was altered to allow the Nordic combined athletes to compete in a dedicated 15 kilometre cross @-@ country race . Two days later they had three jumps on the ski jump hill . Their best two scores were combined with their cross @-@ country time to determine a winner . This format would become the standard for Nordic combined competitions going forward . Norway continued its dominance of Nordic combined when Sverre Stenersen won the gold medal . Since its inception at the 1924 Games , the country had only lost the Nordic combined event once . Stenersen was followed by Bengt Eriksson of Sweden and Poland 's Franciszek <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Ski jumping = = = 
 In the ski jumping event , the Swiss jumper , Andreas Däscher introduced a new style of jumping , which would soon come to be known as the Däscher technique . Before these Games , the athletes would hold their arms forward over their heads . Däscher reasoned that if the athlete held his arms at his side he would fly farther . Adherents to this new style dominated the competition . Finnish jumpers Antti <unk> and Aulis <unk> took first and second place ; Harry Glass of Germany won the bronze medal . This competition marked the end of Norwegian dominance in the sport . Since the first winter Games in 1924 , the Norwegians had won the gold medal at each Olympics until 1956 . The poor performance of the Norwegian jumpers was attributed to their refusal to use the new jumping technique . 
 = = = Closing ceremonies = = = 
 The closing ceremonies took place on Sunday , 5 February in the Olympic Ice Stadium . They were preceded by a figure skating exhibition performed by the men 's , women 's , and pairs figure skating champions . The flag bearers of each nation then entered the stadium followed by the flags of Greece and the United States . These two flags were raised to honor the nation that founded the Olympics and the next country to host the Winter Games . Avery Brundage , chairman of the International Olympic Committee , declared the Olympics closed , and a fireworks display concluded the Games . 
 = = Calendar = = 
 All dates are in Central European Time ( UTC + 1 ) 
 The opening ceremony was held on 26 January , along with the first games of the hockey tournament . From 27 January until 5 February , the day of the closing ceremony , at least one event final was held each day . 
 † The numeral indicates the number of event finals for each sport held that day . 
 = = Venues = = 
 A unique feature of the Cortina Olympics was the proximity of many event locations which were in walking distance of each other within the town of Cortina . The speed skating events were held at Lake Misurina , roughly 13 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) from Cortina . The venues featured grandstands heated by silica coils built into the seats . Silica coil heating was a technology that had only recently become economical . The competitions were held without incident except for the skiing events , which suffered from a lack of snow . 
 A notable venue not found at the 1956 Games was an Olympic Village , where the athletes would be housed . The town of Cortina d 'Ampezzo had a population of less than 7 @,@ 000 people in 1956 . Local hotels were concerned that after the Olympics an Olympic Village would so significantly increase the hotel capacity it would put many of them out of business . Athletes were billeted by local families or stayed in hotels during the Games . 
 The Olympic Ice Stadium ( Stadio Olimpico Del <unk> ) was intended to be the focal point of the Games . It was built on the banks of the Boite river just north of Cortina . After new roads and a bridge had been constructed , the stadium was an eight @-@ minute walk from the center of town . The stadium was built to accommodate 6 @,@ 000 – 7 @,@ 000 people . Due to space limitations the grandstands were constructed vertically , with tiers built directly on top of each other . There were two artificial ice rinks of 30 by 60 m ( 98 by 197 ft ) , with a total ice surface of 4 @,@ 320 m2 ( 46 @,@ 500 sq ft ) . A special cooling plant was built under the stadium , which froze the ice through the evaporation of ammonia . The construction cost totaled <unk> 1 @.@ 3 billion ( US $ 2 @.@ 1 million in 1956 ) , making it the most expensive venue of these Games . The stadium was used for the opening and closing ceremonies , all of the figure skating competitions and select ice hockey events . After the Games , the organising committee made the Ice Stadium a gift to the city of Cortina . It was used as an ice skating rink in the winter and an outdoor gymnasium for judo and gymnastics in the summer . 
 The <unk> Stadium was used for select games of the ice hockey tournament . Considerable work had to be done to bring the stadium up to date . A second rink was added to allow for two games to be held simultaneously . The stadium was outfitted with electric lights and the seating capacity was enlarged to accommodate 2 @,@ 000 people . 
 The bobsleigh run ( Pista <unk> di Bob – Eugenio Monti ) , was originally constructed in 1928 . The track was rebuilt and expanded several times during the years leading up to the Olympics . A state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art signal board was installed displaying a diagram of the run with the position of each sleigh on the run shown with lights . 
 Situated around 2 @.@ 5 km ( 2 mi ) from Cortina , near Zuel , the " Italia " Jump ( <unk> Olimpico Italia ) was originally built in 1923 as the " Franchetti " Jump . After modifications in 1926 , the first structure was demolished in 1939 and rebuilt in 1940 . With the 1956 Games coming to Cortina , the jump had to be updated again to comply with the technical demands of the Olympics . On April 15 , 1955 , the " Franchetti " Jump was finally demolished and the new " Italia Jump " was completed in the same year at a cost of nearly <unk> 310 million ( $ 500 @,@ 000 ) . The reinforced concrete platform was 54 m ( 177 ft ) high , and possessed a 87 @.@ 5 m ( 287 ft ) long , 35 ° steep in @-@ run . Two grandstands , each with a capacity for 3 @,@ 000 people , were placed on either side of the landing slope ; a natural <unk> at the bottom of the hill could hold up to 40 @,@ 000 standing spectators . A special road was built between Cortina and the venue for the transport of athletes , officials and authorities . 
 The Snow Stadium ( Stadio della <unk> ) was constructed 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from Cortina , and hosted all of the cross @-@ country events . Two grandstands were constructed to accommodate 6 @,@ 000 people . Three types of cross @-@ country courses were constructed : one of 15 km ( 9 mi ) , three of 5 km ( 3 mi ) , and four of 10 km ( 6 mi ) . Some of these courses went through the bobsleigh run . As a result , a bridge had to be constructed so events occurring in the two venues would not interfere with each other . 
 The alpine runs ( Le piste alpine ) were built on the slopes of Monte Tofana and Monte Faloria in the nearby Dolomite alps . The men 's and women 's downhill and slalom races were held on Tofana . Faloria was the site of the two giant slalom events . It took nearly two years to complete construction of the runs . In previous years , lack of snow was never an issue , but in the winter of 1956 there was insufficient snowfall for skiers to safely navigate the runs . As a consequence , snow had to be transported from other parts of the mountains by the Italian army . 
 The Misurina rink ( La pista di Misurina ) was the location of the speed skating events . This was the last time that speed skating at the Olympics was held on natural ice . It was 13 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) from Cortina . The rink was established at the northern end of the lake with a mountain backdrop . Stands were constructed to accommodate 8 @,@ 500 people . Despite the event being held outdoors on lake ice , two world records and two Olympic records were broken during the competition . 
 Three of the venues for these games ( the bobsleigh run , indoor arena , and ski jump ) would serve as film location for the 1981 James Bond film For Your Eyes Only . 
 = = Participating nations = = 
 A total of 32 nations sent athletes to Cortina d 'Ampezzo . Along with the Soviet Union , Bolivia and Iran competed at the Winter Games for the first time . Korea , Liechtenstein , and Turkey returned after having missed the 1952 Winter Olympics , while Argentina , Denmark , New Zealand , and Portugal did not compete at these Games , after having participated in the previous edition . Athletes from West Germany ( FRG ) and East Germany ( GDR ) competed together as the United Team of Germany , an arrangement that would continue for the following two Olympiads . 
 Below is the list of participating nations , with the number of competitors indicated in brackets : 
 = = Medal count = = 
 These are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1956 Winter Olympics : 
 * Two gold medals were awarded when Soviet skaters tied in the 1 @,@ 500 metre speed skating competition . 
 = Astonishing Stories = 
 Astonishing Stories was an American pulp science fiction magazine , published by Popular Publications between 1940 and 1943 . It was founded under Popular 's " Fictioneers " imprint , which paid lower rates than Popular 's other magazines . The magazine 's first editor was Frederik Pohl , who also edited a companion publication , Super Science Stories . After nine issues Pohl was replaced by Alden H. Norton , who subsequently rehired Pohl as an assistant . The budget for Astonishing was very low , which made it difficult to acquire good fiction , but through his membership in the Futurians , a group of young science fiction fans and aspiring writers , Pohl was able to find material to fill the early issues . The magazine was successful , and Pohl was able to increase his pay rates slightly within a year . He managed to obtain stories by writers who subsequently became very well known , such as Isaac Asimov and Robert Heinlein . After Pohl entered the army in early 1943 , wartime paper shortages led Popular to cease publication of Astonishing . The final issue was dated April of that year . 
 The magazine was never regarded as one of the leading titles of the genre , but despite the low budget it published some well @-@ received material . Science fiction critic Peter Nicholls comments that " its stories were surprisingly good considering how little was paid for them " , and this view has been echoed by other historians of the field . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Although science fiction ( sf ) had been published before the 1920s , it did not begin to coalesce into a separately marketed genre until the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . By the end of the 1930s the field was booming , and several new sf magazines were launched in 1939 . Frederik Pohl , a young science fiction reader , was looking for a job that year . He visited Robert Erisman , who was the editor of two pulps , Marvel Science Stories and Dynamic Science Stories , to ask for a job as an assistant . Erisman turned him down , but suggested that Pohl contact Rogers Terrill at Popular Publications , a leading pulp publisher . Erisman had heard that Popular was starting a new line of magazines , and thought that they might be interested in adding a science fiction title . On October 25 , 1939 , Pohl visited Terrill and persuaded him to give the idea a try , and left Terrill 's office having been hired , at the age of nineteen , to edit two new magazines , on a salary of ten dollars per week . One was Super Science Stories ; the other was at one point intended to be titled Incredible Stories , but ultimately appeared as Astonishing Stories . 
 Popular was uncertain of the sales potential for the two new titles and decided to publish them under its Fictioneers imprint , which was used for lower @-@ paying magazines . Astonishing 's first issue was dated February 1940 ; it was bimonthly , alternating monthly with Super Science Stories . Pohl 's budget for an issue was $ 405 : in Pohl 's memoirs he recalls Harry Steeger , one of the company owners , breaking down the budget for him : " Two hundred seventy @-@ five dollars for stories . A hundred dollars for black and white art . Thirty dollars for a cover . " Pohl could only offer half a cent per word for fiction , well below the rates offered by the leading magazines . At ten cents , the magazine was cheaper than any of the other sf magazines of the day , and it sold well , despite Pohl 's limited resources . It was certainly assisted by Popular 's wide and effective distribution network , and the publisher soon increased Pohl 's budget , to pay bonuses for popular stories . Pohl later commented that he was uncertain whether the additional funds really helped to bring in higher quality submissions , although at the time he assured Steeger it would improve the magazine . Some of the additional money went to long @-@ time writer Ray Cummings , who was sufficiently well known that the young Pohl felt unable to reject his stories , even though he disliked his work . Cummings came to see Pohl in person to submit his work , and refused to sell for less than one cent a word ; since the first visit came on a day when Pohl had some extra money available , Pohl was never able to bring himself to tell Cummings that he could not really afford to pay that rate . Pohl comments in his memoirs that " for months he would turn up regularly as clockwork and sell me a new story ; I hated them all , and bought them all . " 
 Pohl stretched his budget by reducing the space he needed to fill with fiction . For example , a long letter column took up several pages but required no payment ; similarly , running advertisements for Popular 's other magazines did not use up the fiction budget . Some authors sent inaccurate word counts with the stories they submitted , and Popular saved money by paying them on the basis of whichever word count was less — the author 's or one done by Popular 's staff . The result was a saving of forty to fifty dollars per issue . More money was saved by reusing snipped elements of black and white illustrations to fill space , as multiple uses of the same artwork did not require additional payments to the artist . 
 Towards the end of 1940 Popular doubled Pohl 's salary to twenty dollars per week . In June 1941 Pohl went to see Steeger to ask for a further raise ; he was planning to resign and work as a free @-@ lance writer if he did not get more pay . Steeger , in Pohl 's words , " had complaints of his own " , and was not receptive ; by the end of the meeting Pohl had lost his job as editor . Pohl later commented " I have never been sure whether I quit or got fired . " Instead of replacing Pohl , Popular assigned editor @-@ in @-@ chief Alden H. Norton to add the magazines to his responsibilities . The arrangement lasted for seven months , after which Norton asked Pohl to return as his assistant . Norton offered Pohl a higher salary as an associate editor than he had received as the editor , and Pohl quickly accepted . 
 Pohl was not eligible to be drafted for military service as he was married , but by the end of 1942 his marriage was over and he decided to enlist . As voluntary enlistment was suspended he was unable to immediately join the army , but eventually was inducted on April 1 , 1943 . Paper was difficult to obtain because of the war , and Popular decided to close the magazine down ; the final issue , dated April 1943 , was assembled with the assistance of Ejler Jakobsson . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 Because of the low rates of pay , the stories submitted to Astonishing in its first year had generally already been rejected elsewhere . However , Pohl was a member of the Futurians , a group of science fiction fans that included Isaac Asimov , C.M. Kornbluth , Richard Wilson and Donald Wollheim ; the Futurians were eager to become professional writers and were glad to submit stories to Pohl . Asimov recalls in his memoirs that on October 27 , 1939 , two days after Pohl was hired to edit the magazines , Pohl turned up at Asimov 's apartment and asked to buy " Half @-@ Breed " , a story Pohl had been trying to sell on Asimov 's behalf since June of that year . Pohl needed stories quickly for the first issue of Astonishing ( though the name had not yet been selected ) , and as the story had been rejected by Amazing Stories and Astounding Stories , Asimov was willing to sell it for half a cent per word . A couple of weeks later Pohl also acquired " The <unk> Menace " from Asimov . The other Futurians were prolific as well ; in Pohl 's first year as an editor he bought a total of fifteen stories from them for the two magazines . Damon Knight , another of the Futurians , recalled in his memoirs that Pohl once asked the group for a story to fill out an issue , with $ 35 available to pay for it . Kornbluth and Wilson wrote a first draft , alternating turns at the typewriter ; the result was edited by Harry Dockweiler , another Futurian , and then again by Pohl before it appeared in the April 1940 Astonishing under the title " <unk> of Mars " , with a byline of " Ivar Towers " . Pohl contributed material himself , using the pseudonyms " James <unk> " and " Dirk Wylie " ( the latter pseudonym was also used by Dockweiler ) ; he used his own stories when he needed to fill an issue , and to supplement his salary of ten dollars a week . Particularly after his marriage to Doris Baumgardt in August 1940 , Pohl realized that his salary covered their apartment rent with almost no money left over , and began to augment his income by selling to himself as well as to other magazines . When Pohl lost his job as editor in late 1941 , he had bought from himself ( and paid for ) a couple of stories that he had not actually written , and hence had to write them very quickly and turn them in . 
 The first issue of Astonishing Stories was dated February 1940 ; the lead story was " Chameleon Planet " by John Russell Fearn , and it also included Asimov 's " Half @-@ Breed " and fiction by Henry Kuttner and Manly Wade Wellman . Despite the difficulties caused by the low budget , Pohl was able to pay his authors promptly , unlike some of his competitors , and he thus began to receive stories of higher quality . Sf historian Mike Ashley identifies " The Last Drop " , by L. Ron Hubbard and L. Sprague de Camp as one of the better stories in Astonishing ; historians Milton Wolf and Raymond H. Thompson consider the story to be unimpressive , and point instead to Alfred Bester 's " The Pet Nebula " in the February 1941 issue . Kuttner 's " Soldiers of Space " and Robert Bloch 's " It Happened Tomorrow " , both of which appeared in the February 1943 issue , are also praised . Pohl was also able to print the first three of Ross Rocklynne 's well @-@ liked " Into the Darkness " series . Other well @-@ known writers who appeared in the pages of Astonishing include Leigh Brackett , Clifford Simak , and E. E. Smith . 
 Pohl told his readers in Astonishing 's first issue that he would listen to their feedback and respond to their requests . In addition to paying attention to their comments on stories , he included departments in the magazine that encouraged interaction with the fans , such as a letter column , a section that listed fanzines with names and addresses , and a review column . The reviews , primarily by Wollheim , but also including contributions from Richard Wilson , Forrest Ackerman , and John Michel , were of a higher standard than elsewhere in the field , and historian Paul Carter regards Astonishing and Super Science Stories as the place where " book reviewing for the first time began to merit the term ' literary criticism ' " , and adds that " it was in those magazines that the custom began of paying attention to science fiction on the stage and screen also . " 
 The artwork in Astonishing was initially quite poor , which was unsurprising given the minuscule budget Pohl had to work with . Much of the art was supplied by fans and artists early in their careers , including Doris Baumgardt ( under the pseudonym Leslie Perri ) and Dorothy Les Tina , who later became Pohl 's first and second wives , respectively . One fan artist who stood out from the rest was Hannes Bok , who went on to become a well @-@ respected artist with a very distinctive style . Ray Bradbury commented positively on Bok 's work in a letter in the August 1940 Astonishing , and Bok subsequently illustrated a story of Bradbury 's in the April 1943 issue . Aleck <unk> , Popular 's art director , had initially told Pohl that the regular artists would be unwilling to work for the low rates he could offer , but in the event some of them were willing to take less pay to get the extra work . More professional art began to appear in the magazine , including work by Virgil Finlay , Alexander Leydenfrost , Leo Morey , Hans Wessolowski , and Frank R. Paul , all well known in the field . Some art appeared under the name Stephen Lawrence , which was known to be a pseudonym of Lawrence Stevens , but it was subsequently discovered that some of this work was actually by Lawrence Stevens ' son Peter . 
 Astonishing Stories is not remembered as being among the best science fiction magazines : both critic Peter Nicholls and sf writer Jack Williamson have described it as a " training ground " for writers who would go on to do their best work elsewhere . However , Nicholls adds that " its stories were surprisingly good considering how little was paid for them " , and Wolf and Thompson agree , claiming that " there was much that was memorable in Astonishing , both by way of immediate appeal and of more lasting quality " . Pohl himself , who later became a very successful magazine editor , felt he made many mistakes . He quotes as an example his serialization of Malcolm Jameson 's story " <unk> of <unk> " in three parts ; the story was only 27 @,@ 000 words long , and readers complained ( justifiably , in Pohl 's view ) that serializing it in a bimonthly magazine meant they had to wait for five months to read the whole story , in relatively small 9 @,@ 000 @-@ word pieces . Overall , Pohl assessed his performance by saying " I wasn 't really a very good editor " ; adding " With what I know now I could have made those magazines sing , but as it was they just lay there " . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Astonishing Stories was edited by Frederik Pohl from February 1940 through September 1941 ( nine issues ) , and then by Alden H. Norton from November 1941 through April 1943 ( seven issues ) . It was published by Fictioneers , Inc . , a subsidiary of Popular Publications . It was pulp @-@ sized throughout its run , with 112 pages and a cover price of 10 cents . The volume numbering was regular , with four volumes of four numbers . It was bimonthly for the first eight issues ; the next four were on an irregular schedule , and the last four , from October 1942 , were bimonthly again . 
 A Canadian edition appeared for three issues , dated January , March , and May 1942 , published by Popular Publications ' Toronto branch . It was priced at 10 cents and ran to 96 pages ; it was also in pulp format , but fractionally larger than the US version . The first and third issues reprinted the November 1941 and March 1942 US issues of Astonishing , but the March 1942 Canadian issue was a reprint of the November 1941 Super Science Stories , omitting one story . The covers in all three issues were replaced by new paintings , and the interior artwork was also different . The artists responsible for the new illustrations and covers were not credited . In August 1942 a Canadian edition of Super Science Stories began which also alternated between reprinting the US editions of Astonishing and Super Science Stories ; this could be regarded as a continuation of the Canadian edition of Astonishing , although the volume numbering was restarted at volume 1 number 1 when the name was changed . 
 = 1985 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1985 Pacific hurricane season is the third most active Pacific hurricane season on record . It officially started on May 15 , 1985 in the eastern Pacific , and on June 1 , 1985 in the central Pacific , and lasted until November 30 , 1985 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . At the time , the 1985 season was the most active on record in the eastern north Pacific , with 28 tropical cyclones forming . Of those , 24 were named , 13 reached hurricane intensity , and 8 became major hurricanes by attaining Category 3 status or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . At that time , the 24 named storms was a record ; however , this record was broken seven years later in 1992 , and was therefore recognized as the second busiest season within the basin , until it was surpassed exactly thirty years later by the 2015 season . 
 Despite the activity , only one system made landfall in 1985 . Hurricane Waldo caused moderate damage in Northwestern Mexico and one death in Kansas . Surf from Hurricanes Pauline and Rick caused minor damage in Hawaii . Hurricane Nele resulted in disruption in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands , while Hurricane Ignacio threatened Hawaii , but only ended up producing light rainfall and minimal damage . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 This year , 25 tropical cyclones formed in the eastern north Pacific ( 140 ° W to North America ) . Of those systems , three never strengthened beyond the depression stage , while 22 were named . This total was six storms above the 1966 @-@ 1985 average seven above the 1971 @-@ 2006 average and nine above the 1949 @-@ 2006 average of 13 . With a total 26 tropical cyclones and 24 named storms , this season was the most active on record , breaking the short @-@ lived record held by the 1983 Pacific hurricane season , though the 1992 Pacific hurricane season then broke and surpassed this record . This season is now the third @-@ most active , being recently also surpassed by the 2015 Pacific hurricane season , which is now the second @-@ most active overall . 
 Of the named systems , 10 peaked as tropical storms , 12 as hurricanes , and 8 reached the intensity of major hurricanes by attaining Category 3 strength or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . The season lasted 170 days , three days longer than the 1984 Pacific hurricane season , but still then days longer than normal . The Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) issued 620 bulletins during the season , 35 more than the previous season . In the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility ( 140 ° W to the International dateline ) , three tropical cyclones formed . One of those stayed as a tropical depression through its life . One strengthened into a hurricane , and another crossed into the northwestern Pacific before eventually returning to the central Pacific . 
 Although meteorologists expected a below @-@ normal season , the season got on to a fast start though no storms formed in May . The activity picked up significantly thereafter , with 5 storms forming in June , including one major hurricane . By the middle of July , a total of 10 storms had formed with another tropical storm forming off the coast of Central America roughly every 10 days . 
 Within two more weeks , 13 tropical storms or hurricanes had formed , including 4 major hurricanes . By August 23 , 2 more storms had been named . By early September , a total of 17 named storms had developed , 6 of which became hurricanes . Roughly two weeks later , two additional named storms were classified . After a lull in late September and early October , a total of 22 storms had formed by mid @-@ October 21 of which developed in the EPHC 's area of responsibility and the list of names was exhausted , forcing the agency to request emergency names . 
 The cause of the high activity in 1985 is unknown ; however , this year continued a trend of above average season that began in 1981 . The hurricane season took place during a La Nina event , which tends to inhibit Pacific hurricane activity . However , 1985 was during a warm phase of the Pacific Decadal Oscillation and in the middle of an era where all but one pacific hurricane season was near or above average . 
 Several storms were investigated by Hurricane Hunter aircraft in 1985 ; the first was on July 24 during Hurricane Ignacio . On September 10 , a flight was made into Hurricane Rick , where the storms lowest pressure was recorded . Hurricane Sandra was investigated on September 12 on the way from Hawaii , where the hunters were on standby . The final two flights of the season were made on September 21 and 22 into Hurricane Terry while the storm was located off the west coast of the Baja California Peninsula . In addition to Hurricane Hunter aircraft , the National Weather Service satellite station provided the basin with adequate satellite converge . The earlier loss of a GOES @-@ East satellite and the move of a GOES @-@ west satellite further west had little effect on EPHC operations . Enhanced infrared imagery was especially useful in determining cold @-@ core centers . 
 Even though the early season storms were no threat to land , there were several notable storms during the season , with one writer describing the season as the " worst year ever " . The first storm of series of storms to affect Hawaii , Hurricane Ignacio produced 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) waves along south @-@ facing beaches . However , rainfall from Ignacio was light . The second storm to affect the state , Tropical Storm Linda dropped heavy rainfall along the windward slopes of the island chain . In early September , Hurricane Pauline came close enough to require a hurricane watch , but the watch was discontinued when Pauline veered north . However , the storm did produced high waves , with amplitudes of 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) on the eastern side of Puna and Kau . Days later , Hurricane Rick generated high waves ; however , the waves were not nearly as high as they were during Pauline . The final storm to affect Hawaii was Hurricane Nele . Due to fears of a repeat from Hurricane Iwa , which struck during the 1982 Pacific hurricane season , a hurricane watch was issued . Although the watch was discontinued when Nele veered west , it later re @-@ curved and struck the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands , giving boats a rough night . 
 The only storm to make landfall during the year was Hurricane Waldo . Waldo destroyed hundreds of homes in Sinaloa and later produced significant rainfall across the Southwestern United States and Great Plains . One person was killed in Kansas . In addition , two storms affected California . The first , Tropical Storm Guillermo , helped firefighters put out fires during mid @-@ July . The second , Tropical Storm Nora , brought light rainfall to the northern portion of the state in late August . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Andres = = = 
 On June 1 , an area of thunderstorms south of Acapulco developed . It increased in size and , by June 5 , was organized enough to be considered a tropical depression . The depression was upgraded to a tropical storm shortly after thereafter . While the Monthly Weather Review reported that Tropical Storm Andres operationally started out as a tropical <unk> the HURDAT database does not give Andres an initial depression stage . Andres headed west , and two days after formation , it reached its maximum intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) while located south of the Baja California Peninsula . It then slowly weakened as it moved around a weak upper @-@ level high . It weakened to a depression on June 8 . The low stayed a depression as it continued west until it dissipated on June 12 as the cyclone gradually increased in speed . 
 = = = Hurricane Blanca = = = 
 Blanca originated from a tropical disturbance south of Nicaragua . A tropical depression formed on June 6 south of the Mexican coast . Shortly thereafter , it strengthened and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Blanca . By June 8 , the EPHC reported that Blanca had intensified into a hurricane . Blanca fluctuated in intensity for several days , but Blanca did not intensify into a major hurricane , Category 3 or higher , until June 13 . After reaching its peak intensity that day with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) later that day , Hurricane Blanca began to weaken . It held on to hurricane strengthen until June 14 , when the agency reported that Hurricane Blanca had fell to tropical storm intensity . Steadily weakening , Blanca deteriorated into a tropical depression , before dissipating on June 16 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Carlos = = = 
 Carlos originated from a tropical disturbance moving that was moving westward along the northern edge of the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) . The wave developed into the third tropical cyclone of the season at 1800 UTC on June 7 . Due to weak steering currents , the depression moved north and then south , which subsequently resulted in a very small cyclonic loop . By 0000 UTC on June 10 , the depression was upgraded to a Tropical Storm Carlos ; at the time , the storm also attained its maximum sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . However , six hours later , Carlos weakened back to a tropical depression . Thereafter , the storm accelerated somewhat , and quickly merging with the remnants of Tropical Storm Andres at 1800 UTC on June 10 . 
 = = = Hurricane Dolores = = = 
 A disturbance located south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec moved westward along 10 ° N between June 24 and June 25 . After interacting with an upper trough , the disturbance strengthened , and by the following day , it developed into the fourth tropical depression of the season at 0600 UTC . The depression steadily intensified and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Dolores late on June 27 . Dolores strengthened further while tracking west @-@ northwestward around the southern end of a deep layer ridge . By 1800 UTC on June 28 , the storm had reached hurricane intensity . Thereafter , Dolores continued to steadily deepen , and by 0600 UTC on July 1 , the storm peaked as a 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) Category 3 hurricane . However , due to colder sea surface temperatures and increasing vertical wind shear , Dolores quickly weakened , and by early on July 2 , it was downgraded to a tropical storm . Later that day , the storm further weakened to a tropical depression . At around 1800 UTC on July 5 , Dolores dissipated . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Enrique = = = 
 Enrique began as a tropical disturbance in the ITCZ west of the larger and very intense Hurricane Dolores . Moving west over 81 ° F ( 27 ° C ) water , the system was designated as a tropical depression on June 27 . Shortly thereafter , it intensified Tropical Storm Enrique . Turning west @-@ northwest , the storm moved over slightly warmer water . Despite this , Enrique never strengthened beyond 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) winds , and entered the CPHC 's warming responsibility on July 1 . Turning west beneath a ridge , Enrique rapidly weakened to tropical depression status . On July 4 , the shallow and weak system turned slightly south of west . Enrique had dissipated by July 5 . Despite its weak intensity , moisture carried by the system caused a few localized heavy showers on the windward side of the Big Island of Hawaii on July 5 and over the Kona slopes throughout the night hours of July 5 and 6 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fefa = = = 
 A tropical disturbance moved westward across the warm sea surface temperatures of the Gulf of Tehuantepec on July 1 . At 1200 UTC on the following day , the disturbance was classified as Tropical Depression Six , while centered about 215 miles ( 346 km ) south of Acapulco . Early on July 3 , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Fefa , while moving parallel to the Pacific coast of Mexico . Fefa approached hurricane status and peaked as a 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) tropical storm at 0000 UTC on July 4 . However , thereafter , the storm began weakening as a short @-@ wave trough in the westerlies moved into northern Mexico , which caused increased wind shear on Tropical Storm Fefa . Additionally , colder sea surface temperatures over the west coast of the Baja California Peninsula further weakened Fefa . By 1800 UTC on July 6 , Fefa dissipated . At the time of dissipation , the low while located about 170 miles ( 270 km ) east of La Paz . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Guillermo = = = 
 The origins of Guillermo were from a tropical disturbance that formed within 300 mi ( 485 km ) south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . Moving rapidly west @-@ northwest over moderately warm water , the disturbance was classified as a tropical depression . At this time , the depression was centered 270 mi ( 435 km ) south of Acapulco on July 7 . Roughly 24 hours later , the storm intensified slightly , enough to warrant an upgraded into Tropical Storm Guillermo . Tropical Storm Guillermo moved northwest at almost 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) around the southwest side of a high pressure area over Central Mexico . Passing 50 mi ( 80 km ) north of Socorro Island , Guillermo attained its maximum intensity of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) during the evening of July 9 . 
 Shortly after its peak , Guillermo began to weaken rapidly due to a combination of strong wind shear and 77 ° F ( 25 ° C ) waters . By 1800 UTC , most of the thunderstorm activity had dissipated and only a weak low @-@ pressure area remained . Based on this , Guillermo was downgraded into a tropical depression . Finally , Guillermo turned west and ceased to exist as a tropical cyclone on July 12 . The remnants of the storm brought light rainfall to the mountains and valleys of California , helping re @-@ fill dry reservoirs and put out large fires . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Hilda = = = 
 Tropical Depression Nine developed at 0000 UTC on July 18 . Initially , the depression tracked northward due to weak southerly flow associated with an upper @-@ level high centered near the southern tip of Baja California Sur . By 0000 UTC on July 19 , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Hilda ; the storm reached its maximum sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) at this time . Thereafter , Hilda turned westward . Due to sea surface temperatures of only 75 ° F ( 24 ° C ) , Hilda began to weaken and it dissipated on 1200 UTC July 20 . 
 = = = Hurricane Jimena = = = 
 Jimena originated from a tropical wave that moved across Central America and southern Mexico on July 18 and 19 . Located along the northern edge of the ITCZ , a tropical depression formed by July 20 . Initially moving west , the depression turned west @-@ northwest and was upgraded into Tropical Storm Jimena early on July 21 . Jimena attained hurricane intensity two days later . Hurricane Jimena remained a Category 1 hurricane for roughly another day , only to undergo a burst of intensification despite being above marginally warm ocean temperatures . The storm attained peak wind speed of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) while located roughly 600 mi ( 965 km ) southwest of Cabo San Lucas . 
 After maintaining peak intensity for 12 hours , Jimena turned northwest , and respectively began a slow decline . Jimena fell below hurricane status on 1800 UTC July 26 . Tropical Storm Jimena was downgraded into a tropical depression late on July 27 . Jimena was no longer considered a tropical cyclone by July 29 , as its center had dissipated over fairly cold water . 
 = = = Hurricane Ignacio = = = 
 A tropical depression was spotted early on July 21 while located 1 @,@ 623 mi ( 2 @,@ 612 km ) southwest of San Diego . Situated over warm waters , the depression attained tropical storm intensity a couple hours later . Ignacio reached winds of 70 mph ( 140 km / h ) on July 22 , roughly 24 hours after formation , and subsequently entered the CPHC 's warning zone . A Hurricane Hunter aircraft investigated Ignacio at daybreak on July 22 , and thus upgraded Ignacio into hurricane status . Continuing to rapidly intensify , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft discovered that Hurricane Ignacio had reached its peak wind speed of 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) and an estimated central pressure of 960 mbar ( 28 inHg ) . Operationally , Ignacio was believed to have peaked as a Category 5 hurricane . Shortly after its peak , the environment was rapidly becoming less conductive . By the evening on July 24 , Ignacio was no longer a major hurricane . The hurricane resumed its westerly course , and Ignacio was re @-@ assessed as a tropical storm on July 26 . Passing south of the island chain , Ignacio dissipated on July 27 . 
 On July 24 , a high surf advisory was issued for east @-@ facing shores of Hawaii ; subsequently , a hurricane watch was issued the next day for the Big Island . Roughly 24 hours after the watch was issued , it was cancelled though a small craft advisory remained in effect for the Hawaiian Islands . Ignacio resulted in 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) surf , peaking midday on July 25 . Rainfall from the storm was generally light though many secondary roads that lead to the beaches were closed . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Kevin = = = 
 A tropical wave crossed the Gulf of Tehuantepec on July 27 and developed into a tropical depression at 0000 UTC on July 29 . While tracking west @-@ northwestward between 7 and 11 mph ( 11 and 18 km / h ) , the depression slowly intensified , and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Kevin at 1800 UTC on July 31 . Crossing marginally warm sea surface temperatures , Kevin maintained tropical storm intensity while tracking westward . However , by August 5 , vertical wind shear began increasing , which was generated by an upper @-@ level trough . As a result , Kevin weakened to a tropical depression at 0600 UTC on August 6 and dissipated 12 hours later . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Linda = = = 
 A tropical wave formed on July 28 over fairly warm water . Moving west @-@ northwest , the system was declared a tropical depression far from land the next day . It became Tropical Storm Linda later on July 29 . A relatively weak cyclone , Linda peaked as a moderate tropical storm at 1200 UTC on July 31 . Shortly after its peak , Tropical Storm Linda began to weaken over cooler waters and increased wind shear . Linda began to weaken and was downgraded into a tropical depression on August 2 . Two days later , it passed into the CPHC 's area of responsibility . 
 Upon entering the warning zone , the tropical depression was moving slowly toward the northwest and within six hours , Tropical Depression Linda began to re @-@ intensify . On August 4 , the storm had regained tropical storm status . Subsequently , Linda reaches its secondary peak with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Linda remained a tropical storm for about 24 hours before it started to weaken again on August 5 . It was downgraded to a tropical depression early the next day . Meanwhile , Linda turned west under the influence of northerly trade winds . The depression came within 150 mi ( 240 km ) of South Point , Hawaii before dissipating early on August 9 . Some heavy showers associated with the outer rainband 's of the low fell on the windward slopes of the Big Island of Hawaii and Maui , where rainfall totals of 5 – 10 in ( 130 – 250 mm ) were recorded . 
 = = = Hurricane Marty = = = 
 A tropical disturbance crossed the coast of El Salvador and entered the Pacific Ocean on August 3 . After moving westward over sea surface temperatures of 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) , the disturbance developed into Tropical Depression Fourteen at 1800 UTC on August 6 , while centered about 460 mi ( 740 km ) southwest of Acapulco . While tracking west @-@ northwestward at about 13 mph ( 21 km / h ) , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Marty at 1200 UTC August 7 . Further strengthening occurred and Marty became a hurricane on 0000 UTC August 9 . However , after 18 hours as a hurricane , Marty weakened back to a tropical storm as it began tracking across colder sea surface temperatures . Early on August 31 , Marty weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated later that day at 1800 UTC . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nora = = = 
 A tropical disturbance detached from the ITCZ on August 18 . While tracking across an area of sea surface temperatures of 81 ° F ( 27 ° C ) , the disturbance slowly intensified and the EPHC reported that the system had developed tropical depression at 1800 UTC on August 19 . Initially , the depression remained weak , though by 1200 UTC on August 21 , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Nora . Thereafter , Nora turned northwestward toward a deep @-@ layer low pressure area offshore of California . During this time , the storm began to weaken due to a decrease in sea surface temperatures . Nora weakened back to a tropical depression on August 22 . Nora began to dissipate at 1200 UTC August 23 over 73 ° F ( 23 ° C ) waters . Meanwhile , low @-@ level clouds began to enter the storm 's circulation . The high @-@ level outflow associated with the storm moved northward and then eastward , resulting in light rainfall in Northern California on August 22 and 23 . 
 = = = Hurricane Olaf = = = 
 Olaf originated from a disturbed south of Acapulco on August 21 over extremely warm waters . Moving slowly west , the EPHC reported that a tropical depression formed on August 22 . The depression attained tropical storm status the next day , and subsequently began to rapidly intensify . While turning northwest , Olaf became a hurricane 460 mi ( 740 km ) south @-@ southwest of La Paz . It headed west @-@ northwest , and reached its peak intensity as a moderate Category 1 hurricane late on August 26 , with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . 
 Hurricane Olaf then moved slowing towards the west beneath a ridge and into progressively cooler waters . Olaf weakened into a tropical storm on August 28 , and then degenerated into a tropical depression the next afternoon . Tropical Depression Olaf suddenly turned north towards an upper @-@ level through off the U.S. West Coast . However , hostile conditions caused the system to cease to exist as a tropical cyclone early on August 31 several hundred miles west @-@ southwest of San Diego , California . 
 = = = Hurricane Pauline = = = 
 A small , westward moving area of thunderstorm activity become the 17th cyclone of the season . Turning southwest between an upper @-@ level high over Baja California and a low near the southern coast of Mexico , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Pauline . Over the next couple of day , the cyclone turned west , and then west @-@ northwest . Slowly strengthening despite underneath warm waters , Pauline attained hurricane intensity on September 7 . Subsequently , Pauline turned towards the south . After peaking in intensity as a moderate Category 1 hurricane , the system crossed into the CPHC 's area of responsibility . 
 It remained at hurricane intensity for three days . Shortly thereafter , Pauline began to weaken and turn northwest away from Hawaii . Due to interaction with trough , the hurricane veered north into an environment of strong wind shear . The result was rapid weakening ; Hurricane Pauline was downgraded to a tropical storm late on September 8 and a tropical depression well north of the islands the next day . Pauline ceased to exist as a tropical cyclone by the evening hours of September 9 . However , the remnants of Pauline moved northwest into an area of low pressure of the Gulf of Alaska . A recognizable circulation in the low level flow was visible for several days as it drifted westward far to the north of the Hawaiian Islands . 
 Hurricane Pauline threatened the islands enough to prompt the issuance of a hurricane watch on September 6 . Around this time , officials drew plans to evacuate coastal residents and 100 @,@ 000 people were asked to make emergency preparations . Instead , Pauline turned away from the islands and the watch was cancelled . However , Pauline did cause high surf along the east facing shores of all the <unk> up to 10 – 15 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 6 m ) surf was measured along the Big Island , Puna , and Kau coastlines . As a result , some roads were temporarily closed due to washed debris . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Skip = = = 
 The origins of Skip were from a disturbance that passed well south of Hawaii in late August . The CPHC monitored the disturbance for several days and was classified as Tropical Depression Two @-@ C on August 30 . Two @-@ C crossed the International dateline the next day and into the western pacific typhoon . Initially moving west , the depression was upgraded into Tropical Storm Skip at 0900 UTC September 9 . A Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough then steered tip to the north and later towards the northeast . It underwent two strengthened phases . Skip reached typhoon intensity on two occasions , the first on September 1 and the second on September 7 . The system subsequently recrossed the dateline as Skip was rapidly weakening and gaining extratropical features . Shortly thereafter , Skip was declared extratropical despite still producing hurricane @-@ force winds . The typhoon briefly threatened Wake Island . 
 = = = Hurricane Rick = = = 
 A tropical wave that moved slowly westward over the warm waters south of Salina Cruz . Moving westward , the EPHC upgraded the low into Tropical Depression Eighteen on 0000 UTC September 1 . The depression was upgraded into Tropical Storm Rick midday on September 2 . Initially , further intensification was slow ; the storm did not attain hurricane status until the low was located 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) away from land . After becoming a hurricane , Rick began to intensify more rapidly . Early the next day , the EPHC re @-@ assessed the intensity of Rick to Category 4 status . Shortly thereafter , Rick reached its peak intensity of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) . Operationally , it was believed to be much stronger , with winds of 170 mph ( 275 km / h ) , equivalent to Category 5 strength . 
 Following a path similar to the one Pauline made a few days earlier , the powerful hurricane moved northwest . A weakening trend commenced on September 10 ; Hurricane Rick began to rapidly deteriorate . On September 11 , Tropical Storm Rick merged with the same trough though weak low @-@ level circulation persisted for several more days . Early forecasts noted uncertainty in the storm 's path and meteorologists noted the potential to be more of a threat to Hawaii than Pauline . The hurricane approached the islands , coming close enough to require a high surf advisory . Even though Hurricane Rick turned north sooner than Pauline , the surf did rise somewhat . 
 = = = Hurricane Sandra = = = 
 During the late evening of September 4 , a large intense area of thunderstorm activity formed near the Guatemala @-@ El Salvador coast . The thunderstorm developed a circulation about 24 hours later , and was thus upgraded into a tropical depression a few hundred miles south of the Mexican coast . Turning west @-@ northwest over 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) waters , the depression was upgraded into Tropical Storm Sandra early on September 7 . By 0600 UTC September 8 , winds had increased to 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , and Sandra was upgraded into a hurricane . Sandra turned west , and quickly intensified , reaching Category 3 status later that day after bypassing the Category 2 stage . On 0000 UTC September 9 , Sandra peaked in intensity with winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . 
 After moving towards the west for an additional 18 hours , it subsequently began a sharp turn northwest and later west @-@ northwest due to an intensifying trough off the west coast of Baja California . Meanwhile , Sandra slowly weakened . At 1746 UTC September 12 , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft intersected Hurricane Sandra after being on standby in Hawaii . The aircraft penetrated Sandra twice , reaching the 700 mbar ( 700 @.@ 00 hPa ; 20 @.@ 67 inHg ) level . It also measured surface winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) and a surface pressure of 972 mbar ( 972 @.@ 00 hPa ; 28 @.@ 70 inHg ) . The eye was reportedly open to the west with low @-@ level banding , and the eye was 37 mi ( 60 km ) in diameter . 
 Shortly after the flight , the cyclone then began to turn to the west and weaken further over 78 ° F ( 26 ° C ) waters . Sandra was downgraded into a tropical storm the next day ; however , the storm briefly regained minimal hurricane status . On 1800 UTC September 14 , Sandra weakened back into a tropical storm roughly 600 mi ( 970 km ) west of the Baja California Peninsula . Now over 77 ° F ( 25 ° C ) sea surface temperatures , Sandra weakened into a tropical depression on September 15 and dissipated two days later . 
 = = = Hurricane Terry = = = 
 A tropical wave moved through Nicaragua on September 14 . Moving rapidly west over 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) warms , a circulation became evident and tropical depression developed at 1800 UTC September 15 , the twentieth of the season . The system turned northwest ; subsequently , the depression was upgraded into Tropical Storm Terry 24 hours after formation approximately 300 mi ( 480 km ) south of Acapulco . Early on September 25 , Terry attained hurricane status . Terry quickly reached Category 2 status and briefly reached Category 3 intensity , peaking with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) on September 21 over 300 mi ( 485 km ) south of Cabo San Lucas . 
 Shortly after its peak , a cold trough moved southward into Baja California Norte . This steered Hurricane Terry northward into cooler waters . A U.S Air Force weather reconnaissance aircraft investigated the weakening Terry on 1800 UTC September 21 and 22 while the storm was west @-@ southwest of the peninsula . Two penetrations were made in both flights . The second flight suggested that the hurricane had a poorly defined eye . A combination of cooler water and increased wind shear took its toll on Terry . The system weakened into a tropical storm at 0600 UTC September 23 due west of the Baja California Peninsula , and a tropical depression early the following day . By 1800 UTC , Terry dissipated while its center dissipated 500 mi ( 800 km ) west @-@ southwest of San Diego . The hurricane at one point in time was predicted to make landfall in central Baja California and threaten San Diego ; however , this did not occur . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Vivian = = = 
 A disturbance emerged from the northern ITCZ on September 17 . By 0600 UTC on the following day , it developed into a tropical depression . Initially , the depression tracked northwestward in response to a strong upper @-@ level trough centered over northern Baja California . After crossing an area of sea surface temperatures in excess of 82 ° F ( 28 ° C ) , the depression was able to strengthen into Tropical Storm Vivian at 0000 UTC on September 20 . Under the influence of Hurricane Terry and an upper @-@ level high pressure , Vivian turned west , southwest , and eventually southward . While tracking to the south , the storm re @-@ entered the ITCZ , which caused Vivian to weaken and become indistinguishable . Vivian was downgraded to a tropical depression on September 21 , shortly before dissipating on 1800 UTC on that same day . 
 = = = Hurricane Waldo = = = 
 Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Three formed from a disturbance on October 7 . In a favorable environment over warm waters , It rapidly intensified , reaching tropical storm intensity the same day it formed . Tropical Storm Waldo then began to turn to the north and while located 130 miles ( 210 km ) south of Baja California Sur , Waldo was upgraded into a Category 1 hurricane . A trough started re @-@ curving Waldo towards the Mexican coast . Shortly after peaking as a Category 2 hurricane , Waldo made landfall southwest of Culiacán . Waldo rapidly dissipated over land and eventually merged with a cold front . 
 Prior to the arrival of Waldo , the Mexican Army was put on standby in the event the Fuerte River flooded . While no deaths or injuries were reported , much farmland and 600 houses were destroyed . The Juarez River bursts its banks , flooding at least eight neighborhoods in Culiacán . Telephone service in Los Mochis , <unk> , and Guasave was cut when a communications tower was blown over . A total of 10 @,@ 000 people were left homeless across the state . 
 In combination with a cold front , Waldo contributed to major flooding in Kansas that forced many rivers and creeks to overflow their banks . One indirect death was reported and roughly 15 people were evacuated from their homes in one town . In Kansas City , Waldo produced 1 ft ( 30 cm ) of water on roads , but none of the nearby homes received extensive damage . The Sedgwick County , the county fire department freed 35 trapped people from rising flood waters . Flash floods affected the southern one – third of New Mexico from rainfall associated from Waldo . Damage was estimated between $ 100 @,@ 000 – $ 1 million ( 1985 USD ) , mostly to crops , roads , and buildings . In all , Waldo 's rain was comparable to Atlantic Hurricane Gloria . 
 = = = Hurricane Nele = = = 
 The origins of Nele were from a tropical disturbance to the south @-@ southeast of Hawaii on October 20 . The tropical disturbance developed into Tropical Depression Three @-@ C while located south @-@ southeast of Hawaii on October 23 . Although difficult to observe on satellite imagery , the CPHC upgraded it to Tropical Storm Nele early on October 24 . Continuing to intensify , the storm tracked northwestward , following a similar path to Hurricane Iwa in 1982 and Hurricane Nina in 1957 . On October 25 , Nele attained hurricane strength as it turned to the north . On October 26 it attained peak winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . It entered an area of weaker steering currents due to a nearby trough . This caused concern for the CPHC , who noted that a continued path would result in the hurricane moving through the island chain . Instead , Nele turned to the northwest at a steady pace and instead moved through the Hawaiian Leeward Islands , passing about 100 mi ( 160 km ) west of French Frigate Shoals and very near Tern Island . Around that time , reconnaissance aircraft measured winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a pressure of 982 mbar ( 982 @.@ 00 hPa ; 29 @.@ 00 inHg ) . After passing through the island chain , the storm finally weakened and accelerated towards the north . Nele re @-@ curved to the northeast , transitioning into an extratropical cyclone on October 30 . 
 Due to fears of a repeat of Hurricane Iwa , a hurricane watch was issued for Hawaii . Officials moved beach equipment away from the beach in preparation . About 24 hours after the hurricane watch was issued , it was dropped as Nele moved away from the islands , alongside the cancellation of a high surf advisory . The hurricane produced 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) waves along south @-@ facing beaches . Upon passing through the Leeward Islands , a weather station on Tern Island recorded winds of 34 mph ( 55 km / h ) with gusts of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , along with a pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mbar ( 1 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 hPa ; 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) . Many fishing boats spent a tough night at French Frigate Shoals due to high waves and seas . One vessel was partially disabled due to a broken rudder and required assistance from the U.S. Coast Guard . Another vessel reported winds of hurricane @-@ force and 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) to 40 ft ( 12 m ) . Other fishing vessels near Maro Reef and Laysan Island had an easier time as they were in the weaker left of the hurricane . 
 = = = Hurricane Xina = = = 
 Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Four developed at 0600 UTC on October 25 , in the southwest quadrant of a quasi @-@ stationary deep @-@ layer mean anticyclone . The depression moved generally westward and slowly strengthened , becoming Tropical Storm Xina about 72 hours after becoming a tropical cyclone . Thereafter , the storm curved northwestward and gradually intensified , and by late on October 28 , it was upgraded to a hurricane . Xina then rapidly deepened , peaking as a 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) Category 3 hurricane at 1800 UTC on October 29 . However , due to decreasing sea surface temperatures , Xina almost immediately began to weaken . 
 Shortly thereafter , the storm curved eastward , later followed by a south @-@ southwestward turned early on October 31 . Later that day , Xina was downgraded to a tropical storm . At around 0600 UTC on November 1 , the storm had further weakened to a tropical depression . Xina briefly re @-@ strengthened to a tropical storm at 0600 UTC on November 2 , though it quickly weakened back to a tropical depression about six hours later . After weakening back to a tropical depression , the circulation of Xina became very disorganized and difficult to locate . Early on November 4 , the depression curved southwestward , and by 0600 UTC on November 5 , Xina had dissipated . 
 = = = Tropical depressions = = = 
 Of the four tropical cyclones that did not reach tropical storm strength , the first was a weak disturbance that began to develop in the northern Intertropical Convergence Zone on July 10 . After convection increased and a circulation formed , the system was upgraded to Tropical Depression Eight at 1800 UTC on July 11 . However , deep convection quickly began to diminish , and by early on the following day , the depression dissipated . 
 The only tropical depression to develop in the CPHC 's area of responsibility developed from a disturbance embedded in the trade wind flow south of the Hawaiian Islands that was about 35 mi ( 56 km ) south of the Hawaiian Islands . A tropical depression was declared on August 20 as the system appeared to be intensifying while moving rapidly west @-@ northwest . However , increased wind shear from a trough , an elongated area of low pressure , took toll on the storm and it weakened on August 21 near the Johnston Atoll . Due to the lack of a well @-@ defined atmospheric circulation , the storm ceased to exist as a tropical cyclone two days after formation . 
 An area of convection within the ITCZ developed into Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Two at 0000 UTC on October 1 . However , the depression never separated from the ITCZ . Despite sea surface temperatures in excess of 82 ° F ( 28 ° C ) , the depression did not strengthen , and on the following day , the center became ill @-@ defined and difficult to locate on satellite imagery . Convection began decreasing , and as a result , the depression is estimated to have dissipated at 1800 UTC on October 2 . Over a month later , a weak disturbance located about 345 mi ( 555 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California Sur developed a circulation ; the system was promptly classified as Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Five at 0600 UTC on November 21 . The depression drifted slowly southward at 3 mph ( 5 km / h ) , shortly before curving west @-@ southwestward . Thereafter , the depression turned north @-@ northwestward and dissipated later on November 21 . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the eastern Pacific in 1985 . No names were retired , so it was used again in the 1991 season , although the name Dolores was misspelled as Delores in 1991 . This is the same list used for the 1979 season , except for the added names . Storms were named Kevin , Linda , Marty , Nora , Olaf , Rick , Sandra , Terry , Vivian , Waldo , and Xina for the first time in 1985 . The name Pauline was previously used in the 1961 and 1968 seasons respectively . 
 Because of the level of activity , these names were added during the season : 
 One name from the Central Pacific list was used - Nele . It was the first usage for this name . One storm , Typhoon Skip , formed in the central Pacific but did not receive a name until it reached the west Pacific . 
 Later during the 80 's , the added names were made a permanent part of the Eastern Pacific lists , and other names were added for even @-@ numbered years . 
 = Bixby 's Back = 
 " Bixby 's Back " is the 14th episode of the second season of the American comedy television series , Modern Family and the 38th episode overall . It originally aired February 9 , 2011 on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) . The episode was written by Danny Zuker , and directed by Chris Koch . 
 In the episode , Claire and Phil decide to reprise their role @-@ playing adventure from the previous Valentine 's Day episode , " My Funky Valentine " . Jay 's elaborate Valentine 's surprise for Gloria keeps getting held up . An admirer comes between Cameron and Mitchell . 
 " Bixby 's Back " received generally mixed reviews from critics with many saying it was an inadequate sequel to " My Funky Valentine " . Despite the mixed reviews , the episode was viewed by 13 @.@ 16 million households , according to the Nielsen Media Research , and received a 5 @.@ 1 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , tying the spot for highest @-@ rated episode of the series at that time with " The Old Wagon " and " Halloween " . It later became the most viewed scripted program of the week among 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old adults . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the Dunphy house , Phil ( Ty Burrell ) and Claire ( Julie Bowen ) decide to have a small dinner for Valentine 's Day in order to avoid the disastrous results of the events of last year . Since they only could get a very early dinner reservation , Claire realizes that all the couples are elderly so she decides to bring back their characters from last year , Clive Bixby and Julianna . Julianna has Clive ditch his wife and meet her at their hotel . At the bar , Claire gives Phil the key to her room . While watching Claire walk way , Phil takes the wrong room key belonging to an older woman who was arranging her purse . He enters the wrong room , sprinkles rose petals on the bed , undresses , and waits on the bed with a bottle of champagne . The older woman then walks in after coming back from the bar . Back at the house , Phil and Claire decide to just act like themselves . 
 Haley 's ( Sarah Hyland ) boyfriend David blows her off to study for a big exam . Manny ( Rico Rodriguez ) expects to profit from Haley being free from both David and Dylan ( Reid Ewing ) and manages to convince Haley to send David a break @-@ up email . She feels liberated for a brief moment but then her ex @-@ boyfriend Dylan shows up with his band on a flatbed of a truck and he sings a love song to her . Haley rushes into Dylan 's arms and thus Manny 's hopes of wooing Haley are dashed . 
 Meanwhile , Cameron ( Eric Stonestreet ) suspects Mitchell 's new assistant , Broderick ( Jeremy Rowley ) , has a crush on Mitchell ( Jesse Tyler Ferguson ) , which he denies but secretly affirms . His suspicion is soon proven wrong when Broderick hugs Cameron in an elevator revealing that he is the real object of his desire . While eating dinner together , Cameron reveals this to Mitchell , who still believes Broderick has a crush on him . To see which one is right , the two go to Broderick 's house , but after getting a text from Broderick which says he is quitting , the two decide it would be best if they never knew which one of them Broderick liked . 
 Jay ( Ed O 'Neill ) plans out a perfect Valentine 's surprise for Gloria ( Sofía Vergara ) . He hires a chef to prepare her a luxurious meal at their house , but must keep Gloria away while the chef is setting up . Jay takes Gloria to a great restaurant that she loves , with the intent to leave after pretending to find that his secretary had forgotten to make a reservation . Unfortunately his plan goes awry ; at the restaurant there really is a reservation for two under the name Pritchett , so they have to stay much to Gloria 's delight and Jay 's flabbergasted anguish . Later , the reservation turns out to have been for Cameron and Mitchell , so that relieved and elated Jay and furious Gloria have to leave again . 
 Back at their house , the two have a fight and Gloria refuses to go inside . She is so angry she wants to get in her car and take a drive to cool down . Jay has no choice but to carry the screaming Gloria into the house for her surprise dinner . When the two finally go into the house , however , Jay is stunned to find the house empty . Gloria goes to the garage to take her car out for her drive with Jay following . As the garage door opens we see the romantic surprise dinner is , for some reason , taking place in the garage . Gloria reveals that she had figured out Jay 's secret plan , moved it to the garage , and bought him a new motorcycle which sits beside the dinner table . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Bixby 's Back " was written by Danny Zuker , his sixth writing credit for the series . The episode was directed by Chris Koch , his third credit for the series . The episode is considered a sequel to the first season episode , " My Funky Valentine " . 
 Many plots of the episode were revealed before the episode 's airdate by TV Guide writers Adam Bryant and Natalie Abrams . It originally aired on February 9 , 2011 on the American Broadcasting Company . " Bixby 's Back " was filmed between January 5 , and January 17 , 2011 . 
 The episode also featured the return of Reid Ewing 's character , Dylan , after he broke up with Haley . Julie Bowen said in an interview with TV Guide at the 17th Screen Actors Guild Awards that , " This year 's Valentine 's Day episode is pretty insane , It 's different than last year 's . Clive and Julianna are back , but Clive is in the more compromising position this time instead of Julianna . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bixby 's Back " was viewed by an estimated 13 @.@ 16 million viewers according to the Nielsen Media Research , and received a 5 @.@ 1 rating / 13 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 5 @.@ 1 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 13 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This episode of Modern Family saw an increase of 9 percent from the previous episode , " Caught in the Act " . The episode became the highest @-@ rated episode of the series , tying with " The Old Wagon " and " Halloween " . The episode also ranked first in its timeslot and became the second highest @-@ rated program on Wednesday after American Idol . " Bixby 's Back " was the most @-@ watched scripted show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 , and the ninth most @-@ watched show among all viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Bixby 's Back " received mixed reviews from critics with many critics saying it didn 't live up to its predecessor , " My Funky Valentine " . 
 The A.V. Club writer John Teti gave the episode a mixed review calling it " fine " . Teti wrote that he felt like the producers " was doing Valentine ’ s Day [ episode ] out of obligation " and that the writers did not have a " great idea " for this episode like " My Funky Valentine " . He ultimately gave the episode a B- . Entertainment Weekly writer Lesley Savage gave the episode a more positive review saying the cast " proved why they truly deserved the award in tonight 's Valentine 's Day themed episode . " 
 Rachael Maddux of New York magazine said the episode was a great sequel to " My Funky Valentine " calling it " a solid episode , start to finish " . 
 Meredith Blake of The Los Angeles Times said the episode was below the show 's usual quality writing that " it didn 't quite have the usual zing " . CNN writer Henry Hanks gave the episode a more positive review and praised Ty Burrell 's performance calling him the " MVP of the week " . He later went on to criticize Mitchell and Cameron 's sub @-@ plot calling it a " another sub @-@ par storyline " . 
 Despite the mixed reviews , many praised Ty Burrell 's performance . Teti praised both the writing and the acting in the bar scene writing that " There is a fantastic run of writing during Clive and Juliana ’ s rendezvous at the bar , as every smooth Clive Bixby utterance stumbles out of Phil ’ s mouth with just the right amount of awkwardness " . Maddux called his performance " comedic mastery " . 
 = Knife attack on Kevin Lau = 
 Kevin Lau , former editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Hong Kong daily newspaper Ming Pao , was attacked in the morning of 26 February 2014 as he was getting out of his car in Lei King Wan , Hong Kong by two men who were waiting for him . Lau suffered stab wounds to his back and legs . He was rushed to hospital , where he underwent emergency surgery . The police and most commentators agree that it was a triad @-@ style attack aimed at maiming without killing . 
 While pro @-@ establishment figures sought to be prudent concerning any link between the attack and press freedom , local journalists and the local press saw the attack as part of an unhealthy trend in which mainland Chinese interests seek to rein in Hong Kong 's vibrant and still free press . Thousands of people , led by leading journalists , attended a rally to denounce violence and intimidation of the media . Ming Pao put up a reward of HK $ 3 million for information leading to the bringing to justice of the perpetrators . 
 Eleven people , some of them with connections to triads in Hong Kong , were arrested in connection with the attack . The two main suspects had fled to Guangdong , China . On 21 August 2015 , two men were sentenced in Hong Kong to 19 years imprisonment for the attack . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Ming Pao editorial = = = 
 Ming Pao is one of the most credible news outlets in Hong Kong , with a tradition of liberalism and strong record on investigative reporting . Kevin Lau Chun @-@ to ( <unk> ) is a journalist with a law degree who was editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Ming Pao in Hong Kong since the retirement of his predecessor , Cheung Kin @-@ bor , in 2012 . A colleague at the Chinese University , where he lectured part @-@ time , describes Lau as a " mild @-@ mannered guy , an intellectual , a lawyer , a journalist , not in any way a firebrand radical or a controversial character " . Under Lau 's leadership , Ming Pao has continued in its liberal stance , investigated the suspicious death of Li <unk> , spoken out against government policies such as Moral and National Education ( <unk> ) , and in favour of greater democratic reforms in Hong Kong – a stance seen as being unsympathetic to the Chinese central government . The journal scooped several political scandals , including the 2012 Henry Tang illegal basement controversy and a similar scandal involving <unk> Leung , Tang 's erstwhile opponent for election as chief executive of Hong Kong . The paper also contributed to investigative work with the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists ( <unk> ) ; this work looked into the offshore assets of China 's leaders , including relatives of Communist Party general secretary Xi Jinping , former Premier Wen Jiabao , and several members of the National People 's Congress , and led to published stories . 
 In January 2014 , Lau was abruptly replaced by Chong Tien Siong , a Singapore @-@ based Malaysian who , according to The Economist , is widely regarded as pro @-@ establishment . Chong had been former editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Nanyang Siang Pau , and was a vocal advocate of the compulsory <unk> for school children before it was shelved in 2012 amid large protests against " brainwashing " . Lau had been appointed chief operating officer of <unk> Resources , a subsidiary of the parent organisation of the journal that publishes electronic books and teaching materials . A journalism academic said the manner in which Lau was replaced was " extremely abnormal " , and that the owners need to explain . Staff at the journal feared that this meant a curtailment of its independent tradition . His staffers staged several protests : more than 90 % of them petitioned to demanding to know the reason for Lau 's removal , and four senior writers refused to submit copy for their columns in protest . Some 300 of his former colleagues signed a petition calling for safeguards to press freedom , and several thousand people took to the streets on 23 February in support of Lau and in reaction to the apparent imposition of controls on the press by the Communist Party of China . 
 = = = Violence against journalists and media owners = = = 
 Since the 1990s , there have been a spate of unsolved attacks against journalists and media owners who are not aligned with the Chinese Government . In 1996 , journalist Leung Tin @-@ wai was stabbed ; in 1998 , broadcaster Albert Cheng was accosted by a gang when leaving his office and was stabbed . In June 2013 , Chen Ping , the publisher of <unk> Affairs , a weekly magazine banned on the mainland , was beaten by two men armed with batons . Three masked men with knives threatened workers at Next Media , publisher of Apple Daily , and set thousands of copies of the paper on fire . Its proprietor , Jimmy Lai , a fervent supporter of the Pan @-@ democracy camp , had the gate of his home rammed with a stolen car ; the attacker left weapons at the scene and fled . 
 = = = Financial pressure = = = 
 Press freedom advocates point to trend of increasing self @-@ censorship by editors , or media tycoons with substantial business interests in China installing editors who are pro @-@ China . The South China Morning Post reported that <unk> , an outspoken tabloid free @-@ sheet , suffered a concerted advertising boycott from mainland Chinese companies . Beijing 's representative office frequently pressures the free media in Hong Kong to revise or remove coverage that it dislikes . Hong Kong 's ranking in Reporters Without Borders index on press freedom has slid from 18th place in 2002 to 61st in 2014 . 
 = = The incident = = 
 Lau was attacked on 26 February 2014 at approximately 10 : 20 am , as he was parking his car near a restaurant he is known to frequent for breakfast in Sai Wan Ho . An assailant armed with a meat cleaver hacked at Lau as soon as Lau got out of his car , leading to three knife wounds . The attacker climbed back onto the motorcycle driven by an accomplice and sped away . Lau managed to call the police using his telephone as the attackers raced away . He was admitted to hospital in a critical condition . Police described the brazen attack on Lau as a classic triad @-@ style hit that was intended as a " warning " rather than intent to kill . One of the chest wounds penetrated his lung . A University of Hong Kong academic who has studied crime believes the attack was planned : " The attackers obviously knew which parts of the body to attack in order to cause severe bodily harm without killing him . If they intended to kill , they would not have targeted the neck , back and legs . " Lau returned to work on 1 August 2014 . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 The day after the attack , a group of 200 people held vigil outside the government headquarters calling for safeguards . Ming Pao said it was " deeply angry that the assailants dared to conduct an attack in broad daylight " , and offered a reward of HK $ 1 million ( $ 128 @,@ 000 ) for information leading to the apprehension of the assailants . Lau 's family was reported to be under police protection . The <unk> , which had been participating with Ming Pao on the investigations into the assets of China 's leaders , said they were not aware of any connection between their investigation and the attack . The paper 's editorial director said that he was co @-@ operating with police investigations by reviewing all the recently published stories to try and establish possible motives . Ming Po staff were said to be distraught and in shock . Ming Pao tripled its reward to HK $ 3 million within days of making the first offer . Regular South China Morning Post columnist Alex Lo summarised the fear in journalists saying : " If a respected editor could be attacked in such a blatant and ruthless manner , no one in the news @-@ gathering business is safe " . 
 Journalism organisations were outraged by the attack – Hong Kong Journalists Association condemned the violence , the Foreign Correspondents ' Club expressed " shock " at the incident and urged the government to ensure safety of members of the press . Many saw the attack as politically motivated , and part of an unhealthy trend in which the Communist Party seeks to reign in Hong Kong 's vibrant and still free press . Lau 's friend and fellow journalist Shirley Yam said that such a flagrant attack strongly suggests that Lau had antagonised somebody powerful in the course of his work . In a commentary in the South China Morning Post , Mike Rowse said : 
 Several aspects of the case stand out . The assailants clearly came to maim rather than to kill , which they could easily have done . They were hired for the purpose and targeted a particular individual . This was not a random exercise ; it was a well @-@ planned assault intended to send a message . Working back from this scenario , the pieces almost align themselves . Someone very powerful and wealthy – and evil – has been angered by something Lau has done . [ There is no ] ambiguity in Lau 's case [ that ] it is an attack on freedom of the press and the whole community needs to respond . 
 A spokesman for the Committee to Protect Journalists declined to link the attack to Lau 's work on China , but admitted there was " a growing chilling effect on journalists and media houses in Hong Kong , and that pressure is coming from China . " Hong Kong is known as one of the safest cities in the world , and most people agree that the attack is disturbing regardless of the motive . 
 Representatives of mainland China , the US and EU in Hong Kong have all expressed concern over the attack , and Hong Kong 's Chief executive <unk> Leung expressed his indignation and outrage . In excess of 8 @,@ 600 people dressed in black attended a rally on 2 March in defence of press freedom . Many banners bore the slogan " They can 't kill us all " . Ming Pao chief executive Tiong <unk> <unk> and the paper 's new chief editor were photographed at the rally ; some pro @-@ Beijing lawmakers were also present . Organisers claimed 13 @,@ 000 participants attended the march . In a pre @-@ recorded message to the rally , Lau urged people not to take freedom for granted . He said : " We cannot assume it will never change . It takes everyone to guard it . " The march culminated at the police headquarters in Wan Chai , where organisers delivered a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ signature petition to the Hong Kong Police . 
 Legislators strongly condemned the attack on Lau , and urging the police to " spare no effort to arrest the assailants , so as to expeditiously bring them to justice " . While pan @-@ democrats sought to link the attack to press freedom in the motion and amendments , pro @-@ establishment figures argued that it was " too early to conclude " that the two issues were linked . Ip Kwok @-@ him of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong said that while he privately believed that there was a strong link between the attack and freedom of the press , lawmakers ought to be prudent as investigations are ongoing . The motion condemning the violent attack on Lau passed unanimously ; amendments urging preservation of press freedom and protection of journalists were also voted through at the end of March . 
 = = Arrests = = 
 Eleven people , some of whom have connections to the Shui Fong triad gang , were arrested in connection with the attack . The two main suspects were detained in Guangdong , China . Seven were arrested in several locations in sweeps across Hong Kong on 12 March ; Hong Kong Police received word on 9 March that the two had been tracked down by Mainland police in Dongguan . The police commissioner Andy Tsang said they suspected the attack was carried out by hired hands . On 21 August 2015 , two men were sentenced to 19 years imprisonment for the cold @-@ blooded and premeditated attack on Lau . The judge said although there lacked direct evidence that the attack , motivated by financial gain , was related to Lau 's work , journalists deserved to be adequate protection under the law . 
 = New Jersey Route 31 = 
 Route 31 is a state highway in New Jersey , United States . It runs 48 @.@ 93 mi ( 78 @.@ 75 km ) from U.S. Route 1 Business ( US 1 Bus . ) / US 206 in Trenton , Mercer County north to an intersection with US 46 in Buttzville in White Township , Warren County . Along the way , Route 31 heads through the communities of Flemington , Clinton and Washington . Most of the highway is state @-@ maintained ; however , the section within the city limits of Trenton is maintained by the city . Much of Route 31 is a two @-@ lane highway that passes through farmland , woodland , and mountainous areas . Two portions of the route — from Trenton to Pennington and from Ringoes to Clinton — consist of more development . 
 The highway was constructed from 1926 to 1935 . Route 31 has carried two different numbers in the past . It was known as Route 30 between 1927 and 1953 , when it was renumbered to Route 69 to avoid conflicting with US 30 in southern New Jersey . It was renumbered to Route 31 in 1967 due to sign theft that resulted from the sexual meaning of the number 69 . There were plans made in the late 1960s and early 1970s to build a freeway in the Route 31 corridor that would begin in the Trenton area and extend as far north as Interstate 84 ( I @-@ 84 ) in Port Jervis , New York ; however , it was canceled in the mid @-@ 1970s due to opposition from area residents and environmental and financial constraints . In recent years , the portion of Route 31 between Flemington and Clinton has been widened to four lanes . In addition , there was a failed project to build a bypass of Flemington that would have also eliminated the Flemington Circle . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Mercer County = = = 
 Route 31 heads north from US 1 Bus. and US 206 at the Trenton Battle Monument in Trenton , Mercer County on city @-@ maintained two @-@ lane undivided Pennington Road . The route passes by residences and some businesses in the northern part of Trenton , crossing County Route 653 ( CR 653 , Calhoun Street ) . Route 31 enters Ewing Township and becomes state @-@ <unk> at the point where it crosses CR 634 ( Parkway Avenue ) . The route continues north through suburban residential areas and passes to the west of The College of New Jersey campus . It crosses into Hopewell Township and briefly becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway as it interchanges with I @-@ 95 . Past this interchange , Route 31 continues north as an undivided road through a mix of residences with some businesses , meeting CR 546 and CR 640 at a traffic circle . It continues past the circle as a two @-@ lane , undivided road and bypasses Pennington to the west . The route briefly skirts into Pennington twice , where it is a divided highway as it crosses over CSX 's Trenton Subdivision . Route 31 enters Pennington again before heading back into Hopewell Township . Here , the road meets CR 640 ( North Main Street ) again , and heads north into farmland and woodland with some homes . It eventually turns to the northwest and crosses CR 518 ( Lambertville @-@ Hopewell Road ) . 
 = = = Hunterdon County = = = 
 Upon crossing CR 518 , Route 31 enters East Amwell Township , Hunterdon County and continues through rural areas . The route eventually forms the border between East Amwell Township and West Amwell Township and intersects CR 579 ( <unk> Road ) . The two routes run concurrent to the northwest , becoming a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane that crosses entirely into East Amwell Township before resuming along the border of East and West Amwell Townships . The road becomes a divided highway and crosses entirely into East Amwell Township again before it comes to an interchange with US 202 , where CR 579 continues north into Ringoes and Route 31 heads north along US 202 , a four @-@ lane , divided highway with intersections featuring jughandle ramps . 
 US 202 and Route 31 head to the north , coming to an intersection with Old York Road , which heads to the southwest as Route 179 and to the northeast as CR 514 . Past this intersection , the road forms the border between East Amwell Township to the west and Raritan Township to the east before crossing entirely into Raritan Township . The road continues north through farms , reaching commercial development as it approaches the Flemington area . The road widens to six lanes and crosses into Flemington . The road comes to the Flemington Circle where US 202 continues to the northeast , Route 12 heads to the west , and Route 31 continues to the north on a five @-@ lane , undivided road . 
 The route crosses back into Raritan Township , where it briefly becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway before reentering Flemington . Not long afterward , it heads into Raritan Township again , where it crosses CR 523 ( Walter E. Foran Boulevard ) and passes by the former site of Flemington Speedway , now a commercial development called Raritan Town Square . Route 31 passes through suburban development before turning into a four @-@ lane , divided highway with some intersections controlled by jughandles and crossing over Norfolk Southern 's Lehigh Line and the South Branch Raritan River into Readington Township . It continues north through a mix of farms and wooded areas with some residential areas , crossing into Clinton Township . 
 Route 31 comes to an interchange with I @-@ 78 and US 22 , where it turns to the northwest into a more developed setting and interchanges with Route 173 . The road runs through Clinton Town , where it crosses the South Branch Raritan River again . Back in Clinton Township , Route 31 intersects CR 513 ( Halstead Street ) , forming a concurrency with that route and running along the eastern shore of Spruce Run Reservoir . CR 513 splits from Route 31 by heading north on West Main Street and Route 31 continues north , narrowing to a two @-@ lane undivided road . The route crosses into Lebanon Township , where it heads northwest across the wooded Musconetcong Mountains . Route 31 passes through Glen Gardner , which it enters upon crossing <unk> Run , before heading into Hampton , where it heads west through that community as a three @-@ lane road with two southbound lanes and one northbound lane . 
 = = = Warren County = = = 
 Route 31 crosses the Musconetcong River into Washington Township , Warren County , where it heads north into the agricultural Musconetcong Valley . It heads into Washington Borough , where the road becomes four lanes , passing under Norfolk Southern 's Washington Secondary and crossing Route 57 ( Washington Avenue ) . Past the Route 57 intersection , Route 31 narrows to three lanes , and becomes a two @-@ lane road again as it crosses back into Washington Township at the Essex Road intersection . It heads into farmland before turning northwest and heading across Oxford Mountain , entering Mansfield Township . While crossing Oxford Mountain , Route 31 skirts along the border between Mansfield Township and Washington Township . The route enters Oxford Township , where it heads through the community of Oxford as a four @-@ lane road . Route 31 continues north through a mix of woods and agricultural areas past Oxford , crossing into White Township at the East Quarry Road intersection and coming to its terminus at US 46 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old roads and construction = = = 
 Before the state received ownership of Route 31 , the portion of the highway from Clinton to Oxford was part of the Spruce Run Turnpike . The turnpike was chartered by the New Jersey State Assembly on February 6 , 1813 and was maintained and tolled by the Spruce Run Turnpike Company . The turnpike served as a connector along the old Hopewell Road from modern @-@ day Lambertville ( then called Georgetown ) to New Brunswick . The road also served as a highly used connector route for the Jersey and <unk> wagon lines , which served both of the aforementioned communities . The route from Trenton to Pennington was part of the Pennington Turnpike , another privately maintained pre @-@ designation highway . The turnpike was chartered on March 17 , 1854 by the General Assembly along an alignment of the old Pennington Road . The turnpike road was to be constructed no further than 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) in breadth , and to be made out of stone , plank or gravel . The turnpike cost one cent for every carriage or sled pulled by horses or mules ( and one cent more for every animal ) , five mills for horse and rider and every dozen of pigs and sheep . It cost two cents to move a dozen cattle , mules or horses . Fines were levied as high as $ 10 ( 1854 USD ) to anyone who vandalized any structure along the turnpike . If the company did not construct their highway in six years , the state would then take over and make it a public highway . On November 1 , 1898 , the 7 @-@ mile ( 11 km ) long turnpike , made mostly of stone , was taken over by the state at a cost of $ 31 @,@ 661 @.@ 87 ( 1898 USD ) . Repairs were slated to be completed on the road by October 31 , 1899 . Also on March 17 , 1854 , the state legislature made the charter official for the Hopewell and Ewing Turnpike , which used the portion of Route 31 from Pennington to the current @-@ day intersection with CR 654 . The turnpike was taken over by the state in 1897 and the privately maintained company was dissolved . 
 The formation of current @-@ day Route 31 began around 1916 , when a portion of the highway , along the community of Hampton was taken over by the state and was repaired to state standards for $ 300 ( 1916 USD ) . In 1923 , the state of New Jersey passed the Good Roads Act , which greatly expanded the state highway system in New Jersey . This act took over pre @-@ existing highways and rebuilt them to a standard mandated by the state . Construction began on Route 31 in 1926 , when the State Highway Department began work at the southern terminus in Trenton . A total of 11 bridges were constructed along the highway during this time , signifying the route 's construction northward . The oldest ones , dating back to 1926 , were located in Ewing Township and Oxford Township . The one in Ewing Township was along the first portion of the highway to be constructed . By 1929 , the construction had reached Lawrence Township , where another long stretch of highway was built . During 1930 , the construction had reached Clinton , Glen Gardener , and Washington . Construction of the highway progressed northbound , with sections of the Mercer @-@ Hunterdon @-@ Warren route reaching Hunterdon County in 1931 . The Hunterdon County portion up to the Musconetcong River was constructed for six months , with completion in October 1931 . Construction of the highway northward from the Musconetcong River started in October of the same year . The mainline construction reached the northern terminus in Buttzville in 1932 . The route , although the construction had reached its northern end , was not complete due to bypasses around Clinton and Pennington were proposed to be built . These bypasses were never constructed , and during 1934 , more portions of the highway in Hunterdon County were finished . The route was completed in 1935 , providing an uninterrupted route from the capital city of Trenton to northern Warren County . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 What is today Route 31 was defined in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering as Route 30 , a highway that began in Trenton and ended in Buttzville . In the 1953 renumbering , Route 30 was renumbered as Route 69 , as the number conflicted with US 30 in southern New Jersey . The bypass of Ringoes , shared with US 202 , opened in the 1960s . Due to the sexual meaning of the number and resulting sign theft , Route 69 was changed in 1967 to Route 31 once all the signs were removed . The justification for the removal was that people were stealing signs as a trophy for dorm rooms because of their interest in the number 69 . 
 A limited @-@ access freeway was once planned to serve traffic along the Route 31 ( then Route 69 ) corridor . Plans came forth in the 1960s for a highway to run along Route 69 from the in @-@ construction US 1 freeway ( then designated Route 174 ) to the U.S. Route 202 freeway in Ringoes . The estimated cost to build the highway according to the proposal estimated to $ 18 million , with construction completing in 1975 . 
 There were plans to extend the freeway further in both directions , including northward to I @-@ 80 in Hope Township and southward to I @-@ 195 . Each of these two extensions were brought forth in the 1960s , and were later shelved due to lack of support . In the early 1970s , a 36 @-@ mile ( 58 km ) long extension of Route 31 was proposed from Oxford , connecting the highway with the proposed Route 23 freeway to I @-@ 84 near Port Jervis , New York . This northern freeway extension of Route 31 was to be known as Route F @-@ 31 and the Foothills Freeway , and was to run through the Kittatinny Mountains , passing through Stokes State Forest and High Point State Park . The proposal gave an estimated price tag of about $ 105 million ( 1970s USD ) . The northern freeway faced high opposition from residents living in Warren and Sussex counties , who feared environmental damage . A group called Opponents of the Foothills Freeway formed to prevent the road from being built . Along with the growing opposition , environmental and financial issues arose , causing the New Jersey Department of Transportation to cancel the Route 31 from being built mid @-@ 1970s . 
 Following the completion of I @-@ 287 's New Jersey portion in 1993 , more out @-@ of @-@ state tractor trailer drivers began to use the alignment of Route 31 as a toll @-@ free alternative to the New Jersey Turnpike . On July 16 , 1999 , oversize trucks were banned from using Route 31 as part of a larger statewide ban imposed on New Jersey roads not a part of the National Highway System by then @-@ governor Christine Todd Whitman . The legislation had a significant effect on trucks that followed Route 31 as it forced them to use I @-@ 287 and the New Jersey Turnpike instead . In the mid @-@ 2000s , the portion of Route 31 was widened during extensive construction between Flemington and Clinton that widened the road to four lanes . 
 = = = The South Branch Parkway = = = 
 In 2005 , the New Jersey Department of Transportation introduced a case study for Route 31 for its New Jersey : Future in Transportation project . Over time , the residents and business owners of Raritan Township and Flemington had growing concerns over the congestion along the highway and US 202 . After trying to use vacant land to the east of the current alignment , the Department of Transportation put forth the Flemington Bypass , trying to relieve congestion on Route 31 along the commercial district and to provide access to the industrial land between the two highways and the South Branch River . The project was never completed and the proposed site remains undeveloped . The Department of Transportation is now looking at a scaled @-@ down bypass , proposed as the South Branch Parkway , to connect Route 31 to US 202 in Flemington . 
 The parkway was to be built as a two @-@ lane alternative to Route 31 defining the border of the suburban and rural portions of Flemington Borough and Raritan Township . Along with the new parkway , a brand @-@ new local street network was proposed to help support the new alignment . These would minimize the pressure of traffic on Route 31 and include better roads for bicycles and pedestrians . More direct routes to different portions of the community would be provided to maintain the community 's character . The proposed parkway was to also help upgrade the sensitive history along the South Branch River . According to the 2008 highway plans , the South Branch Parkway would cost the state more than $ 2 @.@ 2 million ( 2008 USD ) in funds to put together the survey of lands in the proposed alignment . Some of these funds for the survey were originally intended to go towards the removal of the Flemington Circle . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hurricane Florence ( 1994 ) = 
 Hurricane Florence was a strong , late season hurricane that remained out over the open waters of the Central Atlantic for nearly a week , before being absorbed into a large extratropical cyclone . With peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 972 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 71 inHg ) , Florence was the strongest storm of the 1994 Atlantic hurricane season . Florence developed out of an area of low pressure associated with a stalled frontal system located 1 @,@ 150 mi ( 1 @,@ 850 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda in late October . The system gradually became better organized and was classified a subtropical depression on November 2 . The storm intensified into a subtropical storm shortly thereafter before weakening to a depression the next day . 
 After gaining tropical characteristics throughout most of the day on November 3 , the storm was designated Tropical Depression Eleven . The depression quickly strengthened into Tropical Storm Florence , the sixth named storm of the season . The storm briefly underwent rapid intensification , strengthening into a hurricane , before leveling out as a Category 1 hurricane . Florence was subsequently upgraded to a Category 2 hurricane on November 7 . However , a large extratropical cyclone located to the north caused the hurricane to rapidly accelerate , with forward speeds reaching 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) . By the next day , Florence lost its identity , while still producing hurricane @-@ force winds , as it was absorbed by the extratropical cyclone . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Florence can be traced back to an area of low pressure which developed in late October along a stationary front located 1 @,@ 150 mi ( 1 @,@ 850 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . The low gradually detached from the front and began developing convective banding features . The system was not fully tropical as the strongest winds were recorded a couple hundred miles from the center , leading to the system being classified a subtropical cyclone on the morning of November 2 . Minor intensification followed shortly after and the subtropical depression was upgraded to a subtropical storm . This was based on ship reports of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) sustained winds associated with the system . By November 3 , the storm became slightly disorganized and was downgraded to a subtropical depression . By the afternoon , the subtropical system began to undergo a transition from a subtropical system to tropical system . Later that day , the storm was classified Tropical Depression Eleven while located 875 mi ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . The depression was moving towards the northwest at 8 mph ( 13 km / h ) and the same general motion was expected as a large upper @-@ level low situated over the system was forecast to move towards the northeast , leading to Eleven moving around the periphery of the low . 
 The depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Florence the next morning . However , outflow from the storm remained poor as the upper @-@ level low was still interacting with the center of Florence and the storm was still not completely tropical but there was slight improvement . By the afternoon of November 4 , Florence completed its transition into a tropical cyclone and deep convection developed , causing the storm to quickly intensity ; with winds increasing by 20 mph ( 30 km / h ) in a 6 hour time period . The trend in intensification was forecast to continue and Florence was forecast to become the second hurricane of the season within 12 hours . Late on November 4 , Florence was upgraded to a hurricane as a solid area of deep convection developed around the center of circulation . An eye feature also appeared on infrared satellite but was not associated with significant strengthening . Florence slowly intensified as the eye persisted and the structure slightly improved . By the morning of November 6 , the eye became less defined and the cloud tops around it warmed . The storm also shifted its foreword motion northward as the trough located to the southeast began to move towards the east , moving the steering currents with it . As the low moved further to the east , steering currents in the area of Florence weakened , leading to the storm stalling late on November 6 . 
 By the morning of November 7 , the eye began to reappear and the storm turned towards the northwest and the foreword motion began to rapidly increase . Later that morning , Florence had developed a large , 35 to 40 mi ( 55 to 65 km / h ) wide eye and the foreword motion continued to increase . The intensification continued and by the afternoon hours , Florence was upgraded to a Category 2 hurricane with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . A strong extratropical cyclone located to the north of Florence was causing the storm to move towards the northwest at a rapid pace of 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) . Operationally , Florence was reported to have peaked at that intensity , but post season analysis determined that the storm reached its peak intensity just short of major hurricane — a storm with winds of 111 mph ( 178 km / h ) or higher — status late on November 7 . By the morning of November 8 , Florence weakened slightly to Category 1 status . The large system to the north continued to cause Florence to move at 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) . Since the storm was very close to a cold front , Florence was expected to rapidly transition into an extratropical cyclone . Later that morning , Florence was absorbed into the extratropical cyclone while still maintaining hurricane @-@ force winds . 
 = = Impact and naming = = 
 As Florence remained out over the open waters of the central Atlantic , no effects , damages , or fatalities were reported . No tropical storm watches or warnings were issued , and the storm was never forecast to strike land . 
 = Asama @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Asama @-@ class cruisers ( <unk> , Asama @-@ gata <unk> <unk> ) were a pair of armored cruisers built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the late 1890s . As Japan lacked the industrial capacity to build such warships herself , the ships were built in Britain . They were part of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " expansion program that began after the defeat of China during the First Sino @-@ Japanese War of 1894 – 95 . Between them , the sister ships participated in all four main naval battles of the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 — the Battle of Port Arthur , the Battle off Ulsan , the Battle of the Yellow Sea , and the Battle of Tsushima — but played a much more minor role in World War I. Asama ran aground while searching for German commerce raiders in early 1915 and was under repair for the next two years . Tokiwa participated in the Battle of Tsingtao and also searched for commerce raiders . Both ships made training cruises during the war and continued to do so after the war . 
 Asama continued to make training cruises until she ran aground again in 1935 , after which she became a stationary training ship for the rest of her career . Tokiwa was converted into a minelayer in 1922 – 24 . She was placed in reserve in 1927 after she was damaged by an accidental explosion of several mines . The ship became a training minelayer in 1940 . During the Pacific War , Tokiwa participated in the occupation of the Gilbert Islands and Rabaul and Kavieng in New Guinea . Damaged by American aircraft shortly afterwards , the ship was forced to return to Japan for repairs . Tokiwa laid minefields during 1944 – 45 until she was twice damaged by mines in 1945 . Shortly before the end of the war , the ship was badly damaged by American aircraft and her crew was forced to beach her . Tokiwa was salvaged in 1947 and subsequently broken up for scrap . Asama survived the war intact and was scrapped in 1946 – 47 . 
 = = Background and design = = 
 The 1896 Naval Expansion Plan was made after the First Sino @-@ Japanese War of 1894 – 95 and included four armored cruisers in addition to four more battleships , all of which had to be ordered from foreign shipyards as Japan lacked the capability to build them itself . Further consideration of the Russian building program caused the IJN to believe that the battleships ordered under the original plan would not be sufficient to counter the Imperial Russian Navy . Budgetary limitations prevented ordering more battleships and the IJN decided to expand the number of more affordable armored cruisers to be ordered from four to six ships . The revised plan is commonly known as the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " . These ships were purchased using the £ 30 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 indemnity paid by China after losing the First Sino @-@ Japanese War . Unlike most of their contemporaries which were designed for commerce raiding or to defend colonies and trade routes , these cruisers was intended as fleet scouts and to be employed in the battleline . 
 In June 1896 , Sir Andrew Noble , then in Japan , telegraphed Armstrong Whitworth to lay down two stock cruisers . Work then began on a preliminary design based on an improved version of the earlier Chilean cruiser O 'Higgins . Several iterations of the design were made before the IJN approved the final design on 21 August . This was over 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 016 t ) larger , more heavily armed , and slightly faster the Chilean armored cruiser . The first ship of the class was laid down in October although the Japanese did not order the ships until 6 July 1897 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The ships were 442 feet 0 inches ( 134 @.@ 72 m ) long overall and 408 feet 0 inches ( 124 @.@ 36 m ) between perpendiculars . They had a beam of 20 @.@ 48 meters ( 67 ft 2 in ) and had an average draft of 24 feet 3 inches – 24 feet 5 inches ( 7 @.@ 40 – 7 @.@ 43 m ) . The sisters displaced 9 @,@ 514 – 9 @,@ 557 long tons ( 9 @,@ 667 – 9 @,@ 710 t ) at normal load and 10 @,@ 311 – 10 @,@ 353 long tons ( 10 @,@ 476 – 10 @,@ 519 t ) at deep load . The ships had metacentric heights of 2 feet 9 inches – 2 feet 11 inches ( 0 @.@ 85 – 0 @.@ 88 m ) . Their crew consisted of 676 officers and enlisted men . 
 The Asama @-@ class ships had two 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , built by Humphrys , Tennant , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was provided by a dozen cylindrical boilers and the engines were rated at a total of 18 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) . The ships had a designed speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) and exceeded that speed during their sea trials , reaching 22 @.@ 07 – 23 @.@ 1 knots ( 40 @.@ 87 – 42 @.@ 78 km / h ; 25 @.@ 40 – 26 @.@ 58 mph ) from 19 @,@ 000 – 19 @,@ 040 ihp ( 14 @,@ 170 – 14 @,@ 200 kW ) . They carried up to 1 @,@ 390 long tons ( 1 @,@ 410 t ) of coal and could steam for 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament for all of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " armored cruisers was four Armstrong Whitworth @-@ built 45 @-@ caliber eight @-@ inch guns in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The electrically operated turrets were capable of 130 ° rotation left and right , and the guns could be elevated to + 30 ° and depressed to − 5 ° . The turret accommodated 65 shells , but could only be reloaded through doors in the turret floor and the ship 's deck that allowed the electric winch in the turret to hoist shells up from the shell room deep in the hull . A total of 120 shells were carried for each gun . The guns were manually loaded and had a rate of fire about 1 @.@ 2 rounds per minute . The 203 @-@ millimeter gun fired 250 @-@ pound ( 113 @.@ 5 kg ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 500 feet per second ( 760 m / s ) to a range of 13 @,@ 200 yards ( 12 @,@ 100 m ) . 
 The secondary armament consisted of fourteen Elswick Ordnance Company " Pattern Z " quick @-@ firing ( QF ) , 40 @-@ caliber , six @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . All but four of these guns were mounted in armored casemates on the main and upper decks , and their mounts on the upper deck were protected by gun shields . Their 100 @-@ pound ( 45 @.@ 4 kg ) AP shells were fired at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 300 feet per second ( 700 m / s ) . Each gun was provided with total of 150 shells per gun . The ships were also equipped with a dozen 40 @-@ caliber QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 @-@ cwt guns and eight QF 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Yamauchi guns as close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats . The former gun fired three @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) , 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 359 feet per second ( 719 m / s ) . 
 The Asama @-@ class ships were equipped with five submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes , two on each broadside , and one above water in the bow . The Type 30 torpedo had a 100 @-@ kilogram ( 220 lb ) warhead and three range / speed settings : 870 yards ( 800 m ) at 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) , 1 @,@ 100 yards ( 1 @,@ 000 m ) at 23 @.@ 6 knots ( 43 @.@ 7 km / h ; 27 @.@ 2 mph ) or 3 @,@ 300 yards ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) at 14 @.@ 2 knots ( 26 @.@ 3 km / h ; 16 @.@ 3 mph ) . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 All of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " armored cruisers used the same armor scheme with some minor differences , with the Asama class using Harvey armor . The waterline belt ran the full length of the ships and its thickness varied from 7 @.@ 0 inches ( 178 mm ) amidships to 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 89 mm ) at the bow and stern . The thickest part of the belt covered the middle of the ship for a length of 284 feet 2 inches ( 86 @.@ 62 m ) . It had a height of 7 feet 0 inches ( 2 @.@ 13 m ) , of which 4 feet 11 inches to 5 feet 0 inches ( 1 @.@ 51 to 1 @.@ 52 m ) was normally underwater . The upper strake of belt armor was 5 @.@ 0 inches ( 127 mm ) thick and extended from the upper edge of the waterline belt to the main deck . It extended 214 feet 8 inches ( 65 @.@ 42 m ) from the forward to the rear barbette . The Asama @-@ class ships had a single transverse 5 @-@ inch armored bulkhead that closed off the forward end of the central armored citadel . 
 The barbettes , gun turrets and the front of the casemates were all 6 inches thick while the sides and rear of the casemates were protected by 51 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of armor . The above @-@ water torpedo tube in the bow was enclosed by a 23 @-@ by @-@ 9 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 0 by 2 @.@ 7 m ) patch of 6 @-@ inch armor . The armor protecting the conning tower was 356 millimeters ( 14 @.@ 0 in ) in thickness . In addition to the Harvey armor , the Asama @-@ class ships were unique among the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " cruisers in that their armored deck was 51 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The ships had 32 watertight compartments in their double bottom and an additional 131 between the bottom and the upper deck . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 Before the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War in 1904 , Tokiwa supported Japanese forces during the Boxer Rebellion in China while Asama participated in the Coronation Review for King Edward VII in 1902 . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 At the beginning of the Russo @-@ Japanese War the sisters were assigned to the 2nd Division of the 2nd Fleet , although Asama was attached to the 4th Division of Rear Admiral Uryū Sotokichi for operations near Seoul , Korea . Just before the war began , the ship escorted Japanese troop convoys to Chemulpo , Seoul 's port on the west coast , and helped to sink the two Russian warships stationed there on the first day of the war . Tokiwa participated in the Battle of Port Arthur that same day , when Vice Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō led the Combined Fleet in an attack on the Russian ships of the Pacific Squadron anchored just outside Port Arthur . Tōgō had expected the earlier surprise night attack by his destroyers to be much more successful than it was , anticipating that the Russians would be badly disorganized and weakened , but they had recovered from their surprise and were ready for his attack . 
 In early March Tokiwa was reassigned to the 3rd Division and Asama joined her shortly afterwards . They participated in the action of 13 April when Tōgō successfully lured out two battleships of the Russian Pacific Squadron . During this action , the sisters engaged the Russian cruisers that preceded the battleships before falling back on Tōgō 's battleships . When the Russians spotted the five battleships of the 1st Division , they turned back for Port Arthur and the battleship Petropavlovsk struck a minefield laid by the Japanese the previous night . The ship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded . 
 Tokiwa rejoined the 2nd Division a few days later and the division was tasked to contain the Russian armored cruisers based at Vladivostok . It failed to do so until 13 August when the latter tried to rendezvous with the ships that attempted to breakout from Port Arthur . Unbeknownst to the Russians , Tōgō had defeated the ships from Port Arthur during the Battle of the Yellow Sea on 10 August and the Russian squadron from Vladivostok was intercepted off Ulsan , Korea by the 2nd Division . The steering of the Russian cruiser Rurik was damaged early in the battle and the Russians made several attempts to prevent the Japanese from concentrating fire on her , but were ultimately forced to abandon her to her fate . Kamimura left Rurik to the tender ministrations of his reinforcements and pursued the two remaining Russian ships for a time before breaking off pursuit prematurely based on an incorrect report that his flagship had expended most of her ammunition . Tokiwa only suffered three men wounded during the battle . 
 In the meantime , Asama remained on blockade duty off Port Arthur and participated in a minor way in the Battle of the Yellow Sea . She was coaling when the Pacific Squadron sortied and took some time to intercept the Russian ships . The battle was almost over by then and the ship only engaged them for the last hour or so of the battle . After the battle , the sisters were refitted and assigned to different units , escorting troop convoys to northern Korea and blockading the Tsugaru Strait until the Russian ships from the Baltic Fleet approached Japan in mid @-@ 1905 . 
 = = = = Battle of Tsushima = = = = 
 The Russian 2nd and 3rd Pacific Squadrons were spotted on the morning on 27 May 1905 and Tōgō ordered his ships to put to sea . Asama and Tokiwa were assigned to the 2nd Division in anticipation of this battle and Kamimura 's ships confirmed the initial spotting later that morning before joining Tōgō 's battleships . Together with most of the Japanese battleships , the division opened fire at 14 : 10 on the Russian battleship Oslyabya . Shortly afterwards , Asama was damaged by a shell that knocked out her steering that forced her to fall out of formation . Around 15 : 35 , the Russian battleship Knyaz Suvorov suddenly appeared out of the mist at short range . Kamimura 's ships engaged her for five minutes before she disappeared back into the mists . Asama rejoined the division at 15 : 50 , but further hits caused serious flooding that again caused her to fall out of formation about 20 minutes later . She finally caught up to the division at 17 : 05 . Shortly afterwards , Kamimura led his division in a fruitless pursuit of some of the Russian cruisers around 17 : 30 . He abandoned his chase around 18 : 03 and encountered the Russian battleline about a half @-@ hour later . He stayed at long range and his ships fired when practicable before ceasing fire at 19 : 30 . 
 The surviving Russian ships were spotted the next morning and the Japanese ships opened fire and stayed beyond the range at which the Russian ships could effectively reply . Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov therefore decided to surrender his ships as he could neither return fire nor close the range . During the battle , Asama was struck by about a dozen shells that killed 11 men and wounded 13 more . In contrast , Tokiwa was struck by eight shells that caused only minor damage , but killed 1 crewman and wounded 14 . After the battle , the division covered amphibious landings in northeastern Korea in July and August before the war ended . 
 = = = Subsequent service = = = 
 In 1910 – 11 and 1914 , Asama served as a training ship , making cruises with naval cadets to North and Central American and Hawaii , among other destinations . After the start of World War I in August 1914 , she was assigned to search for Vice Admiral Maximilian von Spee 's German East Asia Squadron in the South Sea Islands . In late October , the ship was ordered to blockade a German gunboat in Honolulu , Hawaii before she was assigned to the American Expeditionary Squadron , the Japanese component of a joint Anglo @-@ Japanese command to protect shipping of the western coast of the Americas , off the Mexican coast after the gunboat was interned in early November . The squadron then spent the next several months for German commerce raiders . 
 While entering Puerto San Bartolomé in Baja California in early 1915 , Asama struck an uncharted rock and was badly damaged . It took months to refloat her and to make her partially seaworthy . The ship was given temporary repairs at the British naval base at Esquimalt , British Columbia before arriving back in Japan in December where permanent repairs were not completed until March 1917 . Asama was assigned to the Training Squadron later that year and made another cadet training cruise in 1918 . 
 Tokiwa supported Japanese forces during the Battle of Tsingtao before returning to Sasebo in October 1914 . She was assigned to the Training Squadron in 1916 in preparation for a training cruise that she made the following year . After arriving home , the ship was deployed to Hawaii in October 1917 to protect shipping from German commerce raiders and to allow the US Navy to redeploy its forces to the Atlantic . Tokiwa made two more cruises in 1919 – 20 before she began conversion into a minelayer in 1922 – 24 . To accommodate her 200 – 300 mines , her rear 8 @-@ inch gun turret removed , as were the six 6 @-@ inch guns on the main deck . In addition , the number of light guns was reduced to two 12 @-@ pounders , although two 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns were added . The gun had a maximum elevation of + 75 degrees , and could fire a 3 @-@ inch , 12 @.@ 5 lb ( 5 @.@ 67 kg ) projectile with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 200 ft / s ( 680 m / s ) to a maximum height of 23 @,@ 600 feet ( 7 @,@ 200 m ) . 
 Asama made a training cruise in 1921 before her armament was modified in 1922 . All of her main deck guns , six 6 @-@ inch and four 12 @-@ pounder guns , were removed and their casemates plated over . In addition all of her QF 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder guns were removed and a single 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type AA gun was added . After the refit , she resumed her training cruises , generally at two @-@ year intervals , until she ran aground in 1935 . The damage to her bottom was severe enough that the IJN decided make her a stationary training ship in 1938 . 
 Tokiwa 's stern was badly damaged in an accidental explosion 1927 when fuzed mines were being disarmed . One mine detonated and then several others followed , killing 35 crewmen and wounding 65 . The ship was assigned to the reserve fleet after repairs . She patrolled Chinese waters after the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931 . In 1937 – 38 , Tokiwa was retrofitted with eight Kampon water @-@ tube boilers that reduced her maximum speed to 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) and her remaining torpedo tubes were removed . The space made available by these changes increased her capacity to 500 mines . In 1940 , the ship was refitted as a training minelayer which reduced her capacity to 200 @-@ 300 mines . As part of the refit , her forward 8 @-@ inch gun turret and the four amidships 6 @-@ inch guns were removed , as was one of the 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type AA guns . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament was heavily reinforced with the addition of two single 40 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) guns and twenty license @-@ built Hotchkiss 25 @-@ millimeter Type 96 light AA guns in twin @-@ gun mounts . The 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) weapon was the standard Japanese light anti @-@ aircraft gun during World War II , but it suffered from severe design shortcomings that rendered it a largely ineffective weapon . The twin and triple mounts lacked sufficient speed in train or elevation ; the gun sights were unable to handle fast targets ; the gun exhibited excessive vibration ; the magazine was too small and , finally , the gun produced excessive muzzle blast . The weapon had a maximum range of 24 @,@ 600 feet ( 7 @,@ 500 m ) , but effective range was only about 4 @,@ 900 – 9 @,@ 800 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 m ) . 
 = = = The Pacific War = = = 
 A few days after the attack on Pearl Harbor , Tokiwa and the other minelayers of the 19th Division of the 4th Fleet escorted two troop transports that carried the occupation forces for the Gilbert Islands . In January 1942 , the ship participated in Operation R ( the invasion of Rabaul and Kavieng ) and returned to Kwajalein Atoll afterwards . She was damaged by American carrier aircraft in February 1942 and forced to return home for repairs . Tokiwa returned to Truk on 14 July , and reoccupied Makin Atoll the following month after the Makin Raid . 
 The ship returned home in 1943 and began to lay defensive minefields in 1944 . She was moderately damaged by a mine in April 1945 and struck an American mine two months later . By this time , her armament had been augmented with approximately ten 25 mm Type 96 AA guns in single mounts and 80 depth charges . In addition Tokiwa was fitted with Type 3 , Mark 1 , Model 3 and Type 2 , Mark 2 , Model 1 air search radars . While in northern Japan a few days before the end of the war , Tokiwa was severely damaged by American carrier aircraft and had to be beached by her crew lest she sink . 
 Asama was reclassified as a training ship in 1942 and became a gunnery training ship later that year . She was disarmed at some point during the war , only retaining several 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type anti @-@ aircraft guns , . The ship survived the war intact and she and Tokiwa were stricken from the navy list in November 1945 . Asama was scrapped in 1946 – 47 while Tokiwa was refloated in 1947 and scrapped that same year . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = Sybil Plumlee = 
 Sybil Virginia Plumlee ( née Burgess ; April 29 , 1911 – January 6 , 2012 ) was an American teacher , caseworker , and police officer who served in Portland , Oregon 's Women 's Protective Division , a special unit of the Portland Police Bureau , from 1947 to 1967 . She is recognized as a pioneer in the law enforcement field , which has historically been dominated by men . 
 Born in Seattle in 1911 , Plumlee attended high school in Portland and then graduated from Oregon Normal School , now known as Western Oregon University . She became a school teacher in Clarno , Oregon , but later returned to Portland , where she married and had a son . Following a divorce in 1943 , she worked as an educator with the Ellis Mining Company in Bourne , Oregon . In 1945 , she married Virgil " Paul " Plumlee , who died in 2010 . 
 Plumlee wrote an unpublished memoir of her experiences on the police force , called Badge 357 . At age 96 , she published Stories of Hester Ann Bolin Harvey and Her Family , a collection of family stories and history . Plumlee was the oldest living former member of the city 's police force prior to her death in 2012 . 
 = = Early life , education , and teaching career = = 
 Sybil Virginia Burgess was born on April 29 , 1911 , in Seattle , Washington . She was the daughter of Charles and Stella Burgess . The family moved to Portland , where she attended both Lincoln High School and Jefferson High School , graduating from Jefferson in 1930 . After graduating from Oregon Normal School ( now known as Western Oregon University ) in 1932 , she spent some time working as a teacher in a single @-@ room school located in Clarno , Oregon . She returned to Portland , married Lloyd Barker ( who was also an instructor ) , and had a son , Louis Barker . The couple divorced in 1943 . 
 After the divorce , Sybil worked during World War II as a teacher for the Ellis Mining Company in Bourne , Oregon , and buying a $ 150 house in nearby Sumpter for herself and her son . Plumlee also occasionally worked as a soda fountain clerk at a drugstore in northeast Portland , and as a cab driver . In 1945 , she married Virgil P. " Paul " Plumlee . She survived the 1948 flood that destroyed Vanport , Oregon . 
 = = Police career = = 
 While Plumlee was working as a caseworker for the welfare department of Clackamas County , a woman police officer encouraged her to take a civil service test . She passed the test , and was selected from a pool of 300 applicants to fill the Portland Police Bureau 's only open position . According to Louis Barker , his mother became a police officer " for the money " rather than to " make the world safe " . The family needed her income : Paul , a World War II veteran , suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder and had difficulty holding steady jobs , and Plumlee was also contributing to the support of her aging mother . She served in the unit known as the known as the Women 's Protective Division from 1947 to 1967 . <unk> in that division did not work with male officers other than those assigned to the Juvenile Division , and did not wear uniforms . Their work focused on crimes like child abuse , domestic violence , and rape . 
 Plumlee often responded to cases involving child abuse or abandonment . Records show that she also participated in undercover investigations , including an anti @-@ homosexual campaign organized by Mayor of Portland Dorothy McCullough Lee . In 1949 , the Women 's Protective Division sent Plumlee and Edna Trout to Music Hall , which was known at the time for catering to gay men and lesbians , with the intention to " apprehend lesbians who might approach them and solicit attentions " . Plumlee also helped educate women on how to avoid victimization . In a 1955 article by The Oregonian called " <unk> Beware " , she was photographed illustrating how a woman might be susceptible to pickpocketing by opening her <unk> in public . In 1957 , the paper published a photograph of Plumlee and five other women at a shooting range , with the caption : " Feminine pistol team makes good showing in contest with all @-@ male team from North precinct as <unk> tournament gets under way " . In 1959 , two brothers were charged with disorderly conduct and destroying city property after tearing the speaker system from a police car occupied by Plumlee and another female officer . Plumlee also participated in civic events such as luncheons . At a 1964 Portland Yacht Club luncheon called " Women with the Badge " , she told female attendees how they should protect themselves and their children . In 1967 , she presented slides depicting dangers to women on urban streets to the Women 's Council of the Portland Board of Realtors at the Hoyt Hotel . 
 Plumlee later said of the unit : " In some ways , the old Women 's Protective Division was archaic , but on balance we did a lot of good . " She is recognized as a pioneer in the largely male @-@ dominated law enforcement field . As of 2006 , women doing police work in the United States were about 14 percent of the total number of police . 
 = = Later life , writing , and other interests = = 
 Plumlee purchased her first computer when she was in her eighties , and continued driving until age 98 . Plumlee wrote an unpublished memoir of her experiences on the police force , which was called Badge 357 . At age 96 , she published the book Stories of Hester Ann Bolin Harvey and Her Family . The collection of stories , including one of her grandmother 's journey across the Oregon Trail in 1850 , included photographs and more than a century of her family history . Plumlee also enjoyed camping , fishing , genealogy , and traveling . 
 Her husband Paul died in 2010 . In 2011 , she celebrated her centennial birthday at her residence in Lake Oswego , Oregon . Guests included Multnomah County Sheriff Daniel Staton , her great @-@ niece Lieutenant Mary <unk> , also from the Multnomah County Sheriff 's Office , and Frank Springer , then age 99 and the oldest living male retiree of the Portland Police Bureau . Birthday wishes and certificates of appreciation were also presented to her from President Barack Obama and Mayor of Portland Sam Adams . 
 Plumlee died in 2012 , and was survived by her son , three grandchildren , and four great @-@ grandchildren . Before her death , Plumlee was the oldest surviving former member of the Portland Police Bureau . 
 = Géza II of Hungary = 
 Géza II ( Hungarian : II . Géza ; Croatian : Gejza II ; Slovak : Gejza II ; 1130 – 31 May 1162 ) was King of Hungary and Croatia from 1141 to 1162 . He was the oldest son of Béla the Blind and his wife , Helena of Rascia . When his father died , Géza was still a child and he started ruling under the guardianship of his mother and her brother , Beloš . A pretender to the throne , Boris Kalamanos , who had already claimed Hungary during Béla the Blind 's reign , temporarily captured Pressburg ( now Bratislava in Slovakia ) with the assistance of German mercenaries in early 1146 . In retaliation , Géza , who came of age in the same year , invaded Austria and routed Henry Jasomirgott , Margrave of Austria , in the Battle of the Fischa . 
 Although the German – Hungarian relations remained tense , no major confrontations occurred when the German crusaders marched through Hungary in June 1147 . Two months later , Louis VII of France and his crusaders arrived , along with Boris Kalamanos who attempted to take advantage of the crusade to return to Hungary . Louis VII refused to extradite Boris to Géza , but prevented the pretender from coming into contacts with his supporters in Hungary and took him to Constantinople . Géza joined the coalition that Louis VII and Roger II of Sicily formed against Conrad III of Germany and the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Komnenos . The ancestors of the Transylvanian Saxons came to Hungary during Géza 's reign . Western European knights and Muslim warriors from the Pontic steppes also settled in Hungary in this period . Géza even allowed his Muslim soldiers to take concubines . 
 Géza intervened at least six times in the fights for Kiev on behalf of Iziaslav II of Kiev either by sending reinforcements or by personally leading his troops to the Kievan Rus ' between 1148 and 1155 . He also waged wars against the Byzantine Empire on behalf of his allies , including the Serbs of Rascia , but could not prevent the Byzantines from restoring their suzerainty over them . Conflicts emerged between Géza and his brothers , Stephen and Ladislaus , who fled from Hungary and settled in Emperor Manuel 's court in Constantinople . Géza supported Frederick I , Holy Roman Emperor , against the Lombard League with auxiliary troops between 1158 and 1160 . After the cardinals who supported Emperor Frederick I elected Victor IV pope , Géza acknowledged his legitimacy in 1160 , but in a year , he changed sides and concluded a concordat with Victor IV 's opponent , Pope Alexander III . Before his death , Géza organized a separate appanage duchy for his younger son , Béla . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Géza was born the eldest son of Béla the Blind , a cousin of King Stephen II of Hungary , and Helena of Raška in 1130 . Géza 's father had been blinded , together with his rebellious father , Álmos , in the 1110s on the order of Stephen II 's father , Coloman , King of Hungary , who wanted to ensure Stephen 's succession . When Géza was born , his parents lived on an estate that King Stephen had granted them in Tolna . Géza 's father succeeded King Stephen in the spring of 1131 . In the same year , Queen Helena took Géza and his younger brother , Ladislaus , to an assembly held at Arad , where she ordered the massacre of sixty @-@ eight noblemen " by whose counsel the King had been blinded " , according to the Illuminated Chronicle . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Minor king ( 1141 – 1146 ) = = = 
 King Béla died on 13 February 1141 and Géza succeeded him without opposition . The eleven @-@ year @-@ old Géza was crowned king on 16 February . During his regency , his mother and her brother , Beloš , ruled the kingdom in the first years of his reign . 
 One of Géza 's first charters , issued in 1141 , confirmed the privileges of the citizens of Split in Dalmatia . In the charter , Géza is titled as " By the Grace of God , King of Hungary , Dalmatia , Croatia and Rama " . According to historian Paul Stephenson , the towns of central Dalmatia — including Šibenik and Trogir — accepted Géza 's suzerainty after a Hungarian invasion around 1142 . Hungarian troops assisted Prince <unk> of Halych — who had been the ally of Géza 's father against the pretender Boris — when Great Prince Vsevolod II of Kiev invaded Halych in 1144 . Although the Hungarian auxiliaries " were of no use whatsoever " , according to the Hypatian Codex , the grand prince could not occupy <unk> 's principality . 
 Boris was the son of Eufemia of Kiev , King Coloman of Hungary 's second wife , whom the king expelled on the charge of adultery before Boris 's birth . According to the chronicler Bishop Otto of Freising , Boris approached Conrad III of Germany to seek his assistance against Géza at the end of 1145 . Upon the recommendation of Vladislav II of Bohemia , the German monarch authorized Boris to muster an army of mercenaries in Bavaria and Austria . Boris stormed Hungary and took the fortress of Pressburg ( present @-@ day Bratislava in Slovakia ) . The royal forces soon imposed a blockade on the fortress and convinced Boris 's mercenaries to surrender without resistance in exchange for compensation . 
 The Hungarians blamed Conrad III for Boris 's attack and decided to invade the Holy Roman Empire . Before crossing the river Lajta ( now Leitha in Austria ) , which marked the western border of Hungary , the sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Géza was girded with a sword in token of his coming of age . In the Battle of the Fischa on 11 September , the Hungarian army under the command of Géza and Beloš routed the German troops led by Henry Jasomirgott , Margrave of Austria . 
 = = = Crusaders ' march across Hungary ( 1146 – 1147 ) = = = 
 Géza married Euphrosyne , sister of Grand Prince Iziaslav II of Kiev , in the second half of 1146 . German – Hungarian relations remained tense as Boris attempted to take advantage of Conrad III 's decision to lead a crusade to the Holy Land through Hungary . However Géza , who knew that " he could conquer more easily by gold than by force , poured out much money among the Germans and thus escaped an attack from them , " according to the chronicler Odo of Deuil . The German crusaders marched across Hungary without major incident in June 1147 . 
 The Illuminated Chronicle relates that some Hungarian noblemen promised Boris " if he could make his way into the kingdom , many would take him for their lord and , deserting the King , would cleave to him . " Boris convinced two French noblemen to assist by hiding him among the French crusaders who followed the Germans towards the Holy Land . King Louis VII of France and his crusaders arrived in Hungary in August . Géza learnt that his opponent was with the French and demanded his extradition . Although Louis VII rejected this demand , he held Boris in custody and " took him out of Hungary , " according to Odo of Deuil . Having left Hungary , Boris settled in the Byzantine Empire . 
 = = = Active foreign policy ( 1147 – 1155 ) = = = 
 Disputes among European powers led to the formation of two coalitions in the late 1140s . One alliance was formed by the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Komnenos and Conrad III against Roger II of Sicily who had invaded Byzantine territories . Géza sided with Roger II and his allies , including the rebellious German prince , Welf VI and Uroš II of Rascia . Géza sent reinforcements to his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Grand Prince Iziaslav II , against Prince Vladimir of Chernigov in the spring of 1148 . The Serbs of Rascia rebelled in 1149 , forcing Emperor Manuel I to interrupt his preparations for an invasion of Southern Italy and invade Rascia in 1149 . According to the emperor 's panegyrist Theodore Prodromus , Hungarian forces supported the Serbs during the emperor 's campaign . The Hypatian Codex says that Géza referred to his war against Emperor Manuel when excusing himself for refusing to send reinforcements to Iziaslav II whom Yuri Dolgorukiy , Prince of Suzdal , expelled from Kiev in August 1149 . Hungarian auxiliaries supported Iziaslav II to reoccupy Kiev in the early spring of 1150 , but before long Yuri Dolgorukiy expelled Iziaslav from the town . In autumn , Géza led his army against Volodimirko of Halych , who was Yuri Dolgorukiy 's close ally . He captured Sanok , but Volodimirko bribed the Hungarian commanders , who persuaded Géza to leave Halych before November . 
 A " countless allied force of Hungarian cavalry as well as of the heterodox <unk> " had supported the Serbs in the same year , according to the contemporaneous John Kinnamos , but the Byzantine army routed their united troops on the river Tara in September . The Byzantine victory forced Uroš II of Rascia to acknowledge the emperor 's suzerainty . Emperor Manuel launched a retaliatory campaign against Hungary and ravaged the lands between the rivers Sava and Danube . Assisted by Byzantine troops , the pretender Boris also broke into Hungary and devastated the valley of the river Temes . Géza , who had just returned from Halych , did not want to " involve the remaining Hungarian force in destruction " and sued for peace . The peace treaty was signed in late 1150 or early 1151 . 
 Géza met Henry Jasomirgott which contributed to the normalization of their strained relations in 1151 . He sent reinforcements to Iziaslav II who again reoccupied Kiev before April 1151 . Three months later , Volodimirko of Halych routed a Hungarian army that was marching towards Kiev . Frederick Barbarossa , the newly elected King of Germany , demanded the German princes ' consent to wage war against Hungary at the Imperial Diet of June 1152 , but the princes refused him " for certain obscure reasons " , according to Otto of Freising . Géza invaded Halych in the summer of 1152 . The united armies of Géza and Iziaslav defeated Volodimirko 's troops at the San River , forcing Volodimirko to sign a peace treaty with Iziaslav . Pope Eugenius III sent his envoys to Hungary to strengthen the " faith and discipline " of the Hungarian church . Géza forbade the papal envoys to enter Hungary , which shows that his relationship with the Holy See had deteriorated . 
 Géza planned to invade <unk> — the Byzantine province along the Lower Danube — in the spring of 1153 . According to John Kinnamos , Géza sought vengeance for Manuel 's invasion of 1150 ; on the other hand , Michael of Thessalonica wrote that Géza prevented Emperor Manuel from invading Southern Italy . However , the emperor , who had been informed of Géza 's plan , marched to the Danube . Géza sent his envoys to the emperor and a new peace treaty was signed in <unk> ( now Sofia in Bulgaria ) . In accordance with the peace treaty , the Byzantines released their Hungarian prisoners of wars , according to Abū Hāmid al @-@ <unk> , a Muslim traveler from Granada who lived in Hungary between 1150 and 1153 . 
 Abū Hāmid stated that every country feared Géza 's attack , " because of the many armies he has at his disposal and his great courage " . The Muslim traveler observed that Géza employed Muslim soldiers who had been recruited from among the peoples of the Eurasian steppes . Abū Hāmid even urged the soldiers to make " every effort to go on jihad " with Géza " for thus God [ would ] set down the merit of Holy War to [ their ] account " . Géza allowed his Muslim subjects to take concubines , which stirred up the Hungarian clergy . He also invited Western European ( primarily German ) knights to settle in Hungary . For instance , he made a land grant to two knights , named Gottfried and Albert , who had " abandoned their homeland " upon his invitation in the 1150s . Some years earlier , one <unk> of <unk> sold his patrimony in the region of Aachen before departing to Hungary from where he never returned to his homeland . According to the Diploma Andreanum of 1224 , which spelled out the privileges of the Transylvanian Saxons , their ancestors were invited by Géza to settle in southern Transylvania . 
 Pope Anastasius IV declared Géza 's rule in Dalmatia unlawful in October 1154 . Emperor Manuel 's cousin , Andronikos Komnenos , who administered Belgrade , Braničevo and Niš sent a letter to Géza in 1154 , offering to hand over those towns to Géza in exchange for Géza 's support against the emperor . Géza sent his envoys to Sicily to sign a new alliance with William I of Sicily around the end of the year , but William I was fighting with his rebellious subjects . Although <unk> <unk> 's plot was discovered and he was captured , Géza invaded the Byzantine Empire and laid siege to Braničevo in late 1154 . After hearing of the imprisonment of Andronikus Komnenos , Géza abandoned the siege and returned to Hungary . A Byzantine general , Basil <unk> , launched an attack on the Hungarian army , but Géza annihilated the Byzantine forces before returning to Hungary . In early 1155 , the Byzantine and Hungarian envoys signed a new peace treaty . In the same year , a Byzantine army expelled Géza 's ally , Desa , from Rascia and restored Uroš II , who had promised that he would not enter into an alliance with Hungary . 
 = = = Last years ( 1155 – 1162 ) = = = 
 Frederick Barbarossa , who had been crowned Holy Roman Emperor , received the envoys of Manuel I in Nuremberg in July 1156 . The Byzantine envoys proposed a joint invasion of Hungary , but Barbarossa refused their offer . On 16 September , Barbarossa stipulated that the dukes of Austria were to support the Holy Roman emperors during a war against Hungary in his charter by which he elevated Austria to a duchy , showing that the relationship between Hungary and the Holy Roman Empire was still tense . Barbarossa 's close advisor , Daniel , Bishop of Prague , visited Hungary in the summer of 1157 . On this occasion , Géza promised that he would support Barbarossa with auxiliary troops if the emperor invaded Italy . 
 Géza 's youngest brother , Stephen , started conspiring with their uncle , Beloš , and other lords against Géza , according to the nearly contemporaneous <unk> . To avoid a civil war , Géza first ordered the persecution of Stephen 's partisans , then had his rebellious brother expelled from the kingdom and even sentenced to death . Niketas Choniates also recorded that Stephen had been " forced to flee from the murderous clutches " of Géza . Géza 's uncle , Beloš , was not mentioned in royal charters issued after March 1157 , which suggest that he left Hungary after that date . During the summer of that year , Stephen fled to the Holy Roman Empire , seeking Emperor Frederick 's protection against Géza . Upon the emperor 's demand , Géza accepted Frederick Barbarossa as arbitrator in his conflict with Stephen and sent his envoys to Regensburg in January 1158 . However , Barbarossa " decided to defer to a more suitable time the settlement " of the quarrel between Géza and Stephen and departed for his campaign against the Lombard League . In accordance with his former promise , Géza sent a troop of 5 – 600 archers to accompany the emperor to Italy . Before long , Géza 's brother , Stephen , left for the Byzantine Empire and settled in Constantinople where he married Emperor Manuel 's niece Maria Komnene . Within two years , he was joined by his brother , Ladislaus , who fled from Hungary around 1160 . 
 Frederick Barbarossa forced the Italian towns to surrender in September 1158 . However , Milan and Crema again rose up in open rebellion against the emperor 's rule after the Diet of <unk> ordered the restoration of imperial rights , including the emperor 's rights to levy taxes in the Northern Italian towns . Géza sent his envoys to Barbarossa 's camp and promised to dispatch further reinforcements against the rebellious towns . 
 The death of Pope Adrian IV on 1 September 1159 caused a schism , because the college of the cardinals was divided : the majority of the cardinals was opposed to Barbarossa 's policy , but a minority supported him . The first group elected Alexander III pope , but Barbarossa 's supporters chose Victor IV . Emperor Frederick summoned a synod to Pavia to put an end to the schism . Géza sent his envoys to the church council where Victor IV was declared the lawful pope in February 1160 . However , Lucas , Archbishop of Esztergom , remained loyal to Alexander III and persuaded Géza to start negotiations with the representatives of Alexander III . Géza only decided to change sides after most European monarchs , including the kings of Sicily , England and France , joined Alexander III . Géza 's envoys announced his decision to Alexander III in early 1161 , but Géza only informed the emperor of his recognition of Alexander III in the autumn of the same year . 
 Géza 's and Alexander III 's envoys signed a concordat in the summer of 1161 . According to that treaty , Géza promised that he would not depose or transfer prelates without the consent of the Holy See ; on the other hand , the pope acknowledged that no papal legates could be sent to Hungary without the king 's permission and the Hungarian prelates were only allowed to appeal to the Holy See with the king 's consent . He also signed a truce for five years with the Byzantine Empire . Shortly before his death , Géza granted Dalmatia , Croatia and other territories to his younger son , Béla , as an appanage duchy . Géza died on 31 May 1162 and was buried in Székesfehérvár . 
 = = Family = = 
 Géza 's wife , Euphrosyne of Kiev , was a daughter of Grand Prince Mstislav I of Kiev . She survived Géza and died around 1193 . Their first child , Stephen , was born in the summer of 1147 ; he succeeded Géza in 1162 . His younger brother , Béla , was born in about 1148 ; he inherited Hungary after the death of Stephen in 1172 . Géza 's third son and namesake , Géza , was born in the 1150s . The youngest son of Géza and Euphrosyne , Árpád , did not survive childhood . Géza 's and Euphrosyne 's oldest daughter , Elizabeth , was given in marriage to Frederick of Bohemia , who was the heir to Vladislaus II , Duke of Bohemia , in 1157 . The second daughter , <unk> , married Vladislaus II of Bohemia 's younger son , <unk> , in 1164 . The third daughter of Géza and Euphrosyne , Helena , became the wife of Leopold V of Austria in 1174 . 
 = System 6 = 
 System 6 ( also referred to as System Software 6 ) is a graphical user interface @-@ based operating system for Macintosh computers . It was released in 1988 by Apple Computer and was part of the Mac OS line of operating systems . System 6 was shipped with various Macintosh computers until it was succeeded by System 7 in 1991 . The boxed version of System 6 cost $ 49 when introduced . System 6 is classed as a monolithic operating system . It featured an improved MultiFinder , which allowed for co @-@ operative multitasking . 
 = = Main features = = 
 = = = MacroMaker = = = 
 A new feature called MacroMaker was included with System 6 . When enabled , it allowed users to record mouse and keyboard input as " macros . " MacroMaker had a unique user interface , which aimed to look and act like a tape recorder . MacroMaker was criticized for its lack of features when compared to Microsoft 's <unk> III , which was already available commercially . As MacroMaker only recorded the locations of mouse @-@ clicks inside windows and not what was being clicked or exactly when , users soon found that it could not be used to automate more sophisticated programs . The pre @-@ recorded clicks would miss buttons if they had moved or failed to appear upon playback . MacroMaker was not compatible with System 7 , which marked the introduction of <unk> as an alternative . 
 = = = Multitasking = = = 
 Cooperative multitasking made its Macintosh debut in March 1985 with a program called Switcher by Andy <unk> , which allowed the user to launch multiple applications and switch between them . Many programs and features did not function correctly with Switcher . Also , Switcher did not display windows of other applications beside the selected one . It was not included with the operating system , but was available from Apple for purchase separately . Both System 5 and System 6 had a feature called MultiFinder instead , which was much more mature and widely used in System 6 . MultiFinder could be enabled or disabled , with a reboot . If disabled , the Finder would quit when the user launched another application , thus freeing RAM for it . If enabled , the system behaved as in the nowadays familiar multitasking tradition , with the desktop and windows of other applications in the screen 's background . 
 = = = Hardware support = = = 
 System 6 included support for the Apple <unk> <unk> and other PostScript laser printers . New software drivers allowed the <unk> <unk> to be used on AppleTalk local area networks and supports use of tabloid , or B , size paper ( 11 in × 17 in ( 280 mm × 430 mm ) ) . System 6 also included Color QuickDraw , a piece of system software used to accelerate the drawing of color screen images on the Macintosh II . It was licensed to Apple and Radius Inc by its programmer , Andy <unk> . 
 = = Limitations = = 
 System 6 's Apple menu cannot be used to launch applications . The current application icon in the upper right @-@ hand corner of the menu bar cycles between open applications ; it is not a menu . System 6 supports 24 bits of addressable random access memory ( RAM ) , which allowed a maximum of 8 megabytes of RAM with no provision for virtual memory . These limitations were fixed in System 7 . The version of the HFS used by System 6 also has a hard drive capacity limit ; it supports up to 2 gigabytes ( <unk> ) and 65 @,@ 536 files on a drive . This limitation was not increased until System 7 @.@ 5 which first increased the limit to 4 GB . 
 The Trash ( or " <unk> " in the British version ) empties when the Finder terminates . If MultiFinder is not running , this occurs as soon as an application launches . Icons on the desktop in System 6 are not organized into a single folder , as in later operating systems . Instead , the system records whether each file is on the desktop or not . This is inefficient and confusing , as the user cannot browse to the desktop in applications besides the Finder , even within the standard Open and Save As dialog boxes . Furthermore , these dialogs are primitive , mostly unchanged since 1984 . The lack of aliases , shortcuts to files , was another limitation of file management on System 6 . Custom file and folder icons are also not supported . These problems were all remedied in System 7 . 
 A maximum of 15 Desk Accessories may be installed at one time , including the <unk> , Scrapbook , and Control Panel . System 6 uses the Control Panel desk accessory to access all the installed control panels , which imposes severe user interface limitations . Desk Accessories cannot be installed or removed within the Finder ; this requires the Font / DA Mover utility . System 7 also fixed this . Control panels , however , are contained in separate files . 
 Few methods exist for interface personalization . The Finder allows each icon to be assigned a color , but the desktop background is limited to an 8x8 pixel color tiled pattern ( color patterns were introduced in System 5 ) , and standard window frames are all black and white . However , many " <unk> " extension files existed to add color and customization . System 7 later allowed the user to change the color and various other aspects of the user interface . By 1989 , the System 6 user interface was in need of a change . In comparison to the NeXTSTEP operating system of the time , System 6 did not make use of sound , and its user interface presented several limitations in terms of file management and the way windows were displayed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The initial releases of System 6 were unstable ; many third party software developers did not receive copies before its release , resulting in widespread compatibility problems . At first , many common software programs such as Microsoft Excel , Microsoft Works and 4th Dimension were not fully compatible with System 6 . There were also software bugs in the Color Manager , Script Manager , and Sound Manager extension files . Apple announced that 66 bugs were fixed when the 6 @.@ 0 @.@ 1 update was released in September 1988 . However , a major bug involving text spacing of screen fonts was found in 6 @.@ 0 @.@ 1 after distribution began . This led to the quick release of 6 @.@ 0 @.@ 2 , which solved this problem . Some customers waited longer until moving to System 6 because of the poor reputation already gained . 
 = = Compatibility = = 
 System 6 was officially supported by Apple for many different machines , some of which were shipped with System 6 . It may be that some Apple computers for which System 6 was not officially supported may nevertheless be able to run it , perhaps with limitations . 
 = = Version history = = 
 = Archie MacLaren = 
 Archibald Campbell " Archie " MacLaren ( 1 December 1871 – 17 November 1944 ) was an English cricketer who captained the England cricket team at various times between 1898 and 1909 . A right @-@ handed batsman , he played 35 Test matches for England , as captain in 22 of those games , and led the team to defeat in four Ashes series against Australia . An amateur , MacLaren played first @-@ class cricket for Lancashire , captaining that county for most of his career . As a batsman , MacLaren was one of the leading cricketers of his time and had a reputation as a fast @-@ scoring stylist . In 1895 , he scored 424 runs in an innings against Somerset which was the highest individual score in first @-@ class cricket until 1923 and remained a record in English cricket until 1994 . Opinions were divided over his captaincy . He was a deep thinker on the game and critics believed him to be tactically advanced , but his pessimism , clashes with the selectors and inability to get the best out of his players led most commentators to rate him a poor leader . 
 After attending public school , MacLaren played intermittently for Lancashire until 1899 as he tried to establish a career outside the sport . Even so , he was appointed county captain in 1894 and was chosen frequently to play for England . An appointment as Lancashire 's assistant secretary allowed him to play more regularly from 1900 . He first captained England in 1898 as a stand @-@ in , but became captain in his own right in 1899 . Under his leadership , England lost to Australia in three consecutive series — 1899 , 1901 – 02 and 1902 . MacLaren was involved in controversies throughout all three defeats , and was replaced as captain in 1905 , although he remained in the team . Business interests kept him out of the game for the following years , but he was invited to lead England once more in 1909 . Defeat in that series ended his Test career , and the following year he ceased playing regular first @-@ class cricket . He played occasionally until 1922 – 23 , and had some late successes : in 1921 , a team selected and captained by MacLaren defeated a previously unbeaten Australian team , and on his final first @-@ class appearance during a 1922 – 23 Marylebone Cricket Club tour of New Zealand , he scored 200 runs . 
 MacLaren had many jobs as he attempted to find ways to support his cricket , family and lifestyle . At various time , he worked as a teacher , a journalist and a cricket coach . For many years , he was employed as Lancashire 's assistant secretary but such were his financial worries that he often had to ask for cash advances from the committee , with which he had a stormy relationship . He worked for several years as private secretary to K. S. Ranjitsinhji and he became involved in his employer 's financial scandals . Many of MacLaren 's later business ventures were failures , and only when his wife came into an inheritance did he and his family live in comfort . Throughout his life , MacLaren was involved in many disagreements and was never popular with team @-@ mates . However , he was a hero to the cricket writer Neville Cardus , who wrote prolifically on him . MacLaren died in 1944 , aged 72 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 MacLaren was born on 1 December 1871 in Whalley Range , a fairly prosperous district of Manchester , the second of seven sons to James MacLaren and Emily Carver . His father , a cotton merchant and cricket enthusiast , served as honorary treasurer to the Lancashire team from 1881 until his death in 1900 . MacLaren senior encouraged his sons to play cricket . With the aim of improving their ability in the game , MacLaren senior sent Archie and his older brother James to Elstree , a school well @-@ regarded for its coaching . 
 MacLaren 's cricket instruction was supplemented during the holidays at Old Trafford Cricket Ground , where his father paid professional cricketers to bowl at him . He was soon selected for the school 's cricket team , scored his first century , and was the captain by his final year . From Elstree , MacLaren went to Harrow School in 1886 where he joined James ; Geoffrey , their younger brother , followed them but financial difficulties prevented any other family members attending the school . MacLaren had little success in intra @-@ school cricket during his first year there but in 1887 , success in trial games resulted in his promotion to the school first eleven . A century in an early match ensured his selection for the important fixture against Eton College at Lord 's Cricket Ground . Although an inexperienced Harrow team was easily defeated , MacLaren top @-@ scored in both innings with scores of 55 and 67 , and in praising his batting , critics suggested he had a bright future . He came top of the school batting averages for the 1887 season . 
 Wet weather in the following two years affected playing conditions , making the cricket pitches slow @-@ paced and difficult to bat on . With little experience of such conditions , MacLaren had a succession of failures . His technique , based at the time on playing forward at the ball , was unsuited to wet pitches and it was only late in 1889 that he made the required technical adjustments and learned to play off the back foot ( i.e. stepping backwards to play a shot ) . During 1890 , his final year at Harrow , he captained the team and had his most successful season , scoring over 500 runs at an average of 42 @.@ 54 . In the match against Eton at Lord 's , MacLaren once more succeeded when others struggled , and he scored 76 on a difficult pitch . In his four years at Harrow , MacLaren was twice awarded the prize for the school 's best batsman , and received awards for his fielding . MacLaren also played football successfully : he captained his House team and played in the school first eleven in 1888 and 1889 before a knee injury forced him to miss the 1890 season . Unlike many of his fellow amateur cricketers in this period , MacLaren did not attend Oxford or Cambridge Universities , where he would have played a high level of cricket ; his father could not afford to send him or his brothers there . On leaving Harrow , MacLaren found employment with the Manchester and Liverpool District Bank . 
 = = Lancashire cricketer = = 
 Lancashire monitored MacLaren 's progress during his time at Harrow . When his season there ended in 1890 , he was selected to play for Lancashire in the County Championship . Making his first @-@ class debut on 14 August 1890 in a match against Sussex , he scored 108 runs on a difficult pitch in a relatively fast time of two hours . Although less successful in the remaining games of the season , he finished fourth in the Lancashire averages with 140 runs at an average of 23 @.@ 33 . MacLaren 's financial circumstances forced him to keep working at the District Bank , limiting the amount of cricket he played in 1891 and 1892 . 
 When he did play for Lancashire , MacLaren was moderately successful . He led the county 's batting averages in 1892 and in total scored 548 runs at 27 @.@ 40 . Of his two centuries , the second came when he opened the batting . During the winter of 1892 – 93 , MacLaren studied cotton manufacture in New Orleans ; when he returned home , he played more regularly for Lancashire . He scored consistently in 1893 , totalling 831 runs at 25 @.@ 18 , had success in the high profile match against Yorkshire , and led the team in the absence of the regular captain . As a result of his successes , he was selected to play for the North of England in a representative match against the Australian team who were touring England that year . He scored 66 , sharing an opening partnership of 121 in 80 minutes with his county colleague Albert Ward . Later in the season , he was chosen to play for the amateur " Gentlemen " team in the prestigious Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's . 
 Before the 1894 season , MacLaren resigned from the bank to play a whole season of cricket . Lancashire at the time were undergoing a period of transition , and the captaincy was unsettled : three men captained the county in the first part of the season . In the absence of other amateurs with county experience who could play regularly , MacLaren was appointed captain . Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack observed that MacLaren was young for the position , and largely unproven in cricket , but it supported the decision . After losing his first match in charge , the team improved in the latter part of the season to finish fourth in the Championship . MacLaren finished sixth in the Lancashire averages , and in total scored 1 @,@ 105 runs at 25 @.@ 69 , but his batting had made little progress since his debut . However , his successful leadership of Lancashire led some press critics to suggest him as a future England captain . At the end of the season , he was a last @-@ minute selection to tour Australia with a team led by Andrew Stoddart . 
 = = Test cricketer = = 
 = = = Test debut = = = 
 Approached to organise a touring team by the Australian cricket authorities , Stoddart had been unable to persuade several leading batsmen to join his squad . Stoddart only took 13 men , of whom two were wicket @-@ keepers ( only one of whom could realistically play in each match ) and one was a lob bowler who did not play any Test matches ; this guaranteed MacLaren 's selection for all the matches against Australia . Consequently , he retained his place even when his form was poor . In his first game , against South Australia , he scored 228 , and hit another half @-@ century in the build @-@ up to the first Test . He made his international debut on 14 December 1894 , scoring 4 and 20 as England won despite being asked to follow on . England also won the next game , although MacLaren was caught from the opening delivery of the match , the first time anyone had been dismissed by the first ball of a Test . Australia took the third and fourth Tests to level the series . MacLaren had little personal success , and averaged only 12 @.@ 50 in the series after four games . 
 By then , MacLaren was in financial difficulties . As an amateur , his expenses were covered by the tour organisers but he received no money for playing . To support him financially , the Lancashire committee had given him £ 100 before the tour . By the latter stages of the tour , his money was running out ; most of it was probably spent betting on horse races , and he sent Lancashire a request for further money . Just before the final Test , he received a £ 60 advance on his expenses for the upcoming English season . For the fifth Test , he dropped down from opening the batting , which he had done throughout the series , to batting at number five , and responded with his first Test century . Batting with greater caution than usual , he scored 120 before accidentally standing on his own wicket . England won the match to take the series 3 – 2 , amid great public interest in England and Australia . MacLaren scored 240 runs at 26 @.@ 67 in the Test series , finishing fourth in the English averages . He performed more effectively in the lesser matches , and following some final tour fixtures , he totalled 803 runs at 47 @.@ 23 in all first @-@ class games . On the six @-@ week outward journey MacLaren met ( Kathleen ) Maud Power , an Australian socialite and the daughter of a horse racing official . They were married in 1898 . 
 = = = World record holder = = = 
 MacLaren returned home via Japan , missing the start of the 1895 cricket season . In his absence , he was named as a " Young Batsman of the Year " in Wisden for his performances in 1894 . After playing two games for Lancashire , MacLaren accepted the offer of a teaching job in a preparatory school in Harrow ; although still Lancashire 's captain , he missed several matches , to the disquiet of its supporters . The team 's results were mixed in his absence , and he returned to play Somerset at Taunton . On the first day of the three @-@ day game , MacLaren scored 289 not out in 330 minutes . On the second day , he took his score to 424 before he was dismissed , surpassing the previous highest individual innings in first @-@ class cricket , W. G. Grace 's score of 344 , made in 1876 . MacLaren batted for 470 minutes in total and hit 62 fours and a six . This remained the highest score in first @-@ class cricket until 1923 when Bill Ponsford scored 429 in Australia , and was the largest first @-@ class innings in England until Brian Lara scored 501 in 1994 . In total , Lancashire scored 801 runs and won the game by an innings . After a spell of lower scores , MacLaren played several big innings , including three consecutive centuries in the last three games of the season . He ended 1895 top of the national batting averages with 1 @,@ 229 runs at 51 @.@ 20 . MacLaren was elected a life member of Lancashire in recognition of his achievements . 
 Teaching commitments left MacLaren unavailable for the start of the 1896 season , and his first appearance came in July . Although he had only batted once in the season , he was chosen to play in the second Test match of the summer between England and Australia , a selection made controversial by his lack of cricket . As the Test was played at Old Trafford , the England team was chosen by the Lancashire committee , who recognised that MacLaren would attract spectators as a local player . He was dismissed by the first ball he faced in the first innings , and scored 15 runs in the second as England were defeated . Shortly after the Test , he scored 226 against Kent to take Lancashire to a draw in a match they seemed likely to lose . This was enough for him to retain his place in the team for the final Test match , where he scored 20 and 6 . He batted effectively for the rest of the season , finishing with 713 runs for Lancashire at 54 @.@ 85 . Critics praised his batting , but his absences may have prevented the team from winning the Championship ; they finished second . In all first @-@ class matches , he scored 922 runs at 36 @.@ 88 . 
 = = = Second tour of Australia = = = 
 MacLaren 's teaching duties meant that in 1897 he again missed the start of the cricket season , and he felt it necessary to resign as Lancashire 's captain . When he began playing , he scored heavily , including another double century against Kent , and his runs helped Lancashire to win the County Championship : concentrating on aggressive batting , he scored faster than in previous years , and hit 974 runs at 51 @.@ 26 . At the end of the season , MacLaren was included in Stoddart 's second Australian touring team . Despite high expectations of success , the Test series was lost 4 – 1 . Although nominally captain , Stoddart played in only two Tests ; he was grief @-@ stricken after the death of his mother and disillusioned by the failures of his team . MacLaren , after an unproductive start to the tour , scored 142 and 100 against New South Wales to become the first batsman to score two centuries in the same Australian first @-@ class match . In the absence of Stoddart , he captained the England team in the first Test . He scored 109 in the first innings , batting more cautiously than usual , and 50 not out in the second as England won by nine wickets . His captaincy proved controversial when he refused to recall the Australian batsman Charlie McLeod to the wickets after he was dismissed ; McLeod was out to a no ball but , being deaf , did not hear the umpire 's call and was run out when he left his crease . With Stoddart still absent , MacLaren was captain in the second Test . Australia won by an innings , and MacLaren was criticised in the Australian press for complaining about the pitch . Commentators also suggested that he underused the bowling of Ted Wainwright . Stoddart returned for the third and fourth Tests , both of which England lost by an innings . MacLaren scored 124 in the third game , but was mocked in the press after the fourth when he claimed that a fly in his eye caused him to be dismissed . When Stoddart withdrew from the final match , MacLaren once more assumed the leadership . He scored 65 in the first innings but could not prevent Australia winning again . 
 In all first @-@ class matches , MacLaren scored 1 @,@ 037 runs at 54 @.@ 57 ; in the Test matches , he aggregated 488 runs at an average of 54 @.@ 22 . Wisden noted that MacLaren batted " magnificently " and commented : " Of all the English players the one who had the best cause to look back upon the trip with satisfaction was MacLaren . " At the conclusion of the tour , on 17 March 1898 , he married Power . The wedding attracted media attention and was well attended . The couple later had two sons . 
 = = England captain = = 
 = = = Appointment and start of captaincy = = = 
 MacLaren played little cricket in 1898 , initially owing to his teaching commitments and the need to establish himself and his wife in a new home . After making his first appearance in July , he did not play again until August . He played nine first @-@ class games , scoring 478 runs at 29 @.@ 87 , before his season was ended by neuralgia . Despite his frequent absences — again he missed the first part of the season — Lancashire re @-@ appointed MacLaren as joint captain for 1899 . That summer , the Australians toured England and the first Test took place before MacLaren had played any cricket . For the second game , MacLaren replaced W. G. Grace as England captain ; the other candidate for the leadership was Stanley Jackson , who was senior to MacLaren at Harrow and had preceded him into the England side , but MacLaren was favoured owing to his previous experience in the role with Lancashire and England . 
 Australia comfortably won the second Test , and on his first appearance of the season , MacLaren scored 4 runs opening the innings on the first day . In the second innings , he moved down the order to number six , but he came in to bat when England trailed heavily and had lost four wickets . He batted for around 150 minutes to score 88 not out . The Wisden match report stated : " There was ... some risk in playing MacLaren , who had not so far taken part in any first @-@ class cricket during the season . In this case however , the [ selection ] committee had reason to congratulate themselves , MacLaren playing a magnificent second innings and making a great , though fruitless , effort to save the game ... Never has MacLaren played a greater innings . " Afterwards , MacLaren scored a century in difficult batting conditions against Yorkshire . Jackson did not play in this game , and initially refused to play for England in the third Test ; the press attributed this to jealousy of MacLaren and anger at being passed over for the captaincy . The third Test was drawn owing to poor weather , but England 's revival continued in the next game , which was drawn with England in a dominant position . The final match was also drawn , but while England lost the series 1 – 0 , critics believed the team had recovered from a poor start to the summer and held the ascendancy in the final three games . MacLaren 's only score over fifty was that in the second Test , and he finished the series with 164 runs at 32 @.@ 80 . In all first @-@ class cricket , he made 814 runs at 32 @.@ 56 , including two centuries against Yorkshire . 
 = = = Full @-@ time cricketer = = = 
 In late 1899 , MacLaren joined a private cricket tour of America and Canada organised by the cricket @-@ playing Indian prince Ranjitsinhji . The following March , he was appointed as an assistant secretary at Lancashire . The position was a sinecure ; his main role was to coach the first eleven which effectively meant that he was paid to play cricket , despite his amateur status . Surviving records do not indicate his salary , but some sources suggest he was paid comfortably more than Lancashire 's leading professionals . In addition , MacLaren worked as a journalist for the Daily Express , reporting on matches in which he played , a common practice at the time for amateurs . Resuming sole control over the Lancashire side , and freed from his teaching responsibilities , MacLaren played from the beginning of the 1900 season , planning meticulously in a bid to lead Lancashire to the County Championship . His batting form suffered initially , but the team dominated the start of the season . Commentators gave much of the credit to MacLaren 's captaincy . However , he was severely criticised for conservative tactics in one game , when he was reluctant to attempt to force a win . In the latter stages of the season , MacLaren scored prolifically , making a succession of high scores at rapid pace . He ended the 1900 season with 1 @,@ 554 runs at 36 @.@ 13 . During that season , the leading Lancashire bowler Arthur Mold had been no @-@ balled for throwing , but MacLaren defended him in the press . At a meeting of county captains in December , MacLaren was the only representative to defend the legality of Mold 's bowling action , and in 1901 , Mold was again no @-@ balled and his career was effectively over . MacLaren struggled with injury in 1901 , and his batting form suffered . He frequently dropped low in the batting order , and it was late in the season before he began to score runs regularly . His captaincy was criticised after some tactical decisions which were either unconventional or unsuccessful , and he clashed with the Lancashire committee over the poor state of Old Trafford 's pitch . In total , he scored 1 @,@ 069 first @-@ class runs at 31 @.@ 44 . 
 MacLaren was invited by the Melbourne Cricket Club to bring a team to Australia during the English winter of 1901 – 02 . This was the last privately organised team to represent England at Test level in Australia , with subsequent ones playing under the colours of the MCC . Many leading players were unavailable — Yorkshire 's Wilfred Rhodes and George Hirst were not permitted to tour by their captain Lord Hawke . The team was judged to be weak , but contained several players at the beginning of their careers who went on to success at Test level . Sydney Barnes was chosen by MacLaren after playing only a handful of county matches . Barnes ' success on his single appearance for Lancashire in 1901 convinced MacLaren of his worth , to the surprise and disparagement of commentators , most of whom had never seen him . Barnes began the tour well , but did not get on with his captain . During a storm on part of the sea journey , MacLaren , speculating on their chances of survival , commented to a team member : " If we go down , at least that bugger Barnes will go down with us . " The team lost their first match and continued to struggle . MacLaren clashed with authorities in Melbourne over his right to choose an umpire , but he began to bat well at Sydney , where he scored 145 and 73 in a tour match . 
 In the first Test , MacLaren shared a century opening partnership with Tom Hayward and scored 116 to become the first man to score four Test centuries . This was the last Test century by an England captain in Australia for 57 years . Barnes bowled with great success ; Colin Blythe and Len Braund , like Barnes chosen by MacLaren and making their Test debuts , performed effectively and England won by an innings . The remaining four Tests were lost as the team suffered from a lack of effective bowlers . MacLaren severely <unk> Barnes , who took 13 wickets , in the second Test ; the bowler was injured in the next game and took no further part on the tour . MacLaren was successful with the bat . He scored 92 in the fourth Test , made centuries in the two first @-@ class games played in between the Test matches , and finished top of the batting averages . Critics judged that his team had performed well despite the heavy defeat , and his captaincy attracted praise . In addition , the team were considered to be the best fielding side to visit Australia . In the Test series , MacLaren scored 412 runs at 45 @.@ 77 , while in all first @-@ class matches he hit 929 runs at 58 @.@ 06 . 
 Before the tour began , MacLaren resigned as Lancashire 's captain and assistant secretary , owing to his concern for the health of his wife . Journalists speculated that MacLaren would join the Hampshire team as assistant secretary , as he lived in that county , or even move to Australia . Lancashire selected a replacement captain , but when MacLaren returned to England , he re @-@ committed to the club , stating the visit to Australia had improved the health of his wife , and he was reappointed . 
 = = = Ashes series of 1902 = = = 
 MacLaren began the 1902 season well and , facing an Ashes series against Australia , began planning for the Tests ; he arranged to receive reports on prospective players from both sides . England dominated the first Test , scoring 376 and bowling Australia out for 36 ; rain prevented a result and also heavily curtailed the drawn second Test . The team for the third Test , played in Sheffield , was to be chosen from 12 players picked by the selectors , with the final place contested between Bill Lockwood and Schofield Haigh . However , on the morning of the match , MacLaren , with the approval of the selector Lord Hawke , summoned Barnes from Manchester to play instead of either . The move was unpopular with spectators — their favoured choice , Haigh , was a Yorkshire player — but Barnes took six wickets in the first innings , although injury reduced his effectiveness in the second innings . England were bowled out in poor light — MacLaren 's biographer Michael Down suggests that part of the blame lies with him for not appealing against the light — and needed an unlikely 339 runs to win in their second innings . MacLaren changed the batting order , asking Gilbert Jessop to open the batting . Jessop scored fifty , and MacLaren scored 63 , but England lost by 143 runs . 
 Following the defeat , the England selectors made several changes for the fourth Test ; both Barnes and Jessop were left out . MacLaren favoured Jessop 's inclusion but the selectors considered him unreliable . Although Barnes was not fully fit , later commentators suggested the selectors omitted him because of MacLaren 's actions at Sheffield . A further player was added to the squad in case the pitch was affected by rain before the match , but rather than choosing Haigh , the leading wet @-@ pitch bowler in the country , Hawke insisted that Sussex 's Fred Tate was included — critics have suggested that Hawke wanted to prevent Haigh 's absence from the Yorkshire team , of which Hawke was captain , given the unlikeliness of the extra bowler being needed . According to the cricket writer Neville Cardus , when MacLaren saw the list of players in the team , he responded : " My God , look what they 've sent me " . MacLaren was angry with Hawke , and when it rained before the match , included Tate in the final eleven at the expense of George Hirst , a leading all @-@ rounder . Gibson suggests that Tate was only included by the selectors " because they thought MacLaren could not possibly pick him " and so he could not make any further late changes to the team ; MacLaren , according to Gibson , in turn included Tate out of spite . Other writers have suggested that MacLaren , as a Lancastrian , preferred a Sussex player to a Yorkshire one . 
 Australia won the toss . The match began in damp conditions , and before the pitch began to dry , at which point it would become extremely difficult for batting , the Australian opening batsmen scored 135 in 90 minutes ; Australia 's total reached 173 for one wicket at lunch , and Victor Trumper scored a century in that time . MacLaren was subsequently criticised for allowing Australia to score so quickly , but claimed that his carefully planned strategy was rendered obsolete when Trumper began to strike the ball out of the ground . MacLaren commented : " I couldn 't very well have had a man fielding in the bloody practice ground , now could I ? " The bowlers recovered the situation to some extent , and following a century from Jackson , England trailed by 37 runs after the first innings . In the second innings , Australia collapsed to the England bowlers , but Tate dropped a crucial catch while stationed by MacLaren at the edge of the field . MacLaren also received criticism for this , as Tate was unaccustomed to fielding on the boundary . Gibson notes that MacLaren " later spent much breath defending himself on this point " ; although it is not clear how Tate came to be moved — a later interpretation is that MacLaren moved Tate there rather than ask an amateur player to cross the field for a few deliveries — most commentators agree that this was the turning point of the match . England were left needing 124 runs to win . MacLaren opened the batting , having batted at number four in the first innings , and tried to score quickly , but was caught from a big hit . According to Gibson , he returned to the dressing room in fury , throwing his bat across the room and saying that he had " thrown away the match and the bloody rubber [ series ] " . Gibson suggests that the implication that only MacLaren could have guided England to victory must have had a demoralising effect on the remaining batsmen , and speculates that he felt guilty over the composition of a team that looked likely to lose . Gibson comments : " This does not say much for MacLaren as a captain . Indeed , it has always seemed to me a shocking performance , from the choice of the team to the chuck of the bat . " Wickets continued to fall and Tate , the last batsman , was bowled when England needed four runs to win . 
 England won the final match by one wicket , but lost the series 2 – 1 . While contemporary critics did not blame MacLaren , the cricket authorities were less happy . MacLaren believed that the choices of the selectors had made it impossible to win , and continued to write about the series for many years . He finished the series with 198 runs at 28 @.@ 28 , and ended the season with 1 @,@ 254 first @-@ class runs at 32 @.@ 15 . 
 = = Cricketing decline = = 
 = = = Replacement as England captain = = = 
 MacLaren took a new job with a wine merchant which allowed him to complete a full season in 1903 . Wet weather caused many difficult pitches for batting , and MacLaren was often the only Lancashire batsman able to cope with the conditions . His highest @-@ profile success came when he captained the Gentlemen against the Players at Lord 's . When his team faced defeat on the final day on a difficult pitch , he scored 168 not out and shared a partnership of 309 with C. B. Fry in less than three hours . This innings was later praised as one of his finest . He ended the season with 1 @,@ 886 runs at 42 @.@ 86 , and Lancashire finished fourth . However , his success with the bat was overshadowed by controversy over the England captaincy . MacLaren originally planned to tour Australia with another private team in the winter of 1903 – 04 , but withdrew over his concerns that there was not enough strong bowling available . Frustrated with MacLaren , the cricket authorities in Melbourne asked the MCC , via Pelham Warner , to organise their own team . MacLaren was not offered the captaincy — Warner was chosen in June 1903 when Jackson proved unavailable . Newspaper rumours suggested that Lord Hawke played a part in this decision , and that MacLaren 's recent paid role for Lancashire counted against him . The press favoured MacLaren , and Warner was widely criticised ; one journal noted that he was " condemned as an interloper and a nonentity " . The cricket establishment was less sympathetic to MacLaren . After publicly vacillating over the summer , he eventually decided not to tour under Warner , whom he perceived to be his junior . The tour proved a great success for Warner , and his team won the Test series . 
 In 1904 , MacLaren led Lancashire to victory in the County Championship , their only such success under his captaincy . Unusually for a Championship @-@ winning team , the club relied heavily on batting rather than bowling . MacLaren played several big innings , scoring at a rapid pace , as his team began the season with a string of victories . Their form faded later in the season , but they remained unbeaten . In all first @-@ class cricket , MacLaren scored 1 @,@ 191 runs at 31 @.@ 34 . At some point during the season , he was asked by Ranjitsinhji , a close friend , to become his private secretary , and both men travelled to India during the winter of 1904 – 05 . Ranjitsinhji at the time was pursuing his claim to the throne of <unk> , and he remained in India when MacLaren returned to England for the 1905 cricket season . 
 The Australians toured England in 1905 , but MacLaren was again passed over for the England captaincy ; the team was captained by Jackson and won the series 2 – 0 . MacLaren began the season well and played in the first Test . Australia led by 25 runs after the first innings , as England struggled to play the pace of Albert Cotter . According to a story later told by Neville Cardus , before the second innings he saw MacLaren muttering : " Cotter ! I 'll bloody Cotter him ! " . MacLaren attacked Cotter 's bowling , and overcame the defensive bowling tactics used by Australia to slow down the game . He scored 140 , his highest Test innings and only Test century in England . When Australia batted , Bernard Bosanquet took eight wickets to bowl England to a win ; it was MacLaren 's suggestion that Jackson persist with Bosanquet 's bowling when it was initially unsuccessful . MacLaren scored 56 and 79 in the drawn second Test , but did not play in the third owing to injury . He played in the final two Tests but accomplished little . In the series , he scored 303 runs at 43 @.@ 28 . Jackson later wrote that MacLaren was an invaluable tactical aid during the series . Lancashire ended the season second in the Championship , and opened a testimonial fund for MacLaren which raised over £ 800 by the end of the season . He later clashed with committee members who were unhappy with his decision to use the money to buy a motor car . At the end of the season , MacLaren resigned the captaincy of Lancashire , but was persuaded to continue by the committee . In total during 1905 , he scored 1 @,@ 522 runs at an average of 35 @.@ 39 in all first @-@ class cricket . 
 = = = Private secretary to Ranjitsinhji = = = 
 A combination of injuries and work reduced the amount of cricket MacLaren played after 1905 . He missed most of Lancashire 's matches in June and July 1906 . He returned against Middlesex at Lord 's in August , but was involved in mild controversy when he declined to put Middlesex 's batsmen under pressure when chasing a small but challenging total to win the game ; this may have arisen from his dislike of Lord 's and the figures in authority there . MacLaren ended the 1906 season with 599 runs at 20 @.@ 65 . In the winter of 1906 – 07 , MacLaren returned to India to work for Ranjitsinhji . In January 1907 , he wrote to Lancashire to inform them of his reduced availability for 1907 ; even so , the committee retained him as captain . In February , Ranjitsinhji was named as the new ruler of <unk> . MacLaren attended his installation on 11 March — MacLaren and the politician Arthur Priestley were the only English attendees — and did not return to England until mid @-@ June , although he informed Lancashire that his absence in India was to recover from an illness . He resumed the captaincy of Lancashire , and made a good start with scores of 47 and 92 in his second match , but his form faded . One match provoked a public row between MacLaren and Lord 's . MacLaren captained Lancashire against Middlesex at Lord 's in July ; rain restricted play on the first day of the three @-@ day game , and at the start of the second day , the umpires ruled that the waterlogged pitch remained unfit to play on . Some spectators came on to the pitch to look for themselves , then protested outside the pavilion . The incident was defused by the ground authorities , but the following day MacLaren told the press : " Owing to the pitch having been deliberately torn up by the public , I , as captain of the Lancashire eleven , cannot see my way to continue the game , the groundsman bearing me out that the wicket [ pitch ] could not be again put right . " Lancashire would not play — although all decisions about fitness for play should have been made by the umpires , not MacLaren — and the match was drawn . The incident provoked discussion in the press , but most critics agreed that MacLaren was in the wrong . MacLaren subsequently scored his first century for two years , but he did little in the remainder of the season , at the end of which he again resigned the captaincy of Lancashire , conscious of his failing form and fitness . In all first @-@ class cricket in 1907 , he scored 829 runs at 26 @.@ 74 . 
 Much of MacLaren 's time was now taken up working for Ranjitsinhji , who visited England between October 1907 and December 1908 . MacLaren played just nine matches in 1908 ; Lancashire were eager for him to play , but he had little impact . His greatest success came for the Gentlemen against the Players at the Oval , when he shared a partnership of 141 with C. B. Fry . In total , he scored 428 runs at an average of 28 @.@ 53 . Meanwhile , Ranjitsinhji lived extravagantly in Sussex , running up huge bills and ignoring most attempts to make him pay . MacLaren was involved in several cases which resulted in either legal action or complaint to the India Office . When an artist had to go to court to make Ranjitsinhji pay for work she had done , MacLaren 's attempts to delay and obstruct her caused the India Office , in its adjudication , to describe him as Ranjitsinhji 's " ridiculous private secretary " . In October , MacLaren was taken to court himself over non @-@ payment of rent . He had a house close to Ranjitsinhji 's residence , and claimed in court that Ranjitsinhji rented the house on his behalf , and , as a ruling prince , could not be prosecuted . The magistrates disagreed , ruled MacLaren liable , and forced him to pay — although Ranjitsinhji probably paid for him . 
 In his biography of Ranjitsinhji , Simon Wilde suggests that MacLaren had to work very hard for his employer in this period , and found little time for cricket . In addition , his batting form was poor throughout , and he seemed to be in bad physical condition when he occasionally found time to play . Before Ranjitsinhji returned to India , MacLaren resigned as his secretary — although he went with him to India for a holiday . According to Wilde , the resignation was to allow MacLaren to play more regularly , but " he never really recovered his form " . In summarising Ranjitsinhji 's life at this time , Wilde suggests that his unreliability with money was quite calculated , and writes : " Many of his off @-@ the @-@ field exploits with A. C. MacLaren ... will probably never be known , but it seems clear that sometimes they were not averse to conducting themselves in the fashion of E. W. Hornung 's fictional character Raffles , the cricketing burglar . " 
 = = = Return as England captain = = = 
 For the 1909 season , MacLaren worked to improve his fitness prior to that summer 's Test series against Australia . Jackson was first choice to lead the England team , but when he was unavailable , MacLaren was appointed captain , to the approval of critics and the public . MacLaren began the season well for Lancashire , and as Australia struggled in their early tour matches , England began the Tests as favourites to win . England won the low @-@ scoring first match ; the press praised MacLaren 's deployment of fielders . In England 's second innings Jack Hobbs , batting with Fry — whom MacLaren promoted to open the batting having done so himself in the first innings — scored the required runs to complete a ten @-@ wicket win . Hobbs was making his first Test appearance in England , despite MacLaren 's reluctance to include him in the team . 
 The England selectors made several changes to the team for the second Test . Colin Blythe , a crucial bowler to the team , withdrew before the game . Other players were left out whom most commentators believed should have played , and the bowling attack was packed with medium @-@ paced bowlers of a similar style . The report in Wisden suggested : " Never in the history of Test Matches in England has there been such blundering in the selection of an England eleven " . The selectors later implied the controversial choices were at the behest of MacLaren , although other evidence suggests that MacLaren did not get the team he requested . England lost the game ; MacLaren 's reputation suffered and commentators began to blame him for the defeat . He offered his resignation , but the selectors retained him as captain and restored some of the players omitted from the second Test . When England lost the third Test after the batsmen failed , not helped by MacLaren 's poor form , critics questioned his place in the team . MacLaren tried to excuse his position , suggesting in the press that he knew the team would struggle and played " in spite of my personal wishes " . He also implied that the team 's selection was out of his hands . When the fourth Test was rained off , England could not win the series and so Australia retained the Ashes . 
 The final match of the series was drawn , mainly because the pitch heavily favoured batting . MacLaren was involved in another selection controversy when the fast bowler Claude Buckenham was left out of the England team at his instigation . The Wisden match report described this decision as " so grave a blunder that it is difficult to find words in which to speak of it . " The Wisden editor , Sydney Pardon , commented : " A fatal blunder was committed in leaving out Buckenham — a blunder for which it was generally understood that MacLaren was responsible . Experts occasionally do strange things and this was one of the strangest . The idea of letting England go into the field in fine weather , on a typical Oval wicket , with no fast bowler except Sharp touched the confines of lunacy . " Further issues arose over MacLaren 's handling of his bowlers , and Wisden suggested " MacLaren was sadly at fault in his management of the England bowling " . Douglas Carr , a 37 @-@ year @-@ old , was called into the team after some success in preceding games and on the premise that the Australians would be unable to play his googly . After Carr had initial success , MacLaren kept him bowling for a long period until the player tired and was easily punished by the batsmen . In his only innings , MacLaren scored 12 , and when the match ended , much of the blame for England 's failures was apportioned to him . In the series , he scored 85 runs at 12 @.@ 14 . The Oval match was his final Test match ; in 35 games he had scored 1 @,@ 931 runs at 33 @.@ 87 . He ended the season with 613 runs at 19 @.@ 77 . 
 = = = Retirement from regular cricket = = = 
 MacLaren played regularly for Lancashire at the start of 1910 , but his poor form continued until mid @-@ way through the season , when he scored centuries in successive matches . He played once more for Lancashire and once for the " Gentlemen of England " before withdrawing from first @-@ class cricket for the season , in which he scored 345 runs at 26 @.@ 53 . This was effectively the end of his Lancashire career and he played only sporadically for the team afterwards . He continued to play cricket , including a tour of Argentina with the MCC in 1910 – 11 . He also played for the team of the businessman Lionel Robinson , including some first @-@ class games , over the following seasons . During the 1914 season , MacLaren attempted to return to the Lancashire team , possibly to boost the circulation of a magazine for which he was writing . He appeared in one county match , without success , although he continued to play in other first @-@ class games for the MCC and other teams . 
 = = Later career = = 
 = = = Final cricket matches = = = 
 After MacLaren stopped playing regularly for Lancashire , he formed a business partnership with J. N. Pentelow , a cricket writer . Pentelow was the owner of The World of Cricket , a cricket magazine , and in 1914 MacLaren joined him in an attempt to improve its circulation . MacLaren was officially known as the editor of the publication and Pentelow his assistant , but the latter did most of the work . Pentelow was already struggling to keep the magazine going , but matters worsened after MacLaren joined . Pentelow 's debts increased and by the end of 1914 , the business folded ; although details are obscure , Down suggests that " MacLaren 's characteristic unreliability with money left Pentelow very much in the lurch . " 
 During the First World War , MacLaren joined the Royal Army Service Corps as a lieutenant and worked in the Manchester area recruiting men into the army . He was promoted to captain before leaving the Army on health grounds . After the war , he was employed as cricket manager for Lionel Robinson and wrote for various newspapers and cricket publications . MacLaren and his family lived for a time on Robinson 's estate when their financial situation was poor . He advised Robinson on the best way to prepare cricket pitches and to organise matches which might bring about Robinson 's greater acceptance in society . As part of this process , MacLaren arranged for the 1921 Australian touring team to play at Robinson 's cricket ground against a team selected and captained by MacLaren himself . The Australians struggled against MacLaren 's team , but went on to dominate the Test matches against England ; MacLaren insisted throughout the summer that the Australian team was not as strong as it appeared , and that younger English players should be chosen . Eastbourne Cricket Club invited him to captain a team named " An England XI " against the tourists following the conclusion of the Tests . He was dismissed by critics when he claimed that he could beat the Australian team ; prior to the game , the Australians were undefeated on the tour and had won 22 of their 36 games . MacLaren planned meticulously for the match ; he chose an all @-@ amateur team , selecting spin bowlers noted for their reliability and excellent fielders . Although bowled out for 43 in their first innings , MacLaren 's team came back strongly to win by 28 runs , the touring team 's first defeat , although his batting contribution was slight . 
 = = = Coach and senior figure = = = 
 Lancashire appointed MacLaren as coach for the 1922 season , to popular acclaim ; he also captained the Lancashire second team . Even before he began work , his poor financial situation forced him to request two advances on his salary . As a coach , MacLaren was autocratic and demanding , but encouraged the players to think for themselves . He was unpopular with some players and clashed frequently with the Lancashire committee . During the winter of 1922 – 23 , the MCC organised two cricket tours — a Test playing tour to South Africa and a tour to Australia and New Zealand intended to give experience to young , promising cricketers . MacLaren was chosen to captain the latter team on account of his experience and his success with young cricketers during his win over the Australians in 1921 . He was given a good reception by the crowds when he played and press reports praised his tactical awareness . The team was undefeated in matches in New Zealand . Against the full New Zealand team , MacLaren scored 200 not out in 264 minutes in his final first @-@ class innings ; the effort placed a strain on his knee and he was unable to play again on the tour . He ended his first @-@ class career with 22 @,@ 236 runs at an average of 34 @.@ 15 . 
 When the team returned to play more matches in Australia , MacLaren became involved in controversy for criticising the standards of play in New Zealand and for comments made in the press there . He also queried the first @-@ class status of Bill Ponsford 's record innings of 429 , scored against Tasmania . On the journey home , MacLaren sent a message to Lancashire asking for more money ; the committee declined to send the sum and shortly afterwards terminated his contract as coach . Lancashire told the press that MacLaren 's knee injury meant that he could not continue . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 In the following years , MacLaren and his family struggled financially . His wife 's family sometimes sent money , but MacLaren often spent extravagantly whenever he had funds . On one occasion , when paid for writing an article , he moved out of his accommodation into an expensive hotel , and threw a dinner party for his friends . He ran up many debts — including an unpaid champagne bill at Old Trafford Cricket Ground in 1923 — and borrowed money from friends . He supplemented his wife 's income through working as a journalist and a coach . Among other business ventures , he designed a cricket bat , showed specially shot cricket films , briefly owned a hotel and attempted to start a horse bloodstock agency . He continued to play club cricket and in 1924 – 25 he managed a privately organised tour of South Africa . 
 Shortly before the Second World War , MacLaren 's wife inherited a large sum of money which enabled them to live in comfort . They bought an estate on which MacLaren had a house built , and the couple were able to live in the extravagant manner he had always wanted . Around this time , on a visit to America , MacLaren made a brief appearance in the Hollywood film The Four Feathers , which starred his friend , former cricketer C. Aubrey Smith . In the 1940s , his health began to fail . He was hurt in a car crash and then contracted cancer . He died on 17 November 1944 , aged 72 ; his wife died a few months later . 
 = = Style , technique and captaincy = = 
 MacLaren 's obituary in The Times stated that he was " one of the outstanding opening batsmen of all time " . As a batsman , he had a reputation for stylishness , but his technique was based on scoring runs safely . He always tried to seize the initiative in a game . Batting with his head slightly raised , he drew his bat back unusually far , which provided the power to his shots , and in particular his drives . He scored runs quickly , mainly through his ability to score from good length balls . When playing a shot , he either stepped right forward or moved far back in the batting crease and having hit the ball , he followed through with the bat , often holding his pose for effect . These qualities , and his quick footwork , made him effective on difficult batting pitches . One of his most highly regarded shots was the hook . In later years , Cardus described the shot : " To see MacLaren hook a fast ball ... from the front of his face , was in those days an experience which thrilled me like heroic poetry ; he didn 't merely hook the ball , he dismissed it from his presence . " Cardus , for whom MacLaren was a boyhood hero , wrote prolifically about him in later years ; he called one such essay on MacLaren " The Noblest Roman " , and judged him among the best of all batsmen . Gideon Haigh suggests : " If ever a cricketer was the creation of a single writer , it is MacLaren , the luminous majesty with which he is associated owed in very large degree to his youthful acolyte Neville Cardus . " MacLaren was also a highly proficient fielder , initially in the outfield but later at slip . 
 Critics have looked less favourably on MacLaren as a captain . When he assumed the leadership of England , the press were reporting on the tactical performance of captains for the first time . MacLaren was among the first captains to study tactics . However , judgements on his effectiveness have varied greatly . For most of his career , he was regarded as an excellent captain . Contemporaries praised his tactical awareness ; he planned minutely , and organised his fields extremely carefully to prevent batsmen scoring through blocking their favourite shots , a technique practically unheard of at the time . He liked to alter the batting order , a tactic which often divides critics , although it frequently succeeded for MacLaren . He was less successful in managing his team . Regarded as a pessimist , he openly showed disappointment at the composition of his sides , and became downcast when the course of the match was running against him . Some of those who played under him thought that his sides were unhappy ones which operated without joy and solely concentrated on winning . He encountered many difficulties over selection ; he often promoted cricketers whom he considered to show potential and consequently railed against committees which did not provide him with the players he wanted . Down suggests that MacLaren was usually correct , being more experienced and a better judge than most of those who chose the teams . Peter Wynne @-@ Thomas describes MacLaren 's approach to selection as " unorthodox " , and writes that while his ideas were sometimes successful , they failed badly at other times . Apart from his own failings , MacLaren had a reputation as an unlucky captain , both in terms of losing important players to injury and illness before vital games , and in the frequency with which he lost the toss before a match . Nor was MacLaren particularly popular ; in later years , several people for whom he had been a hero changed their opinion once they met him . 
 In his history of the club , Peter Wynne @-@ Thomas describes MacLaren as the dominant figure in Lancashire cricket from his debut until the First World War . Gibson accepts that MacLaren was tactically a good captain , but observes that in his 12 seasons as leader of a strong Lancashire team , he only once won the County Championship . In addition , as the appointed captain in four series against Australia , he was beaten in each one , something no other England captain has repeated . Gibson suggests that " the excuses begin to run thin , sieved through such a tale of failure . " Gibson summarises that " England under MacLaren must have been a good side to watch , save for the passionate partisans , but an uncomfortable side in which to play ... Bad captain or no , with no doubt ... MacLaren was one of the most entrancing , one of the most glamorous — though that word had not come into fashion in his day — characters of his cricketing epoch . " 
 = Lead poisoning = 
 Lead poisoning is a type of metal poisoning caused by increased levels of the heavy metal lead in the body . Like most toxic heavy metals , lead interferes with a variety of body processes and is toxic to many organs and tissues , including the heart , bones , intestines , kidneys , and reproductive and nervous systems . The brain is the organ most sensitive to lead exposure . Lead interferes with the development of the nervous system and is therefore particularly toxic to children , causing potentially permanent learning and behavior disorders including violence . Symptoms include abdominal pain , confusion , headache , anemia , irritability , and in severe cases seizures , coma , and death . 
 Routes of exposure to lead include contaminated air , water , soil , food , and consumer products . Occupational exposure is a common cause of lead poisoning in adults . According to estimates made by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) , more than 3 million workers in the United States are potentially exposed to lead in the workplace . One of the largest threats to children is lead paint that exists in many homes , especially older ones ; thus children in older housing with chipping paint or lead dust from moveable window frames with lead paint are at greater risk . Prevention of lead exposure can range from individual efforts ( e.g. , removing lead @-@ containing items such as piping or blinds from the home ) to nationwide policies ( e.g. , laws that ban lead in products , reduce allowable levels in water or soil , or provide for cleanup and mitigation of contaminated soil , etc . ) 
 Elevated lead in the body can be detected by the presence of changes in blood cells visible with a microscope and dense lines in the bones of children seen on X @-@ ray , but the main tool for diagnosis is measurement of the blood lead level . When blood lead levels are recorded , the results indicate how much lead is circulating within the blood stream , not the amount stored in the body . There are two units for reporting blood lead level , either micrograms per <unk> ( µg / dl ) , or micrograms per 100 grams ( µg / 100 g ) of whole blood , which are numerically equivalent . The Centers for Disease Control ( US ) has set the standard elevated blood lead level for adults to be 10 µg / dl of the whole blood . For children the number is set much lower at 5 µg / dl of blood as of 2012 down from a previous 10 µg / dl . Children are especially prone to the health effects of lead . As a result , blood lead levels must be set lower and closely monitored if contamination is possible . The major treatments are removal of the source of lead and chelation therapy ( administration of agents that bind lead so it can be excreted ) . 
 Humans have been mining and using this heavy metal for thousands of years , poisoning themselves in the process . Although lead poisoning is one of the oldest known work and environmental hazards , the modern understanding of the small amount of lead necessary to cause harm did not come about until the latter half of the 20th century . No safe threshold for lead exposure has been discovered — that is , there is no known sufficiently small amount of lead that will not cause harm to the body . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Classically , " lead poisoning " or " lead intoxication " has been defined as exposure to high levels of lead typically associated with severe health effects . Poisoning is a pattern of symptoms that occur with toxic effects from mid to high levels of exposure ; toxicity is a wider spectrum of effects , including subclinical ones ( those that do not cause symptoms ) . However , professionals often use " lead poisoning " and " lead toxicity " interchangeably , and official sources do not always restrict the use of " lead poisoning " to refer only to symptomatic effects of lead . 
 The amount of lead in the blood and tissues , as well as the time course of exposure , determine toxicity . Lead poisoning may be acute ( from intense exposure of short duration ) or chronic ( from repeat low @-@ level exposure over a prolonged period ) , but the latter is much more common . Diagnosis and treatment of lead exposure are based on blood lead level ( the amount of lead in the blood ) , measured in micrograms of lead per <unk> of blood ( μg / dL ) . Urine lead levels may be used as well , though less commonly . In cases of chronic exposure lead often sequesters in the highest concentrations first in the bones , then in the kidneys . If a provider is performing a provocative excretion test , or " chelation challenge " , a measurement obtained from urine rather than blood is likely to provide a more accurate representation of total lead burden to a skilled interpreter . 
 The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization state that a blood lead level of 10 μg / dL or above is a cause for concern ; however , lead may impair development and have harmful health effects even at lower levels , and there is no known safe exposure level . Authorities such as the American Academy of Pediatrics define lead poisoning as blood lead levels higher than 10 μg / dL . 
 Lead forms a variety of compounds and exists in the environment in various forms . Features of poisoning differ depending on whether the agent is an organic compound ( one that contains carbon ) , or an inorganic one . Organic lead poisoning is now very rare , because countries across the world have phased out the use of organic lead compounds as gasoline additives , but such compounds are still used in industrial settings . Organic lead compounds , which cross the skin and respiratory tract easily , affect the central nervous system predominantly . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Lead poisoning can cause a variety of symptoms and signs which vary depending on the individual and the duration of lead exposure . Symptoms are nonspecific and may be subtle , and someone with elevated lead levels may have no symptoms . Symptoms usually develop over weeks to months as lead builds up in the body during a chronic exposure , but acute symptoms from brief , intense exposures also occur . Symptoms from exposure to organic lead , which is probably more toxic than inorganic lead due to its lipid solubility , occur rapidly . Poisoning by organic lead compounds has symptoms predominantly in the central nervous system , such as insomnia , delirium , cognitive deficits , tremor , hallucinations , and convulsions . 
 Symptoms may be different in adults and children ; the main symptoms in adults are headache , abdominal pain , memory loss , kidney failure , male reproductive problems , and weakness , pain , or tingling in the extremities . 
 Early symptoms of lead poisoning in adults are commonly nonspecific and include depression , loss of appetite , intermittent abdominal pain , nausea , diarrhea , constipation , and muscle pain . Other early signs in adults include malaise , fatigue , decreased libido , and problems with sleep . An unusual taste in the mouth and personality changes are also early signs . 
 In adults , symptoms can occur at levels above 40 μg / dL , but are more likely to occur only above 50 – 60 μg / dL . Symptoms begin to appear in children generally at around 60 μg / dL . However , the lead levels at which symptoms appear vary widely depending on unknown characteristics of each individual . At blood lead levels between 25 and 60 μg / dL , neuropsychiatric effects such as delayed reaction times , irritability , and difficulty concentrating , as well as slowed motor nerve conduction and headache can occur . Anemia may appear at blood lead levels higher than 50 μg / dL . In adults , abdominal colic , involving paroxysms of pain , may appear at blood lead levels greater than 80 μg / dL . Signs that occur in adults at blood lead levels exceeding 100 μg / dL include wrist drop and foot drop , and signs of encephalopathy ( a condition characterized by brain swelling ) , such as those that accompany increased pressure within the skull , delirium , coma , seizures , and headache . In children , signs of encephalopathy such as bizarre behavior , <unk> , and apathy occur at lead levels exceeding 70 μg / dL . For both adults and children , it is rare to be asymptomatic if blood lead levels exceed 100 μg / dL . 
 = = = Acute poisoning = = = 
 In acute poisoning , typical neurological signs are pain , muscle weakness , numbness and tingling , and , rarely , symptoms associated with inflammation of the brain . Abdominal pain , nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , and constipation are other acute symptoms . Lead 's effects on the mouth include astringency and a metallic taste . Gastrointestinal problems , such as constipation , diarrhea , poor appetite , or weight loss , are common in acute poisoning . Absorption of large amounts of lead over a short time can cause shock ( insufficient fluid in the circulatory system ) due to loss of water from the gastrointestinal tract . Hemolysis ( the rupture of red blood cells ) due to acute poisoning can cause anemia and hemoglobin in the urine . Damage to kidneys can cause changes in urination such as decreased urine output . People who survive acute poisoning often go on to display symptoms of chronic poisoning . 
 = = = Chronic poisoning = = = 
 Chronic poisoning usually presents with symptoms affecting multiple systems , but is associated with three main types of symptoms : gastrointestinal , neuromuscular , and neurological . Central nervous system and neuromuscular symptoms usually result from intense exposure , while gastrointestinal symptoms usually result from exposure over longer periods . Signs of chronic exposure include loss of short @-@ term memory or concentration , depression , nausea , abdominal pain , loss of coordination , and numbness and tingling in the extremities . Fatigue , problems with sleep , headaches , stupor , slurred speech , and anemia are also found in chronic lead poisoning . A " lead hue " of the skin with pallor and / or <unk> is another feature . A blue line along the gum with bluish black edging to the teeth , known as a Burton line , is another indication of chronic lead poisoning . Children with chronic poisoning may refuse to play or may have hyperkinetic or aggressive behavior disorders . Visual disturbance may present with gradually progressing blurred vision as a result of central <unk> , caused by toxic optic neuritis . 
 = = = Effects on children = = = 
 A fetus developing in the womb of a woman who has elevated blood lead level is susceptible to lead poisoning by intrauterine exposure , and is at greater risk of being born prematurely or with a low birth weight . 
 Children are more at risk for lead poisoning because their smaller bodies are in a continuous state of growth and development . Lead is absorbed at a faster rate compared to adults , which causes more physical harm than to older people . Furthermore , children , especially as they are learning to crawl and walk , are constantly on the floor and therefore more prone to ingesting and inhaling dust that is contaminated with lead . 
 The classic signs and symptoms in children are loss of appetite , abdominal pain , vomiting , weight loss , constipation , anemia , kidney failure , irritability , lethargy , learning disabilities , and behavioral problems . Slow development of normal childhood behaviors , such as talking and use of words , and permanent intellectual disability are both commonly seen . Although less common , it is possible for fingernails to develop <unk> striata if exposed to abnormally high lead concentrations . 
 = = = Complications = = = 
 Lead affects every one of the body 's organ systems , especially the nervous system , but also the bones and teeth , the kidneys , and the cardiovascular , immune , and reproductive systems . Hearing loss and tooth decay have been linked to lead exposure , as have cataracts . Intrauterine and neonatal lead exposure promote tooth decay . Aside from the developmental effects unique to young children , the health effects experienced by adults are similar to those in children , although the thresholds are generally higher . 
 = = = = Kidneys = = = = 
 Kidney damage occurs with exposure to high levels of lead , and evidence suggests that lower levels can damage kidneys as well . The toxic effect of lead causes nephropathy and may cause Fanconi syndrome , in which the proximal tubular function of the kidney is impaired . Long @-@ term exposure at levels lower than those that cause lead nephropathy have also been reported as nephrotoxic in patients from developed countries that had chronic kidney disease or were at risk because of hypertension or diabetes mellitus . Lead poisoning inhibits excretion of the waste product urate and causes a predisposition for gout , in which urate builds up . This condition is known as saturnine gout . 
 = = = = Cardiovascular system = = = = 
 Evidence suggests lead exposure is associated with high blood pressure , and studies have also found connections between lead exposure and coronary heart disease , heart rate variability , and death from stroke , but this evidence is more limited . People who have been exposed to higher concentrations of lead may be at a higher risk for cardiac autonomic dysfunction on days when ozone and fine particles are higher . 
 = = = = Reproductive system = = = = 
 Lead affects both the male and female reproductive systems . In men , when blood lead levels exceed 40 μg / dL , sperm count is reduced and changes occur in volume of sperm , their motility , and their morphology . A pregnant woman 's elevated blood lead level can lead to miscarriage , prematurity , low birth weight , and problems with development during childhood . Lead is able to pass through the placenta and into breast milk , and blood lead levels in mothers and infants are usually similar . A fetus may be poisoned in utero if lead from the mother 's bones is subsequently mobilized by the changes in metabolism due to pregnancy ; increased calcium intake in pregnancy may help mitigate this phenomenon . 
 = = = = Nervous system = = = = 
 Lead affects the peripheral nervous system ( especially motor nerves ) and the central nervous system . Peripheral nervous system effects are more prominent in adults and central nervous system effects are more prominent in children . Lead causes the axons of nerve cells to degenerate and lose their myelin coats . 
 Lead exposure in young children has been linked to learning disabilities , and children with blood lead concentrations greater than 10 μg / dL are in danger of developmental disabilities . Increased blood lead level in children has been correlated with decreases in intelligence , nonverbal reasoning , short @-@ term memory , attention , reading and arithmetic ability , fine motor skills , emotional regulation , and social engagement . The effect of lead on children 's cognitive abilities takes place at very low levels . There is apparently no lower threshold to the dose @-@ response relationship ( unlike other heavy metals such as mercury ) . Reduced academic performance has been associated with lead exposure even at blood lead levels lower than 5 μg / dL . Blood lead levels below 10 μg / dL have been reported to be associated with lower IQ and behavior problems such as aggression , in proportion with blood lead levels . Between the blood lead levels of 5 and 35 μg / dL , an IQ decrease of 2 – 4 points for each μg / dL increase is reported in children . 
 High blood lead levels in adults are also associated with decreases in cognitive performance and with psychiatric symptoms such as depression and anxiety . It was found in a large group of current and former inorganic lead workers in Korea that blood lead levels in the range of 20 – 50 μg / dL were correlated with neuro @-@ cognitive defects . Increases in blood lead levels from about 50 to about 100 μg / dL in adults have been found to be associated with persistent , and possibly permanent , impairment of central nervous system function . 
 Lead exposure in children is also correlated with neuropsychiatric disorders such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and anti @-@ social behaviour . Elevated lead levels in children are correlated with higher scores on aggression and delinquency measures . A correlation has also been found between prenatal and early childhood lead exposure and violent crime in adulthood . Countries with the highest air lead levels have also been found to have the highest murder rates , after adjusting for confounding factors . A May 2000 study by economic consultant Rick Nevin theorizes that lead exposure explains 65 % to 90 % of the variation in violent crime rates in the US . A 2007 paper by the same author claims to show a strong association between preschool blood lead and subsequent crime rate trends over several decades across nine countries . It is believed that the U.S. ban on lead paint in buildings in the late 1970s , as well as the <unk> of leaded gasoline in the 1970s and 1980s , partially helped contribute to the decline of violent crime in the United States since the early 1990s . 
 = = Exposure routes = = 
 Lead is a common environmental pollutant . Causes of environmental contamination include industrial use of lead , such as is found in facilities that process lead @-@ acid batteries or produce lead wire or pipes , and metal recycling and foundries . Children living near facilities that process lead , such as lead smelters , have been found to have unusually high blood lead levels . In August 2009 , parents rioted in China after lead poisoning was found in nearly 2000 children living near zinc and manganese smelters . Lead exposure can occur from contact with lead in air , household dust , soil , water , and commercial products . Leaded gasoline has also been linked to increases in lead pollution . Some research has suggested a link between leaded gasoline and crime rates . 
 = = = Occupational exposure = = = 
 In adults , occupational exposure is the main cause of lead poisoning . People can be exposed when working in facilities that produce a variety of lead @-@ containing products ; these include radiation shields , ammunition , certain surgical equipment , developing dental x @-@ ray films prior to digital x @-@ rays ( each film packet had a lead liner to prevent the radiation from going through ) , fetal monitors , plumbing , circuit boards , jet engines , and ceramic glazes . In addition , lead miners and smelters , plumbers and fitters , auto mechanics , glass manufacturers , construction workers , battery manufacturers and recyclers , firing range instructors , and plastic manufacturers are at risk for lead exposure . Other occupations that present lead exposure risks include welding , manufacture of rubber , printing , zinc and copper smelting , processing of ore , combustion of solid waste , and production of paints and pigments . Parents who are exposed to lead in the workplace can bring lead dust home on clothes or skin and expose their children . 
 = = = Paint = = = 
 Some lead compounds are colorful and are used widely in paints , and lead paint is a major route of lead exposure in children . A study conducted in 1998 – 2000 found that 38 million housing units in the US had lead @-@ based paint , down from a 1990 estimate of 64 million . Deteriorating lead paint can produce dangerous lead levels in household dust and soil . Deteriorating lead paint and lead @-@ containing household dust are the main causes of chronic lead poisoning . The lead breaks down into the dust and since children are more prone to crawling on the floor , it is easily ingested . Many young children display pica , eating things that are not food . Even a small amount of a lead @-@ containing product such as a paint chip or a sip of glaze can contain tens or hundreds of milligrams of lead . Eating chips of lead paint presents a particular hazard to children , generally producing more severe poisoning than occurs from dust . Because removing lead paint from dwellings , e.g. by sanding or torching creates lead @-@ containing dust and fumes , it is generally safer to seal the lead paint under new paint ( excepting moveable windows and doors , which create paint dust when operated ) . Alternately , special precautions must be taken if the lead paint is to be removed . In oil painting it was once common for colours such as yellow or white to be made with lead carbonate . Lead white oil colour was the main white of oil painters until superseded by compounds containing zinc or titanium in the mid @-@ 20th century . It is speculated that the painter Caravaggio and possibly Francisco Goya and Vincent Van Gogh had lead poisoning due to overexposure or carelessness when handling this colour . 
 = = = Soil = = = 
 Residual lead in soil contributes to lead exposure in urban areas . It has been thought that the more polluted an area is with various contaminants , the more likely it is to contain lead . However , this is not always the case , as there are several other reasons for lead contamination in soil . Lead content in soil may be caused by broken @-@ down lead paint , residues from lead @-@ containing gasoline , used engine oil , or pesticides used in the past , contaminated landfills , or from nearby industries such as foundries or smelters . Although leaded soil is less of a problem in countries that no longer have leaded gasoline , it remains prevalent , raising concerns about the safety of urban agriculture ; eating food grown in contaminated soil can present a lead hazard . 
 = = = Water = = = 
 Lead from the atmosphere or soil can end up in groundwater and surface water . It is also potentially in drinking water , e.g. from plumbing and fixtures that are either made of lead or have lead solder . Since acidic water breaks down lead in plumbing more readily , chemicals can be added to municipal water to increase the pH and thus reduce the corrosivity of the public water supply . <unk> , which were adopted as a substitute for chlorine disinfectants due to fewer health concerns , increase <unk> . In the US , 14 – 20 % of total lead exposure is attributed to drinking water . In 2004 , a team of seven reporters from The Washington Post discovered high levels of lead in the drinking water in Washington , D.C. and won an award for investigative reporting for a series of articles about this contamination . In the Flint water crisis , a switch to a more corrosive municipal water source elevated lead levels in drinking water in domestic tap water . 
 In Australia , collecting rainwater from roof runoff used as potable water may contain lead if there are lead contaminants on the roof or in the storage tank . The Australian Drinking Water Guidelines allow a maximum of .01 mg / L lead in water . 
 = = = Lead @-@ containing products = = = 
 Lead can be found in products such as kohl , an ancient cosmetic from the Middle East , South Asia , and parts of Africa that has many names ; and from some toys . In 2007 , millions of toys made in China were recalled from multiple countries owing to safety hazards including lead paint . Vinyl mini @-@ blinds , found especially in older housing , may contain lead . Lead is commonly incorporated into herbal remedies such as Indian Ayurvedic preparations and remedies of Chinese origin . There are also risks of elevated blood lead levels caused by folk remedies like <unk> and <unk> , which each contain about 95 % lead . 
 Ingestion of metallic lead , such as small lead fishing lures , increases blood lead levels and can be fatal . Ingestion of lead @-@ contaminated food is also a threat . Ceramic glaze often contains lead , and dishes that have been improperly fired can leach the metal into food , potentially causing severe poisoning . In some places , the solder in cans used for food contains lead . When manufacturing medical instruments and hardware , solder containing lead may be present . People who eat animals hunted with lead bullets may be at risk for lead exposure . Bullets lodged in the body rarely cause significant levels of lead , but bullets lodged in the joints are the exception , as they deteriorate and release lead into the body over time . 
 In May 2015 , Indian food safety regulators in the state of Uttar Pradesh found that samples of Maggi 2 Minute Noodles contained lead up to 17 times beyond permissible limits . On 3 June 2015 , New Delhi Government banned the sale of Maggi noodles in New Delhi stores for 15 days because it was found to contain lead beyond the permissible limit . The Gujarat FDA on June 4 , 2015 banned the noodles for 30 days after 27 out of 39 samples were detected with objectionable levels of metallic lead , among other things . Some India 's biggest retailers like Future Group , Big Bazaar , <unk> and Nilgiris have imposed a nationwide ban on Maggi noodles . Many other states too have banned Maggi noodles . 
 = = = Bullets = = = 
 Contact with ammunition is a source of lead exposure . As of 2013 , lead @-@ based ammunition production is the second largest annual use of lead in the US , accounting for over 60 @,@ 000 metric tons consumed in 2012 , second only to the manufacture of storage batteries . The Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) does not regulate lead , as a matter of law . Lead birdshot is banned in some areas , but this is primarily for the benefit of the birds and their predators , rather than humans . Non @-@ lead alternatives include steel , tungsten @-@ nickel @-@ iron , bismuth @-@ tin , and tungsten @-@ polymer . 
 Because game animals can be shot using lead bullets , the potential for lead ingestion from game meat consumption has been studied clinically and <unk> . In a recent study conducted by the CDC , a cohort from North Dakota was enrolled and asked to self @-@ report historical consumption of game meat , and participation in other activities that could cause lead exposure . The study found that participants ' age , sex , housing age , current hobbies with potential for lead exposure , and game consumption were all associated with blood lead level ( PbB ) . 
 This study has been cited by popular media as simple evidence that hunting increases exposure to lead poisoning , prompting the University of Illinois Extension to release a statement that there is no such risk . Concerning the CDC report , the authors ' conclusion in a related Epi @-@ AID Trip Report notes the small increase associated with game consumption in the study , and urges interpretation with respect to environmental context : 
 While this study suggests that consumption of wild game meat can adversely affect PbB , no participant had PbB higher than the CDC recommended threshold of <unk> / dl — the level at which CDC recommends case management ; and the geometric mean PbB among this study population ( <unk> / dl ) was lower than the overall population geometric mean PbB in the United States ( 1 @.@ 60 μg / dl ) . The clinical significance of low PbB in this sample population and the small quantitative increase of <unk> / dl in PbB associated with wild game consumption should be interpreted in the context of naturally occurring PbB . 
 Copper @-@ jacketed , lead @-@ based bullets are more economical to produce and use than lead or any other material . Alternative materials are available such as steel , copper , and tungsten , but alternatives are universally less effective and / or more expensive . However , the biggest impediment to using the vast majority of alternatives relates to current laws in the United States pertaining to armor @-@ piercing rounds . Laws and regulations relating to armor @-@ piercing ammunition expressly prohibit the use of brass , bronze , steel , tungsten , and nearly every metallic alternative in any bullet that can be shot by a handgun , which at this time is nearly every caliber smaller than <unk> ( including the popular .223 Remington , .308 Winchester and .30 @-@ 06 to name just a few ) . Some lead @-@ based bullets are resistant to fragmentation , offering hunters the ability to clean game animals with negligible risk of including lead fragments in prepared meat . Other bullets are prone to fragmentation and exacerbate the risk of lead ingestion from prepared meat . In practice , use of a non @-@ fragmenting bullet and proper cleaning of the game animal 's wound can eliminate the risk of lead ingestion from eating game ; however , isolating such practice to experimentally determine its association with blood lead levels in study is difficult . Bismuth is an element used as a lead @-@ replacement for shotgun pellets used in waterfowl hunting although <unk> made from bismuth are nearly ten times the cost of lead . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Exposure occurs through inhalation , ingestion or occasionally skin contact . Lead may be taken in through direct contact with mouth , nose , and eyes ( mucous membranes ) , and through breaks in the skin . <unk> , which was a gasoline additive and is still used in fuels such as aviation fuel , passes through the skin ; however inorganic lead found in paint , food , and most lead @-@ containing consumer products is only minimally absorbed through the skin . The main sources of absorption of inorganic lead are from ingestion and inhalation . In adults , about 35 – 40 % of inhaled lead dust is deposited in the lungs , and about 95 % of that goes into the bloodstream . Of ingested inorganic lead , about 15 % is absorbed , but this percentage is higher in children , pregnant women , and people with deficiencies of calcium , zinc , or iron . Children and infants may absorb about 50 % of ingested lead , but little is known about absorption rates in children . 
 The main body compartments that store lead are the blood , soft tissues , and bone ; the half @-@ life of lead in these tissues is measured in weeks for blood , months for soft tissues , and years for bone . Lead in the bones , teeth , hair , and nails is bound tightly and not available to other tissues , and is generally thought not to be harmful . In adults , 94 % of absorbed lead is deposited in the bones and teeth , but children only store 70 % in this manner , a fact which may partially account for the more serious health effects on children . The estimated half @-@ life of lead in bone is 20 to 30 years , and bone can introduce lead into the bloodstream long after the initial exposure is gone . The half @-@ life of lead in the blood in men is about 40 days , but it may be longer in children and pregnant women , whose bones are undergoing remodeling , which allows the lead to be continuously re @-@ introduced into the bloodstream . Also , if lead exposure takes place over years , clearance is much slower , partly due to the re @-@ release of lead from bone . Many other tissues store lead , but those with the highest concentrations ( other than blood , bone , and teeth ) are the brain , spleen , kidneys , liver , and lungs . It is removed from the body very slowly , mainly through urine . Smaller amounts of lead are also eliminated through the feces , and very small amounts in hair , nails , and sweat . 
 Lead has no known physiologically relevant role in the body , and its harmful effects are myriad . Lead and other heavy metals create reactive radicals which damage cell structures including DNA and cell membranes . Lead also interferes with DNA transcription , enzymes that help in the synthesis of vitamin D , and enzymes that maintain the integrity of the cell membrane . Anemia may result when the cell membranes of red blood cells become more fragile as the result of damage to their membranes . Lead interferes with metabolism of bones and teeth and alters the permeability of blood vessels and collagen synthesis . Lead may also be harmful to the developing immune system , causing production of excessive inflammatory proteins ; this mechanism may mean that lead exposure is a risk factor for asthma in children . Lead exposure has also been associated with a decrease in activity of immune cells such as <unk> leukocytes . Lead also interferes with the normal metabolism of calcium in cells and causes it to build up within them . 
 = = = Enzymes = = = 
 The primary cause of lead 's toxicity is its interference with a variety of enzymes because it binds to sulfhydryl groups found on many enzymes . Part of lead 's toxicity results from its ability to mimic other metals that take part in biological processes , which act as cofactors in many enzymatic reactions , displacing them at the enzymes on which they act . Lead is able to bind to and interact with many of the same enzymes as these metals but , due to its differing chemistry , does not properly function as a cofactor , thus interfering with the enzyme 's ability to catalyze its normal reaction or reactions . Among the essential metals with which lead interacts are calcium , iron , and zinc . 
 One of the main causes for the pathology of lead is that it interferes with the activity of an essential enzyme called delta @-@ aminolevulinic acid dehydratase , or <unk> ( see image of the enzyme structure ) , which is important in the biosynthesis of heme , the cofactor found in hemoglobin . Lead also inhibits the enzyme <unk> , another enzyme involved in the formation of heme . <unk> catalyzes the joining of protoporphyrin and Fe2 + to form heme . Lead 's interference with heme synthesis results in production of zinc protoporphyrin and the development of anemia . Another effect of lead 's interference with heme synthesis is the buildup of heme precursors , such as aminolevulinic acid , which may be directly or indirectly harmful to neurons . 
 = = = Neurons = = = 
 The brain is the organ most sensitive to lead exposure . Lead is able to pass through the endothelial cells at the blood brain barrier because it can substitute for calcium ions and be <unk> by Calcium @-@ ATPase pumps . Lead poisoning interferes with the normal development of a child 's brain and nervous system ; therefore children are at greater risk of lead neurotoxicity than adults are . In a child 's developing brain , lead interferes with synapse formation in the cerebral cortex , neurochemical development ( including that of neurotransmitters ) , and organization of ion channels . It causes loss of neurons ' myelin sheaths , reduces numbers of neurons , interferes with neurotransmission , and decreases neuronal growth . 
 Lead interferes with the release of neurotransmitters , chemicals used by neurons to send signals to other cells . It interferes with the release of glutamate , a neurotransmitter important in many functions including learning , by blocking NMDA receptors . The targeting of NMDA receptors is thought to be one of the main causes for lead 's toxicity to neurons . A Johns Hopkins University report found that in addition to inhibiting the NMDA receptor , lead exposure decreased the level of expression of the gene for the receptor in part of the brain . In addition , lead has been found in animal studies to cause programmed cell death in brain cells . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Diagnosis includes determining the clinical signs and the medical history , with inquiry into possible routes of exposure . Clinical toxicologists , medical specialists in the area of poisoning , may be involved in diagnosis and treatment . The main tool in diagnosing and assessing the severity of lead poisoning is laboratory analysis of the blood lead level ( <unk> ) . 
 Blood film examination may reveal basophilic stippling of red blood cells ( dots in red blood cells visible through a microscope ) , as well as the changes normally associated with iron @-@ deficiency anemia ( <unk> and <unk> ) . However , basophilic stippling is also seen in unrelated conditions , such as megaloblastic anemia caused by vitamin B12 ( <unk> ) and folate deficiencies . 
 Exposure to lead also can be evaluated by measuring erythrocyte protoporphyrin ( EP ) in blood samples . EP is a part of red blood cells known to increase when the amount of lead in the blood is high , with a delay of a few weeks . Thus EP levels in conjunction with blood lead levels can suggest the time period of exposure ; if blood lead levels are high but EP is still normal , this finding suggests exposure was recent . However , the EP level alone is not sensitive enough to identify elevated blood lead levels below about 35 μg / dL . Due to this higher threshold for detection and the fact that EP levels also increase in iron deficiency , use of this method for detecting lead exposure has decreased . 
 Blood lead levels are an indicator mainly of recent or current lead exposure , not of total body burden . Lead in bones can be measured <unk> by X @-@ ray fluorescence ; this may be the best measure of cumulative exposure and total body burden . However this method is not widely available and is mainly used for research rather than routine diagnosis . Another radiographic sign of elevated lead levels is the presence of radiodense lines called lead lines at the <unk> in the long bones of growing children , especially around the knees . These lead lines , caused by increased calcification due to disrupted metabolism in the growing bones , become wider as the duration of lead exposure increases . X @-@ rays may also reveal lead @-@ containing foreign materials such as paint chips in the gastrointestinal tract . 
 Fecal lead content that is measured over the course of a few days may also be an accurate way to estimate the overall amount of childhood lead intake . This form of measurement may serve as a useful way to see the extent of oral lead exposure from all the diet and environmental sources of lead . 
 Lead poisoning shares symptoms with other conditions and may be easily missed . Conditions that present similarly and must be ruled out in diagnosing lead poisoning include carpal tunnel syndrome , Guillain @-@ Barré syndrome , renal colic , appendicitis , encephalitis in adults , and viral gastroenteritis in children . Other differential diagnoses in children include constipation , abdominal colic , iron deficiency , subdural hematoma , neoplasms of the central nervous system , emotional and behavior disorders , and intellectual disability . 
 = = = Reference levels = = = 
 The current reference range for acceptable blood lead concentrations in healthy persons without excessive exposure to environmental sources of lead is less than 5 µg / dL for children . It was less than 25 µg / dL for adults . Previous to 2012 the value for children was 10 ( µg / dl ) . The current biological exposure index ( a level that should not be exceeded ) for lead @-@ exposed workers in the U.S. is 30 µg / dL in a random blood specimen . 
 The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( CDC / NIOSH ) reference blood lead level in adults is 10 μg / dL The U.S. national <unk> geometric mean among adults was 1 @.@ 2 μg / dL in 2009 – 2010 . 
 Blood lead concentrations in poisoning victims have ranged from 30- > 80 µg / dL in children exposed to lead paint in older houses , 77 – 104 µg / dL in persons working with pottery glazes , 90 – 137 µg / dL in individuals consuming contaminated herbal medicines , 109 – 139 µg / dL in indoor shooting range instructors and as high as 330 µg / dL in those drinking fruit juices from glazed earthenware containers . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 In most cases , lead poisoning is preventable by avoiding exposure to lead . Prevention strategies can be divided into individual ( measures taken by a family ) , preventive medicine ( identifying and intervening with high @-@ risk individuals ) , and public health ( reducing risk on a population level ) . 
 Recommended steps by individuals to reduce the blood lead levels of children include increasing their frequency of hand washing and their intake of calcium and iron , discouraging them from putting their hands to their mouths , vacuuming frequently , and eliminating the presence of lead @-@ containing objects such as blinds and jewellery in the house . In houses with lead pipes or plumbing solder , these can be replaced . Less permanent but cheaper methods include running water in the morning to flush out the most contaminated water , or adjusting the water 's chemistry to prevent corrosion of pipes . Lead testing kits are commercially available for detecting the presence of lead in the household . As hot water is more likely than cold water to contain higher amounts of lead , use only cold water from the tap for drinking , cooking , and for making baby formula . Since most of the lead in household water usually comes from plumbing in the house and not from the local water supply , using cold water can avoid lead exposure . Measures such as dust control and household education do not appear to be effective in changing children 's blood levels . 
 Screening is an important method in preventive medicine strategies . Screening programs exist to test the blood of children at high risk for lead exposure , such as those who live near lead @-@ related industries . 
 Prevention measures also exist on national and municipal levels . Recommendations by health professionals for lowering childhood exposures include banning the use of lead where it is not essential and strengthening regulations that limit the amount of lead in soil , water , air , household dust , and products . Regulations exist to limit the amount of lead in paint ; for example , a 1978 law in the US restricted the lead in paint for residences , furniture , and toys to 0 @.@ 06 % or less . In October 2008 , the US Environmental Protection Agency reduced the allowable lead level by a factor of ten to 0 @.@ 15 micrograms per cubic meter of air , giving states five years to comply with the standards . The European Union 's Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive limits amounts of lead and other toxic substances in electronics and electrical equipment . In some places , remediation programs exist to reduce the presence of lead when it is found to be high , for example in drinking water . As a more radical solution , entire towns located near former lead mines have been " closed " by the government , and the population resettled elsewhere , as was the case with <unk> , Oklahoma in 2009 . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 The mainstays of treatment are removal from the source of lead and , for people who have significantly high blood lead levels or who have symptoms of poisoning , chelation therapy . Treatment of iron , calcium , and zinc deficiencies , which are associated with increased lead absorption , is another part of treatment for lead poisoning . When lead @-@ containing materials are present in the gastrointestinal tract ( as evidenced by abdominal X @-@ rays ) , whole bowel irrigation , <unk> , endoscopy , or even surgical removal may be used to eliminate it from the gut and prevent further exposure . Lead @-@ containing bullets and shrapnel may also present a threat of further exposure and may need to be surgically removed if they are in or near fluid @-@ filled or synovial spaces . If lead encephalopathy is present , anticonvulsants may be given to control seizures , and treatments to control swelling of the brain include corticosteroids and mannitol . Treatment of organic lead poisoning involves removing the lead compound from the skin , preventing further exposure , treating seizures , and possibly chelation therapy for people with high blood lead concentrations . 
 A chelating agent is a molecule with at least two negatively charged groups that allow it to form complexes with metal ions with multiple positive charges , such as lead . The chelate that is thus formed is nontoxic and can be excreted in the urine , initially at up to 50 times the normal rate . The chelating agents used for treatment of lead poisoning are <unk> disodium calcium ( <unk> ) , dimercaprol ( BAL ) , which are injected , and succimer and d @-@ penicillamine , which are administered orally . Chelation therapy is used in cases of acute lead poisoning , severe poisoning , and encephalopathy , and is considered for people with blood lead levels above 25 µg / dL . While the use of chelation for people with symptoms of lead poisoning is widely supported , use in asymptomatic people with high blood lead levels is more controversial . Chelation therapy is of limited value for cases of chronic exposure to low levels of lead . Chelation therapy is usually stopped when symptoms resolve or when blood lead levels return to <unk> levels . When lead exposure has taken place over a long period , blood lead levels may rise after chelation is stopped because lead is leached into blood from stores in the bone ; thus repeated treatments are often necessary . 
 People receiving dimercaprol need to be assessed for peanut allergies since the commercial formulation contains peanut oil . Calcium EDTA is also effective if administered four hours after the administration of dimercaprol . Administering dimercaprol , DMSA ( <unk> ) , or <unk> prior to calcium EDTA is necessary to prevent the redistribution of lead into the central nervous system . <unk> used alone may also redistribute lead to the brain and testes . An adverse side effect of calcium EDTA is renal toxicity . <unk> ( DMSA ) is the preferred agent in mild to moderate lead poisoning cases . This may be the case in instances where children have a blood lead level > <unk> / dL . The most reported adverse side effect for succimer is gastrointestinal disturbances . It is also important to note that chelation therapy only lowers blood lead levels and may not prevent the lead @-@ induced cognitive problems associated with lower lead levels in tissue . This may be because of the inability of these agents to remove sufficient amounts of lead from tissue or inability to reverse preexisting damage . <unk> agents can have adverse effects ; for example , chelation therapy can lower the body 's levels of necessary nutrients like zinc . <unk> agents taken orally can increase the body 's absorption of lead through the intestine . 
 Chelation challenge , also known as provocation testing , is used to indicate an elevated and <unk> body burden of heavy metals including lead . This testing involves collecting urine before and after administering a one @-@ off dose of chelating agent to mobilize heavy metals into the urine . Then urine is analyzed by a laboratory for levels of heavy metals ; from this analysis overall body burden is inferred . Chelation challenge mainly measures the burden of lead in soft tissues , though whether it accurately reflects long @-@ term exposure or the amount of lead stored in bone remains controversial . Although the technique has been used to determine whether chelation therapy is indicated and to diagnose heavy metal exposure , some evidence does not support these uses as blood levels after chelation are not comparable to the reference range typically used to diagnose heavy metal poisoning . The single chelation dose could also redistribute the heavy metals to more sensitive areas such as central nervous system tissue . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Since lead has been used widely for centuries , the effects of exposure are worldwide . Environmental lead is ubiquitous , and everyone has some measurable blood lead level . Atmospheric lead pollution increased dramatically beginning in the 1950s as a result of the widespread use of leaded gasoline . Lead is one of the largest environmental medicine problems in terms of numbers of people exposed and the public health toll it takes . Lead exposure accounts for about 0 @.@ 2 % of all deaths and 0 @.@ 6 % of disability adjusted life years globally . 
 Although regulation reducing lead in products has greatly reduced exposure in the developed world since the 1970s , lead is still allowed in products in many developing countries . In all countries that have banned leaded gasoline , average blood lead levels have fallen sharply . However , some developing countries still allow leaded gasoline , which is the primary source of lead exposure in most developing countries . Beyond exposure from gasoline , the frequent use of pesticides in developing countries adds a risk of lead exposure and subsequent poisoning . Poor children in developing countries are at especially high risk for lead poisoning . Of North American children , 7 % have blood lead levels above 10 μg / dL , whereas among Central and South American children , the percentage is 33 to 34 % . About one fifth of the world 's disease burden from lead poisoning occurs in the Western Pacific , and another fifth is in Southeast Asia . 
 In developed countries , people with low levels of education living in poorer areas are most at risk for elevated lead . In the US , the groups most at risk for lead exposure are the impoverished , city @-@ dwellers , and immigrants . African @-@ American children and those living in old housing have also been found to be at elevated risk for high blood lead levels in the US . Low @-@ income people often live in old housing with lead paint , which may begin to peel , exposing residents to high levels of lead @-@ containing dust . 
 Risk factors for elevated lead exposure include alcohol consumption and smoking ( possibly because of contamination of tobacco leaves with lead @-@ containing pesticides ) . Adults with certain risk factors might be more susceptible to toxicity ; these include calcium and iron deficiencies , old age , disease of organs targeted by lead ( e.g. the brain , the kidneys ) , and possibly genetic susceptibility . Differences in vulnerability to lead @-@ induced neurological damage between males and females have also been found , but some studies have found males to be at greater risk , while others have found females to be . 
 In adults , blood lead levels steadily increase with increasing age . In adults of all ages , men have higher blood lead levels than women do . Children are more sensitive to elevated blood lead levels than adults are . Children may also have a higher intake of lead than adults ; they breathe faster and may be more likely to have contact with and ingest soil . Children of ages one to three tend to have the highest blood lead levels , possibly because at that age they begin to walk and explore their environment , and they use their mouths in their exploration . Blood levels usually peak at about 18 – 24 months old . In many countries including the US , household paint and dust are the major route of exposure in children . 
 = = = Notable cases = = = 
 Cases of mass lead poisoning can occur , primarily in underdeveloped countries . 
 15 @,@ 000 people are being relocated from Jiyuan in central Henan province to other locations after 1000 children living around China 's largest smelter plant ( owned and operated by <unk> Gold and Lead ) were found to have excess lead in their blood . The total cost of this project is estimated to around 1 billion yuan ( $ 150 million ) . 70 % of the cost will be paid by local government and the smelter company , while the rest will be paid by the residents themselves . The government has suspended production at 32 of 35 lead plants . The affected area includes people from 10 different villages . 
 The <unk> State lead poisoning epidemic occurred in Nigeria in 2010 . As of October 5 , 2010 at least 400 children have died from the effects of lead poisoning . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
